Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides: interface and defect engineering  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00024G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00024G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3100-3128Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides: interface and defect engineering

        
          
            Zehua 
            Hu†
abc, 
      
        
          
            Zhangting 
            Wu†
d, 
      
        
          
            Cheng 
            Han†
abe, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            He
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Zhenhua 
            Ni
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *abcg
aDepartment of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117543, Singapore. E-mail: phycw@nus.edu.sg
bCentre for Advanced 2D Materials and Graphene Research Centre, National University of Singapore, 6 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117546, Singapore
cDepartment of Physics, National University of Singapore, 2 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117542, Singapore
dSchool of Physics, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China. E-mail: zhni@seu.edu.cn
eSZU-NUS Collaborative Innovation Center for Optoelectronic Science and Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
fSchool of Physics and Electronics, Central South University, 932 South Lushan Road, Changsha, 410083, China
gNational University of Singapore (Suzhou) Research Institute, 377 Lin Quan Street, Suzhou Industrial Park, Jiang Su 215123, China
Received 
      9th January 2018
    First published on 6th March 2018AbstractTwo-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have been considered as promising candidates for next generation nanoelectronics. Because of their atomically-thin structure and high surface to volume ratio, the interfaces involved in TMDC-based devices play a predominant role in determining the device performance, such as charge injection/collection at the metal/TMDC interface, and charge carrier trapping at the dielectric/TMDC interface. On the other hand, the crystalline structures of TMDCs are enriched by a variety of intrinsic defects, including vacancies, adatoms, grain boundaries, and substitutional impurities. Customized design and engineering of the interfaces and defects provides an effective way to modulate the properties of TMDCs and finally enhance the device performance. Herein, we summarize and highlight recent advances and state-of-the-art investigations on the interface and defect engineering of TMDCs and their corresponding applications in electronic and optoelectronic devices. Various interface engineering approaches for TMDCs are overviewed, including surface charge transfer doping, TMDC/metal contact engineering, and TMDC/dielectric interface engineering. Subsequently, different types of structural defects in TMDCs are introduced. Defect engineering strategies utilized to modulate the optical and electronic properties of TMDCs, as well as the developed high-performance and functional devices are summarized. Finally, we highlight the challenges and opportunities for interface and defect engineering in TMDC materials for electronics and optoelectronics.
Zehua Hu
Mr Zehua Hu received his Bachelor's degree in physics from Nanjing University (China) in 2014. Currently, he is a PhD candidate in the National University of Singapore (NUS). His research interests include synthesis and characterization of novel 2D materials, and interface engineering of nanoscale optoelectronic devices.
Zhangting Wu
Dr Zhangting Wu received her PhD degree in Physics from Southeast University (China) in 2017. She is currently a lecturer in the College of Electronics and Information at Hangzhou Dianzi University (China). Her research interests include the spectroscopic investigation of defects and modulation of the properties of two-dimensional materials.
Cheng Han
Dr Cheng Han is currently an assistant professor of Shenzhen University (SZU, China). He received his Bachelor's degree in Physics from Sichuan University (SCU, China) in 2009 and his PhD degree in Physics from the National University of Singapore (NUS, Singapore) in 2014. He did research as a postdoctoral fellow in the Chemistry Department, the National University of Singapore from 2014 to 2017. His research interests mainly focus on the interface engineering of novel material-based functional devices, especially for low-dimensional materials.
Zhenhua Ni
Dr Zhenhua Ni is currently a professor in the School of Physics at Southeast University (SEU, China). He received his Bachelor's degree in Physics from Shanghai Jiaotong University (SJTU, China) in 2003, PhD degree in Physics from the National University of Singapore (NUS, Singapore) in 2007, and did his postdoctoral research in the Department of Physics and Applied Physics at Nanyang Technological University (NTU, Singapore) from 2007–2010. His current research interests include the spectroscopic investigation of two dimensional materials and their applications in optoelectronic devices, e.g. phtotodetectors.
Wei Chen
Dr Wei Chen is currently an Associate Professor in both the Chemistry Department and Physics Department at the National University of Singapore (NUS). He received his Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Nanjing University (China) in 2001 and PhD degree from the Chemistry Department at NUS in 2004. His current research interests include molecular-scale interface engineering for organic and 2D material-based optoelectronics, and interface-controlled nanocatalysis for energy and environmental research.
1. Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) materials offer a new platform in both exploring fundamental physics and breaking through technological bottlenecks such as the scaling limit of bulk materials. Graphene, as the first discovered 2D material, has unique mechanical, thermal and electrical properties,1 but the lack of a sizable energy gap limits its application in logic devices. Since then, a variety of 2D materials such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs),2 black phosphorus (BP)3 and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)4 have been extensively investigated for their intriguing properties when thinned down to few- or even one-atomic layer. These fast-developing 2D materials, as well as their heterostructures, are now playing important roles in both fundamental research and technological applications.5–11
TMDCs are a class of materials with stoichiometry MX2, where M is a transition metal of group IV, group V or group VI, and X represents a chalcogen. Due to the abundant atomic combinations and rich phases including 1T (trigonal symmetry), 2H (hexagonal symmetry) and 3R (rhombohedral symmetry), the TMDC family contains semiconductors (such as MoS2, WSe2), metals (such as 1T MoTe2) and superconductors (such as NbS2, NbSe2), and therefore attracts intensive research attention. Among them, the most widely studied materials are 2H phase group VI TMDCs such as molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) (Fig. 1a), with the calculated band structure shown in Fig. 1b.12 The bandgap gradually increases from ∼1.2 to ∼1.9 eV when thinning down from bulk to a monolayer along with an indirect to direct bandgap cross-over. The unique electronic band structure enables a series of remarkable features, such as gate-tunable conductivity,13 moderate mobility,13 excellent photoresponse6 and valley-selective optical excitation.14,15 Based on these properties, different functional devices have been developed, including field-effect transistors (FETs),13 broad-band photodetectors,16 light-harvesting devices,17 chemical sensors,18 flexible devices19 and valleytronics,14,15 and so on.
 Fig. 1  (a) Unit cell (top) and top view (bottom) of the 2H-MoS2 lattice. (b) Calculated band structure of MoS2 with a decreasing number of layers, indicating a transition from an indirect to a direct band gap. (c) Schematic illustration of the three interfaces in a TMDC-based FET device, including the TMDC/surface adsorbate, TMDC/metal contact and TMDC/dielectric interface, which are highlighted by the dashed circles. (d) Schematic of the MoS2 crystal structure with typical defects, including vacancy, adatom, substitutional impurity and line defects. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 24, Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group; (b) ref. 12, Copyright 2011, American Physical Society. 
Unlike the bulk materials, atomic-thin 2D materials are essentially interface-type materials and the performance of their devices is controlled and determined by the interface.20,21 In a typical TMDC-based FET device, three types of interfaces are usually involved, including (i) TMDC/adsorbate, (ii) TMDC/metal contact, and (iii) TMDC/dielectric interfaces, as indicated in Fig. 1c. The effective control of the properties of these interface offers the opportunity to optimize the device performance as well as to realize devices with novel functionalities. For example, the surface adsorbates can effectively and non-destructively dope the TMDCs to obtain a desired carrier type and concentration;22 the charge carrier transport in TMDCs is dominated by the contact between the TMDCs and electrodes23 as well as the scattering at the dielectric interfaces.13 This results in a great necessity to understand and utilize interface engineering to achieve high-performance TMDC-based devices.25,26
On the other hand, the crystals of TMDCs are enriched by a variety of intrinsic defects, such as vacancies, adatoms, grain boundaries, and substitutional impurities, as shown in Fig. 1d. The presence of these defects leads to a significant impact on the optical and electronic properties of TMDCs,27–34 making it crucial to develop various strategies of defect engineering for the realization of materials with novel features as well as high-performance devices. The rational design of defects is able to facilitate carrier transport, induce effective doping and modulate the band35,36 and phase structures37 in TMDCs, based on which multifunctional heterostructures or devices can be constructed. Therefore, understanding the role of defects as well as developing effective defect engineering schemes is of great significance for the future development of TMDC-based electronics and optoelectronics.
In this review, we summarize the recent progress and development in understanding the effects of interfaces and defects on TMDCs for electronics and optoelectronics. In the first part on interface engineering, we start from surface charge transfer doping (SCTD) at the TMDC/adsorbate interface and discuss its impact on the electronic and optical properties of TMDCs, as well as practical applications in electronic and optoelectronic devices. Subsequently, the interface at the TMDC/metal contact will be introduced by providing several strategies of contact engineering to improve the device performance. This part ends with a discussion on the TMDC/dielectric interface. Notably, other than traditional high-k dielectrics, a detailed review will be given on a family of fast-emerging dielectric materials, i.e. ferroelectric films, which bring intriguing functionalities. In the second part on defect engineering, we will first provide a brief overview of the existing defects in TMDCs, including vacancies, substitutional impurities, line defects and local phase transition, as well as their effects on electronic and optical properties. We then discuss how defect engineering is able to modulate the optical and electronic properties and create materials and devices with novel functionalities, e.g. photoconductors, photovoltaics, and quantum light emitting diodes (LEDs). Finally, a summary and outlook are given towards the future development of interface and defect engineering on TMDCs.
2. Interface engineering of TMDCs and its application in electronic and optoelectronic devices
2.1. Surface charge transfer doping
Fast development of 2D TMDCs has led to high demand for expanding their applications in electronic and optoelectronic devices as well as optimizing the device performance. In particular, it is crucial to control the charge carrier type and concentration in TMDCs. SCTD, as a strong and non-destructive doping methodology, relies on the interfacial charge transfer between the surface dopant and underlying semiconductor.38 This process is driven by the energy level alignment at the interfaces (i.e. adsorbate/semiconductor, semiconductor/semiconductor, oxide/semiconductor, or metal/semiconductor interface), in particular the misalignment of Fermi levels, which has been systematically investigated in conventional solid-state physics.39 Unlike the traditional substitutional doping or plasma treatment, SCTD does not introduce significant amounts of defects or destroy the crystal structure of the underlying semiconductors, and is thereby known as a defect-free doping scheme. Compared with the electrostatic modulation via an external electrical field, SCTD usually provides a stronger and non-volatile doping capability with ease of device fabrication. In the pioneering studies, SCTD was used to tune the conductivity of carbon-based materials such as graphene, diamond38,40–45 and organic semiconductors.46–49 Recently, this doping strategy has been applied to a variety of 2D materials including TMDCs,9,10,50 BP42,51–54etc. In the following sections, we will illustrate the mechanism of SCTD and summarize its effects on the modulation of the electronic and optical properties of TMDCs.

2.1.1. SCTD mechanism. 
The mechanism of SCTD on TMDCs can be schematically illustrated by the band/energy level diagrams in Fig. 2. Here we use the SCTD process between organic molecules and MoS2, the most studied TMDC, as an example to show the underlying mechanism, which is also applicable to other dopant/semiconductor systems. The electron affinity (EA, termed as χ) and ionization potential (IP) of the adsorbed molecules are two key parameters to determine the charge transfer at the molecule/MoS2 interface, where EA or IP refers to the energy difference between the vacuum level and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) or highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), respectively. For the molecules with high EA and their LUMO locating below the VBM of MoS2 [e.g. 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ)55], the electrons will be spontaneously transferred from MoS2 to the LUMO of the molecules, as exhibited in Fig. 2a. This results in hole accumulation or p-type doping in MoS2, and hence the upward band bending of MoS2 at the molecule/MoS2 interface (Fig. 2b). In contrast, for the molecules with low IP and their HOMO lying above the CBM of MoS2 (e.g. benzyl viologen56), spontaneous electron transfer will occur from the HOMO of the molecules to MoS2, thus resulting in an n-type doping on MoS2 and its downward band bending (Fig. 2c and d). The injected charge carriers induced by such a process can be confined at the MoS2/molecule interface and continuously contribute to the charge transport in MoS2.38 For the SCTD occurring between TMDCs and other surface dopants, such as metals and metal-oxides, the work function (WF) of the dopants should be used for comparison instead of EA and IP in organic molecules. Consequently, SCTD is able to effectively modulate the charge carrier type and concentration in TMDCs, and thereby impose deep impacts on both the electronic and optical properties of TMDCs.
 Fig. 2  Schematic energy level diagrams of SCTD between organic molecules and MoS2. (a and b) Depletion and p-doping process via SCTD of organic molecules with high EA; (c and d) n-doping on MoS2via SCTD of organic molecules with low IP. 


2.1.2. The modulation of electronic properties. 
Recently, a large variety of chemical dopants have been utilized to tune the electronic properties of 2D TMDCs, among which benzyl viologen (BV),56 potassium (K),57 cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3),58,59 triphenylphosphine (PPH3),60 nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NaDH),55 ammonia (NH3),61 chloride molecular,62 DNA,63 dehydrated poly(vinyl-alcohol) (PVA),64 polyethyleneimine (PEI),65 tetrathiafulvalene (TTF),66 acetone and triethylamine (TEA)18 serve as n-dopants; while AuCl3,25,67,68 O2/H2O,69 molybdenum trioxide (MoO3),70 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ), F4TCNQ,55 nitrogen oxide (NOx),61,71 bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide (TFSI),72 octyltrichlorosilane (OTS),73 and metal ion modified DNA63 serve as p-dopants. Of these species, K,57 BV,56 and NOx61,71 exhibit an extremely strong electron donating or accepting capability that can shift the Fermi level of TMDCs even above the CBM or below the VBM, respectively, corresponding to a degenerate doping process (Fig. 2d). As an organic compound with a high electron reduction potential (i.e. low IP), BV possesses a great electron donating behavior.74,75 Upon physical contact with MoS2, it can significantly increase the electron density of MoS2 to a remarkably high level of ∼1.2 × 1013 cm−2, but unfortunately this decreases its on/off ratio to less than 10. Furthermore, a BV-doped MoS2 device shows a superior stability in air ambient and the BV layer can be simply removed by rinsing in toluene solution. As a comparison, the non-degenerate n-dopant, Cs2CO3,58,59 can effectively increase the electron concentration of MoS2 and WSe2 by almost one order of magnitude, while retaining good semiconducting properties like high on/off ratio and gate tunability. Owing to the filling and screening of charge trapping sites by the increased electron concentration, the electron mobility of MoS2 and WSe2 can be enhanced by ∼3 and 5 times, respectively.58,59 On the other hand, the typical degenerate p-dopant, NO2, is able to shift the Fermi level of WSe2 below the VBM,71 revealing its strong electron accepting behaviour. However, this doping scheme suffers from its volatile nature due to the weak adsorption strength of NO2 on TMDCs,61 which can be solved by a chemical reaction at 150 °C76 to form chemisorbed NO2. The most widely used non-degenerate p-type dopant is AuCl3,25,67,68 which can draw electrons from TMDCs and then be chemically reduced to Au nanoparticles, leading to the p-doping of TMDC devices. AuCl3-based SCTD can be easily achieved via a standard solution-based process and thus has been extensively used to p-dope MoS2,67 and WSe2,68 as well as integrated into functional (opto)electronic devices.25


2.1.3. The modulation of optical properties. 
Owing to the strong electron–phonon interaction in 2D systems, the charge carrier concentration of 2D materials can greatly affect the phonon frequencies,77 which can be characterized by Raman spectroscopy. Raman spectra of few layer MoS2 before and after SCTD induced n- (DNA) and p-doping (metal ion-modified DNA) are presented in Fig. 3a and b. For MoS2 n-doped by DNA, both vibration modes of E12g and A1g are red-shifted by 1.9–2.3 cm−1 and 1.8–2.0 cm−1, respectively; while for MoS2 p-doped by metal ion-modified DNA, E12g and A1g are blue-shifted, with the wavenumbers determined by the metal-ions (Fig. 3b).63 Similar phenomena were also revealed on other TMDCs such as WSe268 and other dopants like BV56 and Cs2CO3.58,59 Therefore, Raman spectroscopy is considered to be an effective technique to characterize the doping process in TMDCs.
 Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra of MoS2 doped by DNA or metal ion-modified DNA, and (b) extracted E12g and A1g peak shift data for MoS2. (c) PL spectrum of a monolayer of MoS2 on a h-BN substrate at 10 K. (d) Comparison of the PL spectra of monolayer MoS2 under vacuum and upon exposure to H2O, O2, and ambient air, respectively. (e) PL spectrum of both as-exfoliated and TFSI-treated MoS2 monolayers. (f) Effective PL lifetime as a function of pump fluence. (g) Schematic of the formation of the exciton and trion as well as the charge transfer occurring in GQD-doped MoS2. (h) Circularly polarized PL spectra and the degree of circular polarization (P) of the pure MoS2 and GQD/MoS2 heterostructures with different GQD concentrations. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 63, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 15, Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group; (d) ref. 69, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (e and f) ref. 72, Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (g and h) Ref. 78, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to the Raman spectra, the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of TMDCs also strongly depend on the doping level. Upon light illumination, the photo-induced excitons (X0) in TMDCs are tightly bound due to the quantum confinement effect and reduced dielectric screening in 2D TMDCs. They can further interact with free charge carriers (h+/e−) and form charged exctions (termed as trions). The formation of positive/negative trions (X+/X−) needs extra binding energies (Eb1 = E(X0) − E(X+/−)) to bind the free carriers, resulting in the lower emission energy of a trion than the corresponding exciton. As illustrated in Fig. 3c, the low temperature PL spectrum clearly resolves the trion and exciton emission peaks for monolayer MoS2 on an h-BN substrate, with an energy difference (trion binding energy) between these two peaks of ∼34 meV. Compared with the electrostatic modulation on trion states via an external electrical field,79,80 SCTD provides a stronger and easy-access doping strategy to tune the carrier concentration and hence the PL emission of TMDCs.
O2 and H2O molecules in air can physisorb on the surface of MoS2, thus depleting the free electrons in the intrinsically n-doped MoS2. Such electron depletion converts the PL emission process from X− to X0 and also suppresses the electrostatic screening effect and nonradiative recombination, thereby greatly enhancing the quantum yield. As a result, the PL intensity of monolayer MoS2 is remarkably increased by over 100 times along with a 40 meV blue shift (Fig. 3d).69 Similar PL enhancement under air exposure is also observed in other n-type TMDCs like MoSe2, but is reversed in p-type WSe2 (PL intensity is further suppressed after exposure to O2 and H2O).69 Following this report, Mouri et al. modulated the PL characteristics of monolayer MoS2via a solution-based SCTD process.55 The PL intensity is enhanced by over 10 times using p-dopant TCNQ/F4TCNQ, but reduced by using electron donor, NADH.55 Amani et al. achieved a uniformly-enhanced PL intensity in monolayer MoS2 by more than two orders of magnitude via an organic superacid bis(trifluoro-methane) sulfonimide (TFSI) treatment (Fig. 3e),72 reaching ∼95% quantum yield. The TFSI treatment can help deplete the extra electrons as well as eliminate the defects in MoS2. By performing time-resolved PL measurement, it was found that the exciton lifetime is largely enhanced after the treatment. At the lowest measurable pump fluence of 5 × 10−4 μJ, the treated sample features a lifetime of ∼10.8 ± 0.6 ns, compared to the lifetime of ∼0.3 ns in the pristine MoS2 (Fig. 3f).72
Light excitation can also lead to SCTD in heterostructures and further tune the optical properties of TMDCs. In a graphene quantum dot (GQD)/MoS2 heterostructure, photo-generated electrons transfer from the HOMO of GQDs to the CB of MoS2 (Fig. 3g).78 In addition to the suppressed PL intensity, the valley polarization of MoS2 can also be tuned by such SCTD processes, as shown in Fig. 3f. The degree of circular polarization (P) is defined as P = (I+ − I−)/(I+ + I−), where I+ and I− represent the PL intensity of right handed σ+ and left handed σ− circularly polarized light, respectively. At a high doping level, P decreases from 25% (pure MoS2) to 8% (10 mg ml−1 GQDs on MoS2), as shown in Fig. 3h.78 The valley depolarization at a high doping level can be ascribed to the enhanced electron–electron interaction. Electron spins tend to be inversed under inter-collision, leading to conversion from a bright to a dark exciton or nonradiative dissipation.81


2.1.4. Application of SCTD in electronic and optoelectronic devices. 
Based on the strong tunability of the electronic and optical properties of TMDCs, SCTD can be applied to improve the performance of TMDC-based electronic and optoelectronic devices. In a pioneering work, Lin et al. utilized Cs2CO3 to achieve effective n-doping of an MoS2 FET.58 The excess electrons injected by Cs2CO3 can tightly bind with excitons to form X− in monolayer MoS2, which prolongs the lifetime of the photo-induced excitonic state, and hence enhances the photoresponsivity by ∼5 times (Fig. 4a–c). In addition, Cs2CO3 has been also utilized to n-dope WSe2, resulting in a dramatic photocurrent increase by nearly three orders of magnitude.59 Such enhancement of the device performance is attributed to the reduction of the contact resistance and the decrease of the recombination probability of photo-excited excitons. Organic n-type dopant, PPh3, consisting of lone pairs of phosphorus atoms, can dramatically enhance the photoresponsivity of WSe2 from 2.7 × 103 to 4.3 × 105 only with a fractional deterioration of response speed.60 Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) are another family of effective dopants for TMDCs. For example, a p-doped WSe2 phototransistor decorated by octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) achieves great enhancement of both field-effect mobility (by 5 times), photoresponsivity (by 28 times) and detectivity (by 26 times); while a comparable enhancement can be achieved in n-doped MoS2 by coating with 3-amino-propyltriethoxysilane (APTES) SAM.82
 Fig. 4  (a) Transfer characteristics of the MoS2 FET under vacuum with increasing Cs2CO3 thickness (Vds = 100 mV). (b) PL spectra of 1L-MoS2 before and after Cs2CO3 (0.7 nm) doping. (c) Photocurrent of the device without and with Cs2CO3 decoration, respectively (Vds = 20 mV, Vg = 0 V). (d) Schematic diagram of the MoS2 p–n diodes with AuCl3 doping under light illumination. (e) I–V curves of the MoS2 diode at Vg = 40 V with the ideal factor of n = 1. (f) Photovoltaic behavior of the doping-induced p–n junction upon light illumination with different wavelengths. Inset shows the enlarged I–V diagram curve under 600 nm light irradiation. (g) Schematic drawing of the vertical p–n junction in MoS2. (h) Schematic image of the device structure for a WSe2 inverter. (i) The output signal (Vout − Vin) of the WSe2 inverter with Vdd ranging from 2 to 6 V. Inset: The channel current versus the input voltage. Reprinted with permission from: (a–c) ref. 58, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (d–f) ref. 25, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (g) ref. 86, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (h and i) ref. 26, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Using a spatially controlled doping scheme to establish a p–n junction is another strategy to realize TMDC-based functional devices. A typical schematic drawing of the junction structure is shown in Fig. 4d, where the MoS2 device is constructed with asymmetric electrodes (Pd, Cr/Au) to facilitate the carrier transport at each side.25 Half of the channel was masked by h-BN while the other half was p-doped by AuCl3 solution, thereby forming a p–n diode across the two regimes. The p–n junction possesses an ideal diode behavior with an ideal factor n = 1, as revealed by the I–V characteristic in Fig. 4e. Furthermore, the diode device shows an excellent photodetecting performance with a responsivity of ∼5 A W−1 and an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of ∼1200% at VD = 1.5 V. In addition, an apparent open circuit voltage (Voc) and short circuit current (Isc) are observed upon illumination, revealing a photovoltaic characteristic. The built-in potential across the junction can effectively separate the photo-generated electron–hole pairs, resulting in a solar cell device with wide spectrum response (350–700 nm, Fig. 4f). Although the above lateral homojunction demonstrates a near ‘ideal’ diode performance, the active junction area for light absorption is relatively small. Further optimization can be realized by building up a vertical p–n junction to obtain a much larger planar active area. A widely adopted method is to stack 2D materials with different polarities together to achieve 2D–2D heterojunctions, which has attracted intensive research efforts in the last few years.10,83–85 Another possible solution with easy-access and high-productivity is to obtain a vertical homojunction. As shown in Fig. 4g, after a 4-step fabrication process, BV and AuCl3 were used to dope two sides of MoS2 in the opposite manner to build up a vertical p–n junction. The fabricated device shows a high photocurrent on/off ratio of ∼100 under 655 nm light illumination. Meanwhile, the photovoltaic performance such as power-conversion efficiency, fill factor and photoresponsivity were estimated to be 0.4%, 0.22 and 30 mA W−1 under standard solar simulator illumination.86
SCTD has also been widely implemented in TMDCs to construct complementary logic devices, such as a logic inverter.26,87,88 A WSe2-based inverter consists of two separated nMOS and pMOS FET channels in parallel, with low (Ag) and high (Pt) WF metal contacts, respectively.26 The nMOS channel was protected by an AlOx layer prior to the treatment by F4TCNQ-poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) on the pMOS channel, as shown in Fig. 4h. Upon supplying a voltage (Vdd) from 2 to 6 V, the device shows an excellent signal inversion performance, such as full logic swing, fast transition, symmetrical shape, high noise margin and almost zero current under 0 V voltage (Fig. 4i). The gain of the inverter, defined as the slope dVout/dVin of the output characteristic, is calculated to be as high as ∼38. Meanwhile, the static power, defined as Pstatic = Vdd(Istatic_low + Istatic_high)/2, is as low as 2 pW at Vdd = 2 V. In a similar device configuration, a MoTe2-based inverter was fabricated by atomic layer deposition (ALD) induced hydrogen diffusion, achieving a DC voltage gain of 29 and an AC gain of 18 at 1 kHz,87 respectively.

2.2. TMDC/metal contact engineering.
To improve the device performance of TMDCs, it is crucial to optimize the electrical contact.89–95 The large bandgap of TMDCs leads to a Schottky barrier (SB) at the metal electrode/TMDC interface, resulting in a high contact resistance for the as-fabricated devices. Furthermore, an SB may still exist even using a contact metal with matched WF due to the Fermi level pinning effect.91
Contact engineering is a promising approach to lower the SB at the metal/TMDC interface and eventually enhance the device performance. For example, both n- and p-type behavior can be realized in the same TMDCs via suitable contact engineering. The representative contact engineering strategies include the selection of suitable metal contact, metal contact doping and buffer layer engineering strategies.

2.2.1. Selection of a suitable metal contact. 
A number of metal materials, such as aluminium (Al), tungsten (W), gold (Au), platinum (Pt), scandium (Sc), titanium (Ti) and nickel (Ni) have been applied in contact with TMDCs to optimize the device performance.89–93,96–101 For n-type MoS2, metals with low WF are found to form low SBs for electrons with MoS2, thereby facilitating the electron transport in MoS2 FETs. For example, Sc (WF = 3.5 eV) and Ti (WF = 4.3 eV) contacted MoS2 devices show a small SB height (φB) of ∼30 meV and ∼50 meV, respectively (Fig. 5a and b).91 In particular, Sc-contacted few-layer MoS2 achieves a high field-effect mobility of ∼184 cm2 V−1 s−1, and this could be further improved to ∼700 cm2 V−1 s−1 by coating with an Al2O3 layer. On the other hand, the deposited metal interacts strongly with the top S atoms through metal–S hybridization, which in turn weakens the lattice Mo–S bonding, and thereby induces surface states of Mo d-orbitals within the bandgap.102 This leads to the strong Fermi level pinning effect in MoS2 for most of the metal contacts, even when a high WF material like Pd has been used (Fig. 5a).91 This effect was extensively investigated in metal-contacted MoS2 devices, but seems not so obvious for other TMDCs. For example, both n- and p-type transport can be realized in WSe2-based FETs with the selection of suitable metal contacts.93,103,104 By using high WF metal Au as a contact, a sizable SB exists at the MoS2/Au interface,91,105 but the ‘Ohmic performance’ can still be observed in a low bias region.13,106 Meanwhile, Au tends to form clusters or even nanostructures on MoS2 surfaces, thus restricting the electron injection and producing overheating at the contact regions.93
 Fig. 5  (a) Line-up of the Fermi level of different metals with respect to the band structure of MoS2 based on the experimental data. (b) Transfer characteristics of MoS2 FETs with Sc, Ti, Ni, and Pt metal contacts at VDS = 0.2 V. The inset shows the output characteristics of the corresponding devices for a gate voltage overdrive of 4.0–5.0 V. (c) Ids–Vgs characteristics of a MoS2 pFET with MoOx contacts. Inset shows the device structure. (d) Temperature-dependent I–V curve of the diode with asymmetric Ni and MoO3 electrodes. Inset: Qualitative band structure of the device. (e) Schematic drawing of a horizontally contact-doped TMDC device. (f) Transfer characteristics of a WSe2 device before and after NO2 contact doping. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 91, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; (c and d) ref. 107, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (f) ref. 71, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 


2.2.2. Contact doping. 
Recently, Steven et al. realized efficient hole injection in few-layer MoS2 FETs by selectively p-type doping the contact area of MoS2 beneath the electrodes using high WF material MoOx, as shown in the inset of Fig. 5c.107 The introduction of a MoOx interlayer effectively suppresses the Fermi-level pinning effect between MoS2 and the metal electrodes, thus enabling p-type conduction in MoS2. MoS2 Schottky diodes with rectification ratio ∼106 can be achieved by using asymmetric contacts (Fig. 5d, Ni as electron contact and MoOx/Pd as a hole contact).107 Yang et al. achieved effective chloride molecular doping by immersion of WS2 and MoS2 flakes into undiluted 1,2-dichloroethane (DCE). The contact resistance of WS2–Ni and MoS2–Ni after treatment can be reduced by 2–3 orders of magnitude to 0.7 and 0.5 kΩ μm, respectively.62
Horizontal contact doping, defined as doping the channel region in the proximity of the metal contact (Fig. 5e), can also lower the SB at the TMDC/metal interface, thereby facilitating efficient carrier injection into the conduction channel. Recently, Javey's group adopted this doping scheme on MoS2 and WSe2 FETs to optimize the device performance by using NO2 (Fig. 5f)71 and K57 as degenerate hole and electron dopants, respectively. WSe2 FETs with NO2 doped contacts exhibit an excellent hole field-effect mobility of ∼250 cm2 V−1 s−1, near ideal subthreshold swing of ∼60 mV dec−1 and high Ion/Ioff larger than 106; while K-contact-doped WSe2 shows a high electron field-effect mobility up to ∼100 cm2 V−1 s−1. The K-contact-doped nFET was then integrated with a Pd contacted pFET on the same flake to demonstrate a logic inverter with a high gain of ∼13.108 However, NO2 or K doped devices suffer from poor air stability due to the high chemical reactivity of the surface dopant, which can be solved by using stable dopants such as BV56 and AuCl3.88
Another interesting contact doping method is to utilize a layer of photoresist such as hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ)109 and cross-linked PMMA110 as a dopant. Perera et al. selectively covered the MoS2 contact and the vicinity of the channel area with HSQ and then used low beam dosages to destroy the Si–H bond in HSQ and release hydrogens to induce n-doping on the contact.109 This method can be directly combined with traditional lithography techniques and offers a precisely area-selective doping capability, showing great potential in the fabrication of integrated logic circuits.


2.2.3. Buffer layer engineering. 
Graphene buffer layer. 
Some metals such as Au and Ag tend to aggregate on the surface of TMDCs to form clusters (Fig. 6a). Such inhomogeneous metal/TMDC interfaces may seriously deteriorate the device performance, which can be improved by inserting a buffer layer between the metal and TMDCs.92 Graphene is the most widely adopted buffer material owing to its semimetal nature with tunable Fermi level by electrostatic gating.111,112 The graphene layer can be easily transferred onto the TMDC surface via a standard wet/dry transfer method.113 Compared to intimate metal–MoS2 contact, insertion of a graphene layer between the metal and MoS2 eliminates the metal deposition induced strain and the overheating effect.92 MoS2 devices with graphene buffer layer have been extensively investigated.88,112,114–117 Yu et al. constructed complementary logic devices based on chemical vapor deposition (CVD)-grown MoS2/graphene heterostructures and quantitatively analyzed the contact resistance.112 By fitting the Id–Vd characteristics in the thermal emission relation of the Schottky junction, the SB height (φB) can be extracted, as plotted as a function of back gate voltages (Vg) in Fig. 6b. The φB of MoS2/graphene strongly depends on Vg, which dramatically decreases from 110 to 0 meV with Vg increasing from 0 V to 35 V; while the φB of MoS2/Ti nearly remains at 40 meV. Such gate-dependent barrier in MoS2/graphene is attributed to the effective tuning of the Fermi level in graphene by Vg with respect to the energy levels of MoS2. Further optimization of the device configuration can be fulfilled by sandwiching the MoS2 channel as well as the graphene electrodes within h-BN layers to reduce the interfacial charge scattering.114 MoS2/graphene/metal edge-contacts were fabricated via side-etching the h-BN/graphene/h-BN stack by O2 plasma (Fig. 6c). The fabricated device shows a high Hall mobility reaching 34000 cm2 V−1 s−1 (6-layer flake) at a temperature below 5 K, leading to the direct observation of Shubnikov–de Haas oscillations on MoS2.114
 Fig. 6  (a) AFM images of 2 nm Ag on monolayer MoS2. The rms value of roughness is 0.78 nm. (b) The plot of SB height φB as a function of Vg for CVD-grown MoS2–graphene and MoS2–Ti junctions. (c) Schematic of a graphene edge-contacted and h-BN-encapsulated MoS2 multi-terminal FET. (d) Transfer characteristics of a graphene-contacted MoS2 before and after AuCl3 doping. Inset shows the optical microscopy image of this device. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 92, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 112, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 114, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (d) ref. 88, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
The use of graphene as contact in TMDC devices can lower the contact resistance for both electron and hole transport via tuning the Fermi level of graphene by either electrical field116 or chemical doping.88 Liu et al. used AuCl3 as the electron-acceptor to convert an MoS2 FET from n-type to p-type conduction,88 but the large SB at the metal/MoS2 contact limits the hole transport in Pd-contacted MoS2 channels. After inserting a graphene buffer layer, the SBs for hole transport are significantly reduced due to the AuCl3-induced downward shift of graphene's Fermi level, hence achieving a high-performance p-type FET (Fig. 6d).88
Tunnelling buffer layer. 
In quantum physics, if the width of an energy barrier reaches the quantum limit, wave-like electrons could ‘tunnel’ the barrier even without sufficient energy to overcome it. This tunnelling effect can be utilized to reduce the contact resistance via inserting an ultrathin tunnelling buffer layer between the TMDCs and metal, i.e. forming a metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) structure. In a MIS structure, the gap between the metal and semiconductor helps to enhance the decay of the electronic wavefunctions, and hence to suppress the metal induced gap states (MIGS) at the metal/semiconductor interface, thereby leading to a largely improved contact. In particular, this method shows advantages in either enhancing the spin polarization118,119 in the TMDC or improving the contacts in top-gated FETs, where the TMDCs under the metal contact cannot be electrically gated to high doping levels due to the metal contact induced screen effect. Illustrations of the band alignment before and after inserting an insulating buffer layer are shown in Fig. 7a and b, respectively. When the metal electrodes are in direct contact with MoS2, electrons will fill the surface states and induce strong band bending at the interface, which can be greatly attenuated with the insertion of an insulating buffer layer.120,121 Meanwhile, the interface dipoles formed across the buffer layer can compensate the applied bias, which further prevents the movement of the Fermi level in MoS2 towards the charge neutrality point and reduces the SB height.122 As a result, MIS is an effective structure to obtain MoS2 FETs with excellent contact performance.
 Fig. 7  Band alignment of a metal/MoS2 contact (a) before and (b) after inserting an insulating layer. Transfer characteristics of the MoS2 devices with (c) Co and (d) TiO2/Co contact. The plot of SB heights at different gate voltages for the MoS2 device (e) without and (f) with a h-BN buffer layer, respectively. Reprinted with permission from: (c and d) ref. 119, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (e and f) ref. 124, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
Various insulators, including MgO,118 TiO2,119 Ta2O5123 and h-BN124,125 have been adopted as tunnelling buffer layers to modify the contacts in MoS2 devices. Chen et al. reported that the insertion of a 2 nm MgO thin film between MoS2 and Co can greatly reduce the SB height from 60.6 to 9.7 meV.118 Similarly, the introduction of a TiO2 thin layer shows a dramatic decrease of the contact resistance by two orders of magnitude, as exhibited in Fig. 7c and d119. Although metal oxides form effective tunnelling barriers between metals and TMDCs, the lack of surface dangling bonds on TMDCs induces the inhomogeneous growth of the oxide layer,126,127 and interfacial charge transfer may occur between the metal oxide and TMDCs, deteriorating the intrinsic transport properties of the TMDCs.107,128,129 As an alternative with an atomically-smooth and inert surface, a h-BN buffer layer has been used as a tunnelling buffer layer in MoS2 to improve the electrical contact.124,125 As illustrated in Fig. 7e and f, the initial SB height of ∼158 meV (MoS2/Ni) can be greatly reduced to 31 (38) meV by adding 1–2 (3–4) layers of h-BN. Given that tunnelling resistance is mainly determined by the h-BN thickness, the device with a monolayer h-BN buffer layer possesses the best device performance, which largely reduces the contact resistance from 5.1 kΩ μm to 1.8 kΩ μm.124 With the development of CVD growth of large scale monolayer h-BN130 and mature transfer technologies, the h-BN/TMDC heterostructure shows great potential in future 2D material-based electronics.
Other buffer layers. 
Very recently, substitutionally-doped TMDCs have been synthesized by chemical vapor transport (CVT) to serve as the buffer layer to improve the contact performance of TMDC devices.131 By applying p-doped Nb0.005W0.995Se2 as a contact, the WSe2 FET device exhibits a contact resistance as low as ∼0.3 kΩ μm, a high on/off ratio larger than 109, and high drive currents exceeding 320 μA μm−1. Furthermore, this strategy is able to obtain high-performance hole transport in MoS2 FETs via inserting a p-doped buffer layer Nb0.005Mo0.995S2, showing a high hole field-effect mobility of ∼180 and 2800 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature and 5 K, respectively. Using the plasma-enhanced ALD-CVD technique, an interfacial transition regime of WxNb1−xSe2 can be introduced between semiconducting WSe2 and metallic NbSe2.132 The SB heights in Pd/WSe2, Pd/NbSe2/WSe2 and Pd/NbS2/WxNb1−xSe2/WSe are 326, 199 and 176 meV, respectively. Lowering the SB and tunnelling at the metal/WxNb1−xSe2/TMDCs are considered to be the two main reasons for the improvement in the contact performance in these transition-regime-contained van der Waals heterostructures.

2.3. Dielectric/TMDC interface engineering
In early studies, the field-effect electron mobility for monolayer MoS2 was found to be less than 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature in commonly used back-gated FET configurations on an SiO2 dielectric,133 far less than the theoretical predictions.33,134 This is mainly attributed to the serious extrinsic scattering of charge carriers during the transport, including the scattering induced by charge impurities (Coulomb impurities, CIs), trapping states at the interface, defects of TMDCs and remote surface optical (SO) phonons.32,114,135–138 CIs originate from a variety of impurity sources, such as the residual metal ions in the dielectric, impurities at the 2D material/substrate interface and residual solvent or adsorbed gas molecules during the device fabrication, which are deemed to be point charges and interact with e−/h+ in the 2D material through long range Coulomb interactions. Defects refer to the imperfection or disorder of the crystal lattice, such as atomic vacancies/interstitials and grain boundaries, which will be discussed in Section 3. SO phonons come from the polar vibrational modes in the dielectric, which can be excited by electrons in the conduction channel and in turn degrade the mobility in the channel. All the aforementioned scattering processes can be suppressed by lowering the temperature.
A comprehensive experimental and theoretical study of electron transport in defect-rehabilitated monolayer MoS2136 by Yu et al139 indicates that the mobility of MoS2 is dominated by CI scattering if the CI concentration is more than 0.3 × 1012 cm−2, whereas the use of a high-k dielectric like HfO2 can effectively screen the CI scattering. Otherwise, the SO phonon scattering dominates the charge transport with the CI concentration below 0.3 × 1012 cm−2 and a low-k dielectric like SiO2 is preferred, as shown in Fig. 8a. From the theoretical simulation, the electron mobility of MoS2 is limited by ionized impurity scattering at low temperature; while the combined homopolar and the polar-optical phonon scattering dominate at room temperature.143
 Fig. 8  (a) The simulated charge carrier mobility as a function of CI concentration for TMDC devices on SiO2 (black), Al2O3 (green), and HfO2 (red). (b) Field-effect mobility as a function of temperature for three devices on SiO2 (black), Al2O3 (green), and HfO2 (red), respectively. Solid lines are the modelling results. Temperature dependent field-effect mobility of monolayer MoS2 in (c) bottom- and (d) dual-gated MoS2 FETs, respectively. (e) Schematic illustration of a HfO2-covered MoS2 FET with Pd (E-mode) and Al (D-mode) top electrodes. (f) The transfer characteristics of D-mode and E-mode bilayer MoS2 FETs. (g) Schematic drawing of a top-gated FET with a bilayer CYTOP/Al2O3 top gate dielectric. (h) Transfer characteristics of a 4L WSe2 FET after Al2O3 deposition with and without a CYTOP buffer layer. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 139, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons; (c and d) ref. 140, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group; (e and f) ref. 141, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; (g and h) ref. 142, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 

2.3.1. High-k dielectric. 
It has been predicted that deposition of a high-k dielectric like HfO2 is an effective method to enhance the carrier mobility in 2D semiconductors,144 as further demonstrated by several experimental studies.13,136,143,145–147 Wang's group has performed a series of detailed investigations in this field.139,145,146 They first developed a defect-healing method by thiol chemistry to get rid of the defect scattering from S vacancies, which will be discussed in Section 3.3.1.136 Under the same carrier density n = 7.0 × 1012 cm−2, the charge carrier field-effect mobility of monolayer WS2 on Al2O3 (ε = 10) reaches 49 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature, twice the value on SiO2 (ε = 3.9),146 which can be further improved to 83 cm2 V−1 s−1 by thiol functionalization. Furthermore, the room temperature field-effect mobilities of monolayer MoS2 on HfO2 (ε = 16.5), Al2O3 and SiO2 at the same carrier concentration are compared and presented in Fig. 8b, which clearly shows that mobility increases with the dielectric constant.139 This significant mobility enhancement by high-k dielectrics can be attributed to the reduction of CI scattering and the charge traps, as well as possible modification of the phononic dispersion relation.13,139,145,146 Temperature-dependent transport measurements on dual-gated MoS2 (SiO2 and HfO2 as bottom and top gate, respectively) further confirm the effective depression of CI scattering by using a high-k dielectric, as revealed by the monotonic increase of Hall mobility with decreasing temperature in Fig. 8d, in sharp contrast to the temperature dependence of a bottom-gated device in Fig. 8c.140,148 More interestingly, the charge carrier density of monolayer MoS2 can be tuned to a high doping level up to ∼3.6 × 1013 cm−2 in dual-gated FETs, thus inducing the transition from an insulating to a metallic state due to the strong electron–electron interaction.149 The success of the effective control of device performance via high-k dielectrics provides the opportunity to incorporate this dielectric engineering into integrated logic circuits.141,150,151 As shown in Fig. 8e and f, transistors with both negative (D-mode) and positive (E-mode) threshold voltages are achieved on a single bilayer MoS2 using Al and Pd gate electrodes on 20 nm HfO2, respectively.141 The origin of the threshold voltage difference between D- and E-mode transistors can be understood by a band alignment process in an MIS structure (Fig. 7a and b). Based on the prototype device, multiple transistors can be integrated to achieve various functional devices, including inverters, NAND gates, static random-access memory and five-stage ring oscillators.141
Although high-quality metal oxide dielectrics can be grown by ALD, several studies report the inhomogeneity of grown dielectrics owing to the lack of dangling bonds on TMDC surfaces, which may lead to leakage from the gate electrode.96,127 A possible solution is to chemically pre-treat the surface of TMDCs152–154 or insert a buffer layer before the growth of the high-k dielectric.96,142 Zou et al. built up MoS2 FETs by adding an ultrathin metal oxide (MgO, Al2O3, Y2O3) buffer layer between MoS2 and HfO2, which shows a good device performance with a high on/off ratio larger than 108 as well as a near-ideal subthreshold swing of ∼65 mV dec−1.126 This method is also applicable to other TMDCs like HfS2.148 In addition, during the traditional ALD process, the precursor reacts with water at high temperature, e.g. 250–300 °C for Al2O3, which may generate hydrogen atoms that diffuse into the TMDCs and lead to n-type doping.142 The use of an organic fluoropolymer (CYTOP) as a buffer layer in WSe2 devices can eliminate the n-type doping effect during the ALD growth of Al2O3, thus retaining its unipolar hole transport properties, as shown in Fig. 8g and h. Moreover, as CYTOP is a low-k dielectric, it will not induce serious SO phonon scattering as found in devices with high-k dielectrics.138,142 Other surface treatments, like ultraviolet-O3 exposure to form oxygen–S bonds at the MoS2 surface153 or oxygen plasma pre-treatment to provide dangling bonds can also facilitate the growth of high-k dielectrics on TMDCs.152,154


2.3.2. Other solid dielectrics. 
Another dielectric engineering strategy is using a better bottom gate dielectric to replace the conventional solid-state dielectric SiO2 that limits the device performance of TMDCs due to the existence of severe dangling bonds, impurities and surface states. For example, the carrier mobility of TMDCs is limited by the scattering from the charged surface states and impurities,155 surface roughness, and surface optical phonons of SiO2, while the photoresponsivity and photoresponse time of TMDCs can also be affected due to the carrier scattering and trap states on the SiO2 substrate. The slow photoresponse in MoS2 photodetectors may result from charge trap states at the MoS2/SiO2 interface with surface-bound water.156 h-BN, as a layered insulator with a bandgap of ∼6 eV, features an atomic flat surface without dangling bonds. Therefore, it has been widely used as a dielectric material in graphene electronics157 and can be an appropriate choice for TMDCs. MoS2 devices with different back gating architectures of MoS2/SiO2 (denoted as MS), MoS2/h-BN/SiO2 (MB) and MoS2/h-BN/graphene (MBG)19 have been systematically investigated. The h-BN-supported devices (MB and MBG) possess a much higher carrier mobility and smaller hysteresis than the MS device (Fig. 9a), owing to the atomically flat surface and low-density of charge trapping sites in h-BN. In addition, high photoresponsivity and short photoresponse time of TMDCs can be obtained by using h-BN as the substrate due to reduced scattering from the impurities and trap states in the substrate.60,158,159 The MBG structure can be easily integrated into flexible electronic devices by transferring it onto a flexible polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrate, where the bending of the device (up to 1.5% strain) would not disturb the output signal (Fig. 9b).19 Double-face encapsulation by h-BN would further increase the device performance and side contact is needed114,160 (Fig. 6c). Other solid dielectrics like PMMA161 and parylene-C,162 have also been utilized in TMDC devices to enhance their performance. On the other hand, the use of dielectric materials functionalized by SAMs can effectively dope the TMDCs from the substrate by choosing suitable terminal groups with different dipole moments.73 For example, fluoroalkyltrichlorosilane-SAM and 3-(trimethoxysilyl)-1-propanamine-SAM on the substrate could serve as dopants to either p- or n-dope MoS2, respectively (Fig. 9c and d). SAMs not only effectively dope the upper TMDCs in a controlled manner, but also form an ultrasmooth surface to reduce the interfacial impurity scattering, thus enhancing the transport performance of TMDC-based devices.
 Fig. 9  (a) Transfer characteristics of MoS2 FETs with different back gating structures of MoS2/SiO2 (MS) and MoS2/h-BN/SiO2 (MB). (b) Transfer characteristics of the flexible MoS2/h-BN/graphene (MBG) device with respect to the bending strain. (c) Schematic illustration of the SiO2 dielectric modified by self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). (d) Transfer characteristics of few-layer MoS2 FETs on SAM-modified SiO2 substrates. (e) Schematic illustration of the working principle of an ionic-liquid-gated MoS2 FET. Transfer characteristics of ionic-liquid-gated (f) few-layer, (g) bilayer and trilayer MoS2 FETs, and (h) a few-layer WS2 FET. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 19, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (c and d) ref. 73, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (e and g) ref. 109, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (f) ref. 167, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; (h) ref. 172, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Owing to the weak dielectric screening and strong quantum confinement in the 2D limit, the exciton binding energies in TMDCs (∼370 meV for monolayer WSe2) are over an order of magnitude larger than those in the conventional inorganic semiconductors, which are also highly sensitive to the local dielectric environment.163–165 Even though excitons are confined in TMDC monolayers, the electric field of excitons can permeate into the local surroundings and can be effectively screened by top or bottom attached few-layer graphene and h-BN, leading to a decrease in both the bandgap and exciton binding energy by several hundreds of meV.166


2.3.3. Ionic liquid gating. 
As a liquid-phase dielectric, ionic liquids feature an electric double layer (EDL) structure, which provides a huge capacitance to accumulate the charge carriers that is far beyond those of conventional solid dielectrics.167 A schematic device structure with ionic liquid gating is shown in Fig. 9e. With this ultra-high electron-drawing ability, ionic liquids have been used to induce insulator-to-metal transitions in ZnO168 as well as superconductivity in SrTiO3.169 Zhang et al. used DEME-TFSI (N,N-diethyl-N-methyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl) ammonium bis (trifluoromethyl-sulfonyl) imide) as an ionic liquid dielectric167 in MoS2 FETs. The device exhibits ambipolar transport characteristics with a field-effect hole and electron mobility of ∼86 and 44 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, while both the hole and electron carrier concentration could reach as high as ∼1014 cm−2, which is 1 order of magnitude higher than in the MoS2 device with an SiO2 dielectric.170 However, this ion-gel-gated device suffers from a low on/off ratio of ∼102. The ultrathin EDL can reduce the width of the SB by strong band bending near the contacts, thus facilitating the tunnelling of both holes and electrons through the metal/semiconductor interface. Hence, the injection of both carriers occurs via thermal-assisted tunnelling rather than by a thermionic emission process.171 Perera et al. also used DEME-TFSI ionic liquid as the dielectric in bi- and tri-layer MoS2 FETs,109 achieving a high on/off ratio >107 (104) for electrons (holes), a subthreshold swing of about 50 mV dec−1 at 250 K, and a field-effect mobility of up to 220 cm2 V−1 S−1 at 77 K108 (Fig. 9g). The device performance of an ion-liquid-gated device can be further enhanced by replacing the metal contacts with graphene, by taking advantage of the gate-tunable Fermi level, as previously discussed in Fig. 6b. Chuang et al. fabricated WSe2 FETs with h-BN-passivated channels and ionic liquid-gated graphene contacts, showing high hole and electron field-effect mobilities of 270 and 330 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 77 K, respectively.116 Moreover, the ionic-liquid-gated WS2 device shows stable and hysteresis-free ambipolar characteristics with steep subthreshold slopes for both electrons and holes (Fig. 9h), owing to the perfect electrostatic coupling between the ionic liquid gate and the semiconductor channel.172 This feature permits the quantitative determination of the WS2 bandgap using the equation:ΔVgap = VeTH − VhTH,where VeTH and VhTH are threshold voltage for the electron and hole side, respectively. The bandgap is calculated to be ∼1.4 eV, consistent with the previously reported values (1.3–1.35 eV).12,173
Owing to the super-high carrier concentration achieved by ionic liquid gating, many interesting phenomena such as rectifying behavior,174 metal–insulator transition,116 phase transition,175,176 charge-density wave177 and superconductivity178,179 have been observed in ionic liquid gated-TMDCs. As a result, ionic liquid gating has emerged as an essential tool to investigate 2D material-based many-body effects under extreme conditions.


2.3.4. Ferroelectric dielectrics. 
Ferroelectric materials are a family of materials with intrinsic ferroelectricity. Analogous to ferromagnetic materials that feature a permanent magnetic momentum, ferroelectric materials have a spontaneous electric polarization even at zero bias, which can be divided into polarization up (Pup) and down (Pdown) states as shown in Fig. 10a. This polarization can be reversed by an external electrical field, leading to great potential applications in memory devices. Note that ferroelectric materials are high-k insulators, which makes them a potential dielectric material for constructing 2D material-based devices with different functionalities, such as low power transistors, memory devices, photodetectors etc.
 Fig. 10  (a) Left: Typical ferroelectric hysteresis curve. Pr and Ec are the remnant polarization and coercive electric field, respectively. Right: A schematic of the FET devices with a ferroelectric dielectric of polarization up and down, respectively. (b) Schematic illustration of a MoS2 FET with an HZO ferroelectric film and Al2O3 dielectric. (c) The plot of subthreshold voltage with respect to the drain current Id and (d) I–V characteristics at Vg from −0.65 V to −0.55 V in the device shown in (b). (e) Time-dependent relaxation curves in a WSe2 FET with a PZT dielectric obtained after pulsed gating at on (Pdown) states and following off (Pup) states. (f) PL spectra measured from the MoS2 monolayer with a PZT dielectric at both polarization states. In a MoS2 FET with a P(VDF-TrFE) dielectric, (g) photoswitching behaviors at three states, fresh, Pdown and Pup, respectively, and (h) photoresponsivity as a function of incident light wavelength from 500 to 1550 nm under the Pup state. Reprinted with permission from (a, g and h) ref. 194, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons; (b–d) ref. 186, Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group; (e and f) ref. 191, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
FET devices with low power dissipation are desirable for future electronic devices, which can be realized by lowering the operation voltage.180–182 The operation voltage strongly depends on the subthreshold swing of FETs, which cannot be lower than 60 meV dec−1 at room temperature under thermodynamic equilibrium. A possible way to overcome this limitation is to replace the traditional insulating dielectric with a ferroelectric material that acts as a negative capacitor.183 A typical device structure is shown in Fig. 10b, where the ferroelectric material Hf0.5Zr0.5O2 (HZO)184,185 and Al2O3 are used as dielectric and capacitance matching materials, respectively. The use of HZO in MoS2 FETs leads to a high working current of 510 μA μm−1 with an outstanding subthreshold swing of 57.6 and 52.3 mV dec−1 for forward and reverse sweeps, respectively.186 This can be further reduced to as low as 5.6 mV dec−1 (min #2 in Fig. 10c) and is much smaller than 80–90 mV dec−1 realized in Al2O3 back-gated devices. The significant reduction of subthreshold swing results from the switching between two polarization states of HZO. Meanwhile, a negative differential resistance186 is observed in this device (Fig. 10d), showing great potential in high-frequency electronics, i.e. Gunn diodes.
TMDC-based memory devices can be constructed by utilizing ferroelectric materials with gate-tunable polarization effects as dielectrics.187–191 For instance, Ko et al. used MoS2 or WSe2 in combination with Pb[Zr0.2Ti0.8]O3 (PZT) to fabricate non-volatile memory devices, presenting a low switching voltage (<2.5 V), high on–off ratio (>104), superior data retention (>10 d) and fast on/off switching (<25 ms), as shown in Fig. 10e, which are comparable to conventional ferroelectric materials.191 More interestingly, there exists a non-volatile modulation of PL intensity (increased by over 7 times) in monolayer MoS2 when switching the polarization from the Pup to Pdown state, in agreement with the transition from negative trion recombination to exciton recombination.55,58,69 In addition, the photodetecting performance of MoS2 with ferroelectric films (P(VDF-TrFE))192,193 as dielectrics was investigated by Wang et al.194 In the Pup state, the electrons in MoS2 are largely exhausted, leading to an ultra-high signal-to-noise ratio of ∼103; while the fresh and Pdown state devices give a negligible photocurrent (Fig. 10g). Moreover, the strong electrical field induced by the Pup ferroelectric film decreases the bandgap of MoS2, making the (P(VDF-TrFE))/MoS2 phototransistor operate in a broad spectrum range up to 1.55 μm (Fig. 10h).194

3. Defect engineering of TMDCs and its application in electronic and optoelectronic devices
3.1. Structural defects in TMDCs
The structures of TMDCs always contain abundant and different types of defects, such as vacancies, adatoms, edges, grain boundaries, and substitutional impurities, which play significant roles in electronics and optoelectronics. Below, we will introduce several types of structural defects that are frequently adopted for defect engineering.

3.1.1. Point defects. 
Vacancies, including chalcogen and transition metal vacancies and their related coalescence and reconstruction (Fig. 1d), are the most commonly investigated defects in TMDCs.27,195,196 High resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization reveals that there is a high density (∼1013 cm−2) of S vacancies in single layer mechanically exfoliated MoS2 (Fig. 11a).32 According to theoretical calculations, these S vacancies can induce localized states in the bandgap of MoS2 as shown in Fig. 11b. S vacancies as short-range disorders and electron donors are one of the key extrinsic factors leading to low mobility and n-type doping of MoS2.30,32,197 On the other hand, scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS) characterization reveals that the localized states appear around the transition metal (tungsten, W) vacancies in a WSe2 monolayer as shown in Fig. 11c and d, and lead to p-type doping.197 Since excitons can be localized by defect states, emission from bound excitons is detected in TMDCs, especially at low temperature.198Fig. 11e gives electronic (upper) and excitonic (lower) schematic diagrams of the WSe2 monolayer, respectively.197 Polarization-resolved PL spectra of a WSe2 monolayer containing W vacancies are shown in Fig. 11f. Due to the high density of defects in the CVD sample, a broadened defect activated PL peak (Xb) appears.197 The band-edge of monolayer TMDCs is located at energy degenerate valleys (±K) at the corners of the hexagonal Brillouin zone. The absorption of left and right-handed light (σ±) is different for monolayer TMDCs and the confinement of electrons and holes to the ±K valleys gives rise to valley excitons and trions. The circular polarization (P) of free excitons (49% at ∼1.72 eV) is much larger than that of bound excitons (16% at ∼1.64 eV) and valley coherence of the bound excitons is absent. This indicates that the trigonal symmetry of the single W vacancy defect is reduced.197 When suitably isolated, defects can also act as single quantum emitters (SQEs).199–201 Sharp emission lines appear in the PL spectrum of WSe2 at low temperature and PL excitation (PLE) spectra of these lines show absorption resonances in accordance with the absorption band of WSe2, as shown in Fig. 11g.200 Furthermore, compressive strain can also be generated by introducing S vacancies into a MoS2 monolayer after electron beam exposure202 and local bandgap modification is achieved, which is confirmed by the blue shift of the PL peak in the exposed areas.203
 Fig. 11  (a) TEM characterization of S vacancies in a MoS2 monolayer. (b) Band structure and partial density of states of the MoS2 monolayer (5 × 5 supercell with an S vacancy). The localized states are highlighted by red lines. (c) Atomically resolved STM imaging of the WSe2 monolayer with W vacancy at bias voltage of −1.2 V. (d) STM spectra of positions marked with crosses in (c). (e) Electronic (upper) and excitonic (lower) schematic diagrams of the WSe2 monolayer with W vacancies. (f) Polarization-resolved PL spectra of the WSe2 monolayer under σ+ detection. The red and black lines correspond to σ+ and σ− circularly polarized light excitation. (g) The PL spectrum of WSe2 with isolated defects and PLE of the sharp emission lines. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 32, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group; (c–f) ref. 197, Copyright 2017, American Physical Society; (g) ref. 200, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Substitutional impurities (Fig. 1d), for example, isoelectronic substitutions, are another typical form of defects in TMDC materials.31 The transition metal or chalcogenide or both of them in TMDCs can be substituted by an isoelectronic atom during CVD growth and different types of alloys are prepared. Composition-dependent bandgap emission can be observed by employing isoelectronic substitution, ranging from ∼1.6 to ∼2 eV for sulphides (MoS2, WS2) and selenides (MoSe2, WSe2). A scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image of transition metal isoelectronic substitution (Mo1−xWxS2 monolayer) after fast Fourier transform (FFT) filtering is shown in Fig. 12a, which exhibits two types of atoms with different contrasts.204 W and Mo atoms are confirmed by electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) characterization as shown in Fig. 12b.204Fig. 12c gives the STEM image of chalcogenide isoelectronic substitution (WS2xSe2−2x monolayer).36 The S, Se and W element distribution is characterized by Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping (Fig. 12d), revealing composition uniformity.36 In addition to substitution with randomly distributed elements, a Janus monolayer (such as SMoSe or SeMoS) of TMDCs breaking the out-of-plane structural symmetry can be prepared by replacing the top-layer S (Se) with Se (S) in monolayer MoS2 (MoSe2).205,206 The fabrication process of SeMoS is as follows: hydrogen plasma is employed to strip off the top-layer S atoms of MoS2 and replace the S atoms with hydrogen (H) atoms, forming a Janus HMoS monolayer; thermal selenization then allows Se atoms to replace the H atoms, forming a Janus SeMoS monolayer (Fig. 12e).205 The PL spectra (Fig. 12f) of MoS2, HMoS, and SeMoS agree well with the theoretical calculations, indicating the metallic properties of HMoS, recovering from HMoS to MoS2 after sulfurization, and the formation of the Janus SeMoS monolayer.205 The study of Janus structures provides a novel material with symmetry breaking in the out-of-plane direction and shows promising applications in light–matter interactions, nanoelectromechanical devices, catalysis and spintronics.205,206 For example, the catalytic activity of Janus structures for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is superior and the high activity may originate from the synergistic effects of the intrinsic defects and structural strain.206 Another kind of substitutional impurity is substitutional dopants with non-isoelectronic elements, such as nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and niobium (Nb). These dopants are very efficient to tune the carrier concentration, mobility and interface properties of TMDCs. The cross-section STEM images of N-doped MoS2 in Fig. 12g reveal the substitution of S atoms by N atoms after N2 plasma irradiation.207 Raman spectra of MoS2 before and after such treatment are shown in Fig. 12h. The E12g peak splitting is attributed to the presence of strain and a shift of the out-of-plane vibrational mode A1g illustrates charge doping effects for the N-doped MoS2 system.
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM image of a Mo1−xWxS2 monolayer. (b) EELS characteristics of W and Mo atoms indicated as “1” and “2” in (a), respectively. (c) TEM image of a WS2xSe2−2x nanosheet. (d) High-angle annular dark-field image and EDS mapping of a WS2xSe2−2x domain. (e) TEM image of a Janus monolayer (MoSSe). (f) PL spectra of pristine MoS2 and those after H2 plasma treatment, sulphurization and selenization, respectively. (g) TEM images of N-doped MoS2. (h) Raman spectra of the as-exfoliated MoS2 flakes and after sequential N2 plasma exposures of 15 and 60 min, respectively. (i and k) TEM images of polycrystalline MoS2 with a tilt (i) and mirror (k) twin boundary. (j and l) 8–4 (j) and 7–5 (l) membered rings in the grain boundary. (m) High resolution TEM image of a WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructure. (n) Raman image at 250 and 350 cm−1 of a WS2–WSe2 superlattice structure. (o) STM image of monolayer MoS2 after local phase-transition treatment. (p) dI/dV spectra recorded at different locations (triangles marked as 5, 6, 7, 8) in (o). Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 204, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (c and d) ref. 36, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (e and f) ref. 205, Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group; (g and h) ref. 207, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (i–l) ref. 29, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group; (m and n) ref. 208, Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (o and p) ref. 209, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2. Line defects. 
Line defects (one-dimensional defects) are also an important type of defect that can strongly influence the properties of CVD-grown TMDCs, including grain boundaries and lateral heterojunctions.29,208,210Fig. 12i and k show dark-field TEM images of a polycrystalline MoS2 sample grown by CVD, with a tilt (Fig. 12i) and mirror (Fig. 12k) twin boundary, respectively.29 Tilt and mirror twin boundaries are stitched together by lines of 8- and 4- (Fig. 12j) or 7- and 5-membered rings (Fig. 12l). The mirror boundary can induce quenching of the PL intensity, while the tilt boundary shows a strong enhancement in emission strength. The defects in the mirror or tilt boundaries are Mo or S rich, which can n- or p-dope the boundary, respectively.29 Since MoS2 is commonly n-doped, the depletion of electrons by p-doping in the tilt boundary would cause a transformation from trion to neutral exciton emissions, and hence the enhancement of PL efficiency. In addition, strain around the boundaries can also modulate the PL emission.29
Furthermore, if two TMDCs with the same crystal orientation are combined together, a lateral heterojunction can be realized. Though p–n junctions can also be formed by a vertical heterostructure, there are problems including unwanted trapping states, lattice mismatch, and spatial inhomogeneity.211 In-plane p–n junctions formed by lateral heterostructure can possibly overcome these challenges. The atomic structure of the WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructures has been characterized by STEM (Fig. 12m), indicating a seamless connection and an atomically sharp ‘interline’ or interface,197 which is critical for fabricating high-performance lateral heterostructures. The PL and Raman mapping (Fig. 12n) further confirm the formation of WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructures and the sharp transition from WS2 to WSe2 at the interface.208


3.1.3. Local phase transition. 
Under certain conditions, structural phase transition could be realized in TMDCs, either locally or entirely. The properties of TMDCs could be dramatically changed after phase transition, e.g. a transition from the semiconducting (2H) to metallic (1T or 1T′) phase of TMDCs could greatly reduce the contact resistance between TMDCs and metal electrodes. The methods commonly employed for phase transformation include thermal annealing, chemical treatment, Ar plasma bombardment, strain, and laser irradiation.37,209,212–215 The structural difference of 2H- and 1T (1T′)-phases in TMDCs is the spatial arrangement of chalcogen-atoms with trigonal prismatic coordination in the 2H-phase and octahedral (distorted octahedral) coordination in the 1T(1T′)-phase.37,209 Through a transversal displacement of one chalcogen-plane, the 2H- and 1T-phases can be converted from one to the other.209Fig. 12o shows the STM image of a MoS2 monolayer with local phase-transition, where the bright and dark regions correspond to the 2H- and 1T-phases, respectively. The STS analysis (Fig. 12p) reveals that the bright domains have a similar bandgap to the 2H-MoS2, while the dark regions exhibit distinct metallic behavior.209

3.2. The modulation of optical properties through defect engineering
The optical properties of TMDCs can be effectively tuned by defect engineering. A pristine TMDC monolayer exhibits direct bandgap emission assigned to neutral or charged excitons. When defects are introduced into TMDCs by ion or electron beam irradiation, mid-gap states can be formed and strong localization appears surrounding the defects.34,198,216 At low temperature, in addition to the neutral and charged exciton emission, there is a defect activated emission in TMDCs attributed to excitons bound to mid-gap states.198 The main features of the bound excitons include: (1) a nonlinear laser power dependence and saturation phenomena at high laser power, (2) vanishing with increasing temperature, and (3) electrical gate dependence.31,79,198,217Fig. 13a shows that vacancies can be introduced into WSe2 monolayers during the electron-beam lithography (EBL) process, and result in a strong bound exciton peak (Xb) located at ∼1.62 eV (Fig. 13b).34
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of electron beam irradiation on a monolayer WSe2 sample during the EBL process. (b) PL spectra of pristine monolayer WSe2 and the sample after electron beam irradiation. (c–h) PL intensity images of monolayer MoS2: (c and f) as-prepared, (d and g) annealed under vacuum at 350 °C and 500 °C, (e and h) after vacuum pumping. (i) PL spectra taken from locations A–D in (c–h). (j and k) Relaxed configuration and charge density difference of an O2 molecule physisorbed on perfect monolayer MoS2 (j) and chemisorbed on defective monolayer MoS2 (k). (l) Structure of an Mo1−xWxS2 monolayer. (m) PL spectra of Mo1−xWxS2 monolayers with different W compositions. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 34, Copyright 2016, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; (c–k) ref. 28, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (l and m) ref. 204, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Defect engineering can also be employed to tune the PL intensity of TMDCs. The vacancy defects in TMDCs would result in n- or p-doping and nonradiative recombination, and hence reduce the PL quantum yield. For example, MoS2 monolayers commonly show very weak PL due to n-doping caused by S vacancies and the formation of negative trions (Fig. 3d). The vacancy defects can be healed by chemical treatment, such as with nonoxidizing acids poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) and hydrohalic acid. With the decrease of electron concentration after defect healing, the neutral excitons recombine rather than form negative trions, leading to a strong enhancement of PL intensity.218 In addition, strong enhancement of PL can also be realized by introducing adatom defects into TMDCs, which can be realized by thermal treatment or oxygen plasma irradiation. Fig. 13c–h give PL intensity images of the as-prepared MoS2 monolayer, and the sample annealed at 350 and 500 °C (∼0.1 Pa), and after vacuum pumping, respectively.28 According to the images and spectra (Fig. 13i), the PL of MoS2 is greatly enhanced after annealing at both temperatures, with the 500 °C annealed sample showing stronger enhancement. The PL enhancement could be attributed to physisorption and chemisorption of oxygen (Fig. 13j and k), corresponding to samples after 350 and 500 °C annealing, respectively. Such enhancement is partially due to the charge (electron) transfer from MoS2 to oxygen, and hence the conversion from trion to exciton emission. However, the physisorption of an oxygen molecule (350 °C annealed sample) is not stable due to the weak bonding energy, and the PL intensity is reduced after vacuum pumping. On the other hand, the PL intensity of the 500 °C annealed sample only drops slightly after vacuum pumping, indicating strong interaction between MoS2 and the chemically adsorbed oxygen molecules. Another reason for the strong PL enhancement is the suppression of nonradiative recombination of excitons in the MoS2 monolayer at defect sites due to the strong localization of excitons.28 Isoelectronic substitution can also cause PL enhancement, which is due to the suppression of chalcogen defects and deep levels in the TMDC monolayer.219 For example, the PL intensity of the Mo0.82W0.18Se2 monolayer is ∼10 times stronger than that of MoSe2. According to the theoretical calculations, the defect levels become closer to the CBM in Mo1−xWxSe2. The concentration of Se vacancies is also suppressed in Mo1−xWxSe2 due to stronger W–Se bonding, resulting in a decrease in nonradiative recombination and a longer exciton lifetime than that of pure MoSe2.219
Tunable PL emission can be realized by isoelectronic substitution in TMDCs.35,36,204 The monolayers of MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 possess optical bandgaps of ∼1.85, ∼1.95, ∼1.55, and ∼1.65 eV, respectively. By changing the composition of alloys, a tunable optical bandgap is achieved, such as 1.62–1.84 eV for Mo1−xWxS2xSe2(1−x) and 1.82–1.99 eV for Mo1−xWxS2, respectively.35,204Fig. 13l and m show the atomic structure and composition-dependent PL emission of Mo1−xWxS2.204 It is worth mentioning that the bandgap of the alloy shows a bowing effect,35,204i.e. the bandgap emission energy of the alloy monolayer is smaller than the linear combination of those of the initial components. Taking an Mo1−xWxS2 monolayer as an example, the bandgap emission energy bowing can be described by EPL,Mo1−xWxS2 = (1 − x)EPL,MS2 + xEPL,WS2 − bx(1 − x), where b is the bowing parameter.192 An Mo1−xWxS2 monolayer shows a bowing parameter of 0.25 ± 0.04 eV for the A exciton and 0.19 ± 0.06 eV for the B exciton, indicating a weak bowing in composition-dependent valence band spin–orbit coupling. In addition, though WTe2 is commonly 1T′ metallic phase, tunable bandgap PL emission can be realized in WSe2(1−x)Te2x semiconductors by isoelectronic substitution of Te with Se atoms.220
3.3. Defect engineering for electronic devices
The properties of TMDC electronic devices are affected by various factors, such as the interface, dielectric materials, structural defects, carrier concentration and contact resistance.136,221,222 Defect engineering provides a logical route to tune the properties of TMDC-based electronic devices through the healing of structural defects, changing the doping concentration or carrier types, and reducing contact resistance.136,221,223

3.3.1. Defect healing. 
As mentioned in Section 2.3, defects in TMDC crystals are another scattering source that greatly limits the charge carrier mobility.136 High resolution TEM characterization reveals a large number of vacancy defects in the TMDC monolayer, leading to a dominant hopping mechanism of charge transport at low carrier density.32 Studies have also shown that structural defects are introduced in WSe2 devices during the EBL process, and greatly degrade the hole conduction performance.34 A monolayer WSe2 device with a limited number of defects was prepared by adopting an electron-beam-free transfer-electrode technique and a maximum field-effect hole-mobility of ∼200 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature was achieved due to the reduced scattering sources.34 Some chemical approaches have been employed to repair vacancy defects in TMDCs to improve the electronic performance of the devices.136,224Fig. 14a and b respectively show TEM images of MoS2 monolayers before and after low-temperature thiol chemistry treatment, indicating the significant reduction of S vacancies.136 The single-side and double-side healed samples show improved conductivity compared with the as-exfoliated sample, and a high mobility >80 cm2 V−1 s−1 is achieved for backgated monolayer MoS2 FETs (Fig. 14c). The improved mobility of the MoS2 device is attributed to the significant reduction of the S vacancies, charged impurities and traps.
 Fig. 14  (a and b) TEM images of the as-exfoliated (a) and single-side thiol chemistry treated (b) monolayer MoS2 sample. (c) Transfer characteristics for the as-exfoliated (black), single-side treated (blue) and double-side treated (red) monolayer MoS2. (d) Schematic diagram of SVSH in MoS2. (e) Transfer characteristics of a monolayer MoS2 transistor before and after SVSH. (f) Output characteristics of a monolayer WSe2 device before and after laser modification. (g) Band structures of WSe2: pristine WSe2, with selenium vacancy (VSe) and with oxygen replacing Se (Ose). Reprinted with permission from: (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 136, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing group; (d and e) ref. 218, Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing group; (f and g) ref. 224, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from defect healing by chemical approaches, S vacancy self-healing (SVSH) has been reported by PSS treatment for a CVD MoS2 monolayer.218 During the SVSH treatment, the hydrogenation of PSS would guide S adatom clusters on the MoS2 surface to heal the vacancies (Fig. 14d).218 A current decrease can be observed in the output characteristic curve and the threshold voltage dramatically shifted toward zero after SVSH (Fig. 14e), indicating the decrease of electron concentration. Similar to vacancy healing via thiol chemistry,136 interface trapping states of the SVSH sample are reduced according to the improvement of the subthreshold slope. The WF of the as-grown and self-healed MoS2 is ∼4.3 and ∼4.55 eV, respectively, as revealed by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurement. A lateral homojunction of the MoS2 monolayer can then be fabricated by a selected-area SVSH process and an SB height of ∼150 meV is obtained at the boundary. Foreign atoms can also be applied for repairing defects in TMDCs. Chalcogen vacancies in TMDCs can be healed by isoelectronic substitutional defects and the improvement of electronic properties is achieved.224,225 A focused laser beam treatment in air has been used for healing a WSe2 monolayer and the conductivity is enhanced by ∼400 times. Fig. 14f gives the output characteristics of a WSe2 monolayer device before and after laser modification. According to the calculated band structures (Fig. 14g), defect-related mid-gap states are suppressed by substitutional oxygen at selenium vacancies.224


3.3.2. Controlling the carrier type and concentration. 
Defect engineering can also be used to control the carrier concentration in TMDCs. Studies have shown different positions of MoS2 samples can exhibit n-type or p-type conduction, which is defect-chemistry-related and accompanied by S or Mo vacancies, respectively.222 A mild plasma treatment (He or H2) is used to introduce chalcogen (Se) vacancies into WSe2 and induce n-doping.226 The plasma treated sample shows a reduction of the metal contact resistance, a 20 times improvement in ON current and a near ideal subthreshold swing value of 66 mV dec−1 (Fig. 15a). On the other hand, the hole conduction is suppressed by two orders of magnitude for the H2-plasma treated sample.226
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the as-exfoliated and H2 plasma treated WSe2, and transfer characteristics of the as-exfoliated and H2 plasma treated WSe2 device. (b) Schematic diagram and output characteristics of the p–n junction device of multilayer MoS2 fabricated by area selective PIII doping. (c) PL spectra and transfer characteristics of composition tunable WS2xSe2−2x monolayer nanosheets. (d) Optical image and output characteristics of the lateral WSe2–WS2 heterojunction device. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 226, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 221, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 36, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 208, Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Substitutional or physisorbed impurities can be used for tuning the doping type and fabricating p–n junctions.227 p-Type MoS2 is prepared by a phosphorus plasma immersion ion implantation (PIII) process.221 A large number of S vacancies in the intrinsic n-type MoS2 facilitate the phosphorus doping.221 Theoretical calculation confirms that the p-type doping is attributed to charge transfer originating from the substitutional and physisorbed P atoms in the top few layers of MoS2. A lateral homogeneous p–n junction was fabricated by using area selective doping and a high rectification ratio (2 × 104) was obtained as shown in Fig. 15b.221 p-Type doping of MoS2 can also be realized by N2 plasma surface treatment because of the substitution of S by N atoms.207
Since isoelectronic substitution doping can be realized in TMDCs by CVD growth, WS2xSe2−2x alloys with tunable electronic properties are prepared.36Fig. 15c show PL spectra of WS2xSe2−2x alloys as a function of composition. Electrical transport studies (Fig. 15c) reveal that the variation of alloy composition can tune the charge carrier types, threshold voltages, and mobility of the alloy. The doping type of a WS2xSe2−2x alloy changes from p- to n-type with the change of the S and Se atomic ratio.36 A lateral p–n heterojunction can also be obtained by controlling the growth of the heterojunction.218 Since WSe2 is intrinsically p-type and WS2 is intrinsically n-type, the as grown WSe2–WS2 lateral heterojunction exhibits a rectification ratio up to 105 (Fig. 15d).218


3.3.3. Lowering contact resistance. 
Achieving low resistance contacts is vital for TMDC based electronic devices. The commonly used methods to reduce contact resistance by defect engineering include the introduction of vacancy defects, substitution doping, and local phase transition. S vacancy defects in n-type MoS2 have been verified to dominate the metal/MoS2 contact resistance.222 Surface oxidation is a general approach for enhancing the performance of TMDC electronic devices. When WSe2 is exposed to ozone (O3) below 100 °C, tungsten oxide is formed, nucleated from edges and defects on the surface.228 With further exposure to O3, the oxides grow electively along selenium zigzag-edge orientations, until the top layer is fully oxidized.228 The top oxide film blocks vertical diffusion of oxygen into the underlying WSe2 layers, indicating that the oxidation of WSe2 is self-limiting.229 Electrons transfer from the underlying WSe2 to the tungsten oxides (WOx), resulting in highly p-doped WOx-covered WSe2 and a low contact barrier. The performance of WOx-covered WSe2 transistors has been greatly improved (Fig. 16a), showing better on-current, on/off current ratio, and carrier mobility than that of the pristine WSe2.223 Air heating can also improve the device performance of WSe2 because of the formation of the in-plane heterojunction of WSe2 and nonstoichiometric tungsten oxide (WO3−x).230 Two mechanisms can explain the improvement of performance, including (i) WO3−x dopes WSe2 and increases the hole concentration, and (ii) the highly conductive WO3−x domains in WSe2 reduce the effective channel lengths of the device, resulting in an increase in on-state current and carrier mobility.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematics and transfer characteristics of a WSe2 transistor before and after O3 exposure, and that after air exposure. (b) Schematic diagrams of a MoTe2 device with a 1T′/2H phase homojunction, and field-effect mobility as a function of temperature. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 223. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 37, Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Metallic 1T/1T′ phase TMDCs can also decrease the contact resistance of FETs and significantly improve the device performance. The local phase transition from 2H to 1T/1T′ phase can be realized by n-BuLi treatment, laser irradiation, Ar-plasma bombardment and strain.37,209,212–215 The phase transition process by n-BuLi treatment comprises the following steps: (1) during the exposure to n-BuLi, lithium will intercalate into 2H phase TMDCs and donate negative charges, (2) to accommodate this additional negative charge, a local transformation of the TMDCs will occur, leading to a structural change of the pristine 2H TMDCs to 1T TMDCs.212 Phase transition of MoTe2 induced by laser irradiation can be used to prepare a homojunction transistor with Ohmic contact, and increases the carrier mobility by about 50 times, while retaining a high on/off ratio of 106.37Fig. 16b gives a schematic diagram of a device constructed by 2H and 1T′ MoTe2 and the field-effect mobility as a function of temperature.37 According to the theoretical calculations and TEM characterization, the local phase transition in MoTe2 is triggered by Te vacancies. A Te monovacancy concentration exceeding 3% causes the 1T′ phase to be more stable than the 2H phase.37 Similarly, the 2H to 1T phase transition in MoS2 can also be induced by Ar-plasma bombardment, which produces S vacancies and stabilizes the phase transitions.209 Tensile strain can also be used to induce phase transition of MoTe2 at room temperature, which is attributed to the reduction of the activation energy of the phase transition and results in a lowered phase transition temperature.218 In particular, the phase transition produced by n-BuLi and tensile strain is proved to be reversible, where a 1T metallic phase can be easily converted to a 2H semiconducting phase.214 On the other hand, the phase transition created by laser irradiation is irreversible.37

3.4. Defect engineering for optoelectronic devices
TMDCs with tunable bandgaps in the visible to NIR regions have attracted much interest for applications in photodetection, photovoltaics and LEDs. There is a large variation in the performance of TMDC optoelectronic devices due to different factors, such as the interface, impurities, structural defects, and the metal–semiconductor contact. Taking a MoS2 photodetector as an example, the photoresponsivity varies from ∼10−5 to ∼104 A W−1 and the response time ranges from microseconds to seconds.2,16,231–235 Defect engineering can be applied to effectively improve the responsivity, speed and operation wavelength of photodetectors, and obtain novel photovoltaic devices and LEDs.

3.4.1. Photoconductors. 
The photoconductor geometry (metal–semiconductor–metal device configuration) is mostly adopted in TMDC photodetectors. In photoconductors, photo-induced carriers increase the conductivity of semiconductors, described as the photoconductive effect.16 In particular, there is a photoconductive gain, which is the number of charge carriers passing between the electrodes per second for each photon absorbed per second.236 When a hole (electron) is trapped by defects, charge impurities etc.,237,238 the electron (hole) will be replenished from the source as soon as it reaches the drain, in order to maintain charge neutrality. The multiple circulations of the electron (hole) following a single electron–hole photogeneration would lead to the high gain of the photoconductor. The photoconductive gain can then be expressed as the ratio of the free lifetime of a charge carrier to the time required for the carrier to move between the electrodes (transit time). The responsivity and response time are two important figures of merit for photoconductors, which are dominated by trapping and recombination centers. Defects can either act as trapping or recombination centers, depending on the energy levels of the defect states.156,239,240
The density of states (left) and simplified energy band diagram (right) of MoS2 are shown in Fig. 17a.156 There are shallow traps and deep nonradiative recombination centers existing in TMDCs, which dominate photoconductive gain. τr−1 is the nonradiative recombination rate. τt−1, and τg−1 are the trapping and escape rate of holes into and from shallow traps, respectively. Photoresponsivity can be obtained through the following equation:  where τeff = τr(τg/τt) is the effective carrier lifetime, τtr = L2/(μnVD) is the electron transit time through the device,156 and  is the photoconductive gain. According to the above analysis, high responsivity of TMDCs can be realized by increasing shallow traps and reducing deep nonradiative recombination. Fig. 17b shows the power dependence of the photoresponsivity of a MoS2 photoconductor.156 From theoretical calculation, the responsivity of MoS2 in trap-free conditions is only about 0.06 A W−1, which is much smaller than the experimentally observed value of ∼6 A W−1. The high responsivity of MoS2 is attributed to the large number of shallow trapping centers. According to the fitting of the experimental data in Fig. 17b, the effective energetic position of the traps is ∼0.27 eV above the valence band edge. On the other hand, due to the limited number of defects/traps in the highly crystalline MoSe2 samples synthesized by CVD, the MoSe2 photoconductor presents much lower responsivity as compared to the MoS2 device.241 One piece of evidence is that the low temperature PL spectrum of MoS2 shows a strong defect-activated PL peak (Xb) arising from excitons binding to defect states, while such a peak is absent in MoSe2.241 The photoresponsivity of the WSe2 monolayer can be improved by ∼150 times by laser modification,224 due to the introduction of oxygen-related defects. Moreover, the photoresponsivity of few-layer rhenium disulfide (ReS2) can reach as high as 88600 A W−1, attributed to the increased light absorption by the multilayer as well as the gain enhancement due to the existence of trap states.159 However, the achieved ultrahigh gain is always accompanied by an increased response time, which is normally in the time scale of seconds for ReS2 photoconductors. The photoconductivity can also be enhanced in alloys (e.g. WS2(1−x)Se2x), which is attributed to the carrier diffusion and confinement into the alloy region according to finite element analysis.242
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagrams of the density-of-states (DOS) (left) and simplified energy band diagram of MoS2 (right) that shows the main features of the charge trapping model. (b) Power dependence of photoresponsivity of the MoS2 photoconductor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The factor that affects the response time in TMDC photoconductors is the carrier recombination. An ultrafast two-pulse photovoltage correlation (TPPC) technique (Fig. 18a), which offers carrier recombination dynamics, has been employed on a monolayer MoS2 photodetector (Fig. 18b) to obtain the intrinsic response times.243 Two pulses of 452 nm (2.74 eV, ∼150 fs) with a time delay of Δt are focused on the metal–MoS2 junction (Fig. 18b). The electrons and holes are separated by the lateral electrical field of the junction. The photoresponse varied with Δt as measured by a lock-in amplifier. Photovoltage Vc(Δt) as a function of the time delay Δt between the two pulses is shown in Fig. 18c. ΔVc(Δt), defined as Vc(Δt) − Vc(∞), shows a fast timescale of ∼4.3 ps and a slow timescale of ∼105 ps, which are independent of the temperature. As theoretically proposed, carriers are captured by one fast and one slow defect level via Auger scattering,244 where the Auger process means that an exciton is annihilated at a defect site with the capture of the electron (or the hole) by the defect and the hole (or the electron) is scattered to a high energy. Most of the photoexcited holes (both free and bound) and electrons are captured by the fast defects within the first few picoseconds after photoexcitation and only a small fraction is captured by the slow defects. The photoexcited carriers recombine or are captured by defects in the few picoseconds range, resulting in a fast response time and a low internal quantum efficiency.244–248
 Fig. 18  (a) A schematic of the TPPC experiment. (b) The energy band diagram of the metal–MoS2 junction after photoexcitation with an optical pulse. (c) TPPC signals Vc(Δt) as a function of the time delay Δt between the pulses measured at 5 and 300 K, respectively. The plot shows two timescales: a fast timescale of ∼4.3 ps, and a slow timescale of ∼105 ps, which are largely temperature independent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 243, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Since defects can also act as recombination centers to determine the response time, one can control the types and density of defects in TMDCs to achieve fast photodetection. Fast temporal response of the ReS2 photoconductor can be obtained by O2 plasma treatment.249 O2 plasma treatment creates trap states in the bandgap of ReS2, which would increase the recombination rate of the photocarriers, and consequently reduce the photocarrier lifetime and response time (rise time of 670 ms).249 Since the absorbance of ReS2 is saturated above 10 nm, the photoresponsivity is still high for the plasma treated ReS2 with the thickness of ∼30 nm.249 When both fast and slow recombination centers are presented in CVD-grown monolayer MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloy devices, a superlinear photocurrent is observed. A superlinear photocurrent emerges when the nonequilibrium occupancy of initially empty fast recombination centers becomes comparable to that of slow recombination centers.250 During illumination, the free hole and electron concentrations increase, and their respective quasi Fermi levels move closer to the valence and conduction band edges. At a high intensity of illumination, the initially empty centers near the conduction band become partially filled, and the recombination rate drops rapidly, which signals the onset of superlinearity.250
The wavelength range or bandwidth of the photoresponse is another key factor for photodetection. The range of light absorption is varied for different TMDCs due to different electronic bandgaps. TMDC alloys with tunable bandgaps show promising potential for broadband optoelectronic applications. A vertically composition-controlled (VCC) Mo1−xWxS2 multilayer has been synthesized by using sulphurization of Mo1−xWxOy (Fig. 19a)251 grown via super-cycle atomic layer deposition. The VCC Mo1−xWxS2 multilayer with strong interlayer coupling has different vertical composition and broadband light absorption, resulting in a 3–4 times greater photocurrent than that of MoS2- and WS2-based devices (Fig. 19a). The VCC Mo1−xWxS2 multilayer has a broadband photocurrent from 1.2 to 2.5 eV, which is broader than 1.3 and 2.1 eV for a WS2 multilayer and 1.2 and 1.8 eV for an MoS2 multilayer.251
 Fig. 19  (a) Sequential super-cycle ALD procedure and schematic structure of a VCC Mo1−xWxS2 multilayer (left) and spectral photocurrent of a VCC Mo1−xWxS2 multilayer, and 5l WS2 and 5l MoS2 photodetectors (right). Proposed mechanisms of photocurrent generation at zero gate bias and scanning photocurrent microscopy in (b) 2H-contacted and (c) 1T-contacted devices, respectively. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 251, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (b and c) ref. 252, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Low contact resistance is essential to obtain intrinsic and high-performance photodetection. Local phase transition underneath the metal electrodes is realized in TMDC optoelectronic devices and the photoresponsivity is enhanced by more than an order of magnitude due to the reduction of SB.252 The SB heights of 1T- and 2H-contacted MoS2 devices are a few meV and ∼200 meV, respectively (Fig. 19b and c).252 The maximum photocurrent is generated at the contacts for 2H-phase MoS2, while the photocurrent peak of the sample with 1T-phase contacts is at the device channel (Fig. 19b and c). Under a bias, the photocurrent of a 2H device is greatly affected by the high SB. However, the photocurrent of 1T devices is mainly attributed to the intrinsic photoresponse because of the low SB at both contacts. Other approaches employed for reducing contact resistance, such as substitution doping and adsorption, can also be applied to improve the optoelectronic performances of TMDCs.


3.4.2. Photovoltaics. 
Photovoltaic device can be constructed by partially healing the defects in TMDCs. The S vacancies in MoS2 can be healed by PSS treatment and a homojunction is constructed by selective area S vacancy self-healing (Fig. 20a).218Fig. 20a gives the band diagram of the monolayer MoS2 homojunction with a SB height of ∼150 meV for the as-grown and self-healed regions. The photoresponse at the homojunction as a function of light intensity is shown in Fig. 20a. An excellent responsivity of ∼308 mA W−1 at zero bias is obtained due to the photovoltaic effect, which has a much faster response time than that of the MoS2-based photoconductors.2,16,253
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagram, band diagram and photovoltaic effect under different illumination intensities (575 nm) of the monolayer MoS2 homojunction by selective area S vacancy self-healing. (b) Atomic model, optical image, and output characteristics with and without light exposure of a WSe2–MoS2 lateral heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 218, Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group; ref. 255, Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Recently, to achieve a high-performance monolayer photovoltaic device, a lateral TMDC heterojunction was constructed by two-step epitaxial growth.254,255 For example, a WSe2–MoS2 lateral p–n junction shows an atomically sharp interface (atomic model shown in Fig. 20b) and offers band offset tuning.254 Asymmetric metal contacts, Pd and Ti/Au, are deposited on p-type WSe2 and n-type MoS2, respectively. The I–V characteristic curve of the junction exhibits good rectification character.255 A photovoltaic effect with an open-circuit voltage of 0.22 V and a short-circuit current of 7.7 pA is achieved under light illumination (power density of 1 mW cm−2). The extracted fill factor (FF) and the calculated power conversion efficiency (PCE) are 0.39 and 0.2%, respectively. The highest PCE reported is 2.56% due to the high quality atomically sharp interface.254 In addition, the PCE of the lateral heterojunction has small dependence on the angles of incidence (AOIs) with merely 5% loss of PCE at an AOI of 75°.254 This is superior as compared to Si-based solar cells, which show 90% PCE reduction from 0° to 75° AOI.256 On the other hand, the efficiency of a photovoltaic device based on a vertically stacked TMDC heterostructure is limited by quenching centers, such as contaminants and defects at the interface, or corrugations at the surface.198,257,258


3.4.3. Electroluminescence. 
When suitably isolated, defects can act as single quantum emitters (SQEs) in TMDCs. If SQEs are incorporated into LEDs, quantum LEDs can be fabricated with great potential for quantum information and technology applications. Quantum LEDs can be realized by vertical stacking of layered materials and charge can be injected into the active layer containing quantum emitters, i.e. defect sites.259Fig. 21a shows a quantum LED including a single layer of graphene (SLG), a thin (2–6 atomic layers) sheet of hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) and a mono- or bi-layer of TMDC, such as WSe2, to form a p-i-n junction. Fig. 21b and c show the operational concept of the TMDC-LED, indicating that charge flow is prevented between the layers at zero bias (Fig. 21b) and electrons tunnel from the SLG into the WSe2 monolayer through the h-BN tunnel barrier at a negative bias (Fig. 21c), and finally radiatively recombine. Localized states introduced by defects lie in the bandgap of WSe2 and excitons localized by these states emit at lower energies compared with free exciton emission.200,201,204Fig. 21d shows a spatial map of the integrated electroluminescence (EL) from a WSe2-based LED. In addition to light emission from free excitons, quantum emissions from localized light emission are observed in the WSe2 monolayers and bilayers shown in the dotted circles of Fig. 21d. The typical EL emission spectra of WSe2 monolayers and bilayers show quantum emissions with linewidths ranging between 0.8 and 3 nm (Fig. 21e). In addition to the structure of SLG/h-BN/TMDC, other p-i-n junctions can also be constructed to obtain quantum LEDs. For example, the SLG/h-BN/TMDC/h-BN/SLG structure has been designed, where SLG layers act as semitransparent electrodes, the TMDC offers radiation recombination centers and h-BN act as a tunnel barrier.260 When the device is biased, electrons (holes) can tunnel from the negative (positive) electrode through the thin h-BN barriers to defect states in the WSe2 layer, resulting in recombination of excitons and hence producing EL.260 Single defect EL is detected by adopting a confocal detection method using a pinhole. The EL peak is composed of a fine structure doublet with two narrow lines (width of ∼300 μeV) separated by 0.9 meV, which is consistent with SQEs in WSe2.260
 Fig. 21  (a) Optical image, (b and c) heterostructure band diagram, (d) EL intensity map, and (e) EL emission spectra of a TMDC based quantum LED. (f) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup used for generating EL in a GB region of a WS2 sample. (g) Red-channel only optical image of EL localized in an eroded GB. (h) SEM images of monolayer-WS2 nanoribbons at GB regions after partial erosion. (i) Normalized EL and PL spectra of a WS2 monolayer device with GBs. Reprinted with permission from: (a–e) ref. 259, Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group; (f–i) ref. 261, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Grain boundaries (GB) as typical line defects in CVD TMDCs can also influence the EL behavior. Fig. 21f shows a schematic illustration of the experimental setup used for generating EL in WS2 domains with a GB, where ultrafine W probe tips as contacts are used to apply source–drain bias.261 The GBs degrade after increasing VSD due to the localized Joule heating induced oxidization, and strong EL could be observed at the eroded GB region (Fig. 21g). It can be seen from the SEM image in Fig. 21h that there are randomly distributed micro- and nanoribbons formed within the GB of WS2. Restricting current to flow through the ribbons would enhance the carrier recombination rates, and hence introduce strong and localized EL at the eroded GB regions.261Fig. 21i shows similar EL and PL spectra, indicating that EL originates from electron–hole (exciton) recombination across the direct bandgap.

4. Conclusions and outlook
The recent progress on interface and defect engineering for 2D TMDCs towards high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices has been reviewed. Three types of interfaces in TMDC-based devices are highlighted, including the TMDC/adsorbate, TMDC/metal contact and TMDC/dielectric interface, which can be suitably engineered by the rational choice of interface engineering schemes. Surface charge transfer doping occurring at the TMDC/adsorbate interface has been demonstrated to be an effective method to tune the charge carrier type and concentration of 2D TMDCs, which significantly impacts both the electronic and optical properties. At TMDC/metal contact interface, several strategies like contact doping and buffer layer engineering have been utilized to lower the Schottky barrier, thus facilitating the carrier transport in TMDCs. Various extrinsic impurities existing at TMDC/dielectric interfaces can induce severe scattering of charge carriers during the transport. An appropriate dielectric engineering scheme, such as the selection of high- or low-k dielectrics, is effective to suppress the scattering, leading to a highly improved device performance. The second part on defect engineering reviews a variety of defects existing in the lattice of TMDCs, e.g. vacancies, substitutional impurities, grain boundaries, and local phase transitions, and their effects on the electronic and optical properties of TMDCs. Defect engineering has been demonstrated to efficiently modulate the optical properties of TMDCs, e.g. introducing bound exciton emission, enhancing the PL quantum efficiency and tuning the PL emission energy. Appropriate defect engineering can notably facilitate the charge carrier transport by defect healing, generating effective doping as well as lowering the contact resistance in electronic devices. Finally, defect engineering has been utilized to improve the responsivity, speed and operation wavelength of photodetectors, and realize novel photovoltaic devices and quantum LEDs.
Interface and defect engineering not only open up new research areas on tuning the fundamental properties of TMDCs, but also pave the way for the practical device applications of interface- or structure-modified TMDCs in future electronics and optoelectronics. However, there still exists much room for further improvement. For example, stable and non-toxic degenerate p-type dopants are still absent for practical device applications, and new dangling-bond-free high-k layered dielectric materials are also required to achieve an ideal TMDC/dielectric interface in TMDC devices (h-BN is a commonly used low-k dielectric). In addition, defect engineering also faces challenges, such as how to simultaneously achieve high-response and fast photoresponsivity in TMDC-based photodetectors and how to trigger single-photon EL with high efficiency in defect-engineered TMDCs. The aforementioned challenges could be overcome by precisely controlling the type and density of defects in TMDCs, and by introducing localized density states with suitable energy levels.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFA0205700), NSFC grants (21573156 and 61774034), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province under BK20170005, and Singapore MOE Grant R143-000-652-112.
References
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ling, H. Wang, S. Huang, F. Xia and M. S. Dresselhaus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4523–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kubota, K. Watanabe, O. Tsuda and T. Taniguchi, Science, 2007, 317, 932–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, H. Liu, E. S. Tok and C.-H. Sow, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2494–2515 RSC .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano and V. R. Cooper, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3900–3917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Schmidt, F. Giustiniano and G. Eda, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7715–7736 RSC .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han and G.-H. Nam, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, W. Yao, D. Xiao and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuc, N. Zibouche and T. Heine, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 245213 CrossRef .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, J. Dai, W. Yao, D. Xiao and X. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 490–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 494–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xie, C. Mak, X. Tao and F. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603886 CrossRef .
L. Britnell, R. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y.-J. Kim, R. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou and S. Morozov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. K. Perkins, A. L. Friedman, E. Cobas, P. M. Campbell, G. G. Jernigan and B. T. Jonker, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 668–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Lee, Y. J. Yu, X. Cui, N. Petrone, C. H. Lee, M. S. Choi, D. Y. Lee, C. Lee, W. J. Yoo and K. Watanabe, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7931–7936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Wang, R. X. Du, X. T. Guo, J. Jiang, W. W. Zhao, Z. H. Ni, X. R. Wang, Y. M. You and Z. H. Ni, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e17113 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, W. Wang, H. Nan, Y. Yu, J. Jiang, W. Zhao, J. Li, Z. Zafar, N. Xiang and Z. Ni, Optica, 2016, 3, 1066–1070 CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Shao, X. Zhang, Y. He and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10409–10442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Allain, J. Kang, K. Banerjee and A. Kis, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1195–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cao, G. Wang, W. Han, H. Ye, C. Zhu, J. Shi, Q. Niu, P. Tan, E. Wang and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 887 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Choi, D. Qu, D. Lee, X. Liu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and W. J. Yoo, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9332–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, A. Zubair, E. J. Santos, X. Zhang, Y. Lin, Y. Zhang and T. S. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4928–4934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, X. Zou, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. Shi, J. Kong, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, B. I. Yakobson and J.-C. Idrobo, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2615–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nan, Z. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Liang, Y. Lu, Q. Chen, D. He, P. Tan, F. Miao, X. Wang, J. Wang and Z. Ni, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5738–5745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Van Der Zande, P. Y. Huang, D. A. Chenet, T. C. Berkelbach, Y. You, G.-H. Lee, T. F. Heinz, D. R. Reichman, D. A. Muller and J. C. Hone, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 554–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suh, T. E. Park, D. Y. Lin, D. Fu, J. Park, H. J. Jung, Y. Chen, C. Ko, C. Jang, Y. Sun, R. Sinclair, J. Chang, S. Tongay and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6976–6982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu and Z. Ni, Nanophotonics, 2017, 6, 1219–1237 CAS .
H. Qiu, T. Xu, Z. Wang, W. Ren, H. Nan, Z. Ni, Q. Chen, S. Yuan, F. Miao and F. Song, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2642 Search PubMed .
K. Kaasbjerg, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 115317 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, Z. Luo, Y. Shen, W. Zhao, W. Wang, H. Nan, X. Guo, L. Sun, X. Wang and Y. You, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3622–3631 CrossRef CAS .
S. Susarla, A. Kutana, J. A. Hachtel, V. Kochat, A. Apte, R. Vajtai, J. C. Idrobo, B. I. Yakobson, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702457 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, Z. Fan, G. Hao, L. Kou, U. Halim, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Wang and J. Jiang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 264–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, S. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. Zhao, J. Seok, D. H. Keum, J. Baik, D.-H. Choe, K. Chang and K. Suenaga, Science, 2015, 349, 625–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, D. Qi, X. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2009, 84, 279–321 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Lüth, Solid surfaces, interfaces and thin films, Springer,  2001 Search PubMed .
W. Chen, S. Chen, D. C. Qi, X. Y. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10418–10422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, I. Santoso, R. Wang, L. F. Xie, H. Y. Mao, H. Huang, Y. Z. Wang, X. Y. Gao, Z. K. Chen and D. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 213104 CrossRef .
D. Xiang, C. Han, J. Wu, S. Zhong, Y. Liu, J. Lin, X.-A. Zhang, W. P. Hu, B. Özyilmaz and A. C. Neto, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, J. Lin, D. Xiang, C. Wang, L. Wang and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 263117 CrossRef .
P. Wei, N. Liu, H. R. Lee, E. Adijanto, L. Ci, B. D. Naab, J. Q. Zhong, J. Park, W. Chen and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1890–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhong, J. Q. Zhong, H. Y. Mao, R. Wang, Y. Wang, D. C. Qi, K. P. Loh, A. T. S. Wee, Z. K. Chen and W. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3134–3140 CAS .
N. Koch, S. Duhm, J. P. Rabe, A. Vollmer and R. L. Johnson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 237601 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Koch, S. Duhm, J. P. Rabe, S. Rentenberger, R. L. Johnson, J. Klankermayer and F. Schreiber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 101905 CrossRef .
E. L. Bruner, N. Koch, A. R. Span, S. L. Bernasek, A. Kahn and J. Schwartz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3192–3193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, H. Zhu, Q. Meng, X. Gong and W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1754–1808 RSC .
Y. Zhao, K. Xu, F. Pan, C. Zhou, F. Zhou and Y. Chai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603484 CrossRef .
W. Lei, G. Liu, J. Zhang and M. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3492–3509 RSC .
Z. Hu, Q. Li, B. Lei, Q. Zhou, D. Xiang, Z. Lyu, F. Hu, J. Wang, Y. Ren and R. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9131–9135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, Z. Hu, A. Carvalho, N. Guo, J. Zhang, F. Hu, D. Xiang, J. Wu, B. Lei and L. Wang, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 021007 CrossRef .
S. P. Koenig, R. A. Doganov, L. Seixas, A. Carvalho, J. Y. Tan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, N. Yakovlev, A. H. Castro Neto and B. Özyilmaz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2145–2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi and K. Matsuda, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5944–5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kiriya, M. Tosun, P. Zhao, J. S. Kang and A. Javey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7853–7856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, M. Tosun, G. Seol, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, J. Guo and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1991–1995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Lin, C. Han, F. Wang, R. Wang, D. Xiang, S. Qin, X.-A. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Zhang and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5323–5329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lei, Z. Hu, D. Xiang, J. Wang, G. Eda, C. Han and W. Chen, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1282–1291 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Jo, D. H. Kang, J. Shim, J. Jeon, M. H. Jeon, G. Yoo, J. Kim, J. Lee, G. Y. Yeom and S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4824–4831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, L. Chen, G. Liu, A. N. Abbas, M. Fathi and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5304–5314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, K. Majumdar, H. Liu, Y. Du, H. Wu, M. Hatzistergos, P. Hung, R. Tieckelmann, W. Tsai and C. Hobbs, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6275–6280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Park, S. R. Dugasani, D.-H. Kang, J. Jeon, S. K. Jang, S. Lee, Y. Roh, S. H. Park and J.-H. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11603–11613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Lockhart de la Rosa, A. Nourbakhsh, M. Heyne, I. Asselberghs, C. Huyghebaert, I. Radu, M. Heyns and S. De Gendt, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 258–265 RSC .
Y. Du, H. Liu, A. T. Neal, M. Si and D. Y. Peide, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2013, 34, 1328–1330 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dey, H. S. Matte, S. N. Shirodkar, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. Rao, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 1780–1784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, J. K. Huang, L. Jin, Y. T. Hsu, S. F. Yu, L. J. Li and H. Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1839 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-H. Chen, C.-L. Wu, J. Pu, M.-H. Chiu, P. Kumar, T. Takenobu and L.-J. Li, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 034001 CrossRef .
S. Tongay, J. Zhou, C. Ataca, J. Liu, J. S. Kang, T. S. Matthews, L. You, J. Li, J. C. Grossman and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2831–2836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, H. Li, H. Zhang and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 203109 CrossRef .
H. Fang, S. Chuang, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, T. Takahashi and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3788–3792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amani, D.-H. Lien, D. Kiriya, J. Xiao, A. Azcatl, J. Noh, S. R. Madhvapathy, R. Addou, K. Santosh and M. Dubey, Science, 2015, 350, 1065–1068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C.-Y. Xu, P. Hu and L. Zhen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7795–7804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yu, L. Liao, S. H. Chae, Y. H. Lee and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4759–4763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Kim, J. H. Jang, K. K. Kim, H. K. Park, J. J. Bae, W. J. Yu, I. H. Lee, G. Kim, D. D. Loc and U. J. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 327–331 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhao, D. Kiriya, A. Azcatl, C. Zhang, M. Tosun, Y.-S. Liu, M. Hettick, J. S. Kang, S. McDonnell and S. KC, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10808–10814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chakraborty, A. Bera, D. Muthu, S. Bhowmick, U. V. Waghmare and A. Sood, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 161403 CrossRef .
Z. Li, R. Ye, R. Feng, Y. Kang, X. Zhu, J. M. Tour and Z. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5235–5240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, S. Wu, H. Yu, N. J. Ghimire, A. M. Jones, G. Aivazian, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, D. Xiao and W. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1474 CrossRef PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, C. Lee, G. H. Lee, J. Hone, T. F. Heinz and J. Shan, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 207–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yao, D. Xiao and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 235406 CrossRef .
D. H. Kang, M. S. Kim, J. Shim, J. Jeon, H. Y. Park, W. S. Jung, H. Y. Yu, C. H. Pang, S. Lee and J. H. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4219–4227 CrossRef CAS .
M. Buscema, J. O. Island, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3691–3718 RSC .
K. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. C. Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Li, D. Lee, D. Qu, X. Liu, J. Ryu, A. Seabaugh and W. J. Yoo, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lim, A. Pezeshki, S. Oh, J. S. Kim, Y. T. Lee, S. Yu, D. K. Hwang, G. H. Lee, H. J. Choi and S. Im, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 170198 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, D. Qu, J. Ryu, F. Ahmed, Z. Yang, D. Lee and W. J. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2345–2351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Walia, S. Balendhran, Y. Wang, R. Ab Kadir, A. Sabirin Zoolfakar, P. Atkin, J. Zhen Ou, S. Sriram, K. Kalantar-zadeh and M. Bhaskaran, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 232105 CrossRef .
H. Qiu, L. Pan, Z. Yao, J. Li and Y. Shi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 123104 CrossRef .
S. Das, H. Y. Chen, A. V. Penumatcha and J. Appenzeller, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 100–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gong, C. Huang, J. Miller, L. Cheng, Y. Hao, D. Cobden, J. Kim, R. S. Ruoff, R. M. Wallace and K. Cho, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11350–11357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, J. Kang, D. Sarkar, Y. Khatami, D. Jena and K. Banerjee, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1983–1990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Li, D. Y. Lee, M. S. Choi, D. Qu, X. Liu, C. H. Ra and W. J. Yoo, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4041 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Mönch, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 1899–1901 CrossRef .
H. Liu, M. Si, S. Najmaei, A. T. Neal, Y. Du, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou and P. D. Ye, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2640–2646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, M. Si, Y. Deng, A. T. Neal, Y. Du, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2013, 8, 1031–1038 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Liu, Y. Guo, L. Fang and J. Robertson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 183113 CrossRef .
C. D. English, G. Shine, V. E. Dorgan, K. C. Saraswat and E. Pop, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3824–3830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Somvanshi, S. Kallatt, C. Venkatesh, S. Nair, G. Gupta, J. K. Anthony, D. Karmakar and K. Majumdar, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2017, 96, 205423 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. Guo, Y. Wu, E. Zhu, N. O. Weiss, Q. He, H. Wu, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Xu and I. Shakir, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6337–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gong, L. Colombo, R. M. Wallace and K. Cho, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1714–1720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das and J. Appenzeller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 103501 CrossRef .
J. Kang, W. Liu, D. Sarkar, D. Jena and K. Banerjee, Phys. Rev. X, 2014, 4, 031005 Search PubMed .
N. Kaushik, A. Nipane, F. Basheer, S. Dubey, S. Grover, M. M. Deshmukh and S. Lodha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 113505 CrossRef .
K.-K. Liu, W. Zhang, Y.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, M.-T. Chang, C.-Y. Su, C.-S. Chang, H. Li, Y. Shi and H. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chuang, C. Battaglia, A. Azcatl, S. McDonnell, J. S. Kang, X. Yin, M. Tosun, R. Kapadia, H. Fang, R. M. Wallace and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1337–1342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tosun, S. Chuang, H. Fang, A. B. Sachid, M. Hettick, Y. Lin, Y. Zeng and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4948–4953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Perera, M.-W. Lin, H.-J. Chuang, B. P. Chamlagain, C. Wang, X. Tan, M. M.-C. Cheng, D. Tománek and Z. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4449–4458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Bao, T. Pei, R. Ma, Y.-Y. Zhang, L. Sun, G. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Li and C. Gu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6870–6878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu, Y.-H. Lee, X. Ling, E. J. Santos, Y. C. Shin, Y. Lin, M. Dubey, E. Kaxiras, J. Kong and H. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3055–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. Gorbachev, R. Jalil, B. Belle, F. Schedin, A. Mishchenko, T. Georgiou, M. Katsnelson, L. Eaves and S. Morozov, Science, 2012, 335, 947–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, G. H. Lee, Y. D. Kim, G. Arefe, P. Y. Huang, C. H. Lee, D. A. Chenet, X. Zhang, L. Wang, F. Ye, F. Pizzocchero, B. S. Jessen, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. A. Muller, T. Low, P. Kim and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 534–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Roy, M. Tosun, J. S. Kang, A. B. Sachid, S. B. Desai, M. Hettick, C. C. Hu and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6259–6264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Chuang, X. Tan, N. J. Ghimire, M. M. Perera, B. Chamlagain, M. M.-C. Cheng, J. Yan, D. Mandrus, D. Tománek and Z. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3594–3601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du, L. Yang, J. Zhang, H. Liu, K. Majumdar, P. D. Kirsch and D. Y. Peide, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2014, 35, 599–601 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Chen, P. M. Odenthal, A. G. Swartz, G. C. Floyd, H. Wen, K. Y. Luo and R. K. Kawakami, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3106–3110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dankert, L. Langouche, M. V. Kamalakar and S. P. Dash, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 476–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Heine, Phys. Rev., 1965, 138, A1689 CrossRef .
J. Tersoff, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 52, 465 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Tung, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 205310 CrossRef .
S. Lee, A. Tang, S. Aloni and H.-S. P. Wong, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 276–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Q. Yao, C. W. Huang, X. Zou, L. Liao, S. Chen, Z. Fan, K. Zhang, W. Wu and X. Xiao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8302–8308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, E.-M. Shih, L. A. Jauregui, S. H. Chae, Y. D. Kim, B. Li, D. Seo, K. Pistunova, J. Yin and J.-H. Park, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4781–4786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou, J. Wang, C. H. Chiu, Y. Wu, X. Xiao, C. Jiang, W. W. Wu, L. Mai, T. Chen and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6255–6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. McDonnell, B. Brennan, A. Azcatl, N. Lu, H. Dong, C. Buie, J. Kim, C. L. Hinkle, M. J. Kim and R. M. Wallace, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10354–10361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, J. Zhong, S. Zhong, H. Li, H. Zhang and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 063109 CrossRef .
S. McDonnell, A. Azcatl, R. Addou, C. Gong, C. Battaglia, S. Chuang, K. Cho, A. Javey and R. M. Wallace, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6265–6272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, C. Hamsen, X. Jia, K. K. Kim, A. Reina, M. Hofmann, A. L. Hsu, K. Zhang, H. Li and Z.-Y. Juang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4134–4139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Chuang, B. Chamlagain, M. Koehler, M. M. Perera, J. Yan, D. Mandrus, D. Tománek and Z. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1896–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Kim, Y. Kim, J. Nam, H.-S. Chung, D. J. Kim, J.-D. Kwon, S. W. Park, J. Park, S. Y. Choi and B. H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1890–1895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. T. Mullen, Z. Jin, K. M. Borysenko, M. B. Nardelli and K. W. Kim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 115418 CrossRef .
B. W. Baugher, H. O. Churchill, Y. Yang and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4212–4216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, Y. Pan, Y. Shen, Z. Wang, Z. Y. Ong, T. Xu, R. Xin, L. Pan, B. Wang, L. Sun, J. Wang, G. Zhang, Y. W. Zhang, Y. Shi and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Wu, H.-C. Cheng, S. Yang, E. Zhu, Q. He, M. Ding, D. Li, J. Guo and N. O. Weiss, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3030–3034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ma and D. Jena, Phys. Rev. X, 2014, 4, 011043 Search PubMed .
Z. Yu, Z. Y. Ong, Y. Pan, Y. Cui, R. Xin, Y. Shi, B. Wang, Y. Wu, T. Chen and Y. W. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 547–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic and A. Kis, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 815–820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Yu, Y. H. Lee, Y. Shi, A. Hsu, M. L. Chin, L. J. Li, M. Dubey, J. Kong and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4674–4680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. H. Shokouh, P. J. Jeon, A. Pezeshki, K. Choi, H. S. Lee, J. S. Kim, E. Y. Park and S. Im, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7208–7214 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, A. Konar, W. S. Hwang, J. H. Lee, J. Lee, J. Yang, C. Jung, H. Kim, J. B. Yoo, J. Y. Choi, Y. W. Jin, S. Y. Lee, D. Jena, W. Choi and K. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1011 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Jena and A. Konar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yu, Z. Y. Ong, S. Li, J. B. Xu, G. Zhang, Y. W. Zhang, Y. Shi and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604093 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, R. Xin, Z. Yu, Y. Pan, Z. Y. Ong, X. Wei, J. Wang, H. Nan, Z. Ni and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5230–5234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, X. Wang, S. Raju, Z. Lin, D. Villaroman, B. Huang, H. L.-W. Chan, M. Chan and Y. Chai, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8695–8700 RSC .

          S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor devices, John Wiley & Sons,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. Punnoose and A. M. Finkel'stein, Science, 2005, 310, 289–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, M. B. Whitwick and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9934–9938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Song, S. L. Li, L. Gao, Y. Xu, K. Ueno, J. Tang, Y. B. Cheng and K. Tsukagoshi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9666–9670 RSC .
W. Yang, Q.-Q. Sun, Y. Geng, L. Chen, P. Zhou, S.-J. Ding and D. W. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11921 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Azcatl, S. McDonnell, S. KC, X. Peng, H. Dong, X. Qin, R. Addou, G. I. Mordi, N. Lu and J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 111601 CrossRef .
J. Yang, S. Kim, W. Choi, S. H. Park, Y. Jung, M.-H. Cho and H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4739–4744 CAS .
L. Li, W. Wang, Y. Chai, H. Li, M. Tian and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701011 CrossRef .
M. M. Furchi, D. K. Polyushkin, A. Pospischil and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6165–6170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim and K. L. Shepard, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Tamalampudi, Y.-Y. Lu, U. R. Kumar, R. Sankar, C.-D. Liao, B. K. Moorthy, C.-H. Cheng, F. C. Chou and Y.-T. Chen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2800–2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Liu, M. Long, J. Zeng, W. Luo, Y. Wang, Y. Pan, W. Zhou, B. Wang, W. Hu and Z. Ni, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1938–1944 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Huang, Q. Gao, Y. Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, L. Campos and D. Muller, Science, 2013, 342, 614–617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bao, X. Cai, D. Kim, K. Sridhara and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 042104 CrossRef .
B. Chamlagain, Q. Li, N. J. Ghimire, H.-J. Chuang, M. M. Perera, H. Tu, Y. Xu, M. Pan, D. Xaio and J. Yan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5079–5088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. He, N. Kumar, L. Zhao, Z. Wang, K. F. Mak, H. Zhao and J. Shan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 026803 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Ugeda, A. J. Bradley, S.-F. Shi, H. Felipe, Y. Zhang, D. Y. Qiu, W. Ruan, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain and Z.-X. Shen, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, X. Ling, L. Yu, S. Huang, A. L. Hsu, Y. H. Lee, J. Kong, M. S. Dresselhaus and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5569–5576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Raja, A. Chaves, J. Yu, G. Arefe, H. M. Hill, A. F. Rigosi, T. C. Berkelbach, P. Nagler, C. Schüller and T. Korn, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15251 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Ye, Y. Matsuhashi and Y. Iwasa, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1136–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shimotani, H. Asanuma, A. Tsukazaki, A. Ohtomo, M. Kawasaki and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 082106 CrossRef .
K. Ueno, S. Nakamura, H. Shimotani, A. Ohtomo, N. Kimura, T. Nojima, H. Aoki, Y. Iwasa and M. Kawasaki, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. Booth, V. Khotkevich, S. Morozov and A. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Svensson and E. E. Campbell, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 16 CrossRef .
D. Braga, I. Gutierrez Lezama, H. Berger and A. F. Morpurgo, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5218–5223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kam and B. Parkinson, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 463–467 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Ye, Y. Yomogida, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3023–3028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Xiao, H. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Alsaid, K. Y. Fong, Y. Zhou, S. Wang, W. Shi and Y. Wang, Nature, 2017, 550, 487–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, K.-A. N. Duerloo, K. Wauson and E. J. Reed, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, E. O'Farrell, K. Loh, G. Eda, B. Özyilmaz and N. A. Castro, Nature, 2016, 529, 185–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, Y. Zhang, R. Akashi, M. Bahramy, R. Arita and Y. Iwasa, Science, 2012, 338, 1193–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, O. Zheliuk, I. Leermakers, N. F. Yuan, U. Zeitler, K. T. Law and J. Ye, Science, 2015, 350, 1353–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Borkar, IEEE Micro, 1999, 19, 23–29 CrossRef .
L. B. Kish, Phys. Lett. A, 2002, 305, 144–149 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Cavin, V. V. Zhirnov, J. A. Hutchby and G. I. Bourianoff, Fluctuation Noise Lett., 2005, 5, C29–C38 CrossRef .
S. Salahuddin and S. Datta, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 405–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Müller, T. S. Böscke, U. Schröder, S. Mueller, D. Bräuhaus, U. Böttger, L. Frey and T. Mikolajick, Nano Lett.,  2012, 12, 4318–4323 Search PubMed .
C. H. Cheng and A. Chin, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2014, 35, 274–276 CrossRef CAS .
M. Si, C.-J. Su, C. Jiang, N. J. Conrad, H. Zhou, K. D. Maize, G. Qiu, C.-T. Wu, A. Shakouri and M. A. Alam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Lee, S. W. Min, M. K. Park, Y. T. Lee, P. J. Jeon, J. H. Kim, S. Ryu and S. Im, Small, 2012, 8, 3111–3115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Lee, H. Kwon, J. S. Kim, H.-H. Kim, Y. J. Lee, J. A. Lim, Y.-W. Song, Y. Yi, W.-K. Choi and D. K. Hwang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10394–10401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lipatov, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and A. Sinitskii, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8089–8098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-W. Zhang, D. Xie, J.-L. Xu, Y.-L. Sun, X. Li, C. Zhang, R.-X. Dai, Y.-F. Zhao, X.-M. Li and X. Li, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2015, 36, 784–786 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ko, Y. Lee, Y. Chen, J. Suh, D. Fu, A. Suslu, S. Lee, J. D. Clarkson, H. S. Choe and S. Tongay, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2923–2930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, G.-X. Ni, C.-T. Toh, C.-Y. Tan, K. Yao and B. Özyilmaz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 166602 CrossRef PubMed .
R. C. Naber, C. Tanase, P. W. Blom, G. H. Gelinck, A. W. Marsman, F. J. Touwslager, S. Setayesh and D. M. De Leeuw, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 243–248 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, P. Wang, J. Wang, W. Hu, X. Zhou, N. Guo, H. Huang, S. Sun, H. Shen and T. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6575–6581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, Z. Hu, M. Probert, K. Li, D. Lv, X. Yang, L. Gu, N. Mao, Q. Feng and L. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, T. Björkman, H.-P. Komsa, P.-Y. Teng, C.-H. Yeh, F.-S. Huang, K.-H. Lin, J. Jadczak, Y.-S. Huang and P.-W. Chiu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, C.-G. Wang, M.-Y. Li, D. Huang, L.-J. Li, W. Ji and S. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 046101 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tongay, J. Suh, C. Ataca, W. Fan, A. Luce, J. S. Kang, J. Liu, C. Ko, R. Raghunathanan and J. Zhou, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2657 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Srivastava, M. Sidler, A. V. Allain, D. S. Lembke, A. Kis and A. Imamoğlu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 491–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Koperski, K. Nogajewski, A. Arora, V. Cherkez, P. Mallet, J.-Y. Veuillen, J. Marcus, P. Kossacki and M. Potemski, Nat.
Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 503–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-M. He, G. Clark, J. R. Schaibley, Y. He, M.-C. Chen, Y.-J. Wei, X. Ding, Q. Zhang, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 503–506 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-P. Komsa, S. Kurasch, O. Lehtinen, U. Kaiser and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 035301 CrossRef .
M. Matsunaga, A. Higuchi, G. He, T. Yamada, P. Krüger, Y. Ochiai, Y. Gong, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan and J. P. Bird, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9730–9737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Xi, D. O. Dumcenco, Z. Liu, K. Suenaga, D. Wang, Z. Shuai, Y.-S. Huang and L. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4610–4616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-Y. Lu, H. Zhu, J. Xiao, C.-P. Chuu, Y. Han, M.-H. Chiu, C.-C. Cheng, C.-W. Yang, K.-H. Wei and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 744–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Jia, I. Kholmanov, L. Dong, D. Er, W. Chen, H. Guo, Z. Jin, V. B. Shenoy and L. Shi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8192–8198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Azcatl, X. Qin, A. Prakash, C. Zhang, L. Cheng, Q. Wang, N. Lu, M. J. Kim, J. Kim and K. Cho, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5437–5443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Duan, K. Zang, J. Luo and X. Duan, Science, 2017, 357, 788–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Wang, H. Yu, N. Li, J. Zhang, J. Meng, M. Liao, J. Zhao, X. Lu and L. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10216–10219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, W. Zhou, X. Zou, G. Shi, S. Lei, B. I. Yakobson, J.-C. Idrobo, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 754–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Son, M.-Y. Li, C.-C. Cheng, K.-H. Wei, P. Liu, Q. H. Wang, L.-J. Li and M. S. Strano, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3571–3577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kappera, D. Voiry, S. E. Yalcin, B. Branch, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1128–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Song, D. H. Keum, S. Cho, D. Perello, Y. Kim and Y. H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 16, 188–193 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, B. Liu, A. Zhang, L. Chen, M. Fathi, C. Shen, A. N. Abbas, M. Ge, M. Mecklenburg and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7383–7391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lei, Y. Pan, Z. Hu, J. Zhang, D. Xiang, Y. Zheng, R. Guo, C. Han, L. Wang, J. Lu, L. Yang and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2070–2077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, W. Zhao, J. Jiang, T. Zheng, Y.-M. You, J. Lu and Z. Ni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 12294–12299 CAS .
A. M. Jones, H. Yu, N. J. Ghimire, S. Wu, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, B. Zhao, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus and D. Xiao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Q. Liao, S. Liu, Z. Kang, Z. Zhang, J. Du, F. Li, S. Zhang, J. Xiao and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, A. A. Puretzky, X. Sang, S. KC, M. Tian, F. Ceballos, M. Mahjouri-Samani, K. Wang, R. R. Unocic and H. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603850 CrossRef .
P. Yu, J. Lin, L. Sun, Q. L. Le, X. Yu, G. Gao, C. H. Hsu, D. Wu, T. R. Chang and Q. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603991 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nipane, D. Karmakar, N. Kaushik, S. Karande and S. Lodha, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2128–2137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. McDonnell, R. Addou, C. Buie, R. M. Wallace and C. L. Hinkle, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2880–2888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamamoto, S. Nakaharai, K. Ueno and K. Tsukagoshi, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2720–2727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, A. Carvalho, X. K. Chan, H. Liu, B. Liu, E. S. Tok, K. P. Loh, A. Castro Neto and C. H. Sow, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3524–3532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nan, Z. Wu, J. Jiang, A. Zafar, Y. You and Z. Ni, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 154001 CrossRef .
M. Tosun, L. Chan, M. Amani, T. Roy, G. H. Ahn, P. T. Aheri, C. Carraro, J. W. Ager, R. Maboudian and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6853–6860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carvalho and A. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 081406 CrossRef .
M. Yamamoto, S. Dutta, S. Aikawa, S. Nakaharai, K. Wakabayashi, M. S. Fuhrer, K. Ueno and K. Tsukagoshi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2067–2073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ross and A. Sussman, J. Phys. Chem., 1955, 59, 889–892 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Ma, A. Zhang, L. Chen, A. N. Abbas, Y. Liu, C. Shen, H. Wan and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5153–5160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. K. Huang, C. H. Chen, Y. H. Chang, Y. J. Cheng and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3456–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, M. Y. Cho, A. Konar, J. H. Lee, G. B. Cha, S. C. Hong, S. Kim, J. Kim, D. Jena and J. Joo, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5832–5836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-S. Tsai, K.-K. Liu, D.-H. Lien, M.-L. Tsai, C.-F. Kang, C.-A. Lin, L.-J. Li and J.-H. He, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3905–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kufer and G. Konstantatos, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7307–7313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, M. M. Naiini, S. Vaziri, M. C. Lemme and M. Östling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6524–6531 CrossRef CAS .

          R. H. Bube, Photoconductivity of solids, RE Krieger Pub. Co.,  1978 Search PubMed .
S. Ghatak and A. Ghosh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 122103 CrossRef .
S. Ghatak, A. N. Pal and A. Ghosh, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7707–7712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang and W. Hu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700323 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Chang, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Han, J. Pu, J. K. Chang, W. T. Hsu, J. K. Huang, C. L. Hsu, M. H. Chiu, T. Takenobu, H. Li, C. I. Wu, W. H. Chang, A. T. Wee and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8582–8590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tsai, Z. Chu, Y. Han, C. P. Chuu, D. Wu, A. Johnson, F. Cheng, M. Y. Chou, D. A. Muller and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703680 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Zhang, W. Chan, S. Tiwari and F. Rana, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Zhang and F. Rana, Nano Lett., 2014, 15, 339–345 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, J. H. Strait, C. Zhang, W. Chan, C. Manolatou, S. Tiwari and F. Rana, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 165411 CrossRef .
D. Lagarde, L. Bouet, X. Marie, C. Zhu, B. Liu, T. Amand, P. Tan and B. Urbaszek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 047401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Korn, S. Heydrich, M. Hirmer, J. Schmutzler and C. Schüller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 102109 CrossRef .
C. J. Docherty, P. Parkinson, H. J. Joyce, M.-H. Chiu, C.-H. Chen, M.-Y. Lee, L.-J. Li, L. M. Herz and M. B. Johnston, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11147–11153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shim, A. Oh, D. H. Kang, S. Oh, S. K. Jang, J. Jeon, M. H. Jeon, M. Kim, C. Choi and J. Lee, Adv. Mat, 2016, 28, 6985–6992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Klee, E. Preciado, D. Barroso, A. E. Nguyen, C. Lee, K. J. Erickson, M. Triplett, B. Davis, I.-H. Lu and S. Bobek, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2612–2619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Song, G. H. Ryu, S. J. Lee, S. Sim, C. W. Lee, T. Choi, H. Jung, Y. Kim, Z. Lee and J.-M. Myoung, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7817 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yamaguchi, R. Kapper, S. Lei., S. Najmaei, B. D. Mangum, G. Gupta, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, M. Chhowalla, J. J. Crochet and A. D. Mohite, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 840–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 171 Search PubMed .
M. L. Tsai, M. Y. Li, J. R. D. Retamal, K. T. Lam, Y. C. Lin, K. Suenaga, L. J. Chen, G. Liang, L. J. Li and H. He Jr, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701168 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L. Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei and J.-H. He, Science, 2015, 349, 524–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-R. Wei, M.-L. Tsai, S.-T. Ho, S.-H. Tai, C.-R. Ho, S.-H. Tsai, C.-W. Liu, R.-J. Chung and J.-H. He, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3658–3663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, N. R. Monahan, Z. Gong, H. Zhu, K. W. Williams and C. A. Nelson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8313–8320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wu, X. Huang, Z. Yin, J. Liu and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6563–6570 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Palacios-Berraquero, M. Barbone, D. M. Kara, X. Chen, I. Goykhman, D. Yoon, A. K. Ott, J. Beitner, K. Watanabe and T. Taniguchi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Clark, J. R. Schaibley, J. Ross, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, J. R. Hendrickson, S. Mou, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3944–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rong, Y. Sheng, M. Pacios, X. Wang, Z. He, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2015, 10, 1093–1100 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this paper.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Zehua Hu
	Mr Zehua Hu received his Bachelor's degree in physics from Nanjing University (China) in 2014. Currently, he is a PhD candidate in the National University of Singapore (NUS). His research interests include synthesis and characterization of novel 2D materials, and interface engineering of nanoscale optoelectronic devices.

Zhangting Wu
	Dr Zhangting Wu received her PhD degree in Physics from Southeast University (China) in 2017. She is currently a lecturer in the College of Electronics and Information at Hangzhou Dianzi University (China). Her research interests include the spectroscopic investigation of defects and modulation of the properties of two-dimensional materials.

Cheng Han
	Dr Cheng Han is currently an assistant professor of Shenzhen University (SZU, China). He received his Bachelor's degree in Physics from Sichuan University (SCU, China) in 2009 and his PhD degree in Physics from the National University of Singapore (NUS, Singapore) in 2014. He did research as a postdoctoral fellow in the Chemistry Department, the National University of Singapore from 2014 to 2017. His research interests mainly focus on the interface engineering of novel material-based functional devices, especially for low-dimensional materials.

Zhenhua Ni
	Dr Zhenhua Ni is currently a professor in the School of Physics at Southeast University (SEU, China). He received his Bachelor's degree in Physics from Shanghai Jiaotong University (SJTU, China) in 2003, PhD degree in Physics from the National University of Singapore (NUS, Singapore) in 2007, and did his postdoctoral research in the Department of Physics and Applied Physics at Nanyang Technological University (NTU, Singapore) from 2007–2010. His current research interests include the spectroscopic investigation of two dimensional materials and their applications in optoelectronic devices, e.g. phtotodetectors.

Wei Chen
	Dr Wei Chen is currently an Associate Professor in both the Chemistry Department and Physics Department at the National University of Singapore (NUS). He received his Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Nanjing University (China) in 2001 and PhD degree from the Chemistry Department at NUS in 2004. His current research interests include molecular-scale interface engineering for organic and 2D material-based optoelectronics, and interface-controlled nanocatalysis for energy and environmental research.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Unit cell (top) and top view (bottom) of the 2H-MoS2 lattice. (b) Calculated band structure of MoS2 with a decreasing number of layers, indicating a transition from an indirect to a direct band gap. (c) Schematic illustration of the three interfaces in a TMDC-based FET device, including the TMDC/surface adsorbate, TMDC/metal contact and TMDC/dielectric interface, which are highlighted by the dashed circles. (d) Schematic of the MoS2 crystal structure with typical defects, including vacancy, adatom, substitutional impurity and line defects. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 24, Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group; (b) ref. 12, Copyright 2011, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic energy level diagrams of SCTD between organic molecules and MoS2. (a and b) Depletion and p-doping process via SCTD of organic molecules with high EA; (c and d) n-doping on MoS2via SCTD of organic molecules with low IP.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra of MoS2 doped by DNA or metal ion-modified DNA, and (b) extracted E12g and A1g peak shift data for MoS2. (c) PL spectrum of a monolayer of MoS2 on a h-BN substrate at 10 K. (d) Comparison of the PL spectra of monolayer MoS2 under vacuum and upon exposure to H2O, O2, and ambient air, respectively. (e) PL spectrum of both as-exfoliated and TFSI-treated MoS2 monolayers. (f) Effective PL lifetime as a function of pump fluence. (g) Schematic of the formation of the exciton and trion as well as the charge transfer occurring in GQD-doped MoS2. (h) Circularly polarized PL spectra and the degree of circular polarization (P) of the pure MoS2 and GQD/MoS2 heterostructures with different GQD concentrations. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 63, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 15, Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group; (d) ref. 69, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (e and f) ref. 72, Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (g and h) Ref. 78, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Transfer characteristics of the MoS2 FET under vacuum with increasing Cs2CO3 thickness (Vds = 100 mV). (b) PL spectra of 1L-MoS2 before and after Cs2CO3 (0.7 nm) doping. (c) Photocurrent of the device without and with Cs2CO3 decoration, respectively (Vds = 20 mV, Vg = 0 V). (d) Schematic diagram of the MoS2 p–n diodes with AuCl3 doping under light illumination. (e) I–V curves of the MoS2 diode at Vg = 40 V with the ideal factor of n = 1. (f) Photovoltaic behavior of the doping-induced p–n junction upon light illumination with different wavelengths. Inset shows the enlarged I–V diagram curve under 600 nm light irradiation. (g) Schematic drawing of the vertical p–n junction in MoS2. (h) Schematic image of the device structure for a WSe2 inverter. (i) The output signal (Vout − Vin) of the WSe2 inverter with Vdd ranging from 2 to 6 V. Inset: The channel current versus the input voltage. Reprinted with permission from: (a–c) ref. 58, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (d–f) ref. 25, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (g) ref. 86, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (h and i) ref. 26, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Line-up of the Fermi level of different metals with respect to the band structure of MoS2 based on the experimental data. (b) Transfer characteristics of MoS2 FETs with Sc, Ti, Ni, and Pt metal contacts at VDS = 0.2 V. The inset shows the output characteristics of the corresponding devices for a gate voltage overdrive of 4.0–5.0 V. (c) Ids–Vgs characteristics of a MoS2 pFET with MoOx contacts. Inset shows the device structure. (d) Temperature-dependent I–V curve of the diode with asymmetric Ni and MoO3 electrodes. Inset: Qualitative band structure of the device. (e) Schematic drawing of a horizontally contact-doped TMDC device. (f) Transfer characteristics of a WSe2 device before and after NO2 contact doping. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 91, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; (c and d) ref. 107, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (f) ref. 71, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) AFM images of 2 nm Ag on monolayer MoS2. The rms value of roughness is 0.78 nm. (b) The plot of SB height φB as a function of Vg for CVD-grown MoS2–graphene and MoS2–Ti junctions. (c) Schematic of a graphene edge-contacted and h-BN-encapsulated MoS2 multi-terminal FET. (d) Transfer characteristics of a graphene-contacted MoS2 before and after AuCl3 doping. Inset shows the optical microscopy image of this device. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 92, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 112, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 114, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (d) ref. 88, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  Band alignment of a metal/MoS2 contact (a) before and (b) after inserting an insulating layer. Transfer characteristics of the MoS2 devices with (c) Co and (d) TiO2/Co contact. The plot of SB heights at different gate voltages for the MoS2 device (e) without and (f) with a h-BN buffer layer, respectively. Reprinted with permission from: (c and d) ref. 119, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (e and f) ref. 124, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The simulated charge carrier mobility as a function of CI concentration for TMDC devices on SiO2 (black), Al2O3 (green), and HfO2 (red). (b) Field-effect mobility as a function of temperature for three devices on SiO2 (black), Al2O3 (green), and HfO2 (red), respectively. Solid lines are the modelling results. Temperature dependent field-effect mobility of monolayer MoS2 in (c) bottom- and (d) dual-gated MoS2 FETs, respectively. (e) Schematic illustration of a HfO2-covered MoS2 FET with Pd (E-mode) and Al (D-mode) top electrodes. (f) The transfer characteristics of D-mode and E-mode bilayer MoS2 FETs. (g) Schematic drawing of a top-gated FET with a bilayer CYTOP/Al2O3 top gate dielectric. (h) Transfer characteristics of a 4L WSe2 FET after Al2O3 deposition with and without a CYTOP buffer layer. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 139, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons; (c and d) ref. 140, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group; (e and f) ref. 141, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; (g and h) ref. 142, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Transfer characteristics of MoS2 FETs with different back gating structures of MoS2/SiO2 (MS) and MoS2/h-BN/SiO2 (MB). (b) Transfer characteristics of the flexible MoS2/h-BN/graphene (MBG) device with respect to the bending strain. (c) Schematic illustration of the SiO2 dielectric modified by self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). (d) Transfer characteristics of few-layer MoS2 FETs on SAM-modified SiO2 substrates. (e) Schematic illustration of the working principle of an ionic-liquid-gated MoS2 FET. Transfer characteristics of ionic-liquid-gated (f) few-layer, (g) bilayer and trilayer MoS2 FETs, and (h) a few-layer WS2 FET. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 19, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (c and d) ref. 73, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (e and g) ref. 109, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (f) ref. 167, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; (h) ref. 172, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 
ΔVgap = VeTH − VhTH,

 	Fig. 10  (a) Left: Typical ferroelectric hysteresis curve. Pr and Ec are the remnant polarization and coercive electric field, respectively. Right: A schematic of the FET devices with a ferroelectric dielectric of polarization up and down, respectively. (b) Schematic illustration of a MoS2 FET with an HZO ferroelectric film and Al2O3 dielectric. (c) The plot of subthreshold voltage with respect to the drain current Id and (d) I–V characteristics at Vg from −0.65 V to −0.55 V in the device shown in (b). (e) Time-dependent relaxation curves in a WSe2 FET with a PZT dielectric obtained after pulsed gating at on (Pdown) states and following off (Pup) states. (f) PL spectra measured from the MoS2 monolayer with a PZT dielectric at both polarization states. In a MoS2 FET with a P(VDF-TrFE) dielectric, (g) photoswitching behaviors at three states, fresh, Pdown and Pup, respectively, and (h) photoresponsivity as a function of incident light wavelength from 500 to 1550 nm under the Pup state. Reprinted with permission from (a, g and h) ref. 194, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons; (b–d) ref. 186, Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group; (e and f) ref. 191, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) TEM characterization of S vacancies in a MoS2 monolayer. (b) Band structure and partial density of states of the MoS2 monolayer (5 × 5 supercell with an S vacancy). The localized states are highlighted by red lines. (c) Atomically resolved STM imaging of the WSe2 monolayer with W vacancy at bias voltage of −1.2 V. (d) STM spectra of positions marked with crosses in (c). (e) Electronic (upper) and excitonic (lower) schematic diagrams of the WSe2 monolayer with W vacancies. (f) Polarization-resolved PL spectra of the WSe2 monolayer under σ+ detection. The red and black lines correspond to σ+ and σ− circularly polarized light excitation. (g) The PL spectrum of WSe2 with isolated defects and PLE of the sharp emission lines. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 32, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group; (c–f) ref. 197, Copyright 2017, American Physical Society; (g) ref. 200, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM image of a Mo1−xWxS2 monolayer. (b) EELS characteristics of W and Mo atoms indicated as “1” and “2” in (a), respectively. (c) TEM image of a WS2xSe2−2x nanosheet. (d) High-angle annular dark-field image and EDS mapping of a WS2xSe2−2x domain. (e) TEM image of a Janus monolayer (MoSSe). (f) PL spectra of pristine MoS2 and those after H2 plasma treatment, sulphurization and selenization, respectively. (g) TEM images of N-doped MoS2. (h) Raman spectra of the as-exfoliated MoS2 flakes and after sequential N2 plasma exposures of 15 and 60 min, respectively. (i and k) TEM images of polycrystalline MoS2 with a tilt (i) and mirror (k) twin boundary. (j and l) 8–4 (j) and 7–5 (l) membered rings in the grain boundary. (m) High resolution TEM image of a WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructure. (n) Raman image at 250 and 350 cm−1 of a WS2–WSe2 superlattice structure. (o) STM image of monolayer MoS2 after local phase-transition treatment. (p) dI/dV spectra recorded at different locations (triangles marked as 5, 6, 7, 8) in (o). Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 204, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; (c and d) ref. 36, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (e and f) ref. 205, Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group; (g and h) ref. 207, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (i–l) ref. 29, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group; (m and n) ref. 208, Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (o and p) ref. 209, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of electron beam irradiation on a monolayer WSe2 sample during the EBL process. (b) PL spectra of pristine monolayer WSe2 and the sample after electron beam irradiation. (c–h) PL intensity images of monolayer MoS2: (c and f) as-prepared, (d and g) annealed under vacuum at 350 °C and 500 °C, (e and h) after vacuum pumping. (i) PL spectra taken from locations A–D in (c–h). (j and k) Relaxed configuration and charge density difference of an O2 molecule physisorbed on perfect monolayer MoS2 (j) and chemisorbed on defective monolayer MoS2 (k). (l) Structure of an Mo1−xWxS2 monolayer. (m) PL spectra of Mo1−xWxS2 monolayers with different W compositions. Reprinted with permission from: (a and b) ref. 34, Copyright 2016, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; (c–k) ref. 28, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (l and m) ref. 204, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) TEM images of the as-exfoliated (a) and single-side thiol chemistry treated (b) monolayer MoS2 sample. (c) Transfer characteristics for the as-exfoliated (black), single-side treated (blue) and double-side treated (red) monolayer MoS2. (d) Schematic diagram of SVSH in MoS2. (e) Transfer characteristics of a monolayer MoS2 transistor before and after SVSH. (f) Output characteristics of a monolayer WSe2 device before and after laser modification. (g) Band structures of WSe2: pristine WSe2, with selenium vacancy (VSe) and with oxygen replacing Se (Ose). Reprinted with permission from: (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 136, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing group; (d and e) ref. 218, Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing group; (f and g) ref. 224, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the as-exfoliated and H2 plasma treated WSe2, and transfer characteristics of the as-exfoliated and H2 plasma treated WSe2 device. (b) Schematic diagram and output characteristics of the p–n junction device of multilayer MoS2 fabricated by area selective PIII doping. (c) PL spectra and transfer characteristics of composition tunable WS2xSe2−2x monolayer nanosheets. (d) Optical image and output characteristics of the lateral WSe2–WS2 heterojunction device. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 226, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 221, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 36, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 208, Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematics and transfer characteristics of a WSe2 transistor before and after O3 exposure, and that after air exposure. (b) Schematic diagrams of a MoTe2 device with a 1T′/2H phase homojunction, and field-effect mobility as a function of temperature. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 223. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 37, Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagrams of the density-of-states (DOS) (left) and simplified energy band diagram of MoS2 (right) that shows the main features of the charge trapping model. (b) Power dependence of photoresponsivity of the MoS2 photoconductor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) A schematic of the TPPC experiment. (b) The energy band diagram of the metal–MoS2 junction after photoexcitation with an optical pulse. (c) TPPC signals Vc(Δt) as a function of the time delay Δt between the pulses measured at 5 and 300 K, respectively. The plot shows two timescales: a fast timescale of ∼4.3 ps, and a slow timescale of ∼105 ps, which are largely temperature independent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 243, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Sequential super-cycle ALD procedure and schematic structure of a VCC Mo1−xWxS2 multilayer (left) and spectral photocurrent of a VCC Mo1−xWxS2 multilayer, and 5l WS2 and 5l MoS2 photodetectors (right). Proposed mechanisms of photocurrent generation at zero gate bias and scanning photocurrent microscopy in (b) 2H-contacted and (c) 1T-contacted devices, respectively. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 251, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (b and c) ref. 252, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagram, band diagram and photovoltaic effect under different illumination intensities (575 nm) of the monolayer MoS2 homojunction by selective area S vacancy self-healing. (b) Atomic model, optical image, and output characteristics with and without light exposure of a WSe2–MoS2 lateral heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 218, Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group; ref. 255, Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Optical image, (b and c) heterostructure band diagram, (d) EL intensity map, and (e) EL emission spectra of a TMDC based quantum LED. (f) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup used for generating EL in a GB region of a WS2 sample. (g) Red-channel only optical image of EL localized in an eroded GB. (h) SEM images of monolayer-WS2 nanoribbons at GB regions after partial erosion. (i) Normalized EL and PL spectra of a WS2 monolayer device with GBs. Reprinted with permission from: (a–e) ref. 259, Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group; (f–i) ref. 261, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this paper.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
