Formation, growth and applications of femtoliter droplets on a microlens  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP06861A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP06861A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 4226-4237Formation, growth and applications of femtoliter droplets on a microlens

        
          
            Lei 
            Lei
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jia 
            Li
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Haitao 
            Yu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Bao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shuhua 
            Peng
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Xuehua 
            Zhang
          
        
      *bd
aSchool of Electrical and Power Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, Jiangsu Province 221000, China
bSoft Matter & Interfaces Group, School of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia
cKey Laboratory of Green Chemical Engineering and Technology of College of Heilongjiang Province, College of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, Harbin University of Science and Technology, Harbin, 150080, China
dDepartment of Chemical & Materials Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G1H9, Canada. E-mail: xuehua.zhang@ualberta.ca
Received 
      12th October 2017
    , Accepted 27th December 2017First published on 8th January 2018AbstractFormation and growth of femtoliter droplets on surface microstructures are important in many fundamental and practical interfacial processes, such as water collection, vapour condensation in cooling devices, drop self-removal on anti-icing surfaces and fabrication of droplet-templated functional microstructures. In this work, we experimentally and theoretically investigate the growth of femtoliter oil-like liquid on the microlens surrounded by a hydrophilic planar area. The droplets were produced by solvent exchange, a process where the droplets nucleate and grow from an oversaturation created by displacing a good solvent by a poor solvent of the droplet liquid. Our results showed that the droplet fully coats the lens surface and the contact angle of the droplet relative to the flat surface is finely tuned over a large range by the droplet volume. The growth of the droplet on a microlens is largely described by the constant contact radius model. To demonstrate the new opportunities provided by the controlled formation of the droplet situated on a microlens, we will show a simple and effective approach for production of arrays of composite microlenses consisting of two types of polymers with different refractive indices. A high curvature of the composite microlens results in desirable diffraction patterns with potential application for enhanced light harvesting. Moreover, we demonstrate that extraction of traces of a hydrophobic solute from the flow is much faster as the droplet is lifted up from the channel wall by the microlens, promising a time effective in situ detection process in narrow channels.
Introduction
Femtoliter droplets on a surface play an important role in many fundamental and practical interfacial processes.1–4 These surface droplets serve as simple precursors for fabrication of functional materials, such as microlens arrays to enhance light harvesting or microlamps to facilitate vapour condensation.5–8 Droplets also extract traces of analytes from solutions for in situ detection,9 accommodate catalytic nanoparticles for chemical reactions and synthesis, or accommodate active reagents for multiplex high throughput screening and analysis.10–12 Various approaches have been developed for producing femtoliter droplets with defined volume and morphology by controlled droplet evaporation on a nanopatterned substrate,13 thin polymer film dewetting,14–17 inkjet printing technique,18 or entrapment of emulsion droplets.19
Formation of femtoliter droplets through heterogeneous nucleation at the solid–liquid interface has gained great attention, due to simplicity and scalability of the bottom-up approach. However, the challenge is usually how to terminate the growth of the droplet and the final droplet size on the scale of femtoliter or even less. Among all possible approaches, solvent exchange has shown significant potential in controlled growth of surface droplets. In the process of solvent exchange,20,21 the droplets form on the substrate as a consequence of a pulse of oversaturation created by displacing a good solvent by a poor solvent of the droplet liquid in a controlled manner.21,22 The final size of the droplets produced by solvent exchange is influenced by several parameters, including flow rate, channel dimensions, solution composition and physical and chemical properties of the substrate.7,21,23 Both experimental and theoretical understanding of droplet formation by solvent exchange has been reported in the series of our papers published in the last 3 years. To be brief, the droplet volume per unit area increases with an increase in the flow rate of the poor solvent and also with an increase in the channel height.21,24 A ternary phase diagram of the liquids (good and poor solvents and droplet liquid) is the base for prediction of the droplet size when the solution composition is varied.23 The droplets may grow or dissolve in a constant contact radius (CR) mode, a constant contact angle mode or a mixed mode.25 On a substrate with highly ordered hydrophobic prepatterns, the droplet formation also follows the spatial arrangement of the domains.7,26 The solvent exchange is applicable to produce droplets of various types of liquids including extremely viscous ones that are challenging to jet.27 Clearly the solvent exchange possesses very attractive attributes for controlled formation of surface droplets with extremely small volume.
An interesting aspect that has not been explored much is the formation of femtoliter droplets on geometrical microstructures. In general, droplet behaviours on microstructures,28–34 in particular, spherical particles or bumps, are very important for controlling liquids on functional surfaces, as those microstructures are relevant to several most classic biomimetic substrates that are designed by following the inspiration from the back of desert beetles, lotus leaves or moth eyes for self-cleaning, antireflection and other functional surfaces.35–39 With our co-workers, we showed that droplets may form at the rim or on the top of the microlens or somewhere away from the microlens, depending on the wetting properties of the droplet liquid.40 A theoretical phase diagram was constructed to reveal the location for the droplet nucleation relative to the very thin microlens based on interfacial energy minimisation.40
In this work, we will focus on formation and applications of femtoliter droplets on a microlens. The contact angle of the droplet liquid is high on the surrounding area, but low on the microlens surface. With such wetting properties, the droplets are expected to form preferentially on the top of the microlens. Our results show that the formation of the droplet by solvent exchange is confined on the microlens surface, and the droplet volume on the microlens is finely tuned by solution concentrations or flow rate during solvent exchange. As a demonstration of the potential applications of femtoliter droplets on a microlens, we will show a simple approach for additive production of composite microlens arrays with desirable optical properties and droplet-based fast nanoextraction.
Results and discussion
1. Microlens arrays as the substrate
The substrates used in our experiments are prepatterned with highly ordered arrays of polymeric microlenses as shown in Fig. 1, which were prepared by following the protocol reported in the literature.7 The microlens was made of polymerised lauryl methacrylate (PLMA) and 1,6-hexanediol diacrylate (PHDODA). The small microlenses were 5 μm while the large ones were 10 μm in the lateral diameter. The spacings between two lenses in the arrays were 0.5–1 times of the lateral diameter.
 Fig. 1  Sketch of the droplet formation process and definition of geometrical parameters for the droplet on a microlens. The solvent exchange was performed on a substrate prepatterned with a polymeric microlens array. The droplet selectively formed on the microlens surface. HL is the height of the microlens, HD is the distance from the substrate to the top of the droplet, and CAL and CAD are the contact angle of the microlens and of the droplet. LD is defined as the lateral diameter of the microlens, which is the same as the extension of the droplet projected on the flat surface. 
The droplets of the oil-like polymerisable liquid lauryl methacrylate (LMA) were produced on the array of PLMA or PHDODA microlenses by solvent exchange and were also converted to PLMA by photopolymerization before morphological characterisation. The combinations of the microlens, liquid of the droplet, and contact angles of the droplet liquid on the lens material and the flat surrounding area of bare silicon are listed in Table 1. Both the advancing and the receding contact angles of LMA were much higher on the surrounding area than on the flat films of PLMA or PHDODA. For instance, when immersed in water the advancing angle of LMA was 103° on the flat area, but was 82° and 22° on a flat film of PHDODA and PLMA, respectively.
Table 1 List of polymeric microlenses, the surrounding substrate and droplet liquids in our experiments. The advancing and receding contact angles of the droplet were measured on a flat film of the polymer and on the silicon substrate immersed in water




Substrate
Droplet liquid
Advancing contact angle
Receding contact angle




PHDODA
LMA
82° ± 1°
33° ± 3°


PLMA
LMA
22° ± 1°
15° ± 2°


Si
LMA
103° ± 2°
73° ± 1°




The sketch in Fig. 1 shows the droplet on a microlens, and definition of the relevant dimensions in this work. Here HL is the height of the underlying microlens, and HD the distance from the substrate to the top of the droplet. CAL is the contact angle of the microlens and CAD that of the droplet. LD is defined as the lateral diameter of the microlens, which is the same as the extension of the droplet projected on the flat surface. After the droplet is polymerised, the newly obtained lens can consist of the same material or two different materials. Specifically those microlenses with two materials are referred to as composite microlenses. Those with the same material are referred to as ‘new microlenses’, distinguishing from the underlying microlens.
2. LMA droplet on PLMA microlens
LMA droplets were produced on an array of 5 μm PLMA microlenses, with a center-to-center spacing between two adjacent microlenses of 7.5 μm. Fig. 2 shows the representative optical images of composite microlens arrays after polymerisation of the droplets. The new microlenses exhibit high uniformity in their size, following the spatial arrangement and location of the original microlens array over a large surface area. The lateral diameter of the new microlens increases with the concentration of LMA in the first solution for solvent exchange. Meanwhile the spacing between the additive microlenses decreases obviously, and the distance between the neighbouring additive microlenses eventually became unresolvable for the optical resolution (∼1.5 μm) in our experiments. The results show that the microlenses in the array have provided uniform geometrical and chemical confinement for droplet formation.
 Fig. 2  Optical images of microlens arrays. (a) and (e) PLMA microlens array served as the underlying microlens array, produced by solvent exchange. The first solution was LMA in 80% ethanol aqueous solution, and the flow rate was 100 μL min−1. The lateral diameter of the microlens is 5 μm with a spacing between two microlens of 2.5 μm. To produce LMA droplets on top of the PLMA microlens by solvent exchange, the first solution was LMA saturated 50% ethanol aqueous solution for (b), (f) and (c), (g), and LMA saturated 70% ethanol aqueous solution for (d) and (h). The flow rate was 5 μL min−1 for (b) and (f), 30 μL min−1 for (c) and (g), and 3 μL min−1 for (d) and (h). The channel height was ∼2 mm for all experiments. Length of the scale bars: 12.5 μm. 
The morphology of the new lens with a polymerised droplet on the top was further examined by atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging. The cross-sectional profiles of the droplets were extracted from the images in Fig. 3(a)–(c), showing that the shape of the new microlens is a spherical cap. We note that the profile of the microlens with a high aspect ratio may likely be convoluted by the AFM tip. But the data are reliable for the microlens with a height less than half of the lateral diameter, i.e. the contact angle less than 90°. The above results demonstrate that it is possible to form femtoliter droplets selectively on top of microlenses. The height and volume of the polymerised droplets were extracted after subtraction of that of the underlying microlens, showing that the volume of the deposited liquid is of an order of femtoliter as shown in Fig. 3(d)–(g). The height increased from ∼2.5 μm to ∼3.5 μm, and correspondingly the contact angle of the new microlens was gradually built up from 70° to ≥90° by tuning the flow or solution conditions for solvent exchange.
 Fig. 3  Morphology of composite microlenses of PLMA-on-PHDODA. (a)–(c) AFM images and (d)–(f) cross-sectional profiles of a representative composite microlens. (g) Cross-sectional profiles to highlight the gradual increase in the lens height. The underlying microlens arrays of PHDODA were the same for all three groups. In solvent exchange to produce LMA droplets, the first solution was LMA saturated 50% ethanol aqueous solution for (a), (d) and (b), (e), and saturated 70% ethanol aqueous solution for (c) and (f). The flow rate was 5 μL min−1 for (a) and (d), 30 μL min−1 for (b) and (e), and 3 μL min−1 for (c) and (f). The channel height was ∼2 mm for all experiments. Length of the scale bars: 5 μm. 
3. LMA droplet on PHDODA microlens
It is also possible to form femtoliter droplets on a microlens made of other polymers. Here we performed solvent exchange to produce LMA droplets on the substrate with an array of PHDODA microlenses with the lateral diameter of 5 μm and 10 μm as shown in Fig. 1. After the process of solvent exchange-polymerisation, we obtained the composite microlens array shown in Fig. 4. To prove that the composite microlens consists of both PHDODA and PLMA, we performed infrared measurements on top of a pure PLMA lens, a pure PHDODA lens and a composite lens of PHDODA–PLMA. The measurements were performed by using an infrared microspectrometer and the obtained spectra are shown in Fig. 4. The infrared adsorption from all three types of polymeric microlens is located at a wavenumber of 1720 cm−1 from the stretching of a carbonyl group and at 2850 cm−1 and 2925 cm−1 from CH stretching of the α-hydrocarbon chain. The ratio of the peak intensity at a wavenumber of 1730 cm−1 and 2850 cm−1 is ∼9.2 on the pure PHDODA microlens, and is ∼0.6 for the pure PLMA microlens. The spectra from the composite microlens showed that the ratio of the intensity of these two peaks is ∼2.4, between the values from pure PHDODA (9.2) or from pure PLMA (0.8). The silicon substrate and the hydrophobic coating may have some interference with the spectrum of the supporting microlens (PHDODA) at a wavenumber around 1750 cm−1, leading to broadening of the peak. Although the interference makes it uncertain to determine the exact ratio of PHDODA and PLMA in the composite lens, it is sufficient to support our statement that the composite lens consists of both PLMA and PHDODA.
 Fig. 4  (a) and (b) Optical images and atomic force microscopic images of PHDODA microlens arrays. (c) Infrared spectra of pure PHDODA, pure PLMA and PLMA-on-PHDODA composite microlens. (d) and (e) The size distribution of the microlens in the array of (a) and (b), respectively. (f) Optical image and (g) size distribution of the highly uniform PLMA-on-PHDODA composite microlens in the array. Length of the scale bar in (d): 20 μm. 
The supporting microlenses and the composite microlenses in the array are highly uniform in size and spatial arrangement as shown in Fig. 4. Their shape of a spherical cap is evident from the cross-sectional profiles in Fig. 5. The height of the top PLMA layer is adjusted by changing the conditions for solvent exchange: as the oil concentration of LMA in the solutions increased from 2% (CL1) to 5% (CL4), the height of the additive microlens increased from 1.08 μm to 1.86 μm in Fig. 5(a)–(d) while the lateral diameter LD remained largely constant.
 Fig. 5  (a) AFM topographic image of the PLMA-on-PHDOA microlens prepared with different solution concentrations. From left to right, the concentration of LMA in the first solution increased from CL1 (2%) for the droplet in the first image to CL4 (5%) for the one in the fourth image. (b) Cross-sectional profiles of the composite lens shown in (a). Plots of the height (c) and volume (d) of the droplet as a function of the LMA concentration in the first solution for solvent exchange. (e) AFM topographic image of the PLMA-on-PHDODA microlens prepared on microlenses with different heights. From left to right, the height of the underlying PHDODA microlens was 1.03 μm, 1.57 μm, 2.03 μm and 2.54 μm. (f) Cross-sectional profiles of the composite lens. Plots of the height (g) and volume (h) of the droplet as a function of the height of the underlying PHDODA microlens. The profile of the tallest lens (LensL4) may be convoluted by the AFM tip. The area of the images is 8.5 μm by 8.5 μm in (a) and (e). 
The droplets were also produced on microlenses of different heights, the representative AFM images of which are shown in Fig. 5(e)–(h). The height of the obtained droplet was from 1.57 μm to 3.16 μm under the same conditions of solvent exchange. The contact angle of the composite microlens is already above 90° for the two larger droplets. The slight increase in the lateral diameter from the droplet on the taller microlens may be partly related to the convulsion from AFM imaging. The droplet volume increased by 10–40 femtoliters after the solvent exchange. We compared the droplet volume on a substrate prepatterned with circular microdomains and on the microlenses under the same conditions of solvent exchange. The volume of the droplets produced on a planar substrate was from 6.9 fL to 19.5 fL for the domain diameter of 5 μm, and 21.1 fL to 96.5 fL for the domain diameter of 10 μm. Even though the conditions for solvent exchange were identical, the volume of the liquid varied with the size of the underlying lens: more liquid deposited on a taller lens, due to the difference in the growth dynamics of the droplets which will be discussed in the next section.
Furthermore, a new generation of droplets can be formed again on top of the composite microlens by performing the two-step process of droplet formation-polymerisation. In this way, it is possible to build up the microlens in a layer-by-layer manner. In our experiments, we repeated the process of droplet formation-polymerisation four times, and found discrete increment in the height of the composite microlens after each cycle while the lens remained in a highly ordered array all the time. For an array with a small spacing, a further increase in the droplet volume eventually led to contact and coalescence among droplets on adjacent microlenses, resulting in some spindle or worm-like microstructures.
4. Growth modes of the droplet on a microlens
We propose that there are two stages in the growth of droplets on a microlens. As sketched in Fig. 6(a), at an early stage, more than one small droplet form and grow on the microlens surface. There may be preferential nucleation of the droplets at the edge of the microlens, compared to the concave top surface.4 However there may be also droplets on the top surface as our lens was rather flat. These small droplets on the same microlens may grow in a mixed mode, switching between pinned and depinned modes. With time the droplets merge into one big droplet that fully covers the microlens surface and then grow upward in a constant contact radius (CR) mode. This two-stage growth may be similar to that observed for droplet formation in a smooth circular chemical pattern.26
 Fig. 6  (a) Sketch of the growth modes of the droplet on a microlens. (b) Plot of theoretical and experimental volume of the droplet on lens as a function of the LMA concentration in the first solution for solvent exchange. The microlens array used for droplet formation was the same for all concentrations. The experimental data are shown in Fig. 5(a)–(d). (c) Plot of theoretical and experimental volume of the droplet as a function of the height of the underlying microlens. The droplets were produced under the same conditions of solvent exchange. The experimental data are shown in Fig. 5(e)–(h). 
Under the same flow and solution conditions, the final volume of the droplet on the microlens is determined by the morphology of the physical and chemical confinement on the substrate. We analysed the CR mode droplet growth on a smooth circular domain, compared to that on the surface of microlenses of different aspect ratios under the same conditions of solvent exchange.
In a flat hydrophobic pattern, the contact angle θ of the droplet with time t is given by7,26,41 (1) (2)where  is the diffusion coefficient of droplet liquid in solution and ρ is the density of the liquid droplet. The exact values of these two parameters are not important, as they are constant in all experiments and can be cancelled out in our calculations. L is the lateral diameter of the droplet. Cs is the solubility of oil in the solution, and ζ(t) the oversaturation level of oil in the solution. We note that during solvent exchange, Cs and ζ(t) are dependent on the composition in the liquid phase, varying with the time of solvent exchange. When the droplets are produced under identical liquid and flow conditions, Cs and ζ(t) are the same in the experiments.
If we integrate eqn (1) from the initial contact angle θ0 to the final contact angle θf in the CR mode, we can obtain the theoretical volume of droplet G(droplet), according to (3)
The first equal sign in eqn (3) is the defining equation for the function G(droplet). Therefore eqn (3) can be recast as (4)
The concentration of the oil was varied, producing the droplets with a volume from 7 fL to 25 fL. From the fitting of the diffusive growth, we obtain the value of  for the given flow solution concentration based on the sizes of droplets on a planar circular domain, growing with the contact angle θ from 0 to the final.7 This value will be used in the analysis of the droplet growth on microlenses.
For the CR mode droplet growth on microlenses, the lateral diameter remains the same as the original lens diameter. Different from the CR mode of droplet growth on a flat pattern, the initial angle for the droplet on microlenses is not from 0, but from the angle of the microlens θ0. The droplet volume is integrated from θ0 to θf. Fig. 6 shows the plots of the droplet volumes from the calculation and from the experimental data. Fig. 6(b) shows the cases when the supporting microlens is the same while the oil concentration is varied. We obtain excellent agreement with the droplet volume from our experimental measurements. Fig. 6(c) shows the cases when the same solutions are used for the solvent exchange while the height of the supporting microlenses is varied. A slightly larger derivation in Fig. 6(c) may be due to the slight extension of the droplet base diameter over the microlens. The agreement between the experimental data and the calculations suggests that the droplet formation on the microlens can be largely described by diffusive growth in the CR mode.
5. Potential applications: additive production of composite microlens arrays and droplet-based faster nanoextraction
The controlled formation of femtoliter droplets on microlenses offers new opportunities for several droplet-based applications. As demonstration, we will show two very different cases: (1) additive production of composite microlens arrays with desirable optical properties, and (2) fast nanoextraction and in situ detection of traces of hydrophobic solutes from the flow of the solution.

(1) Optical properties of additive microlens arrays. 
Microlens arrays have been recently proposed to be a universal approach for improving the power conversion efficiency of organic-based photovoltaics.42,43 It is reported that in the coupling of incident light into the active layer of the device, a transparent polymer microlens array increases the light path in the active layer, resulting in an improvement of the overall cell efficiency by 15–60%.43 In a latest paper, the scheme based on a microlens array has been implemented in perovskite solar cells to enhance light harvesting.44 The arrays were attached on the glass side of the solar cell without disturbing the internal adsorbing layers. The reported absorption enhancement is ∼6% for the optimal period and height of microlenses due to their focusing effect.44 The microlens array is also reported to be beneficial for enhancing the efficiency of organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), providing a solution for reducing photon loss due to total internal refection at the substrate–air interface.44
Complementary to those elegant approaches for microlens fabrication,15,42,45–48 controlled formation of femtoliter droplets on a microlens provides a simple, flexible and solution-based approach for producing composite microlens arrays with tailored materials, curvature and spatial arrangement. The volume and hence the curvature of the composite microlens can be built up in an additive fashion. From the additive production, the curvature of the composite microlens is finely tuned by simple parameters for the solvent exchange. Another novel feature is the creation of a composite microlens that consists of different polymers of a desirable refractive index. Here we show the diffraction pattern from the array of composite microlenses embedded in a free-standing PDMS film prepared by following the protocol in our previous work.7

Fig. 7 shows the corresponding diffraction patterns from composite microlens arrays with PHDODA on the bottom layer and PLMA on the top layer. The lateral diameter of the composite microlens was ∼5 μm while the height was finely tuned from 0.94 μm to 2 μm during the formation of LMA droplets on the PHDODA microlens by solvent exchange. The results show that higher orders of diffraction patterns were obtained with the gradual increase in the height and hence the curvature of the composite lens. Clearly the additive production of microlens arrays offers great flexibility in terms of lens material, curvature and spatial arrangement.
 Fig. 7  Diffraction patterns from composite microlens arrays with varying aspect ratios. The lateral diameter of the composite microlens is 5 μm, while the height is 0.94 μm (a), 1.28 μm (b), 1.58 μm (c) and 2.03 μm (d). 


(2) Fast nanoextraction and in situ detection. 
Surface droplets enrich traces of a hydrophobic solute, such as a fluorescent dye, from its aqueous solution, due to the high solubility of the solute in an oil phase than in water.9 We refer to this surface droplet based process as ‘nanoextraction’,49 in analogy to microextraction by emulsion droplets50,51 or a single hanging drop.52,53 In addition to the advantageous large specific surface area of surface droplets, the extracted solute may be also detected in situ as the solution of the analyte flows through the microchannel with the droplets on the wall. The droplet on the microlens is expected to be faster in extraction compared to the droplets located on the flat surface, due to the diffusion profile in the laminar flow.54,55 To demonstrate this aspect, we compare the time for a dye in the flow to be extracted by the femtoliter droplets and detected by using fluorescence microscopy as shown in Fig. 8.
In our experiments, the droplets were produced on microlens array substrates that were placed next to each other in the same microchannel with a height of ∼600 μm. The flow of the solution doped with the dye (Rhodamine 6G) reached the substrates at the same time. The droplets became red from the extracted dye, and the fluorescence intensity of the dye was uniform cross all the droplets in the array. The height of the droplet was varied by changing the height of the underlying microlens, or the oil concentration in the solutions for solvent exchange, and was characterised by AFM imaging of the polymerised droplets after the experiments of dye extraction. The plot in Fig. 8 shows the representative curves of the dye intensity in the droplets as a function of time. The results suggest that the dye was extracted to the droplets on taller microlenses much earlier.
 Fig. 8  Nanoextraction by droplets situated on a microlens array. (a) Sketch of the procedure for dye extraction from the flow of the dye solution by the droplets. The channel height was ∼600 μm in the experiments. (b) Fluorescence intensity detected from the droplets as a function of time. The time required to detect the dye was shorter for the droplet sitting on a taller microlens. (c)–(e) Snapshots of the dye extraction by the droplet on a microlens lifted up by micropillars as sketched in (f). The inset SEM images show the structure of the microlens on top of the micropillar before the formation of the droplet. (g) Plot of the detection time Δt as a function of the height of the droplet from the substrate. 
To confirm that nanoextraction is earlier for the droplets lifted up from the wall, we tested nanoextraction by the droplet on a microlens sitting on the top of micropillars as sketched in Fig. 8(f). The micropillars capped with the microlens array were obtained by etching the substrate by following the reported protocol.8 The droplets were produced on the microlens on top of micropillars, the height of which was varied systematically. The measurements show that it took more than 100 s for the dye to be detected in the droplet with a distance of 430 nm from the substrate, but ∼50 s in the droplet with a distance of 3.92 μm. We obtained the time for dye detection in the fluorescent image as a function of droplet height in Fig. 8(g). Clearly placing the droplets on the microlens shortens the time required for nanoextraction by the droplets. The results demonstrate the potential of the droplet on the microlens for time effective extraction and separation.

Conclusions
In summary, this work reports controlled formation and potential applications of femtoliter liquid on a microlens. The selective formation of the droplet on top of the microlens was performed by solvent exchange on the microlens array with appropriate wetting properties. The droplet size is determined by diffusive growth, largely in a constant contact area mode with the lateral diameter similar to the original microlens. The contact angle of the coated microlens is finely tuned by the flow condition and the solution concentration for solvent exchange. This work shows the remarkable capability of solvent exchange in controlling droplet formation on surface microstructures, providing new opportunities for femtoliter droplet-based applications. As demonstration, we showed the additive production of the composite microlens array of the same or different polymers with diffraction patterns desirable for enhancement of light harvesting. We also showed that the process of nanoextraction of traces of hydrophobic solutes from the flow is much faster by using the droplet supported by a microlens, promising a simple approach for time effective detection in narrow fluidic channels.
Experimental section
(1) Preparation of microlens substrates
Highly ordered microlens arrays were prepared by polymerisation of droplets on a chemically patterned substrate by following the published protocol.7 In brief, polymerisable liquid droplets were produced by solvent exchange on the silicon substrate patterned with hydrophobic circular domains. The monomer was a mixture of 1,6-hexanediol diacrylate (HDODA) (80%, Sigma-Aldrich) and 2-hydroxy-2-methylpropiophenone (97%, Sigma-Aldrich). During the solvent exchange, the first solution was prepared by adding 4 mL of monomer in 100 mL of 50 vol% ethanol aqueous solution, while the monomer-saturated water was used as the second solution. The microlens arrays were obtained after the droplet arrays were photopolymerized by placing the fluid cell under a UV lamp (365 nm, 20 W) for about 15 min. We measured the shrinkage rate of a sessile LMA droplet a few micrometers in diameter upon curing, which was found to be less than 5% in our experiments.
(2) Formation and characterisation of droplet-on-microlens
Femtoliter droplets were formed on the lens-decorated surfaces by repeating the solvent exchange process, in which ethanol solution with LMA was replaced by water. In the process, the flow rates were controllable by a syringe pump. As the oil oversaturation and hence the droplet size produced by solvent exchange are strongly dependent on the flow rate, channel geometry and solution conditions,21,24 those conditions were well controlled in the experiments as specified. Solutions for the solvent exchange were prepared as follows: to prepare different concentrations of the monomer in solution A, lauryl methacrylate (LMA) with a volume of 0.2 mL (CL1), 0.3 mL (CL2), 0.4 mL (CL3) and 0.5 mL (CL4) was added into 10 mL of ethanol. When different solutions were used as solution A, the concentrations are specified in the figure captions. Water was used as solution B, due to the extremely low solubility of LMA.
Reflection mode optical microscopy (Huvitz HRM-300) was used to get the optical images of the microlens array and the newly formed composite microlens arrays. Atomic force microscopy (AFM, Dimension Icon-Bruker, ScanAsyst mode) was used to obtain the 3D topography of the polymerised droplet on the microlens. The images of the microlens were taken in the mode of ScanAsyst in air. The cantilevers for AFM imaging were purchased from Bruker (SCANASYST-AIR). We note that AFM images cannot reveal the real profile of the microlens with a contact angle >90°, due to the tip convolution.
The infrared spectra of the supporting microlens and the composite microlens were measured by using an imaging FTIR microscope (Perkin Elmer Spectrum Spotlight 400). The instrument was equipped with a diamond probe for attenuated total internal reflection mode (ATR). The configuration of ATR was used for the measurements of polymerized microlenses on patterned silicon substrates.
(3) Diffraction patterns of the microlens array and dye detection by nanoextraction
A thin layer of PDMS was cast on the array of composite microlenses and cured at elevated temperature. After being embedded into the film, the lens array was freed from the substrate by gently peeling off the PDMS film. The free standing film with the composite microlens array was illuminated normally with a white light source and the diffraction pattern was recorded using a colour camera.
Droplets were produced on the microlens array placed in a channel with a height (h) of 0.63 mm. The aqueous solution of Rhodamine 6G at a concentration of 5 ng mL−1 was injected into the fluid cell at a flow rate of Q = 300 μL min−1. The fluorescence intensity of the droplets was recorded by using top-view fluorescence microscopy. The recorded video was analyzed using self-written MATLAB codes.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Miaosi Li for the assistance with infrared measurements. L. L. and J. L. acknowledge the support from the Chinese Scholarship Council. X. H. Z. acknowledges the support from the Australian Research Council (FT120100473 and LP140100594), S. P. acknowledges the support from the ARENA Research Fellowship, L. B. acknowledges the support from the RMIT Vice Chancellor Postdoctoral Fellowship and H. T. Y. acknowledges the support from the RMIT Vice Chancellor Scholarship. We also acknowledge the access to facilities and the associated technical support at the RMIT MicroNano Research Facility (MNRF) and the Microscopy and Microanalysis Facility (RMMF).
References
A. Lafuma and D. Quere, Superhydrophobic states, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Herminghaus, M. Brinkmann and R. Seemann, Wetting and Dewetting of Complex Surface Geometries, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2008, 38, 101–121 CrossRef CAS .
K.-C. Park, P. Kim, A. Grinthal, N. He, D. Fox, J. C. Weaver and J. Aizenberg, Condensation on slippery asymmetric bumps, Nature, 2016, 531, 78–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Beysens, Dew Nucleation and Growth, C. R. Phys., 2006, 7, 1082–1100 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kang, C. Pang, S. M. Kim, H. S. Cho, H. S. Um, Y. W. Choi and K. Y. Suh, Shape-controllable Microlens Arrays via Direct Transfer of Photocurable Polymer Droplets, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1709–1715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lee, B. H. Hong, W. Y. Kim, S. K. Min, Y. Kim, M. V. Jouravlev, R. Bose, K. S. Kim, I.-C. Hwang, L. J. Kaufman, C. W. Wong, P. Kim and K. S. Kim, Near-field Focusing and Magnification through Self-assembled Nanoscale Spherical Lenses, Nature, 2009, 460, 498–501 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bao, A. R. Rezk, L. Y. Yeo and X. Zhang, Highly Ordered Arrays of Femtoliter Surface Droplets, Small, 2015, 11, 4850–4855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Peng and X. Zhang, Simple Nanodroplet Templating Functional Surfaces with Tailored Wettability and Microstructures, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, S. Peng, L. Lei, J. Zhang, T. L. Greaves and X. Zhang, Large Scale Flow-Mediated Formation and Potential Applications of Surface Nanodroplets, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 22679–22687 CAS .
D. T. Chiu and R. M. Lorenz, Chemistry and Biology in Femtoliter and Picoliter Volume Droplets, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 649–658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Yang, G. Li, M. Li, S. Wang, Y. Song and A. Splitting, Droplet for Femtoliter Liquid Patterns and Single Cell Isolation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9060–9065 CAS .
J. Shemesh, T. Ben Arye, J. Avesar, J. H. Kang, A. Fine, M. Super, A. Meller, D. E. Ingber and S. Levenberg, Stationary Nanoliter Droplet Array with A Substrate of Choice for Single Adherent/nonadherent Cell Incubation and Analysis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 11293–11298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Z. Dong, M. Kuang, Y. Li, F. Li, L. Jiang and Y. Song, Printing Patterned Fine 3D Structures by Manipulating the Three Phase Contact Line, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2237–2242 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Wang, Z. H. Zheng, H. W. Li, W. T. S. Huck and H. Sirringhaus, Dewetting of Conducting Polymer Inkjet Droplets on Patterned Surfaces, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 171–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Verma and A. Sharma, Enhanced Self-Organized Dewetting of Ultrathin Polymer Films Under Water-Organic Solutions: Fabrication of Sub-micrometer Spherical Lens Arrays, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Verma, S. Sekhar, P. Sachan, P. D. S. Reddy and A. Sharma, Control of Morphologies and Length Scales in Intensified Dewetting of Electron Beam Modified Polymer Thin Films Under A Liquid Solvent Mixture, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 3318–3326 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Thickett, C. Neto and A. T. Harris, Biomimetic Surface Coatings for Atmospheric Water Capture Prepared by Dewetting of Polymer Films, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3718–3722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kuang, L. Wang and Y. Song, Controllable Printing Droplets for High-resolution Patterns, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6950–6958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Méndez-Vilas, A. B. Jódar-Reyes and M. L. González-Martn, Ultrasmall Liquid Droplets on Solid Surfaces: Production, Imaging, and Relevance for Current Wetting Research, Small, 2009, 5, 1366–1390 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lohse and X. Zhang, Surface Nanobubbles and Nanodroplets, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2015, 87, 981–1035 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Lu, H. Tan, L. Bao, Y. He, C. Sun and D. Lohse, Formation of Surface Nanodroplets Under Controlled Flow Conditions, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 9253–9257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Zhang and W. Ducker, Formation of Interfacial Nanodroplets Through Changes in Solvent Quality, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12478–12480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, H. Xu, H. Zeng and X. Zhang, Solvent Effects on the Formation of Surface Nanodroplets by Solvent Exchange, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 12120–12125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Z. Lu, D. Lohse and X. Zhang, Gravitational Effect on the Formation of Surface Nanodroplets, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 12628–12634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Bao, E. Dietrich, R. C. A. van der Veen, S. Peng, J. Friend, H. J. W. Zandvliet, L. Yeo and D. Lohse, Mixed Mode of Dissolving Immersed Nanodroplets at A Solid-water Interface, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 1889–1900 RSC .
L. Bao, Z. Werbiuk, D. Lohse and X. Zhang, Controlling the Growth Modes of Femtoliter Sessile Droplets Nucleating on Chemically Patterned Surfaces, J. Phys. Lett., 2016, 7, 1055–1059 CAS .
B. Dyett, H. Yu and X. Zhang, Formation of surface nanodroplets of viscous liquids by solvent exchange, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2017, 40, 26 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Lenz and R. Lipowsky, Morphological Transitions of Wetting Layers on Structured Surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 1920–1923 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lipowsky, Morphological Wetting Transitions at Chemically Structured Surfaces, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 6, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
R. Seemann, M. Brinkmann, E. J. Kramer, F. F. Lange and R. Lipowsky, Wetting Morphologies at Microstructured Surfaces, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 1848–1852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Quéré, Wetting and Roughness, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2008, 38, 71–99 CrossRef .
M.-G. Medici, A. Mongruel, L. Royon and D. Beysens, Edge effects on water droplet condensation, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2014, 90, 062403 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Giacomello, L. Schimmele and S. Dietrich, Wetting Hysteresis Induced by Nanodefects, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E262–E271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Raj, S. Adera, R. Enright and E. N. Wang, High-resolution liquid patterns via three-dimensional droplet shape control, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Purity of the sacred lotus, or escape from contamination in biological surfaces, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Parker and C. R. Lawrence, Water capture by a desert beetle, Nature, 2001, 414, 33–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Kim, Y. Lee, H. G. Kim, K.-J. Choi, H.-S. Kweon, S. Park and K.-H. Jeong, Biologically Inspired LED Lens from Cuticular Nanostructures of Firefly Lantern, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 18674–18678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, T. Liao, K. Liu, L. Jiang, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, Fly-Eye Inspired Superhydrophobic Anti-Fogging Inorganic Nanostructures, Small, 2014, 10, 3001–3006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dewan, S. Fischer, V. B. Meyer-Rochow, Y. Özdemir, S. Hamraz and D. Knipp, Studying nanostructured nipple arrays of moth eye facets helps to design better thin film solar cells, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2012, 7, 016003 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Peng, I. Devi, H. Tan, D. Lohse and X. Zhang, How a Surface Nanodroplet Sits on the Rim of a Microcap, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 5744–5754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. O. Popov, Evaporative deposition patterns: Spatial dimensions of the deposit, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 71, 036313 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, M. Elshobaki, Z. Ye, J.-M. Park, M. a. Noack, K.-M. Ho and S. Chaudhary, Microlens Array Induced Light Absorption Enhancement in Polymer Solar Cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4297–4302 RSC .
J. D. Myers, W. Cao, V. Cassidy, S.-H. Eom, R. Zhou, L. Yang, W. You and J. Xue, A universal optical approach to enhancing efficiency of organic-based photovoltaic devices, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6900–6904 CAS .
A. Peer, R. Biswas, J.-M. Park, R. Shinar and J. Shinar, Light management in perovskite solar cells and organic LEDs with microlens arrays, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 10704–10709 CrossRef PubMed .
E. P. Chan and A. J. Crosby, Fabricating Microlens Arrays by Surface Wrinkling, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3238–3242 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Tien, C.-H. Hung and T.-H. Yu, Microlens Arrays by Direct-Writing Inkjet Print for LCD Backlighting Applications, J. Disp. Technol., 2009, 5, 147–151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Verma and A. Sharma, Self-organized Nano-lens Arrays by Intensified Dewetting of Electron Beam Modified Polymer Thin-films, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 11119–11124 RSC .
X. Bi and W. Li, Fabrication of Flexible Microlens Arrays through Vapor-induced Dewetting on Selectively Plasma-treated Surfaces, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5825–5834 RSC .
Z. Lu, M. H. K. Schaarsberg, X. Zhu, L. Y. Yeo, D. Lohse and X. Zhang, Universal nanodroplet branches from confining the Ouzo effect, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10332–10337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rezaee, Y. Yamini and M. Faraji, Evolution of Dispersive Liquid-liquid Microextraction Method, J. Chromatogr. A, 2010, 1217, 2342–2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Biparva, E. Ranjbari and M. R. Hadjmohammadi, Application of Dispersive Liquid-liquid Microextraction and Spectrophotometric Detection to the Rapid Determination of Rhodamine 6G in Industrial Effluents, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 674, 206–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jain and K. K. Verma, Recent Advances in Applications of Single-drop Microextraction: A Review, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 706, 37–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Spietelun, u. Marcinkowski, M. De La Guardia and J. Namie??nik, Green Aspects, Developments and Perspectives of Liquid Phase Microextraction Techniques, Talanta, 2014, 119, 34–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Taylor, Dispersion of Soluble Matter in Solvent Flowing Slowly through a Tube, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1953, 219, 186–203 CrossRef CAS .
R. Aris, On the Dispersion of a Solute in a Fluid Flowing through a Tube, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1956, 235, 67–77 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Sketch of the droplet formation process and definition of geometrical parameters for the droplet on a microlens. The solvent exchange was performed on a substrate prepatterned with a polymeric microlens array. The droplet selectively formed on the microlens surface. HL is the height of the microlens, HD is the distance from the substrate to the top of the droplet, and CAL and CAD are the contact angle of the microlens and of the droplet. LD is defined as the lateral diameter of the microlens, which is the same as the extension of the droplet projected on the flat surface.	 

PHDODA	LMA	82° ± 1°	33° ± 3°
PLMA	LMA	22° ± 1°	15° ± 2°
Si	LMA	103° ± 2°	73° ± 1°

 	Fig. 2  Optical images of microlens arrays. (a) and (e) PLMA microlens array served as the underlying microlens array, produced by solvent exchange. The first solution was LMA in 80% ethanol aqueous solution, and the flow rate was 100 μL min−1. The lateral diameter of the microlens is 5 μm with a spacing between two microlens of 2.5 μm. To produce LMA droplets on top of the PLMA microlens by solvent exchange, the first solution was LMA saturated 50% ethanol aqueous solution for (b), (f) and (c), (g), and LMA saturated 70% ethanol aqueous solution for (d) and (h). The flow rate was 5 μL min−1 for (b) and (f), 30 μL min−1 for (c) and (g), and 3 μL min−1 for (d) and (h). The channel height was ∼2 mm for all experiments. Length of the scale bars: 12.5 μm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Morphology of composite microlenses of PLMA-on-PHDODA. (a)–(c) AFM images and (d)–(f) cross-sectional profiles of a representative composite microlens. (g) Cross-sectional profiles to highlight the gradual increase in the lens height. The underlying microlens arrays of PHDODA were the same for all three groups. In solvent exchange to produce LMA droplets, the first solution was LMA saturated 50% ethanol aqueous solution for (a), (d) and (b), (e), and saturated 70% ethanol aqueous solution for (c) and (f). The flow rate was 5 μL min−1 for (a) and (d), 30 μL min−1 for (b) and (e), and 3 μL min−1 for (c) and (f). The channel height was ∼2 mm for all experiments. Length of the scale bars: 5 μm.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) and (b) Optical images and atomic force microscopic images of PHDODA microlens arrays. (c) Infrared spectra of pure PHDODA, pure PLMA and PLMA-on-PHDODA composite microlens. (d) and (e) The size distribution of the microlens in the array of (a) and (b), respectively. (f) Optical image and (g) size distribution of the highly uniform PLMA-on-PHDODA composite microlens in the array. Length of the scale bar in (d): 20 μm.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) AFM topographic image of the PLMA-on-PHDOA microlens prepared with different solution concentrations. From left to right, the concentration of LMA in the first solution increased from CL1 (2%) for the droplet in the first image to CL4 (5%) for the one in the fourth image. (b) Cross-sectional profiles of the composite lens shown in (a). Plots of the height (c) and volume (d) of the droplet as a function of the LMA concentration in the first solution for solvent exchange. (e) AFM topographic image of the PLMA-on-PHDODA microlens prepared on microlenses with different heights. From left to right, the height of the underlying PHDODA microlens was 1.03 μm, 1.57 μm, 2.03 μm and 2.54 μm. (f) Cross-sectional profiles of the composite lens. Plots of the height (g) and volume (h) of the droplet as a function of the height of the underlying PHDODA microlens. The profile of the tallest lens (LensL4) may be convoluted by the AFM tip. The area of the images is 8.5 μm by 8.5 μm in (a) and (e).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Sketch of the growth modes of the droplet on a microlens. (b) Plot of theoretical and experimental volume of the droplet on lens as a function of the LMA concentration in the first solution for solvent exchange. The microlens array used for droplet formation was the same for all concentrations. The experimental data are shown in Fig. 5(a)–(d). (c) Plot of theoretical and experimental volume of the droplet as a function of the height of the underlying microlens. The droplets were produced under the same conditions of solvent exchange. The experimental data are shown in Fig. 5(e)–(h).	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 7  Diffraction patterns from composite microlens arrays with varying aspect ratios. The lateral diameter of the composite microlens is 5 μm, while the height is 0.94 μm (a), 1.28 μm (b), 1.58 μm (c) and 2.03 μm (d).	 

 	Fig. 8  Nanoextraction by droplets situated on a microlens array. (a) Sketch of the procedure for dye extraction from the flow of the dye solution by the droplets. The channel height was ∼600 μm in the experiments. (b) Fluorescence intensity detected from the droplets as a function of time. The time required to detect the dye was shorter for the droplet sitting on a taller microlens. (c)–(e) Snapshots of the dye extraction by the droplet on a microlens lifted up by micropillars as sketched in (f). The inset SEM images show the structure of the microlens on top of the micropillar before the formation of the droplet. (g) Plot of the detection time Δt as a function of the height of the droplet from the substrate.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
