p–i–n silicon nanowire array–NGQD: a metal-free electrocatalyst for the photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE00409C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE00409C
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 3160-3171p–i–n silicon nanowire array–NGQD: a metal-free electrocatalyst for the photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution†

        
          
            Sk 
            Riyajuddin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sushil 
            Kumar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Damini 
            Badhwar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shumile Ahmed 
            Siddiqui
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jenifar 
            Sultana
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kaushik 
            Ghosh
          
        
      *
      Institute of Nano Science & Technology, Knowledge City, Sector-81, SAS Nagar, Manauli P.O., 140306, Mohali, Punjab, India. E-mail: kaushik@inst.ac.in
Received 
      19th March 2021
    , Accepted 10th May 2021First published on 11th May 2021AbstractPhotoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is the most promising approach for the realization of efficient solar-to-fuel conversion. However, the biggest challenge is the development of efficient photoelectrodes with active, durable and inexpensive photocatalysts for the enhanced hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) kinetics. To date, pristine planar Si/metal-based devices have been featured as the most effective choice for the photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction (PEC-HER). Although this assembly has the advantage of prolonged stability, a major drawback remains in their higher production cost and ineffective light-trapping capabilities. These issues can be addressed by developing a metal-free, environment-friendly and corrosion-proof catalyst loaded on the large surface area of photoelectrodes to facilitate smooth charge transfer and enhanced light trapping properties. The present study reports the development of a vertically aligned p–i–n SiNWs electrode decorated with metal-free N-doped graphene quantum dots (NGQD), demonstrating a simplistic approach towards PEC-HER. The heterostructure shows excellent PEC-HER performance in terms of the low onset potential (−280 mV@1 mA cm−2), overpotential (−460 mV@10 mA cm−2) and the corresponding Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1. Moreover, the Applied Bias Photon-to-current conversion Efficiency (ABPE) of the as-developed robust photocathode is ∼16.4%, which is higher as compared to most of the Si-based photocathodes. The catalyst also displays good stability of at least 6 hours at an applied current density of 10 mA cm−2 in acidic medium with a minimum (1%) loss of potential. Here, NGQD not only facilitates a low resistive path for the rapid electron transfer process, but also helps to accelerate the electrocatalytic HER kinetics on its surface. Remarkable properties, such as the enhanced absorption of incident light, easy separation, collection and the less recombination of charge carriers in the p–i–n SiNWs geometry, assist to boost the overall PEC performance. This study creates a new avenue to design a metal-free photocathode in the existing Si technology for an eco-friendly solar-to-hydrogen fuel conversion to cope with the present energy demand.
Introduction
Energy and environmental issues are becoming one of the most prominent focal points at a global level with the rapidly growing population over the past few decades.1–3 To resolve these issues, scientists are compelled to develop renewable and sustainable energy resources.1–4 Among all the existing clean energy resources, solar energy is one of the most useful and abundant natural resources of energy, as the energy provided by the sun per hour if collected and stored without any loss is equivalent to the energy consumed by a person per year.5 Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting offers the most favorable and environment-friendly approach to harvest energy under solar radiation with carbon-neutral efficient solar-to-hydrogen fuel conversion.6–8 Nevertheless, the development of an efficient, stable and inexpensive photoelectrode for water splitting is a major concern in the scientific society.
Among all other semiconductors, silicon (Si) is the most attractive candidate for PEC water splitting owing to its low carrier recombination velocity, high carrier mobility, earth abundance, low cost, broadband absorption and environment-friendly nature.9–12 The conduction band edge of Si is more negative than the water reduction potential, but the high reflectance loss, photo-corrosion, slow kinetics and poor photo-stability make it a low efficiency photocathode.10,13,14 To resolve the stability and efficiency issues of Si-based photocathodes, several methods have been adopted such as the introduction of a passivation layer, surface functionalization, replacement of the aqueous solution, among others.15,16 The efficiency and photostability can further be enhanced via the introduction of various Si nano-architectures, including nanowires, nanorods, nanospheres, and porous and pyramidal structures, having enhanced active surface areas, high mechanical stability, antireflective properties, and suitable optoelectronic properties.15–18 Among all architectures, owing to their one-dimensional morphology and high surface area, Si nanowire arrays (SiNWs) have emerged as the most promising candidate due to its superior carrier generation, light absorption through multiple scattering, radial charge carrier collection and low areal flux of photo-generated carriers, which could help in the charge transfer between the semiconductor loaded with electrocatalyst/electrolyte interface for the PEC study.9,19 Oh et al.16 reported that p-SiNW arrays decorated with Pt nanoparticles for the HER catalyst are facing severe problems related to surface oxidation. However, it can be minimized by introducing a thin TiO2 passivation layer in between the p-SiNWs and Pt nanoparticles.20 Alternatively, various oxides, including Ba2O3, ZnO2 and IrOx, have been deposited on SiNWs, which protect the Si surface against oxidation rather than act as a suitable electrocatalyst for PEC-HER due to the favorable band alignment with SiNWs, promoting the electron–hole pair separation effectively.21,22 Nevertheless, the poisoning effect of a metal catalyst and high activation barrier under electrocatalytic HER is a serious issue for long-term stability and expected catalytic efficiency of the photocathode. On the other hand, the formation of a metal-boride (M-B) complex activates the catalyst surface in universal pH, promotes the electron transfer mechanism from boron to metal in M-B nanoparticles, and makes suitable interfaces with a semiconductor for light-driven green fuel synthesis.11 Besides that, some other catalysts like MoS2,23 CdSe,24 MoSe2,25 MoS3,26 Fe2S2(CO)6,27 along with SiNWs have shown good efficiency towards PEC-HER. Although decoration of the above catalysts in combination with SiNWs shows moderate PEC-HER performance, it suffers from dragging industrial attention due to its high cost, low efficiency and non-durability.
In this aspect, researchers are driven towards the creation of a new class of metal-free catalysts on the planar, as well as Si nanowire surface.28 Nam et al.19,29 demonstrated that using N-doped graphene as a metal-free catalyst on a planar Si surface extracts the low photocurrent density of 5.5 mA cm−2 with the low STH (solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency) of 3.05 due to the limited absorption of light and charge carrier transportation. However, changing the active layer from planar Si to vertically aligned SiNWs using the same catalytic environment surprisingly improves the photocurrent density to 35 mA cm−2 with ABPE (applied bias photon-to-current conversion efficiency) of 2.29%. This significant improvement of the catalytic performance is due to the enhanced light absorption via multiple scattering between the nanowires and the radial charge carrier collection. In continuation with this trend, while changing the metal-free catalyst from N-doped graphene to reduced graphene oxide (r-GO) and a composite of chlorophyll/carbon quantum dots, the electrocatalytic efficiency towards photo-assisted H2 generation is enhanced up to 3.16 (% STH) and 7.86 (% ABPE), respectively.30,31
In all of the above studies, it has been found that the excitonic charge separation occurs at the silicon-to-catalyst interface. In this context, the major challenge of the scientific community is to further improve the efficiency and stability via inhibiting the carrier recombination, as well as accelerating the charge separation. The problem attributed to the axial p–n junction geometry is the increased recombination at the surface due to a small carrier diffusion length. To diminish the surface recombination, the p and n layer have to be passivated to incorporate an internal electric field. This can be done by the introduction of an intrinsic-i layer, which will also contribute to reduce the defects arising from the surface dangling bonds or lattice mismatch at the interface.32 In this core–shell radial p–i–n geometry, the small diameters of the NWs assist in the reduction of the recombination rate inside the core since almost the entire core is depleted from the majority charge carriers. Thus, the photo-generated excitonic pair gets separated immediately by the electric field. On the other hand, the optical absorption of SiNWs lies in the near-infrared (NIR) region with a low absorption coefficient, which is one of the major drawbacks. In this context, the heterostructure of SiNWs with a material having an appropriate band-gap is required to facilitate the broadband absorption for facile PEC performance. In this aspect, the nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots (NGQD) could be a better alternative for making heterostructure with SiNWs due to its advanced properties like optical absorption in the UV region, sharp catalytic edges, tunable photoemission, as well as its hydrophilicity, biocompatibility and low cost.15,31
Due to the advantageous properties of p–i–n silicon for facile excitonic separation, it has been used as a photo-absorber along with metal-based catalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen generation.32,33 However, to date to the best of the author's knowledge, no reports are available on the integration of p–i–n SiNWs along with a metal-free catalyst for PEC-HER study. The present study reports the development of a complete metal-free photocathode based on a p–i–n SiNWs array coated with N-doped graphene quantum dots (NGQD). Here, the SiNWs have been synthesized via a cheap nanosphere lithography technique, followed by wet chemical etching and NGQD by adopting a simple chemical route. This heterostructure has demonstrated excellent photocatalytic activity towards the PEC-HER in terms of its low onset potential (−280 mV@1 mA cm−2), overpotential (−460 mV@10 mA cm−2) and Tafel slope (46 mV dec−1). The photocathode also exhibits an ABPE of ∼16.4%, which is 6.5 times higher than that of the p-SiNW–NGQD matrix. The robust catalyst displays good stability for at least 6 hours at an applied current density of 10 mA cm−2 in acidic medium with a minimum loss of potential (∼1%). The NGQD not only facilitates a resistance-less path for the rapid electron transfer process, but also helps to accelerate the electrocatalytic HER kinetics on its surface.34 This work creates a new avenue to design a metal-free photocathode for solar-to-hydrogen fuel conversion in the upcoming energy demand.
Experimental section
Fabrication of vertically aligned p–i–n SiNWs arrays
Initially, the 2 × 2 cm2 pieces of p-type Si 〈100〉 wafers (B-doped; 1–5 Ω cm) are cleaned in acetone, ethanol and purified de-ionized water (DI) in sequence. After the removal of organic impurities, the Si chips are immersed into piranha solution (H2SO4:H2O2 in 3:1) at 90 °C for an hour, followed by DI water rinse. Simultaneously, a solution of PS beads and ethanol with a ratio of 1:1 has been sonicated for 60 minutes. Then, this solution is slowly pipetted in a mixture of water and IPA (50:0.002) in a glass Petri-dish. At this floating condition, the beads are reoriented in the hexagonally patterned monolayer, which is finally transferred over the pretreated and surface-activated Si chip, and dried overnight at ambient condition. Furthermore, the diameters of the polystyrene nano-beads are reduced to ∼235 nm by mild O2 plasma, which gives rise to the hexagonally patterned uniformly spaced PS beads on the Si surface. A 30 nm thin Au film is deposited on top of the patterned Si surface via electron-beam evaporation technique at a very slow deposition rate of 0.5 Å s−1. Thereafter, PS beads are removed under mild sonication in CHCl3 solution, resulting in the formation of the Au mesh on the Si surface. This Au mesh catalyzes the formation of uniformly fabricated vertically aligned SiNWs arrays by metal-assisted chemical etching (MACE) process using a solution of HF, H2O2 and H2O (1:0.5:1) for 5 minutes.31,35 Finally, the Au mesh is removed by aqua regia (nitric acid:hydrochloric acid in 1:3) treatment for a few minutes, followed by mild BOE (buffer oxide etching) for a few seconds to remove the native oxides. After the formation of the p-SiNWs array, the 15 nm intrinsic (i-layer) and 25 nm n-layer are deposited on SiNWs by Plasma-Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (PECVD). The i-layer is deposited using a reaction gas mixture of silane (SiH4 at a flow rate of 0.5 sccm) diluted with hydrogen and helium (at 25 sccm) at a pressure of 1.5 torr. For the n-layer, PH3 (1% SiH4) mixed with SiH4 diluted in hydrogen and helium is used. In both cases, the substrates are kept at a temperature of 300 °C.
Synthesis of nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots (NGQD)
The nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots (NGQD) have been synthesized by the standard recipe reported elsewhere.36 In brief, 3 g of white powdered citric acid (CA) is heated at 200 °C for 20 minutes under ambient condition, which then turns orange in colour. This melted CA is added dropwise into a 100 mL volume of 0.25 mol L−1 NaOH solution under vigorous stirring until the pH reaches ∼7. Finally, the colour of the solution changes from orange to faint yellow, resulting in the formation of graphene quantum dots (GQDs). The 10 mL as-synthesized GQD is mixed with 10 mL (6.5 mol L−1) urea solution, and stirred for 30 minutes. The mixture is then transferred to a poly-tetrafluoroethylene-lined autoclave (100 mL) and heated at 110 °C for 3 hours. Finally, a homogeneous solution of orange-colored NGQD is obtained after cooling down to room temperature. The solution is centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 15 minutes to remove any undissolved materials, and the supernatant part is further filtered through 200 nm of cellulose acetate membrane to remove the bigger particles. The filtrate is then used for the necessary characterizations.
Material characterizations
For the morphological and structural characterizations, field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) (JEOL JSM-7600F) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (JEOL JEM 2100) operated at 200 kV are used. To investigate the oxidation states and nature of the chemical bonding of NGQD, a X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) system (EscaLab: 220i-XL) with monochromatized Mg Kα energy source (1253 eV) are carried out. A confocal Raman microscope (WITEC alpha 300R Raman spectrometer with a 532 nm Nd-YAG laser with 1800-line mm−1 grating) is used to check the conformation of graphene on the p–i–n SiNWs array. To investigate the NGQD size, atomic force microscope analysis is carried in tapping mode at ambient condition using BRUKER multimode 8 AFM. Optical absorption/reflectance data are obtained using a Shimadzu UV-Vis spectrometer (model UV-2600). Fluorescence spectra are recorded on a FluoroLog 3-221 (HORIBA Scientific) fluorimeter equipped with a 450 W Xenon lamp. Attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy (Thermo Scientific Nicolet iS5) is used to investigate the surface functionalization of the NGQD and GQD. The I–V measurement is carried out at ambient conditions with two probes set up connected to the Keithley source meter (2450 model) at a voltage swipe of −2 to 2 V.
Electrode fabrication and photoelectrochemical measurements
A 500 μL mixture solution of NGQD and Nafion (5:1) is drop casted thrice (each with 100 μL in a time interval of 30 minutes) on 1 × 1 cm2 p–i–n silicon nanowire arrays (respective dimension has been shown in Fig. S1†). Finally, the sample is dried for 2 hours under an IR lamp. The as-prepared silicon chip further proceeds for the PEC measurement. The measurement is carried out in a three-electrode system using an electrochemical workstation (Metrohm-Autolab PGSTAT302N). A double junction Ag/AgCl setup saturated with 3 M KCl is used as a reference electrode (Metrohm). Here, Pt wire acts as the counter electrode (Metrohm), whereas NGQD decorated on a p–i–n SiNWs array is the main working electrode. The counter and reference electrodes are rinsed several times with distilled water, and dried with compressed air before electrochemical measurements. The working and reference electrodes are kept fixed at a distance of ∼1 cm for every electrochemical analysis. A xenon lamp (AM 1.5G filter) at a distance of 5 cm from the quartz cell reactor with the light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 is used as an irradiation source to conduct the PEC measurement. The PEC-HER activity is investigated via linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 under the presence and absence of light. The electrochemical impedance analysis (EIS) is performed at an applied voltage of −300 mV (vs. RHE) over a frequency range from 100 kHz to 0.01 Hz with an AC amplitude of 10 mV in a three-electrode system. All of the electrochemical tests are performed in 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH ∼ 0.3) aqueous solution, and a precautionary step has been adopted via purging Ar gas into the solution for 30 minutes before HER analysis to saturate the solution under an inert environment. All of the applied potentials are converted in terms of the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) by the Nernst equation: ERHE = 0.197 + 0.059 × pH + EAg/AgCl.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 schematically summarizes the steps involved in the fabrication of the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure (additional details have been described in the Experimental section). The morphological and structural analysis provides the fundamental information for estimating the physiochemical properties of the materials. Fig. 2a shows the FE-SEM image of the closely packed monolayer domains of the polystyrene (PS) nano-beads having a diameter of 500 nm coated on the bare Si substrate. Fig. 2b represents the formation of a uniformly dispersed monolayer of PS nano-beads, where the diameter has been shrunk down to ∼235 nm with an optimized power of the O2 plasma. Here, the O2 plasma is assisting to create a uniform gap between the PS beads, while keeping the position of the beads at the same location. The bead size can also be tuned by varying the power and the duration of exposure of the O2 plasma. After the reduction of the PS beads size up to an optimized diameter, a thin film of Au ∼30 nm has been deposited, which acts as a catalyst to develop vertically aligned patterned SiNWs. The patterned PS beads have been removed by mild sonication in chloroform (CHCl3), which results in the formation of the hexagonal honeycomb-like gold mesh arrays (Fig. S2†). The approximate sizes of these nanoholes are in the range of 240–250 nm.
 Fig. 1  (a–f) Schematic representation of the fabrication of vertically aligned p-SiNWs using nanosphere lithography and Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching (MACE). (g) Representation of the deposition of the intrinsic i-layer, (h) n-layer on p-SiNWs using the PECVD process, and (i) the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure. 
 Fig. 2  FE-SEM images of the (a) monolayer of polystyrene nano-beads (500 nm) on the silicon surface. (b) The reduced diameter of the monolayer polystyrene nano-beads at ∼235 nm using O2 plasma. (c) Top view of the as-prepared p-SiNWs. The inset shows a high-magnification image after MACE, where the average gap between the vertically aligned p-SiNWs are found to be ∼90–120 nm. (d) Tilted view of the vertically aligned SiNWs. The inset shows the high-magnification image, where the diameter and height of the SiNWs are found to be ∼220 nm and 1.27 μm, respectively. 

Fig. 2c shows the top view of p-SiNWs, and the average gap between p-SiNWs is ∼90 to 120 nm. The resulting fill factor is calculated to be 56.9%, which can also be seen from the inset of Fig. 2c. The vertical alignment of the nanowire can easily be observed in the titled edge position, as shown in Fig. 2d. All of the SiNWs are homogeneously distributed in a patterned order. The dense array of vertically aligned p-SiNWs is of average length at ∼1.27 μm, and diameters ranging from 220–225 nm with an optimized etching time of 5 minutes (Fig. 2d inset). The length and diameter can be tuned via controlling the etching time of silicon. It has been observed that while etching for 20 minutes, all of the SiNWs are collapsed and interconnected to each other, where the diameter falls in the range of 230–240 nm and the length is above 10 μm (Fig. S3a†). However, upon reducing the etching time to 15, 10, 5 and 1 minutes, the length of the SiNWs are calculated to be 5, 3, 1.3 and 0.2 μm, respectively, with a small variation of diameters (shown in Fig. S3†). It is also observed that a longer etching time results in the formation of a random length distribution. However, for PEC-HER analysis for the SiNWs-based photo-electrocatalyst design, it is predicted that the length of the SiNWs should not exceed above 1.5 μm for ∼250 nm diameter due to the high light-trapping capability with low excitonic diffusion length.9,37
The crystallinity, functionality, doping level and optical properties of the as-prepared NGQD have been characterized via various techniques, like TEM, XPS, FTIR, UV-Vis spectrometer and fluorescence spectrometer, respectively. In the UV-Vis spectra of GQD (Fig. S4a†), the absorption peak at 364 nm indicates the n–π* transition for the formation of the CO bond.36 For NGQD, the two prominent absorption peaks lying in the UV range at 232 nm and 340 nm, along with an absorption tail extending into the visible range (as shown in Fig. 3a), are aligned with the previous reports.36,38 The absorption peak at a wavelength of 232 nm mainly arises from the π–π* transitions of the CC bonds due to the high population of delocalized π electrons in GQD.36 Furthermore, the absorption peak at 340 nm is mainly attributed to both σ–π and n–π* electronic transitions in the surface states, and indicates the presence of different functional groups (like CO, C–H) inside the carbon framework.36,39 The PL spectrum is recorded upon the excitation wavelength of 370 nm of GQD, which shows a strong peak at 462 nm with a Stokes shift of 92 nm, as compared to blue photoluminescence (Fig. S4b†). However, the PL spectrum of NGQD shows a strong peak at 430 nm with an excitation wavelength of 340 nm (Fig. 3b). In this case, the Stokes shift of 90 nm is slightly less than GQD, which furnishes a more prominent blue color as compared to GQD when irradiated under UV lamp. The excitation and emission peaks have confirmed the complete formation of NGQD. Fig. S5† shows the ATR-FTIR absorption spectrum of GQD and NGQD, where the absorption bands at 3328 and 1387 cm−1 are attributed to the functional group of the O–H stretching vibration in GQD.36 Furthermore, both GQD and NGQD spectra have the absorption bands at 2925, 2855, 2159, 2035 cm−1, indicating the stretching vibrational modes of the –CH2, –CH3, CCO and CCC bonds.36,40 The bands at 3260–3132 and 1625 cm−1 represent the bond formation of N–H, and the 1450 and 1154 cm−1 bands correspond to the CN and C–N bonds, respectively.36 To investigate the detailed analysis of the elemental and chemical states, and to gain insight into the chemical bonding of the carbon and nitrogen species in the as-synthesized NGQD, the XPS measurements were carried out. The XPS survey spectrum (Fig. S6†) of NGQD shows the presence of the C, N and O elements. The very small signal of oxygen is coming from the surface oxidation and incomplete carbonization during the pyrolysis of citric acid.36,41 The deconvoluted high-resolution C1s spectrum of NGQD is shown in Fig. 3c, where the major peak at 284.9 eV is due to the presence of C atoms in the C–C bonds.36,40,42 Simultaneously, peaks at 286.5 eV and 288.0 eV correspond to C–N–C or the formation of C–OH functional groups and the sp2 C atoms bound to N (N–CN) in the aromatic rings, respectively.40,42 A small peak at 291 eV is also observed, which may be assigned to plasmonic energy loss. This arises due to plasmon excitations at the higher binding energy region with reduced intensity.43 The high-resolution spectrum of N1s (Fig. 3d) has been deconvoluted into three sub-peaks, which mainly arise from the spin–orbit coupling. The two primary N sub-peaks at ∼398.6 eV and ∼401 eV correspond to the pyridinic-N and graphitic-N units, respectively.36,40 The third peak at 403.6 eV is due to the presence of the oxidative N–O(–C) species, which could be responsible for the creation of the trap layer-assisting electron transfer mechanism from the n-Si shell to NGQD at the time of the PEC reaction.36,40 This detailed analysis of the observed XPS spectra proves that the sample is entirely composed of NGQD.44,45 It is commonly known that the N-dopants neighboring a C atom act as an electron acceptor in a graphene matrix.45,46 Similarly, here, the N-functionality in the NGQD also acts as an active catalytic centre for HER.19 Moreover, the improved PEC performance demonstrates the synergistic combination between the NGQD and p–i–n SiNWs heterostructure, and the details are discussed in a later section.
 Fig. 3  (a) Absorbance spectra and (b) PL spectra of NGQD at an excitation wavelength of 340 nm. High-resolution XPS spectra of (c) C1s and (d) N1s of NGQD. 
Furthermore, the TEM characterization is performed to determine the crystalline orientation and morphology of the N-doped graphene quantum dots (NGQD) on p–i–n SiNWs. Fig. 4a shows the TEM image of the dispersion of NGQD, which is spherical in nature. The size distribution histogram (Fig. 4b) indicates that the average diameter of the NGQD falls in the range of 3.5–4.5 nm, which is concomitant with the AFM analysis shown in Fig. S7.† Moreover, the formation of the NGQD and the crystallinity were verified by high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) (inset in Fig. 4a). The associated lattice parameters (d-spacing) of ∼0.34 nm in the NGQD corresponds to that of the (002) plane.39 This confirms the presence of the graphitic unit, which is in concurrence with XPS analysis.39,47 Furthermore, the diameter of the SiNWs is calculated to be 230 nm, as shown in the bright-field TEM image of Fig. 4c, where the inset represents the uniform decoration of NGQD on the p–i–n SiNWs surface. However, it is quite difficult to identify the presence of the i- and n-layers on p-SiNWs via TEM analysis. The HR-TEM image (Fig. 4d) clearly shows the lattice fringes of Si and NGQD with a d-spacing of ∼0.31 nm and 0.21 nm, respectively. This corresponds to the well-known plane of (100) of both elements, indicating the presence of the heterostructure interface.31,47 The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. S8†) confirms the presence of the (111), (220), (311) planes of crystalline silicon.15 However, due to the thin coating of the NGQD layer on the SiNW surface, it is very difficult to find the corresponding planes of NGQD, along with Si in a single SAED pattern.
 Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of the dispersed NGQD. The inset shows the HR-TEM image of a single NGQD having a lattice spacing of ∼0.34 nm, which corresponds to the (002) plane and indicates graphene layers. (b) Histogram analysis of the particle size distribution, depicting the average particle size between 3.54.5 nm. (c) p–i–n SiNWs with the dispersion of NGQD on its surface. The inset reveals the even dispersion of the NGQD at the interface. (d) HR-TEM image depicting the interface of p–i–n SiNWs (d = 0.31 nm of silicon (100) planes) and NGQD (d = 0.21 nm corresponding to the (100) in-plane lattice spacing of graphene) clearly showing the lattice fringes of Si and NGQD, respectively. 
To investigate the electron-transfer mechanism at the silicon-to-graphene interface under the illuminated condition, the SiNWs sample is coated with few-layers graphene (Fig. S9a†) and the respective I–V measurements is performed. The quality of the transferred few-layers graphene on the SiNWs surface is investigated with Raman spectra, where ID/IG ∼0.91. This indicates the high crystallinity of the transferred graphitic films. Furthermore, it shows that the number of layers of graphene is more than 10, as shown in Fig. S9b.†48,49 The bare SiNWs Raman spectra shown in Fig. S10b† helps to get a clear understanding about the intense prominent peak centered at 520 cm−1, which appears to be due to the scattering of incident light with the first-order optical phonon of Si.50 The I–V measurements have been carried out under the sweeping voltage of −2 to 2 V for both p-SiNWs and p–i–n SiNWs under illuminated and dark conditions. The schematic illustration for the I–V measurement of the SiNWs–graphene heterostructure and the optical photograph of the device characterization using two-probe configurations are shown in Fig. S11 and S12a,† respectively. Both p-SiNW–graphene and p–i–n SiNWs–graphene heterojunctions behave like semiconductor/metal Schottky diodes, as shown in Fig. S12b.†51 It is clearly observed that the p–i–n SiNWs–graphene shows a photocurrent of 3.76 mA, which is ∼26 times higher than that of only p-SiNW–graphene (photocurrent ∼ 0.14 mA) at 2 V under the 1 sun illumination. However, the p–i–n SiNWs–graphene shows 7 times less current at an applied potential of 2 V in dark condition. These I–V curves can be described by the energy band bending process at the SiNWs–graphene interface. In the case of the p-SiNW–graphene heterostructure, the formation of the Schottky barrier causes the majority carriers in the p-SiNWs to move towards the graphene side, thereby bending the energy levels at the p-SiNWs surface downwards. This results in the formation of the depletion region and built-in electric field at the p-SiNW–graphene interface. Under a forward bias, these majority charge carriers can easily overcome the low barrier height and tend to move towards graphene from p-SiNWs. Therefore, it gives rise to an enhanced photocurrent response under a positive bias. However, under a reverse bias, the majority carrier (holes) faces difficulty to overcome the enhanced barrier height at the p-SiNW–graphene interface. Thus, it results in a negligible photocurrent response in the negative bias, as shown in Fig. S12b.†52 Similarly, the p–i–n SiNWs–graphene heterostructure also behaves as a well-defined diode with a Schottky junction with non-linear I–V characteristics. Here, the presence of the radial core–shell geometry in the p–i–n SiNWs–graphene architecture reduces the surface recombination of the charge carriers, thereby effectively separating the photo-generated excitons in the orthogonal direction of the incident light. These charge carriers, once separated, travel very short distances before being captured at the top and the bottom electrodes. The electrons are sweeping towards the top graphene layer (a charge collector) and the holes are moving towards the p-Si back contact in the core–shell architecture, thereby enhancing the overall photocurrent. This proof-of-concept could help to boost the electrochemical performance of the optimized photocathode for the PEC-HER.
The photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction is performed using a three-electrode set-up connected to a potentiostat in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution, as illustrated in the schematic (Fig. 5a). The photocathodic performance is analyzed via linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) under the illumination of 1 sun (100 mW cm−2), and demonstrates the photocurrent density of −22.69 mA cm−2 at −0.53 V vs. RHE for p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD (Fig. 5b). In contrast, the current density comes out to be −13.15 mA cm−2 at the same potential under dark condition (Fig. S13†), which is approximately half the value as compared to that under illuminated condition. The low current densities of −3.75, −0.01 mA cm−2 in the presence of light and −1.44, −0.008 mA cm−2 in the absence of light have been observed for p-SiNW–NGQD, p-SiNWs, respectively, at a potential of −0.53 V vs. RHE (Fig. 5b and S13†). In the presence of light, the significant enhancement in the HER activity is attributed to the excitonic electron transfer from Si to NGQD. This facilitates the proton reduction process and leads to higher photocurrent density. In addition, the charge separation process is further enhanced due to the higher band bending at the electrode/electrolyte interface.53 Here, the potential achieved at a current density of −1 mA cm−2 is defined as the onset potential. In the presence of light, the onset potential of p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD is −0.28 V (vs. RHE). However, that value has been shifted to a more negative potential of −0.33 V (vs. RHE) under the dark condition. The HER activity has been estimated in terms of the overpotential with the value of −460 mV@10 mA cm−2 for p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD, which is lower than that of the other tested samples. All of the overpotential values at different current densities of the as-prepared samples are listed in Table S1.† To quantitatively gain more insight into the catalytic activity and HER kinetics, the Tafel slope (Fig. 5c) has been calculated from the Tafel equation. It has been found that in the case of p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD, the value of the Tafel slope is ∼46 mV dec−1 under the illuminated condition, which is lower than that of 68 mV dec−1 in the dark condition. It clearly indicates a faster electron transfer process under illuminated condition. These lower values of the Tafel slope reveal that the reaction proceeds via the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism, where the electrochemical desorption, i.e., Heyrovsky step, is the rate-limiting step (details of the mechanism are discussed in ESI†).54 The exchange current density is an important parameter to complete the HER process. It is well known that a larger exchange current density indicates the faster electron transfer process as it facilitates the adsorption/desorption of the protons at the electrode/electrolyte interface with lower kinetic barrier.54 The exchange current density has been calculated (Fig. S14†) by extrapolating the Tafel plots to the X-axis, and was found to be 0.026, 0.015 mA cm−2 in p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD in light and dark conditions, respectively. From the calculated values, it is clearly understandable that the HER kinetics is much faster under the illumination of light. To verify the above statement, the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) analysis has been performed. The corresponding Nyquist plots of p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD at an applied voltage of −300 mV (vs. RHE) is shown in Fig. S15.† The circuit diagram for the data fitting has been shown in the inset of Fig. S15.† The charge transfer resistance between the electrode and electrolyte in light and dark conditions is found to be ∼121 and −195 ohm, respectively. The lower charge transfer resistance in the illuminated condition confirms the increment of the photocurrent density due to the enhancement of the photoexcited carrier generation, and the faster and smooth electron transfer process.15
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure for HER in a three-electrode PEC setup; (b) LSV polarization curve (without iR correction) for p-SiNWs, p-SiNW–NGQD and p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution under illumination; (c) Tafel plot of the p–i–n SiNW–NGQD heterostructure under illuminated and dark conditions, respectively. (d) ABPE of p-SiNW–NGQD and p–i–n SiNWS–NGQD. 
The applied bias photon-to-current conversion efficiency (ABPE) of the different photocathodes are calculated using the given equation:15,31ABPE = [jph × (Vreverse − Vapplied)/Pin] × 100%where jph is the photocurrent density under an applied bias Vapplied, Vreverse is the standard reversible potential (in the case of the water splitting reaction, Vreverse ∼ 1.23 V), and Pin is the incident light intensity under AM 1.5G conditions (∼100 mW cm−2). The maximum ABPE achieved ∼16.46% at 0.56 V (vs. RHE) in the case of the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD photocathode, which is 6.5 times higher than that of p-SiNW–NGQD (Fig. 5d). The obtained ABPE value is higher as compared to most of the reported Si-based photocathodes (shown in Table S2†). It can be considered that the choice of NGQD is highly beneficial for hydrogen evolution due to the high charge mobility, lower hydrogen binding energies and higher number of active sites. Here, p–i–n SiNWs and the NGQD heterostructure play an important role to capture high-intensity light, followed by the facile separation of photo-excitons at the heterojunction interface. The UV-Vis spectrum of planar Si, p–i–n SiNWs and the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure has been shown in Fig. S16.† The p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure improves the light absorption and overall surface area, thereby acting as an anti-reflector, while the NGQD serves as active electrocatalysts and further improves the hydrogen evolution performance. The transfer of the photo-generated electrons from Si to NGQD corresponds to a very high current density during hydrogen evolution reflected from the cathodic current density of −22.69 mA cm−2 at −0.53 V (vs. RHE). At a very low potential, the current density is almost the same as that of the p-SiNW–NGQD heterostructures. However, at higher potentials, the enhancement in the current density is due to the hydrogen evolution, as evident from the image in Fig. 5b (inset).
Transient photo-response measurements of the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure were carried out (Fig. 6a) under chopped light illumination cycles in the specific time intervals of 20 second at a constant potential of −300 mV (vs. RHE). Initially, the current density is constant under dark condition, but it attained a certain peak under the illumination, known as the initial photocurrent density (Jin).19 The Jin value for the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD electrode is measured to be −2.22 mA cm−2. The current density is then approximately saturated, and the average value of the saturated photocurrent density (Jst) under illumination is −2.45 mA cm−2. While the light is switched off, the current density again goes back to its initial state and retains a constant current density. This initial current density under the absence of light is called dark current density Joff, and the average value of Joff for the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD electrode is found to be −0.70 mA cm−2. The higher value of the Jst/Jin ratio ∼1.10 and a lower value of Joff indicate that the recombination, as well as the surface charge trapping, have been reduced significantly, which results in boosting the charge transfer rate and enhancing the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD HER performance. The periodic light response of the heterostructure under cyclic chopped illumination confirms that the light-generated charge carriers in the p–i–n SiNWs are separated radially and transferred to the NGQD system for further participation in the proton reduction process. Additionally, the faster recovery of the current density under both ON/OFF states implies the low possibility of surface trapping and charge recombination at sub-bandgap energy levels.19 For the commercialization of the heterostructure towards hydrogen production, the stability test is one of the important parameters. The chronopotentiometry measurement is carried (Fig. 6b) out in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for 6 hours with a minimum of 1% loss in the potential, which indicates that p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD is an excellent super-stable photocathode. The superior electrocatalytic stability of the as-designed material may be attributed to the fact that the uniform coating of the Si surface with the carbonaceous matrix diminishes the chances of surface oxidation under acidic medium.29 The cyclic stability test is also performed under repeated LSV at 5 mV s−1 scan rate in acidic solution (inset of Fig. 6b), where the robust catalyst shows very high cycling stability with a minimum increase of the overpotential at ∼2% @ −20 mA cm−2 after 1000 cycles. The SEM analysis has been carried out before and after stability (Fig. S17†), where the morphology does not get altered upon continuous cycling process, indicating the structural integrity and superior stability of the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD.
 Fig. 6  (a) Transient photo-response of the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure under repeated exposures in the light source at room temperature. (b) Chronopotentiometry measurement of p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD at an applied current density of 10 mA cm−2 under illumination. Inset shows the LSV polarization curve of the 1st and 1000th cycle at 5 mV s−1. Under the rigorous cycling process, a very small current density loss is observed after the 1000th cycle as compared to the 1st cycle indicates the development of a super-stable photo-cathode. 
This outstanding performance of the as-designed p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure is attributed to the following mentioned reasons: (1) SiNWs as compared to their bulk planar counterpart, provides an enhanced light absorption via multiple scattering between the nanowires and the radial charge carrier collection. (2) The one-dimensional morphology and the high surface area provide superior carrier generation along with low areal flux, help in charge transfer between the semiconductor loaded with an electrocatalyst/electrolyte interface for the PEC study. (3) Introduction of the intrinsic-i layer facilitates to reduce the defects at the interface arising from the surface dangling bonds or lattice mismatch. (4) In the core–shell radial p–i–n geometry, the small diameter of the NWs assists in the reduction of the recombination rate inside the core. Thus, the photo-generated excitonic pair gets separated immediately by the electric field. (5) In addition, introducing the metal-free NGQD as an electrocatalyst diminishes the possibility of metal poisoning of the commonly used metal catalyst in the HER process that imparts prolonged stability. (6) Simultaneously, the choice of NGQD is beneficial owing to its advanced properties like optical absorption in the UV region, sharp catalytic edges, high charge mobility, lower hydrogen binding energies, as well as its hydrophilicity, biocompatibility and low cost. (7) Moreover, NGQD provides a low resistance pathway for the electron transfer towards the electrolyte, and also hastens the electrocatalytic HER kinetics on its surface. (8) The uniform coating of the Si surface with the carbonaceous matrix corresponds to the superior electrocatalytic stability of the as-designed material under harsh acidic medium. In this context, the as-grown p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure provides an innovative model that aims to deliver a low-cost, stable and realistic conversion of solar energy via PEC-HER technology.
Conclusions
In summary, a vertically aligned radial p–i–n SiNWs decorated with metal-free N-doped graphene quantum dots (NGQD) photocathode is developed for the photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction. The proposed device demonstrates the photocurrent density of −22.69 mA cm−2 at −0.53 V (vs. RHE) and exhibited an ABPE of ∼16.46%, which is higher than most of the Si-based photocathodes. In addition, the lower value of the overpotential (−460 mV@10 mA cm−2) and Tafel slope (46 mV dec−1) indicates the faster electron transfer mechanism in the HER kinetics. This remarkable performance is attributed to the unique feature of orthogonalization of the directions of the incident light, easy separation, collection and less recombination of the charge carriers in the p–i–n SiNWs geometry. Furthermore, the metal-free NGQD acts as an active catalytic centre owing to the N-functionality in the GQD, which augments the smooth electron transfer at the photoelectrode/electrolyte interface. The metal-free robust catalyst demonstrates an outstanding prolonged stability for 6 hours at a high current density of 10 mA cm−2 with a minimum loss of potential (1%) in acidic medium due to minimization of the surface oxidation of the Si-based photo absorber. The major objective of our work is to demonstrate a “proof of concept” for the application of the proposed heterostructure made of p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD towards the advanced management of incident photons and enhanced catalytic performance of the metal-free catalyst for photoelectrochemical HER. Overall, this low-cost design of a metal-free photocathode creates a new pathway to model a solar energy harvesting device for PEC hydrogen production.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors sincerely acknowledge the financial support of Nanomission, Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India (Grant No. SR-/NM/NS-91/2016) and Institute of Nano Science and Technology (INST) for the infrastructural facilities. The authors are also thankful to Prof. P. Agarwal, IIT-Guwahati for the deposition of the i and n Si layers on as-grown p-SiNWs.
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 364, 6482 Search PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 38, 253–278 RSC .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

World Energy Assessment, https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/environment-energy/sustainable_energy/world_energy_assessmentenergyandthechallengeofsustainability.html, accessed March 17,  2021 Search PubMed.
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Han, W. Park, A. Sivanantham, S. W. Hwang, S. Surendran, U. Sim and I. S. Cho, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 3972–3977 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Han, W. Park, S. W. Hwang, H. Kim, Y. Sim, S. Surendran, U. Sim and I. S. Cho, J. Catal., 2020, 389, 328–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Thalluri, J. Borme, D. Xiong, J. Xu, W. Li, I. Amorim, P. Alpuim, J. Gaspar, H. Fonseca, L. Qiao and L. Liu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 978–982 RSC .
S. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Wu, D. Kong, D. Lin, Y. Fan, X. Yang, Z. Zhong, S. Huang, Z. Jiang and C. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12111–12118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Wang, P. Zhang, W. Wang, H. Han and L. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30143–30151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sim, J. John, S. Surendran, B. Moon and U. Sim, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 16 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dai, J. Xie, M. T. Mayer, X. Yang, J. Zhan and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11119–11123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ke, M. Adnan Younis, Y. Kong, H. Zhou, J. Liu, L. Lei and Y. Hou, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ghosh, K. Roy, K. Sarkar, P. Devi and P. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 28792–28800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Oh, J. Kye and S. Hwang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 298–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Oh, T. G. Deutsch, H.-C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1690–1694 RSC .
Y. Hou, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700090 CrossRef .
U. Sim, J. Moon, J. An, J. H. Kang, S. E. Jerng, J. Moon, S.-P. Cho, B. H. Hong and K. T. Nam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1329–1338 RSC .
N. P. Dasgupta, C. Liu, S. Andrews, F. B. Prinz and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12932–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Weng, F. Xu and J. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 455402 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sheng, B. Sun, T. Shi, X. Tan, Z. Peng and G. Liao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7163–7169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Tran, S. S. Pramana, V. S. Kale, M. Nguyen, S. Y. Chiam, S. K. Batabyal, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. Loo, Chemistry, 2012, 18, 13994–13999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Devarapalli, C. K. Kamaja and M. V. Shelke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13352–13358 RSC .
G. Huang, J. Mao, R. Fan, Z. Yin, X. Wu, J. Jie, Z. Kang and M. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 013902 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, C. Wang, L. Pan, F. Tian, X. Zhang and C. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1337–1346 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chandrasekaran, T. Nann and N. H. Voelcker, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 144 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Alam, Y. Sim, J.-H. Yu, J. Gnanaprakasam, H. Choi, Y. Chae, U. Sim and H. Cho, Nanomaterials, 2020, 13(1), 12 CAS .
U. Sim, T.-Y. Yang, J. Moon, J. An, J. Hwang, J.-H. Seo, J. Lee, K. Y. Kim, J. Lee, S. Han, B. H. Hong and K. T. Nam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3658–3664 RSC .
Y. Sim, J. John, J. Moon and U. Sim, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 2046 CrossRef CAS .
K. Roy, D. Ghosh, K. Sarkar, P. Devi and P. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37218–37226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Perez-Rodriguez, D. Cardenas-Morcoso, I. A. Digdaya, A. M. Raventos, P. Procel, O. Isabella, S. Gimenez, M. Zeman, W. A. Smith and A. H. M. Smets, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1797–1804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, C. Battaglia, M. Boccard, M. Hettick, Z. Yu, C. Ballif, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5615–5618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ke, F. He, H. Wu, S. Lyu, J. Liu, B. Yang, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Lei, Y. Hou and K. Ostrikov, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 13, 24 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Huang, N. Geyer, P. Werner, J. de Boor and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 285–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-N. Hao, H.-L. Guo, L. Tian and X. Kang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 43750–43755 RSC .
P. Yu, J. Wu, S. Liu, J. Xiong, C. Jagadish and Z. M. Wang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 704–737 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, M. Zheng, L. Zhang, H. Zhao, Z. Xie, X. Jing, R. E. Haddad, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Mihalache, A. Radoi, R. Pascu, C. Romanitan, E. Vasile and M. Kusko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29234–29247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-J. Kuo, Y.-S. Chen, C.-W. Wu, C.-Y. Huang, Y.-H. Chan and I.-W. P. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, F. Tian, W. Wang, J. Chen, M. Wu and J. X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4676–4684 RSC .
L. Tang, R. Ji, X. Li, G. Bai, C. P. Liu, J. Hao, J. Lin, H. Jiang, K. S. Teng, Z. Yang and S. P. Lau, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6312–6320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. F. Moulder and J. Chastain, Handbook of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy: a reference book of standard spectra for identification and interpretation of XPS data, Physical Electronics, Eden Prairie Minnesota,  1995 Search PubMed .
D. B. Shinde, V. M. Vishal, S. Kurungot and V. K. Pillai, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2015, 38, 435–442 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. H. Li, T. Xing, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5290–5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Riyajuddin, S. K. T. Aziz, S. Kumar, G. D. Nessim and K. Ghosh, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 1394–1402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, H. Pang, H. B. Yang, C. Guo, J. Shao, Y. Chi, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7800–7804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Riyajuddin, S. Kumar, S. P. Gaur, A. Sud, T. Maruyama, M. E. Ali and K. Ghosh, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 295501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Riyajuddin, S. Kumar, K. Soni, S. P. Gaur, D. Badhwar and K. Ghosh, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 385702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Parida, J. Choi, H. Y. Ji, S. Park, G. Lim and K. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 6189–6195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Di Bartolomeo, Phys. Rep., 2016, 606, 1–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. D. Oh, J. H. Kim, D. H. Shin, S. Kim and S.-H. Choi, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 2496 CrossRef CAS .
S. Riyajuddin, K. Azmi, M. Pahuja, S. Kumar, T. Maruyama, C. Bera and K. Ghosh, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5586–5599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se00409cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a–f) Schematic representation of the fabrication of vertically aligned p-SiNWs using nanosphere lithography and Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching (MACE). (g) Representation of the deposition of the intrinsic i-layer, (h) n-layer on p-SiNWs using the PECVD process, and (i) the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure.	 

 	Fig. 2  FE-SEM images of the (a) monolayer of polystyrene nano-beads (500 nm) on the silicon surface. (b) The reduced diameter of the monolayer polystyrene nano-beads at ∼235 nm using O2 plasma. (c) Top view of the as-prepared p-SiNWs. The inset shows a high-magnification image after MACE, where the average gap between the vertically aligned p-SiNWs are found to be ∼90–120 nm. (d) Tilted view of the vertically aligned SiNWs. The inset shows the high-magnification image, where the diameter and height of the SiNWs are found to be ∼220 nm and 1.27 μm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Absorbance spectra and (b) PL spectra of NGQD at an excitation wavelength of 340 nm. High-resolution XPS spectra of (c) C1s and (d) N1s of NGQD.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of the dispersed NGQD. The inset shows the HR-TEM image of a single NGQD having a lattice spacing of ∼0.34 nm, which corresponds to the (002) plane and indicates graphene layers. (b) Histogram analysis of the particle size distribution, depicting the average particle size between 3.54.5 nm. (c) p–i–n SiNWs with the dispersion of NGQD on its surface. The inset reveals the even dispersion of the NGQD at the interface. (d) HR-TEM image depicting the interface of p–i–n SiNWs (d = 0.31 nm of silicon (100) planes) and NGQD (d = 0.21 nm corresponding to the (100) in-plane lattice spacing of graphene) clearly showing the lattice fringes of Si and NGQD, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure for HER in a three-electrode PEC setup; (b) LSV polarization curve (without iR correction) for p-SiNWs, p-SiNW–NGQD and p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution under illumination; (c) Tafel plot of the p–i–n SiNW–NGQD heterostructure under illuminated and dark conditions, respectively. (d) ABPE of p-SiNW–NGQD and p–i–n SiNWS–NGQD.	 
ABPE = [jph × (Vreverse − Vapplied)/Pin] × 100%

 	Fig. 6  (a) Transient photo-response of the p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD heterostructure under repeated exposures in the light source at room temperature. (b) Chronopotentiometry measurement of p–i–n SiNWs–NGQD at an applied current density of 10 mA cm−2 under illumination. Inset shows the LSV polarization curve of the 1st and 1000th cycle at 5 mV s−1. Under the rigorous cycling process, a very small current density loss is observed after the 1000th cycle as compared to the 1st cycle indicates the development of a super-stable photo-cathode.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se00409c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
