Perovskite–silicon tandem solar modules with optimised light harvesting   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE00237A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE00237A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1489-1498Perovskite–silicon tandem solar modules with optimised light harvesting†

        
          
            Manoj 
            Jaysankar
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Miha 
            Filipič
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bartosz 
            Zielinski
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Raphael 
            Schmager
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wenya 
            Song
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Weiming 
            Qiu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ulrich W. 
            Paetzold
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Tom 
            Aernouts
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Maarten 
            Debucquoy
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Robert 
            Gehlhaar
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jef 
            Poortmans
          
        
      abe
aimec – Partner in Solliance, 3001 Leuven, Belgium. E-mail: manoj.jaysankar@imec.be; weiming.qiu@imec.be
bESAT, KU Leuven, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
cInstitute of Microstructure Technology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Karlsruhe, Germany
dLight Technology Institute, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
eFaculty of Sciences, Hasselt University, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium
Received 
      23rd January 2018
    , Accepted 21st March 2018First published on 21st March 2018AbstractPerovskite–silicon tandem solar cells are potentially attractive, inexpensive solutions to surpass the power conversion efficiency limits of market-leading silicon solar cells. While such tandem solar cells have been demonstrated to reach high efficiencies, they require advanced light management to utilise the solar spectrum efficiently. Moreover, area upscaling with minimal optical losses is necessary to transfer the properties of lab scale devices to commercial scale products. Here, we demonstrate four-terminal perovskite–silicon tandem solar modules with efficient light management. With rigorous optical simulations of the complete tandem stack, we design light management concepts that minimise overall reflection and enhance complementary absorption of the subcells. The optical optimisation results in four-terminal tandem power conversion efficiencies of 25.3% on 0.13 cm2 and 23.9% on 4 cm2, both exceeding the stand-alone silicon solar cell power conversion efficiency of 23.0%.

Broader context
Crystalline silicon photovoltaics is currently the dominant technology for solar energy harvesting. However, the power conversion efficiency of crystalline silicon solar cells is approaching its theoretical limit. Tandem solar cells employing silicon solar cells and organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells bear exciting potential to surpass the efficiency limit of market-leading single-junction silicon solar cells. Although such high-efficiency tandem solar cells have been reported on small areas, maintaining the high efficiency on large areas requires careful optical control, and efficient design and fabrication of the thin-film photovoltaic device. For the economic viability of this technology, an efficient transition from lab-scale cells to industrial-scale modules is crucial. In this work, we demonstrate an efficient four-terminal perovskite–silicon tandem solar module with a scalable design. Through a combination of electrical and optical optimisation, our tandem solar module of 4 cm2 aperture area exhibits a power conversion efficiency of 23.9%, the highest reported for a perovskite–silicon tandem photovoltaic device with aperture area larger than 0.5 cm2. Furthermore, our tandem solar module concept is compatible with industrially scalable fabrication techniques, thus enabling the production of high-performance large-area perovskite–silicon tandem solar modules.

Introduction
Increasing research interest in perovskite photovoltaics has triggered a rapid advancement of the technology in recent years. Owing to their high absorption coefficients and excellent charge transport properties, organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites have evolved into efficient light absorbers for solar cells.1,2 Simple fabrication, sharp absorption edges, and competitive power conversion efficiency (PCE) make this technology promising for low-cost tandem photovoltaics.3–13 Tandem solar cells with a perovskite top cell and a silicon bottom cell bear the exciting potential to achieve PCEs above 30%, thereby overcoming the theoretical efficiency limit of single-junction silicon solar cells.14,15
Perovskite–silicon tandem solar cells are commonly fabricated in two configurations: two-terminal and four-terminal. In a two-terminal tandem configuration, the two sub cells are connected in series. As a consequence, the overall current output of the tandem cell will be limited by the lower of the currents generated by the individual sub cells.16 Due to this characteristic current matching between the sub cells, variations in the solar spectrum will significantly affect the overall performance of the two-terminal tandem solar cells and reduce their energy yield.17 In addition, with increasing device sizes, the losses due to the higher sheet resistance of the transparent front electrode become more significant. On the other hand, in a four-terminal tandem configuration, the top and bottom sub cells are electrically isolated from each other, thus enabling independent optimization of the sub cells and modular fabrication. For final assembly, the sub cells are mechanically stacked and the output power is extracted separately. Although the requirement of additional inverters may lead to increased complexity, the absence of current matching restriction and independent power extraction make the output of four-terminal tandem solar cells less susceptible to angular variations in irradiance resulting in significantly higher energy yields than two-terminal tandem solar cells.17 Moreover, the constraint on the optimal bandgap of the perovskite is more relaxed for the four-terminal configuration, providing an additional benefit and flexibility over the two-terminal configuration.18
The exciting prospect of high-efficiency perovskite–Si tandem photovoltaics comes with many challenges, one of which is maintaining the high efficiency on large areas.19–21 Although such high-efficiency tandem solar cells have been reported on small areas, maintaining the high efficiency on large areas requires careful optical control, and efficient design and fabrication of the thin-film perovskite photovoltaic device. For the economic viability of perovskite–Si tandem technology, an efficient transition from lab-scale cells to industrial-scale modules is crucial. Besides intrinsic perovskite performance, optical losses strongly affect the overall PCE of such tandem devices.22–24 In silicon solar cells, optical losses can be reduced by texturing the front surface with micrometre-sized random upright pyramids.25 In perovskite solar cells however, the front surface is usually a flat glass substrate. As a consequence, high reflectance at the front interfaces leads to significant optical losses.26,27 While perovskite solar cells with pyramidal cell structures have been simulated to have better light trapping,28,29 experimental fabrication of the perovskite solar cells with such structures is difficult. Due to constraints in the fabrication of perovskite solar cells, an inexpensive, production-compatible solution to incorporate textured layers is important. Additionally, in perovskite–silicon tandem devices the transmittance of the semi-transparent perovskite solar cell for sub-bandgap wavelengths needs to be maximized. Besides the transparency of electrodes of the perovskite top solar cell, the intermediate medium between top and bottom solar cells influences the light incident on the bottom solar cell. The refractive index of the intermediate medium must also be taken into account when designing efficient light management concepts for perovskite–silicon tandem photovoltaics.
In this work, we present 4 cm2 four-terminal perovskite–Si tandem solar modules with scalable architecture and optimised light management. We use an efficient module-on-cell design that minimises electrical losses due to the sheet resistance of transparent electrodes.19 Through comprehensive optical modelling, we design a free-standing, roll-to-roll fabricable, prototype retroreflective textured film that can be easily added to the front surface of a completed perovskite device to minimise optical losses. Our inexpensive approach is compatible with mass production and back-end processing techniques.30 Moreover, we enhance the optical coupling between the perovskite and Si solar cells using an optimised refractive index matching layer. By incorporating the optical loss-reduction strategies in an efficient, low-loss perovskite solar module design, we fabricate four-terminal perovskite–Si tandem solar modules that are more efficient than stand-alone Si solar cells on 0.13 cm2 and 4 cm2 aperture areas.
Results and discussion
Simulation
We design the optics of the perovskite–Si tandem solar cell based on optical simulations of the tandem stack performed in a Sentaurus Device (Synopsys Inc.), a 3D-simulator that combines the transfer matrix method (for thin-films) with ray tracing (for textured layers). The device in focus is a four-terminal tandem solar cell where the top and bottom cells are electrically disconnected but optically coupled such that light transmitted through the top cell is absorbed by the bottom cell. We discuss three cases with progressively increasing tandem PCEs (Fig. 1). The layer stack of the semi-transparent perovskite top solar cell consists of a glass substrate with front indium tin oxide (ITO), TiO2, Cs0.1FA0.9PbI2.865Br0.135 (CsFAPbIBr), 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD), MoO3, and rear ITO. The complex indices of refraction for all the involved layers were experimentally extracted from spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements.26 For the Si bottom solar cell, we use an interdigitated back contact (IBC) c-Si solar cell.31 The optical structure of the IBC c-Si bottom solar cell consists of a c-Si absorber with a textured front surface consisting of random upright pyramids at an inclination angle of 54.7°. Additionally, the front side of the textured c-Si cell has a passivating SiO2 layer and a SiNX anti-reflective coating. The rear side of the c-Si cell has a passivating SiO2 layer and Al metal fingers.
 Fig. 1  Optical structure of the tandem stack for three different cases; (a) FLAT – reference, (b) TEX – with a textured film, and (c) TEX + IML – with a textured film and refractive index matching layer. 

Case 1 – reference (FLAT). 
First, we consider the case where a semi-transparent CsFAPbIBr solar cell with a flat front surface is stacked on top of an IBC c-Si solar cell with an air gap in between (Fig. 1a). The simulated as well as measured transmittance and reflectance spectra of the flat semi-transparent CsFAPbIBr solar cell are shown in Fig. S1a (ESI†). The excellent agreement between simulation and experiment validates the accuracy of our model with the separately extracted complex indices of refraction of the involved layers. We note that although the semi-transparent CsFAPbIBr solar cell exhibits high transmittance in the near-infrared spectral region, the tandem solar cell suffers from high reflection that leads to considerable optical loss (Table S1, ESI†). Reducing the reflection, particularly in the near-infrared spectral region, will lead to significant improvement in the performance of the tandem device.
A common approach to reduce reflection in flat devices is using thin-film antireflective coatings (ARCs). Such ARCs use destructive interference and are usually optimised for a narrow range of wavelengths. In tandem solar cells as in our case, broadband anti-reflection is necessary for maximum performance. In addition, trapping light of short wavelength in the top cell while efficiently transmitting light of wavelength beyond the bandgap of the top cell to the bottom cell is essential. In this regard, textured surfaces are more effective than ARCs. Textured surfaces provide better anti-reflection over a wide range of wavelengths and angles of incidence.28,32–34 Moreover, when the feature sizes of the texture are significantly larger than the wavelengths of light, the anti-reflective effect is independent of the spectrum of incident light.34 Besides reducing reflection, textured layers increase the optical path length in the cell.35


Case 2 – texture (TEX). 
Perovskite-based solar cells will certainly benefit from reduced reflection losses. To that end, we use a proprietary textured film with regular, inverted square pyramids imprinted in a UV curable lacquer on a PET film (Fig. S2, ESI†). This freestanding textured antireflection film is glued onto the front glass of a completed perovskite solar cell (Fig. 1b). The geometry of the textured film provides excellent light in-coupling over a wide spectral range by forcing incident light to impinge multiple times at the air/film interface (Fig. 2a), thereby significantly reducing the reflection compared to a planar air/glass interface. Since this effect involves only ray optics, it is broadband and has no spectral limitation. As shown in Fig. 2a, to obtain inclination angles of the inverted pyramidal texture larger than 40°, the reflection losses at the air/glass interface of ∼4% can be almost entirely eliminated.
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of light incoupling due to inverted pyramidal texture. The transmittance of light through the textured film is enhanced for inclination angles larger than 40°. (b) Illustration of retroreflection effect at the rear of the textured film. The retroreflection effect is most pronounced for inclination angles around 45°. (c) Impact of inclination angle and base length of the inverted pyramidal texture on the short-circuit current density of the IBC c-Si bottom solar cell. The intermediate medium between top and bottom solar cells is air. 
Additionally, our inverted pyramidal textured film exhibits a so-called retroreflective effect that improves the light management in our CsFAPbIBr–Si tandem solar cell.36 Due to the specific texture, a large fraction of light reflected at the interfaces of the tandem solar cell is prevented from escaping through the front by the rear side of the film, which redirects the reflected light towards the CsFAPbIBr–Si tandem solar cell. To analyse the retroreflective effect in detail, we performed detailed ray tracing simulations of the film texture. Fig. 2b illustrates the working principle of the inverted pyramidal textured film. Firstly, the incident light is scattered to higher propagation angles (θ1) inside the textured film (Fig. 2b). Secondly, the light reflected at the interfaces of the tandem solar cell impinging on the rear side of the textured film is reflected back into the cell with varying probabilities depending on the scatter angle (θ1). This retroreflected light can be harvested again by the tandem solar cell, thus increasing the overall PCE. By convoluting the angular resolved transmittance with the angular resolved retroreflectance, we determine a retroreflection coefficient that quantifies the potential of the specific geometry of our film with inverted pyramids to recapture light. We find that the retroreflective effect is maximum for pyramids with an inclination angle of 45° (Fig. 2b). This geometry has a retroreflection coefficient greater than 0.7. It must be noted that the three-dimensional geometry of the inverted pyramids is a prerequisite for the retroreflective effect since it involves different planes of propagation for the incident and the retroreflected light.
Besides improving light absorption in the CsFAPbIBr top solar cell, the textured film substantially increases the transmittance of near-infrared light to the c-Si bottom solar cell (Fig. S1b, ESI†). Since this is crucial for our CsFAPbIBr–Si tandem device, we optimised the design of the texture based on optical simulations considering the entire tandem stack. We investigated inverted pyramidal textures with various inclination angles and base lengths. Fig. 2c illustrates the impact of texture geometry on the short circuit current density (JSC) of the IBC c-Si bottom solar cell, explicitly considering the optical properties of the tandem stack. The inclination angle of the pyramids has more impact on the JSC than the base length since the former determines the propagation angle within the tandem device stack and in turn the optical path length. The inclination angle also influences retroreflection. The optimal base length depends on the thicknesses of the layers of the tandem stack, which range from a millimetre thick glass substrate to nanometre thin films. For the layer stack in our tandem cell, inverted pyramids with an inclination angle of 45° and a base length of 20 μm are optimal for maximal current generation (Fig. 2c).


Case 3 – texture + index matching layer (TEX + IML). 
In the previous two cases, the CsFAPbIBr solar cell (flat or textured) was stacked on top of the IBC c-Si solar cell with an air-gap in between. Given the high refractive indices of the layers in the tandem stack, an air-gap is unfavourable for optimum light coupling between the two devices. To minimise the optical losses at the interfaces of the CsFAPbIBr thin-film stack/air-gap and air-gap/IBC c-Si stack, we replace the air-gap with a refractive index matching layer (IML) (Fig. 1c). Our simulations show that by introducing an IML, the transmission of near-infrared light through the CsFAPbIBr top solar module to the c-Si bottom solar cell is boosted, thus significantly increasing the current generation and consequently the PCE of the c-Si bottom solar cell. The introduction of an IML also has an effect on light distribution within the CsFAPbIBr top solar module due to different reflection behaviours at the ITO (rear)/IML interface compared to the ITO (rear)/air interface. According to our simulations, the refractive index of the IML will have a marginal effect on the JSC of the CsFAPbIBr top solar cell but a pronounced effect on the c-Si bottom solar cell with 1.5 being optimal for maximum JSC (Fig. S3, ESI†).
The IBC c-Si solar cell used in this work has 60 nm of SiNX as ARC on the front side, optimised for AM 1.5G irradiance. The addition of a textured CsFAPbIBr top solar cell and an IML of refractive index 1.5 will alter the spectrum of light incident on the c-Si bottom solar cell requiring re-optimisation of the SiNX ARC thickness (Fig. S4, ESI†). However, our simulation predicts negligible improvement in the JSC of the c-Si bottom solar cell by re-optimising the SiNX ARC (Table S2, ESI†). Therefore, we keep the IBC c-Si ARC unaltered. Also, the optimal feature size of the textured film remains unchanged with the introduction of the IML (Fig. S5, ESI†). While the addition of the textured film and IML improves the absorption of CsFAPbIBr and c-Si, it also increases parasitic absorption in other layers in the tandem stack (Table S1, ESI†). Nevertheless, the optical optimisation strongly suppresses the overall reflection (Fig. 3), reducing the loss to just 2.2 mA cm−2 in terms of photocurrent density.
 Fig. 3  Simulated reflectance and absorptance in various layers of the tandem stack in (a) the reference case (FLAT) and (b) the case with the optimised textured film and index matching layer of refractive index 1.5 (TEX + IML). 

Measurement
For optical simulations, we considered a semi-transparent CsFAPbIBr solar cell stacked on top of an IBC c-Si solar cell in a cell-on-cell design while for experimental demonstration, a semi-transparent CsFAPbIBr solar module was stacked on top of an IBC c-Si solar cell in a module-on-cell design (Fig. 4). Optically there is little difference between CsFAPbIBr cells and modules. Although a module has a certain dead area that could transmit marginally more light than the active area, we showed in our previous work that there is no measurable difference in the photo current of the bottom solar cell when used in tandem with a perovskite top solar cell or module.7,19 The module-on-cell design ensures that both the perovskite and silicon devices have identical aperture area, thus bringing the measured overall tandem PCE closer to actual working conditions.
 Fig. 4  Optical images and schematic cross-sections of (a) the perovskite top solar module and (b) the IBC c-Si bottom solar cell. (c) Optical image of the four-terminal tandem solar module with the perovskite solar module stacked on top of the IBC c-Si solar cell with an air gap in between. 
Our semi-transparent perovskite top solar module consists of monolithic, serial interconnection of seven cell stripes with a geometrical fill factor of 0.91 and an aperture area of 4 cm2 (Fig. 4a). The details of module design and fabrication are reported in our previous work.19 In this work, we use CsFAPbIBr as the perovskite absorber owing to its high PCE and stability.20 A cross-section image of the perovskite device stack is shown in Fig. 5. When stand-alone, the 4 cm2 semi-transparent CsFAPbIBr solar module has an aperture area PCE of 15.3% with a short-circuit current (ISC) of 11.4 mA, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 7.12 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 74.9% (Table 1). A small-area (0.13 cm2) semi-transparent CsFAPbIBr solar cell with identical layers has a PCE of 16.7% (Table S3, ESI†). Despite the presence of hysteresis, the CsFAPbIBr cell and module show stable power output under operation at maximum power point for 10 minutes (Fig. S10a and b, ESI†). The stabilised power output (PCESPO) is very close to the peak PCE obtained from current–voltage scans. In the bottom solar cell, we use a 4 cm2 IBC c-Si solar cell with a textured front surface.31 Since all metal contacts of the c-Si solar cell are on the rear side, shadowing losses are eliminated. In the single-junction configuration, the IBC c-Si solar cell exhibits a JSC of 41.3 mA cm−2, a VOC of 691 mV and a fill factor of 80.6% resulting in a PCE of 23.0% (Table 1).
 Fig. 5  Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy image of the perovskite solar cell. 
Table 1 Average values of the photovoltaic parameters of the semi-transparent perovskite solar module (4 cm2) and IBC c-Si solar cell (4 cm2) measured under 1000 W m−2 AM 1.5G irradiance. The response of the IBC c-Si solar cell in four-terminal configuration is measured with the incident light filtered through the semi-transparent perovskite solar module. The aperture area of both the devices is 4 cm2. The reported power conversion efficiencies are stabilised power outputs (PCESPO) tracked at maximum power point for 10 minutes. The JSC values reported for the perovskite module are normalised to a single cell for easier comparison with small-area cells






Device

I
SC (mA)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
Aperture PCESPO (%)




Stand alone
Perovskite
11.4 ± 0.1
20.0 ± 0.1
7.12 ± 0.06
73.5 ± 1.5
15.3 ± 0.2


IBC c-Si


41.3 ± 0.04
0.691 ± 0.001
80.6 ± 0.1
23.0 ± 0.01






FLAT
Perovskite
11.4 ± 0.1
20.0 ± 0.1
7.12 ± 0.08
73.5 ± 1.4
15.3 ± 0.1


IBC c-Si


14.1 ± 0.06
0.673 ± 0.002
81.7 ± 0.1
7.8 ± 0.02


Tandem








23.1 ± 0.1






TEX
Perovskite
11.5 ± 0.1
20.1 ± 0.2
7.12 ± 0.05
73.3 ± 1.6
15.4 ± 0.2


IBC c-Si


15.1 ± 0.01
0.674 ± 0.001
81.7 ± 0.1
8.3 ± 0.04


Tandem








23.7 ± 0.2






TEX + IML
Perovskite
11.4 ± 0.2
20.0 ± 0.2
7.12 ± 0.06
73.4 ± 1.5
15.3 ± 0.3


IBC c-Si


15.6 ± 0.03
0.674 ± 0.002
81.7 ± 0.1
8.6 ± 0.04


Tandem








23.9 ± 0.3




When in tandem configuration, the flat CsFAPbIBr top solar module maintains its stand-alone PCE of 15.3% with an average transmittance of 70% in the wavelength range of 800–1200 nm and a peak transmittance of 85% at 870 nm (Fig. S1a, ESI†). As a result, the c-Si bottom solar cell in the FLAT case exhibits a PCE of 7.8%. Overall, the 4 cm2 tandem solar module has an aperture PCE of 23.1% (Table 1). On the smaller aperture area of 0.13 cm2, the tandem solar cell exhibits a PCE of 24.5% (Table S3, ESI†). The tandem devices exhibit higher PCE than the stand-alone IBC c-Si solar cell even without optical optimisation. However, they suffer from high overall reflection that limits current generation and by extension, their PCE (Fig. 3a).
As discussed previously, the addition of the textured film with inverted pyramids of 45° inclination angle and 20 μm base length substantially reduces the reflectance of the semi-transparent CsFAPbIBr solar module over a wide spectral range and enhances its transmittance in the near-infrared spectral range (Fig. S1b, ESI†). The measured transmittance and reflectance spectra of the CsFAPbIBr solar module with the textured film show very good agreement with the simulation considering the complexity of the stack. The improved transmittance increases the JSC of the c-Si bottom solar cell by 1 mA cm−2. Consequently the PCE of the c-Si bottom solar cell increases to 8.3% when in tandem configuration. The overall aperture PCEs of the tandem devices with the textured film are 23.7% on 4 cm2 (Table 1) and 25.1% on 0.13 cm2 (Table S3, ESI†).
Furthermore, replacing the air gap between the CsFAPbIBr and c-Si devices with an IML with a refractive index of 1.5 provides an additional 0.5 mA cm−2 increase to the JSC of the c-Si bottom solar cell, thereby boosting its PCE to 8.6% in tandem configuration. Consequently, the overall PCE of the textured tandem solar module with IML is 23.9% on 4 cm2 (Table 1) and 25.3% on 0.13 cm2 aperture area (Table S3, ESI†). The measured current–voltage characteristics of the CsFAPbIBr top solar module and the IBC c-Si bottom solar cell for the three cases are shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Measured current–voltage characteristics of (a) the perovskite top solar module and (b) the IBC c-Si bottom solar cell when stand-alone and in four-terminal tandem configuration. 

Fig. 7 shows the measured external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the CsFAPbIBr top solar cell and c-Si bottom solar cell for the three cases discussed. In comparison with the flat case, the addition of the textured film greatly increases the EQE of the c-Si bottom solar cell while modestly improving the CsFAPbIBr top solar cell. This is in accordance with the previous observation that the textured film largely suppresses reflection in the near-infrared spectral region (Fig. S1a and b, ESI†). Furthermore, replacing the air-gap between the top and bottom cells by the optimal IML has little effect on the EQE of the CsFAPbIBr top solar cell but considerably changes the EQE of the c-Si bottom solar cell. Interestingly, the introduction of an optimal IML lowers the EQE of the c-Si solar cell beyond 1050 nm, probably due to worse light trapping (Fig. 7). However, the gain in EQE of the c-Si solar cell at wavelengths up to 1050 nm significantly outweighs the loss at longer wavelengths. Nearly two-thirds of the total power is generated by the CsFAPbIBr solar module and the current generated by it is extracted at a higher voltage than the c-Si solar cell, thus leading to efficient utilisation of solar irradiance.
 Fig. 7  Measured external quantum efficiency of the semi-transparent perovskite top solar cell and IBC c-Si bottom solar cell in the three cases. Since the aperture areas of the two devices are different, the bottom cell was measured with the incident light filtered through a flat semi-transparent perovskite solar module. 
Conclusions and outlook
Planar perovskite–Si tandem solar cells with flat surfaces suffer from optical losses largely due to reflection and inefficient light management. With comprehensive optical modelling and prototyping, we have demonstrated a commercially viable and scalable approach to boost the PCE of perovskite–Si tandem solar modules. With four-terminal tandem PCEs of 23.9% on 4 cm2, we have demonstrated that such perovskite–Si tandem devices can be scaled up in size and still be more efficient than stand-alone c-Si solar cells. The high tandem PCE over relatively large area with devices of identical dimensions is a key advancement in the field of perovskite–Si tandem photovoltaics. As a consequence of independent power extraction, four-terminal tandem devices require separate inverters. However, since the perovskite top device generates two-thirds of the total power with the silicon bottom device generating the remaining one-third, the capacity of the separate inverters can be chosen accordingly. Since inverter prices scale with power, the overall inverter cost will then be distributed among the separate inverters based on the generated power.37 Moreover, the increased PCE of tandem devices can compensate for the extra area-related cost and reduce the overall system cost.38 Furthermore, the module-on-cell design of the tandem solar module demonstrated in this work is scalable to current commercial dimensions and beyond. In conjunction with ongoing efforts in scalable fabrication techniques for perovskite photovoltaics, our results pave the way for larger, high-efficiency perovskite-silicon tandem solar modules.
Methods
Experimental

Perovskite solar module fabrication. 
Glass sheets with pre-deposited front ITO were purchased from Thin Film Devices Inc. and diced into 3 cm × 3 cm sized substrates. The glass/ITO substrates were then patterned by laser ablation (P1) to aperture dimensions of 2 cm × 2 cm comprising seven cell stripes. They were cleaned in ultrasonic baths of detergent, de-ionized water, acetone and isopropanol successively for 10 minutes in each bath. The cleaned substrates were loaded into an Angstrom Engineering e-beam evaporation system. TiO2 pellets supplied by Prof. Feierabend GmbH were evaporated onto the substrates at a rate of 1 Å s−1 while maintaining a partial oxygen pressure of 1.7 × 10−4 Torr during the deposition to obtain the desired stoichiometry of the TiO2 layers. The perovskite films were deposited by a two-step inter-diffusion method. First, 0.12 mmol CsI was dissolved together with 1.2 mmol PbI2 in 0.876 mL of DMF and 86.4 μL of DMSO and spin-coated onto the glass/ITO/TiO2 layer stack at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Then, a 0.422 M solution of FAI with 15 mol% FABr was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s. The spin coated films were then annealed on a hot plate inside a N2 glovebox at 100 °C for 30 minutes. On top of the annealed perovskite films, a solution of Spiro-OMeTAD (80 mg ml−1 in chlorobenzene) doped with 17.5 μL of lithium bis(tri-fluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (520 mg ml−1 in acetonitrile) and 28.5 μL of 4-tert-butylepyridine was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 60 s. The perovskite films coated with Spiro-OMeTAD were then kept out in air overnight for oxygen exposure. A 10 nm buffer layer of MoO3 was then deposited by thermal evaporation to protect the underlying layers from damage during sputtering of the rear transparent electrode. Before depositing the rear electrode, the films were patterned by mechanical scribing (P2) for the interconnection of subcells. To complete the layer stack, a 100 nm rear ITO electrode was deposited by DC magnetron sputtering using a Nimbus 310 sputtering tool. A final patterning by mechanical scribing (P3) was done after the deposition of the rear ITO electrode to create solar modules with seven serially interconnected cell stripes. The aperture area of all solar modules is 4 cm2. The anti-reflective textured film is custom-made by temicon GmbH.


IBC c-Si solar cell fabrication. 
Single junction IBC c-Si solar cells were prepared from n-CZ (ρ = 1–4 Ω cm) wafers as described by O’Sullivan et al.31 After saw damage removal, a p+ emitter was diffused on both sides of the wafer in a diffusion furnace containing BBr3 gas followed by a wet oxidation process to drive in the dopants and to passivate both surfaces with SiO2. Next, photolithography and an etch of SiO2 and Si were used to locally shape the emitter into an interdigitated pattern. The wafers were then returned to the diffusion furnace (POCl3 gas) for the diffusion of an n+ back surface field (BSF) in the regions where the emitter was etched resulting in an interdigitated pattern of emitter and BSF fingers. The diffusion was followed by a dry oxidation step. The front Si surface was then textured in a TMAH solution to enhance the optical performance. An additional diffusion (POCl3 gas) and dry oxidation resulted in an n+ front surface field passivated with SiO2. This SiO2 was covered with a PECVD SiNX anti-reflective coating to maximize light harvesting. Finally, the rear side was subjected to two additional photolithography steps; one to create contact holes in the rear SiO2 and another to pattern the sputtered AlSi rear metallization.


Characterization. 
The J–V characteristics of the perovskite solar modules were measured in an inert N2 glovebox with a Keithley 2602A Source-Measure Unit and an Abet solar simulator producing 1000 W m−2 simulating AM 1.5G irradiance. The solar simulator was calibrated using a KG5 band pass equipped, ISE Fraunhofer certified Si Photodiode. The J–V measurement scans of the perovskite solar modules were made at a rate of 4.9 V s−1 with a step size of 50 mV per step inside a N2 glove box at room temperature. The maximum power point tracking was done using a perturb and observe method under continuous AM 1.5G illumination. The J–V characteristics of the IBC c-Si solar cells, stand-alone and in four-terminal configuration, were measured in air using a Wacom solar simulator producing 1000 W m−2 simulating AM 1.5G irradiance. The scan rate was 0.25 V s−1 with a step size of 2.7 mV per step. The solar simulator was calibrated by the measurement of a reference c-Si solar cell that has been certified by ISE Fraunhofer. The response of c-Si solar cells in four-terminal configuration is commonly measured by filtering the incident light through a dummy perovskite stack with identical layers as the small perovskite solar cell. In our experiments, we noted that the transmittance spectrum of a working perovskite solar module is identical to that of a dummy perovskite stack. Therefore, we used a working perovskite solar module as an optical filter to measure the response of the silicon solar cell in cell-on-cell and module-on-cell configurations. For the IML, commercial refractive index liquids purchased from Cargille Laboratories, Inc. were used. An aperture mask with dimensions of 2 cm × 2 cm was used for J–V measurements of all perovskite solar modules and c-Si solar cells. While measuring the J–V characteristics of small-area perovskite cells, an aperture mask of 0.13 cm2 was used. The transmittance and reflectance spectra of the semi-transparent solar modules were recorded using an integrating sphere in a Bentham PVE300 spectral response setup. Ellipsometry spectra were recorded under ambient conditions on a Sopra GES-5 rotating polarizer ellipsometer. Ellipsometric data were analyzed using the Spectroscopic Ellipsometry Analyzer software. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the solar cells was measured using a spectrophotometer setup (Bentham PVE300) by illuminating the solar cells with modulated monochromatic light. The EQE of the IBC c-Si bottom solar cell was measured in four-terminal configuration with the incident light filtered through a semi-transparent CsFAPbIBr top solar module. Both the perovskite and c-Si cells were at zero bias voltage during the measurements.

Simulation
Optical simulations were carried out using Sentaurus Device version L-2016.03. A combination of ray-tracing and transfer matrix methods was used. Optically thick layers, in which the light propagates incoherently (textured film, glass, IML, c-Si), were simulated using ray-tracing. Thin-film stacks were simulated coherently using the transfer matrix method, and were included in the ray-tracing simulation as boundary conditions at the relevant interfaces. Deterministic ray-tracing with 500 initial rays normally incident on the tandem stack was used. The rays were traced until their power dropped to 0.2% of the starting value. The simulation results include reflection, transmission, and absorption in each layer of the tandem solar cell. The simulated photocurrent density is then calculated by integrating the absorptance spectra with AM 1.5G irradiance. The retro-reflection properties of the inverted pyramidal texture were simulated with a ray tracing model using the LightTools commercial software by Synopsys. The inclination angle of the pyramids was varied by changing the height of the inverted pyramids. Far field and planar detectors were used to measure transmitted and reflected rays, respectively. Retroreflection characteristics were calculated by simulating illumination from the top and bottom of the pyramids with varying angles of incidence ranging from 0° to 80° in steps of 0.5°.
The following parameters and boundary conditions were used for the optical simulations of the perovskite–silicon tandem solar cell. The optical structure of the IBC c-Si solar cell was adapted to obtain a good match with its experimentally measured EQE. The thickness of the Si absorber was fixed at 170 μm with random upright pyramids of 54.7° inclination angle at the front. The rear side of Si was set to be 97% reflective and 0% transmissive to account for the metallisation. Perfectly reflective boundary conditions were applied to the sidewalls of the simulated structure. The optical structure of the perovskite solar cell was defined as follows: 0.7 mm thick float glass, 120 nm ITO (front), 20 nm TiO2, 478 nm CsFAPbIBr, 260 nm Spiro-OMeTAD, 10 nm MoO3, and 80 nm ITO (rear). The anti-reflective textured film was defined on top of the glass with the following structure at the glass/air interface: 1 mm PV6100 glue, 50 μm PET and 20 μm lacquer. Regular pyramidal structures with the same optical constants as the lacquer were then embedded on top at the lacquer/air interface. The inclination angle of the pyramids was varied from 0° to 80° in steps of 5° while the base length was varied from 5 μm to 35 μm in steps of 5 μm. The IML and air gap between perovskite and Si solar cells were defined as incoherent layers with thicknesses ranging from 1 μm to 1000 μm.
Author contributions
M. J., R. G. and M. D. conceived and designed the experiments. M. J. fabricated the devices, performed optical simulations and experimental measurements of the devices along with data analysis. M. F. and B. Z. established the optical model of the tandem solar cell. R. S. and U. P. performed the optical analysis of the textured film. W. S. performed microscopy and image analysis. W. Q. developed the perovskite solar cell stack. M. D. provided the c-Si solar cells. T. A. and J. P. contributed to the general idea and supervised the work. All authors contributed to the discussion and writing of the article.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Solliance, a partnership of R&D organizations from the Netherlands, Belgium and Germany working on thin-film photovoltaic solar energy. The work of M. Filipic was funded by the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement 657270. The work of R. Schmager and U. W. Paetzold was supported by Initiating and Networking fund of the Helmholtz Association; Helmholtz Young Investigator Group of Dr U.W. Paetzold, the PEROSEED project, the Helmholtz Energy Materials Foundry (HEMF), the Science and Technology of Nanostructures research program, and the Karlsruhe School of Optics and Photonics. The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Notes and references
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F. J. Haug, J. H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Löper, S. J. Moon, S. Martín de Nicolas, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, S. Nicolay, J. Bailat, J. H. Yum, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1619–1629 RSC .
D. Forgács, L. Gil-Escrig, D. Pérez-Del-Rey, C. Momblona, J. Werner, B. Niesen, C. Ballif, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602121 CrossRef .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. (Jason) Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
J. Werner, L. Barraud, A. Walter, M. Bräuninger, F. Sahli, D. Sacchetto, N. Tétreault, B. Paviet-Salomon, S.-J. Moon, C. Allebé, M. Despeisse, S. Nicolay, S. De Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
U. W. Paetzold, M. Jaysankar, R. Gehlhaar, E. Ahlswede, S. Paetel, W. Qiu, J. Bastos, L. Rakocevic, B. S. Richards, T. Aernouts, M. Powalla and J. Poortmans, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9897–9906 CAS .
M. Jaysankar, W. Qiu, J. Bastos, J. G. Tait, M. Debucquoy, U. W. Paetzold, D. Cheyns and J. Poortmans, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10524–10531 CAS .
T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs, E. Wang, T. C. Kho, K. C. Fong, M. Stocks, E. Franklin, A. Blakers, N. Zin, K. McIntosh, W. Li, Y. Cheng, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700228 CrossRef .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. P. Weiss, S. Pisoni, E. Avancini, C. Andres, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16190 CrossRef .
I. M. Peters, S. Sofia, J. Mailoa and T. Buonassisi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 66911–66923 RSC .

          P. A. Basore, in 2016 IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists
Conference (PVSC), IEEE, 2016, vol. 2016-Novem, pp. 2635–2637.
J. Werner, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 1700731, 1700731 Search PubMed .
N. N. Lal, T. P. White and K. R. Catchpole, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 1380–1386 CrossRef .
F. Meillaud, A. Shah, C. Droz, E. Vallat-Sauvain and C. Miazza, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2952–2959 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bonnet-Eymard, M. Boccard, G. Bugnon, F. Sculati-Meillaud, M. Despeisse and C. Ballif, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 120–125 CrossRef CAS .

          U. W. Paetzold, R. Gehlhaar, J. Tait, W. Qiu, J. Bastos, M. Debucquoy, M. Jaysankar, T. Aernouts and J. Poortmans, Light, Energy and the Environment, OSA, Washington, D.C.,  2016, p. SoW2C.4 Search PubMed .
M. H. Futscher and B. Ehrler, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 2–7 Search PubMed .
M. Jaysankar, W. Qiu, M. van Eerden, T. Aernouts, R. Gehlhaar, M. Debucquoy, U. W. Paetzold and J. Poortmans, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602807 CrossRef .
W. Qiu, A. Ray, M. Jaysankar, T. Merckx, J. P. Bastos, D. Cheyns, R. Gehlhaar, J. Poortmans and P. Heremans, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700920 CrossRef .
W. Qiu, T. Merckx, M. Jaysankar, C. Masse de la Huerta, L. Rakocevic, W. Zhang, U. W. Paetzold, R. Gehlhaar, L. Froyen, J. Poortmans, D. Cheyns, H. J. Snaith and P. Heremans, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 484–489 CAS .
M. Filipič, P. Löper, B. Niesen, S. De Wolf, J. Krč, C. Ballif and M. Topič, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A263 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jošt, S. Albrecht, L. Kegelmann, C. M. Wolff, F. Lang, B. Lipovšek, J. Krč, L. Korte, D. Neher, B. Rech and M. Topič, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1232–1239 CrossRef .
S. Manzoor, Z. J. Yu, A. Ali, W. Ali, K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, S. F. Bent, M. D. McGehee and Z. C. Holman, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 173, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .
P. Campbell and M. A. Green, J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 62, 243–249 CrossRef .
M. van Eerden, M. Jaysankar, A. Hadipour, T. Merckx, J. J. Schermer, T. Aernouts, J. Poortmans and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700151 CrossRef .
U. W. Paetzold, W. Qiu, F. Finger, J. Poortmans and D. Cheyns, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 173101 CrossRef .
B. W. Schneider, N. N. Lal, S. Baker-Finch and T. P. White, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, A1422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, Y. Zeng and W. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16504 CrossRef PubMed .

          F. Di Giacomo, Y. Galagan, S. Shanmugam, H. Gorter, F. van den Bruele, G. Kirchner, I. de Vries, H. Fledderus, H. Lifka, S. C. Veenstra, T. Aernouts, P. Groen and R. Andrissen, in Organic, Hybrid, and Perovskite Photovoltaics XVIII, ed. K. Lee, Z. H. Kafafi and P. A. Lane, SPIE,  2017, p. 10 Search PubMed .

          B. O’Sullivan, M. Debucquoy, S. Singh, A. Uruena de Castro, M. Récaman-Payo, N. Posthuma and J. Poortmans, in 28th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, WIP,  2013, pp. 956–960 Search PubMed .
A. Gombert and A. Luque, Phys. Status Solidi, 2008, 205, 2757–2765 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sai, H. Fujii, K. Arafune, Y. Ohshita, Y. Kanamori, H. Yugami and M. Yamaguchi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, 3333–3336 CrossRef CAS .
J. Escarré, K. Söderström, M. Despeisse, S. Nicolay, C. Battaglia, G. Bugnon, L. Ding, F. Meillaud, F.-J. Haug and C. Ballif, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 185–190 CrossRef .
S. C. Baker-Finch and K. R. McIntosh, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2011, 19, 406–416 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Trowbridge, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1978, 68, 1225 CrossRef .

          R. Fu, D. J. Feldman, R. M. Margolis, M. A. Woodhouse and K. B. Ardani, U.S. Solar Photovoltaic System Cost Benchmark: Q1 2017, Golden, CO (United States),  2017 Search PubMed .

          P. A. Basore, 2016 IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), IEEE,  2016, pp. 2635–2637 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee00237aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Broader context
Crystalline silicon photovoltaics is currently the dominant technology for solar energy harvesting. However, the power conversion efficiency of crystalline silicon solar cells is approaching its theoretical limit. Tandem solar cells employing silicon solar cells and organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells bear exciting potential to surpass the efficiency limit of market-leading single-junction silicon solar cells. Although such high-efficiency tandem solar cells have been reported on small areas, maintaining the high efficiency on large areas requires careful optical control, and efficient design and fabrication of the thin-film photovoltaic device. For the economic viability of this technology, an efficient transition from lab-scale cells to industrial-scale modules is crucial. In this work, we demonstrate an efficient four-terminal perovskite–silicon tandem solar module with a scalable design. Through a combination of electrical and optical optimisation, our tandem solar module of 4 cm2 aperture area exhibits a power conversion efficiency of 23.9%, the highest reported for a perovskite–silicon tandem photovoltaic device with aperture area larger than 0.5 cm2. Furthermore, our tandem solar module concept is compatible with industrially scalable fabrication techniques, thus enabling the production of high-performance large-area perovskite–silicon tandem solar modules.


 	Fig. 1  Optical structure of the tandem stack for three different cases; (a) FLAT – reference, (b) TEX – with a textured film, and (c) TEX + IML – with a textured film and refractive index matching layer.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of light incoupling due to inverted pyramidal texture. The transmittance of light through the textured film is enhanced for inclination angles larger than 40°. (b) Illustration of retroreflection effect at the rear of the textured film. The retroreflection effect is most pronounced for inclination angles around 45°. (c) Impact of inclination angle and base length of the inverted pyramidal texture on the short-circuit current density of the IBC c-Si bottom solar cell. The intermediate medium between top and bottom solar cells is air.	 

 	Fig. 3  Simulated reflectance and absorptance in various layers of the tandem stack in (a) the reference case (FLAT) and (b) the case with the optimised textured film and index matching layer of refractive index 1.5 (TEX + IML).	 

 	Fig. 4  Optical images and schematic cross-sections of (a) the perovskite top solar module and (b) the IBC c-Si bottom solar cell. (c) Optical image of the four-terminal tandem solar module with the perovskite solar module stacked on top of the IBC c-Si solar cell with an air gap in between.	 

 	Fig. 5  Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy image of the perovskite solar cell.	 

Stand alone	Perovskite	11.4 ± 0.1	20.0 ± 0.1	7.12 ± 0.06	73.5 ± 1.5	15.3 ± 0.2
IBC c-Si	
	41.3 ± 0.04	0.691 ± 0.001	80.6 ± 0.1	23.0 ± 0.01


FLAT	Perovskite	11.4 ± 0.1	20.0 ± 0.1	7.12 ± 0.08	73.5 ± 1.4	15.3 ± 0.1
IBC c-Si	
	14.1 ± 0.06	0.673 ± 0.002	81.7 ± 0.1	7.8 ± 0.02
Tandem	
	
	
	
	23.1 ± 0.1


TEX	Perovskite	11.5 ± 0.1	20.1 ± 0.2	7.12 ± 0.05	73.3 ± 1.6	15.4 ± 0.2
IBC c-Si	
	15.1 ± 0.01	0.674 ± 0.001	81.7 ± 0.1	8.3 ± 0.04
Tandem	
	
	
	
	23.7 ± 0.2


TEX + IML	Perovskite	11.4 ± 0.2	20.0 ± 0.2	7.12 ± 0.06	73.4 ± 1.5	15.3 ± 0.3
IBC c-Si	
	15.6 ± 0.03	0.674 ± 0.002	81.7 ± 0.1	8.6 ± 0.04
Tandem	
	
	
	
	23.9 ± 0.3

 	Fig. 6  Measured current–voltage characteristics of (a) the perovskite top solar module and (b) the IBC c-Si bottom solar cell when stand-alone and in four-terminal tandem configuration.	 

 	Fig. 7  Measured external quantum efficiency of the semi-transparent perovskite top solar cell and IBC c-Si bottom solar cell in the three cases. Since the aperture areas of the two devices are different, the bottom cell was measured with the incident light filtered through a flat semi-transparent perovskite solar module.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee00237a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
