Vapour printing: patterning of the optical and electrical properties of organic semiconductors in one simple step   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM15190A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM15190A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4519-4526Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsVapour printing: patterning of the optical and electrical properties of organic semiconductors in one simple step†

        
          
            Dmitri 
            Nassyrov
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Christian 
            Müller
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Abel 
            Roigé
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            I. 
            Burgués-Ceballos
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Oriol Ossó
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            David B. 
            Amabilino
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Miquel 
            Garriga
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Isabel Alonso
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alejandro R. 
            Goñi
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            Mariano 
            Campoy-Quiles
          
        
      *a
aInstitut de Ciència de Materials de Barcelona (ICMAB-CSIC), Esfera UAB, Bellaterra, 08193, Spain. E-mail: mcampoy@icmab.es
bMATGAS 2000, IAE, Esfera UAB, Bellaterra, 08193, Spain
cInstitució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Passeig Lluis Companys 23, Barcelona, 08010, Spain
Received 
      13th October 2011
    , Accepted 11th December 2011First published on 19th January 2012AbstractWe have exploited the effective and versatile concept of post-deposition treatment using vapour and added a new dimension, space, in order to form patterns of organic thin films with modified optical and electrical properties in a low cost and straightforward fashion. To achieve this feat, we developed a vapour printer which locally exposes an organic film to low concentrations of common organic solvents. This technique readily enables the generation of spatially resolved patterns through three different approaches: (i) local changes in molecular conformation; (ii) local changes in the degree of crystallinity; and (iii) local chemical reactions. In order to demonstrate the potential of vapour printing, we have fabricated a range of proof-of-concept optoelectronic devices, including integrated optical interferometers, photodiodes with position dependent response, organic solar cells and conducting wires.
1. Introduction

Patterning is essential for the fabrication of advanced device architectures as well as their eventual integration into arrays of components and circuits. There already exist a variety of patterning techniques that have been applied to organic materials, including traditional photolithographic methods,1–5 selective in situpolymerisation,1,5reactive ion etching,6laser ablation,7 screen-8,9 and ink-jet printing,10,11micromolding,12microcontact printing,13 controlled vapour deposition14,15 and selective photobleaching.16 Most processes provide the quality required for micro- and nanoelectronics in terms of high definition, but typically involve multiple steps, masks and/or sacrificial layers. In addition, some of these techniques are relatively low throughput in nature. As a consequence, a range of potential applications including plastic sensors17 and solar cells,18 lab-on-a-chip optical applications,19 electrochemical devices20,21 as well as foldable circuits22,23 will only become truly attractive if simple, low-budget processing techniques can be used that are not over-engineered with respect to the required feature size. Furthermore, suitable patterning methods usually cannot be conducted in parallel with available post-deposition treatments, which significantly adds to the complexity of workflow schemes. However, post-deposition treatments are often required in order to tailor the film morphology, enabling improved optical and electronic properties and overall optimised device performance.24–30 In this communication, we will demonstrate that our novel vapour printing technique addresses this apparent lack of a straightforward, simple and broadly applicable method and offers an elegant solution that allows simultaneous patterning of organic semiconductor thin films as well as precise manipulation of their nano- and microstructure. The use of vapour annealing instead of the more conventional thermal annealing may offer additional advantages of this patterning technique,29 as the former does not chemically degrade the organic thin films and in some cases can selectively target one individual layer in multiple component stacks, or even one single component in a blend film30 and therefore easily reduces, or even avoids, undesired annealing of adjacent layers and mechanical stress at the interfaces between layers while promoting the desired nanostructure.
2. Results and discussion
Vapour printing setup
Implementation of the basic setup is versatile and thus compatible with established processing equipment: a controlled flux of a carrier gas such as nitrogen, N2, passes through a two terminal reservoir that contains the liquid solvent to be used for patterning, with the other exit connected to a nozzle (see Fig. 1k). The N2 accelerates the evaporation of solvent through the formation of bubbles and also serves as a carrier of solvent vapour towards the nozzle. The sample is placed perpendicularly to the print head on an automatic XYZ mapping stage. Patterns are then easily created by computer-controlled movement of the stage as well as regulation of the N2 flux.
 Fig. 1  Vapour-printed patterns of the optical properties of PFO films. Photographs recorded under UV illumination of (a) as spin-coated film; (b) fully vapour-annealed film; (c) vapour-printed single dot; (d and e) square and hexagonal array of dots, respectively; (f) two lines produced by a continuous variation of nozzle–sample distance; (h) Mach–Zehnder integrated optical interferometer; (i) squared pattern of lines; (j) parallel lines produced with different vapour printing conditions. All scale bars represent 3 mm. (g) Optical micrograph under UV illumination of a single line fabricated with a 60 μm inner diameter nozzle (scale bar corresponds to 250 μm). (k) Schematic of the vapour printer used in this report. (l) Waveguided photoluminescence (PL) at the edge of the Mach–Zehnder interferometer (shown in (h)). Initial PL (red) and PL recorded whilst applying pressure to one arm of the interferometer via a PDMS stamp that had been placed on top of the film (black), thus, substantially varying the amount of outcoupled light. 

Patterning of the optical properties of PFO films via local changes in molecular conformation
In order to test the potential of our vapour printing setup, in a first set of experiments we elected to pattern thin films of poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene), PFO, one of the most widely studied polymeric semiconductors that is used in applications such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)31–34 and organic lasers.35 In particular, we made use of the fact that the conformation of spin-coated PFO can be modified by exposing the material to solvent vapour, which promotes a more extended conformation of the polymer chains34 commonly known as the β-phase. Compared to the as-cast material, β-phase PFO films exhibit a new low energy absorption peak and red-shifted photoluminescence (PL) emission,31–34 as well as an increase of the refractive index (Fig. S1†).36,37Fig. 1c–j show photographs of different patterns fabricated using the vapour printing technique on PFO films. Under UV light, the patterned PFO layers show a lighter blue PL originating from those areas that have been exposed to solvent vapour, and thus are in the β-phase conformation. As a reference, Fig. 1a and b show photographs of an as spin-coated film and a fully converted film, respectively. Without doubt, the crisp appearance and reproducibility of the converted structures clearly reveal the patterning potential of our technique.
These patterns are the result of local changes in film morphology. More generally, the particular evolution of the morphology with vapour depends on the specific solvent and system under investigation, including changes in molecular conformation,31–36 changes in molecular packing and crystallinity26–29 and promotion of phase separation of components in blended films.28,30
Monitoring vapour printing with in situspectroscopic ellipsometry
Interestingly, the versatility of the setup enables its straightforward integration together with other probes and thus opens a simple avenue to study the effect of vapour on the morphology of organic semiconductor systems. As an example, we have installed the vapour printer inside a spectroscopic ellipsometer coupled to a CCD detector that allows measuring the optical properties and thickness, d, during printing of a PFO film. Fig. S2† displays the deduced variation in d as a function of exposure time. As soon as the vapour impinges on the sample, the film begins to swell as evidenced by a rapid increase in d of up to 30%. Almost simultaneously, PFO polymer chains start to rearrange themselves into the β-phase. Finally, after the flux is stopped, the remaining vapour evaporates from the film in less than 5 seconds (which is the time resolution of our ellipsometer) yielding a spot of some millimetres in diameter of β-phase converted film that features a final thickness dfinal that is a few percent less than d0 (see Fig. 1c and S2†). Although the uptake time of vapour molecules varies with the tip-to-sample distance (Fig. S2†), it is one order of magnitude faster than that observed normally in a conventional vapour annealing experiment in which a film is homogeneously exposed to vapour by saturating a hermetic recipient with solvent vapour (Fig. S3†). The evolution of the β-phase with time can be followed by the corresponding changes in the polarisability,31 α, which we deduced here using the ellipsometrically derived thickness and refractive index (Fig. S2†).38,39 Interestingly, the film is converted into its β-phase following an Avrami profile,40 which finally results in a 10% increase in polarisability (see the ESI† for more details).
Optical components with patterned PFO films
One potential functionality of such patterned PFO films arises from an increase in the refractive index of ca. 0.05 in the whole visible range (see Fig. S1†),36,37 which—in contrast to most patterning techniques—does not rely on locally substituting one material by another (or simply by removing material) but, instead, is associated with changes in molecular conformation. Vapour printing does, therefore, avoid a mismatch between lattice parameters or the need for orthogonal solvents and permits easy production of patterns of material with different optical properties from homogeneous films with approximately constant thickness. This readily enables the fabrication of optical devices that use a variation in refractive index between different parts of the film. As an example we have vapour-printed β-phase waveguides (Fig. 1j) in as spin-coated PFO films. The propagating modes which can be measured at the edge of the sample (see Fig. 1f and S4†) are defined by the film thickness (100–500 nm in our experiments). Recently, Ryu and co-workers35 have prepared a similar type of waveguide by exposing a thin film to solvent vapour through a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mask and demonstrated its potential use in organic lasers. Instead, vapour printing such structures disposes of the need for masks, increases the patterning resolution by at least one order of magnitude (see below) and speeds up the fabrication process by a factor of ca. 100.
Besides stripe waveguides, more elaborate optical components can be prepared where, in a single step, both the optimum (high refractive index) microstructure and the patterning are achieved using vapour printing. As an example, we fabricated a Mach–Zehnder integrated interferometer (Fig. 1h). This device, which is often used for optical modulation and switching, allows us to verify that light can actually be confined within the β-phase stripe. Fig. 1l shows the waveguided photoluminescence light measured at the edge of the interferometer when excited before the branching point. By covering one of the branches with a PDMS film, light propagating through that branch is less confined (and more attenuated) and the output intensity is thus reduced (Fig. 1l) as its main contribution comes from the PDMS free branch of the interferometer. This simple concept could be exploited in optical pressure sensors (see Fig. S5†), as well as, with appropriate modification of the surface, in chemical sensors.

Patterning of the electronic properties of P3HT:PCBM films via local changes in the degree of crystallinity
In order to demonstrate that vapour printing can also be used to pattern the electronic properties of organic semiconductors, we have investigated the structuring of poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) blends, which are currently extensively studied not only for applications such as organic photovoltaics (OPVs)18,26–28 but also for low dark-current photodetectors41 and organic field-effect transistors (OFETs).42 A diode-like structure was fabricated by spin coating a P3HT:PCBM blend onto conducting indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates and a series of dots were vapour printed on the film. Fig. 2a shows the absorption spectra for dots printed at different N2 fluxes. The increase of the long wavelength absorption shoulder centred at ∼600 nm has been related to increased P3HT crystallinity43 and thus our data suggest that increasing N2 flux of the vapour printer enhances ordering of the macromolecule (Fig. S6†).44 This hypothesis is corroborated by the increase of surface roughness28 as measured with atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. 2b). Fig. 2b also compares current maps of as-coated and vapour-printed areas of the diode, respectively, measured by applying a 1.5 V bias between the ITO and the AFM tip. A comparison of current maps reveals that vapour-printed regions are significantly more conductive than the as-cast regions in agreement with the previously reported enhancement of the charge-carrier mobility upon annealing.45 Current–voltage characteristics (Fig. 2c) confirm that vapour printing increases by ten-fold the current flowing through the blend film. Clearly, the observation made in this photodiode like structure demonstrates that vapour printing can be employed as an efficient tool to pattern the electrical properties of organic semiconductors. This, in turn, has the potential to be beneficial in many applications due to a reduction in dark currents, parasitic capacitances and cross-talking between pixels in photovoltaic panels, photodiodes and OFET arrays.
 Fig. 2  Vapour printing to locally enhance the electronic properties in P3HT:PCBM solar cell blends. (a) Absorbance spectra of a P3HT:PCBM film exposed for 10 seconds to different vapour fluxes. Inset: photograph of a patterned P3HT:PCBM film (scale bar is 2 mm). (b) Conventional (top, scale 0–8 nm) and current-sensing atomic force micrographs (bottom, scale 0–13 mV) comparing the as spin-coated (left) and vapour-printed areas (right) of the same P3HT:PCBM film. X–Y scale bars are 2 μm. (c) Current–voltage characteristics averaged over six current-sensing AFM measurements. Vapour-printed areas (black) display a drastic increase in current as compared to as spin-coated areas (grey). 
Vapour printing of organic solar cells
We have shown above that vapour printing can be used to change the morphology of P3HT:PCBM blends promoting the crystallisation of the polymer chains and thus, enhancing the charge transport in the film. In order to demonstrate the potential of these morphological changes in fully operational devices, we have fabricated organic solar cells and treated the active layers with vapour printing. For this, a 1:1 P3HT:PCBM layer was spin coated on top of a PEDOT:PSS/patterned ITO/glass, vapour printed with chlorobenzene using a nozzle with an inner diameter of 250 μm, ca. 400 sccm of N2 flux, and a stage speed of 1 mm s−1. The cells were finished by evaporating a 100 nm thick Al electrode which defines a 25 mm2 active area. Fig. 3 shows the J–V characteristics under standard 1 sun illumination for the vapour printed cells. Compared to the as-cast films, vapour printing greatly increases the short circuit current, as one may expect from an increase in the absorption coefficient and charge transport originated from the crystallisation of the polymeric component.27,28 For these non-optimized devices, a more than two-fold increase in power conversion efficiency is measured, from 0.4% for the as-cast to more than 1.1% for the vapour treated devices. This value is comparable to what we obtained for a thermally annealed sample (140 °C for 20 minutes before deposition of the Al electrodes) prepared the same day from the same solution. These results clearly show the potential of vapour printing also in the photovoltaics field.
 Fig. 3  Current density–voltage curves under one sun illumination for organic solar cells based on spin coated P3HT:PCBM photovoltaic active layers as-cast (dashed line) and with vapour printing treatment (solid line). 

Patterning of the electronic conductivity of ODT–TTF films via local chemical reactions
Finally, we demonstrate that the vapour printing technique developed here can be employed not only to locally vary the micro-/nanostructure of thin films but also to manipulate the chemical nature of organic semiconductors. We selected a small-molecule conductor 3-(methylthio)-2-(thioacetooctadecylamide) ethylenedithio-tetrathiafulvalene (ODT-TTF), which displays pronounced electrical conductivity upon doping the xerogel of the material and its composites.46,47 This is facilitated by the tendency of ODT-TTF to form stable charge transfer compounds at room temperature with dopants such as iodine, which display greatly enhanced electrical conductivity compared to the neutral state. Thus, conducting lines in ODT-TTF thin films were generated by local exposure to iodine vapour (Fig. 4a and b). Estimated conductivity values greater than 0.02 S cm−1 (Fig. 4c) are in good agreement with previously reported values for fully exposed films and xerogels.46,47 Clearly, the capability to locally dope organic films opens the possibility to easily vapour print organic electrical circuits without the need of elevated temperatures,23 thus extending its applicability to many types of substrates such as paper and plastic.
 Fig. 4  Conducting line by local iodine doping of ODT-TTF films. (a) Absorbance spectra of an undoped region of an ODT-TTF film (grey) as well as after doping through exposure to iodine vapour (black). A shift of the oscillator strength from the ODT-TTF peak to the new long wavelength peak is clearly observed, confirming the formation of a complex. Inset: photograph of a patterned ODT-TTF film; iodine-vapour was used to locally dope (red) an otherwise pristine ODT-TTF film (transparent). Scale bar in the inset is 5 mm. (b) The thickness profile of an iodine vapour-printed ODT-TTF line was deduced from ellipsometry scans. (c) Current–voltage characteristics (two-point probe spacing 2 cm) measured parallel (full circles) and perpendicular (open circles) to a 4 mm thick doped line. The conductivity of the doped region was estimated to be 0.02 S cm−1. The formation of the complex is further confirmed by the reproducibility of these measurements taken over a two week period on the same samples. 
Vapour printing characteristics
In terms of the printing characteristics, we can identify a number of important parameters that determine the degree of morphology modification of the exposed film, as well as the feature sizes. For the case of PFO, increasing the nitrogen flux enhances β-phase formation and increases the size of the features, as seen in the absorption profiles as shown in Fig. 5a, 5c and S7†. Reducing the tip–sample distance, dts, reduces both the degree of β-phase formation and the characteristic size, but not in a linear fashion. Fig. 5c shows the width of the line, w, as a function of dts for three different N2 fluxes. Interestingly, the width is independent of this distance until it is reduced below ∼250 μm (which coincides with the diameter of the tip) when it rapidly decreases. The insensitivity to dts over a large range of dts values means that the technical implementation of this technique is not extremely demanding as the patterns will not vary with small sample tilts or misalignments.
 Fig. 5  Parameters influencing the feature height and size of the vapour printer. (a) Comparison of absorbance profiles at a wavelength of 429 nm across vapour printed lines produced with the same nozzle inner diameter of 250 μm and nozzle–sample distance of 500 μm but varying N2 flux. (b) Comparison of absorbance profiles at a wavelength of 429 nm across vapour printed lines produced with the nozzle–sample distance of 500 μm and N2 flux of 150 sccm but varying nozzle inner diameter. (c) Variation of the width of vapour-printed features with the nozzle–sample distance (nozzle inner diameter 250 μm); N2 flux 200 sccm (black squares), 150 sccm (red triangles) and 100 sccm (blue diamonds). Solid lines are guides to the eye and the shaded area indicates the regime at which the feature size does not depend on the tip to sample distance, in contrast to the expanding regime at early times. Full symbols indicate data extracted from ellipsometry line scans and open symbols indicate values extracted from photographs. 
Preliminary steady state Navier–Stokes calculations of the pressure and velocity fields show that as the N2 flux is ejected from the nozzle, the moving gas expands to equal its pressure with the surrounding atmospheric pressure. After this initial expansion, the jet size remains practically constant, although it may further expand due to radial diffusion of organic solvent molecules.48 The gas flow is then redirected parallel to the substrate through convection caused by molecular collisions against the sample.48 This convection current may also help to remove the excess solvent and thus improve the definition of the features. A full and rigorous theoretical description of this vapour printing awaits development.
Some applications may require smaller feature sizes, which, reassuringly, can be straightforwardly achieved by reducing the inner diameter of the tip employed. Fig. 1g shows an optical microscope picture of a UV-illuminated thin line fabricated using a glass tip with a diameter of 60 μm. The printed line is 1 cm long and has a Gaussian width of ∼250 μm (Fig. 5b). Interestingly, this thin line has been fabricated using similar scan speeds as the wider lines (ca. 1 mm s−1) which suggest that, contrary to most patterning methods, feature sizes may be reduced significantly without considerably increasing the processing time. We note that we have used scan speeds ranging between 0.08 mm s−1 and 8 mm s−1, which is comparable to other industrially relevant methods. Thus, the expected throughput values of vapour printing can be varied to cover the range of both ink-jet and screen printing.
Further optimisation of the vapour printing technique is expected to enable size definition down to dimensions of the employed nozzle,48 and thus comparable to other techniques such as ink-jet printing. A precise control of temperature, pressure, scan speed and time, geometry of the tip (length, diameter and shape), greater mechanical stability of the tip, etc. can all be further optimised for this purpose. Alternative geometries, such as the coaxial double nozzle recently used by Biswas and co-workers49 for their inspiring method of deposition of organic molecules, may also offer higher resolution for the printing with solvent vapour.
3. Conclusions
We would like to stress that the vapour printing of the three investigated material systems is conceptually quite different. In the first case, exposure of PFO to vapour results in conformational changes that lead to distinct optical properties. Besides optical and photonic devices and sensors shown above, these conformational changes have been recently proposed as simple architectures for the production of plastic metamaterials.35 On the other hand, vapour printing in P3HT:PCBM promotes the crystallisation of the polymer chains, i.e.rearrangement of intermolecular distances and orientations. This opens the possibility to perform relatively easy fundamental studies of the phase separation, crystallisation and diffusion dynamics in organic blends towards an advanced control of the optimum nanostructure.28,44,50 As vapour printing can be easily scaled up by using parallel injector arrays, we argue that it is feasible to employ this technique in combination with more industrially relevant deposition methods such as ink-jet and screen printing as well as roll-to-roll production schemes. We show proof-of-concept organic solar cells treated with vapour printing and demonstrate a two-fold increase in power conversion efficiency for non-optimized devices with respect to the as-cast cells. Finally, in the last example, the main effect of vapour printing is the formation of a compound between ODT-TTF derivative cation radicals and triiodide anions. Clearly, the technique described in this article opens the possibility to initiate local chemical reactions to produce patterns with different materials extending recent work on local electrically1 and thermally induced29polymerisation, and, perhaps in the future, enable solid–gas microchemistry in a wide range of material systems.
4. Experimental
Materials
Poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (PFO, Mw ≥ 20 kg mol−1) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) were purchased from Aldrich and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT, Mw ≈ 48 kg mol−1, RR > 90%) was purchased from Rieke Metals and used as received. 3-(Methylthio)-2-(thioacetooctadecylamide) ethylenedithio-tetrathiafulvalene (ODT-TTF) was synthesised following our previous report.46 Overnight stirred solutions of PFO in chloroform (10–20 g L−1), P3HT:PCBM (1:1 in weight) in chlorobenzene (20–50 g L−1), and ODT-TTF (20 g L−1, containing 1–2 g L−1 of polyisobutylene (PIB; Mw ≈ 4.7 Mio g mol−1) to enhance wettability) in chloroform were spin coated onto pre-cleaned substrates at spin speeds ranging from 1500 to 3000 rpm for 90 seconds. PFO and ODT-TTF were deposited onto glass, while P3HT:PCBM was cast onto ITO coated glass. Organic solar cells were fabricated by spin coating a 54 g L−1 P3HT:PCBM solution in chlorobenzene at 2000 rpm for 90 s onto a PEDOT:PSS/ITO/glass substrate. The PEDOT:PSS layer had previously been spin coated at 2000 rpm for 90 seconds and heated at 90 °C for 15 min to remove remaining solvent before subsequent deposition of the active layer. Some of the samples were patterned using the vapour printer and chlorobenzene vapour using a 250 μm diameter nozzle, ca. 400 sccm of N2 flux, and a stage speed of 1 mm s−1. A 100 nm thick aluminium electrode was evaporated on top to finalise the devices. The solar cells were encapsulated inside a N2 filled glovebox. ODT-TTF samples were annealed at 80 °C for 1 minute after iodine exposure in order to promote the formation of stable complexes.47
Vapour printer setup
The vapour printer setup consists of a glass vessel filled with chlorobenzene (for PFO and P3HT:PCBM samples) or I2 pellets (for the ODT-TTF derivative) that is connected to a N2 flux on one side, and, on the other side, to a nozzle through a 25 cm long PVC tube. The nozzle for most experiments consisted of a commercial metal needle with an inner diameter of about 250 μm. Glass and plastic micropipettes of the same characteristics were also successfully employed (not shown). For one set of experiments, an ink-jet printer MicroFab nozzle with an inner diameter of 60 μm was employed. A commercial automatic XYZ micrometre stage was used to control the sample–tip distance and to produce the patterns. The horizontality of the samples was ensured by using the optical system of the ellipsometer prior to the patterning. Typical scan speeds range from 0.08 mm s−1 up to 8 mm s−1 (the faster bound was limited by the used micromapping stage maximum speed). The sample in Fig. 1f was created by exposing to vapour a sample that is tilted so that by displacing laterally the stage across the sample, on one extreme the tip touches the sample and on the other there is a 1 mm distance between them. In other words, in a single scan we can monitor the effect of the tip–sample distance and, effectively, the sample registers the shape of the vapour escaping the tip.
Characterisation techniques
Pictures of the samples under 366 nm UV light excitation were taken using a Fujifilm S100fs digital camera. Higher resolution photographs were recorded through a BX51 Olympus microscope (5 × objective) coupled to an Olympus DP20 camera. Ellipsometry, photoluminescence and absorption measurements were performed using a GESP 5 SOPRALAB rotating variable angle ellipsometer with in-built CCD detection. The real time spectroscopic ellipsometry data were analysed using a Cauchy description of the dielectric function in the transparent region of each material by means of the WinElli II piece of software. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and current sensing AFM measurements were performed with an Agilent 5500 SPM (Molecular Imaging). Topographical and current sensing images were recorded in contact mode, and the former were double checked by means of dynamic mode (tapping mode) operation. Current–voltage curves for the presented organic solar cells were measured using a 4200 Keithley SourceMeter under 150 W illumination produced by an Oriel 96000 Solar Simulator coupled to a 1.5G Air Mass filter. Current–voltage curves of the doped ODT-TTF samples were taken using a 4200 Keithley SourceMeter after sample preparation, and also after one as well as two weeks. The invariant characteristics provide further proof that the formed complexes are stable under ambient conditions.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Eric Le Ru (Victoria University in Wellington, New Zealand) for the preliminary Navier–Stokes calculations, Dr Josep Puigmartí-Luis (ETH-Zürich) for generously supplying the ODT-TTF derivative, and Ms Mahdieh Aghamohammadi (ICMAB) for her assistance during the fabrication of ODT-TTF films. We greatly acknowledge Dr Natalie Stingelin (Imperial College London, UK) for many fruitful discussions and suggestions. We also thank the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation for funding through the projects MAT2009-10642, PLE2009-0086, RYC-2009-05392 and E-08-2011-0061869. Finally, we deeply acknowledge Cetemmsa Technological Centre (Spain) for technical and financial support.
References
S. Holdcroft, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1753–1765 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Lidzey, M. A. Pate, M. S. Weaver, T. A. Fisher and D. D. C. Bradley, Synth. Met., 1996, 82, 141–148 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Renak, G. C. Bazan and D. Roitman, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 392–395 CrossRef .
P. F. Tian, P. E. Burrows and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 3197–3199 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Gorman, H. A. Biebuyck and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 526–529 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Wu, J. C. Sturm, R. A. Register and M. E. Thompson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 3117–3119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Noach, E. Z. Faraggi, G. Cohen, Y. Avny, R. Neumann, D. Davidov and A. Lewis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 3650–3652 CrossRef CAS .
F. Garnier, R. Hajlaoui, A. Yasser and P. Srivastava, Science, 1994, 265, 1684–1686 CAS .
Z. Bao, Y. Feng, A. Dodabalapur, V. R. Raju and A. J. Lovinger, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1299–1301 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bharathan and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 2660–2662 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Hoth, S. A. Choulis, P. Schilinsky and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3973–3978 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, E. Kim, X.-M. Zhao, J. A. Rogers, M. Prentiss and G. M. Whitesides, Science, 1996, 273, 347–349 CAS .
A. Kumar and G. M. Whitesides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 2002–2004 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Burrows, V. Bulovic, S. R. Forrest, L. S. Sapochak, D. M. McCarty and M. E. Thompson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 2922–2924 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Vaeth and K. F. Jensen, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 814–820 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kocher, A. Montali, P. Smith and C. Weder, Adv. Mater., 2001, 11, 31–35 Search PubMed .
T. Someya, Y. Kato, T. Sekitani, S. Iba, Y. Noguchi, Y. Murase, H. Kawaguchi and T. Sakurai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 12321–12325 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 761–768 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. A. Renckens, D. Janeliunas, H. van Vliet, J. H. van Esch, G. Mul and M. T. Kreutzer, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 2035–2038 RSC .
P. Andersson, D. Nilsson, P.-O. Svensson, M. Chen, A. Malmström, T. Remonen, T. Kugler and M. Berggren, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1460–1464 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tehrani, N. D. Robinson, T. Kugler, T. Remonen, L.-O. Hennerdal, J. Häll, A. Malmstöm, L. Leenders and M. Berggren, Smart Mater. Struct., 2005, 14, N21–N25 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Siegel, S. T. Phillips, M. D. Dickey, N. Lu, Z. Suo and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Tai and Z.-G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5938–5943 RSC .
X. Yang and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1353–1362 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Virkar, S. Mannsfeld, Z. Bao and N. Stingelin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3857–3875 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec and J. R. Durrant, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 670–675 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Luca, W. Pisula, D. Credgington, E. Treossi, O. Fenwick, G. M. Lazzerini, R. Dabirian, E. Orgiu, A. Liscio, V. Palermo, K. Müllen, F. Cacialli and P. Samorì, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1279–1295 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiu, J. A. Lim, X. Wang, W. H. Lee, M. Hwang and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1141–1145 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Cadby, P. A. Lane, H. Mellor, S. J. Martin, M. Grell, C. Giebeler, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Wohlgenannt, C. An and Z. V. Vardeny, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2000, 62, 15604–15609 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ariu, D. G. Lidzey and D. D. C. Bradley, Synth. Met., 2000, 111, 607–610 CrossRef .
M. J. Winokur, J. Slinker and D. L. Huber, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2003, 67, 184106 CrossRef .
W. Chunwaschirasiri, B. Tanto, D. L. Huber and M. J. Winokur, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 107402 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ryu, P. N. Stavrinou and D. D. C. Bradley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3237–3242 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Stavrinou, G. Ryu, M. Campoy-Quiles and D. D. C. Bradley, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 466107 CrossRef .
M. Campoy-Quiles, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and P. G. Etchegoin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 235206 CrossRef .
M. Campoy-Quiles, G. Heliotis, R. D. Xia, M. Ariu, M. Pintani, P. Etchegoin and D. D. C. Bradley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 925–933 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, M. Schmidt, D. Nassyrov, O. Peña, A. R. Goñi, M. I. Alonso and M. Garriga, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 2678–2681 CrossRef CAS .
M. Avrami, J. Chem. Phys., 1939, 7, 1103–1112 CrossRef CAS .
T. Agostinelli, M. Campoy-Quiles, J. C. Blakesley, R. Speller, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 203305 CrossRef .
E. von Hauff, J. Parisi and V. Dyakonov, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 043702 CrossRef .
U. Zhokhavets, T. Erb, G. Gobsch, M. Al-Ibrahim and O. Ambacher, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 418, 347–350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miller, G. Fanchini, Y.-Y. Lin, C. Li, C.-W. Chen, W.-F. Sub and M. Chhowalla, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 306–312 RSC .
V. D. Mihailetchi, H. Xie, B. de Boer, L. J. A. Koster and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 699–708 CrossRef CAS .
J. Puigmartí-Luis, V. Laukhin, A. Pérez del Pino, J. Vidal-Gancedo, C. Rovira, E. Laukhina and D. B. Amabilino, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 238–241 CrossRef .
J. Puigmartí-Luis, E. E. Laukhina, V. N. Laukhin, Á. Pérez del Pino, N. Mestres, J. Vidal-Gancedo, C. Rovira and D. B. Amabilino, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 934–941 CrossRef .
M. Shtein, P. Peumans, J. V. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 4500–4507 CrossRef CAS .
S. Biswas, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 263301 CrossRef .
S. Hüttner, M. Sommer, A. Chiche, G. Krausch, U. Steiner and M. Thelakkat, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4206–4211 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm15190aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Vapour-printed patterns of the optical properties of PFO films. Photographs recorded under UV illumination of (a) as spin-coated film; (b) fully vapour-annealed film; (c) vapour-printed single dot; (d and e) square and hexagonal array of dots, respectively; (f) two lines produced by a continuous variation of nozzle–sample distance; (h) Mach–Zehnder integrated optical interferometer; (i) squared pattern of lines; (j) parallel lines produced with different vapour printing conditions. All scale bars represent 3 mm. (g) Optical micrograph under UV illumination of a single line fabricated with a 60 μm inner diameter nozzle (scale bar corresponds to 250 μm). (k) Schematic of the vapour printer used in this report. (l) Waveguided photoluminescence (PL) at the edge of the Mach–Zehnder interferometer (shown in (h)). Initial PL (red) and PL recorded whilst applying pressure to one arm of the interferometer via a PDMS stamp that had been placed on top of the film (black), thus, substantially varying the amount of outcoupled light.	 

 	Fig. 2  Vapour printing to locally enhance the electronic properties in P3HT:PCBM solar cell blends. (a) Absorbance spectra of a P3HT:PCBM film exposed for 10 seconds to different vapour fluxes. Inset: photograph of a patterned P3HT:PCBM film (scale bar is 2 mm). (b) Conventional (top, scale 0–8 nm) and current-sensing atomic force micrographs (bottom, scale 0–13 mV) comparing the as spin-coated (left) and vapour-printed areas (right) of the same P3HT:PCBM film. X–Y scale bars are 2 μm. (c) Current–voltage characteristics averaged over six current-sensing AFM measurements. Vapour-printed areas (black) display a drastic increase in current as compared to as spin-coated areas (grey).	 

 	Fig. 3  Current density–voltage curves under one sun illumination for organic solar cells based on spin coated P3HT:PCBM photovoltaic active layers as-cast (dashed line) and with vapour printing treatment (solid line).	 

 	Fig. 4  Conducting line by local iodine doping of ODT-TTF films. (a) Absorbance spectra of an undoped region of an ODT-TTF film (grey) as well as after doping through exposure to iodine vapour (black). A shift of the oscillator strength from the ODT-TTF peak to the new long wavelength peak is clearly observed, confirming the formation of a complex. Inset: photograph of a patterned ODT-TTF film; iodine-vapour was used to locally dope (red) an otherwise pristine ODT-TTF film (transparent). Scale bar in the inset is 5 mm. (b) The thickness profile of an iodine vapour-printed ODT-TTF line was deduced from ellipsometry scans. (c) Current–voltage characteristics (two-point probe spacing 2 cm) measured parallel (full circles) and perpendicular (open circles) to a 4 mm thick doped line. The conductivity of the doped region was estimated to be 0.02 S cm−1. The formation of the complex is further confirmed by the reproducibility of these measurements taken over a two week period on the same samples.	 

 	Fig. 5  Parameters influencing the feature height and size of the vapour printer. (a) Comparison of absorbance profiles at a wavelength of 429 nm across vapour printed lines produced with the same nozzle inner diameter of 250 μm and nozzle–sample distance of 500 μm but varying N2 flux. (b) Comparison of absorbance profiles at a wavelength of 429 nm across vapour printed lines produced with the nozzle–sample distance of 500 μm and N2 flux of 150 sccm but varying nozzle inner diameter. (c) Variation of the width of vapour-printed features with the nozzle–sample distance (nozzle inner diameter 250 μm); N2 flux 200 sccm (black squares), 150 sccm (red triangles) and 100 sccm (blue diamonds). Solid lines are guides to the eye and the shaded area indicates the regime at which the feature size does not depend on the tip to sample distance, in contrast to the expanding regime at early times. Full symbols indicate data extracted from ellipsometry line scans and open symbols indicate values extracted from photographs.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm15190a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
