Nanochemistry and nanomaterials for photovoltaics  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60054H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60054H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8304-8338Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanochemistry and nanomaterials for photovoltaics
Guanying Chen

ab, 
Jangwon Seo†
b, 
Chunhui Yang

*a and 
Paras N. Prasad

*bc
aSchool of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, People's Republic of China. E-mail: yangchh@hit.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry and the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, New York 14260, United States. E-mail: pnprasad@buffalo.edu
cDepartment of Chemistry, Korea University, Seoul 136-701, Korea
Received 
7th February 2013
First published on 18th July 2013AbstractNanochemistry and nanomaterials provide numerous opportunities for a new generation of photovoltaics with high solar energy conversion efficiencies at low fabrication cost. Quantum-confined nanomaterials and polymer–inorganic nanocomposites can be tailored to harvest sun light over a broad range of the spectrum, while plasmonic structures offer effective ways to reduce the thickness of light-absorbing layers. Multiple exciton generation, singlet exciton fission, photon down-conversion, and photon up-conversion realized in nanostructures, create significant interest for harvesting underutilized ultraviolet and currently unutilized infrared photons. Nanochemical interface engineering of nanoparticle surfaces and junction-interfaces enable enhanced charge separation and collection. In this review, we survey these recent advances employed to introduce new concepts for improving the solar energy conversion efficiency, and reduce the device fabrication cost in photovoltaic technologies. The review concludes with a summary of contributions already made by nanochemistry. It then describes the challenges and opportunities in photovoltaics where the chemical community can play a vital role.Guanying ChenGuanying Chen received his BS and PhD degrees in optics in 2004 and 2009, respectively, from Harbin Institute of Technology, P. R. China. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow (2010–2011) with Professor Paras N. Prasad at the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, and Professor Hans Ågren at the Department of Theoretical Chemistry & Biology, Royal Institute of Technology. He is a research assistant professor at the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York. He holds a joint affiliation with Harbin Institute of Technology. His interests include photon up-conversion and down-conversion nanomaterials, nanostructured solar cells, plasmonics, and nanoparticles-based diagnostics and therapy.Jangwon SeoJangwon Seo received his BS degree in Fiber and Polymer Science in 1998 and MS degree in 2000 from Seoul National University, Korea. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University under the supervision of Professor Soo Young Park in 2006 and worked as a postdoctoral fellow by Aug. 2007. He then moved to the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York where he worked with Professor Paras N. Prasad as a postdoctoral fellow (2007–2011) and a research assistant professor (2011–2012). He is currently a research professor at the Center for Supramolecular Optoelectronic Materials in Seoul National University. His research interests include π-conjugated organic materials-polymers for optoelectronic applications and organic–inorganic hybrid nanosystems for nanostructured solar cells.Chunhui YangChunhui Yang received her BS degree in chemistry from Dalian University of Technology in 1991, and obtained MS and PhD degrees in chemistry from Harbin Institute of Technology, in 1996 and 2001, respectively. She then joined Harbin Institute of Technology as an assistant professor, and was promoted to associate professor and full professor in 2001 and 2004, respectively. She has been a visiting professor at Stanford University in 2003 and Oxford University in 2004, respectively. She has published more than 80 peer-reviewed scientific papers, and co-edited two books. Her interests include solar cells, lanthanide-doped nanomaterials, nonlinear infrared single crystals, and poly-silicon technology.Paras N. PrasadParas N. Prasad is a SUNY Distinguished Professor of Chemistry, Physics, Electrical Engineering and Medicine; the Samuel P. Capen Chair of Chemistry; the Executive Director of the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo; the visiting Distinguished Professor at Korea University. He was named among the top 50 science and technology leaders in the world by Scientific American in 2005. He has published nearly 700 scientific and technical papers; four monographs; eight edited books. He has received many scientific awards and honors (Morley Medal; Schoellkopf Medal; Guggenheim Fellowship; Fellow of the APS, OSA, and SPIE, etc.). His interests include solar cells, metamaterials, nanophotonics, biophotonics, and nanomedicine.
A. Background
A1. Introduction
Meeting ever-growing energy needs is one of the important challenges of the twenty-first century. Fossil fuels (coal, oil and natural gas) provide energy sources for our needs now; however, they will run out of stock considering the high consumption rate.1,2 Power generation through burning fossil fuels also raises a significant concern of damage to environment, as large amounts of carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide are released in the burning process.1,2 A quest for new alternative renewable energy sources is urgent and necessary.
There are about one hundred and twenty thousand terawatts of solar power irradiating earth. Globally, humans consume only fifteen terawatts.3 Harnessing solar energy through photovoltaic (PV) technology has the potential to provide a virtually unlimited supply of usable energy that is sustainable and environmentally benign in operation.4–10 However, economical implementation of PV technology on a global scale requires critical advances in both materials and devices to decrease the cost and increase the power conversion efficiency.11–14 Nanochemistry and nanomaterials open up new opportunities to achieve higher solar energy conversion efficiencies at lower fabrication costs, as they allow the use of inexpensive materials and inexpensive processing technologies to harvest sunlight by efficiently capturing photon energy over a broad spectral range, and then quickly separating and collecting photo-generated charge carriers.15–22 Spectral tuning in semiconductor quantum-confined nanomaterials,23 sensitizing dyes,14 and polymers,18,20 allows the band-gap of a single-junction device to be optimally matched over a broad range of the solar spectrum to efficiently produce photon-generated charge carriers. It also allows fabrication of tandem or multi-junction solar cells which sequentially harvest the Sun's constituent spectral components in tandem,24,25 accomplishing power-conversion efficiencies potentially up to 68% through a significant reduction of losses associated with intra-band relaxations.3 Nanochemistry can be utilized to tailor numerous nanointerfaces in these solution-processed nanostructured PV cells, which provides great opportunity to enable efficient photo-induced charge separation and produce significantly improved charge transport and collection. Multi-exciton generation,26 singlet exciton fission,27 plasmonic-induced light trapping,16,17 as well as photon up-conversion and down-conversion,28–30 realized in nanostructures, provide a range of novel approaches to harvest underutilized ultraviolet and currently unutilized infrared (IR) photons with high efficiencies, breaking the Shockley–Queisser limit set for a single junction solar device.31 In addition, nanostructured light-absorbing and electrode materials can be applied to the substrate at low temperature by solution-processed techniques such as successive ionic layer-by-layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR), spray coating, and printing.32–34 This significantly reduces manufacturing and energy costs of solar-cell devices. In this review, we survey recent advances in nanochemistry and nanomaterials employed to introduce new concepts to improve the solar energy conversion efficiency, and reduce the device fabrication cost in PV technologies.
A2. Fundamentals of photovoltaics
Photovoltaics or solar cells are devices that convert the energy from the sun into electric power. The power conversion efficiency η of these devices can be given by,35 
(1)where Pinc is the incident solar power on the device, Voc is the open-circuit voltage, Jsc is the short-circuit current density, and FF is the fill factor. The short-circuit current density Jsc is the current density derived at zero bias voltage, while the open circuit voltage Voc is the maximum voltage that a solar cell can generate. The physical processes in a solar device encompass:
(1) Sun light irradiation. The solar spectrum irradiated on Earth's surface is displayed in Fig. 1a with an optical path length of air mass (AM) 1.5 in Earth's atmosphere. The value of AM can be approximated by 1/cosφ, where φ is the angle of the location of the sun observed on Earth’s surface with respect to the direction perpendicular to the Earth's surface, i.e., the zenith angle (see the inset of Fig. 1a). It is worth to note that the standard solar spectrum used for efficiency evaluation of a solar cell is AM 1.5 (global), referring to an angle of about 48 degrees.6 The solar spectrum covers a wide range of wavelengths, from ultraviolet to IR, resembling the spectrum of a blackbody radiation at a temperature of about 5700 K.6 Owing to influences from atmospheric absorption and the position of the sun, the ultraviolet light is mostly filtered out by ozone, and the dips in the IR range are mainly caused by absorptions of water and carbon dioxide molecules in the atmosphere.
 Fig. 1  (a) Solar spectrum irradiated on the Earth's surface with a global air mass of 1.5, compared with the spectrum of blackbody emission at a temperature of 5700 K. The red line is marked for the edge absorption of single crystalline silicon. The inset depicts the optical path length of sun light through Earth's atmosphere, defined by air mass, at an angle φ with respect to the zenith benchmark. (b) Cross-section of a general solar cell, illustrating the photon-generation of electron–hole pairs as well as processes of their dissociation, collection, and operation. (c) I–V curve of a typical solar cell, illustrating the open-circuit voltage of Voc, the short-circuit current density of Jsc and the fill factor of FF. Vmp and Jmp are the corresponding voltage and current of a solar cell when the device is operating at a maximum power out. 
(2) Light absorption. The photoactive layer in the solar device absorbs sun light, raising an electron from the ground state to a higher energy state and then generates an energy-bearing electron–hole pair, called an exciton.5–13 An appropriate band-gap between the ground state and the higher energy state is required in order to eliminate cascaded nonradiative relaxations. A variety of materials and processes can potentially satisfy the requirements for solar energy conversion, but in practice nearly all PV energy conversion uses semiconductor materials (inorganic or organic). To make full use of the solar spectrum in Fig. 1a to maximize Jsc, light-absorbing substances with a high extinction coefficient, low band-gap, and an appropriate Fermi level, are preferred.
(3) Electron–hole separation. An electron–hole pair is then separated at an energetically favorable charge-separating junction into longer-lived charge carriers through a diffusion-driven process or by a built-in internal field. For example, c-silicon (crystalline) solar devices utilize a built-in electric field to drift the electron into the n-type silicon layer and the hole into the p-type silicon layer.10 A proper alignment of electronic energy band structures or Fermi levels at the charge-separation junction is of particular importance in dissociating the electron–hole pair to lead them into opposite directions. In addition, an efficient charge-separation also requires low electron–hole recombination rates (e.g., radiative recombination, Shockley–Read–Hall recombination), which are generally determined by interfaces of light-absorbing materials.
(4) Transport of photo-generated charge carriers to electrodes. To ensure an efficient collection of charge carriers, carrier-transporting layers are required to have high mobility as well as long diffusion lengths for electrons and holes.3 An obvious but general principle is that electrons or holes move as majorities in carrier-transporting layers that have high mobility. The collecting junctions between metallic electrodes and charge-transporting materials also need optimization to allow a fluent flow of electrons or holes.
(5) Energy dissipation in the circuit. The collected electrons then dissipate their energy in the external circuit, returning to the solar cell, and annihilating with holes.
The open-circuit voltage is important for the performance of a solar cell device as it strongly affects the power conversion efficiency (see eqn (1)). It is determined by Fermi levels or work functions involved in a solar device. A judicious alignment of these Fermi levels or work functions is, therefore, of particular importance to maximize the open-circuit voltage, which is also important for charge separation. In addition, the fill factor FF is related to series resistance, Rs (the sum of film resistance, electrode resistance and the contact resistance between the film and the electrode), and shunt resistance, Rsh.35 The series resistance and shunt resistance are associated with carrier mobility and carrier recombination loss, respectively; high carrier mobility and low carrier recombination loss lead to a device with good FF.
A3. Current challenges in photovoltaics
Photovoltaics have significantly evolved through three generations.36 (i) The first generation of crystalline p–n junction silicon solar cells. Although relatively high in efficiency, they suffer from high manufacturing and installation costs.37–40 (ii) The second generation of thin-film solar cells, e.g., amorphous silicon,41,42 poly-crystalline silicon,43,44 cadmium telluride,45,46 and copper indium gallium selenide.47,48 These solar cells are significantly less expensive than single-crystalline PV cells due to reduced materials and processing costs, and increased manufacturing throughput. The efficiencies of these cells are generally lower than that of the first-generation PV cells. (iii) The third generation of solution-processed solar technologies that aim to lower costs, while maintaining high solar energy conversion efficiencies. They provide the advantage that large area and flexible structures with roll-to-roll coating/printing can be accomplished. These technologies comprise of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),49–51 organic photovoltaics,52,53 solution-processed bulk inorganic photovoltaics,54 colloidal quantum-dot solar cells,23 etc. Currently, solar cells based on crystalline, polycrystalline and amorphous silicon represent more than 90% of the world production.37 However, for both the first and second generation PV cells, the band-gap energy of the semiconductors places a fundamental upper limit on solar energy conversion efficiency. This is known as Shockley–Queisser limit which restricts the efficiency to a maximum of about 31% for unconcentrated sun light irradiation, using a semiconductor material with an optimized band-gap of around 1.35 eV.31 The Shockley–Queisser limit for silicon solar cells (∼1.1 eV bandgap) is approximately 30%.
Approaches for third-generation photovoltaics aim to circumvent the Shockley–Queisser limit for single-band-gap devices that are fabricated at low cost. Impressive progress on the solar-power conversion efficiency is being made in these solution-processed solar technologies, approaching or having exceeded an efficiency of 10%.3 However, the technical challenge now is to continue this progress by tackling the inability to produce photovoltaics over the entire solar spectrum as well as to overcome the fundamental power-loss mechanisms (Fig. 2). The key points to address are:
(1) Sun light in the near infrared range contains almost half of the energy of sun irradiation, yet this portion of sun light is currently unutilized. For example, single crystalline silicon is transparent for sun light photons with a wavelength longer than 1100 nm, as shown in Fig. 1a.
(2) Thermalization losses of photon energies exceeding the band-gap.28 This becomes serious for sun light at ultraviolet and short visible wavelengths. This power loss is caused by processes of cascaded nonradiative relaxations, i.e., for electrons relaxing to the edge of the conduction band or the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), and holes to the edge of the valence band or the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO). In addition, these relaxations generating heat necessitate the management of heat load.
(3) A trade-off between electron extraction and optical absorption, owing to weak absorption in the light-absorbing substance. Typical diffusion lengths for the performance-limiting photocarrier – minority charge carriers – are within the 5–500 nm range in solution-processed semiconductors,3 but the thickness of the light absorbing layer, required to achieve complete absorption of solar irradiation of interest, is often considerably more than this.
(4) Charge separation, transportation, and collection being adversely affected by the defects and interfaces in solution-processed solar cells. These interfaces include large surface area junctions between the photoelectron donors and acceptors, the intra-layer grain boundaries within the absorber, and the interfaces between the photoactive layer and the top and bottom contacts.
 Fig. 2  Current challenges in solar cells as well as corresponding strategies to address them. Challenges are marked within the ellipses, while strategies are marked within the boxes. 
Lowering of the fabrication cost of solar cells is another important challenge for PV technologies. For example, since manufacturing solar cells using conventional semiconductors such as single-crystal silicon is expensive and energy-consuming, the cost per kilowatt hour delivered is too high to compete with widely used energy technologies.5 Third-generation solution-processed solar technologies aim to address this challenge using cost-effective fabrication techniques such as, SILAR, spin-casting, spray coating, and printing (see Section C).
A4. Nanochemistry and nanomaterials meeting the challenges
Nanochemistry and nanomaterials provide numerous ways to address the challenges detailed in Section A3. Fig. 2 describes some of the strategies to meet these challenges using nanochemistry and nanomaterials produced thereby.
To harvest IR light, the absorption of semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) can be tailored to be in the IR range by judicious manipulation of their compositions, sizes or shapes.55–60 Another mechanism of utilizing IR photons involves photon up-conversion by (i) triplet–triplet annihilation in organic dyes61–63 or (ii) sequential multiphoton absorption in lanthanide-doped dielectric inorganic materials.64–70 These up-conversion processes transform IR light into visible light that can be absorbed by the photoactive material to produce charge carriers.
To minimize thermallization losses and to produce a more efficient utilization of ultraviolet photons, the processes of multiple exciton generation (MEG) in QDs and singlet exciton fission in organic dyes can be useful.26,27 Rather than dissipating the excess energy of a highly energetic exciton as heat, these processes generate multiple electron–hole pairs upon the absorption of a single photon at short wavelength. Spectral down-converters of lanthanide-doped dielectric nanoparticles provide two alternative ways, quantum cutting and Stokes-shifting, to reduce thermallization losses.28–30
Tandem cells that contain several p–n junctions can be utilized to reduce both transmission losses and thermalization losses at the same time.24,25 Each junction can be tuned to a different wavelength of light, significantly reducing losses associated with intra-band relaxations, and thereby increasing the efficiency. Traditional single-junction cells have a maximum theoretical efficiency of 31%, while a theoretical “infinite-junction” cell would improve this to 68% under unconcentrated one sun irradiation.3
A trade-off between charge extraction and optical absorption arises due to the weak absorption of solar devices; its alleviation requires the employment of a long optical path length, an increased effective absorption cross section of the absorber, or an enlarged interface area of the active junction. Efficient light trapping can be accomplished using metallic nanoparticles produced by nanochemistry to create plasmonically enhanced multiple scattering that induces multiple absorptions.16,17 In addition, plasmonic nanoparticles can be used as sub-wavelength antennas to concentrate sun light by coupling the plasmonic near-field to light-absorbing substances, thereby increasing the effective absorption cross-section. Also nanochemistry can be used for interface engineering to provide a three-dimensional junction with a high-contact area that might be more than a thousand times the area of the solar cell, as in the case of dye-sensitized solar cells.3
Appropriate nanochemistry to tailor the numerous nanointerfaces in solution-processed nanostructured PV materials provides ways to manipulate the dynamics of charge carriers, allowing efficient separation and collection of energy-bearing photocarriers, before they lose their excess energy through recombination. In addition, mobility boosting nanoinclusions can be used to enhance the carrier mobility and consequently increase the charge collection efficiency.71,72 In summary, nanochemistry and nanomaterials play vital roles in constructing highly efficient, large area, and, at the same time, low cost solar cells.
B. Nanomaterials and interface engineering
B1. Quantum-confined nanomaterials
Efficient solar devices rely on matching of their light absorption spectrum to the AM1.5G spectrum irradiated on the earth surface. AM1.5G is defined by a broadband solar spectrum, spanning from ∼280 nm in the ultraviolet to ∼2500 nm in the mid-infrared region (Fig. 1a). Semiconductor quantum-confined nanomaterials, e.g., QDs, and quantum rods (QRs), hold promise as light-absorbing materials to harvest the whole AM 1.5G spectrum, owing to their band-gap tuning features.55–60 These QDs or QRs can be prepared using a hot colloidal nanochemistry described in Section C1, and thus are suitable for solution processing and casting. Specifically, these quantum-confined nanomaterials provide three main advantages for a solar cell device:
1. The energy gap of semiconductor QDs, which determines the portion of solar spectrum the material can absorb, can be tailored by the choice of the semiconductor material used, by the change of the size, and by the use of an alloyed composition. Importantly, by reducing the dimension of a semiconductor below its Bohr exciton radius, electrons and holes in QDs become quantum confined, producing molecular like discrete states, where the band gap (the gap between the highest discrete level in the valence band and the lowest discrete level in the conduction band) increases as the size of the nanoparticle decreases.73,74 In addition, according to Vegard's law, the band-gap of an alloyed semiconductor is approximately equal to the compositionally-weighted average of the band-gaps of the constituent semiconductors.75,76 Hence, the absorption of quantum-confined materials can be engineered, providing facile ways to build multi-junction tandem or “rainbow” solar cells using QDs with several sizes or having varied alloyed compositions. A range of band gaps, in which each type of QDs is optimized to absorb a particular wavelength of the solar spectrum, are important for constructing panchromatic solar cells with impressive PV performance. We utilize IV–VI semiconductor lead sulfide (PbS) QDs, having the exciton Bohr radius of 18 nm, to illustrate the quantum confinement for band-gap engineering of materials for tandem solar cells (Fig. 3a).77,78 By controlling the size of PbS QDs using nanochemistry, the absorption onset can be tuned from 3000 to 600 nm; a ternary junction solar cell is, thus, able to be prepared within a single material system.79 The first (top) layer is composed of 2.6 nm sized PbS QDs with absorption onset at 680 nm; the second layer is composed of 3.6 nm sized PbS QDs with absorption onset at 1070 nm; the bottom layer is composed of 7.2 nm sized PbS QDs with absorption onset at 1750 nm.35 For a single junction solar cell device, we would like to emphasize that low-band-gap materials absorb more light and produce a large current at the cost of a low open circuit voltage. In contrast, large-band-gap materials yield a high open circuit voltage, but low short circuit current due to their limited absorption. As a consequence, a balance between the voltage and the current necessitates an optimal choice of band-gap in the range of 1.1–1.4 eV in order to yield the best power conversion efficiency. In this case, ∼3.5 nm sized PbS QDs are desired for a single junction device, which corresponds to an optimal band-gap of about 1.1 eV.35
 Fig. 3  (a) The concept of using IV–VI semiconductor PbS QDs with different sizes to build a triple-junction tandem solar cell, each absorbing in a different spectral range. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA). (b) Varying and aligning band gaps of II–VI semiconductor CdSe QDs due to the quantum confinement, which enables the manipulation of charge separation at the junction interface. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society). 
2. In addition to tuning the band-gap, the quantum confinement effect also provides a way to adjust the absolute positions of quantized energy levels, allowing one to manipulate the dynamics of charge separation.80–84 As illustrated in Fig. 3b, modifying the size of II–VI semiconductor cadmium selenide (CdSe) QDs provides control over not only the band gap, but also the position of energy levels with respect to that of the acceptor.80 The smaller the size of CdSe QDs, the larger the difference between the conduction band of CdSe and that of Titanium oxide [TiO2 is generally utilized to accept forward injected electrons in QDs-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) or in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)].
3. A direct band gap semiconductor offers a stronger absorption coefficient of ∼104 cm−1 than the indirect band gap bulk silicon,85,86 which is of crucial importance in engineering films of suitable thicknesses to enable efficient photovoltaics. Also, such a strong absorption imparts reduced material consumption and enables realization of efficient devices based on materials having modest carrier transport lengths. Optical penetration depths for PbS or PbSe are estimated to be ∼20 nm for 400 nm wavelength photons and ∼500 nm for 1700 nm wavelength photons.35 An implementation of complete absorption of most incident solar photons, therefore, requires only ∼1 μm thickness of the direct band-gap PbS or PbSe QD film, which is much thinner than that for indirect band-gap devices such as Si (typically 100 μm is required).
B2. Plasmonic nanostructures
A limitation in all thin-film solar-cell technologies is the weak absorption, particularly at near-band-gap wavelengths, if a single optical pass is used. For example, the indirect band-gap semiconductor Si has a low absorption coefficient between 600–1100 nm, whereas sun emission in this range is quite intense (consult Fig. 1a). A thick absorbance layer, therefore, has to be employed to efficiently harvest sun power (e.g., ∼200–300 μm for silicon,87 in comparison with ∼500 nm for PbS QDs),23 but high-efficiency solar cells at the same time must have minority carrier diffusion lengths several times the material thickness for all photocarriers to be collected. This issue requires ways of effectively trapping sun light inside the device to increase the absorbance. Plasmonic nanostructures provide unique technologies in this endeavor utilizing the collective oscillation of free dense charge carriers at the interface between a plasmonic substance (metals or doped semiconductors) and a dielectric.16,17,88–98 An appropriate structuring of these surface plasmons in the device can concentrate and fold the sun light in a thin semiconductor layer, thereby increasing the device absorption by creating an increase in the optical path derived from strong plasmonically enhanced scattering. Surface plasmon polaritons propagating at the plasmonic substance/semiconductor interface are also promising for increasing the device absorption.64
Plasmonic structures can offer at least three ways of reducing the physical thickness of the PV absorber layers, while keeping their optical thickness constant.16 First, sun light can be bounced into the light-absorbing thin film using plasmonic nanoparticles as subwavelength scattering elements, increasing the effective optical light pathway in the thin film (Fig. 4a).99 It has been shown that when the plasmonic particles are placed close to the interface between two dielectrics, light will be preferentially scattered into the dielectric with a larger permittivity.100 Moreover, light scattered at an angle beyond the critical angle for reflection (total internal reflection) will remain trapped in the cell.101 The employment of a reflecting metal back contact can reflect sun light back to the plasmonic scatters, which enable multiple passes of scattered sun light through the light-absorbing film, providing an additional way to increase the effective path length. Considerable experimental evidences of increased photocurrent spectral response in thin-film solar cells by plasmonic scatterings have been reported for single-crystalline Si,102 amorphous Si,103 Si-on-insulator,104 an InP/InGaAsP quantum well105 and GaAs solar cells.106 The shape and size of plasmonic nanoparticles affect the incoupling efficiency; smaller and anisotropic nanoparticles can couple a larger fraction of the incident light into the underlying semiconductor because of enhanced near-field coupling.107–109 In addition, light-trapping effects are most pronounced at the peak of the plasmon resonance spectrum.107 Plasmonic nanostructures with a peak near the band-gap are required for the use of scattering geometry to enhance device absorption. Tunability of the plasmonic absorption peak is needed because of the varying band-gaps of light-absorbing materials in different types of solar cells. This tunability can be realized by varying the dielectric environment for a plasmonic structure or by selecting appropriate composition or geometry of the plasmonic nanostructure as in Fig. 4d.
 Fig. 4  (a–c) Plasmonic light-trapping geometries for thin-film photovoltaics; (a) light trapping by scattering from plasmonic nanoparticles placed at the surface of the solar cell. (b) Light trapping by excitation of localized surface plasmons in plasmonic nanoparticles embedded in the semiconductor. (c) Light trapping by the excitation of surface plasmon polaritons at the plasmonic nanoparticles/semiconductor interface. (d) Normalized extinction of Ag and Ag0.25Au0.75 alloyed nanoparticles dispersed in toluene, Au nanoparticles dispersed in toluene, Au nanorods (NRs) dispersed in water, Cu2–xS nanoparticles dispersed in hexane, Cu2–xSe nanoparticles dispersed in hexane, and indium tin oxide (ITO, tin 10 mol%) nanoparticles dispersed in hexane. Tuning of the plasmonic absorbance peak between 400–550 nm can be realized by varying the composition in alloyed Ag/Au nanoparticles, while tuning between 550–900 nm can be enabled by elongating the length (thus changing the aspect ratio) of gold NRs. In addition, the plasmonic absorption peak located in the wavelength range of 1000–2100 nm can be achieved by using Cu2–xS, Cu2–xSe and alloyed Cu2–xSySe2–y nanoparticles, as well as ITO nanoparticles with varied dopant concentration of tin. (These plasmonic nanoparticles were produced and characterized at our Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics.). 
Second, sun light can be concentrated using plasmonic nanoparticles as subwavelength antennas in which the plasmonic near-field is coupled to the semiconductor, thereby, increasing its effective absorption cross-section (Fig. 4b). Small sized (5–20 nm diameter) particles work particularly well for this geometry, as a low fraction of the absorbed light is emitted as radiation in them.16 These antennas are particularly useful in materials where the carrier diffusion lengths are small, and photocarriers must thus be generated close to the collection junction area. Doping small plasmonic metal nanoparticles in the active layer has resulted in enhanced efficiencies in bulk hetero-junction organic solar cells,110,111 tandem polymer solar cells,112 dye-sensitized solar cells,113,114 as well as in Si-based solar cells.115–117
Third, a corrugated metallic film on the back surface of a thin PV absorber layer can couple sunlight into surface plasmon polariton modes supported at the metal/semiconductor interface as well as into guided modes in the semiconductor slab, whereupon, the light is converted to photocarriers in the semiconductor (Fig. 4c).118–121 In this geometry, the incident solar flux is effectively turned by 90 degrees, and light is absorbed along the lateral direction of the solar cell, which has dimensions that are orders of magnitude larger than the optical absorption length. A calculation of the absorption of an organic semiconductor (PF10TBT:[C60]PCBM), in contact with Ag or Al, indicates that about ∼90% of surface plasmon polarition energy can be absorbed by the organic semiconductor over the entire spectral range below 650 nm.122 Experiments on amorphous Si thin-film solar cells deposited on a textured metal back reflector showed a 26% enhancement in short-circuit current, with the primary photocurrent enhancement in the near-infrared.123
Utilizing these three light trapping and concentration techniques, a considerable shrinkage (possibly 10- to 100-fold) of the PV layer thickness can be realized, while keeping the optical absorption (and thus efficiency) constant.16 The use of surface plasmon peaks at varying wavelengths can be provided by recent advances in the field of plasmonic materials with tuning capability covering a broad range of 400–2000 nm in nanostructures of metals,124 alloyed metals,124 metal NRs,125 self-doped semiconductors,95 and transparent conductors (Fig. 4d).
B3. Inorganic semiconductor and polymer nanocomposites
Inorganic semiconductor/polymer nanocomposites provide unique advantages in efficient hybrid polymer–inorganic solar cells. The hybrid polymer–inorganic nanocrystal solar cells consist of a hole-conducting conjugated polymer containing inorganic semiconducting quantum materials, like CdSe, PbS and PbSe QDs or QRs. They effectively combine the advantages of the two classes of materials, including: (a) low fabrication costs due to simple solution-based processing; (b) light weight, and flexible substrate manufacturing (roll-to-roll production) of the conjugated polymer matrix; and (c) high electron mobility, size-dependent optical band-gap, and carrier multiplication due to semiconducting nanoparticles.126–129 The performance of these hybrid devices depends on energy band matching, blend film morphology, composition ratio, and semiconductor nanoparticle shape, particularly, the electron-injection efficiency from the conjugated polymer to the inorganic semiconductor nanoparticles. Examples of hybrid solar devices are described in detail in Section D2. An efficient electron injection process is of crucial importance for high power conversion efficiency, which, however, requires that the inorganic semiconductor and the conjugated light-absorbing polymer are chemically placed in intimate contact. Instead of physically blending, which does not generally produce efficient charge transfers, direct tethering of conjugated polymers to the surface of semiconductor nanoparticles can yield a well-defined interface that markedly facilitates photoinduced charge transfer between these two semiconductor components, leading to enhanced power conversion efficiency. There are at least three ways to fabricate inorganic and polymeric nanocomposites (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Advantages of inorganic–polymer nanocomposites displayed together with three synthetic methods for their preparation. 
(1) Ligand exchange of insulating ligand-capped inorganic nanoparticles with functionalized conjugated polymers. In this strategy, a strong coordinating group (e.g., phosphoric acid, amine) functionalized polymer is first synthesized, and then directly anchored onto the inorganic nanoparticles by substituting the original or intermediate ligands on the nanoparticle surface.130–132 For example, a poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) with the amino end-functionality was employed to exchange the pyridine ligand capped on the surface of the CdSe NRs. The original ligands, trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) and tetradecylphosphonic acid (TDPA) capped on the surface of CdSe NRs, had been replaced by refluxing the NRs in pyridine. An improved dispersion of CdSe NRs in the P3HT matrix in the P3HT–CdSe NRs hybrid solar cells was manifested, resulting in an improved power conversion efficiency of 1.4% as compared to that of 0.5% from the device fabricated using non-functionalized P3HT.132 Although ligand exchange provides derivatization of semiconductor nanoparticles with functional ligands, it suffers from incomplete surface coverage.133,134
(2) Directly tethering functionalized conjugated polymers to bifunctional ligand capped inorganic nanoparticles. This strategy relies on the employment of a bifunctional ligand that not only acts as the coordinating ligand (using the steric effect and the coordination capability) to synthesize high quality semiconductor nanoparticles with controlled size and shape, but also is capable of providing another functional group to couple with appropriately functionalized conjugated polymers.133,135 One-dimensional NRs are more preferable over QDs in hybrid solar cells,126,136 because they naturally provide a longer axial path for electrical transport. A bifunctional ligand of bromobenzylphosphonic acid (BBPA) has been employed for grafting vinyl-terminated P3HT onto CdSe QRs.137 BBPA has two functional groups, a phosphonic group which allows the preparation of the elongated CdSe QDs, and the aryl bromide group which allows Heck coupling with the vinyl group in the functionalized P3HT.137 An enhanced charge transfer at the P3HT/CdSe QR interface was substantiated by the observation of quenching and a much shorter lifetime of the emission of P3HT. Although direct tethering of functionalized conjugated polymers to bifunctional ligand capped semiconductor nanoparticles provides high grafting density at the interface, the need for a rational design of bifunctional ligands and polymers as well the necessary coupling reactions can be challenging.
(3) Direct growth of semiconductor inorganic nanoparticles within a conjugated polymer, allowing an intimate contact of the polymer and the semiconductor nanoparticles through a simple process.138–140 A good example is the work on the direct growth of PbS QDs within poly(2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene) (MEH-PPV).138 2–6 nm PbS QDs can be synthesized by injection of a sulfur precursor solution and a lead acetate mixture solution into the MEH-PPV at a high temperature. Since MEH-PPV possesses no charged functional groups, the growth is more likely to be directed by the steric effects of the long chains of MEH-PPV.138 Although the resulting PbS QDs have a wider distribution of size and shape than those synthesized by a hot colloidal method (see Section C1), this synthetic route for inorganic–polymer nanocomposites is quite simple, as it eliminates the needs for not only an initial surfactant to control the nanoparticle growth, but also a functional ligand that subsequently couples to conjugated polymers. Utilizing direct growth of semiconductor nanoparticles in a conjugated polymer, nanocomposites of P3HT/CdSe QDs,140 polyalkyloxythiophene/ZnO QDs,141 P3HT/CdS QRs have been synthesized,142 offering versatile alternatives for hybrid solar cells.
B4. Interface engineering to manipulate charge carrier dynamics
Efficient solar cell operations rely on charge separation, transport, and collection. Appropriate engineering of the chemistry and resultant electronics of various interfaces to manipulate charge carrier dynamics are of particular importance. These interfaces comprise the interface of charge-separation, the interface of nanomaterials, as well as the interface at the metallic electrode. Here we summarize some general principles to engineer these interfaces.
A forward transfer in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) is determined by the energetic position of the LUMO level of the sensitizer relative to the conduction band of the acceptor, and the strength of electronic coupling between the initial and the final states associated with the transfer.6,143,144 In DSSCs, the light-absorbing dye molecules are anchored to the oxide nanoparticle electrode through coordinative bonding of the linker to the metal ions exposed at the surface of the metal oxide.143 It has been shown that adding a –CH2–CH2– spacer between the dye and the metal oxide increases the electron injection time from 13 to 57 fs, while adding an unsaturated group of –CHCH– does not alter the electron injection time.145 Molecular engineering of a linker with delocalized pi electrons is important to ensure efficient electron injection efficiencies.
With respect to QDs-based solar cell devices, solution-processed QDs are generally surrounded by organic ligands that employ long-chains to ensure their solution processability, but adversely act as an insulating matrix material.35 Such an insulating layer drastically reduces electronic interaction at the interface of QDs.146 Transport in the QD film occurs mainly through tunneling or hopping. An efficient way to address the interface problem of QDs is to replace these long-chain ligands with shorter but more conductive ligands, promoting carrier transport while lowering the surface defect density to reduce recombination losses.147–153 Various approaches of nanochemistry to replace these long-chain ligands will be discussed in detail in Section C5. Ligands of short alkylthiols,154,155 aromatic thiols,156 alkylamines,157 mercaptocarboxylic acids (MPA),147,158 and atomic halide anions (such as Cl−, Br− and I− with ligand size scaling down to 0.1 nm),151 have all shown promise in achieving effective surface passivation, while enhancing carrier mobility. Generally, the shorter the ligand is, the better the solar efficiency is, if employing the same PV device configuration (see Section D1). A recent investigation has shown that a hybrid passivation combining the MPA-treatment and the halide anions-treatment is found to have a more pronounced effect on passivation of surface trap sites, while retaining close inter-particle contacts and thus the power conversion efficiency (PCE).153
The use of appropriately energy matched structures of semiconductors and work functions of metals to produce a favorable charge-separating interface is very important for efficient charge separation.3 Early QDs solar cell performance relied on a metal-semiconductor Schottky junction (see Fig. 14b), whereby the contact of a light metal (Al) of a lower work function with the film of a p-type colloidal QDs solid established a charge-separating electric field for charge carrier separation.159 However, the performance of this Schottky junction is largely influenced by the interface between the QD film and the Al metal; tailoring this interface by the deposition of a thin LiF layer (∼0.8 nm) in between, not only reduces the recombination and resistance, but also improves the device stability against air by retarding the penetration of oxygen and moisture below the Al electrode.160 Despite the advances, this metal-semiconductor junction or interface still remains inefficient for charge-separating, as it is placed far from the QDs layer where light absorption starts (see Fig. 14b); thus, electrons are required to travel a long distance before reaching this charge-separation interface.147 A shift of the charge-separating interface to the proximity of the initially absorbing QDs layer (p-type) of light absorption can be implemented by insertion of an n-type TiO2 layer in between the transparent electrode and the QDs film, generating a new type of p–n junction solar cell configuration, termed “depleted heterojunction” solar devices (see Fig. 14d).147 Separating charges on the light-absorbing side of the device lessened the reliance on the long-distance transport of electrons within the p-type quantum-dot film that is required in a Schottky junction solar cell. In addition, the n-type TiO2, p-type colloidal quantum-dot heterojunction removed the limits on the open-circuit voltage that arose as a result of Fermi-level pinning in Schottky devices. The barrier-to-hole extraction presented by the large-band-gap TiO2 was used to prevent back recombination. For photovoltaics using semiconductors, it seems that the use of a p–n junction is still the best way to configure the interface for efficient operations, as is the case for inorganic solution-processed solar cells utilizing CIGS and CZTS.54
The absolute position of the lowest conduction band of TiO2 in “depleted heterojunction” solar devices sets a limit on the energy level, and thus, the size of QDs. A diameter below ∼4.3 nm for PbS QDs is required by energy level matching to ensure an efficient electron transfer from the QDs to TiO2.161 To alleviate this limit, recent approaches are to engineer this interface by lowering the conduction band of TiO2 via doping of Zr or Sb; these approaches proved to be beneficial for charge separation at the TiO2–PbS heterojunction.162 Furthermore, the opposite side of the PbS film in this TiO2–PbS heterojunction device is in contact with a metal, intrinsically forming a Schottky junction that prevents the main electron flow at the interface. Thus, several efforts dedicated to incorporating a hole extraction layer between the PbS film and the metal electrode, eliminated this undesirable Schottky junction and significantly improved the current density together with enhanced Voc.162
B5. Novel approaches to harvest ultraviolet and infrared photons
B5.1. Multiple exciton generation and singlet exciton fission. Multiple exciton generation (MEG) in QDs involves the absorption of one photon possessing at least twice the band-gap energy, leading to the generation of a highly energetic exciton that breaks up to produce two or more excitons (Fig. 6a).26,163–171 Separation of electrons and holes in each exciton thus produces carrier multiplication, i.e., more than one electron and one hole per absorbed photon (Fig. 6b). This process can enable effective harvesting of high-energy photons in the violet and ultraviolet parts of the solar spectrum where part of the photon energy is lost as heat.163–171 It has been indicated that the application of MEG in single junction solar cells has the potential to yield efficiency as high as 44%, well exceeding the Shockley–Queisser limit of 31%.165,168 Although MEG was first observed from a bulk semiconductor in the 1950s,172 its discovery in semiconductor QDs was in PbSe nanocrystals by Schaller and Klimov in 2004.169 Since then, MEG has been reported in a range of QD systems, such as PbS,77,173,174 PbSe,77,169 PbTe,175 CdSe,176 InAs,177,178 InP,179 and Si,180,181 and recently in single-walled carbon nanotubes.182,183 The efficiency of MEG is defined as the number of electron–hole pairs produced per absorbed photon.184,185 However, the measurement of the MEG quantum efficiency in colloidal QDs and its use on solar energy conversion remain controversial, as most works evaluate the MEG quantum efficiency utilizing an indirect approach based on ultrafast transient absorption techniques.169,175–183 A direct proof of carrier multiplication resulting from MEG was reported by Prasad et al. in 2008, when irradiating PbSe QDs with photon energies greater than 2 times that of the QDs band-gap (Fig. 6b).186 A photoelectrochemical system composed of PbS nanocrystals chemically bound to TiO2 single crystals was subsequently utilized to demonstrate the collection of photocurrents with quantum yields greater than one electron per photon.187 A direct evidence of an increase of solar cells efficiency due to MEG in QDs was given by Semonin et al. in 2011, whereby they showed about 4% of total photocurrent in PbSe-based solar cells arises from the MEG effect.188 This is verified by a peak external quantum efficiency of 114% and a peak internal quantum efficiency of 130% obtained in their work. Nevertheless, until now, the impact of MEG on the increase of the solar power conversion efficiency of QD solar cells is still quite limited, requiring an effective minimization of the competing intra-band relaxation processes. Appropriate control of nanoscale excitation dynamics by suitable nanochemistry is needed to be established. In addition, MEG was generally demonstrated utilizing deep ultraviolet photons excitation. The realization of MEG under near ultraviolet and visible light excitation can greatly expedite its use in solar cells, as carriers multiplication can be implemented for photons over a large fraction of the solar spectrum.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of multiple exciton generation. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). (b) Extraction of excitons generated by MEG in a PbSe nanocrystal device. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics). 
In analogy to MEG in QDs, singlet exciton fission is a promising counterpart in organic dyes. Specifically, singlet exciton fission is a process in which a singlet exciton splits into two triplet excitons, thus providing a pathway to enhance energy efficiency in photovoltaics, as in the case of dye-sensitized solar cells.27,189 The enhancement is possible if each of the generated triplet states independently provides an injected electron.190,191 A direct experimental observation of the multiexciton state resulting from singlet fission was reported in 2011 using the model system of pentacene/fullerene bilayers and femtosecond nonlinear spectroscopy.192 The main challenge now is to synthesize photostable dyes with low rates of vibrational deactivation and triplet–triplet annihilation. Molecular engineering with appropriate organic moieties is needed to provide an appropriate electronic structure with the energies of the first excited singlet state and second triplet state equal to or greater than twice the energy of the first excited triplet state.

B5.2 Photon down-conversion. Photon down-conversion comprises two types of energy conversion processes that are useful for solar cells (see Fig. 7).193 One is based on photon quantum cutting,194,195 the other one is based on Stokes-shifted emission.196
 Fig. 7  Spectral conversion design for solar cell applications involving stokes-shifting (SS), quantum-cutting (QC), and up-conversion (UC). 
Quantum cutting is a direct conversion of the energy of one absorbed photon into two (or more) emitted low-energy photons. This process is known to have quantum efficiency more than 100%.195 The ladder-like spacing of energy levels in lanthanide ions provides opportunities for a quantum cutting mechanism due to pronounced energy transfer between two lanthanide ions of the same or different types. Quantum cutting in the visible spectral region with a quantum efficiency of 190% was reported in LiGdF4:Eu3+ phosphors by Wegh et al. in 1999,197 but it has limited influence on PV efficiency. Recently, the potential of using NIR quantum-cutting phosphors in c-Si solar cells has been explored in an effort to increase the power conversion efficiency by alleviating thermalization losses (see Fig. 7).28–30 Theoretical calculations implemented by Trupke et al. indicate that a layer of quantum-cutting phosphors coated on the c-silicon solar cell can increase the efficiency up to 38.6%, well surpassing the Schockley–Queisser limit.198 NIR quantum-cutting has been realized in various Ln3+/Yb3+ (Ln = Ce3+,199–201 Eu2+,202 Tb3+,203,204 Tm3+,205,206 Pr3+,207,208 Er3+,209,210 Nd3+,211 Ho3+,212,213 and Dy3+)214 co-doped materials, emitting NIR emissions at ∼980 nm which is above the band-gap of ∼1.15 eV of silicon. The efficiency of quantum cutting is reported to be theoretically in the range of 150–190%. Among them, broad-band excited quantum cutting in Ce3+/Yb3+ and Eu2+/Yb3+ co-doped systems are more promising for solar cell applications, as they can harvest photons over a broad spectrum of ∼300–500 nm, converting them into two NIR photons at ∼980 nm.199–202 In addition, Ce3+ and Eu2+ utilize much stronger 4f-5d transitions, rather than the discrete and weak 4f–4f transitions in lanthanides to harvest photons. Quantum cutting utilizing an energy transfer between ZnO QDs and Yb3+ ions in a glass matrix,215 Si nanocrystals and Er3+ ions,21,216 as well as between Bi3+ ions and Yb3+ ions in YVO4 nanophosphors217 or Y2O3 films,218 is also being explored in order to impart strong and broad-band light harvesting capability.
Stokes-shifted luminescence can be utilized in solar devices where the photoactive component has a poor spectral photoresponse to short-wavelength light. A Stokes-shifting material absorbs the short-wavelength light, typically in the 300–500 nm range, and emits at a longer wavelength where the external quantum efficiency of the PV device is high.196 While luminescence Stokes-shifting can increase the solar cell efficiency, it cannot overcome the Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit, as thermalization losses remain unchanged.28 In practice, a planar Stokes-shifting layer is placed directly onto the front surface of a solar cell to improve the device performance by transforming short wavelength sun light photons to longer wavelength photons at a quantum yield near unity (see Fig. 7).219,220 An ideal Stokes-shifting material should possess the following characteristics:29 (i) Strong and broadband absorption in the region where the spectral response of the solar cell is low, while having high transmission in the other spectral range; (ii) high extinction coefficient and near unity quantum yield of emission; (iii) sharp or narrowband emission in the spectral region where the external quantum efficiency of the solar device is high; (iv) a large Stokes shift to minimize self-absorption energy losses due to any spectral overlap between the absorption and the emission bands; (v) long-term photo-stability. Until now, lanthanide-doped inorganic phosphors,221–224 colloidal QDs,225–227 organo-lanthanide complexes,228 organic dyes229,230 have been widely investigated as Stokes-shifting materials, manifesting enhanced power conversion efficiencies in solar cell devices.

B5.3 Photon up-conversion. The term of up-conversion describes anti-Stokes optical processes that convert two (or more) low-energy pump photons, even from an incoherent continuous-wave light source, to generate a higher-energy photon by sequential absorption or ion-to-ion energy transfer.65 This phenomenon was first discovered by Auzel in the 1960s.66 As was already discussed above, only the absorption of photons with energy higher than the band-gap can generate electron–hole pairs contributing to the electric current. Indeed, the transmission of sub-band-gap photons is one of the major energy loss mechanisms in conventional solar cells (see Fig. 2). In the case of c-Si solar cells, the transmission loss amounts to about 20% of the incident solar energy, which is not substantially reducible by conventional approaches.28 To this end, the use of up-conversion materials may provide a solution to the transmission loss by converting two sub-band-gap photons into one above-band-gap photon (see Fig. 7).231–234 Indeed, Trupke et al. in 2002 showed that the theoretical efficiency limit of a single-junction solar cell, modified with an up-converter, can reach 63.2% for concentrated sunlight and 47.6% for non-concentrated sunlight, respectively.235Without altering the already existing merits of a solar cell, the photon up-conversion approach utilizes the anti-Stokes up-conversion technique to convert long-wavelength light to visible photons that can be efficiently absorbed by most solar cells (see Fig. 7).236 The up-conversion technique is realized by (1) rare-earth-doped nanocrystals.64–70 The up-conversion process produces a highly energetic excited state in the rare-earth ion by sequential absorption of two or more photons with lower energies, as shown in Fig. 8a on an example of the Er3+ ion absorbing photons with wavelength of ∼1500 nm.237 (2) Triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) up-conversion in a pair of sensitizer-annihilator dyes.61–63 In general, the singlet excited state of a sensitizer will be populated (S0 → S1) with an excitation photon (Fig. 8b). Along with an efficient intersystem crossing process (ISC, S1 → T1) due to the heavy atom effect of the transition metal atom, the triplet excited state of the sensitizer, an organo-metallic, will be populated. Since the lifetime of the triplet excited state is much longer than that of the singlet excited state, energy can be transferred from the triplet sensitizer to the triplet acceptor (TTET process). Two nearby triplet acceptor molecules excited in their triplet states interact to combine their excitation energy which results in one acceptor molecule being excited to the higher singlet state, while the other one returns to the ground singlet state. This process is called triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA). The radiative decay from the generated singlet excited state of the acceptor produces an up-converted fluorescence, for which the energy is higher than the excitation light. The excitation power density required for TTA up-conversion is quite low; a few mW cm−2 (which is in the useful range for solar cells).62 Furthermore, the excitation wavelength and the emission wavelength of TTA up-conversion can be readily tuned, simply by independent selection of the triplet sensitizer and the triplet acceptor (annihilator/emitter pair). In general, the unabsorbed long-wavelength transmission light in solar devices can be efficiently up-converted into visible photons through either rare-earth up-conversion nanocrystals or TTA annihilator/emitter pairs. The resulting visible emission is then to be absorbed by the solar cell devices, e.g., by the dye in the DSSC cell configuration (Fig. 8c) that is known to convert visible light into electricity with high efficiency.
 Fig. 8  (a) Scheme of energy levels in an Er3+ ion and up-conversion of energy corresponding to the wavelength of 1490 nm; the inset is the corresponding up-conversion photographic image of colloidal LiYF4:Er3+ nanoparticles dissolved in chloroform. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). (b) The scheme of triplet–triplet annihilation up-conversion; (c) up-conversion of solar energy from different wavelengths of the NIR spectral range (∼650–850 nm, ∼800, ∼980, ∼1180 and 1500 nm) using up-conversion nanoparticles. All absorbed energy is up-converted to the visible range where the solar cell absorbs. 
Rare-earth up-conversion nanocrystals work efficiently in the wavelength range of 800–2000 nm, while the triplet–triplet up-conversion materials are limited to wavelengths ≤750 nm. Examples for rare-earth-doped up-conversion are: (i) Nd3+/Yb3+/Er3+ for up-conversion from ∼800 nm to ∼550 nm and ∼650 nm;238,239 (ii) Yb3+/Er3+ (or Ho3+) for up-conversion from 980 nm to ∼550 nm and ∼650 nm;240–246 (iii) Yb3+/Tm3+ for up-conversion from 980 nm to ∼800 nm and ∼480 nm;247–251 (iv) Ho3+ for up-conversion from ∼1180 nm to ∼550 nm and ∼650 nm;252,253 (v) Er3+ for up-conversion from ∼1500 nm to ∼550 nm and ∼650 nm.237,254–257 The Ln3+ ions have narrow and low intensity (compared to the organic chromophores) absorption lines at discrete wavelengths, but a number of wavelengths in the range of 800–1550 nm can be used.258,259 Combinations of the doped ions in a fluoride nanocrystal with minimized cross-relaxations between different activators would help to increase the NIR light absorptivity and the useful up-conversion efficiency. In addition, dye-sensitized up-conversion in lanthanides circumvents the drawback of the low and narrow absorption of lanthanide ions,260 opening up the possibility of using an antenna effect provided by appropriate dyes, to implement broad-band up-conversion, similar to TTA up-conversion. The use of up-conversion in NaYF4:Er3+ powders significantly improved the response of a silicon solar cell at 1532 nm,257 while the use of LaF3:Yb3+/Er3+,261 YF3:Yb3+/Er3+,262 and NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+,263 up-conversion nanoparticles made impressive improvement in the efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells. In addition, an increase in the conversion efficiency of about (1.0 ± 0.2)% at 720 nm has also been reported in a hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si: H) thin-film solar cell due to the use of photochemical TTA up-converting pairs (the absorption is in the range of 600–750 nm, while the emission is in the range of 550–600 nm) placed at the rear of the device.264 However, the TTA up-conversion is limited only to shorter NIR wavelengths ≤750 nm;265 synthesis of stable organic compounds with the required hierarchy of the triplet and singlet levels in the energy range beyond 0.9–1 μm is very problematic. Moreover, organic materials are not so photo-/thermo- stable, and are very susceptible to oxygen which quenches the triplets.266,267 Progress on stable TTA up-conversion in new nanostructure designs is being made to circumvent this problem.266–269 The simultaneous use of up-conversion in lanthanide-doped inorganic nanoparticles and TTA in organic solutions or nanoformulations is a promising direction, as full use of sun light in the IR range can be made (see Fig. 8c).

C. Nanochemistry
C1. Solution-based colloidal chemistry
As discussed in Section B, semiconductor nanocrystals (e.g. CdSe, PbS, PbSe.), plasmonic metals or alloyed metal nanoparticles, plasmonic semiconductors or transparent conductor nanoparticles with high free charge carrier concentrations, up-conversion/down-conversion nanoparticles, and inorganic/polymer nanocomposites are increasingly being used for high efficiency solar cells due to their unique optical and electronic properties. Herein, we describe a general solution-based colloidal nanochemistry approach for the preparation of these nanoparticles of varying type, size and shape, and with a well-defined composition, allowing a precise control over their optical or electronic attributes.270,271 The hot colloidal synthesis approach, widely used for the synthesis of inorganic nanoparticles, generally employs three components: (i) a high boiling point solvent, (ii) ligands (also called surfactants or capping groups, such as TOPO, oleic acid, and oleylamine), and (iii) organometallic precursors.272–274 A high boiling point solvent is required to achieve a temperature high enough for crystallization of the inorganic nanoparticles. The organometallic precursors provide the inorganic elements (e.g. Cd and Se for CdSe QDs) from which the particles are formed. The ligands or surfactants adsorb to the surface of the nanoparticles, limiting their growth. Typically, a solution containing surfactants is heated to 150 to 350 °C for synthesis of nanoparticles.65,274 A typical apparatus for preparing inorganic nanoparticles is illustrated in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  A typical laboratory-scale apparatus for preparing inorganic nanoparticles using colloidal synthesis. 
There are two ways for loading precursors into the three-neck round bottom flask, (i) the “heating-up method”;248 (ii) the “hot-injection method”.273 In the “heating-up” process, the temperature of the reaction solution containing pre-loaded precursors is elevated from room temperature to a specific high temperature to produce nanoparticles. The “hot-injection” process employs the injection of pertinent precursors into a hot solution containing the high-boiling solvent and the surfactants.
Semiconductor QDs are generally synthesized by a hot-injection process.272,273 Injection of organometallic precursors into the hot solvent leads to a rapid burst of particle nucleation, followed by a period of particle growth without further nucleation. This separation of nucleation and growth is essential for producing uniform nanoparticles. The size of QDs, and thereby their emission color, can be controlled by the temperature, the nature of the solvent and surfactant, and the aging time. Anisotropic growth of QRs can be accomplished by introducing surfactants, such as phosphonic acids, that preferentially bind to a particular crystal facet of the growing nanoparticles.56,275 The nanocrystal then grows preferentially along a particular direction in the crystal lattice, producing an anisotropic (rod or wire) structure. In analogy to QDs synthesis, high quality monodispersed nanoparticles of plasmonic metal like gold and silver have been successfully prepared by hot colloidal synthesis.124 Monodipersed plasmonic semiconductor nanoparticles and lanthanide-doped up-conversion NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ and NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+ nanoparticles have also been accomplished using the hot-injection method.124,244
The “heating-up” approach plays a vital role for the synthesis of alloyed plasmonic nanoparticles (e.g., Ag/Au),124,276 transparent conductor nanoparticles (ITO nanoparticles),96 and lanthanide-doped up-conversion/down-conversion nanoparticles.277–279 The key for the “heating-up” approach is to utilize the Ostwald-ripening process in which larger particles with smaller surface to volume ratios are favored over the energetically less stable smaller particles, resulting in the growth of larger particles at the expense of smaller ones.277 It allows the synthesis of alloyed metal nanoparticles (Ag/Au). In contrast, when the hot injection method is used, Ag and Au prefer to nucleate by themselves (forming Ag and Au nanoparticles, rather than the Ag/Au alloyed nanoparticles).124
The general hot-colloidal approach has also been applied to produce magnetic nanoparticles (Fe3O4, FePt),280,281 core/shell nanoparticles,282 and other nanocrystalline materials.283,284 The nanocrystals prepared by the hot colloidal synthesis are dispersible in organic solvents such as toluene or chloroform because of the presence of nonpolar (hydrophobic) ligands or surfactants bound to their surface. This provides an opportunity for solution-processing of these nanoparticles. However, the capping ligands generally have long chains and are insulating materials, impeding the charge separation at the interface and charge transport within the quantum dots layers, thus reducing the performance of solar cells involving QDs.148,150 Further surface modification is required to shorten or remove the ligand to impart efficient exciton-dissociation and electron hopping for improved power conversion efficiency (see Section C5).151–153
C2. Chemical reaction within nano-confined geometries
A widely used method to produce nanoparticles is to conduct nanoparticle synthesis in a nanoreactor such as a microemulsion which is produced in a thermodynamically stable, optically isotropic dispersion of two immiscible liquids (e.g. water and oil), with at least one type of surfactant.285,286 Surfactants are amphiphilic molecules having a polar (hydrophilic) head group and a long non-polar (hydrophobic or lipophilic) tail. These systems form dispersions of nanosize droplets, called microemulsions, of oil-in-water (o/w) if water is the majority bulk phase. The microemulsion droplets act to trap nonpolar reactants within them, and act as micelle nanoreactors. If water is dispersed in a large volume of oil, the surfactants assemble around them to form a reverse (water in oil, w/o) microemulsion, in which the polar groups are directed into the aqueous nanodroplets, to form an aqueous (or polar) reverse micelle nanoreactor in which polar molecules can react.285–287 The surfactants present in the microemulsion serve not only to stabilize the nanoreactors for chemical syntheses, but also act as steric stabilizers to inhibit the aggregation of reacting species during the reaction period.288 The size of the micelle, and subsequently the volume of the aqueous pool contained within the micelle, are governed by the water to surfactant ratio, also termed W0, where W0 = [H2O]/[surfactant].285 One can easily tune the size and the shape of the droplet to tune the resulting nanoparticle size and shape. Continuous exchange of the micellar contents through dynamic collisions enables the reaction to proceed. Since the reaction is confined within the nanocavity of the micelle, the growth of a nanoparticle beyond the dimensions of the cavity is inhibited.288 The microemulsion method has been used for the preparation of nanoparticles from a diverse variety of materials including metals (Pt, Pd, Au, Ag, Cu, Ni),289 bimetallic nanoparticles (Ag/Au, Au/Pt),290–292 semiconductor nanoparticles (ZnS, PbS, and CdS),293 as well as for other types of nanoparticles (e.g., silica,269 polymer-based TTA up-conversion nanoparticles266,267).
C3. Successive ionic layer-by-layer adsorption and reaction
Successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) is a novel technique to produce a thin film of the desired materials on a support by in situ chemical reaction involving a range of steps.33 Instead of physically depositing particles or atoms on a surface, SILAR utilizes electrostatic force to attract charged ions in the solution to the ions of opposite charge located on the surface layer, thus implementing in situ chemical reaction at the interface for generation of the desired materials. A layer-by-layer deposition can be employed to allow the generation of nanoparticles and their deposition in the form of a solid film. During each step of SILAR, sub-monolayers of desired cations and anions with defined ratios and compositions are alternately and selectively adsorbed on the surface, yielding the deposition of ultrathin layer of the desired product.294–296 The basic SILAR principle is described in Fig. 10. The simple equipment, large area deposition, low operating temperatures, and atmospheric pressure requirements of the SILAR process, make it a comparatively low cost technology for in situ film deposition.
 Fig. 10  Successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) on a substrate involving the deposition of three layers. 
SILAR in principle is able to deposit a broad class of materials as thin films on the treated substrate surface. The only prerequisite is that appropriate cationic and ionic ions can be available in aqueous or organic solvent (water, ethanol, etc.) that allow an efficient diffusion of charged ions.297–299 Since no coordinating ligands are involved in the deposition of a desired film, it is of great interest for in situ deposition of solar materials in the device, allowing efficient charge transfers or injections at the interface.33 SILAR has been applied to prepare various inorganic-semiconductor-modified electrodes, particularly of metal sulfides (PbS and CdS) on mesoporous TiO2.300,301 It also has been successfully used to deposit a thin film of PbSe and CdSe(Te) on mesoporous TiO2. A six layer-by-layer SILAR deposition produces a thin film of CdSe (Te) QDs with a broad size distribution, yielding a power conversion of 4.2% at 100 W cm−2.33 The SILAR process could now be considered as one of the best ways to allow deposition of well-defined composition modulated (doped, alloyed, or multilayered) QD layers onto mesoporous metal oxides using the solution process by alternating change of cationic and anionic precursors. A modified SILAR process can be combined with atomic layer deposition and ion exchange reaction (ALDIER) to achieve a highly controllable and homogeneous coating of sensitizer particles on arbitrary TiO2 substrates.302
C4. Tailoring the band gap of polymers
Semiconducting polymers play a vital role for either a polymer solar cell or a hybrid solar cell. Earlier polymer solar cells utilized a conjugated polymer (e.g., P3HT, poly(3-hexyl thiophene)) as an electron donor and a soluble fullerene derivative (e.g., PCBM, [6,6]-phenyl-C-61-butyric acid methyl ester fullerene) as an electron acceptor,303 creating nanoscopic interfacial phase separation with abundant interface areas for electric-field-induced charge carrier dissociations.304–306 In a hybrid polymer solar cell, the n-type PCBM is replaced by inorganic nanocrystals like CdS and CdSe that have deep LUMO levels of ∼4.0 eV.126,307 The band-gap of the polymer donor can affect polymer solar cells and hybrid solar cells in three ways:303,307–311 (i) the LUMO–HOMO energy difference of the polymer (electron donor) determine the photon harvesting capability of the device, thus, determining the Jsc of the PV device; (ii) an abrupt change between the LUMO level of the electron donor and the LUMO level of the electron acceptor produces an electric field at the interface to dissociate charge carriers; (iii) the energy difference between the HOMO level of the electron donor and the LUMO level of the electron acceptor determines the Voc of the device. A HOMO offset of the electron donor relative to that of the electron acceptor is favorable for the hole separation. Therefore, a judicious selection of existing pi-conjugated polymers or engineering of conjugated moieties in a specific polymer to produce an electron donor with an appropriate band-gap and a high hole mobility, is important for high efficiency PV devices.
For example, earlier investigations of CdSe QDs-based hybrid solar cells used P3HT or MDMO-PPV as an electron donor;126,312 however, the device efficiency was generally below 3%, as neither MDMO-PPV (Eg = 2.2 eV) nor P3HT (Eg = 1.9 eV) can effectively harvest photons from the solar spectrum due to the large band-gap. Utilization of lower band-gap polymers than P3HT can have a broader absorption spectrum, and thus, a higher solar conversion efficiency.313,314 Indeed, a device efficiency over 3% has been obtained using PCPDTBT (Eg = 1.45 eV) containing a cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene and 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole.315,316 We would like to mention that, in the case of PbS-based hybrid solar cells, fine-tuning of energy levels of the donor polymer is important for exciton dissociation at the interface due to the ambipolar characteristic of PbS nanocrystals. The employment of P3HT of a small HOMO offset relative to that of PbS (PbSe) nanocrystals generally led to low PCEs,317–319 while utilization of high-lying HOMO polymers (PDTPQx and PDTPBT) with a large HOMO offset, has significantly increased the PV device performance (see Fig. 11b). The practical performance of a hybrid PV device is a direct result of a trade-off between Voc and Jsc that are determined by the energy difference between the band gap of the QDs (size, affecting the photoinduced charge separation) and the polymers.320,321 It is worth noting that a majority of semiconducting polymers have band gaps higher than 2 eV (620 nm), which limits the possible harvesting of solar photons to about 30%. A low band gap of 1.1 eV (1100 nm) is capable of absorbing 77% of the solar irradiation on earth.303 Nanochemistry for molecular engineering of polymers to tune the band-gap to the IR range is of particular interest. Fig. 11c exhibits band gap-tuned polymers (PCPBBT, PFTBBT, PCPBTD and PFTBTD) that have been chemically synthesized, displaying tunable absorption from visible to IR in Fig. 11d.322 The PCPBTD (band gap ∼1.6 eV) and PCPBBT (band gap ∼1.01 eV) polymers were obtained by the Stille coupling reaction of the organotin reagent (1) with 4,7-dibromobenzothiadiazole [Reagent (3)], and 4,8-bis(5-bromo-2-thiophenyl)-2l4d2-[1,2-c:4,5-c0]bis[1,2,5]thiadiazole) [Reagent (5)], respectively. The Suzuki coupling reactions have been implemented to prepare PFTBTD (band gap ∼2.05 eV) and PFTBBT (band gap ∼1.2 eV), by reaction between the diboronic acid fluorene [reagent (2)] and 4,7-bis(5-bromo-2-thiophenyl)-benzo[c][1,2,5]-thiadiazole [Reagent (4)], or 4,8-bis(5-bromo-2-thiophenyl)-2l4d2-[1,2-c:4,5-c0]bis[1,2,5]thiadiazole [Reagent (5)], respectively. By using a varying type of the repeated moiety and by increasing the number of the repeated moiety in a precisely defined way, the absorption maxima of the pi-conjugated polymer can be gradually tuned from the short to the long IR wavelength range. These tunable polymers can harvest a broad solar spectral range and, thus, are able to produce a high efficiency single-junction hybrid PV cell (when one low band-gap polymer is utilized), or a high efficiency multi-junction polymer solar cell when multiple of them are simultaneously utilized.323
 Fig. 11  (a) Molecular structures of conjugated polymers of MDMO-PPV, P3HT, PCPDTBT, PSBTBT, PDTPQx, PDTPBT that have been generally used in polymer-based solar cells. (b) HOMO–LUMO energy levels of polymers in (a) and quantum dots (CdS, CdSe, PbS, and PbSe), as well the Fermi levels of some metals that are usually employed as electrodes. Note that the band-gaps of semiconductor QDs are dependent on the size of nanoparticles. (c) Schematic illustration of chemical synthesis of low band-gap polymers PCPBTD, PCPBBT, PFTBTD, and PFTBBT. (d) Absorption spectra, with tuned maxima from visible to IR range, of polymers PFTBTD, PCPBTD, PFTBBT, and PCPBBT dispersed in chlorobenzene. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 322. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
C5. Interface engineering
As described in the section on solution-based colloidal chemistry, the hot colloidal synthesis approach generally employs ligands (also called surfactants or capping groups) which are able to cap on the surface of the quantum dot to control the size and shape as well as to produce a stable dispersion. Usually, as-synthesized nanocrystals are shielded with long alkyl-chain ligands like TOPO (comprising of three 8-carbon chains) and oleic acid (comprising a 18-carbon chain), which enable easy solution-processability for device fabrication, but they also act as an insulating layer (1–3 nm long).146–153 These long-chain ligands produce two adverse effects on the charge dynamics in the film of semiconductor nanocrystals. One is that the insulating characteristic of these ligands produces a barrier for electrons and holes to separate; the other one is that the steric length of the ligand generates wide inter-particle distances between nanocrystals, creating another barrier for electron or hole hopping. To accomplish an efficient solar device, it is necessary to perform ligand exchange with short-length ligands that have a higher binding affinity for QDs, but a shorter length scale for an improved carrier transport.35 Manipulation of the interface of nanoparticles is a promising approach to deal with various interfacial problems of nanomaterials-based solar cell devices. Though Section B3 provides the specific interface treatments to produce closely contacted inorganic and polymer nanocomposites for hybrid solar cells, the following discussions on the interface of nanoparticles are intended for general nanomaterials-based solar cells.
The original long-chain ligand capped on the nanoparticle surface can be replaced with a desired ligand using either a pre-ligand exchange method or a post-ligand exchange method. A pre-ligand exchange method is generally applied to II–VI CdSe or CdS QDs, while a post-ligand exchange method is generally applied to IV–VI PbSe or PbS QDs. In a typical procedure for the pre-ligand exchange, an adequate pre-ligand of pyridine is commonly used to exchange the long alkyl chain ligands capped on the as-synthesized nanocrystals under high temperature.324,325 After casting pyridine-capped CdSe or CdS nanocrystals into a film, heat treatment can efficiently remove pyridine that is weakly bound to the nanoparticle interface. Furthermore, removal of the interfacial pyridine reduces inter-nanoparticle distances, thus enhancing the charge transport in the device.324 Approaches for in situ removal of ligands capped on CdSe nanocrystals have also been demonstrated by using a hexanoic acid treatment or a cleavable functional ligand (see Fig. 12).326,327 Although pre-ligand exchange is a promising approach to remove the insulating ligands from nanoparticles for an efficient device operation, it cannot be applied to IV–VI semiconductors of PbS and PbSe, as some participates are formed after pyridine treatment.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the thermal deprotection of the t-BOC moiety in the tert-butyl N-(2-mercaptoethyl)carbamate ligand linked to the surface of the CdSe nanocrystals (reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics), and (b) acid treatment-assisted removal of the insulating hexadelyamine ligand liked to the QDs surface. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 326. Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics). 
A post-ligand exchange method, therefore, has been developed for PbS and PbSe nanocrystals, which involves soaking the long chain ligand capped nanocrystal film in a solution comprising an excess of short-alkyl chain ligands. A good example is P3HT/oleic acid-capped PbS nanocrystal film, which becomes more conductive after soaking with a solution of acetic acid (CH3COOH) that has a shorter chain length than oleic acid.319,328 Similarly, a higher carrier mobility of nanocrystals was substantiated in a shorter ligand (hydrazine, NH2NH2–)-capped PbSe nanocrystal composite using a field-effect transistor configuration.148 It is important to note that the process of post-ligand exchange can be carried out in a layer-by-layer fashion, creating a thick nanoparticle layer whereby each nanoparticle is capped by the desired short ligand. For example, the first layer of oleic acid-capped PbS nanoparticles can be soaked in 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT, creating an interparticle distance of ∼2.1 nm) solution in acetonitrile (AcCN), allowing the post ligand exchange process of oleic acid by EDT to occur. The exchanged oleic acid and any residual EDT can be removed by washing with pure AcCN and n-hexane. Multiple layers of EDT-capped PbS QDs can be obtained by repeating these procedures, producing the desired thickness of EDT-capped PbS film.146 Such a successive layer-by-layer deposition has been performed by the spin-coating process and then the soaking process. The success of the layer-by-layer post ligand exchange process is revealed by XPS results where sulfur-containing oxide products, lead sulfite (PbSO3) and lead sulfate (PbSO4), are confirmed to be produced.146 In comparison to the EDT-treated nanoparticle, the density of energetic distribution of charge traps in QDs can be more effectively reduced by utilizing a shorter 3-mercaptocarboxylic acid ligand (MPA, creating an interparticle distance of ∼1.8 nm) that comprises functional groups of thiol and carboxylic acid.147 The use of the MPA ligand can cause a decrease in the trap state depth and recombination rate, improving the current density in the solar device.147 The shortest length halide atomic ligand was also applied to the treatment of PbS QDs, binding to surface defect sites that are inaccessible by typical alkyl thiol ligands due to their steric hindrance.151 Atomic halide passivation (Cl−, Br− and I−, ligand size scaling down to 0.1 nm) by post ligand exchange produces more pronounced passivation of the QDs surface, achieving an impressive solar cell efficiency of 6% under AM 1.5 G solar irradiation.151 Recently, a hybrid passivation method of post-ligand exchange using a combination of metal halide treatment and MPA treatment has resulted in immense efficiency of 7.4% in PbS nanocrystal heterojunction solar cells (see Fig. 25).153
Another approach for interface engineering of nanoparticles is to use a functional ligand containing tert-butyl N-(2-mercaptoethyl)carbamate for post ligand exchange, which can be in situ thermally shortened (see Fig. 12a).146 Utilizing a post ligand exchange, the typical TOPO ligand capped on the surface of CdSe NRs can be easily replaced by the tert-butyl N-(2-mercaptoethyl)carbamate ligand in the film of the hybrid P3HT/CdSe NRs device. As the tert-butoxycarbonyl (t-BOC group) in the carbamate ligand become unstable at a temperature range of 150–250 °C, heat treatment in this range can break the t-BOC group into isobutene and carbon dioxide (see Fig. 12a) and shorten this functional ligand, improving the solar conversion efficiency by ∼60 times.146 An acid-assisted washing method has also been employed to remove the ligands from as-prepared CdSe QDs, resulting in improvement of charge transfer between the P3HT polymer and the nanocrystals (see Fig. 12b).326 As illustrated in Fig. 12b, the hexanoic acid can directly react with the hexadecylamine ligand that is capped on the CdSe QDs, forming an ionic organic salt. This organic salt can readily dissolve in the washing solvent and thus, can be separated easily from the QDs by subsequent centrifugation. This acid treatment approach removes the insulating long-chain ligand, allowing an improved charge transfer between the P3HT and QDs as well as an improved electron transport between QDs.326
To conclude, major breakthroughs in this area can be achieved by the development of innovative nanochemistry methods to tailor the surface properties of nanocrystals. Interface engineering to control chemical, physical and electronic interactions at the nanocrystal surface in the nanoscale range plays a vital role for improving electrical transport in the nanocrystal-based devices. The impact of interface engineering of nanoparticles on practical PV devices is covered in Section D.
C6. Spray/printing
A key factor in developing third generation photovoltaics is the ability to utilize low cost production techniques, while maintaining a high device quality. Nanochemistry provides a very attractive approach of in situ generation of desired composition solution-processed thin films towards this goal, particularly for the ones involved in copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) or copper zinc tin sulfide (C2ZTS4) solar cell devices.329,330 Utilizing this approach, the reported performance of solution-processed C2ZT(SSe)4 solar cells has already exceeded that of traditionally vacuum-processed counterparts.330
Unlike particle-based solution processing, this approach utilizes fully dissolved precursor complexes in solvents, in which each of the elemental constituents are mixed on a molecular scale with precisely defined ratios and concentrations. For example, cupric chloride dehydrate (CuCl2·2H2O), zinc chloride (ZnCl2), stannic chloride (SnCl4) and thiourea are mixed in stoichiometric ratios in deionized water for the formation of a copper zinc tin sulfide C2ZTS4 absorber layer.331 A controlled spray-based system can be applied to deposit these absorber precursors on a temperature-controlled hot plate (see Fig. 13a); then in situ chemical reaction is implemented to prepare the film of C2ZTS4. Excellent film homogeneity can be realized by placing the sample at an appropriate distance from the spray head which is moved back and forth at a precisely defined speed. The film thickness can be easily and precisely controlled by the control of the spraying-time, the regulated gas rate, and the concentration of precursors. In addition, in situ nanochemical reactions can be implemented in a layer-by-layer manner, finally building up a low-cost solar cell device with impressive power conversion efficiency of ∼4.4%.331 The high performance of the resulting low-cost devices provides an opportunity to extend the impact of spray-based nanochemical approaches for new generation solar cells.
 Fig. 13  (a) A set-up for spray-based nanochemical fabrication of a thin film for a solar cell device. (b) Confocal images of a printed and patterned metallic gold structure with a 1 μm period: 1st quadrant shows transmission image, 2nd quadrant shows reflectance image, 3rd quadrant shows overlapped images, 4th quadrant shows 3D intensity profile. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA). 
Similar to chemical reactions in spray-based films, in situ nanochemical reactions can also be performed in patterned structures. A patterned-film comprising involved precursors can firstly be produced by a range of approaches, such as conventional lithography, screen-printing, inkjet printing, and pad printing.32 Then, implementation of a nanochemical reaction using heat, light, or other parameters can enable the fabrication of desired and patterned materials. A two-photon lithography approach has been utilized to prepare sub-wavelength metallic structures in a polymer matrix through in situ photon-reduction of a gold precursor (HAuCl4·3H2O) during pattern writing (see Fig. 13b).332 Simultaneous writing and reduction of gold precursors provides a good example for light-induced printing of patterned metallic structures, playing an important role for the improvement of the solar cell efficiency using plasmonic effects (see Section B2).
D. Nanomaterials-based solar cells
D1. Introduction
This section describes various types of QDs-based solar cells that have been fabricated, exploring the advantages of the use of nanomaterials.333–335 These solar cell structures are schematically represented in Fig. 14. Examples for each type are presented in the following.
The first type described in Section D2 is a hybrid bulk-heterojunction cell. Since the first report by Alivisatos and coworkers who used P3HT and CdSe NRs,126 this type of cell has shown efficient photovoltaic performance.336 This device configuration has the advantage of a bulk-heterojunction of nanocomposite that yields bicontinuous percolation pathways in the nanoscale phase. In particular, it is possible to choose a variety of polymers with tuned energy levels and absorption, for compatibility and exciton dissociation in QDs.
 Fig. 14  Various device configurations for QDs-based solar cells. (a) Hybrid polymer–QDs solar cell, (b) Schottky junction solar cell, (c) QDs sensitized solar cell, and (d) depleted heterojunction solar cell. 
The second type of QDs-based solar cell is a Schottky junction cell, described in Section D3. It has a simple device configuration where the QDs film has an ohmic contact with ITO, and on the other side of the QDs film, a low work function metal is deposited to create a built-in-potential at the Schottky junction.154,156 Various sizes of PbS and PbSe QDs have been adopted in this device to harvest infrared light and produce high current density. However, the open circuit voltage is limited to an order of half of the band gap of the QDs.
The third type, described in Section D4, is QDs-sensitized solar cells which utilize photoinduced charge separation at the CdSe–TiO2 interface, similar to that in dye-sensitized solar cells which have been widely investigated.3,337 They are easy to fabricate.
Another type of cells described in Section D5 is depleted heterojunction cells which involve the heterojunction of TiO2–PbS QDs.35,79 Currently, the highest power conversion efficiency (of ∼7%) is reported for this type of heterojunction cell among the various device architectures of QDs-based solar cells.153 The advantage of this device architecture and the materials science of QDs are described in Section D5.35,79,338,339
These types of cells are described in some detail in the respective subsections below. In addition, subsection D6 describes tandem and multijunction cells that couple many cells in tandem and utilize multiple heterojunctions.
D2. Hybrid bulk-heterojunction solar cells
A polymer solar cell is a bulk-heterojunction device composed of a π-conjugated polymer (e.g. P3HT, poly(3-hexylthiophene)) and a soluble fullerene derivative (e.g. PCBM, [6,6]-phenyl-C-61-butyric acid methyl ester fullerene).308 To date, the investigation of varying composition, morphology and annealing conditions, has led to power conversion efficiency (PCE) up to 8–9%.308 One promising direction to further increase the PCE is to replace the organic electron acceptor (PCBM) with solution-processed inorganic semiconductor nanoparticles, producing a new type of hybrid bulk-heterojunction solar cell. The advantages of inorganic and polymer hybrid nanocomposites have been described earlier in Section B3.
A broad variety of nanocrystals have been utilized in the hybrid polymer nanocrystal solar cells, including cadmium selenide (CdSe), cadmium sulfide (CdS), lead selenide (PbSe), lead sulfide (PbS), copper indium disulfide (CuInS2), silicon (Si) spherical nanocrystals, CdSe NRs as well as CdSe hyperbranched nanocrystals.333–336 In analogy to polymer solar cells, nanoscopic arrangement of the polymer and the inorganic QDs as well as their morphologies produced in the nanocomposite film, have pronounced effects on the PCE. This is because the polymer–inorganic interface is important for electron–hole charge separation, while a hopping electron transport is accomplished through the percolation pathway of inorganic QDs. Since the as-prepared QDs are covered with insulating long alkyl chain ligands like TOPO or OA, an efficient charge transfer from a π-conjugated polymer to the QDs requires appropriate interface engineering (see Section C5). It is also found that the percolation pathway of QDs is sensitive to the solvent and the composition of the blend, as well as to the morphological structures of QDs (e.g., the aspect ratio of nanorods, and the three dimensional (3D) structure of hyperbranched (or tetrapod) nanocrystals).333–336 Optimizations of the interface and the percolation pathway of QDs are important for improving solar conversion efficiency. Here, we describe some examples of QDs based bulk hetero-junction hybrid cells that utilize the principles described in Sections B3 and C5 to implement the optimization of these devices. In addition, in the development of hybrid PV cells, much attention is dedicated to semiconducting nanocrystals such as CdSe, CdS, PbSe and PbS. Hence, in the following, we focused on CdSe (CdS)-based and PbSe (PbS)-based hybrid hetero-junction cells.
D2.1 CdSe (CdS). Alivisatos et al. reported 1.7% of power conversion efficiency by controlling the aspect ratio of CdSe NRs dispersed in P3HT polymer (see Fig. 15).126 In their work, a high aspect ratio of nanorod was found to be favorable for forming a vertically aligned orientation during solvent evaporation which improved charge transport. Also they developed hyperbranched CdSe nanocrystals which exhibited better performance (2.2%), comparable to that utilizing NRs.340 This internal 3D structure of dendritic inorganic nanocrystals controlled nanoscale blending and morphology, leading to a preformed percolation network in the active layer. Several reports have described the removal of the surface ligand and morphology control by choosing a suitable solvent for spin-coating.324,325,341 Cao et al. reported that pyridine-capped CdS exhibited improved compatibility with MEH-PPV, resulting in a stronger donor–acceptor interaction in homogeneous blends and thereby better charge generation.325 On the other hand, in order to enhance miscibility of a polymer with nanocrystals and suppress nanocrystal segregation, a chemical modification of the end group of P3HT polymer was also demonstrated to control the morphology and yield a larger interfacial area for charge separation. In addition, other approaches such as direct coordination of thiophene-based dendrimers and oligomers to nanocrystals as well as layer-by-layer assembly of P3HT and nanocrystals through hydrogen bonding have been explored.132,342 A power conversion efficiency of 2.6% has been obtained in hybrid photovoltaic cells, where the P3HT nanofiber morphology with CdSe nanorod was optimized using a high boiling point solvent, 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (TCB).343 Similarly, improved efficiencies (2.4–2.8%) were also achieved in a blend film of CdSe tetrapods with poly(2,7-(9,9-dioctyl-fluorene)-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)) or poly(2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene).344,345 Another approach to enhance interfacial interaction between the nanoscopic inorganic nanocrystal and the polymer for charge generation is the use of a thermally cleavable solubilizing ligand as described in Section C5.146 Prasad and coworkers demonstrated a relative improvement in hybrid polymer composite PV cells of P3HT:CdSe nanocrystals (see Fig. 12a).146 Thermal deprotection processing of the tert-butoxycarbonyl (t-BOC) moiety in the carbamate ligand surrounding the surface of a CdSe nanocrystal significantly shortened the length of the ligand, and thus the distance between the nanocrystal and the polymer matrix. Furthermore, Krüger and coworkers presented an acid-assisted washing method to remove the ligand of as-prepared CdSe quantum dots, resulting in an improvement in charge transfer between the P3HT polymer and the nanocrystals (PCE = ∼2%) (see Fig. 12b).326 In situ formation of CdS nanocrystals in P3HT polymer was achieved by Leventis et al.346 This approach yielded a PCE of 0.7%. So far, there have been tremendous efforts to improve the device efficiency in a hybrid CdSe nanocrystal–P3HT polymer solar cell. Nevertheless, PCEs of all those devices could not exceed 3%. Very recently, the use of a low band gap polymer (poly[2,6-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)], PCPDTBT) with CdSe tetrapods gave rise to a significant enhancement in PCE (∼3.2%) due to a broad band absorption in the range of 350–800 nm.315 Recently, Meerholz and coworkers have enhanced the device performance (up to 3.6%) using a blend of both CdSe QDs and QRs that yielded a well-interconnected pathway for electrons within the p-type PCPDTBT polymer matrix (see Fig. 16).347
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic device structure consisting of P3HT and pyridine-capped CdSe nanorods. The molecular structure of P3HT and the energy band diagram between P3HT and CdSe. (b) EQEs of the resulting devices depending on the aspect ratio of the nanorod. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2002, American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
 Fig. 16  (a) The molecular structure of a low band gap polymer (PCPDTBT) and the pyridine-capped CdSe QDs and NRs. (b) The device performance (PCE and Jsc) as a function of the QDs/NRs weight ratio. The QDs/NRs composite (B) forms the best percolation pathway for electron transport compared to QDs (A) and NRs (C) alone. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 347. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA). 
Besides binary CdSe nanocrystals, several approaches utilizing multinary compounds such as type II CdTe/CdSe nanocrystal heterostructures and tetrapod ternary CdSexTe1–x nanocrystals have been investigated, but their performance is still low.348–350

D2.2 PbS (PbSe). Much research effort has been focused on lead chalcogenide nanocrystals (PbS and PbSe) to harness energy from near- or mid-infrared wavelengths beyond 700 nm, where almost one-half of the total solar AM 1.5 power resides.35 These Pb chalcogenide nanocrystals have tunable broad absorption bands throughout the IR region (from 800 nm to 1600 nm) due to their strong quantum-confined nature (see Section B1). In addition, NIR nanocrystals with low band gap can potentially provide efficient use of the short wavelength (ultraviolet) range of the solar spectrum via the MEG effect discussed earlier in Section B5.1. However, an important consideration in hybrid polymer nanocrystal solar cells is the ligand passivation of nanocrystals. Contrary to CdSe, ligand exchange of PbS (PbSe) nanocrystals by pyridine could not assure solution-processing after the capped oleic acid ligand was removed from the nanocrystal surface (see Section C5). Instead, Sargent et al. prepared octylamine-capped PbS nanocrystals by post ligand exchange, and reported a 200-fold increase in the short circuit current and a 600-fold increase in the maximum power output, as compared to that of the oleic acid-capped PbS and poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MEH-PPV) blend film.351 As a consequence, enhanced exciton dissociation at the improved interfacial contact and improved electron transport by a closer interparticle distance resulted in an enhancement of the photovoltaic performance after ligand exchange.352 Feng et al. utilized MDMO-PPV as the capping ligand for the synthesis of PbS nanocrystals and prepared a MDMO-PPV-capped PbS blend film, reporting more than one order higher power conversion efficiency than that of the pristine MDMO-PPV.353 A facile ligand exchange by post-chemical treatment using acetic acid as a short-length ligand was demonstrated for a OA-capped PbS nanocrystal and P3HT blend film, yielding an improvement of solar cell performance.319 By evaluating the photoluminescence decay, it was confirmed that the electronic interaction (charge generation) was more efficient between the polymer and the PbS nanocrystals after the chemical treatment of the nanoparticle surface. Jiang et al. reported a sizable photovoltaic response from PbSe nanocrystals in P3HT polymer, with an open circuit voltage of 0.3–0.4 V, and a short circuit current of ∼0.2 mA cm−2.354 In particular, this device showed a spectral response in the NIR range up to 2 μm, which was contributed by the embedded PbSe nanocrystals. A power conversion efficiency of 0.14% was achieved with PbSe nanocrystals (80 wt%) in P3HT (20 wt%) under AM 1.5G illumination by Cui et al., who reported 1.3% of current conversion efficiency (IPCE) derived at 805 nm.355 They improved the device efficiency (by two times) by modifying the device configuration from integrated planar (PbSe)/bulk heterojunction (PbSe-P3HT) structures.356 Pal et al. introduced TiO2 NRs into the PbS-P3HT blend film to make a ternary bulk-heterojunction device, enhancing the photoinduced electron-transfer from PbS to TiO2 (see Fig. 17a).357 However, the P3HT-based hybrid PbS(PbSe) nanocrystal-solar cells, discussed above, still exhibited very low PCE. It was mainly attributed to inefficient carrier generation by their poor type-I heterojunctions, because of a small energy difference between the valence band (5.0–5.2 eV) of PbS and the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO) (5.1 eV) of P3HT (see Fig. 11b). Recently, the problem of P3HT-PbS NC devices due to a poor type I-heterojunction has been overcome by the use of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (NWCTs).358 Izquierdo, Ma et al. prepared NIR-active PbS QDs-NWCTs nanostructures that are blended with P3HT (see Fig. 17b). The resulting nanohybrid bulk-heterojunction cell (P3HT:PbS QDs-NWCTs) exhibited a high PCE of 3.03% due to effective charge generation from PbS QDs, and better charge extraction toward each electrode through P3HT and MWCTs. With respect to the band alignment between the polymer and the PbS QDs, it is essential to use p-type polymers with a higher-lying HOMO level than that of P3HT (see the discussion on energy level matching in Section C4). Recently, Ginger, Jenekhe et al. prepared a new polymer, poly(2,3-didecyl-quinoxaline-5,8-diyl-alt-N-octyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole) (PDTPQx), with a HOMO of 4.61 eV and confirmed a significant photoinduced electron transfer from PDTPQx (band gap, Eg = 2 eV) to PbS QDs (∼3 nm diameter) in bulk heterojunction blends by photoinduced absorption (PIA) spectroscopy (see Fig. 18a).320 Using the ligand exchange procedure described earlier in Section C5, the oleic acid ligands of PbS QDs were replaced by butyl amine, prior to blending. This simple device (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Al) of PDTPQx/PbS (90:10 w/w) blend exhibited a power conversion efficiency of ∼0.55%. Prasad and coworkers have introduced the dithienopyrrole-based low band gap polymer (band gap, Eg = 1.4 eV) with a high-lying HOMO energy level to make bulk heterojunction blends with PbS QDs.321 Direct post chemical treatment of 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) for ligand exchange was applied to the blend film and consecutive deposition of a TiO2 layer resulted in an optimized hybrid bulk heterojunction device, giving rise to a broad spectral response and an impressive PV performance of 3.78% (see Fig. 18b). Such a post-deposition ligand exchange by thiol chemicals has also been adopted to a CdSe QDs:P3HT hybrid solar cell by Chen and coworkers to achieve a performance of 3.09% due to surface passivation of the nanocrystals (see also Section C5).359 Very recently, Tao and coworkers have observed direct hole extraction from PbS QDs to a low band gap polymer by quenching of PbS photoluminescence.360 The bilayered planar hybrid device configuration (PbS/polymer) established a type II-heterojunction in combination with hole and electron extraction layers of MoOx and ZnO, to yield a PCE of 3.8%.
 Fig. 17  (a) EQE spectra of the device (P3HT:PbS) with or without a TiO2 layer. TiO2 concentration was varied. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 357. Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics). (B) I–V curves of the P3HT blend devices with PCBM and with PbS QDs-MWCNT nanostructures (inset), respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 360. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA). 
 Fig. 18  (a) X-Channel (in-phase) photoinduced absorption spectra of the polymer:PbS QDs (∼3 nm) nanocomposite film where PDTPQx (red circles), PDTPPPz (green diamonds), and PDTPBT (blue squares) are used. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure and the device structure. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image shows the side view of the device and the surface morphology of the EDT-treated blend film of PDTPBT/PbS (10/90 wt%). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA). 
Among hybrid organic–inorganic nanocrystal solar cells, another design approach used is a planar heterojunction of bilayered device architecture which utilizes C60 and [6,6]-phenyl-C-61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). Silva et al. demonstrated an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 1.2% at 1150 nm in a butylamine-capped PbS/C60 hybrid cell, about two orders higher than that for a oleic acid-capped PbS/C60 device.361 Additional solvent treatment of butylamine-capped PbS resulted in an improvement in PCE, but was still low (0.14%). Bawendi et al. fabricated a PbS QDs-PCBM bilayered device where PCBM acted as the electron-transporting and hole-blocking layer.362 A two-step process consisting of air-annealing and thiol treatment caused a large decrease in charge recombination at the nanocrystal surface, yielding a FF as high as ∼60%. Tao and coworkers improved the device fabrication by performing thiol treatment and introducing a thin hybrid blend layer of PbS QDs:PCBM (wt ratio 30:1) between the p-type PbS QDs film and the n-type PCBM film, yielding a PCE of 3.7%.363
Besides cadmium and lead chalcogenide nanocrystals, copper indium disulfide (CuInS2) and silicon spherical nanocrystals have also been employed in hybrid solar cells, with an advantage that they are non-toxic and made from earth abundant compounds.364,365 In particular, a 35% Si NC (3–5 nm):P3HT blend device exhibited a PCE of 1.15%.365

D3. Schottky junction solar cells
For this type of cell, a colloidal nanocrystal film is in ohmic contact with the indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate, while a low work function metal (Al, Ca, Mg etc.) is deposited on the other side of the nanocrystal film, forming a Schottky junction with a built-in-potential where electrons are extracted and holes are repelled.339 Generally, chemical treatment of PbS and PbSe nanocrystals provides an excellent p-type semiconductor behavior to fabricate a typical Schottky junction with shallow metal contacts. The first PbS Schottky junction device with a PCE of 1% was demonstrated by replacing the long alkyl oleic acid ligand with a much shorter butylamine ligand to improve carrier transport.366 In particular, 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) or 1,4-benzenedithiol (BDT) treatment in a layer-by-layer deposition of PbS QDs resulted in a shorter interparticle distance and significantly decreased surface defects.156,367–369 The detailed procedure for post-ligand exchange has already been shown in Section C5. Moreover, the insertion of a thin LiF buffer layer between the nanocrystal film and the Al metal improved the Schottky device performance through enhancing the air-stability of the device.160 The use of PbS nanocrystals synthesized by a slow-growth method gave rise to a remarkable improvement in Voc and FF due to a largely reduced number of traps on the particle surface.370 As a result, an optimized PbS QDs-Schottky junction cell reported a PCE as high as 3–4%.370,371 On the other hand, for PbSe QDs Schottky cells, despite their high short-circuit current densities (Jsc), a relatively low Voc was found, where Voc is determined by the band-gap (Eg) of the QDs according to the equation,154 
(2) For example, a PbSe QDs Schottky cell with Au contacts, reported by Nozik and coworkers, exhibited a Voc of ∼0.05 V, due to the high work function of Au. Thus, contacts consisting of air-sensitive Ca or Mg metal, overcoated with Al were required to increase the observed built-in potential in the Schottky junction (Voc of 0.2–0.3 V) (see Fig. 19). Recently, the development of high quality small-sized PbSe QDs through low temperature synthesis resulted in a PCE of 2.8–4.57% (see Fig. 20).372,373 As an alternative, Alivisatos and coworkers have developed PbSxSe1–x ternary QDs to improve Voc and Jsc.374 Schottky cells incorporating these ternary QDs yielded a PCE of 3.3% under AM 1.5 (global) illumination. However, in terms of the device geometry and the open-circuit voltage, as mentioned in D1, the Schottky junction devices exhibit several drawbacks as follows (see also Section B4 on interface engineering):
Light is propagated through the nanocrystal film to reach the junction near the electron-collecting metal for charge-generation. So, a film thicker than 200 nm usually gives rise to a decrease in the device performance due to inefficient charge generation and charge transport.
The Schottky PV cells have a limited open-circuit voltage, approximately half of the nanocrystal band gap, due to Fermi level pinning at the semiconductor-metal interface.35,339
 Fig. 19  Schottky junction cell. (a) A typical I–V curve from the device of ITO/PbSe NC/metal electrode. The PbS QDs with a Eg of 0.9 eV were used. (b) Cross sectional SEM image of a Schottky device. (c) Equilibrium band diagram for a Schottky junction, (d) EQE spectra of a Schottky junction device. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 20  (a) The absorption spectra of ultrasmall PbSe nanocrystals in solution. The inset indicates correlation between the first exciton peak and the synthesis temperature. (b) The device performance of the PbSe Schottky junction cell and its dependence on the PbSe nanocrystal size. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 373. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). 
D4. QDs-sensitized solar cells
Quantum dot-sensitized solar cells can be regarded as an analogue of dye-sensitized solar cells that involve a working electrode, an electrolyte and a counter electrode. Usually, a layer of mesoporous nanocrystalline semiconductor (TiO2 or ZnO) on an FTO or ITO glass, acts as a working electrode where the absorption by QDs onto the mesoporous film results in a photoinduced-charge generation at the interface between TiO2 and QDs. A polysulfide liquid electrolyte is commonly used to electrochemically transport the holes to the counter electrode which is made of a conductive glass coated with the layer of a catalyst (Pt, Au).337
There are two primary methods for assembling QDs on the TiO2 surface for QDSSCs. One involves a post-synthesis attachment of QDs to TiO2 through physical absorption375,376 or through a molecular linker with a functional group;377 the other involves in situ generation of QDs onto TiO2 through chemical bath deposition (CBD)378 or successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR).379 In particular, the SILAR method has been discussed in detail in Section C3. In early studies, QDSSCs prepared through post-synthesis attachment methods had yielded low device power conversion efficiencies (PCE) (∼1%).380 QDSSCs prepared by SILAR and containing a single layer of CdS or CdSe have also exhibited relatively low PCEs (∼1–2%).337 CdS/CdSe co-sensitization has been extensively studied to facilitate the absorption of CdSe on the CdS-absorbed TiO2 layer and broaden the absorption spectra in the visible range.298,381–384 Thus, a QDSSC containing both CdS and CdSe, as well as a ZnS blocking layer, has shown a much higher PCE (∼4.22%).384 Baker and Kamat et al. reported that the dipping cycle of the CdS/CdSe layer can be optimized to control the size of QDs and the PCE of QDSSCs.337 In addition, many efforts have been dedicated to modifications of the counter electrode utilizing CoS, Cu2S and rGO (reduced graphene oxide) etc. Recently, a power conversion efficiency of 5.4% has been achieved in a Mn-doped CdS/CdSe QDs-cosensitized solar cell (see Fig. 21).385
 Fig. 21  Quantum dot-sensitized solar cells. (a) Schematic mechanism for electron transfer from Mn-doped CdS to TiO2. Aqueous sulfide electrolyte and a Cu2S/rGO counter electrode were used. (b) IPCE spectra for CdS and CdS/CdSe-sensitized cells with or without Mn doping. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 
Several groups have investigated PbS QDs as NIR light-sensitizers in quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). Hyun et al. studied electron injection from PbS QDs to TiO2 nanoparticles as a function of the size of PbS QDs.161 They demonstrated that an efficient electron transfer from PbS to TiO2 occurred only for PbS QDs with diameter less than ∼4.3 nm. Unfortunately, QDSSCs with the traditional iodide-based electrolyte exhibited a low PCE (0.28%). Grätzel, Nazeeruddin, and coworkers reported an increased PCE (>1%) by incorporating a solid-state organic hole conductor, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMETAD) into a PbS QDSSC.300 Later, they improved the device performance to ∼2% by developing a new cobalt complex electrolyte to make a regenerative QDSSC with a reasonable stability of QDs.379 In addition, it was found that coating a layer of CdS QDs on the PbS/CdS QDs by the SILAR technique can stabilize the PV performance without any significant photocorrosion problem.386 To date, the use of PbS QDs co-capped with oleic acid and 1-dodecanethiol (DT) has led to an enhancement of the device performance (∼3.3%) and also improved device stability.387 Dutta and co-workers used ZnO NRs decorated with gold nanoparticles to fabricate dye-sensitized solar cells.388 They achieved a PCE of 6.49%, which they attributed to the formation of a Schottky barrier at the ZnO/Au interface and higher optical absorption of the ZnO/Au photoelectrode arising from the surface plasmon absorption of Au nanoparticles. Another approach to introduce light harvesting (sensitizer) QDs in QDs-sensitized solar cells is the deposition of QDs in the form of an extremely thin absorber (ETA) onto TiO2, using chemical bath deposition (CBD). An ETA cell based on Sb2S3-sensitized mesoscopic TiO2 films and the polymer:PCBM heterojunction, reached a PCE of 6.3% (see Fig. 22).389,390 Very recently, a high PCE of 9.7% has been achieved in a solid-state mesoscopic solar cell employing (CH3NH3)PbI3 perovskite nanocrystals as light absorber and the spiro-MeOTAD film as a hole-transporting layer.391
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure, (b) energy band diagram, and (c) I–V curve, of the mp-TiO2/Sb2S3/PCPDTBT (low band gap polymer)-PCBM device. Note that this I–V curve is inverted as compared to Fig. 1(c) and 19(a) due to the different definition of current directions. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 390. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). 
D5. Depleted Heterojunction Solar Cells
CdSe and CdTe NRs have been used together to construct a bilayer heterojunction configuration.392 On the ITO substrate, CdTe NRs were deposited first and the capping pyridine ligand was removed via baking. Then, the deposition of CdSe NRs on the layer of CdTe NRs established a planar donor–acceptor junction, which yielded a PCE of 3%. In a similar manner, Cu2S nanocrystals have been employed as an active light absorbing layer in combination with CdS NRs to produce a solution-processed solar cell with 1.6% PCE.393 The device showed good stability over 4 months and a comparable efficiency, even during the bending of the flexible plastic substrate. Even with a flexible plastic substrate instead of ITO, the device exhibited a comparable performance in a bent geometry of the device substrate, to that in the original flat one. Recently, Yang's group has developed a method to prepare CdS–Cu2S core–shell nanowires using a solution-based cation exchange reaction.394 They demonstrated efficient nanowire-based solar cells with a PCE of ∼5.4% due to a well-defined heterojunction with minimized interface defects and recombination sites.
PV devices utilizing the heterojunction between a p-type PbS (or PbSe) NC film and a n-type layer such as ZnO and TiO2, have been widely investigated, reaching promising power conversion efficiencies of 3.0–5.0%.35,339,395,396 Sargent and coworkers reported a depleted heterojunction device consisting of nanoporous TiO2 film and PbS nanocrystal film, which yielded a PCE up to ∼5% (see Fig. 23a and b).147 Using a similar structure, Cater et al. also achieved a PCE of 3% and demonstrated a largely increasing Jsc (∼30 mA cm−2) under low temperature.397 This TiO2–PbS heterojunction configuration overcomes the limitation (the limited light propagation and low Voc) of the Schottky junction, as described earlier in section D3. For a thick film Schottky device, the incident light is hard to reach the junction near the electron-collecting metal without any losses. In contrast, the TiO2–PbS device has a favorable device configuration for light propagation because the junction is formed on the front side of the PbS nanocrystals layer that is deposited on a TiO2 film above the ITO (or FTO) substrate. The use of an electron acceptor with a shallow work function can facilitate efficient charge separation and produce a higher open-circuit voltage, as compared to the Schottky junction. Larger band gap (smaller size) PbS nanocrystals are favorable for electron transfer from PbS to TiO2. An optimized efficiency was obtained with the 3.7 nm-size (Eg = 1.3 eV) PbS nanocrystals (see Fig. 23c).147 An enhanced performance has also been achieved by the control of the energy level of TiO2 through Zr doping, or using an improved device structure of a quantum funnel (multi-band gap) heterojunction cell.82,162,397–399 Recently, several other approaches have been demonstrated for improving the solar cell efficiency by chemically engineering the interface between the layer of PbS QDs and the layer of Au metal electrode via insertion of a hole extraction layer.400–402 Nozik and coworkers found that a precise control over the size of PbS QDs and the thickness of the PbS layer can manipulate the electron flow directions in the device configuration of ITO/ZnO/PbS/Ag (or Au), having a double diode characteristic [a favorable heterojunction diode (ZnO–PbS) and a leaky Schottky junction diode (PbS-metal)].400 It was thus concluded that a hole-injection barrier, resulting from the Schottky barrier at the PbS NC/metal interface, could impede hole-extraction by the metal. Thus, Nozik's, Bawendi's, and Bulovic's groups addressed this interface problem by introducing a layer of transition metal oxide (MoO3, MoOx and V2Ox) in between the ZnO–PbS film and the anode metal electrode, successfully demonstrating a significant improvement of current extraction by the anode metal (see Fig. 24).401,402
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration of a depleted heterojunction device structure of TiO2–PbS QDs, (b) energy band diagram, and (c) I–V curve of the device and its dependence on the size of PbS QDs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of the effect of a MoO3 thin film on the ZnO–PbS heterojunction device structure, and (b) I–V curve of the ZnO–PbS heterojunction device with or without MoO3 as the hole-extraction layer. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 402. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). 
In addition to addressing the interface problem between the light-absorbing layer and the metallic electrode, much attention has also been dedicated to chemically address the interface of QDs to achieve an efficient PV performance (see Sections B4 and C5). The ligand exchange strategy involving a variety of thiol, amine, and acid-based short ligands has been developed to reduce the interparticle distance and passivate the surface defects for improved carrier transport.402–405 The interface engineering of QDs has been described earlier in detail in Section C5. Importantly, an atomic-inorganic ligand passivation strategy,151,152 in combination with the organic thiol treatment, has been suggested as a unique hybrid-multiple passivation method, producing a dramatic improvement in the current density and a 7% PCE in the depleted heterojunction architecture (see Fig. 25).153
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic device structure of a depleted heterojunction; (b) SEM cross section image of the device; (c) schematic cross section of PbS QDs, with organic passivation by MPA (left) and hybrid passivation by halide and MPA (right), and (d) I–V curve of the devices with different passivation types. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group). 
Besides cadmium and lead chalcogenide nanocrystals, efficient solution-processable CZTS(Se) and CIGS(Se) solar cells using their nanocrystal forms have been also fabricated; these compounds are non-toxic, low-cost and earth-abundant.330,406–410 Recently, Bi2S3 nanocrystals have drawn much interest, as they are n-type materials with non-toxicity and a high absorption coefficient.411 Konstantatos and coworkers fabricated a PbS QDs–Bi2S3 QDs bilayer heterojunction device, and subsequently, presented a bulk nano-heterojunction architecture which achieved a threefold higher efficiency of 4.87%.412
D6. Tandem solar cells
Usually QDs with one single band gap have the disadvantage of having a narrow absorption band, resulting in the limitation of performance of a single junction cell. That is, a very broad absorption spectrum is not feasible in one single constituent of a precise size and shape. Moreover, a thicker single film with strong absorption is undesirable due to a short exciton diffusion length in the active absorbing layer. Therefore, a tandem cell approach, consisting of multiple layers, each with its own specific absorption band, can overcome this limitation.413 In addition to covering a larger part of the solar spectrum, tandem solar cells offer the distinct advantage that photon energy is used more efficiently, because the voltage at which charges are collected in each sub-cell is closer to the energy of the photons absorbed in that cell.413 A tandem device commonly consists of a range of junctions, with the bottom cell having a high band gap material and the top cell having a low band gap material.24,25 The lower energy light is incident onto the top cell through the bottom cell that has absorbed the higher energy light. Hanrath, Cornell and coworkers demonstrated the first nanocrystal tandem cell using size-tuned PbS QDs with energy gaps of 1.6 eV (for the visible junction) and 1.0 eV (for the infrared junction), and produced a high open-circuit voltage of 1 V (see Fig. 26a).414 Sargent and coworkers introduced a graded recombination layer, between two stacked depleted heterojunction cells, to achieve the barrier-free access of electrons from the back cell and to efficiently recombine the hole extracted from the front cell (see Fig. 26b).24 This tandem solar cell yielded a high open-circuit voltage of 1.06 V and a PCE of 4.2%. Furthermore, there are a few examples based on a new architecture using multi-component absorbers. Prasad and coworkers developed hybrid solar cells using a hydrazine-treated PbSe QDs layer and a P3HT/PCBM bulk-heterojunction for achieving carrier multiplication and efficient extraction from PbSe QDs in the PV device (see Fig. 27a).415 But, the resulting device showed a lower efficiency than that in the P3HT/PCBM bulk-heterojunction device, due to the absorption overlap between the PbSe film and the P3HT/PCBM film. Luther and coworkers have presented a new device architecture consisting of a p-type inorganic PbS nanocrystal/organic polymer:PCBM bulk-heterojunction (see Fig. 27b).416 Fine tuning of energy-levels of mutli-constituents resulted in efficient exciton generation and an extended spectral response. In this structure, PCBM acted as an acceptor for electrons produced from either the PbS QDs or the polymer, while PbS QDs and the polymer both acted as light absorbers for exciton dissociation and hole-transport. The use of small-sized PbS QDs was favorable of exciton generation with PCBM at the interface, producing a PCE of 4.1%.
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic device structure of the tandem cell using an optimized band-gap combination of PbS QDs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 414. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA). (b) Schematic energy band diagram of the tandem cell with a graded recombination layer. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group). 
 Fig. 27  Schematic energy band diagram of hybrid device architectures of (a) PbSe nanocrystals (reprinted with permission from ref. 415. Copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics), and (b) PbS nanocrystals in combination with a polymer:PCBM bulk heterojunction. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 416. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA). 
E. Conclusions and perspectives
Nanochemistry and nanomaterials thus produced have provided numerous opportunities to develop a third generation of solar cells with impressive solar energy conversion efficiencies, but at a low fabrication cost. Through the control of size, shape, and composition, colloidal QDs can harvest sun light over a broad range of the spectrum and also enable fabrication of solution-processable tandem solar cells. Plasmonic nanostructures of metals or semiconductors and transparent conductors with appreciable free carrier concentrations produced by colloidal chemistry methods, enable tunable strong absorption from the ultraviolet to IR range to offer effective ways for reducing the thickness of light-absorbing layers, and thus eliminating or alleviating the trade-off between charge extraction and optical absorption. Solution processing of polymer/QDs or polymer/QRs nanocomposites with a close contact nanointerface provides efficient interfacial charge transfer, fully exploring the advantages of combining these two classes of materials. Multiple exciton generation in QDs, singlet exciton fission in dyes, photon quantum cutting in lanthanide-doped nanoparticles, as well as photon down-conversion in Stokes-shifted luminescent nanomaterials, produce unconventional ways to more efficiently harvest underutilized ultraviolet light by reduction of thermalization losses in light-absorbing materials. Photon up-conversion, realized through ladder-like energy levels in lanthanide-doped nanoparticles and triplet–triplet annihilation in organics, provides a novel approach to convert currently unutilized infrared (IR) photons into usable visible emissions, breaking the Shockley–Queisser limit set for a single junction solar device. Nanochemical interface engineering of nanoparticle surfaces with appropriate ligands and the junction-interfaces with varying methods, enables efficient processes of charge separation and collection. These specifically tailored nanomaterials with controlled synthesis together with interface engineering using nanochemistry have yielded a rapid increase in the efficiency of recent nanomaterial-based solar cells. These strategies, however, are not limited to a specific type of solar cell; they also have implications to all kinds of solar cells.
We need to understand that despite this promise provided by nanomaterials and nanochemistry, the world-record efficiencies of current nanomaterials-based solar devices are still below or around 10%. There are still a number of technical challenges which need to be addressed in full in order to break the barriers and produce commercially viable nanomaterials-based solar devices. Some of the major challenges are described here.
First, the weak excitonic absorption in a low band-gap semiconductor does not provide sufficient harvesting of IR photons. New, strongly IR absorbing materials are needed. Multiple exciton generation, singlet exciton fission and quantum cutting are exciting concepts, but their effective implementation requires minimization of competing relaxation processes. The currently achieved efficiencies are not practical or useful. Appropriate control of nanoscale excitation dynamics by suitable nanochemistry is to be established.
The use of nanoscale materials also introduces numerous highly active nano-interfaces which can enhance surface induced relaxation and impede interfacial charge transfer. As pointed out earlier, this is particularly a major issue in the case of solution prepared QDs which are surrounded by ligands that can act as a barrier for charge separation and transport. These nano-interfaces also adversely affect migration of charge carriers, thus reducing the charge collection ability.
The transmission and the thermalization losses are still the two main losses for solar cell devices. Efficient ways to overcome or reduce these losses are of fundamental importance for solar energy conversion. Photon up- and down-conversion are some of the most promising ways for this endeavor, but they need new advancements.
Adhesion with an appropriate electrical contact, particularly with the use of a flexible substrate can pose severe problems in terms of device efficiency and stability. Appropriate interfacial chemistry needs to be used to ensure good adhesion and produce new, transparent electrode materials more compatible with a flexible electrode.
New advances in the solar field are required in order to meet these technical challenges. Fig. 28 lists some of the future directions where opportunities exist for the chemical community to make major impacts in this field.
 Fig. 28  Some of the future directions from a practical view of nanomaterial development and device fabrication in the field of solar cells. 
New IR absorbers
New materials with strong IR absorption need to be developed. A promising group is doped semiconductors with strong plasmonic absorption due to abundant free carriers, and also with intra-band/impurity band transitions. Solution-based chemical synthesis with controlled doping provides an opportunity for the chemical community. The absorption can further be amplified by plasmonic interactions and photon trapping as presented earlier in Section B2.
New surface ligands for improved carrier mobility
Since the ligands capping the nanocrystals act as barriers for electron transfer, nanochemical approaches to treat the surface are important. The optoelectronic model proposed by Sargent's group predicts doubling of efficiency of a depleted heterojunction solar cell (e.g., accomplishing 10–15% PCE) when the current hole and electron mobilities of QDs are increased by an order of magnitude.339 Instead of the shortening or eliminating ligands frequently used in literature, a new approach is to replace the insulating ligand with a pi-conjugated aromatic unit-based ligand, which can provide conductive path ways to facilitate charge transfer as well as increase charge mobility. In addition, mobility boosting structural units can be introduced to provide enhancement of carrier mobility. An example is our work on photodetectors, where a polyaromatic ring, pentacene, was generated in situ to facilitate carrier transport by stacking of the aromatic rings with a strong overlap of their pi-orbitals.417
In situ generation of nanoparticles
In situ generation of nanoparticles by using novel nanochemistry and design of appropriate precursors can avoid the use of insulating ligands capping the semiconductor nanoparticles, and produce nanocomposites with direct contact between the nanoparticle and the polymer for hybrid solar cells. These new nanochemical approaches to in situ produce well-defined semiconductor nanostructures can lead to significant enhancement of the solar conversion efficiency.
Photon up- and down-conversion
The utilization of photon up- or down-conversion requires a control of phonon-induced dynamics as well as surface-induced relaxations. This requires a judicious choice and control of the nanocrystal lattice, together with appropriate surface coatings. In addition, the extinction coefficient of lanthanide ions is low, which is limited by the intrinsic nature of 4f–4f optical transitions.65 An antenna effect from dyes, plasmons, quantum dots, or other doping elements with a strong absorption is invaluable for overcoming the weak and sharp absorption of lanthanides, boosting the use of spectral converters in solar cells. The extension of triplet–triplet up-conversion wavelengths to the IR wavelength range is another promising way. This requires a new molecular design paradigm to be developed.
Flexible substrate and transparent electrodes
To facilitate adhesion to a flexible (plastic substrate), one may introduce chemical modifications that provide chemical anchoring sites. Development of transparent electrode materials, other than those based on ITO or FTO, is another very active area of materials chemistry.
Printing and spray fabrication
Printing and spray technologies require new methods to generate in situ functional nanomaterials with good interfacial adhesion.
Portable energy
Lastly, a new direction for alternate energy is portable energy where energy harvested under day light or in a different geographic location can be stored and transported. In addition, the heat generated during the harvesting or storage function can be partially recovered using new generation nanomaterials through an efficient thermoelectric effect. The use of nanomaterials provides new design criteria for a more efficient function of storage as well as thermoelectric power generation. This topic is aside the scope of this review.
AcknowledgementsThis work and our research quoted in this review were supported in part by the grants from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (Grant No. 95500910361), and the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51102066).
Notes and referencesK. Kalyanasundaram and M. Gratzel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24190–24194 RSC .A. J. Nozik and J. Miller, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6443–6445 CrossRef CAS .M. Graetzel, R. A. J. Janssen, D. B. Mitzi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2012, 488, 304–312 CrossRef CAS .W. Y. Wong and C. L. Ho, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1246–1256 CrossRef CAS .N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS .A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. C. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .A. I. Hochbaum and P. D. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 527–546 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 368–368 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Servaites, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4410–4422 CAS .H. Aguas, S. K. Ram, A. Araujo, D. Gaspar, A. Vicente, S. A. Filonovich, E. Fortunato, R. Martins and I. Ferreira, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4620–4632 CAS .A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Y. Yi and A. K. Chandiran, Science, 2011, 334, 1203–1203 CrossRef CAS .P. K. Nayak, G. Garcia-Belmonte, A. Kahn, J. Bisquert and D. Cahen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6022–6039 CAS .E. C. Garnett, M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and M. D. McGehee, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 269–295 CrossRef CAS .B. E. Hardin, H. J. Snaith and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 162–169 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Schwede, I. Bargatin, D. C. Riley, B. E. Hardin, S. J. Rosenthal, Y. Sun, F. Schmitt, P. Pianetta, R. T. Howe, Z. X. Shen and N. A. Melosh, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 762–767 CrossRef CAS .H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 865–865 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. S. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9 Search PubMed .G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS .D. Erickson, D. Sinton and D. Psaltis, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 583–590 CrossRef CAS .Y. Z. Lin, Y. F. Li and X. W. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245–4272 RSC .D. Timmerman, I. Izeddin, P. Stallinga, I. N. Yassievich and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 105–109 CrossRef CAS .A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 174–177 CrossRef CAS .E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 133–135 CrossRef CAS .X. H. Wang, G. I. Koleilat, J. Tang, H. Liu, I. J. Kramer, R. Debnath, L. Brzozowski, D. A. R. Barkhouse, L. Levina, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 480–484 CrossRef CAS .L. T. Dou, J. B. You, J. Yang, C. C. Chen, Y. J. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6891–6936 CrossRef CAS .B. M. van der Ende, L. Aarts and A. Meijerink, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 11081–11095 RSC .D. Chen, Y. Wang and M. Hong, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 73–90 CrossRef CAS .X. Huang, S. Han, W. Huang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 173–201 RSC .W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .H. Lee, M. K. Wang, P. Chen, D. R. Gamelin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4221–4227 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Habas, H. A. S. Platt, M. F. A. M. van Hest and D. S. Ginley, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6571–6594 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Tang and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 12–29 CrossRef CAS .G. Conibeer, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Powell, M. T. Winkler, H. J. Choi, C. B. Simmons, D. B. Needleman and T. Buonassisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5874–5883 Search PubMed .M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 565–572 Search PubMed .M. A. Green, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2009, 17, 183–189 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 12–20 Search PubMed .D. E. Carlson and C. R. Wronski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 28, 671–673 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Shah, H. Schade, M. Vanecek, J. Meier, E. Vallat-Sauvain, N. Wyrsch, U. Kroll, C. Droz and J. Bailat, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2004, 12, 113–142 CrossRef CAS .R. Slunjski, I. Capan, B. Pivac, A. Le Donne and S. Binetti, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 559–563 CrossRef CAS .J. K. Rath, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 76, 431–487 CrossRef CAS .X. Z. Wu, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 803–814 CrossRef CAS .T. Aramoto, S. Kumazawa, H. Higuchi, T. Arita, S. Shibutani, T. Nishio, J. Nakajima, M. Tsuji, A. Hanafusa, T. Hibino, K. Omura, H. Ohyama and M. Murozono, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 36, 6304–6305 CrossRef CAS .K. Ramanathan, M. A. Contreras, C. L. Perkins, S. Asher, F. S. Hasoon, J. Keane, D. Young, M. Romero, W. Metzger, R. Noufi, J. Ward and A. Duda, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2003, 11, 225–230 CrossRef CAS .M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, J. P. Schmidtke, L. Dunn, A. Dodabalapur, P. F. Barbara and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16770–16777 CrossRef CAS .B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS .T. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 17–28 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664–670 CrossRef CAS .X. G. Peng, L. Manna, W. D. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59–61 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Smith and S. M. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 24–26 CrossRef CAS .E. Cassette, T. Pons, C. Bouet, M. Helle, L. Bezdetnaya, F. Marchal and B. Dubertret, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6117–6124 CrossRef CAS .E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 515–522 CrossRef CAS .R. S. Selinsky, Q. Ding, M. S. Faber, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012 Search PubMed .T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .J. Z. Zhao, S. M. Ji and H. M. Guo, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 937–950 RSC .Y. C. Simon and C. Weder, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20817–20830 RSC .P. N. Prasad, Nanophotonics, Wiley, Hoboken, NJ,  2004 Search PubMed .G. Chen, C. Yang and P. N. Prasad, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013 DOI:10.1021/ar300270y .F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139–173 CrossRef CAS .F. Wang and X. G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 976–989 RSC .G. F. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 322–332 CrossRef CAS .S. V. Eliseeva and J. C. G. Bunzli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 189–227 RSC .M. Haase and H. Schafer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5808–5829 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Cho, J. Seo, K. H. Kim, D. H. Choi and P. N. Prasad, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 146–151 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Cho, J. Seo, H. S. Oh, H. Jee, W. J. Kim, K. H. Kim, M. H. Hoang, D. H. Choi and P. N. Prasad, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 5566–5571 CrossRef CAS .L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .A. R. Denton and N. W. Ashcroft, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1991, 43, 3161–3164 CrossRef CAS .R. E. Bailey and S. M. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7100–7106 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. R. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 2001, 50, 1–208 CrossRef CAS .E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 325–331 CrossRef CAS .A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS .Z. J. Ning, H. N. Tian, C. Z. Yuan, Y. Fu, H. Y. Qin, L. C. Sun and H. Agren, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1536–1538 RSC .J. Tang, H. Liu, D. Zhitomirsky, S. Hoogland, X. H. Wang, M. Furukawa, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS .M. Shalom, S. Buhbut, S. Tirosh and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2436–2441 CrossRef CAS .O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 508–515 CrossRef CAS .Q. Q. Dai, Y. N. Wang, X. B. Li, Y. Zhang, D. J. Pellegrino, M. X. Zhao, B. Zou, J. Seo, Y. D. Wang and W. W. Yu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1518–1524 CrossRef CAS .I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue, G. Allan and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS .A. Luque and S. Hegedus, Handbook of photovoltaic science and engineering, 2nd edn, Wiley, Chichester, West Sussex, U.K.,  2011 Search PubMed .M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Y. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. N. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Jones, K. D. Osberg, R. J. Macfarlane, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3736–3827 CrossRef CAS .Y. X. Zhao, H. C. Pan, Y. B. Lou, X. F. Qiu, J. J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4253–4261 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS .F. Scotognella, G. Della Valle, A. R. S. Kandada, D. Dorfs, M. Zavelani-Rossi, M. Conforti, K. Miszta, A. Comin, K. Korobcheyskaya, G. Lanzani, L. Manna and F. Tassone, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4711–4717 CrossRef CAS .I. Kriegel, C. Y. Jiang, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, R. D. Schaller, D. V. Talapin, E. da Como and J. Feldmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1583–1590 CrossRef CAS .G. Garcia, R. Buonsanti, E. L. Runnerstrom, R. J. Mendelsberg, A. Llordes, A. Anders, T. J. Richardson and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4415–4420 CrossRef CAS .X. Liu, X. Wang, B. Zhou, W. C. Law, A. N. Cartwright and M. T. Swihart, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1256–1264 CrossRef CAS .M. Kanehara, H. Koike, T. Yoshinaga and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17736–17737 CrossRef CAS .G. V. Naik, J. Kim and A. Boltasseva, Opt. Mater. Express, 2011, 1, 1090–1099 CrossRef CAS .K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3995–3998 CrossRef CAS .E. T. Yu, D. Derkacs, S. H. Lim, P. Matheu and D. M. Schaadt, Proc. SPIE–Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2008, 7033, 70331V–70331 CrossRef .J. Mertz, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2000, 17, 1906–1913 CrossRef CAS .M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of optics: electromagnetic theory of propagation, interference and diffraction of light, 7th expanded edn, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .D. M. Schaadt, B. Feng and E. T. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063106 CrossRef .D. Derkacs, S. H. Lim, P. Matheu, W. Mar and E. T. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 093103 CrossRef .S. Pillai, K. R. Catchpole, T. Trupke and M. A. Green, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 093105 CrossRef .D. Derkacs, W. V. Chen, P. M. Matheu, S. H. Lim, P. K. L. Yu and E. T. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 091107 CrossRef .K. Nakayama, K. Tanabe and H. A. Atwater, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 121904 CrossRef .K. R. Catchpole and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21793–21800 CrossRef CAS .X. Sheng, J. J. Hu, J. Michel and L. C. Kimerling, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 24699–24700 CrossRef .K. R. Catchpole and A. Polman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 191113 CrossRef .J. L. Wu, F. C. Chen, Y. S. Hsiao, F. C. Chien, P. L. Chen, C. H. Kuo, M. H. Huang and C. S. Hsu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 959–967 CrossRef CAS .C. C. D. Wang, W. C. H. Choy, C. H. Duan, D. D. S. Fung, W. E. I. Sha, F. X. Xie, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1206–1211 RSC .J. Yang, J. B. You, C. C. Chen, W. C. Hsu, H. R. Tan, X. W. Zhang, Z. R. Hong and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6210–6217 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Qi, X. N. Dang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7108–7116 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Brown, T. Suteewong, R. S. S. Kumar, V. D'Innocenzo, A. Petrozza, M. M. Lee, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 438–445 CrossRef CAS .C. Hagglund, M. Zach, G. Petersson and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053110 CrossRef .M. Kirkengen, J. Bergli and Y. M. Galperin, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 093713 CrossRef .J. Chantana, Y. Q. Yang, Y. Sobajima, C. Sada, A. Matsuda and H. Okamoto, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2012, 358, 2319–2323 CrossRef CAS .F. J. Haug, T. Soderstrom, O. Cubero, V. Terrazzoni-Daudrix and C. Ballif, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 064509 CrossRef .P. Berini, Opt. Express, 2000, 7, 329–335 CrossRef CAS .P. Berini, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2000, 61, 10484–10503 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Dionne, L. A. Sweatlock, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 035407 CrossRef .L. H. Slooff, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, D. J. D. Moet, J. Sweelssen and M. M. Koetse, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 143506 CrossRef .V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, H. B. B. T. Li, R. E. I. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 183503 CrossRef .S. Liu, G. Y. Chen, P. N. Prasad and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4098–4101 CrossRef CAS .L. W. Liu, H. Ding, K. T. Yong, I. Roy, W. C. Law, A. Kopwitthaya, R. Kumar, F. Erogbogbo, X. H. Zhang and P. N. Prasad, Plasmonics, 2011, 6, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .C. Sanchez, B. Julian, P. Belleville and M. Popall, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3559–3592 RSC .L. Zhao and Z. Q. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4353–4368 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Chen, Z. Xu, Z. R. Hong and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2575–2598 RSC .N. Hundt, K. Palaniappan, P. Sista, J. W. Murphy, J. Hao, H. Nguyen, E. Stein, M. C. Biewer, B. E. Gnade and M. C. Stefan, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 1624–1632 RSC .C. Querner, A. Benedetto, R. Demadrille, P. Rannou and P. Reiss, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4817–4826 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Liu, T. Tanaka, K. Sivula, A. P. Alivisatos and J. M. J. Frechet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6550–6551 CrossRef CAS .C. Querner, P. Reiss, J. Bleuse and A. Pron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11574–11582 CrossRef CAS .G. Kalyuzhny and R. W. Murray, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7012–7021 CrossRef CAS .J. Xu, J. Wang, M. Mitchell, P. Mukherjee, M. Jeffries-EL, J. W. Petrich and Z. Q. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12828–12833 CrossRef CAS .Y. M. Kang, N. G. Park and D. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 113101 CrossRef .L. Zhao, X. C. Pang, R. Adhikary, J. W. Petrich and Z. Q. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3958–3962 CrossRef CAS .A. Watt, E. Thomsen, P. Meredith and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2334–2335 RSC .A. Stavrinadis, R. Beal, J. M. Smith, H. E. Assender and A. A. R. Watt, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3105–3109 CrossRef CAS .S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17726–17727 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Lai, W. F. Lee, I. C. Wu, C. C. Kang, D. Y. Chen, L. J. Chen and P. T. Chou, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7284–7289 RSC .H. C. Liao, S. Y. Chen and D. M. Liu, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6558–6563 CrossRef CAS .M. Gratzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 143–184 CrossRef CAS .P. Persson, M. J. Lundqvist, R. Ernstorfer, W. A. Goddard and F. Willig, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2006, 2, 441–451 CrossRef CAS .J. Seo, W. J. Kim, S. J. Kim, K. S. Lee, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 133302 CrossRef .A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, I. J. Kramer, A. R. Barkhouse, X. H. Wang, G. Konstantatos, R. Debnath, L. Levina, I. Raabe, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3374–3380 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Kovalenko, M. Scheele and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2009, 324, 1417–1420 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Kovalenko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, J. Zaumseil, J. S. Lee and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10085–10092 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Huang, D. S. Chung and D. V. Talapin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 348–352 CrossRef CAS .J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. H. Wang, R. Debnath, D. K. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765–771 CrossRef CAS .Z. J. Ning, Y. Ren, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, L. Levina, P. Stadler, X. Z. Lan, D. Zhitomirsky and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6295–6299 CrossRef CAS .A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. J. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Luther, M. Law, M. C. Beard, Q. Song, M. O. Reese, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3488–3492 CrossRef CAS .E. J. D. Klem, H. Shukla, S. Hinds, D. D. MacNeil, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 212105 CrossRef .G. I. Koleilat, L. Levina, H. Shukla, S. H. Myrskog, S. Hinds, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 833–840 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, Science, 2005, 310, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385–2393 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Clifford, K. W. Johnston, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 253117 CrossRef .J. Tang, X. H. Wang, L. Brzozowski, D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Debnath, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1398–1402 CrossRef CAS .B. R. Hyun, Y. W. Zhong, A. C. Bartnik, L. F. Sun, H. D. Abruna, F. W. Wise, J. D. Goodreau, J. R. Matthews, T. M. Leslie and N. F. Borrelli, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2206–2212 CrossRef CAS .H. Liu, J. Tang, I. J. Kramer, R. Debnath, G. I. Koleilat, X. H. Wang, A. Fisher, R. Li, L. Brzozowski, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3832–3837 CAS .M. T. Trinh, L. Polak, J. M. Schins, A. J. Houtepen, R. Vaxenburg, G. I. Maikov, G. Grinbom, A. G. Midgett, J. M. Luther, M. C. Beard, A. J. Nozik, M. Bonn, E. Lifshitz and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1623–1629 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Nozik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 548–549 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Beard, J. Luther, O. E. Semonin and A. J. Nozik, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1252–1260 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Nozik, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 272–273 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Schaller, V. M. Agranovich and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Phys., 2005, 1, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. C. Hanna, J. M. Luther, B. K. Hughes and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3019–3027 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS .V. Sukhovatkin, S. Hinds, L. Brzozowski and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2009, 324, 1542–1544 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Mcguire, J. Joo, J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1810–1819 CrossRef CAS .A. Smith and D. Dutton, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1958, 48, 1007–1009 CrossRef CAS .R. F. Service, Science, 2008, 322, 1784–1784 CAS .G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5 Search PubMed .J. E. Murphy, M. C. Beard, A. G. Norman, S. P. Ahrenkiel, J. C. Johnson, P. R. Yu, O. I. Micic, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Schaller, M. Sykora, S. Jeong and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25332–25338 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Schaller, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3469–3476 CrossRef CAS .J. J. H. Pijpers, E. Hendry, M. T. W. Milder, R. Fanciulli, J. Savolainen, J. L. Herek, D. Vanmaekelbergh, S. Ruhman, D. Mocatta, D. Oron, A. Aharoni, U. Banin and M. Bonn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4146–4152 CAS .S. K. Stubbs, S. J. O. Hardman, D. M. Graham, B. F. Spencer, W. R. Flavell, P. Glarvey, O. Masala, N. L. Pickett and D. J. Binks, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 081303 CrossRef .M. Govoni, I. Marri and S. Ossicini, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 672–679 CrossRef CAS .M. T. Trinh, R. Limpens, W. D. A. M. de Boer, J. M. Schins, L. D. A. Siebbeles and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 316–321 CrossRef CAS .S. Konabe and S. Okada, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108 Search PubMed .N. M. Gabor, Z. H. Zhong, K. Bosnick, J. Park and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2009, 325, 1367–1371 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Beard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1282–1288 CrossRef CAS .G. Nair, L. Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2145–2151 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Kim, W. J. Kim, Y. Sahoo, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 031107 CrossRef .J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H. Y. Chen, J. B. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS .I. Paci, J. C. Johnson, X. D. Chen, G. Rana, D. Popovic, D. E. David, A. J. Nozik, M. A. Ratner and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16546–16553 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Jadhav, A. Mohanty, J. Sussman, J. Lee and M. A. Baldo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1495–1498 CrossRef CAS .E. C. Greyson, B. R. Stepp, X. D. Chen, A. F. Schwerin, I. Paci, M. B. Smith, A. Akdag, J. C. Johnson, A. J. Nozik, J. Michl and M. A. Ratner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14223–14232 CrossRef CAS .W. L. Chan, M. Ligges, A. Jailaubekov, L. Kaake, L. Miaja-Avila and X. Y. Zhu, Science, 2011, 334, 1541–1545 CrossRef CAS .C. Strumpel, M. McCann, G. Beaucarne, V. Arkhipov, A. Slaoui, V. Svrcek, C. del Canizo and I. Tobias, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 238–249 CrossRef .B. S. Richards, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1189–1207 CrossRef CAS .Q. Y. Zhang and X. Y. Huang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2010, 55, 353–427 CrossRef CAS .W. G. J. H. M. van Sark, K. W. J. Barnham, L. H. Slooff, A. J. Chatten, A. Buchtemann, A. Meyer, S. J. McCormack, R. Koole, D. J. Farrell, R. Bose, E. E. Bende, A. R. Burgers, T. Budel, J. Quilitz, M. Kennedy, T. Meyer, C. D. M. Donega, A. Meijerink and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21773–21792 CrossRef CAS .R. T. Wegh, H. Donker, K. D. Oskam and A. Meijerink, Science, 1999, 283, 663–666 CrossRef CAS .T. Trupke, M. A. Green and P. Wurfel, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 1668–1674 CrossRef CAS .D. Q. Chen, Y. S. Wang, Y. L. Yu, P. Huang and F. Y. Weng, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 116105 CrossRef .Q. H. Zhang, J. Wang, G. G. Zhang and Q. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7088–7092 RSC .H. Lin, S. M. Zhou, H. Teng, Y. K. Li, W. J. Li, X. R. Hou and T. T. Jia, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 043107 CrossRef .J. J. Zhou, Y. X. Zhuang, S. Ye, Y. Teng, G. Lin, B. Zhu, J. H. Xie and J. R. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 141101 CrossRef .P. Vergeer, T. J. H. Vlugt, M. H. F. Kox, M. I. den Hertog, J. P. J. M. van der Eerden and A. Meijerink, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71 Search PubMed .S. Ye, B. Zhu, J. Chen, J. Luo and J. F. Qi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 14112 Search PubMed .S. Ye, B. Zhu, J. Luo, J. X. Chen, G. Lakshminarayana and J. R. Qiu, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 8989–8994 CrossRef CAS .L. C. Xie, Y. H. Wang and H. J. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 061905 CrossRef .D. Q. Chen, Y. S. Wang, Y. L. Yu, P. Huang and F. Y. Weng, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 1884–1886 CrossRef CAS .B. M. van der Ende, L. Aarts and A. Meijerink, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3073–3077 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Eilers, D. Biner, J. T. van Wijngaarden, K. Kramer, H. U. Gudel and A. Meijerink, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 151106 CrossRef .M. B. Spitzer, H. P. Jenssen and A. Cassanho, Opt. Mater., 2013, 108, 241–245 CAS .D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu, H. Lin, P. Huang, Z. F. Shan and Y. S. Wang, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 220–222 CrossRef CAS .H. Lin, D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu, A. P. Yang and Y. S. Wang, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 876–878 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Deng, T. Gong, L. X. Hu, X. T. Wei, Y. H. Chen and M. Yin, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 1749–1754 CrossRef CAS .Z. H. Bai, M. Fujii, T. Hasegawa, K. Imakita, M. Mizuhata and S. Hayashi, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 455301 CrossRef .S. Ye, N. Jiang, F. He, X. Liu, B. Zhu, Y. Teng and J. R. Qiu, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 639–644 CrossRef CAS .R. Ellingson, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 72–73 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Huang, J. X. Wang, D. C. Yu, S. Ye, Q. Y. Zhang and X. W. Sun, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 113526 CrossRef .M. Qu, R. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, K. Li and H. Yan, J. Lumin., 2013, 132, 1285–1289 CrossRef .M. G. Debije and P. P. C. Verbunt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 12–35 CrossRef CAS .R. Reisfeld, Opt. Mater., 2010, 32, 850–856 CrossRef CAS .M. Mendez, Y. Cesteros, L. F. Marsal, E. Martinez-Ferrero, P. Salagre, P. Formentin, J. Pallares, M. Aguilo, F. Diaz and J. J. Carvajal, Opt. Mater., 2011, 33, 1120–1123 CrossRef CAS .W. Xu, H. W. Song, D. T. Yan, H. C. Zhu, Y. Wang, S. Xu, X. Bai, B. A. Dong and Y. X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12331–12336 RSC .J. H. Wu, G. X. Xie, J. M. Lin, Z. Lan, M. L. Huang and Y. F. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6937–6940 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Liu, Q. H. Yao and Y. D. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 173119 CrossRef .S. J. Gallagher, B. Norton and P. C. Eames, Sol. Energy, 2007, 81, 813–821 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Chatten, K. W. J. Barnham, B. F. Buxton, N. J. Ekins-Daukes and M. A. Malik, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 75, 363–371 CrossRef CAS .M. Stupca, M. Alsalhi, T. Al Saud, A. Almuhanna and M. H. Nayfeh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 063107 CrossRef .A. Le Donne, M. Dilda, M. Crippa, M. Acciarri and S. Binetti, Opt. Mater., 2011, 33, 1012–1014 CrossRef CAS .N. Yamada, L. N. Anh and T. Kambayashi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 413–419 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Currie, J. K. Mapel, T. D. Heidel, S. Goffri and M. A. Baldo, Science, 2008, 321, 226–228 CrossRef CAS .J. de Wild, A. Meijerink, J. K. Rath, W. G. J. H. M. van Sark and R. E. I. Schropp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4835–4848 CAS .E. L. Cates, S. L. Chinnapongse, J. H. Kim and J. H. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 12316–12328 CrossRef CAS .H. Q. Wang, M. Batentschuk, A. Osvet, L. Pinna and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2675–2680 CrossRef CAS .A. Shalav, B. S. Richards and M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 829–842 CrossRef CAS .T. Trupke, M. A. Green and P. Wurfel, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 4117–4122 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Atre and J. A. Dionne, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 034505 CrossRef .G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, A. Kachynski, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4981–4986 CrossRef CAS .H. L. Qiu, L. Sun, S. Tan, Y. Sun, S. W. Hao, Y. Yu, W. Q. Lv, S. B. Ge and C. H. Yang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 7700–7708 CrossRef CAS .M. Lukac, Appl. Opt., 1991, 30, 2489–2494 CrossRef CAS .C. Li and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6831–6847 RSC .G. Y. Chen, Y. G. Zhang, G. Somesfalean, Z. G. Zhang, Q. Sun and F. P. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 163105 CrossRef .G. Y. Chen, G. Somesfalean, Y. Liu, Z. G. Zhang, Q. Sun and F. P. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 195204 CrossRef .J. C. Boyer, N. J. J. Johnson and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2010–2012 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Boyer, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 847–852 CrossRef CAS .K. W. Kramer, D. Biner, G. Frei, H. U. Gudel, M. P. Hehlen and S. R. Luthi, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1244–1251 CrossRef .S. Heer, K. Kompe, H. U. Gudel and M. Haase, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2102–2105 CrossRef CAS .Y. S. Liu, D. T. Tu, H. M. Zhu, R. F. Li, W. Q. Luo and X. Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3266–3271 CrossRef CAS .H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, R. Si, Z. G. Yan, L. D. Sun, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6426–6436 CrossRef CAS .G. Y. Chen, J. Shen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, N. J. Patel, A. Kutikov, Z. P. Li, J. Song, R. K. Pandey, H. Agren, P. N. Prasad and G. Han, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8280–8287 CrossRef CAS .G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, R. Kumar, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS .M. Nyk, R. Kumar, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, E. J. Bergey and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3834–3838 CrossRef CAS .F. Lahoz, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 2982–2984 CrossRef CAS .D. Q. Chen, L. Lei, A. P. Yang, Z. X. Wang and Y. S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5898–5900 RSC .G. A. Kumar, M. Pokhrel and D. K. Sardar, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 395–398 CrossRef CAS .S. Ivanova and F. Pelle, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2009, 26, 1930–1938 CrossRef CAS .K. Z. Zheng, D. Zhao, D. S. Zhang, N. Liu and W. P. Qin, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 2442–2444 CrossRef CAS .A. Shalav, B. S. Richards, T. Trupke, K. W Kramer and H. U. Gudel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 013505 CrossRef .K. A. Gschneidner and L. Eyring, Handbook on the physics and chemistry of rare earths, North-Holland; sole distributors for the U.S.A. and Canada, Elsevier North-Holland, Amsterdam, New York, NY, USA,  1978 Search PubMed .G. H. Dieke and H. M. Crosswhite, Appl. Opt., 1963, 2, 675–686 CrossRef CAS .W. Q. Zou, C. Visser, J. A. Maduro, M. S. Pshenichnikov and J. C. Hummelen, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 560–564 CrossRef CAS .G. B. Shan and G. P. Demopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4373–4377 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Wu, J. L. Wang, J. M. Lin, Z. Lan, Q. W. Tang, M. L. Huang, Y. F. Huang, L. Q. Fan, Q. B. Li and Z. Y. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 78–81 CrossRef CAS .C. Z. Yuan, G. Y. Chen, P. N. Prasad, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, Z. J. Ning, H. N. Tian, L. C. Sun and H. Agren, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16709–16713 RSC .Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fuckel, R. W. MacQueen, T. Khoury, R. G. C. R. Clady, T. F. Schulze, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley, B. Stannowski, K. Lips and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6953–6959 CAS .T. N. Singh-Rachford, A. Haefele, R. Ziessel and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16164 CrossRef CAS .Y. C. Simon, S. Bai, M. K. Sing, H. Dietsch, M. Achermann and C. Weder, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 498–502 CrossRef CAS .A. Monguzzi, M. Frigoli, C. Larpent, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 139–143 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Kim and J. H. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17478–17481 CrossRef CAS .Q. Liu, T. S. Yang, W. Feng and F. Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5390–5397 CrossRef CAS .P. N. Prasad, Introduction to nanomedicine and nanobioengineering, Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, NJ,  2012 Search PubMed .P. N. Prasad, Introduction to biophotonics, Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, NJ,  2003 Search PubMed .Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183–184 CrossRef CAS .C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS .F. Shieh, A. E. Saunders and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8538–8542 CrossRef CAS .C. Wang, H. G. Yin, R. Chan, S. Peng, S. Dai and S. H. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 433–435 CrossRef CAS .N. J. J. Johnson, A. Korinek, C. H. Dong and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11068–11071 CrossRef CAS .F. Wang, R. R. Deng, J. Wang, Q. X. Wang, Y. Han, H. M. Zhu, X. Y. Chen and X. G. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 968–973 CrossRef CAS .Z. Q. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4765–4769 CrossRef CAS .J. Xie, C. Xu, N. Kohler, Y. Hou and S. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3163–3166 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Sun, C. B. Murray, D. Weller, L. Folks and A. Moser, Science, 2000, 287, 1989–1992 CrossRef CAS .Z. C. Xu, Y. L. Hou and S. H. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8698–8699 CrossRef CAS .G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, S. Liu, W. C. Law, F. Wu, M. T. Swihart, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2969–2977 CrossRef CAS .W. L. Shi, H. Zeng, Y. Sahoo, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang, M. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 875–881 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Ganguli, A. Ganguly and S. Vaidya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 474–485 RSC .I. Roy, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, D. J. Bharali, H. E. Pudavar, R. A. Mistretta, N. Kaur and P. N. Prasad, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Zarur and J. Y. Ying, Nature, 2000, 403, 65–67 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Lawrence and G. D. Rees, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2000, 45, 89–121 CrossRef CAS .I. Capek, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 110, 49–74 CrossRef CAS .A. Pal, S. Shah and S. Devi, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 302, 483–487 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Wu, D. H. Chen and T. C. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 599–606 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Chen and C. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1557–1562 RSC .J. Tolia, M. Chakraborty and Z. V. P. Murthy, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2012, 47, 909–916 CAS .K. Ariga, Y. Lvov and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 2224–2231 CrossRef CAS .Y. F. Nicolau, M. Dupuy and M. Brunel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2915–2924 CrossRef CAS .R. B. Kale, S. D. Sartale, B. K. Chougule and C. D. Lokhande, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2004, 19, 980–986 CrossRef CAS .H. M. Pathan and C. D. Lokhande, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2004, 27, 85–111 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Lee, J. Bang, J. Park, S. Kim and S. M. Park, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5636–5643 CrossRef CAS .S. D. Sartale and C. D. Lokhande, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2000, 65, 63–67 CrossRef CAS .H. Lee, H. C. Leventis, S. Moon, P. Chen, S. Ito, S. A. Haque, T. Torres, F. Nuesch, T. Geiger, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2735–2742 CrossRef CAS .R. Plass, S. Pelet, J. Krueger, M. Gratzel and U. Bach, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7578–7580 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Luo, S. K. Karuturi, L. Liu, L. T. Su, A. I. Y. Tok and H. J. Fan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 451 CAS .S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef .W. L. Ma, C. Y. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Scharber, D. Wuhlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. L. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–303 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Milliron, I. Gur and A. P. Alivisatos, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 41–44 CrossRef CAS .G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Chen, L. T. Dou, R. Zhu, C. H. Chung, T. B. Song, Y. B. Zheng, S. Hawks, G. Li, P. S. Weiss and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7185–7190 CrossRef CAS .L. T. Dou, W. Chang, J. Gao, C. Chen, J. B. You and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 825–831 CrossRef CAS .J. B. You, C. C. Chen, L. T. Dou, S. Murase, H. S. Duan, S. A. Hawks, T. Xu, H. J. Son, L. P. Yu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5267–5272 CrossRef CAS .B. Q. Sun, E. Marx and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961–963 CrossRef CAS .M. Morana, M. Wegscheider, A. Bonanni, N. Kopidakis, S. Shaheen, M. Scharber, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1757–1766 CrossRef CAS .J. Peet, J. Kim, N. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 239–242 CrossRef CAS .Y. F. Zhou, M. Eck and M. Kruger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1851–1864 CAS .S. Gunes, K. P. Fritz, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, S. Kumar and G. D. Scholes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 420–423 CrossRef .J. H. Warner, A. Watt and R. D. Tilley, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2381–2384 CrossRef CAS .J. Seo, S. J. Kim, W. J. Kim, R. Singh, M. Samoc, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20 Search PubMed .K. M. Noone, E. Strein, N. C. Anderson, P. T. Wu, S. A. Jenekhe and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2635–2639 CrossRef CAS .J. Seo, M. J. Cho, D. Lee, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3984 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Oh, T. D. Kim, Y. H. Koh, K. S. Lee, S. Cho, A. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8931–8933 RSC .J. B. You, L. T. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C. Chen, L. Gao and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef .W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer, W. C. Libby, G. L. Whiting and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .L. Wang, Y. S. Liu, X. Jiang, D. H. Qin and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9538–9542 CAS .Y. F. Zhou, F. S. Riehle, Y. Yuan, H. F. Schleiermacher, M. Niggemann, G. A. Urban and M. Kruger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 013304 CrossRef .W. J. Kim, S. J. Kim, K. S. Lee, M. Samoc, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3262–3265 CrossRef CAS .K. P. Fritz, S. Guenes, J. Luther, S. Kumar, N. S. Saricifitci and G. D. Scholes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 195, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .W. B. Yang, H. S. Duan, B. Bob, H. P. Zhou, B. Lei, C. H. Chung, S. H. Li, W. W. Hou and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6323–6329 CrossRef CAS .T. K. Todorov, K. B. Reuter and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E156 CrossRef CAS .D. Lee, PhD thesis, University at Buffalo,  2011, ch. 4, 128–164 .S. Shukla, E. P. Furlani, X. Vidal, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3695–3699 CrossRef CAS .B. R. Saunders and M. L. Turner, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 138, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Zhou and J. G. Xue, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2471–2480 CrossRef CAS .B. R. Saunders, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 369, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Moule, L. L. Chang, C. Thambidurai, R. Vidu and P. Stroeve, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2351–2368 RSC .P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2735–2741 CrossRef CAS .I. J. Kramer and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8506–8514 CrossRef CAS .I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, C. P. Chen, A. G. Kanaras and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .L. L. Han, D. H. Qin, X. Jiang, Y. S. Liu, L. Wang, J. W. Chen and Y. Cao, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4736–4742 CrossRef CAS .J. De Girolamo, P. Reiss, M. Zagorska, R. De Bettignies, S. Bailly, J. Y. Mevellec, S. Lefrant, J. P. Travers and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 4027–4035 RSC .B. Sun and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3557–3560 RSC .P. Wang, A. Abrusci, H. M. Wong, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1789–1793 CrossRef CAS .B. Sun, H. Snaith, A. Dhoot, S. Westenhoff and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 014914 CrossRef .H. C. Leventis, S. P. King, A. Sudlow, M. S. Hill, K. C. Molloy and S. A. Haque, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1253–1258 CrossRef CAS .K. F. Jeltsch, M. Schadel, J. B. Bonekamp, P. Niyamakom, F. Rauscher, H. W. A. Lademann, I. Dumsch, S. Allard, U. Scherf and K. Meerholz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 397–404 CrossRef CAS .H. Lee, S. Kim, W. Chung, K. Kim and D. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 446–452 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, R. Mastria, A. Fiore, C. Nobile, L. Yin, M. Biasiucci, G. Cheng, A. M. Cucolo, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and G. Gigli, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4461–4466 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhong, Y. Zhou, Y. Yang, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6538–6543 CAS .S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 233101 CrossRef .A. Watt, T. Eichmann, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop and P. Meredith, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 253109 CrossRef .Z. J. Wang, S. C. Qu, X. B. Zeng, C. S. Zhang, M. J. Shi, F. R. Tan, Z. G. Wang, J. P. Liu, Y. B. Hou, F. Teng and Z. H. Feng, Polymer, 2008, 49, 4647–4651 CrossRef CAS .X. M. Jiang, R. D. Schaller, S. B. Lee, J. M. Pietryga, V. I. Klimov and A. A. Zakhidov, J. Mater. Res., 2007, 22, 2204–2210 CrossRef CAS .Z. N. Tan, T. Zhu, M. Thein, S. A. Gao, A. Cheng, F. Zhang, C. F. Zhang, H. P. Su, J. K. Wang, R. Henderson, J. I. Hahm, Y. P. Yang and J. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 063510 CrossRef .D. H. Cui, J. Xu, T. Zhu, G. Paradee, S. Ashok and M. Gerhold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183111 CrossRef .A. Guchhait, A. K. Rath and A. J. Pal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 073505 CrossRef .Y. G. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Y. Ouyang, S. W. Tsang, J. P. Lu, K. Yu, J. F. Ding and Y. Tao, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2773–2780 CrossRef CAS .W. F. Fu, Y. Shi, W. M. Qiu, L. Wang, Y. X. Nan, M. M. Shi, H. Y. Li and H. Z. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12094–12098 RSC .D. F. Wang, J. K. Baral, H. G. Zhao, B. A. Gonfa, V. V. Truong, M. A. El Khakani, R. Izquierdo and D. L. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4010–4018 CrossRef CAS .N. Dissanayake, R. A. Hatton, C. Giusca, T. Lutz, R. Curry and R. Silva, MRS Online Proc. LIbr., 2008, 1102, 1102–LL1107-1106 Search PubMed .N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, L. Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer, D. Wanger, M. T. Binda, A. C. Arango, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3743–3752 CrossRef CAS .S. W. Tsang, H. Y. Fu, J. Y. Ouyang, Y. G. Zhang, K. Yu, J. P. Lu and Y. Tao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 243104 CrossRef .E. Arici, N. S. Sariciftci and D. Meissner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 165–171 CrossRef CAS .C. Y. Liu, Z. C. Holman and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 449–452 CrossRef CAS .E. J. D. Klem, D. D. MacNeil, P. W. Cyr, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 183113 CrossRef .K. W. Johnston, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, J. P. Clifford, S. H. Myrskog, D. D. MacNeil, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 151115 CrossRef .E. J. D. Klem, D. D. MacNeil, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3433–3439 CrossRef CAS .C. Y. Kuo, M. S. Su, C. S. Ku, S. M. Wang, H. Y. Lee and K. H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11605–11612 RSC .H. Y. Fu, S. W. Tsang, Y. G. Zhang, J. Y. Ouyang, J. P. Lu, K. Yu and Y. Tao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1805–1810 CrossRef CAS .K. Szendrei, W. Gomulya, M. Yarema, W. Heiss and M. A. Loi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 203501 CrossRef .J. Y. Ouyang, C. Schuurmans, Y. G. Zhang, R. Nagelkerke, X. H. Wu, D. Kingston, Z. Y. Wang, D. Wilkinson, C. S. Li, D. M. Leek, Y. Tao and K. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 553–565 CAS .W. L. Ma, S. L. Swisher, T. Ewers, J. Engel, V. E. Ferry, H. A. Atwater and A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8140–8147 CrossRef CAS .W. Ma, J. M. Luther, H. M. Zheng, Y. Wu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1699–1703 CrossRef CAS .P. R. Yu, K. Zhu, A. G. Norman, S. Ferrere, A. J. Frank and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25451–25454 CrossRef CAS .N. Cai, J. Zhang, D. F. Zhou, Z. H. Yi, J. Guo and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4215–4221 CAS .D. F. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2299–2309 CrossRef CAS .O. Niitsoo, S. K. Sarkar, C. Pejoux, S. Ruhle, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 181, 306–313 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Lee, P. Chen, S. J. Moon, F. Sauvage, K. Sivula, T. Bessho, D. R. Gamelin, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, S. Il Seok, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7602–7608 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Lee, J. H. Yum, H. C. Leventis, S. M. Zakeeruddin, S. A. Haque, P. Chen, S. I. Seok, M. Grazel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11600–11608 CAS .Q. X. Zhang, X. Z. Guo, X. M. Huang, S. Q. Huang, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and Q. B. Meng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4659–4667 RSC .M. A. Hossain, J. R. Jennings, C. Shen, J. H. Pan, Z. Y. Koh, N. Mathews and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16235–16242 RSC .J. J. Tian, R. Gao, Q. F. Zhang, S. G. Zhang, Y. W. Li, J. L. Lan, X. H. Qu and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18655–18662 CAS .Y. L. Lee and Y. S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604–609 CrossRef .P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508–2511 CrossRef CAS .A. Braga, S. Gimenez, I. Concina, A. Vomiero and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 454–460 CrossRef CAS .S. Kim, S. H. Im, M. Kang, J. H. Heo, S. I. Seok, S. W. Kim, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14999–15002 RSC .T. Bora, H. H. Kyaw, S. Sarkar, S. K. Pal and J. Dutta, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 681–690 CrossRef CAS .T. Fukumoto, T. Moehl, Y. Niwa, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel and L. Etgar, Adv. Mater., 2013, 3, 29–33 CAS .J. A. Chang, S. H. Im, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, C. S. Lim, J. H. Heo and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1863–1867 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462–465 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wu, C. Wadia, W. L. Ma, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2551–2555 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Tang, Z. Y. Huo, S. Brittman, H. W. Gao and P. D. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 568–572 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Leschkies, T. J. Beatty, M. S. Kang, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3638–3648 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Luther, J. B. Gao, M. T. Lloyd, O. E. Semonin, M. C. Beard and A. J. Nozik, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3704 CrossRef CAS .T. Ju, R. L. Graham, G. M. Zhai, Y. W. Rodriguez, A. J. Breeze, L. L. Yang, G. B. Alers and S. A. Carter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 043106 CrossRef .D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Debnath, I. J. Kramer, D. Zhitomirsky, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, L. Levina, L. Etgar, M. Gratzel and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3134–3138 CrossRef CAS .I. J. Kramer, L. Levina, R. Debnath, D. Zhitomirsky and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3701–3706 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Gao, J. M. Luther, O. E. Semonin, R. J. Ellingson, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1002–1008 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Gao, C. L. Perkins, J. M. Luther, M. C. Hanna, H. Y. Chen, O. E. Semonin, A. J. Nozik, R. J. Ellingson and M. C. Beard, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3263–3266 CrossRef CAS .P. R. Brown, R. R. Lunt, N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, D. D. Wanger, L. Y. Chang, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2955–2961 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Zarghami, Y. Liu, M. Gibbs, E. Gebremichael, C. Webster and M. Law, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2475–2485 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Jeong, J. Tang, H. Liu, J. Kim, A. W. Schaefer, K. Kemp, L. Levina, X. H. Wang, S. Hoogland, R. Debnath, L. Brzozowski, E. H. Sargent and J. B. Asbury, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 89–99 CrossRef CAS .D. A. R. Barkhouse, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2356–2362 CrossRef CAS .J. Tang, L. Brzozowski, D. A. R. Barkhouse, X. H. Wang, R. Debnath, R. Wolowiec, E. Palmiano, L. Levina, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, D. Jamakosmanovic and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 869–878 CrossRef CAS .Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, W. C. Yang, B. C. Walker, E. A. Stach, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17384–17386 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Saha, A. Guchhait and A. J. Pal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8090–8096 RSC .W. Ki and H. W. Hillhouse, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 732–735 CrossRef CAS .M. Kar, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17239–17247 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Rath, M. Bernechea, L. Martinez and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3712 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Rath, M. Bernechea, L. Martinez, F. P. G. de Arquer, J. Osmond and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 529–534 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Siddiki, J. Li, D. Galipeau and Q. Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 867–883 CAS .J. J. Choi, W. N. Wenger, R. S. Hoffman, Y. F. Lim, J. Luria, J. Jasieniak, J. A. Marohn and T. Hanrath, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3144–3148 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Kim, W. J. Kim, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 191107 CrossRef .H. Y. Chen, J. H. Hou, S. Dayal, L. J. Huo, N. Kopidakis, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 528–533 CrossRef CAS .K. R. Choudhury, W. J. Kim, Y. Sahoo, K. S. Lee and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 051109 CrossRef .
Footnote† Present address: Center for Supramolecular Optoelectronic Materials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Guanying Chen	Guanying Chen received his BS and PhD degrees in optics in 2004 and 2009, respectively, from Harbin Institute of Technology, P. R. China. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow (2010–2011) with Professor Paras N. Prasad at the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, and Professor Hans Ågren at the Department of Theoretical Chemistry & Biology, Royal Institute of Technology. He is a research assistant professor at the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York. He holds a joint affiliation with Harbin Institute of Technology. His interests include photon up-conversion and down-conversion nanomaterials, nanostructured solar cells, plasmonics, and nanoparticles-based diagnostics and therapy.
Jangwon Seo	Jangwon Seo received his BS degree in Fiber and Polymer Science in 1998 and MS degree in 2000 from Seoul National University, Korea. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University under the supervision of Professor Soo Young Park in 2006 and worked as a postdoctoral fellow by Aug. 2007. He then moved to the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York where he worked with Professor Paras N. Prasad as a postdoctoral fellow (2007–2011) and a research assistant professor (2011–2012). He is currently a research professor at the Center for Supramolecular Optoelectronic Materials in Seoul National University. His research interests include π-conjugated organic materials-polymers for optoelectronic applications and organic–inorganic hybrid nanosystems for nanostructured solar cells.
Chunhui Yang	Chunhui Yang received her BS degree in chemistry from Dalian University of Technology in 1991, and obtained MS and PhD degrees in chemistry from Harbin Institute of Technology, in 1996 and 2001, respectively. She then joined Harbin Institute of Technology as an assistant professor, and was promoted to associate professor and full professor in 2001 and 2004, respectively. She has been a visiting professor at Stanford University in 2003 and Oxford University in 2004, respectively. She has published more than 80 peer-reviewed scientific papers, and co-edited two books. Her interests include solar cells, lanthanide-doped nanomaterials, nonlinear infrared single crystals, and poly-silicon technology.
Paras N. Prasad	Paras N. Prasad is a SUNY Distinguished Professor of Chemistry, Physics, Electrical Engineering and Medicine; the Samuel P. Capen Chair of Chemistry; the Executive Director of the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo; the visiting Distinguished Professor at Korea University. He was named among the top 50 science and technology leaders in the world by Scientific American in 2005. He has published nearly 700 scientific and technical papers; four monographs; eight edited books. He has received many scientific awards and honors (Morley Medal; Schoellkopf Medal; Guggenheim Fellowship; Fellow of the APS, OSA, and SPIE, etc.). His interests include solar cells, metamaterials, nanophotonics, biophotonics, and nanomedicine.

	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Solar spectrum irradiated on the Earth's surface with a global air mass of 1.5, compared with the spectrum of blackbody emission at a temperature of 5700 K. The red line is marked for the edge absorption of single crystalline silicon. The inset depicts the optical path length of sun light through Earth's atmosphere, defined by air mass, at an angle φ with respect to the zenith benchmark. (b) Cross-section of a general solar cell, illustrating the photon-generation of electron–hole pairs as well as processes of their dissociation, collection, and operation. (c) I–V curve of a typical solar cell, illustrating the open-circuit voltage of Voc, the short-circuit current density of Jsc and the fill factor of FF. Vmp and Jmp are the corresponding voltage and current of a solar cell when the device is operating at a maximum power out.	 

 	Fig. 2  Current challenges in solar cells as well as corresponding strategies to address them. Challenges are marked within the ellipses, while strategies are marked within the boxes.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The concept of using IV–VI semiconductor PbS QDs with different sizes to build a triple-junction tandem solar cell, each absorbing in a different spectral range. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA). (b) Varying and aligning band gaps of II–VI semiconductor CdSe QDs due to the quantum confinement, which enables the manipulation of charge separation at the junction interface. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a–c) Plasmonic light-trapping geometries for thin-film photovoltaics; (a) light trapping by scattering from plasmonic nanoparticles placed at the surface of the solar cell. (b) Light trapping by excitation of localized surface plasmons in plasmonic nanoparticles embedded in the semiconductor. (c) Light trapping by the excitation of surface plasmon polaritons at the plasmonic nanoparticles/semiconductor interface. (d) Normalized extinction of Ag and Ag0.25Au0.75 alloyed nanoparticles dispersed in toluene, Au nanoparticles dispersed in toluene, Au nanorods (NRs) dispersed in water, Cu2–xS nanoparticles dispersed in hexane, Cu2–xSe nanoparticles dispersed in hexane, and indium tin oxide (ITO, tin 10 mol%) nanoparticles dispersed in hexane. Tuning of the plasmonic absorbance peak between 400–550 nm can be realized by varying the composition in alloyed Ag/Au nanoparticles, while tuning between 550–900 nm can be enabled by elongating the length (thus changing the aspect ratio) of gold NRs. In addition, the plasmonic absorption peak located in the wavelength range of 1000–2100 nm can be achieved by using Cu2–xS, Cu2–xSe and alloyed Cu2–xSySe2–y nanoparticles, as well as ITO nanoparticles with varied dopant concentration of tin. (These plasmonic nanoparticles were produced and characterized at our Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics.).	 

 	Fig. 5  Advantages of inorganic–polymer nanocomposites displayed together with three synthetic methods for their preparation.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of multiple exciton generation. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). (b) Extraction of excitons generated by MEG in a PbSe nanocrystal device. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 7  Spectral conversion design for solar cell applications involving stokes-shifting (SS), quantum-cutting (QC), and up-conversion (UC).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Scheme of energy levels in an Er3+ ion and up-conversion of energy corresponding to the wavelength of 1490 nm; the inset is the corresponding up-conversion photographic image of colloidal LiYF4:Er3+ nanoparticles dissolved in chloroform. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). (b) The scheme of triplet–triplet annihilation up-conversion; (c) up-conversion of solar energy from different wavelengths of the NIR spectral range (∼650–850 nm, ∼800, ∼980, ∼1180 and 1500 nm) using up-conversion nanoparticles. All absorbed energy is up-converted to the visible range where the solar cell absorbs.	 

 	Fig. 9  A typical laboratory-scale apparatus for preparing inorganic nanoparticles using colloidal synthesis.	 

 	Fig. 10  Successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) on a substrate involving the deposition of three layers.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Molecular structures of conjugated polymers of MDMO-PPV, P3HT, PCPDTBT, PSBTBT, PDTPQx, PDTPBT that have been generally used in polymer-based solar cells. (b) HOMO–LUMO energy levels of polymers in (a) and quantum dots (CdS, CdSe, PbS, and PbSe), as well the Fermi levels of some metals that are usually employed as electrodes. Note that the band-gaps of semiconductor QDs are dependent on the size of nanoparticles. (c) Schematic illustration of chemical synthesis of low band-gap polymers PCPBTD, PCPBBT, PFTBTD, and PFTBBT. (d) Absorption spectra, with tuned maxima from visible to IR range, of polymers PFTBTD, PCPBTD, PFTBBT, and PCPBBT dispersed in chlorobenzene. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 322. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the thermal deprotection of the t-BOC moiety in the tert-butyl N-(2-mercaptoethyl)carbamate ligand linked to the surface of the CdSe nanocrystals (reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics), and (b) acid treatment-assisted removal of the insulating hexadelyamine ligand liked to the QDs surface. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 326. Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) A set-up for spray-based nanochemical fabrication of a thin film for a solar cell device. (b) Confocal images of a printed and patterned metallic gold structure with a 1 μm period: 1st quadrant shows transmission image, 2nd quadrant shows reflectance image, 3rd quadrant shows overlapped images, 4th quadrant shows 3D intensity profile. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA).	 

 	Fig. 14  Various device configurations for QDs-based solar cells. (a) Hybrid polymer–QDs solar cell, (b) Schottky junction solar cell, (c) QDs sensitized solar cell, and (d) depleted heterojunction solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic device structure consisting of P3HT and pyridine-capped CdSe nanorods. The molecular structure of P3HT and the energy band diagram between P3HT and CdSe. (b) EQEs of the resulting devices depending on the aspect ratio of the nanorod. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2002, American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) The molecular structure of a low band gap polymer (PCPDTBT) and the pyridine-capped CdSe QDs and NRs. (b) The device performance (PCE and Jsc) as a function of the QDs/NRs weight ratio. The QDs/NRs composite (B) forms the best percolation pathway for electron transport compared to QDs (A) and NRs (C) alone. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 347. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) EQE spectra of the device (P3HT:PbS) with or without a TiO2 layer. TiO2 concentration was varied. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 357. Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics). (B) I–V curves of the P3HT blend devices with PCBM and with PbS QDs-MWCNT nanostructures (inset), respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 360. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) X-Channel (in-phase) photoinduced absorption spectra of the polymer:PbS QDs (∼3 nm) nanocomposite film where PDTPQx (red circles), PDTPPPz (green diamonds), and PDTPBT (blue squares) are used. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure and the device structure. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image shows the side view of the device and the surface morphology of the EDT-treated blend film of PDTPBT/PbS (10/90 wt%). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA).	 

	(2)

 	Fig. 19  Schottky junction cell. (a) A typical I–V curve from the device of ITO/PbSe NC/metal electrode. The PbS QDs with a Eg of 0.9 eV were used. (b) Cross sectional SEM image of a Schottky device. (c) Equilibrium band diagram for a Schottky junction, (d) EQE spectra of a Schottky junction device. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) The absorption spectra of ultrasmall PbSe nanocrystals in solution. The inset indicates correlation between the first exciton peak and the synthesis temperature. (b) The device performance of the PbSe Schottky junction cell and its dependence on the PbSe nanocrystal size. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 373. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 21  Quantum dot-sensitized solar cells. (a) Schematic mechanism for electron transfer from Mn-doped CdS to TiO2. Aqueous sulfide electrolyte and a Cu2S/rGO counter electrode were used. (b) IPCE spectra for CdS and CdS/CdSe-sensitized cells with or without Mn doping. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure, (b) energy band diagram, and (c) I–V curve, of the mp-TiO2/Sb2S3/PCPDTBT (low band gap polymer)-PCBM device. Note that this I–V curve is inverted as compared to Fig. 1(c) and 19(a) due to the different definition of current directions. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 390. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration of a depleted heterojunction device structure of TiO2–PbS QDs, (b) energy band diagram, and (c) I–V curve of the device and its dependence on the size of PbS QDs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of the effect of a MoO3 thin film on the ZnO–PbS heterojunction device structure, and (b) I–V curve of the ZnO–PbS heterojunction device with or without MoO3 as the hole-extraction layer. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 402. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic device structure of a depleted heterojunction; (b) SEM cross section image of the device; (c) schematic cross section of PbS QDs, with organic passivation by MPA (left) and hybrid passivation by halide and MPA (right), and (d) I–V curve of the devices with different passivation types. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic device structure of the tandem cell using an optimized band-gap combination of PbS QDs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 414. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA). (b) Schematic energy band diagram of the tandem cell with a graded recombination layer. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic energy band diagram of hybrid device architectures of (a) PbSe nanocrystals (reprinted with permission from ref. 415. Copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics), and (b) PbS nanocrystals in combination with a polymer:PCBM bulk heterojunction. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 416. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA).	 

 	Fig. 28  Some of the future directions from a practical view of nanomaterial development and device fabrication in the field of solar cells.	 
Footnote
† Present address: Center for Supramolecular Optoelectronic Materials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
