Hot kinetic model as a guide to improve organic photovoltaic materials   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP06158G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP06158G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 3658-3671Hot kinetic model as a guide to improve organic photovoltaic materials†

        
          
            Andrey Yu. 
            Sosorev
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dmitry Yu. 
            Godovsky
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Dmitry Yu. 
            Paraschuk
          
        
      *ac
aFaculty of Physics and International Laser Center, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow 119991, Russia. E-mail: paras@physics.msu.ru;   Tel: +7 (495) 9392228
bInstitute of Elementoorganic Compounds, Russian Academy of Science, Moscow, Vavilova, 28, Russia
cEnikolopov Institute of Synthetic Polymeric Materials, Russian Academy of Science, Profsoyuznaya 70, Moscow 117393, Russia
Received 
      9th September 2017
    , Accepted 2nd January 2018First published on 4th January 2018AbstractThe modeling of organic solar cells (OSCs) can provide a roadmap for their further improvement. Many OSC models have been proposed in recent years; however, the impact of the key intermediates from photons to electricity—hot charge-transfer (CT) states—on the OSC efficiency is highly ambiguous. In this study, we suggest an analytical kinetic model for OSC that considers a two-step charge generation via hot CT states. This hot kinetic model allowed us to evaluate the impact of different material parameters on the OSC performance: the driving force for charge separation, optical bandgap, charge mobility, geminate recombination rate, thermalization rate, average electron–hole separation distance in the CT state, dielectric permittivity, reorganization energy and charge delocalization. In contrast to a widespread trend of lowering the material bandgap, the model predicts that this approach is only efficient along with improvement of the other material properties. The most promising ways to increase the OSC performance are decreasing the reorganization energy, i.e., an energy change accompanying CT from the donor molecule to the acceptor, increasing the dielectric permittivity and charge delocalization. The model suggests that there are no fundamental limitations that can prevent achieving the OSC efficiency above 20%.
1. Introduction
Despite great progress in recent decades, the efficiencies of organic solar cells (OSCs) are still significantly lower compared to those of inorganic solar cells. Moreover, the record efficiency curve for OSC has been saturated for the last couple of years at ∼13%. As a result, a key issue is whether there is a fundamental limit for the OSC efficiency that has been already achieved, or there are ways to overcome the stagnation.
Modeling of the OSC operation can shed light on this issue. The variety of approaches to OSC modeling is discussed in several reviews, e.g., ref. 1. The models are based on the kinetic approach,2–5 thermodynamic concepts,6–9 and combined or semi-empirical assumptions.9–11 The main feature of the thermodynamic and semi-empirical models is the concept of the (quasi) equilibrium between the photons, excitons (tightly bound electron–hole pairs formed after photon absorption), and free charges (electrons and holes). Kinetic models, on the contrary, assume that the equilibrium in the OSC is broken mainly due to the irreversibility of the photoinduced charge transfer process.3 Moreover, the kinetic models can take into account non-thermalized photogenerated charges, i.e., those whose energetic distribution cannot be described by a quasi-equilibrium Fermi distribution. Therefore, in the kinetic models, the equilibrium concepts such as the generalized Planck radiation law and Fermi levels splitting are inappropriate, and the OSC operation should be described by kinetic processes such as charge generation, thermalization, and recombination. Most of the OSC models are numerical because of the complexity of the processes involved in the cell operation. Nevertheless, analytical models can be very useful since they provide an opportunity to evaluate the impacts of various parameters on the OSC characteristics and formulate straightforward guidelines for OSC improvement.
Unlike inorganic semiconductors, photon absorption in organic semiconductors generates a bound electron–hole pair, an exciton, instead of a pair of free charges. In a pristine organic semiconductor, the probability of exciton dissociation to free charges is low since the electron–hole binding energy is high, as compared to thermal fluctuations. To efficiently generate free charges, the photoactive layer of the OSC is usually based on a type-II heterojunction formed by two organic semiconductors with different energies of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) and the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs). One of these semiconductors is an electron donor, and the other is an electron acceptor. An exciton can reach the donor–acceptor interface, where the energy difference between the LUMOs of the donor (EdLUMO) and acceptor (EaLUMO), commonly called the “driving force”, ΔE = EdLUMO − EaLUMO, can facilitate electron transfer from the donor molecule to the acceptor, resulting in a charge-transfer (CT) state.12–15 An analogous mechanism works in the case of exciton generation in the acceptor phase, with the driving force for hole transfer determined by the differences in the HOMO energies between the donor and acceptor.16,17 In terms of classical electrostatics, a CT state is a Coulomb-bound pair of the electron at an acceptor molecule and the hole at the adjacent donor molecule. According to quantum mechanics, the CT states are excited states of charge-transfer complexes formed by the donor and acceptor molecules.12,14,18–20 The CT states can further dissociate into free charges (charge separated state, CS) so that the electron and (or) hole move(s) away from the interface. Therefore, the process of exciton dissociation into free charges in OSC can be considered within a two-step charge generation model that is sketched in Fig. 1 for a blend of conjugated polymer (typical donor) with fullerene (typical acceptor).
 Fig. 1  Two-step model for the generation of free charges in a blend of polymer donor (blue) with fullerene acceptor (grey). The first step is the formation of the CT state from an exciton, and the second one is the dissociation of the CT state into separated charges. 
Several models describing the generation of free charges via CT state formation and dissociation have been proposed lately.21,22 However, until recently23 these models did not take into account a manifold of different CT states (“hot”) above the lowest-energy one (“cold”). This manifold corresponds to different excited states of the donor–acceptor complex and originates from mixing of different molecular orbitals of the donor and acceptor molecules.24–26 Hot CT states were observed in time-resolved spectroscopic experiments by Jailaubekov et al.27 and Chen et al.,28 and were found to cover the energy range of at least ∼1 eV above the cold one. It was suggested that the hot CT states dissociate much more efficiently12,29 because they are more delocalized,30 and non-equilibrium charges generated from them are more mobile31–33 due to their excess energy. It is worth noting that the thermalization rate within the hot CT state manifold was found to be comparable to the charge transfer rate and makes the dissociation of the hot CT state competitive with its thermalization.27,28 Large amounts of experimental data12,29,34–36 and theoretical calculations37,38 support the impact of the excess energy on charge separation, and as a result, the cold CT state was considered not essential for free charge generation in many blends.39,40 However, in other systems, the cold CT state can dissociate as efficiently as the hot ones,12,41 and Vandewal et al. recently argued that the role of the hot CT states is strongly overestimated.42 Recent theoretical studies43 have confirmed that hot CT states are necessary intermediates for charge separation in some systems and are unnecessary in others. However, the authors concentrated only on delocalization of CT states, while the increase in the diffusion coefficient (mobility) of separating non-equilibrium charges from the hot CT states was not considered. Since the role of hot and cold CT states in OSC is a subject for debate (e.g., ref. 44), their impact on the OSC performance needs appropriate modeling.
In this work, we propose an analytical OSC model suggesting the kinetic, i.e. non-equilibrium, nature of the OSC operation. We focus on the process of the free charge generation via hot CT states. To describe the formation of a CT state from the exciton, we utilize the widely used Marcus model45,46 explaining CT from a donor molecule to an acceptor. To describe the CT state dissociation into free charges, we use the Onsager–Braun model47,48 (with the corrections suggested by Wojcik and Tachiya40) considering charge motion as a classical diffusion process. We assume that the excess energy (“hotness”) of a CT state is important for its dissociation, and modify the Onsager–Braun model to account for the excess energy. Charge transport and collection in OSC were modeled in detail elsewhere,8,49 and we describe them in an approximate way, neglecting space-charge and contact effects to keep the model analytical. The analytical character of the model allows us to evaluate the influence of various parameters such as the driving force, optical bandgap, dielectric permittivity, electron–hole separation distance in the CT state, geminate recombination, thermalization rate, reorganization energy and charge delocalization on the OSC efficiency. In the last part of the manuscript, we compare our findings with the results of other models. Our approach is applicable both for polymer and small-molecule solar cells; moreover, it can be extended to hybrid solar cells, e.g., to some types of perovskite ones.
2. Model formulation
2.1. CT state formation

Fig. 2 shows states and processes involved in the hot kinetic model. Photons are absorbed by either donor or acceptor with rate kabs (vertical green arrow in Fig. 2), and generate excitons. The latter reach the equilibrium (the shortest green arrow to the bottom of the potential energy curve) resulting in a relaxed exciton state. We suggest that all the photogenerated excitons reach the donor–acceptor interface during their lifetime, since the photoluminescence of both the donor and acceptor is almost completely quenched in optimized donor–acceptor OSCs. As the relaxed exciton reaches the interface, CT states are formed. We suppose a manifold of CT states (blue parabolas in Fig. 2), i.e., many hot (higher-energy) CT(i) states and one cold CT0 (lowest). Transition from the relaxed exciton state to any of the CT states of nearly the same or lower energy can occur. We used the Marcus model that was shown to describe this transition rather well,46 and assume a continuous spectrum of CT states above the lowest-energy CT state, CT0. The total transfer rate from the exciton state to different CT states is denoted kM. The transition probability from the exciton state to a particular CT state with energy E is therefore given as follows: (1)where Eg is the optical bandgap (the lowest of the donor and acceptor ones), λ is the reorganization energy, i.e., the energy changes due to changes in the molecular geometries and environment after the CT event, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and Z is a normalizing constant. As follows from eqn (1), the excitons mostly populate a CT state with energy E = Eg− λ (thick green arrow from the exciton to CT(i) state in Fig. 2). Hence, λ determines an average excess energy of the CT states for a given Eg. Eqn (1) is in line with the experimental data from ref. 27, where a Gaussian-like distribution of the hot CT state energies with the center slightly below Eg was reported. We assume that after the ith hot CT state, CT(i) is populated, its vibrational relaxation and environment reorganization (i.e., reaching the minima of the blue parabolas in Fig. 2 described by thin green arrows) occur faster than any transitions to other electronic states, for example, to free charges or lower-lying CT states. The back transfer from the CT state to the exciton state is neglected.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the hot kinetic model. Different states of bound electron–hole pairs are depicted by parabolas. Photons with energies larger than the optical bandgap Eg are absorbed (vertical green line) with the rate constant kabs, and generate excitons that relax to the bottom of the parabola (short green arrow) and can then either contribute to photoluminescence with the rate constant kPL (vertical downward red arrow), or undergo transfer to one of the CT states (blue parabolas). The total Marcus transfer rate from the exciton state to all the CT states is kM. The CT states can dissociate into free charges (CS state, smooth blue curve) with the rate constant kd or recombine with the rate constant krec. The orange arrow describes the return of some of the charges to the CT state (accounted in kd). The hot CT states and the separating charges generated from them lose their excess energy W with the thermalization rate β (wavy arrow), which includes internal conversion within the manifold of the CT states and thermalization of the non-equilibrium charges. Separated charges can either recombine with the non-geminate recombination constant knon or become extracted from the active layer with the rate constant kext (right green arrow) and contribute to the photocurrent J. For details, see ESI,† Section S1. 
2.2. CT state dissociation
From the relaxed CT(i) state, several decay pathways are possible: it can dissociate into free charges (CS state) with rate constant kd, recombine with rate constant krec, or relax to a CT state with lower energy via internal conversion. The CS state can be interpreted as an electron–hole pair with low binding energy comparable to the thermal fluctuation energy (kT). The CT state dissociation into the CS state is modeled using the Onsager–Braun approach as diffusion of an electron in the attractive field of the hole and an external electric field F. Recently, Tachiya and Wojcik48 showed that the original Braun approximation is not mathematically correct and suggested a correction for kd. Recent electromodulated photoluminescence measurements on vacuum-evaporated films50 indicated that the Tachiya–Wojcik approach reproduces the experimental data very well. This model is also in excellent correspondence with the Monte-Carlo simulations.50,51
The dissociation constant is proportional to the diffusion coefficient, and the latter is related to the electron μe and hole μh mobilities via the Einstein–Smoluchowski relation: D = (μe + μh)kT/e, where e is the elementary charge. However the non-equilibrium charges formed upon dissociation of the hot CT states were reported to be more mobile than those generated from the “cold” CT state, CT0.31,33 One of the key features of our model is that we take into account the influence of the CT energetics on charge mobility, replacing the equilibrium diffusion coefficient D by the non-equilibrium diffusion coefficient for hot charges. The physics behind the enhanced diffusion of the hot charges is discussed in ESI† (Section S1 and Fig. S2). Arkhipov et al.52 and then Servaites et al.50 and Shimazaki and Nakajima38 accounted for the excess energy of a hot CT state using the thermal ionization model and replacing the kT factor with the excess energy W (Fig. 2). Following ref. 52, we approximate the non-equilibrium diffusion coefficient for W > kT as follows: (2)where W = ECTi − ECT0(3)
In eqn (3), ECTi and ECT0 are the energies of the given CT(i) state and the lowest-energy CT state, correspondingly. For W < kT the equilibrium diffusion coefficient D is used. According to eqn (2), for room temperature considered herein, the diffusion coefficient (and effective charge mobility) of the non-equilibrium charges can be about three orders of magnitude (by a factor W/kT) larger, compared to the equilibrium charges, and this corresponds well with the recent experimental findings.33 The modified Onsager–Braun expression for the dissociation yield of the hot CT state with energy E is presented in ESI† (eqn S3–S5).
The other characteristic of the CT state in the model is the electron–hole separation distance, r0, related to the distance between the centers of the electron and hole wavefunctions. The r0 is reported to be relatively short for the homopolymer:homopolymer or homopolymer:planar molecular acceptor (e.g., perylene diimide derivative) blends, longer for homopolymer:fullerene blends, and should be even larger for the blends of donor–acceptor polymers with fullerene derivatives.12 Possible long-range charge separation53 can be taken into account in the model by taking large r0. As shown theoretically, r0 can be significantly larger for hot CT states than for the cold one.12,54 The relation between r0 and ECTi is not universal (e.g., ref. 43), but within the reasonable range of r0 (1–2 nm12,31), this parameter does not play a critical role in charge separation in high-effciency OSC (see below). We thus assume r0 to be equal for all the CT(i) states for simplicity.
In a crystalline donor and/or acceptor, intermolecular charge delocalization can occur. This enlarges r0 and decreases λ;55 both make charge delocalization an important factor, improving the CT state dissociation efficiency.5 Explicit consideration of charge delocalization in our analytical model is not practical because the relationships between the molecular and supramolecular structure, intermolecular delocalization, r0 and λ are not yet established. We therefore evaluate the role of intermolecular delocalization indirectly via rdel0 = r0·n and λdel = λ/n, where n is the number of molecules over which the charge is delocalized. Notably, hot CT states are frequently considered to be stronger delocalized than the cold one.43 This effect also contributes to the enhanced diffusion coefficients of the hot charges (eqn (2)). The overall CT dissociation yield is given as (4)where p(E) is given by eqn (1).
The Onsager–Braun model, as well as its Wojcik–Tachiya variant, considers an effective homogeneous medium conducting both electrons and holes. Donor–acceptor phase separation in real OSCs can facilitate the free charge yield56 because it hinders electron–hole encounters and suppresses charge recombination. However, an analytical model for CT state dissociation in phase-separated blends is a challenge. We roughly evaluated the impact of phase separation in ESI,† Section S2.4 and found that it significantly improves the OSC performance for the low-efficiency blends, but plays a minor role in high-efficiency blends. Moreover, in the latter the donor and acceptor phases are strongly interpenetrated resulting in a large area of the donor–acceptor interface. In this case, the assumption of homogeneous effective medium seems to be reasonable, and it is frequently used in OSC modeling (e.g., ref. 57–59). For instance, in ref. 42 the results of the Monte-Carlo simulation of free charge generation, which take into account phase separation, are in line with those of the Wojcik–Tachiya approach.40 We thus conducted all the modeling under the approximation of an effective homogeneous medium.
The excess energy of a hot CT state and the charge pair generated from it decreases rapidly (within the sub-nanosecond range), due to reorganization of the environment and downhill motion within the energy landscape induced by disorder.27,33 However, we initially neglected the charge thermalization assuming D(t) = Dhot = const to simplify the model, and then will consider it in Section 2.5. Note that the efficient increase of the electron–hole distance as a result of the fast motion of non-equilibrium charges was frequently accounted for in OSC models via a phenomenological parameter of thermalization length that corresponds to the average electron–hole distance after loss of the excess energy.54,60,61 In contrast, we consider the motion of non-equilibrium charges explicitly, and this allows us to estimate the impact of the driving force and the reorganization energy on the OSC performance.
2.3. Charge transport
The free charges (in the CS state) formed as a result of CT state dissociation are transported to the corresponding electrodes to produce the photocurrent, J. The transport and collection of free charges in OSC have been addressed in many studies (e.g., ref. 8 and 10), and we describe them in a very approximated way in order to focus on free charge generation and keep the model analytical. Specifically, we assume that the generated free charges are uniformly distributed within the active layer resulting in a uniform electric field (no space charge and band bending). The charges are assumed to be “cold” and much slower than the non-equilibrium ones, since their thermalization is much faster than their transport to the electrodes. The electric field promoting the motion of separated charges is F = (EHL/e − V)/d, where EHL/e is the built-in voltage (Ohmic contacts are supposed), V is the cell voltage, and d is the cell thickness. Recombination of free charges, i.e. non-geminate recombination (red arrow from SC to GS in Fig. 2), is described by the Langevin model (e.g., ref. 62) with the rate constant knon = μe/(ε0ε), where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and ε is the dielectric permittivity of the active layer. The impact of the reduced bimolecular recombination coefficient63 is discussed in ESI,† Section S2.3, and was found not to be significant for high-efficiency OSCs. Geminate recombination is already taken into account within the Onsager–Braun model for CT state dissociation.
2.4. Balance equations and overall OSC efficiency
The interplay of the processes discussed above is described by the following kintetic balance equations: (5)Ci is the concentration of electron–hole pairs occupying the different states; C1 and C2 correspond to the ground and exciton states, respectively; C3 stands for the total concentration of all the CT states; C4 denotes the concentration of free charges (CS state); kPL is the photoluminescence rate constant; kext is the rate constant for charge extraction to the electrodes. The explicit expressions for the rate constants of various processes involved in the OSC operation are given in ESI,† Section S1. The block-scheme of the model corresponding to eqn (5) is also given in ESI,† Fig. S1.
Without thermalization, the photocurrent is (6)
In eqn (6), S is the solar cell area, kext = μF is the charge extraction rate constant, and kabs is the exciton generation rate per unit area. We use the AM1.5 solar spectrum and assume that the OSC active layer absorbs all the photons with energy above Eg. Finally, the OSC efficiency is the ratio of the maximal power provided by the cell to the incident solar power Ps (7)
2.5. Thermalization
The model formulated above does not consider downward electronic transitions within the manifold of the CT states (wavy arrow in Fig. 2), energy relaxation of non-equilibrium charges (hole in the donor phase and electron in the acceptor one) and their downhill motion within the disorder-induced energy landscape.27 To take this thermalization into account, we follow the approach by Arkhipov et al.52 and assume that the energy of the electron–hole pair decreases as E(t) = E0 − βt, where E0 is the initial energy of the charge pair, i.e. the energy of the parent CT state, and β describes the thermalization rate.
The E(t) dependence implies a time-dependent charge diffusion coefficient, D(t) in eqn (2). A decrease of the diffusion coefficient (charge mobility) was experimentally observed in several studies, e.g., in ref. 31–33. However, the solution of a diffusion equation with a time-dependent coefficient is far beyond the scope of the current study. Fortunately, since the characteristic time of charge thermalization, τ = (E0 − ECT0)/β, is of the order 10−11–10−9 s,33,52 a negligibly low fraction of hot charges can reach electrodes. We thus divide the CT state dissociation into two sub-stages: “hot”, when the charges are not in equilibrium with the environment, and “cold”, when the charges are already thermalized. The electron/hole diffusion during the “hot” sub-stage prepares the charges for separation, providing them an opportunity to become far from each other after their excess energy is lost. If the charges are distant enough, they can be readily separated even if they are “cold”. Ultrafast (∼10−12 s) long-range (∼5 nm) charge separation was observed recently for P3HT:PCBM31 and small molecule30 bulk-heterojunctions. Accordingly, we first calculate the distribution of the electron–hole separation distances (r) after the “hot” sub-stage of CT state dissociation, w(r, E), which depends on the energy of the parent CT state, E (see ESI,† Section S1.2). Then, we apply the Tachiya–Wojcik variant of the Onsager–Braun model47,48 to find the separation probability for these thermalized charges at the “cold” substage, φcold(r). Integrating over r yields the total dissociation efficiency for the CT(i) state: (8)To calculate the OSC efficiency, φth(E) from eqn (8) should be used in eqn (4) instead of φ(E).
In our modeling, the parameter values listed in Table 1 were used, unless others are explicitly mentioned in the text.
Table 1 Parameters used in the hot kinetic model if other values are not specified below




Parameter
Value
Comment




Attempt frequency in Marcus model ν0
1 × 1012 s−1
Lower estimate; CT state formation time is below 100 fs64,65


Reorganization energy λ
0.5 eV
Measured or calculated values are in the range 0.4–0.65 eV for polymer:fullerene or fullerene:fullerene CT66–69


Donor excited state lifetime τPL
0.5 × 10−9 s
Typical PL lifetime is ca. 0.3 ns in neat polymer film70,71


Mobility μ = μe + μh
10−4 cm2 (V s)−1, (“poor” blend, vide infra)

μ
h = 3 × 10−3 cm2 (V s)−1 for P3HT54 and μh ∼ 5 × 10−7 cm2 (V s)−1 for MEH-PPV72,73μe = 3 × 10−3 cm2 (V s)−1 for PCBM74


10−1 cm2 (V s)−1 (“good” blend, vide infra)
Higher than 1 cm2 (V s)−1 for some conjugated polymers75


CT state lifetime in the absence of charge extraction (τ0 = krec−1)
100 ps (“good” blend)

ca. 5 ps in MEH-PPV:DNAQ;64 ≥300 ps in polymer:fullerene blends12,15,64,71,76


1 ps (“poor” blend)


Dielectric permittivity ε
3.5
Average between P3HT (ε = 3) and PCBM (ε = 4)54


Recombination radius R
3.5 A
Typical π–π stacking distance in organic solids


Initial average electron–hole separation in the CT state r0
1 nm

Ref. 12, 31 and 54



Film thickness d
100 nm
Typical value for OSC


Cell temperature T
300 K




Number of molecules the charges is delocalized over n
1
Assumed




3. Results
3.1. Electric field and driving force
In the following sections (3.1–3.3 and 3.5), we neglect the thermalization of the charge pairs during CT state dissociation. In Section 3.4, we show that including thermalization does not affect the qualitative results of the model, but somewhat lowers the OSC efficiency values. We start with the effect of the applied electric field F and the excess energy W on the generation of free charges. Fig. 3 presents the calculated free charge yields φ from the states with different W as a function of F. For moderate fields, up to 108 V m−1, the free charge yields are relatively low, indicating that these electric fields are too weak to force dissociation of the low-energy “cold” CT states. These results are in line with experimental observations of nearly field-independent CT state emission lifetime60,77 and polaron yield78 in the moderate electric field.47,54 For the typical thickness of the OSC active layer (∼100 nm), the external electric field is about ∼107 V m−1. Therefore, the model suggests that the impact of the applied electric field on free charge generation in OSC is not significant. In contrast to the weak impact of F, the excess energy W strongly influences φ. A small change in W from 0.1–0.2 eV, for example, results in a nearly 10-fold increase in φ for E < 108 V m−1.
 Fig. 3  Yield of free charges as a function of the applied electric field for different excess energies. The top axis shows the corresponding voltage for an OSC with active layer thickness d = 100 nm. The curves were calculated for μ = 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and krec = 1010 s−1. 

Fig. 4a shows the photocurrent (J) normalized to the number of absorbed photons as a function of the voltage (V) for various charge mobilities μ = μe + μh. The short-circuit current JSC and fill-factor FF increase with μ. This is because, firstly, for higher μ, the CT states can dissociate more easily; secondly, the free charges reach the corresponding electrodes faster and avoid recombination. The open-circuit voltage VOC also increases with charge mobility and tends toward the energy gap between the acceptor LUMO, EaLUMO, and donor HOMO, EdHOMO, divided by elementary charge: VmaxOC = (EaLUMO − EdHOMO)/e = (Eg −ΔE)/e. Since the impact of the electric field on the dissociation of hot CT states is not significant (see Fig. 3), the field dependence of the photocurrent observed in Fig. 4a stems mainly from the field-dependent transport of free charges to electrodes.
 Fig. 4  Current–voltage characteristics (a) and power conversion efficiency as a function of the driving force (b) for various charge mobilities (Eg = 2 eV, krec = 1010 s−1). 

Fig. 4b illustrates the impact of the driving force ΔE = EdLUMO − EaLUMO on the OSC efficiency for Eg = 2 eV and various charge mobilities. The driving force determines the average excess energy of the hot CT states, which plays the key role in charge separation (see Fig. 3), and hence strongly affects the OSC efficiency. For low ΔE (<0.1 eV), which corresponds to a small energy difference between the acceptor and donor LUMOs, the efficiency is low since the charges in a CT state do not have enough excess energy to escape the mutual Coulomb attraction, resulting in low φ and hence low J. For high ΔE (>0.75 eV), i.e. EaLUMO far below EdLUMO, the CT state easily dissociates into free charges, due to high excess energy, but the transport of these charges to the electrodes is inefficient due to the low built-in electric field decreasing the current and thus the efficiency. In addition, VOC decreases due to low EaLUMO − EdHOMO = Eg − ΔE, decreasing the efficiency as well. To achieve maximum efficiency with given Eg, ΔE should fulfill a tradeoff between J and VOC. Accordingly, the η(ΔE) graph is bell shaped with the maximum at an optimal driving force. This optimal value depends on the material parameters, e.g., on the charge mobility as shown in Fig. 4b, and on the reorganization energy as shown in ESI,† Fig. S3a. The optimal LUMO position as a function of Eg is given in ESI,† Fig. S3b.
We now address the influence of the model parameters, namely krec, μ, r0, ε, λ, and β, on the OSC efficiency η, assuming that ΔE is optimized. To do this, for a given set of these parameters and given Eg, we vary the acceptor LUMO energy (and correspondingly ΔE) to obtain the maximum efficiency ηopt. Then, we plot the calculated efficiencies as a function of the bandgap, ηopt(Eg), by analogy with the famous Shockley–Quiesser plot.79 Below, we refer to the ηopt(Eg) dependence as “the efficiency plot”, and the Eg value corresponding to maximal η as the optimal bandgap.
3.2. Recombination rate and charge mobility
In our kinetic model, as in the Onsager–Braun model, the geminate recombination rate krec and charge mobility μ are interconnected, and only their combination γ = μ/krec determines the free charge yield.47 We discuss only the impact of charge mobility on η, since μ also affects charge transport to electrodes. The impact of krec is addressed in ESI,† Section S2.2. Also, the effect of the reduced Langevin recombination rate is investigated in ESI,† Section S2.3.
Organic semiconductors have relatively low charge mobilities as compared to inorganic ones, and one could expect that an increase in the charge mobility could substantially increase the OSC performance. Fig. 5 presents the efficiency plots for different μ values. The mobility increase from 10−5 to 10−2 cm2 (V s)−1 (typical mobilities in OSC materials) results in a more than 10-fold increase in η. However, further μ increase by two orders of magnitude, up to ∼1 cm2 (V s)−1, results in a less pronounced increase in efficiency, and the efficiency curve (see inset in Fig. 5) saturates at ∼20%. Therefore, we conclude that if the charge mobility is low, its impact is strong, whereas if the charge mobility exceeds ∼10−1–10−2 cm2 (V s)−1, its impact becomes less significant. This may explain why OSCs based on some conjugated polymers or small molecules with high μ (designed for OFETs) do not show remarkable η. Our findings are in accordance with the experimental results from ref. 80, where it was shown that the mobility becomes the limiting factor only below ca. 10−3 cm2 (V s)−1 in blends of P3HT analogs with PCBM, and modeling results reported in ref. 9 and 81. Moreover, modeling performed in ref. 82 predicts that an increase in the charge mobility above 0.1 cm2 (V s)−1 results in a decrease in the OSC efficiency, due to decreased VOC.
 Fig. 5  (a) Efficiency plot (OSC power conversion efficiency for the optimized driving force ΔE as a function of the bandgap) for various charge mobilities. (b) Maximal efficiency as a function of charge mobility. krec = 1010 s−1. 
3.3. Electron–hole distance in the CT state and dielectric permittivity
The Coulomb interaction between the escaping charges is determined by the CT state size (electron–hole separation distance), r0, and the dielectric permittivity, ε. The effect of r0 is discussed in ESI,† Section S3. Briefly, the impact of r0 on η significantly depends on the values of the other parameters. Large r0 is important for efficient CT state dissociation if other material properties are not favorable, for instance if μ is low and krec is large. In contrast, an increase in r0 has little effect on η for advanced OSC materials with high μ and low krec.
The dielectric permittivity decreases the electron–hole interaction and thus suppresses geminate and non-geminate recombination. Fig. 6 illustrates the impact of the dielectric permitivity, ε, on the efficiency plot. The dielectric permittivity affects the efficiency significantly, and higher ε can increase the efficiency far above the current 12%. For ε values corresponding to that of silicon, ε = 16, the maximal efficiency is about 23%, and further increase to ε = 20 yields an efficiency up to 27%. Therefore, an increase in ε is a very promising way to increase the OSC efficiency, in agreement with conclusions of ref. 10 and 83. Interestingly, the impact of ε does not saturate for high ε.
 Fig. 6  Efficiency plot for various dielectric permittivities (a), and maximal efficiency as a function of dielectric permittivity (b). μ =10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1, krec = 1010 s−1. 
3.4. Energy losses: reorganization energy and thermalization

Fig. 7 shows the efficiency plot for various reorganization energies, λ, which is a parameter of the Marcus model responsible for the CT state formation. This parameter affects the OSC performance dramatically: for example, a decrease in λ from the typically reported value of about 0.5 eV (ref. 66–69) to 0.1 eV doubles the maximal performance and allows more than 25% efficiency. The curve in Fig. 7 for a very low reorganization energy of 0.01 eV (pink line) is close to the Shockley–Quiesser limit (dash-dot line).
 Fig. 7  Efficiency plot for various reorganization energies, μ = 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1, krec = 1010 s−1. 
The results presented above do not take into consideration charge thermalization (in CT and CS states). Fig. 8 collates efficiency plots for various thermalization rates, β. Increasing the thermalization rate decreases the efficiency, since for higher β the charges lose their excess energy (and hence high mobility) faster, and the free charge yield decreases (see Fig. 3). The decrease is about 20% as β increases from 108 to 1012 eV s−1. For the thermalization rates observed for the CP:fullerene blend (β ∼ 1010 eV s−133) and λ = 0.4 eV, the model predicts about 14% efficiency, which is close to the current record efficiencies. The impact of β saturates for its higher values (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Efficiency plot for various thermalization rates, μ = 10−1 cm2 (V s)−1, krec = 1010 s−1 eV, λ = 0.4 eV. 
3.5. Charge delocalization
Charge delocalization has double impact on the OSC performance: it increases r043 and decreases λ.55,84 As shown in Sections 3.3, 3.4 and ESI† (Section S2.2), both factors facilitate charge separation and make it less sensitive to the excess energy. For a blend with r0 = 1 nm, λ = 0.4 eV, kr = 1010, μ = 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and ε = 3.5, charge delocalization over two molecules (n = 2) increases the maximal efficiency from 9% to 13% and downshifts the optimal bandgap from ∼1.9 to ∼1.75 eV (Fig. 9a). For a better blend with λ = 0.2 eV, kr = 109 s−1, μ = 1 cm2 (V s)−1 and ε = 3.5, such delocalization has a lower impact (Fig. 9b): maximal efficiency increases from 27% to 31%, and the optimal bandgap remains at ∼1.4 eV with negligible downshift.
 Fig. 9  Impact of charge delocalization on the efficiency plot for the poor (a) and good (b) blends (see the text). 
4. Discussion
4.1. Are hot CT states necessary?
The proposed hot kinetic model distinguishes two general types of OSC materials: “poor” organic ones with low mobility (μ < 0.01 cm2 (V s)−1), low dielectric permittivity (ε < 5) and high reorganization energy (λ > 0.4), and “good” (inorganic-like) ones with high mobility (μ > 0.1 cm2 (V s)−1), high dielectric permittivity (ε > 10) and low reorganization energy (λ → 0). The former type can be termed as “CT-state-dissociation-limited”, since dissociation of the cold CT state is hard, and charge separation occurs mainly via the hot CT states. Therefore, the excess energy, which strongly facilitates CT state dissociation (Fig. 3), determines the overall performance of these OSCs. The other type of OSC materials can be termed as “CT-state-generation-limited”, since the cold CT state can dissociate easily, and overall performance is determined by the rate of the CT state generation, i.e., absorption and exciton diffusion. In this case, the role of the excess energy is less pronounced. For the CT-state-dissociation-limited materials, the OSC efficiency is low, but improving one of the material electronic properties (μ, krec, ε or r0) can result in the significant increase of the OSC performance as shown in Section 3. For the CT-state-generation-limited ones, the OSC efficiency is significantly higher and less dependent on moderate variation of the material properties. Thus, the model describes both types of OSCs, i.e., those where hot CT states play a dominant role and those where the cold CT state dissociates efficiently. The model confirms, in accordance with the previous works and a recent report that appeared while the present work was under review,85 that while the excess energy can force CT state dissociation, it is not always necessary for high efficiency. It is much better to achieve easy dissociation of the cold CT state and hence to decrease the energy loss.
4.2. Optimal bandgap
Since the role of the excess energy depends on the material properties, the model predicts that the optimal bandgap Eg also depends on them. For OSCs based on the state-of-the-art materials, optimal Eg is in the range 1.5–1.8 eV. For instance, for a donor–acceptor pair with λ = 0.5 eV and μ = 10−3 cm2 (V s)−1 (e.g., P3HT:PCBM or F8BT:PCBM), the optimal bandgap is ∼1.75 eV. This is in contrast to inorganic solar cells, where the optimal bandgap should be about 1.34 eV, according to the Shockley–Quiesser model.79 The higher bandgap for OSCs is associated with the losses beyond the unavoidable radiative recombination. The general trend is: the “better” the blend (lower λ and krec, and larger ε, r0 and μ), the lower the optimal bandgap, and the closer it is to that of inorganic solar cells. For example, Fig. 5–7 show the decrease in the optimal bandgap with the increase in μ, ε, and decrease in λ, respectively. For λ ≤ 0.1 eV, the optimal bandgap is about 1.3–1.4 eV, close to that predicted for inorganic semiconductors (Fig. 7). Therefore, the model suggests that the widely used approach for Eg lowering is efficient only with the improvement of the electronic properties. For instance, novel non-fullerene acceptors possess extended conjugated systems, which are expected to result in low λ and a less pronounced role of the excess energy. Efficient charge separation, despite the low driving force, was indeed reported for OSC with a non-fullerene acceptor in ref. 86. Thus, the Eg decrease seems to be promising for the development of well-performing OSCs based on these materials, e.g., the efficiency of more than 10% was achieved for the acceptor with Eg = 1.24 eV.87
Our conclusion that state-of-the art OSCs should have larger bandgaps than that predicted by the Shockley–Quiesser model is in agreement with many other models.1 For instance, the kinetic model suggested in ref. 57 also considers the role of the excess energy and uses the “effective temperature” concept, similar to eqn (3), to account for CT state hotness. Despite several significant differences between our model and that from ref. 57, both models show that the optimal bandgap for state-of-the-art OSC is in the range 1.5–1.8 eV. The efficiency plot predicted by our model for moderate-efficiency blends with maximal efficiency ∼10% (e.g., the black curve in Fig. 7) is close to that reported in ref. 11, and both suggest the optimal bandgap of ∼1.9–2.0 eV. Importantly, several thermodynamic models,9,88,89 in spite of the completely different approach, indicate the same trend: taking into account various losses (e.g., reorganization,90 strong CT-state binding,89 recombination due to low charge mobility,9 or other type of energy loss85) results in higher optimal Eg. For instance, the model based on the detailed balance approach90 suggests that the optimal Eg increases with λ and is between 1.5 and 2 eV for λ = 0.5 eV, in accordance with our findings.
Comparison of our two-step kinetic model with the kinetic model suggested in ref. 4 (that considers charge generation as a single process described by the Marcus formula) shows that for both, the reorganization energy has a large impact on the OSC efficiency. However, our model, first, predicts the lower efficiencies, and second, advises the use of the larger bandgaps. These two features result from the additional energy losses during the CT state dissociation, considered in our model and neglected in ref. 4.
Finally, we compare the predictions of our model with the reported OSC efficiencies. Fig. 10 presents experimental power conversion efficiencies of OSCs from a number of reports plotted vs. donor Eg (points). The best cell efficiencies are observed for materials with bandgaps in the range Eg ∼ 1.5–1.6 eV, which are close to the optimal bandgaps predicted by our model and significantly larger than that within the Shockley–Quisser model.
 Fig. 10  Power conversion efficiencies of well-performing OSCs. The data (points) are from ref. 85 and 91–93. The line corresponds to the model ηopt(Eg) curve for λ = 0.4 eV, r0 = 1 nm and n = 2 (“delocalization”). The vertical line designates the optimal bandgap for inorganic SCs (1.34 eV), μ = 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1, krec = 1010 s−1. 
4.3. Pathways to boost photovoltaic efficiency
To boost the OSC efficiency, the energy loss should be decreased, i.e., the need for excess energy should be avoided. From the model, we suggest three promising approaches: decreasing the reorganization energy, improving intermolecular charge delocalization, and increasing the dielectric permittivity. All three pathways promise the ultimate OSC efficiency above 25%.
The particular importance of the reorganization energy, λ, is unexpected at a glance since the CT state formation, whose rate is determined by λ, is much faster (kM = 1012–1013 s−1 in typical blends20,64) than the PL rate (kPL = 109–1010 s−170 for typical organic donors) and does not limit the charge yield. However, the reorganization energy also determines the average excess energy of the CT states: the CT states manifold is populated according to a Gaussian-like distribution with a maximum at EmaxCT = Eg − λ (see eqn (1)), and for smaller λ values, “hotter” CT states are populated for given Eg. Since the CT state excess energy is crucial for its dissociation (see Fig. 3), the reorganization energy becomes important. The particular role of the reorganization energy is in agreement with the results from ref. 89 and 90, where the impact of the energy loss on η was addressed using the detailed balance approach, and with the data from ref. 10, where the Monte-Carlo modeling based on the Marcus model was utilized. Although in ref. 94 moderate impact of λ variation (two-fold change in the charge separation rate) was reported, it stems from the narrow range of considered λ values (0.06–0.12 eV). For this range, we also observe moderate variation of the cell efficiency (ca. 20%), while λ variation in a wider range provides more than three-fold variation of the OSC efficiency (Fig. 7).
The overall reorganization energy (sum of the λ values for single donor and acceptor molecules) for typical OSC materials is high because of their softness and can be roughly estimated as 0.4–0.6 eV.46,95 Assuming λ = 0.5 eV, the model predicts the limit for the OSC efficiency of about 14% (Fig. 7, green line). If λ = 0.3 eV is achieved, the efficiency limit will rise above 17% (Fig. 7, violet line). Accordingly, ways to decrease the reorganization energy are of great interest and worth detailed studies. The reorganization energy is commonly divided into two terms: the inner-sphere term, λi, which stems from the change in the molecule conformation after the CT event, and the outer-sphere term, λo, which stems from the polarization of the environment. λi usually dominates (at least for non-polar organic semiconductors such as oligoacenes96,97) and can be lowered by increasing the (intramolecular) electron delocalization and the molecular rigidity.98,99 In addition, recent reports show that the non-bonding character of HOMO and/or LUMO is beneficial for small λi.100,101 Relatively small λi values (∼0.1–0.2 eV) were reported for P3HT,102 fullerene,103 porphyrins and phtalocyanines,104 and condensed aromatics.99,105 Notably, the intramolecular reorganization energy of the phtalocyanine molecule was measured as low as 0.037 eV.104 Graphene nanoribbons, carbon nanotubes, graphene nanosheets and quantum dots should also show small λi, due to rigidity and charge delocalization.105,106 The assessment of λo is not straightforward. The calculations show that it is lower than 0.01 eV for oligoacenes,96,97 and one may expect that it is also low for other organic conjugated molecules without polar groups.107 However, λo increases with the polarizability (and hence ε)45 and can be important for organic semiconductors with high ε. Therefore, the impact of ε can be more complicated than discussed above. It is worth mentioning that small λ is not a panacea, and the donor/acceptor pair with small λ will perform well in OSC only if other material properties (μ, krec, etc.) are appropriate (e.g.Fig. 5). For instance, OSCs based on phtalocyanines and condensed aromatics (e.g. perylene diimide), which have low λ, frequently show low efficiency, most probably due to small r0 and high recombination rate in the CT states (krec).108
The second way to boost the OSC performance is to enhance charge delocalization via improved crystallinity of the donor/acceptor domains. Charge delocalization affects several material properties as discussed above, the most important being the decrease of the reorganization energy. The optical data by Vandewal et al.42 show that in well-performing blends, λ can be as low as ∼0.2 eV (the half of the difference between CT state absorption and emission). This value is significantly lower than the sum of the typical reorganization energies of donor and acceptor molecules (∼0.4 eV), and we attribute this decrease to intermolecular charge delocalization. This explains the enhanced OSC performance109 and the lower role of the driving force110 for the blends with crystalline donor and/or acceptor, which are in line with observations that the cold CT state can dissociate efficiently in some blends.42 The deduced impact of delocalization is also in accordance with theoretical results obtained by Nan et al.,43 where the excess energy of the CT state was shown to play a significant role in charge separation for OSCs with low crystallinity of donor/acceptor, but was found to be unimportant in the blends with enhanced crystallinity.
The third factor limiting the solar cell efficiency, namely low ε, was mentioned in previous studies as an important source of worse performance of organic solar cells as compared to inorganic ones;111,112 an increase in ε was suggested as a promising route to improving the OSC efficiency (e.g., in ref. 10). Not surprisingly, in our model, high ε also provides an opportunity to achieve high power conversion efficiency. Note that for materials with large ε, low reorganization energy is not obligatory for high OSC efficiency, since in this case even cold CT states dissociate efficiently due to decreased (screened by ε) electron–hole attraction. To increase ε, polar groups can be attached to organic semiconductor molecules; ε values as high as 16.7 were reported for polymer donors,10,83 5.7 for fullerene derivatives,113 and 9.8 for non-fullerene acceptors.112 However, as mentioned above, increasing ε increases the outer-sphere reorganization energy, λ0, which can decrease the cell efficiency as shown in Section 3.4. The impact of ε on the solar cell performance can therefore be overestimated, and a more detailed investigation of this issue is required, but this is beyond the current study. Note that the frequency dependence of the dielectric permittivity may also play a significant role.
Perovskite structures are interesting emerging photovoltaic materials that provide power conversion efficiencies higher than 20%,114 and should certainly be considered “good” solar cell materials. The photophysics of these materials is under active discussion,115 and the hot kinetic model can be applicable to these materials if the photoinduced charge transfer is essential in the perovskite photophysics. Perovskites show charge mobilities above 10 cm2 (V s)−1,115 which are beneficial for photovoltaics according to our model. However, we assume that the main reason for their superior performance is high ε > 30,116,117 which seems to be related to the organic molecules with a large dipole moment embedded in the perovskite lattice.116 Interestingly, the reorganization energy was calculated to be rather high in these materials.118 However, high reorganization energy can be overwhelmed by high ε as shown in Section 3.3 (see Fig. 6), since in this case the electrons and holes in the excitons (or CT state) are weakly bound and do not require excess energy to be separated.
The constructed model is first of all a guide for high-efficiency OSCs and addresses mainly the pathways to improve the OSC efficiency, rather than a detailed description of specific devices. To keep the analytic character of the model and its generality, we have to use a number of approximations and neglect factors that can be significant in some cases. Specifically, the charges are considered to be localized at molecules, and this can be generally not the case for the blends with high crystallinity of the donor and/or acceptor. While the increase of OSC efficiency due to intermolecular charge delocalization is roughly evaluated in Section 3.5, the more rigorous treatment is not straightforward.119 Further, the model could overestimate VOC and the fill factor, and hence the OSC efficiency for extremely high-performing materials with high mobility (μ ≥ 1 cm2 V−1 s−1) and high dielectric permittivity (ε > 10), since the Langevin expression for non-geminate recombination is valid for semiconductors with low charge mobility and may underestimate the recombination in high-mobility semiconductors. Neglect of charge diffusion and the assumption about the uniform distribution of charge and electric field within the active layer could also overestimate VOC and the fill factor. The current model could be improved by accounting for exciton diffusion, exciton delocalization, and possible long-range dissociation;53 there could also be explicit consideration of intermolecular charge delocalization,120,121 phase separation,56 energetic landscape and disorder,122,123 and more detailed treatment of charge transport and recombination (e.g., with a drift-diffusion model). However, all of this can hardly be done within an analytical model and numerical modeling is required, which is far beyond the current study.
4. Conclusions
The proposed hot kinetic model shows that rigid materials with low reorganization energy, high dielectric permittivity and pronounced charge delocalization are exclusively important for boosting the organic solar cell efficiency toward and above 20%. The model also predicts that for state-of-the-art OSC materials, the optimal bandgaps are in the range 1.5–1.8 eV, i.e., larger than that predicted by the Shockley–Quiesser model. If materials with lower reorganization energy, higher dielectric permittivity, and/or stronger intermolecular charge delocalization are developed, bandgap reduction will be a benefit.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work on model formulation was supported by Russian Foundation of Basic Research (project #16-32-60204 mol_a_dk). The work on application of the model was supported by Russian Science Foundation (project #14-13-01380). The authors would like to thank V. S. Trukhanov, S. A. Zapunidi and S. Dimitrov for valuable discussions.
References
M. C. Scharber and N. S. Sariciftci, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1929–1940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-S. Sun, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 85, 261–267 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tributsch, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 584–596 CrossRef CAS .
D. Godovsky, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 190–194 CrossRef CAS .
S. Athanasopoulos, S. Tscheuschner, H. Bassler and A. Kohler, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2093–2098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganas and J. V. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904–909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nelson, J. Kirkpatrick and P. Ravirajan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 035337 CrossRef .
V. A. Trukhanov, V. V. Bruevich and D. Y. Paraschuk, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205318 CrossRef .
U. Wurfel, D. Neher, A. Spies and S. Albrecht, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6951 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. A. Koster, S. E. Shaheen and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1246–1253 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 093511 CrossRef .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 335, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Deibel, T. Strobel and V. Dyakonov, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4097–4111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt and O. Inganäs, in Semiconductors and Semimetals, ed. M. T. Uli Wüerfel and R. W. Eicke, Elsevier,  2011, 85, 261–295 Search PubMed .
S. Yamamoto, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14804–14810 CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, S. D. Dimitrov, A. Rao, P. C. Y. Chow, C. B. Nielsen, B. C. Schroeder, I. McCulloch, H. J. Bakker, J. R. Durrant and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 209–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Kozlov, Y. N. Luponosov, S. A. Ponomarenko, N. Kausch-Busies, D. Y. Paraschuk, Y. Olivier, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil and M. S. Pshenichnikov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401657 CrossRef .
A. Y. Sosorev and D. Y. Paraschuk, Isr. J. Chem., 2014, 54, 650–673 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, S. G. Elizarov, A. N. Khodarev, D. S. Martyanov, I. V. Golovnin, D. Y. Paraschuk, M. M. Triebel, I. V. Tolstov, E. L. Frankevich, S. A. Arnautov and E. M. Nechvolodova, Synth. Met., 2004, 147, 221–225 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, D. S. Martyanov, D. Y. Paraschuk, M. S. Pshenichnikov and P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 13730–13737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y.-W. Wang, R. Hu, L.-M. Fu, X.-C. Ai, J.-P. Zhang and J.-H. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 735–749 CAS .
K. Li, P. P. Khlyabich, L. Li, B. Burkhart, B. C. Thompson and J. C. Campbell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6940–6948 CAS .
T. Shimazaki and T. Nakajima, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 144, 8 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Grancini, M. Maiuri, D. Fazzi, A. Petrozza, H. J. Egelhaaf, D. Brida, G. Cerullo and G. Lanzani, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 29–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Zhu, Q. Yang and M. Muntwiler, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1779–1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Few, J. M. Frost, J. Kirkpatrick and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8253–8261 CAS .
A. E. Jailaubekov, A. P. Willard, J. R. Tritsch, W. L. Chan, N. Sai, R. Gearba, L. G. Kaake, K. J. Williams, K. Leung, P. J. Rossky and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 66–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, A. J. Barker, M. E. Reish, K. C. Gordon and J. M. Hodgkiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18502–18512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, S. Tierney, W. Zhang, M. Heeney, L. Mcculloch, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3030–3042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512–516 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Vithanage, A. Devižis, V. Abramavičius, Y. Infahsaeng, D. Abramavičius, R. C. I. MacKenzie, P. E. Keivanidis, A. Yartsev, D. Hertel, J. Nelson, V. Sundström and V. Gulbinas, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2334 Search PubMed .
A. Melianas, V. Pranculis, Y. X. Xia, N. Felekidis, O. Inganas, V. Gulbinas and M. Kemerink, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602143 CrossRef .
A. Melianas, V. Pranculis, A. Devižis, V. Gulbinas, O. Inganäs and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4507–4514 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Dimitrov, A. A. Bakulin, C. B. Nielsen, B. C. Schroeder, J. Du, H. Bronstein, I. McCulloch, R. H. Friend and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18189–18192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Dimitrov and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 616–630 CrossRef .
S. Shoaee, S. Subramaniyan, H. Xin, C. Keiderling, P. S. Tuladhar, F. Jamieson, S. A. Jenekhe and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3286–3298 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, G. Han, D. Fan, Y. Xie and Y. Yi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 11320–11326 CAS .
T. Shimazaki and T. Nakajima, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 12538–12544 RSC .
D. Jarzab, F. Cordella, J. Gao, M. Scharber, H.-J. Egelhaaf and M. A. Loi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 604–609 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, C. Lungenschmied, H. J. Egelhaaf, G. Matt, M. Bednorz, T. Fromherz, J. Gao, D. Jarzab and M. A. Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5077–5083 CAS .
A. C. Jakowetz, M. L. Böhm, J. Zhang, A. Sadhanala, S. Huettner, A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11672–11679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vandewal, S. Albrecht, E. T. Hoke, K. R. Graham, J. Widmer, J. D. Douglas, M. Schubert, W. R. Mateker, J. T. Bloking, G. F. Burkhard, A. Sellinger, J. M. J. Fréchet, A. Amassian, M. K. Riede, M. D. McGehee, D. Neher and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 63–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Nan, X. Zhang and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 15028–15035 CAS .
K. Vandewal, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 67, 113–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Marcus and N. Sutin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1985, 811, 265–322 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Ward, A. Ruseckas, M. M. Kareem, B. Ebenhoch, L. A. Serrano, M. Al-Eid, B. Fitzpatrick, V. M. Rotello, G. Cooke and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2496–2500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Braun, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4157–4161 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wojcik and M. Tachiya, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 104107 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bartesaghi, I. D. C. Pérez, J. Kniepert, S. Roland, M. Turbiez, D. Neher and L. J. A. Koster, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Grygiel, K. Falkowski, D. Pelczarski and W. Stampor, Org. Electron., 2016, 39, 328–339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wojcik, A. Nowak and K. Seki, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 146, 054101 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Arkhipov, E. V. Emelianova and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS .
D. Caruso and A. Troisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 13498–13502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Y. Sosorev, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 25478–25486 RSC .
M. Wojcik, P. Michalak and M. Tachiya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 3 CrossRef .
J. D. Servaites, B. M. Savoie, J. B. Brink, T. J. Marks and M. A. Ratner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8343–8350 CAS .
M. Hilczer and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6808–6813 CAS .
V. A. Trukhanov, V. V. Bruevich and D. Y. Paraschuk, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205318 CrossRef .
A. C. Morteani, P. Sreearunothai, L. M. Herz, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 247402 CrossRef PubMed .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 216601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Köhler and H. Bässler, Electronic Processes in Organic Semiconductors, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2015 Search PubMed .
T. M. Burke, S. Sweetnam, K. Vandewal and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500123 CrossRef .
A. A. Bakulin, S. A. Zapunidy, M. S. Pshenichnikov, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht and D. Y. Paraschuk, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 7324–7330 RSC .
C. J. Brabec, G. Zerza, G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri, S. Luzzati, J. C. Hummelen and S. Sariciftci, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 340, 232–236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and A. Suna, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5627–5638 CrossRef CAS .
C. Leng, H. Qin, Y. Si and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 1843–1855 CAS .
Y. Kawashima, K. Ohkubo and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 6737–6743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Karsten, R. K. M. Bouwer, J. C. Hummelen, R. M. Williams and R. A. J. Janssen, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 1055–1065 CAS .
L. J. Rothberg, M. Yan, F. Papadimitrakopoulos, M. E. Galvin, E. W. Kwock and T. M. Miller, Synth. Met., 1996, 80, 41–58 CrossRef CAS .
F. Etzold, I. A. Howard, R. Mauer, M. Meister, T.-D. Kim, K.-S. Lee, N. S. Baek and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9469–9479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, P. K. Bhatnagar, P. C. Mathur, M. Husain, S. Sengupta and J. Kumar, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 024502 CrossRef .
H. C. F. Martens, J. N. Huiberts and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 1852–1854 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS .
R. Noriega, J. Rivnay, K. Vandewal, F. P. V. Koch, N. Stingelin, P. Smith, M. F. Toney and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1038–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Etzold, I. A. Howard, N. Forler, D. M. Cho, M. Meister, H. Mangold, J. Shu, M. R. Hansen, K. Müllen and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10569–10583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Jamieson, T. Agostinelli, H. Azimi, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3306–3310 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gulbinas, Y. Zaushitsyn, V. Sundström, D. Hertel, H. Bässler and A. Yartsev, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 107401 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke, A. Ballantyne, S. Shoaee, Y. W. Soon, W. Duffy, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5287–5291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kirchartz, K. Taretto and U. Rau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17958–17966 CAS .
M. M. Mandoc, L. J. A. Koster and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 133504 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, T. M. Clarke and A. J. Mozer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7033–7043 CAS .
S. T. Bromley, F. Illas and M. Mas-Torrent, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 121–127 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Zhu and Z. Wei, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700258 CrossRef .
J. Liu, S. S. Chen, D. P. Qian, B. Gautam, G. F. Yang, J. B. Zhao, J. Bergqvist, F. L. Zhang, W. Ma, H. Ade, O. Inganas, K. Gundogdu, F. Gao and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 7 Search PubMed .
H. F. Yao, Y. Cui, R. N. Yu, B. W. Gao, H. Zhang and J. H. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 472–476 CAS .
N. C. Giebink, G. P. Wiederrecht, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 195326 CrossRef .
K. Seki, A. Furube and Y. Yoshida, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 253904 CrossRef .

          E. Zhu, L. Bian, J. Hai, W. Tang and F. Zhang, in Solar Cells – New Aspects and Solutions, ed. P. L. A. Kosyachenko, InTech,  2010, ch. 20, pp. 433–453 Search PubMed .

          W. C. H. Choy, Organic Solar Cells: Materials and Device Physics, Springer,  2012 Search PubMed .
H. Zhou, L. Yang and W. You, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 607–632 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu and A. Troisi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2406–2415 CAS .
S. Fukuzumi, K. Ohkubo, H. Imahori, J. Shao, Z. Ou, G. Zheng, Y. Chen, R. K. Pandey, M. Fujitsuka, O. Ito and K. M. Kadish, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10676–10683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Norton and J.-L. Brédas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12377–12384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. McMahon and A. Troisi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 941–946 CrossRef CAS .

          D. A. da Silva Filho, Y. Olivier, V. Coropceanu, J.-L. Bredas and J. Cornil, in Organic Field-Effect Transistors, ed. Z. Bao and J. Locklin, CRC Press,  2007 Search PubMed .
I. Yavuz, B. N. Martin, J. Park and K. N. Houk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2856–2866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Chang and I. Chao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 116–121 CrossRef CAS .
W.-C. Chen and I. Chao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20176–20183 CAS .
M. Qiu, R. G. Brandt, Y. Niu, X. Bao, D. Yu, N. Wang, L. Han, L. Yu, S. Xia and R. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8501–8511 CAS .
A. Devos and M. Lannoo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 8236–8239 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. da Silva Filho, V. Coropceanu, N. E. Gruhn, P. H. de Oliveira Neto and J.-L. Bredas, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6069–6071 RSC .
J. C. Sancho-Garcia and A. J. Perez-Jimenez, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 2741–2746 RSC .
R. Ihly, K. S. Mistry, A. J. Ferguson, T. T. Clikeman, B. W. Larson, O. Reid, O. V. Boltalina, S. H. Strauss, G. Rumbles and J. L. Blackburn, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 603–609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Hutchison, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2339–2350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. P. Rand and H. Richter, Organic Solar Cells: Fundamentals, Devices, and Upscaling, Pan Stanford Publishing,  2014 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Liu, J. B. Zhao, Z. K. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. W. Hu, K. Jiang, H. R. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Jakowetz, M. L. Bohm, J. B. Zhang, A. Sadhanala, S. Huettner, A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11672–11679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Tress, Organic Solar Cells: Theory, Experiment, and Device Simulation, Springer International Publishing,  2014 Search PubMed .
J. E. Donaghey, A. Armin, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14115–14118 RSC .
S. Torabi, F. Jahani, I. Van Severen, C. Kanimozhi, S. Patil, R. W. A. Havenith, R. C. Chiechi, L. Lutsen, D. J. M. Vanderzande, T. J. Cleij, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. A. Koster, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
Research Cell Efficiency Records, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg.
C. S. Ponseca, Y. X. Tian, V. Sundstrom and I. G. Scheblykin, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 16 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Brivio, A. B. Walker and A. Walsh, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 042111 CrossRef .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Neukirch, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, K. Appavoo, H. Tsai, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Katan, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, J. J. Crochet, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite and S. Tretiak, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3809–3816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Few, J. M. Frost and J. Nelson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2311–2325 RSC .
Z. S. Wang, W. E. I. Sha and W. C. H. Choy, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 7 Search PubMed .
H. Vazquez and A. Troisi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 5 CrossRef .
F. Castet, G. D'Avino, L. Muccioli, J. Cornil and D. Beljonne, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20279–20290 RSC .
D. P. McMahon, D. L. Cheung and A. Troisi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2737–2741 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp06158gThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Two-step model for the generation of free charges in a blend of polymer donor (blue) with fullerene acceptor (grey). The first step is the formation of the CT state from an exciton, and the second one is the dissociation of the CT state into separated charges.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the hot kinetic model. Different states of bound electron–hole pairs are depicted by parabolas. Photons with energies larger than the optical bandgap Eg are absorbed (vertical green line) with the rate constant kabs, and generate excitons that relax to the bottom of the parabola (short green arrow) and can then either contribute to photoluminescence with the rate constant kPL (vertical downward red arrow), or undergo transfer to one of the CT states (blue parabolas). The total Marcus transfer rate from the exciton state to all the CT states is kM. The CT states can dissociate into free charges (CS state, smooth blue curve) with the rate constant kd or recombine with the rate constant krec. The orange arrow describes the return of some of the charges to the CT state (accounted in kd). The hot CT states and the separating charges generated from them lose their excess energy W with the thermalization rate β (wavy arrow), which includes internal conversion within the manifold of the CT states and thermalization of the non-equilibrium charges. Separated charges can either recombine with the non-geminate recombination constant knon or become extracted from the active layer with the rate constant kext (right green arrow) and contribute to the photocurrent J. For details, see ESI,† Section S1.	 
	(2)
W = ECTi − ECT0	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

Attempt frequency in Marcus model ν0	1 × 1012 s−1	Lower estimate; CT state formation time is below 100 fs64,65
Reorganization energy λ	0.5 eV	Measured or calculated values are in the range 0.4–0.65 eV for polymer:fullerene or fullerene:fullerene CT66–69
Donor excited state lifetime τPL	0.5 × 10−9 s	Typical PL lifetime is ca. 0.3 ns in neat polymer film70,71
Mobility μ = μe + μh	10−4 cm2 (V s)−1, (“poor” blend, vide infra)	
μ
h = 3 × 10−3 cm2 (V s)−1 for P3HT54 and μh ∼ 5 × 10−7 cm2 (V s)−1 for MEH-PPV72,73μe = 3 × 10−3 cm2 (V s)−1 for PCBM74
10−1 cm2 (V s)−1 (“good” blend, vide infra)	Higher than 1 cm2 (V s)−1 for some conjugated polymers75
CT state lifetime in the absence of charge extraction (τ0 = krec−1)	100 ps (“good” blend)	
ca. 5 ps in MEH-PPV:DNAQ;64 ≥300 ps in polymer:fullerene blends12,15,64,71,76
1 ps (“poor” blend)
Dielectric permittivity ε	3.5	Average between P3HT (ε = 3) and PCBM (ε = 4)54
Recombination radius R	3.5 A	Typical π–π stacking distance in organic solids
Initial average electron–hole separation in the CT state r0	1 nm	
Ref. 12, 31 and 54

Film thickness d	100 nm	Typical value for OSC
Cell temperature T	300 K	

Number of molecules the charges is delocalized over n	1	Assumed

 	Fig. 3  Yield of free charges as a function of the applied electric field for different excess energies. The top axis shows the corresponding voltage for an OSC with active layer thickness d = 100 nm. The curves were calculated for μ = 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and krec = 1010 s−1.	 

 	Fig. 4  Current–voltage characteristics (a) and power conversion efficiency as a function of the driving force (b) for various charge mobilities (Eg = 2 eV, krec = 1010 s−1).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Efficiency plot (OSC power conversion efficiency for the optimized driving force ΔE as a function of the bandgap) for various charge mobilities. (b) Maximal efficiency as a function of charge mobility. krec = 1010 s−1.	 

 	Fig. 6  Efficiency plot for various dielectric permittivities (a), and maximal efficiency as a function of dielectric permittivity (b). μ =10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1, krec = 1010 s−1.	 

 	Fig. 7  Efficiency plot for various reorganization energies, μ = 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1, krec = 1010 s−1.	 

 	Fig. 8  Efficiency plot for various thermalization rates, μ = 10−1 cm2 (V s)−1, krec = 1010 s−1 eV, λ = 0.4 eV.	 

 	Fig. 9  Impact of charge delocalization on the efficiency plot for the poor (a) and good (b) blends (see the text).	 

 	Fig. 10  Power conversion efficiencies of well-performing OSCs. The data (points) are from ref. 85 and 91–93. The line corresponds to the model ηopt(Eg) curve for λ = 0.4 eV, r0 = 1 nm and n = 2 (“delocalization”). The vertical line designates the optimal bandgap for inorganic SCs (1.34 eV), μ = 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1, krec = 1010 s−1.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp06158g

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
