All-inorganic cesium lead halide perovskite nanocrystals: synthesis, surface engineering and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TC04381G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TC04381G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 757-789All-inorganic cesium lead halide perovskite nanocrystals: synthesis, surface engineering and applications

        
          
            Di 
            Yang†
, 
      
        
          
            Muhan 
            Cao†
, 
      
        
          
            Qixuan 
            Zhong
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pengli 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaohong 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Qiao 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *
      Institute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials and Devices, Soochow University, Jiangsu 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: xiaohong_zhang@suda.edu.cn; qiaozhang@suda.edu.cn
Received 
      1st September 2018
    , Accepted 4th December 2018First published on 8th December 2018AbstractRecently, all-inorganic cesium lead halide (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) have attracted much attention because of their excellent photophysical properties and promising applications in diverse fields. In this review article, the synthetic methods have been briefly summarized first, followed by the morphological control of CsPbX3 NCs. To improve their photophysical properties as well as stability, surface passivation strategies, such as chemical treatment and encapsulation approaches, are used and have been summarized. Their representative applications in various fields, including light emitting diodes (LEDs), solar cells, photodetectors, lasers and photocatalysis, have been introduced. Finally, a brief outlook of this field has been proposed to point out some important challenges and possible solutions.
Di Yang
Di Yang received her Bachelor's degree (2015) from the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science of Soochow University. She is now a PhD candidate of Materials Science and Engineering in the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. Her current research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of all-inorganic metal halide perovskite nanocrystals.
Muhan Cao
Muhan Cao obtained her PhD degree in Environmental Science and Technology from Hohai University in 2015. Now she is a postdoctoral fellow in the College of Nano Science and Technology at Soochow University, working with Professor Qiao Zhang. Her current research interests focus on the design of metal and semiconductor nanocrystals and their catalytic applications.
Qixuan Zhong
Qixuan Zhong received his BS degree (2016) from the Changshu Institute of Technology. He is now a graduate student in the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. His current research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of all-inorganic metal halide perovskite/oxide composite materials.
Pengli Li
Pengli Li received her Bachelor's degree from Soochow University in 2017, and now she is a master's degree student in the Institute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM) in Soochow University. Her major is Materials Science and Engineering, and her research interests focus on the synthesis and modification of perovskite nanocrystals.
Xiaohong Zhang
Xiaohong Zhang received his PhD degree from Beijing University of Technology in 1996. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Institute of Photographic Chemistry of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) during 1996–1998, and as a senior visiting scholar at City University of Hong Kong during 1998–2000. He became a full professor at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry of CAS in 2000, and worked in the Cavendish Laboratory of Cambridge University as a senior visiting scholar during 2003–2004. In 2014, he joined Soochow University as a full professor. His main research areas include organic optoelectronic materials and semiconductor nano-materials and devices.
Qiao Zhang
Qiao Zhang is a professor in the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials, Soochow University, China. He received his PhD from the Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside. After being a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemistry, University of California Berkeley & Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (2012–2014), he joined the Institute of Functional and Soft Materials in 2014. His main research areas are molecular level studies of surface and heterogeneous catalysis, and controllable synthesis of all-inorganic perovskites with tunable optical properties and their application.
1. Introduction
Perovskites, named after Russian mineralogist Lev Perovski, refer to a large family of materials adopting a similar crystal structure to calcium titanate (CaTiO3). The general chemical formula for pure perovskite compounds is ABX3, where ‘A’ and ‘B’ are two cations with different sizes, and X is an anion. Recently, much attention has been paid to metal halide perovskite materials that possess similar ABX3 structures, where A is formamidinium (FA), methylammonium (MA), cesium (Cs) or rubidium (Rb); B is tin (Sn), bismuth (Bi) or lead (Pb); and X is chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), iodine (I) or their mixture. According to the composition of A, metal halide perovskites can be divided into two families: organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites where A is an organic group and all-inorganic metal halide perovskites with an inorganic cation, e.g., Cs.
Since organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites were first used as sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells in 2009,1 they have attracted much attention as a class of materials with impressive performance.2 Benefiting from their high light absorption coefficients, low exciton binding energies and long charge-carrier diffusion lengths,3–5 organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite based solar cells have shown unprecedentedly rapid progress, with their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) approaching 23%,6,7 situating them at the forefront of solution-processed photovoltaic devices. In 2014, hybrid perovskites proved to be promising cost-effective light-emitting materials with widely adjustable emission ranges.8,9 Therefore, many efforts have been devoted towards improving the quality and efficiency of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite based devices, in both the photoluminescence and electroluminescence fields.10–14 However, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites are extremely sensitive to moisture, oxygen and heat, because the organic groups could be easily destroyed. The decomposition of perovskite structures has severely limited their potential applications in the optoelectronic field.15,16 To overcome the issues caused by the intrinsic properties of organic–inorganic halide perovskites, other candidates with higher stability need to be exploited.
Compared with organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, all-inorganic perovskites showed improved thermo-stability because of their intrinsically high thermal decomposition temperature due to the inorganic cations.17,18 Since the pioneering work reported by Kovalenko and co-workers on the preparation of colloidal CsPbX3 nanocrystals (NCs),19 tremendous efforts have been devoted towards the preparation and applications of CsPbX3 NCs with various shapes, sizes, and compositions. Both liquid- and gas-phase methods have been investigated. Compared to traditional II–VI and III–V QDs, e.g., CdSe, CdS and InP, the emerging CsPbX3 NCs can be successfully obtained under mild conditions, such as low temperature (room temperature to 200 °C) and ambient conditions. These CsPbX3 NCs exhibit even better photoluminescence characteristics, including higher photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs) up to 100%,20,21 narrow emission bandwidths (<20 nm)5,22,23 and tunable electroluminescence emission.24 The optical properties of CsPbX3 NCs depend on their size and composition. When the radius of NCs decreases to smaller than their Bohr radius (CsPbCl3: 5 nm, CsPbBr3: 7 nm, CsPbI3: 12 nm), the quantum confinement effect will emerge and affect the PL emission.19 In addition, based on the different emission peak positions of CsPbX3 NCs with different compositions (CsPbCl3 (∼3.04 eV, ∼410 nm), CsPbBr3 (∼2.36 eV, ∼525 nm), and CsPbI3 (∼1.82 eV, ∼680 nm) NCs), they can be used as blue, green, and red light sources, respectively.25,26 These all-inorganic perovskite NCs with excellent performance have been demonstrated in many promising applications, including LEDs, photodetectors, solar cells and lasers.
Over the past four years, more than 1000 papers have been published regarding the preparation, physiochemical properties and promising applications of CsPbX3 NCs. This field is being developed very rapidly and many exciting results are being published every day. Although many review papers have been published in this field, we believe that it is time to make a complete summary of the recent progress. In this review, we will summarize the recent advancements in the synthesis and morphological control of CsPbX3 NCs, followed by surface passivation methods and the corresponding mechanisms, which play a significant role in the enhancement of the photophysical performance and stability of CsPbX3 NCs. Lastly, we briefly introduce their potential applications and outlook. We believe that this review may provide some new perspectives on the development of all-inorganic perovskite NCs.
2. Synthesis and morphological control of CsPbX3 nanostructures
The investigation of bulk metal halide perovskites can be traced back to 1958, when Möller first reported the photoconductivity of CsPbX3 crystals.27 However, they are not very attractive due to their poor optical properties and inconvenient fabrication methods. Since the first successful synthesis of high-quality CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, and I) colloidal NCs in 2015,19 many interesting approaches have been developed to prepare all-inorganic perovskite NCs. The approaches could be roughly divided into two categories: direct synthesis (such as hot-injection, room-temperature reprecipitation,28 ultrasonication,25,29,30 microwave,31–33 solvothermal,34–36 and chemical vapor deposition (CVD)37–40 methods) and post-synthesis (including ion exchange,41–43 phase transformation44–47 and template-assisted synthesis48). These approaches offer effective routes for the fabrication of uniform perovskite NCs with various morphologies, including zero-dimensional nanocubes and nanospheres, one-dimensional nanowires and nanorods, two-dimensional nanoplates and nanosheets, and three dimensional nanoflowers.
2.1 Synthetic approaches

2.1.1 Direct synthesis. 
In 2015, the Kovalenko group19 prepared CsPbX3 NCs through a hot-injection method. Fig. 1a shows the schematic diagram of the hot-injection strategy. Generally, a PbX2 precursor was first dissolved in a three-neck flask containing octadecene, oleic acid (OA) and oleylamine (OAm). Then, cesium oleate (Cs-oleate) was injected into the flask at high temperature (140–200 °C). Several seconds later, the reaction system was rapidly cooled down to room temperature using an ice-bath. In this system, OAm and OA played two roles: they could help solubilize PbX2 and stabilize CsPbX3 NCs as the surfactant. The inset in Fig. 1a shows that monodisperse and uniform CsPbBr3 nanocubes could be obtained through this method. XRD and TEM characterization studies confirmed their cubic phase. The as-prepared CsPbX3 NCs exhibited good optical properties, such as tunable emission wavelengths (410–700 nm), high PLQYs (up to 90%), narrow emission line-widths (12–42 nm) and wide color gamuts (up to 140% of the NTSC standard). Subsequently, this simple and effective approach has been modified to synthesize colloidal CsPbX3 NCs with different compositions, shapes, and sizes.49–52
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the hot injection method. The insets show the TEM image of CsPbBr3 NCs, and photographs and fluorescence spectra of samples with different halide compositions. (b) Schematic illustration showing the room temperature reprecipitation method. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 19. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Ref. 28. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 
For the hot-injection method, the need for high reaction temperature and an inert atmosphere may limit its widespread application. In 2016, Zeng and co-workers reported a ligand-assisted reprecipitation method at room temperature,28 in which Cs+, Pb2+ and halide precursors were first pre-dissolved in a polar solvent (dimethyl formamide (DMF) or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)), followed by a quick injection into a non-polar solvent (toluene), as shown in Fig. 1b. Since the solubility of these precursors in non-polar solvents is much lower than that in polar solvents, CsPbX3 NCs formed immediately. Different from cubic phase CsPbX3 NCs obtained through the hot-injection method, the crystal structure has been determined to be monoclinic. Additionally, the NCs exhibited excellent photoluminescence (PL) with narrow line-widths (18–35 nm), high PLQYs (up to 90%) and high photostability.
Tong et al.25 demonstrated an ultrasonication approach to produce highly luminescent CsPbX3 NCs. Precursor materials (Cs2CO3 and PbX2) and capping ligands (OA and OAm) were first dissolved in octadecene or mineral oil, and then directly subjected to one tip sonication to form CsPbX3 NCs. Besides their excellent optical performance, the cubic phase NCs obtained through the direct ultrasonication method exhibit considerable air stability. This simple synthetic strategy can be applied to perovskite NCs with different components.
The Zhang group53 reported a simple and facile solvothermal method, which can be conducted in a sealed Teflon autoclave. The solvothermal method can not only be versatile for preparing different shaped NCs, but also yield high-quality NCs with high crystallinity at moderate temperatures and high pressure. The same group31 also reported a microwave-assisted approach to prepare CsPbX3 NCs with controllable shapes. In a typical experiment, precursor salts (cesium acetate and PbX2) and ligands including trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO), OA and OAm were mixed with 1-octadecene (ODE) in a microwave quartz tube, and then put into a microwave reactor, which was then heated to 160 °C at a certain heating rate. By controlling the reaction process, the morphology of as-prepared highly luminescent CsPbX3 could be easily tuned, such as nanocubes, nanoplates and nanorods.
Besides the above-mentioned solution-phase methods, solvent-free, mechanochemical approaches were also developed. Jana et al.54 conducted a solid-phase synthesis of CsPbBr3 at room temperature for the first time. In a typical synthesis, PbBr2, CsBr and n-octylammonium bromide were ground with a mortar and pestle at room temperature. The powder would change from a white to an orange color immediately, and was then ground for another 10 minutes. The yield was more than 98% and the products exhibited green fluorescence with a PLQY of 13%, which was lower than that of the products prepared by traditional solution phase synthesis. Gas-phase synthesis of CsPbX3 NCs has also been explored by several groups. For example, the Jin group38 developed a CVD method to make CsPbX3 NCs. Generally, a mixture of CsX and PbX2 precursors was heated in the middle of the heating zone of a furnace. Argon was used as the carrier gas to evaporate the precursors to the downstream region for vapor growth. From this system, aligned cubic phase CsPbX3 microwires with a controlled orientation could be obtained. The as-prepared ligand-free wires exhibited good optical performance and have been used in photodetectors as active materials.


2.1.2 Post-synthetic methods. 
Direct synthesis approaches have been widely used to prepare different shaped nanocrystals. Meanwhile, chemical transformation or post-treatment using pre-made nanocrystals as templates or platforms has proven to be an effective method to prepare NCs that cannot be obtained through traditional direct synthesis.
2.1.2.1 Ion exchange. 
Due to the high charge carrier mobility caused by efficient vacancy-assisted diffusion, halide anions in metal halide CsPbBr3 NCs can be easily extracted and replaced with another halide.23,41 In 2015, the Kovalenko group first demonstrated that the anion-exchange process could be achieved at room temperature in a rapid manner (Fig. 2a). The bandgap energies and PL spectra were readily tunable over the entire visible spectral region of 410–700 nm (Fig. 2b).23 The size and shape of NCs were well preserved after the anion-exchange process.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of anion-exchange. (b) Bright emission covering the entire visible spectral region can be realized through the anion-exchange approach. (c) Photograph showing bright yellow emission of Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 NCs and an atomic model showing the placement of Mn2+ in the substitution position of Pb2+ in the CsPbCl3 crystal lattice. (d) Schematic of partial replacement of Pb2+ with divalent cations. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 23. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Ref. 57. Copyright 2017 Wiley. (d) Ref. 56. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the fast anion exchange of CsPbBr3 NCs, cation exchange with other divalent cations (such as Zn2+, Cd2+, Mn2+) was also reported to be an effective way to tune their optical properties (Fig. 2c and d).55–57 For example, Li and co-workers58,59 demonstrated the synthesis of Cs(PbxMn1−x)(ClyBr1−y)3 with tunable PL emission through cation–anion exchange reaction. This ion exchange method avoided the degradation of the photoluminescence of the NCs originating from the additional purification process, which further enhanced the emission intensity and quantum yield of the as-obtained NCs. The Mn2+-doped perovskite NCs have also been applied to prototype white LEDs. The successful cation exchange by Mn can also be achieved in CsPbCl3 NCs by introducing a Mn precursor in a hot-injection reaction system.57 The orange color of the solution (Fig. 2c) arose from the Mn d–d emission. The maximum proportion of Mn in CsPbCl3 could reach 8% with respect to Pb; however, the highest emission was obtained from an effective substitution of 1.3% Pb by 5% Mn atoms in the lattices. In addition, Donega56 employed a simple method to realize cation exchange. Metal bromide salts (SnBr2, CdBr2 and ZnBr2) dissolved in toluene were added into CsPbBr3 NC solution in the presence of OAm. After stirring overnight, the products were collected and purified. The resulting NCs displayed a blue-shift in PL spectra compared with parent CsPbBr3, which could be attributed to the lattice contraction (as shown in Fig. 2d).
2.1.2.2 Phase transformation. 
In addition to CsPbX3 NCs, other cesium lead halide NCs such as Cs4PbX6 and CsPb2X5 have also attracted much attention. Although they possess the same element components, they have completely different structures. Different from the CsPbX3 structure, where [PbX6]4− octahedra are connected by sharing the corner, [PbX6]4− octahedra in Cs4PbX6 were completely decoupled and Cs+ cations filled the holes formed by four adjacent [PbX6]4− octahedra.60,61 CsPb2X5, a derivative with a Cs:Pb ratio of 1:2, has a 2D structure by slicing along crystallographic planes and insertion of Cs+ into PbX2 planes. Based on the way the [PbBr6]4− octahedra are networked, CsPbX3, CsPb2X5 and Cs4PbX6 can be named 3D, 2D and 0D structures, respectively.
These CsxPbyXz structures can be transformed into each other under specific reaction conditions. However, the investigation of the phase transformation is not deep yet. The luminescence properties of CsPb2X5 and Cs4PbX6 are still under debate. Some groups reported that both CsPb2X562–64 and Cs4PbX665,66 were photoluminescent. However, researchers found that the luminescence might arise from the little amount of CsPbBr3 that exhibited very strong luminescence.67–69 Further research studies have proven that Cs4PbBr6 had a decentralized structure, in which the electronic structure was discontinuous and the bandgap was ultra-large, indicating its non-luminescent properties.69,70 For CsPb2Br5, Li and co-workers71 claimed that CsPb2Br5 with a tetragonal structure had a bandgap of 2.98 eV (ca. 416 nm), theoretically revealing weak luminescence emission as well. Until now, there has been no solid evidence about the photoluminescent properties of CsPb2X5 and Cs4PbX6. As a result, additional calculations and optical studies are further required to assess the intrinsic nature of these two materials.
In 2016, the Manna group69 reported a transformation process in which non-luminescent Cs4PbX6 NCs were converted to luminescent CsPbX3 NCs by adding extra PbX2 into pre-synthesized Cs4PbX6 NCs (Fig. 3a). Monodisperse Cs4PbX6 NCs were first prepared in a Cs-rich environment using the hot-injection method. Once the PbBr2 precursor was injected into a solution of Cs4PbX6, the solution started turning green, indicating the formation of CsPbX3. The phase transformation was confirmed by the change in their XRD pattern (Fig. 3b) and optical properties. As shown in Fig. 3c, the spherical/hexagonal Cs4PbX6 NCs converted to cubic CsPbX3 NCs, along with the preservation of their original size. In addition, this work confirmed the non-luminescent nature of Cs4PbX6 NCs.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram showing the evolution process from Cs4PbBr6 to CsPbBr3 upon addition of extra PbBr2. (b) XRD patterns (top) before and (bottom) after PbBr2 treatment. (c) TEM images of Cs4PbBr6 NCs with different sizes (top) before and (bottom) after PbBr2 treatment. The images were modified with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Different from the Manna group's work in which Cs4PbX6 was considered as a PbX2-deficient structure, the Zhang group44 regarded Cs4PbX6 NCs as a CsX-rich structure. The Zhang group reported an interesting research study, in which non-luminescent Cs4PbX6 NCs dispersed in an organic phase could be easily converted to highly luminescent CsPbX3 NCs in the presence of water, as demonstrated in Fig. 4a. Taking CsPbBr3 as an example, with the stripping of CsBr, the oil/water interface became greenish gradually because the solubility of CsX in water is very high, which is 191, 123 and 84.8 g/100 gwater for CsCl, CsBr and CsI (at 25 °C), respectively.72 Upon prolonging the reaction time, the greenish layer expanded to the upper layer, as shown in Fig. 4b. The evolution from Cs4PbBr6 to CsPbBr3 could be further confirmed by the UV-vis absorption spectra, as plotted in Fig. 4c. The original absorption peak at 314 nm indexed to Cs4PbBr6 NCs decreased gradually. Meanwhile, the emerging and strengthening peak at 510 nm suggested the formation of CsPbBr3 NCs. In this work, the size shrinkage in the conversion process can also be found during the CsBr-stripping step (Fig. 4d). This transformation could occur in hexane, cyclohexane, toluene and chloroform, as shown in Fig. 4e–g. More importantly, the as-obtained NCs were more stable than those CsPbBr3 NCs prepared through the hot-injection method. The improved stability could be attributed to the possible passivation during the water treatment. In addition to Cs4PbBr6 NCs, other Cs4PbX6 NCs can also be used to prepare the corresponding CsPbX3 NCs. This finding provides a novel and facile approach to synthesize uniform CsPbX3 NCs and sheds light on the transformation of the emerging perovskite NCs together with oxide shell coating at the interface.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration and (b) photographs showing the interfacial transformation from Cs-rich Cs4PbX6 to CsPbX3. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra monitoring the transformation process. (d) TEM images showing Cs4PbBr6 nanospheres (left) and CsPbBr3 nanocubes (right). (e–g) Photographs showing the products obtained by using different solvents: (e) cyclohexane, (f) toluene and (g) chloroform. The images were modified with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Besides the pioneering works discussed previously, studies related to the transformation among CsxPbyXz have rapidly emerged recently. The Manna group45 reported that both thermal annealing and post-treatment using Prussian Blue could induce the transformation from Cs4PbBr6 to CsPbBr3 NCs. By controlling the capping ligand OA/OAm ratio, the reversible conversion between CsPbX3 and Cs4PbX6 can also be realized.73 The Deng group64 reported the conversion between CsPbBr3 and CsPb2Br5 NCs by light-mediated CsBr dissociation and injection. Thiols are also reported to induce the transformation of CsPbX3 to CsPb2Br5 or Cs4PbBr6 NCs.70,74

2.2 Morphological control
The morphology of nanocrystals is crucial in determining their physiochemical properties and applications. Although the research of CsPbX3 NCs is still in its infancy, different shaped CsPbX3 NCs, such as nanocubes, nanospheres, nanowires, and nanoplates, have been successfully prepared by using different synthetic methodologies or tuning reaction parameters. In this section, we will give a detailed introduction to the controllable synthesis of CsPbX3 NCs with different dimensions, including zero-dimensional nanocubes and nanospheres, one-dimensional nanowires and nanorods, two-dimensional nanoplates and nanosheets, and three-dimensional nanoflowers.

2.2.1 Zero-dimensional nanocubes and nanospheres. 
The most common morphology of CsPbX3 NCs is nanocubes. The earliest CsPbX3 nanocubes were prepared through a hot-injection method, in which CsPbX3 nanocubes with a size of around 8.0 nm (Fig. 5a) were obtained.19 The other methods, such as solvothermal53 and microwave methods,31 have also been employed to produce CsPbX3 nanocubes. The tendency to form cube-like CsPbX3 NCs might be attributed to their typical cubic phase (as shown in Fig. 5a). Size control of nanocubes has been achieved by tuning the reaction parameters. For instance, the Manna group50 demonstrated that the OAm and OA binary ligand system played a critical role in controlling the size of CsPbBr3 NCs in the hot-injection approach. As illustrated in Fig. 5b, the size of the CsPbBr3 NCs increased with the increase of the OAm/OA ratio and temperature. The size of the CsPbBr3 NCs could be varied from 4.0 nm to 16.4 nm. The ratio of lead to cesium precursors also plays an important role in determining the size of the obtained nanoparticles. Dong and co-workers75 investigated the influence of the Br/Pb ratio and reaction temperature on particle size. CsPbBr3 nanocubes from 3.7 nm to 9.5 nm could be obtained based on the thermodynamic equilibrium rather than kinetics (Fig. 5c). The achievement in this work sheds bright light on the utilization of excitons in CsPbX3 NCs for photonic and energy-harvesting applications.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the structure and typical transmission high-resolution electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of cubic CsPbBr3 NCs. (b) Sizes of CsPbBr3 NCs obtained by varying the concentrations of OAm and OA at different reaction temperatures. (c) TEM images and optical properties of CsPbBr3 NCs with different sizes. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 19. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Ref. 50. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Ref. 75. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
CsPbX3 nanospheres can be obtained through similar synthetic methods by tuning the reaction temperature and ligand concentration. In 2016, CsPbBr3 nanospheres were first prepared through a hot-injection method by adding certain amounts of OA and OAm (OA:OAm = 0.6:0.3) in PbBr2 solution.76 Cs-oleate was then injected into the PbBr2 solution at a relatively lower temperature (90 °C). As plotted in Fig. 6a, monodisperse orthorhombic CsPbBr3 nanospheres with an average diameter of 2.4 nm were obtained. The corresponding absorption peak at 435.5 nm and PL emission at 453 nm (Fig. 6b) can be attributed to the strong quantum confinement effects caused by the minimal size. The Zeng group28 found that the ligand-assisted reprecipitation method could also be employed to synthesize ultra-small CsPbX3 nanospheres, which exhibited a nearly amorphous structure under very low reaction temperatures (0 °C). Based on the ligand-mediated reprecipitation strategy, Sun and co-workers77 systematically manipulated the shape of CsPbX3 colloidal NCs by using different kinds of ligands. Besides the conventional ligands OA and OAm, hexanoic acid, octylamine, dodecylamine and acetate acid were also explored in the controllable synthesis of NCs with various shapes (Fig. 6c). CsPbX3 nanospheres with an average diameter of 4.3 nm could be obtained when hexanoic acid and octylamine were used as the ligand pair (Fig. 6d). In addition, the emission peaks of the as-prepared spherical NCs can be tuned in the range from 457 to 515 nm by changing the temperature of the anti-solvent between −20 °C and 60 °C during reprecipitation. With further research, CsPbBr3 nanospheres have been combined with graphene oxide78 and metal (Pt) nanoparticles,79 which displayed novel optical properties in the fields of photoelectric devices and photocatalysis.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM and HRTEM images and (b) UV-vis absorption (black line) and PL emission (blue line) spectra of CsPbBr3 nanospheres. (c) Schematic illustration of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) NCs with different morphologies by varying the organic acid and amine ligands at room temperature. (d) TEM and HRTEM images (inset) of CsPbBr3 nanospheres. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 76. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c and d) Ref. 77. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


2.2.2 One-dimensional nanowires and nanorods. 
One-dimensional nanowires and nanorods are preferable in some specific applications because of the anisotropic structures and quantum confinement effect caused by the small size on one dimension.80,81 Besides the effect of crystal structures, the modulation of suitable capping ligands that can selectively bind to certain facets of nanoparticles is also crucial in the formation of extremely anisotropic nanowires and nanorods. In 2015, the Yang group82 first synthesized single-crystalline, orthorhombic CsPbX3 nanowires with a uniform morphology and size (diameters ∼12 nm and lengths ∼5 μm) through a modified hot-injection approach by reacting Cs-oleate with PbX2 in the presence of OA and OAm at 150–250 °C. The uniform nanowires were single crystalline grown along the 〈110〉 growth direction (Fig. 7a). It is found that the reaction time is critical in controlling the growth of nanowires. Time-dependent results showed that nanowires evolved sequentially from nanocubes to nanosheets and finally to uniform nanowires in 90 min (Fig. 7a). When the reaction time was further prolonged to 180 min, the nanowires gradually disappeared and large crystals were obtained.
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of CsPbBr3 nanowires. (b) Evolution of the optical absorption (solid lines) and PL (dashed lines) spectra of CsPbBr3 nanowires with different halide compositions. (c) Effect of increasing the ratio of short chain carboxylic acids to amine ligands on controlling the width of CsPbBr3 nanowires. (d) Schematic showing the effect of hydrohalic acids on the length of CsPbX3 nanowires. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 82. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Ref. 84. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Ref. 87. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) Ref. 89. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The evolution of nanowires from nanocubes has also been confirmed by other reports.83 Nanowires with different compositions can be obtained successfully through anion-exchange reactions, resulting in tunable bright photoluminescence covering nearly the entire visible spectrum (Fig. 7b).84 The diameter of nanowires can be tuned from 2 nm to about several hundred nanometers.29,38,80,85,86 Imran and co-workers87 found that the diameter of CsPbBr3 nanowires could be tuned by changing the volume ratio of carboxylic acids with short aliphatic chains (octanoic acid or hexanoic acid) to the amine ligands (octylamine and oleylamine). The PLQY of nanowires could reach 77%, and the PL spectral position could be varied from the green to blue region (Fig. 7c). By using the room temperature ligand-assisted colloidal method, Liu and co-workers88 synthesized single-crystalline CsPbBr3 nanowires directly from precursor powders, in which the length of the nanowires could be tuned from nanometers to micrometers and the width could be controlled from 2.5 nm to 32.0 nm by adjusting the reaction time. For length control of nanowires, the Lioz Etgar group89 indicated that addition of hydrohalic acids (HX, X = Cl, Br, I) could affect their length and optical properties. Variable amounts of HX resulted in a constant morphology of CsPbX3 nanowires, while the length of the nanowires was shortened with the increase of the HX amount (Fig. 7d). The change in length was caused by the increase of solution acidity, resulting in the formation of oleyl-ammonium cations from the protonation of oleylamine. The as-formed oleyl-ammonium cations behaved like Cs+.90,91 Furthermore, the self-assembly behaviors of nanowires have also been reported and explored with the aim of realizing functional materials for many photoelectric applications.29
As another typical one-dimensional nanomaterial, CsPbX3 nanorods have been reported. However, most of the reported perovskite nanorods were several hundred nanometers in length, making them more like nanowires rather than nanorods.92–94 Because CsPbX3 nanorods with lengths less than 100 nm may be more promising candidates for application in integrated optoelectronic devices, more research efforts will be devoted towards the preparation and application of these nanorods.


2.2.3 Two-dimensional nanoplates and nanosheets. 
The unique structures and excellent properties of two-dimensional perovskite nanoplates and nanosheets make them promising for potential optoelectronic devices. Over the past few years, conventional two-dimensional materials have been widely explored as functional materials for LEDs, lasers, solar cells and so on. The Alivisatos group95 first reported the preparation of CsPbBr3 nanoplates through a hot-injection method, in which cesium oleate was prepared and then injected into PbX2 solution at lower reaction temperature (90–130 °C). The determining factor was identified as the reaction temperature. As the reaction temperature was decreased from 150 °C to 130 °C, the NCs evolved from symmetrical nanocubes with green-color PL emission to nanoplates with cyan emission. Further decreasing the reaction temperature to around 90 °C led to the formation of thin nanoplates with blue emission (Fig. 8a). However, the as-prepared nanoplates were a mixture of nanoplates with different thicknesses.
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM images of CsPbBr3 nanoplates obtained at different temperatures. (b) Optical properties of CsPbBr3 nanoplates with different thicknesses obtained at different reaction temperatures. (c) TEM image of nanosheets with different lateral sizes by tuning the ratio of shorter ligands to longer ligands. (d) TEM image and (inset in d) schematic illustration of self-assembled CsPbClxBr3−x nanoplates. (e) Schematic of the formation of CsPbX3 nanosheets by the oriented attachment of CsPbX3 nanorods. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 95. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Ref. 96. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) Ref. 99. Copyright 2018 Wiley. (d) Ref. 100. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (e) Ref. 101. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Later, the Zhang group96 further proved that lower injecting temperature favored the formation of thinner nanoplates. When the precursors were first mixed at room temperature and then subjected to higher temperature, CsPbBr3 nanoplates with thicknesses around 1–5 unit cells were successfully fabricated, displaying tunable blue emission due to the quantum size confinement effect, as shown in Fig. 8b. The temperature-dependent carrier mobility in CsPbBr3 nanoplates has also been investigated by adopting electric field modulated PL imaging, which is necessary for device design and can provide a novel method to study charge transport in optoelectronic materials.97
The preferable formation of CsPbX3 nanoplates was also confirmed by Liu's investigation.98 During the hot-injection process, nanoplates were obtained at lower reaction temperature (120–140 °C), while nanocubes usually formed at higher injected reaction temperature (170 °C). In addition, the authors found that the ligand species also played an important role in controlling the morphology and size of the product. The nanoplates could also be achieved at high temperature (170 °C) when long-chain carboxylic acids and short-chain amines were employed in the system.
The other effective way to obtain nanoplates with high quality and desirable size is to introduce additional metal halides. The Wang group99 adopted a modified hot-injection method to synthesize well-defined nanoplates with tunable size and thickness. With the increase of the CuCl2 amount, the morphology evolved from nanocubes to nanoplates gradually. The great uniformity made them ideal building blocks for self-assembly in face-to-face and column-by-column arrangements (Fig. 8c). The resulting self-assembled films can be used as the active layer in optoelectronic photodetectors sensitive to linearly polarized light, which highlighted their new potential for perovskite nanoplate applications utilizing their polarization properties.
Similar to nanoplates, organic ligands usually play the primary role in determining the formation and lateral size of nanosheets, which help improve the dispersion and stability and control the kinetics. For example, the Manna group100 successfully adjusted the lateral size range of CsPbBr3 nanosheets by tuning the ratio of ligands with different chain lengths. In a typical synthesis, Cs-oleate was injected into a lead precursor solution at 150 °C, and kept for 5 minutes before cooling down using a water bath. Orthorhombic CsPbX3 nanosheets with different lateral sizes but almost the same thickness of 2.9 nm were obtained. During the preparation of PbBr2 salt, short ligands (octanoic acid and octylamine) were introduced into the synthesis system, and worked together with longer ones (OA and OAm). The ratio of shorter to longer ligands affected the lateral size of nanosheets obviously; that is, the lateral size increased gradually as the ratio was increased (Fig. 8d).
Two-dimensional CsPbX3 nanosheets can be grown through a two-step process. The Zheng group101 reported the synthesis of CsPbX3 nanosheets, in which CsPbX3 nanorods were prepared first through the hot-injection protocol under the synergistic effect of long-chain capping ligands (OA and OAm) and shorter ligands (octanoic acid and octylamine). Subsequently, cubic phase nanosheets were formed by the assembly of the corresponding nanorods in a Teflon-lined stainless-steel autoclave under solvothermal conditions. The above discussion shows that the solvothermal method took advantage of the relatively high pressure at moderate temperatures, which can facilitate the assembly of nanorods and thin nanoplates into high-quality nanosheets (Fig. 8e), providing more opportunities for further applications in photovoltaic cells and optical and electronic devices.102–104


2.2.4 Three-dimensional nanoflowers. 
Recently, Chen and co-workers105 prepared monodisperse CsPbBr3 nanoflowers through a solvothermal method, in which all precursors were simply mixed without further pre-dissolving and then heated to 120 °C. CsPbBr3 nanoflowers with 12 branches could be obtained, as shown in Fig. 9a and b. The fabrication of this complex structure could be attributed to the different dissolution rates of Cs and Pb precursors. Because CsBr dissolved more rapidly than PbBr2, dodecahedral Cs4PbBr6 seeds were formed first in a Cs-rich environment. At higher temperature, PbBr2 powders dissolved gradually, and the increased Pb concentration would lead to the transformation from Cs4PbBr6 to CsPbBr3. Meanwhile, overgrowth of CsPbBr3 occurred simultaneously. Since the vertices of the dodecahedral seeds are the most unstable sites, the overgrowth occurred at the 12 vertices, resulting in 12 branches on the seeds (as illustrated in Fig. 9c). This work offers us a new understanding of morphological and compositional evolution in all-inorganic perovskite NCs.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of CsPbBr3 nanoflowers. The inset shows the HRTEM image of a single CsPbBr3 nanoflower. (b) SEM images and the corresponding 3D structure models of CsPbBr3 nanoflowers viewed from different angles (scale bar: 20 nm). (c) Schematic illustration of the formation of CsPbBr3 nanoflowers. The images were modified with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 

3. Surface passivation approaches
In spite of the excellent optical properties of CsPbBr3 NCs, two critical issues have seriously limited their future development and practical use. One is their low efficiency that cannot meet practical requirements. For example, the highest external quantum efficiency (EQE) of a reported green NC-based LED is only 16.5%,106 which is still below that of a traditional QD-based LED (22.62%).107 The other significant issue is the intrinsic unstable nature. The CsPbBr3 NCs are prone to be easily destroyed in the presence of oxygen, moisture, light and thermal treatment. Therefore, it is still urged to further improve their photophysical properties and overcome their instability problems. Until now, surface passivation has proven to be a feasible way to realize the enhancement of both efficiency and stability, mainly including surface modification by organic ligands or inorganic chemicals and encapsulation in water-proof materials. In this section, we will focus on the progress of recently reported efficient strategies and deep understanding of surface passivation towards CsPbX3 NCs.
3.1 Surface engineering for improvement of optical properties

3.1.1 Ligand modification. 
In the first report about the successful synthesis of CsPbX3 NCs, OA and OAm were used as the capping ligands for CsPbX3 NCs because of the strong protection they offered.19 Since then, for CsPbX3 NCs, OA and OAm became the most commonly used ligands. However, their long chains and insulating features significantly weaken the conductivity and block charge transfer in devices. How to replace them with other ligands to enhance their properties without destabilizing remains the key challenge preventing the development and applications of CsPbX3 NCs.
In 2016, Pan and co-workers108 introduced di-dodecyl dimethyl ammonium bromide (DDAB) into CsPbX3 NC solution. Through a ligand exchange process, DDAB could easily attach to the surfaces of the NCs and provide better passivation of the trap states. As a result, the PLQY was increased from 49% to 71%. The relatively short-chain ligand could facilitate carrier transport in fabricated LEDs, which demonstrated much higher EQE and luminescence compared to those of OA/OAm capped NCs. The passivation role of DDAB has been further confirmed by subsequent reports.109,110
DDAB has also been employed as a source of DDA+ to form an inorganic–organic hybrid S2− and DDA+ ion pair, the most earliest used materials in the modification.111,112 After treatment, the Cs:Pb:Br atomic ratio was 1:2:5, which showed a considerable deviation from the theoretical value 1:1:3. The PbBr2-rich surface favored an increase in PLQY to 70%, while the untreated one provided a PLQY of only 49%. In addition, the S2−–DDA+ ion pair could act as a highly stable protective layer on the surfaces of CsPbBr3 NCs, which was proven to significantly improve the photostability under laser excitation for more than 30 h.
Trioctylphosphine (TOP), a kind of alkylphosphine, has been reported to be used for the coordination of the surfaces of CsPbI3 NCs.14,113 By forming a stable and reactive TOP–PbI2 precursor, highly luminescent and stable CsPbI3 NCs could be obtained, as shown in Fig. 10a and b. The PLQY could reach up to 100% for all different-sized samples prepared from the TOP–PbI2 precursor, signifying the complete elimination of surface trapping defects. One derivative of TOP, trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO), was also reported to be able to passivate and stabilize CsPbX3 NCs even in the presence of polar solvent ethanol.114
 Fig. 10  (a) HRTEM image and UV-vis absorption and PL spectra of TOP-capped CsPbI3 NCs. The inset shows the solution under daylight and UV light irradiation (365 nm). (b) PLQYs of OA/OAm- and TOP-capped CsPbI3versus particle size and storage time, respectively. (c) TEM and HRTEM images, and UV-vis absorption and PL spectra of zwitterionic ligand-capped CsPbBr3 NCs. (d and e) Schematic illustrations and top and side views of conventional ligand (OA/OAm) and zwitterionic (C3-sulfobetaine) ligand capping. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 14. Copyright 2018 Royal Chemical Society. (c–e) Ref. 122. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Either by in situ capping115,116 or via post-synthetic methods,117 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) was introduced onto the surfaces of CsPbX3 NCs. González-Pedro and co-workers117 found that the optical properties of CsPbBr3 NCs including their PLQY and lifetime could be further enhanced when they were treated with APTES together with equivalent HBr. The modified samples exhibited a PLQY as high as 73%, which was 1.7 times higher than that of classical OA/OAm capped NCs. APTES was found to attach to the surfaces of the NCs through hydrogen bonds between silanol and bromide dangling bonds and further played an active role in the passivation of surface defects. Furthermore, this unique silane ligand can be used as the precursor of SiOx matrixes.115 The modified APTES capped CsPbBr3 NC solution was stirred in air to be hydrolyzed to form SiOx gel encapsulating CsPbBr3 NCs. This transparent, flexible and stable CsPbBr3 gel exhibited a higher PLQY (60% for CsPbBr3 and 35% for CsPbI3). In addition, this inert SiOx shell could also improve the resistance against heat and light irradiation. Similar to the “ligand to shell in situ conversion” strategy, a monomer, methacrylic acid (MA), was introduced to act as the ligand of NCs to passivate the surfaces of CsPbX3 NCs and optimize the PLQY up to 85%.118 The free double bonds could serve as synthetic handles and enable radical polymerization induced by UV light, resulting in polymer encapsulated NCs.
Considering the unstable nature of CsPbI3 NCs,119 the ligand 2,2′-iminodibenzoic acid (IDA) was explored to passivate CsPbI3 NCs’ surfaces by a post-synthetic method.120 Due to the much stronger binding between CsPbI3 and IDA compared to OA, the IDA-treated NCs displayed a PLQY of more than 95% and a slightly improved lifetime, suggesting the reduction of surface trap states through passivation. This special IDA ligand could separately bind to the two Pb atoms via the coordination of double carboxyl groups, leading to a very large binding energy (1.4 eV). In comparison, the OA ligand had a much lower binding energy because of the single carboxyl group in OA (1.14 eV). What is more, the IDA ligand could significantly enhance the stability of CsPbI3 NCs under ambient conditions due to less surface distortion arising from the double functional carboxylic groups.
The cubic phase CsPbI3 is very sensitive and can be easily transformed into an orthorhombic phase (“yellow” phase). In Wang's work,121 bis-(2,2,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (TMPPA) was used as the substitute for OA in the preparation of cubic CsPbI3 NCs. It is found that TMPPA could not only determine and preserve the cubic phase of CsPbI3 NCs, but also prolong the storage to more than 20 days under ambient conditions. Unlike other capping ligands, TMPPA and its ion-pairs cannot bind to the CsPbI3 surface, and may detach from NCs after washing. The deep mechanism should be better understood in the future.
A novel zwitterionic ligand, 3-(N,N-dimethyloctadecylammonio)-propanesulfonate, was used as the substitute for OA and OAm in the synthesis of CsPbBr3 NCs.122 The unique feature of this zwitterionic ligand favored the simultaneous coordination with cations and anions on the surface, as shown in Fig. 10c–e. Due to these tightly bonded ligands, the quantity of ligands could be less than those of OA and OAm. This novel and commercialized class of ligands may be promising candidates for the synthesis of these perovskite NCs in future applications.
Alpert et al.123 reported another promising molecule, tributylphosphine (TBPh), for passivation of CsPbX3 NCs. The post-treatment with TBPh improved the PLQY of CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 NCs up to 100% and 40%, respectively, and also led to superior surface passivation towards CsPbX3 films. On the surface of CsPbX3, TBPh might act as an L-type ligand, which conferred a lone pair to a Pb ion, resulting in the removal of trap sites and reduction of charge extraction. However, whether it worked on its own or along with OA and OAm is still uncertain. A similar mechanism to ligand binding with Pb was also proposed for CsPbBr3 NCs capped with octylphosphonic acid (OPA),124 which could improve the PLQY and resistance against polar solvents.


3.1.2 Inorganic chemical treatment. 
Surface passivation can be realized not only by capping protective ligands, but also by modification of surface states through post-treatment using inorganic chemicals. Different from chain-like ligands that bind to Pb or halide ions on the surfaces of NCs, post-treatment with specific chemicals can remove excess ions, tune the composition and repair shallow traps on the surfaces, resulting in the improvement of their optical properties.
Many reports have shown that a halide-rich surface is favorable for ideal optical performance. To build up a halide-rich surface, ZnBr2125 was employed in the post-treatment to enhance the optical properties. The introduction of Br ions was found to tune the components of the surface and increase the population of Pb–Br species, which induced the generation of a lead bromide layer on the surface. The Zn cation did not likely contribute to the enhancement of the PLQY because InBr3 and CuBr2 could also promote similar enhancements. Furthermore, this method was versatile in the upgradation and stabilization of CsPbI3. After storage for several days, only a slight decrease in the optical properties can be observed. The Konstantatos group126 obtained a near-unity PLQY for CsPbBr3 films fabricated from NCs and post-treated with PbBr2. On the other hand, the PbBr2 treatment also enhanced the stability with no deterioration upon storage for over two months in the dark. The authors mentioned that their excellent optical features and durability could be attributed to the strong binding between PbBr2 and NCs, which induced a Br-rich surface. However, no detailed mechanism has been provided.
Wang and co-workers127 also employed the same surface treatment of CsPbBr3 NCs with the addition of PbBr2. A significantly enhanced PLQY (to 100%) and greater stability were also observed, similar to the above-mentioned result. What's more, the trion PL lifetime was found to increase from 0.9 to 1.6 ns due to the appearance of a Br-rich surface. Solid evidence showed the presence of dominating trion gain and slight biexciton-base gain. That is to say, in the absorption versus stimulated emission, the treated CsPbBr3 NCs displayed negative Trion gain comprising one hole and two electrons. In these Trion gains, a long-durable charge-separated state forms as the hot carriers transfer into high-energy external traps. The resulting suppression of the non-radiative recombination pathway leads to an increase of the PLQY and PL lifetime. Bohn et al.128 investigated the mechanism of PbBr2 passivation through post-treatment. CsPbBr3 nanoplates with different multilayers were chosen as the research targets due to their high surface area-to-volume ratio (Fig. 11a). After post-treatment, an enhancement of PLQY occurred in the double-layer CsPbBr3 nanoplates with the largest surface area-to-volume ratio, as shown in Fig. 11b–d. This revealed that the addition of PbBr2 could repair Pb and Br vacancies on the surface rather than internal traps. The much stronger radiative recombination also implied the removal of surface defects.
 Fig. 11  (a) Photographs of colloidal CsPbBr3 nanoplates and illustrations of nanoplates with different thicknesses. (b) PL spectra of the initial samples (dashed lines) and samples treated with PbBr2 (solid lines). (c) Enhancement factor as a function of layer number. (d) Illustration of the defects fixed with PbBr2 on the surfaces of nanoplates. (e) Demonstration of a [PbBr6]4− octahedron without and with the addition of HBr. (f) Diagram of the carrier recombination process in the presence of trap sites. The images were modified with permission from (a–d) ref. 128. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e and f) Ref. 129. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, the Zeng group129 introduced HBr complex solution into blue emitting CsPbBr3 nanoplate solution, and the additional Br− could reduce Br vacancies and enhance the radiative recombination, resulting in an improved PLQY of up to 96%. In this work, another new mechanism was proposed; that is, the excess Br− could drive the ionic equilibrium and consequently construct intact [PbBr6]4− octahedrons, as shown in Fig. 11e and f.
To provide a halide-rich circumstance for the nucleation-growth of CsPbX3 NCs, the traditional precursor PbX2 was replaced by an NH4X and PbO mixture in Liu's work.130 It's interesting to observe that the highest PLQY and durability of CsPbBr3 were obtained when the PbO:NH4Br ratio was 1:4. The excess Br bound to the surface by a hydrogen bridge or electrostatic interaction with OAm. The high optical performance and Br-rich environment could also be maintained even after several purification steps.
Not limited to the above-mentioned Pb or involved halide reagents, the Alivisatos group first reported a post-treatment method using thiocyanate (SCN−) to improve the PLQY of CsPbBr3 NCs to 100%.20 This procedure was very simple, and involved direct addition of dry NH4SCN or NaSCN powders into a pre-made CsPbBr3 solution. The SCN− treatment could boost the PLQY to unity either for a freshly synthesized sample (92%) or for an aged one (63%). What's more, the PL emission blue shifted by 1.5–2 nm after the post-treatment. It should be noted that the original Pb:Br ratio was 1:2.7, suggesting a Pb-rich surface.131,132 After the treatment, this value was found to be 1:3, which is the perfect ratio for CsPbBr3 NCs. With the assistance of Pb–SCN bonds that formed during the treatment, SCN− favored the elimination of excess Pb atoms from the surface and an effective decrease in the nonradiative pathway of PL decay. However, one drawback of this method was that it was not applicable to CsPbX3 with other halide compositions. Similarly, Ahmed et al.133 used tetrafluoroborate salts to remove redundant Pb adatoms from the surfaces of NCs.
K+ ions have been used to modify the surfaces of CsPbX3 NCs. The Li group134 applied a small amount of K-oleate in the parent CsPbBr3 NCs. Then they observed that the K+-assisted post-treatment favored passivation, resulting in a remarkable improvement of PLQY and stability. The characterization results showed that the local crystal structure and chemical environment of Cs, Pb and Br did not change once the K+ ions were introduced. However, K signals could be detected from the surfaces of the NCs, which indicated the emergence of K-involved impurity layers. On the other hand, the Cs:Pb:Br:K ratio was 0.63:1:2.7:0.24, suggesting a Cs-deficient surface, which might act as vacant sites and decrease the radiative recombination. Thanks to the presence of K+ ions, they would fill these trap sites and induce the formation of defect-free CsPbBr3 NCs.
Ag ions were also introduced in the modification of CsPbX3 NCs.135 Different from previous reports, the Ag ions came from a Ag cathode on an ITO substrate, and then diffused into a luminescent layer fabricated from CsPbI3 NCs. The PLQY of Ag–CsPbI3 could reach over 60% and the EQE of the corresponding LED was 11.2%. Some Cs atoms in the lattice structure were substituted by Ag, contributing to enhanced durability. The original trap states on the surfaces were also converted into radiative ones, which would result in the improvement of optical features. At the same time, Li et al.136 carried out the investigation on the post-treatment of CsPbX3 NCs with Ag+ ions (in the form of Ag–TOP). Ag+ could react with surface Br to form a AgBr shell on the surface. With the passivation and protection provided by AgBr, CsPbBr3 NCs displayed an excellent performance in terms of PLQY and stability. Cu ions were also recently reported to passivate the surface of CsPbCl3 through surface adsorption and fix defects and also modulate the growth orientation of NCs into nanowires.137


3.1.3 Purification method. 
The washing process plays an important role in the successful synthesis of high-quality CsPbX3 NCs, because a rational procedure can be an effective way for the removal of excess ligands to maintain or even enhance their pristine character. Luther's group26 first found that the anti-solvent methyl acetate (MeOAc) could purify cubic CsPbI3 NCs with an efficacious removal of redundant precursors and ligands on the NCs, and isolate the NCs without inducing agglomeration. It was also found that titration of Pb(OAc)2 in MeOAc could further improve the surface passivation effect.
Following this classical purification approach to control the surface state, Zhang et al.138 introduced ethyl acetate to purify CsPbBr3 NCs. Interestingly, some quasi-cube NCs transformed into ultrathin CsPbBr3 nanowires, as shown in Fig. 12a. Through additional stepwise purification with increasing supernatant to ethyl acetate ratio, the yield of ultrathin nanowires increased to more than 90%. However, the nanowires had a PLQY of 30%, which was moderate compared with some currently reported ultrathin nanowires. In this report, the exact mechanism of the evolution of ultrathin nanowires was not deeply understood due to the above-mentioned complication.
 Fig. 12  (a) Morphological evolution of CsPbBr3 NCs during the stepwise purification, showing an increasing yield with the assistance of ethyl acetate. (b) Schematic of the Br-rich surface after etching I through the purification of acetone. (c) Normalized PL spectra of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs obtained from different purification procedures and (d) photographs of different samples stored under ambient conditions. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 138. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b–d) Ref. 142. Copyright 2017 Royal Chemical Society. 
Encouraged by these pioneering works, the Zeng group proposed hexane/ethyl acetate mixed solvent to tune the surface ligand density.139 They found that the CsPbBr3 NCs could preserve their cubic phase after three repeated purification steps with hexane/ethyl acetate, which was found to balance the optical performance, conductivity and durability. An incredible 50-fold EQE improvement was found in properly treated NC based LEDs. Similarly, butyl acetate (AcOBu)140 and ether solvent diglyme141 were also reported to have a great purification effect on the removal of excess ligands on the surface. The optimized density of ligands played a very important role in device performance and stability.
It should be pointed out that the purification process with suitable solvents can also modify the defects on the surfaces of CsPbX3 NCs. The Lu group142 reported that addition of acetone in the washing procedure could partially remove I− ions from the surfaces of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs. The etched I ions would become trap states and further weaken their stability, and the resulting samples with an I-deficient and Br-rich surface exhibited a significantly enhanced PL intensity and durability, as shown in Fig. 12b–d.

3.2 Methods for the enhancement of stability
Compared with organometallic halide perovskites, all-inorganic CsPbX3 NCs exhibited much higher stability; however, their ionic nature is still a problem because the structure of CsPbBr3 NCs could be destroyed in the presence of polar solvents, such as water. To overcome this issue, many methods have been developed, including encapsulation with polymers, inert materials and semiconductors that are stable and also help the internal CsPbBr3 NCs maintain their initial morphology and features. Some of these approaches were also reported to enhance their optical properties, not just their durability. Considering their original purpose aiming at the improvement of stability, all of these encapsulation strategies are thus included in the discussion of stability.

3.2.1 Polymer encapsulation. 
Polymers are widely used in the stabilization of CsPbX3 NCs especially against water because their dense polymer matrix can endow them with water-resistant features and prohibit ion exchange. Polystyrene (PS) is an ultra-hydrophobic and mechanically tough material that has been widely used in the industry. PS has been regarded as a great candidate for stabilization of CsPbX3 NCs. For example, PS microhemispheres/beads/fibers were introduced as the capsule shell for CsPbX3 to form hybridized composite particles with superior stability even when exposed to water.143–147Fig. 13a and b show a typical example of CsPbX3/PS composite beads. It has been reported that perovskite NCs encapsulated within a PS matrix retained nearly 80% of their initial fluorescence after UV light illumination for 60 h.146 Due to the outstanding optical properties and high stability of the CsPbX3/PS composite, CsPbX3/PS composite based LEDs exhibited excellent performance and good stability against water and thermal treatment. Furthermore, the nontoxic composite product has been used for rhodamine 6G detection in aqueous solution and for luminescence probing in live cells.143,146 Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) has been employed in the encapsulation of CsPbX3 NCs.148–150 It is reported that LEDs based on CsPbBr3 NCs/PMMA exhibited enhanced efficiency and stability, promoting their utilization in displays and lighting devices. However, the fabricated WLED is still very sensitive to high operation current, and could only work steadily under low current.149
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the swelling–shrinking strategy for the synthesis of CsPbX3 NCs/PS beads. (b) PL spectra of CsPbX3 NCs/PS beads with different degrees of crosslinking and diameters in the presence of water and PL spectra of composites with different halide ratios. The inset shows fluorescence images of the mixture. (c) Schematic of the formation of NCs/SiOx composites, the corresponding (d) TEM image and (e) the photographs of the red composite powder film under UV light showing its stability. (f) Diagram of the synthetic approach and fabrication of CsPbBr3/SiO2 spheres and the corresponding (g) TEM and HRTEM images. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 144. Copyright 2017 Wiley. (c–e) Ref. 160. Copyright 2016 Wiley. (f and g) Ref. 162. Copyright 2017 Wiley. 
Meyns et al.151 mixed poly(maleic anhydride-alt-1-octadecene) (PMA) with a CsPbX3 precursor and prepared PMA-capped perovskite NCs. During this process, PMA acted as a good candidate for encapsulation of conventional OA and OAm and prevented the weakly protected NCs from aggregating into larger sizes. In PMA-capped CsPbX3 NC based WLEDs, the ligands have proven to be great stabilizers for the NCs by isolation from the circumambient media and dynamic ligand exchange.
By mixing perovskite NCs with pre-synthesized polymers (PS, poly(styrene–ethylene–butylene–styrene) (SEBS) and poly(laurylmethacrylate) (PLMA)), Raja et al.152 prepared a nanocomposite film that could be soaked in water with no PLQY change even after four months. Furthermore, the photo-stability was also significantly improved and no lead escaped with the protection of polymer matrices. This work investigated the optical properties of CsPbX3-based films in water for the first time. In another report, Xin et al.153 compared PMMA, poly(butyl methacrylate) and PS based CsPbBr3 NCs and found that the luminescent properties and stability would vary with different polymers.
Copolymers were also employed to optimize the properties of CsPbBr3 NCs. In a copolymer templated synthesis approach, a block copolymer, polystyrene-block-poly-2-vinylpyridine (PS-b-P2VP), acted as a nanoreactor, in which CsPbBr3 NCs crystallized and their surfaces were passivated by the capping polymers. The as-obtained CsPbBr3 core–polymer shell NCs exhibited superior photo-stability against different solvents, including ethanol, methanol and isopropanol.154 In addition, ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) copolymer was also reported to act as the protective shell of CsPbBr3 NCs.


3.2.2 Inert shell coating. 
As traditional coating materials, inert oxide materials have been widely used to protect the core materials from being damaged. In the development of all-inorganic perovskites, inert oxide materials have also been regarded as promising protective shells for the passivation of CsPbX3 NCs. Due to their high stability and inert properties, oxides mainly including silica (SiOx) and alumina (AlOx) have been introduced to stabilize CsPbX3 against polar solvents, heat, light and oxygen.
AlOx has been employed to improve the stability of traditional QDs, such as PbS, CdSe and PbSe. For the first time, Loiudice and co-workers155 assembled CsPbBr3 NCs into an amorphous AlOx matrix through an atomic layer deposition (ALD) method. The interaction between the AlOx precursor and CsPbBr3 surface favored the uniform coating and preservation of the excellent optoelectronic properties of perovskite NCs. In the stability tests against water and heat, the AlOx layer acted as a robust barrier to prevent ion diffusion and structure destruction.
Using a sol–gel method, the Li group156 incorporated CsPbBr3 NCs into a silica/alumina monolith with surprisingly high stability and PLQY. The preliminary CsPbBr3 NCs could maintain their initial optical properties and would not aggregate in the monolith even after encapsulation. The obtained product could be dried into powder and easily mixed into resins for further application in LEDs. The resulting composite exhibited a high luminous efficacy of up to 80 lm W−1 and maintained 90% of the initial intensity under illumination for more than 300 h. Through a similar method, He et al.157 incorporated Mn-doped CsPbCl3 NCs into silica/alumina particles and further used them for a warm white WLED with a high luminous efficacy (81 lm W−1) and excellent stability against blue light illumination.
The Liu group158 proposed a simple but efficient method to prepare CsPbX3 NCs/SiO2 nanocomposites in 2016. By directly mixing the CsPbX3 nanocubes with mesoporous SiO2 with pore sizes of 12–15 nm, the nanocubes could be incorporated into the pores of SiO2. The as-obtained mesoporous SiO2 decorated with CsPbX3 conserved the excellent optical properties of the perovskite, further enhanced the photo-stability and prevented the anion-exchange. The new nanocomposite has been applied in backlight displays and on-chip LED devices, showing a much better performance than those reported previously.
Hollow tube-like SiO2 matrixes were also used for the encapsulation of CsPbX3 crystals.48 Different from mesoporous SiO2 spheres, the in situ growth of CsPbX3 occurred in the channels inside the SiO2 matrixes. One important advantage of the in situ method is that the as-prepared CsPbX3 would grow into one-dimensional crystals along the oriented channels with tunable lengths and widths. By adjusting the channel diameter of the hard “template”, different sized CsPbX3 nanowires can be easily obtained. Thanks to the protection provided by the SiO2 matrix, the resulting nanocomposites displayed a high PLQY of up to 90%. Similarly, Malgras et al.159 used ordered mesoporous SiO2 films as templates to control and confine the growth of CsPbX3 NCs. This ligand-free approach was confirmed to be feasible to tune the size and isolate the resulting NCs. The corresponding film resulted in an 8-fold increase in EQE.
Besides the template-assisted method, the in situ formation of SiO2 shells on the surfaces of CsPbX3 NCs has also been studied. Alkoxysilane is often used in the modification of crystal surfaces. In Sun's work,160 SiO2 coated CsPbX3 composites were successfully obtained by the decoration of (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES), followed by the hydrolyzation of APTES, as shown in Fig. 13c–e. As a result, SiO2 wrapped CsPbX3 crystals were formed, exhibiting significant enhancement of stability in comparison with pure CsPbX3 NCs. The mixed silicon (SiNx/SiNxOy/SiOy) was also found to act as a barrier layer in the passivation of surface defects on CsPbBr3 NCs.161 The Zeng group162 designed mesoporous aminated SiO2 spheres as the hard templates, which could act as the reaction platforms and adsorption sites for CsPbBr3 NCs. The NCs/aminated-SiO2 composites exhibited a 7-fold increase in PL intensity compared with neat CsPbBr3 NCs (Fig. 13f and g).
However, in these reported studies, only multi-particle coating can be realized and the size of composite particles was in the micrometer range. How to stabilize CsPbX3 NCs through inert component modification and precisely control the particle size at the single-particle-level is still urgently desired due to the superiority of the nanoparticles in some important applications. Monodisperse CsPbX3/SiO2 Janus nanostructures were first reported by the Zhang group.163 Firstly, monodisperse Cs4PbBr6 NCs were prepared through a hot-injection method, and could be regarded as CsX-rich structures. Then the as-prepared Cs4PbBr6 NCs were converted into CsPbBr3 by stripping of CsBr in the presence of water (Fig. 14a). Along with the transformation, SiO2 would gradually form on one end of the cubic CsPbBr3, as shown in Fig. 14b–d. The stability of these Janus NCs was very high when exposed to air, water and light illumination, due to the surface passivation offered by SiO2. For example, the PL intensity of the Janus NCs could remain at 80%, while that of neat CsPbBr3 decreased to ca. 10% after being treated with water for 7 days (Fig. 14e). The Janus nanostructures displayed great potential in the lighting and display fields, as shown in Fig. 14f.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the formation process with the transformation from Cs4PbBr6 to CsPbBr3 NCs and the formation of SiO2 on one end of NCs. (b) TEM, (c) HRTEM and (d) HAADF-STEM images and the corresponding elemental mapping images of Janus CsPbBr3/SiO2 NCs. (e) Photographs showing the stability against water of (I) Janus CsPbBr3/SiO2 and CsPbBr3 obtained from (II) water-triggered and (III) hot-injection methods. (f) Schematic illustration of a Janus CsPbBr3/SiO2 based WLED, PL spectra of the WLED operated at 5 mA, a CIE color diagram and time-dependent PL spectra of WLEDs based on CsPbBr3/SiO2 NCs and water-triggered and hot-injection CsPbBr3 NCs. The images were modified with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Although the CsPbBr3/SiO2 Janus NCs exhibited excellent durability against moisture, the half-naked CsPbBr3 NCs would be destroyed at a slow rate. How to realize the full coating and stabilize the NCs at the single-particle-level still remains to be known. To realize this target, Zhong et al.164 employed a facile sol–gel method to prepare monodisperse CsPbX3/SiO2 core/shell nanostructures at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 15a and b. From the experiments, it could be seen that the key factors were the precisely controlled conditions including reaction temperature and time, ligand species and concentration. This is the first report that provided CsPbX3 NCs fully coated with inert shells at the single-particle level. As expected, the product showed higher long-term stability against moisture and ultrasonication than naked NCs, as shown in Fig. 15c.
 Fig. 15  (a) The formation mechanism of CsPbBr3/SiO2 core/shell NCs. (b) TEM image and (c) photographs showing the resistance against water under ultrasonication conditions – top: naked CsPbBr3 NCs, bottom: CsPbBr3/SiO2 core/shell NCs. The images were modified with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.3 Semiconductor incorporation. 
Besides polymers and inert shells, various semiconductors were introduced to tune the electronic structure and optimize the optoelectronic properties and stability of CsPbX3 NCs. The most commonly used semiconductors were Cs4PbX6 and CsPb2X5, which have similar ternary structures to CsPbX3. Dual-phase CsPbBr3/CsPb2Br5 nanocomposites were first prepared and applied as an emitting layer in LEDs, which showed a luminance of 3853 cd m−2, a current density (CE) of 8.98 cd A−1 and an EQE of 2.21%.67 The incorporation of tiny CsPb2Br5 nanoparticles on CsPbBr3 NC surfaces could help in improving the current density and also decreasing the trap density. This can be ascribed to the reduction of the diffusion length of excitons and control of the trap density during the nonradiative energy transfer owing to the presence of second phase CsPb2Br5. They pointed out that these dual-phase composites presented a new way for advanced lighting devices.
In 2017, Xu et al.165 reported another heterostructure, CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 NCs, which was successfully applied to LEDs, as shown in Fig. 16. Compared with pure CsPbBr3, a composite-based LED showed 100-fold and 68-fold increases in the maximum current efficiency and EQE, respectively. This can be ascribed to the type-I heterostructure by combining narrow-bandgap CsPbBr3 with large-bandgap Cs4PbBr6, leading to the collection of carriers from the Cs4PbBr6 host and concentration of carrier density into recombination wells. Besides, the formation of CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6165–168 and CsPbBr3/amorphous CsPbBrx core/shell hybridized composites169 have also been reported, and both the resulting heterostructures exhibited much higher efficiency and better stability than conventional NCs in LEDs, which provided an alternative candidate for liquid crystal display (LCD) backlights.
 Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of heterostructure CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 NCs. (b) Photographs and (c) PLQYs of films fabricated from CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 NCs with different Cs:Pb ratios. (d) EQEs of different samples and radiative energy transition with CsPbBr3 imbedded Cs4PbBr6 in a conjectured heterostructure. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process. The images were modified with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2017 Wiley. 
TiO2, a conventional and efficient photocatalyst, has also been introduced in the modification of CsPbBr3 NCs. Zhou et al.170 used a facile one-pot colloidal synthesis for a bilayer hybridized film of mesoporous TiO2 and CsPbBr3 NCs for the first time. It was found that composite based photodetectors demonstrated enhanced on/off ratios, which are almost 3 orders of magnitude in comparison with those of CsPbBr3-based ones. The improved performance came from the surface passivation provided by mesoporous TiO2. In their further investigations, the authors also developed a photodetector based on the CsPbBr3 NCs/TiO2 matrix with a bifunctional linker molecule, 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), which displayed an ultrahigh on/off ratio of 105 and a much faster electron injection rate.171 CsPbBr3/TiO2 core/shell NCs were also successfully prepared by the Zheng group.172 The TiO2 shell coating can endow the NCs with enhanced stability against water and light treatment, and also suppress the anion exchange. Owing to the good electrical conductivity of TiO2, an improved photoelectric activity was observed, which opened a new opportunity for photocatalytic applications in aqueous solution.
Moreover, sulfides including MoS2 and ZnS have proven to be promising choices in the incorporation of CsPbX3 NCs.173–175 Besides their higher stability, both MoS2 and ZnS could offer suitable interface structures and induce type II heterojunctions, resulting in rich electronic properties and high interfacial carrier separation.


3.2.4 Carbon materials. 
One promising potential application of CsPbX3 NCs is photodetectors due to their high mobility and adsorption coefficient. However, the development of perovskite photodetectors is still limited by their poor carrier extraction and transport efficiency. From two previous reports, it can be found that carbon materials, such as graphene176 and carbon nanotubes,177 would be great candidates for forming composite materials with perovskite NCs. The main reason could be ascribed to the high conductivity of carbon materials, which enables an efficient electron extraction and fast separation of photo-induced carriers, resulting in fast response and high usage efficiency of electrons. CsPbBr3 NCs/graphene composites can also be devoted to the field of photocatalysis owing to the superior conductivity of graphene. Xu et al.78 employed a CsPbBr3 NCs/graphene composite in photocatalytic CO2 reduction, which showed much better performance than naked CsPbBr3 NCs. Another important role of carbon materials is the passivation layer ensuring an improved stability for CsPbX3 NCs. In Pan's report,178 a composite of polyacrylic acid (PAA) grafted graphene and CsPbBr3 NCs exhibited excellent chemical stability toward methanol and water treatment.


3.2.5 Other materials. 
The earliest water resistant CsPbX3 NC composite was reported by the Rogach group,179,180 in which polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) was employed as the coating shell for perovskite NCs. The POSS molecule has an inorganic siloxane core and eight organic corner groups which form a cage-like structure. A certain amount of POSS powder was added into a pre-made CsPbX3 NC solution upon ultrasonication, and then the solvent was slowly evaporated to obtain a POSS-coated CsPbX3 composite. The thin POSS layer on the surface could endow CsPbX3 NCs with a strong resistance to water and help in preventing ion exchange in both aqueous and solid states. What is more, the POSS additive in LEDs could help balance electron–hole injection, resulting in an enhanced LED performance.
Besides the above-mentioned CsPbX3 based composites, many materials including metals,181,182 zeolites,183 anthracene,184 phospho-silicate glass,185 chiral gels,186 salt pellets,187 crown ethers,188 stearic acid,189 CaF2 matrix,190 glass matrix,191,192 silicone resin,193 black phosphorus sheets,194 alkyl phosphate195 and ammonium bromide frameworks196 were also employed in the modification of CsPbX3 NCs.

4. Optoelectronic properties and the corresponding applications
The optoelectronic properties of CsPbX3 NCs strongly depend on their composition, size and morphology. CsPbX3 perovskite NCs show promising potential in optoelectronic devices because of their defect-tolerance system.197 The defect tolerance is partly attributed to the high ionic feature of these all-inorganic NCs.
Unlike conventional semiconductors, CsPbX3 NCs can be bright emitters without electronic passivation on their surfaces. The defect tolerance of CsPbX3 NCs offers strong inspiration to explore NCs with excellent optical properties, such as high PLQYs, which is a direct consequence of the defect-tolerant nature of the electronic structure in CsPbX3 NCs.198 Compared with traditional II–VI and III–V semiconductor QDs, CsPbX3 NCs exhibit a high PLQY and a narrow FWHM without any surface treatment.20 More importantly, the PL emission of CsPbX3 NCs is mainly determined by their halide composition,19 and is found to be nearly temperature-insensitive at different temperatures (20–100 °C).199,200 In contrast, the PL emission of traditional metal chalcogenide and pnictide NCs is extremely sensitive to their particle size and the bandgap change of semiconductors as a function of temperature,201,202 leading to poor optical consistency in different batches of products. The halide composition dependent PL peak position and unique temperature-insensitive chromaticity of CsPbX3 NCs offer new opportunities in many promising potential applications, such as LEDs, lasers and photodetectors. In addition, photocatalysis and anti-counterfeiting applications of CsPbX3 NCs have also attracted much attention, which will be discussed in detail below.
4.1 Solar cells
Recently, the PCEs of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite-based solar cells have been improved from 3.9% in 20091 to 22.7% in 2018, along with more than 1000 hours operational stability.7 Is the organic cation really playing a critical role in determining the efficiency of solar cells? The answer might be no. Recently, great progress has been made in solar cells by using CsPbX3 NCs as the active layer, and some typical reports are listed in Table 1. The first demonstration of solar cells with CsPbBr3 NCs was reported by Kulbak and coworkers,203 in which they employed the same device structure and fabrication procedures as hybrid solar cells. Compared to the hybrid analogue, all-inorganic compounds are certainly much more temperature-insensitive, although the resulting perovskites are still sensitive to water. In spite of the relatively low efficiency of the device, this work sheds new light on CsPbX3 NC based solar cells.
Table 1 Overview of some representative results of solar cells based on all-inorganic halide perovskite NCs




Material
Device structure

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Publication year
Ref.




CsPbBrI2
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CsPbI3/[60]PCBM/BCP/Al
10.9
1.12
—
6.69
2016

210



CsPbI3
FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/spiro-OMe TAD/MoMx/Al
13.47
1.23
65
10.77
2016

26



CsPbI3
FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/spiro-OMe TAD/MoMx/Al
15.246
1.1626
76.63
13.43
2017

206



CsPbI3
FTO/TiO2/graphene–CsPbI3/PTAA/Au
13.59
1.18
72.6
11.4
2018

211



CsPbI3
FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/HTM/MoO3/Ag
12.39
1.27
80
12.55
2018

212



CsPbI2+xBr1−x/CsPbI3
FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br/CsPbI3/PTAA/Au
15.25
1.204
78.7
14.45
2018

209





An appropriate bandgap is a prerequisite to achieve high PCE. Based on the experience in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells, it is clear that cubic CsPbI3 may be the best candidate because of its narrow bandgap due to which it can absorb long-wavelength light. However, cubic phase CsPbI3 NCs can be stable only at high temperature (>320 °C)204–206 and will turn into an orthorhombic phase (yellow phase) at room temperature, leading to a very low efficiency (0.09%) in solar cells.207 In 2015, Eperon et al.208 first demonstrated solar cells with a PCE of 1.7% fabricated from CsPbI3 films. Through careful control of the processing, they found that a suitable amount of hydroiodic acid in the precursor solution could enhance the solubility of perovskite precursors, resulting in the formation of uniform films. All processes were carried out in an absolutely inert atmosphere, in which stabilized CsPbI3 films in the cubic phase can be obtained at room temperature.
Based on the colloidal synthetic method, dense, conductive and phase stable CsPbI3 NC films can be fabricated under ambient conditions. Swarnkar et al.26 retained the cubic phase of CsPbI3 NCs at room temperature by using methyl acetate (MeOAc) as an anti-solvent during purification. The films obtained through this method exhibited long-range electronic transport and the resulting solar cells exhibited PCEs up to 10.77% and a large open-circuit voltage of 1.23 V (Fig. 17a and b). In addition, the solar cells exhibited high stability, which showed almost no attenuation after 60 days. The following year, the Luther group206 further improved the PCE of solar cells to 13.43% by tuning the surface chemistry based on cation halide salt treatment (Fig. 17c and d). This post-treatment process provided a facile method which could tune the coupling between perovskite NCs, showing its significant role in the improvement of the charge transport properties of high-quality NC films and devices. Recently, Bian et al.209 used Mn2+ substitution, SCN− capping and [(NH2)2CH]+ treatment to achieve stable and high-mobility CsPbI3 NC films. Based on the high-quality NCs achieved through this method, they fabricated a CsPbI3/CsPbI2Br bilayer device which possessed a graded bandgap structure and exhibited an excellent PCE of 14.45% (Fig. 17e and f), which is the best among those reported for CsPbX3 NCs so far. However, compared to the ultrahigh PCE of organo-inorganic hybrid perovskite-based solar cells (>22%), the efficiency of all-inorganic NCs based solar cells still far away from this goal. Further investigation and optimization of all-inorganic NCs are still necessary.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic and cross-sectional SEM image of the CsPbI3 solar cell with a PCE of up to 10.77%. (b) The current density–voltage curves of a device measured in air over the course of 15 days. (c) Schematic of the film deposition process and cation halide salt post-treatment. (d) J–V characteristics of high-voltage photovoltaic cells with high PCEs up to 13.43%. (e) Schematic comparing the CsPbI3 NCs with and without SCN− capping after removing the ligand chain. (f) J–V curves and related data for the CsPbI2Br-based solar cells. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 26. Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c and d) Ref. 206. Copyright 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e and f) Ref. 209. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
4.2 LEDs
Based on their facile tunability and wide emission wavelength range, high PLQY and narrow emission bandwidth, CsPbX3 NCs have attracted much attention in applications of solid-state lightings and displays.55,188,213–215 The EQEs of all-inorganic perovskite NC-based LEDs have rapidly progressed from below 1% to 16.48% in the last three years (Table 2). Although those materials have not yet been used for industrial applications, rapid improvements over the past four years confirm the promising prospect of all-inorganic perovskite NCs in the LED field. Song and co-workers24 first demonstrated the LED application of CsPbX3 NCs in 2015. During the fabrication process, a typical stacking layered LED structure was adopted, which was composed of indium tin oxide (ITO), poly(ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), poly(9-vinlycarbazole) (PVK), CsPbX3 NCs, 1,3,5-tris(N-phenylbenzimidazol-2-yl)benzene (TPBi) and LiF/Al (Fig. 18a and b). The EQEs of blue, green and red LEDs were 0.07%, 0.12% and 0.09%, respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 18c, the EL spectra could be easily tuned by partial substitution of Br ions with I or Cl, and the FWHM and peak positions of the electroluminescence (EL) spectra were consistent with those of the PL spectra, indicating very saturated and pure colors in devices. Since then, many research groups have been trying to improve the efficiency of perovskite NC based LEDs. Tremendous efforts have been devoted towards modification of active materials and manipulation of device structures.
Table 2 Overview of some representative results of light-emission from all-inorganic halide perovskite NC based LEDs




Perovskite emitter
Synthetic method
Morphology
Device architecture
EL lmax (FWHM)
EQE (%)
CE (cd A−1)

L
max (cd m−2)
Voltage (V)
Publication year
Ref.




CsPbBr3
Hot-injection (170 °C)
Nanocubes (8 nm)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al
516 nm (23 nm)
0.12
0.43
946
4.2
2015

24



CsPbBr3
Hot-injection (170 °C)
Nanocubes (19 nm)
ITO/ZnO/CsPbBr3/TFB/MoO3/Ag
523 nm (19 nm)
0.19
—
2335
4.5
2016

228



CsPbBr3
Hot-injection (130 °C)
Nanocubes (10 nm)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al
527 nm (24 nm)
2.21
8.89
3853
3.4
2016

67



CsPbBr3
Hot-injection (180 °C)
Nanocubes (10 nm)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al
515 nm (19 nm)
3.0
—
330
3.0
2016

108



CsPbBr3
Hot-injection (170 °C)
Nanocubes (8 nm)
ITO/ZnO/CsPbBr3/ZnO/Al
512 nm (20 nm)
6.27
13.3
15185
3.4
2017

139



CsPbBr3
Hot-injection (170 °C)
Nanospheres (10.8 nm)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al
516 nm (19 nm)
6.5
18.13
7085
2.8
2018

124



CsPbBr3
Hot-injection (180 °C)
Nanocubes (9 nm)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/CsPbBr3/TPBI/lithium 8-quinolate/Al
513 nm (17 nm)
8.73
18.8
1490
2.6
2018

140



CsPbI3
Hot-injection (160 °C)
Nanocubes (10–12 nm)
ITO/ZnO/PEI/CsPbI3/TCTA/MoO3/Ag
—
11.2
—
1106
—
2018

135



CsPbBr3
Room temperature precipitation
Nanocubes (10 nm)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTAA/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al
515 nm (18 nm)
11.6
54.4
55800
2.6
2018

218



CsPbBr3
Room temperature precipitation
Nanocubes (8 nm)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTAA/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al
518 nm (18 nm)
16.48
66.7
76940
5.6
2018

106



CsPbI3
Hot-injection (170 °C)
Nanocubes (13 nm)
Ag–photopolymer/ZnO/PEI/CsPbI3/TCTA/MoO3/Ag/MoO3
692 nm (37 nm)
8.2
0.8
827
2.0
2018

229



CsPbI3
Hot-injection (160 °C)
Nanocrystals
ITO/ZnO/PEI/CsPbI3-0.1/CsPbI3/TCTA/MoO3/Ag
683 nm (34 nm)
11.8
0.81
1050
2.8
2018

225



CsPbI3
Hot-injection (170 °C)
Nanocubes (12 nm)
ITO/ZnO/PEI/CsPbI3-0.1/CsPbI3/TCTA/MoO3/Ag
691 nm (35 nm)
13.5
—
1152
2.0
2018

224



CsPbBr0.6I2.4
Hot-injection then anion exchange
Nanocubes (11 nm)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/CsPb(BrI)3/TPBI/LiF/Al
649 nm (31 nm)
21.3
10.6
500
2.8
2018

230





 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration and (b) cross-sectional TEM image of an LED device. (c) Photographs and EL spectra (straight line) of LED devices with different halide compositions, and the PL spectra (dashed line) of NCs dispersed in hexane. (d) Schematic illustration of the surface ligand density control on CsPbBr3 surfaces and the corresponding changes of ink stability, PLQY, and carrier injection during the purification process. (e) The schematic and stability of OPA- and OA/OAm-capped CsPbX3 NCs. (f) J–V–L curve of devices based on different ligands, red: OPA, blue: OA/OAm. (g) EQE versus current density characteristics of an LED device based on CsPbBr3 NCs purified by butyl acetate. (h) EQE of the devices by using CsPbBr3 doped with FA+ as the active layer. The images were modified with permission from (a–c) ref. 24. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (d) Ref. 139. Copyright 2017 Wiley. (e and f) Ref. 124. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (g) Ref. 140. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (h) Ref. 218. Copyright 2018 Wiley. 
High-quality luminescent materials with high PLQYs, clean surfaces and high electron conductivity are good candidates for active materials.9,216,217 Capping ligands are generally required to stabilize NCs. However, the existence of ligands will deteriorate the device performance because they act as insulators to block charge transfer and damage the electron conductivity. A clean surface with appropriate ligand density is therefore highly desired and much effort has been put in this direction. For instance, Pan et al.108 improved LED performance (3.0% EQE for green LEDs) by replacing the long-chain OA and OAm ligands with a relatively short ligand, DDAB, through a two-step ligand exchange process, which could facilitate carrier transport in the film.
The Zeng group139 emphasized three key factors for an ideal LED: high ink stability, high PLQY and high charge injection efficiency. Aiming at this target, they reported a purification process to control the surface ligand density and fabricated green LEDs with an EQE of up to 6.27%.139 By using hexane/ethyl acetate mixed solvent, the obtained CsPbBr3 NCs exhibited an excellent balance between ink stability, optical properties and charge injection efficiency (Fig. 18d). This work provided a sustainable way to improve the efficiency of all-inorganic perovskite-based LEDs. Nevertheless, during the synthesis process, alkyl amine ligands were still involved and the further ligand change process or multiple washing steps could not remove the surfactant completely, indicating that the proton transfer among the acid–base ligands is still a big challenge. In order to completely eliminate the influence of acid–base ligands, Tan et al.124 introduced OPA to replace the OA/OAm ligands, which could dramatically enhance the colloidal stability and PLQY (>90%) of CsPbBr3, as shown in Fig. 18e. Meanwhile, Fig. 18f shows that the EQE of OPA-capped CsPbBr3 NC based LEDs was improved to 6.5%. The bonding strength between OPA and CsPbBr3 was stronger than that of OA/OAm, which allowed the purification to not only remove any extra uncombined organic residue but also maintain its initial excellent photophysical properties.
In 2017, a higher EQE of 8.73% was reported by Kido et al.140 A green LED device was fabricated by using CsPbBr3 NCs that were treated by multiple washing steps involving butyl acetate during the purification process to remove excess ligands (Fig. 18g). Through extensive experiments, it was found that CsPbBr3 NCs washed with butyl acetate exhibited a high PLQY and high EQE in devices due to the proper removal of excess ligands. A high EQE of 11.6% was obtained by using FA-doped CsPbBr3 NCs at room-temperature under the synergy between short ligands (tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB), didodecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDAB) and octanoic acid (OTAc)) in toluene.218 A small amount of organic FA cations played a critical role as a dopant to further improve the PLQY, reduce defect trapping and enhance the efficiency of exciton recombination. FA cation doping made CsPbBr3 NCs more efficient for the further application of PLEDs (Fig. 18h). Therefore, along with ligand species and density, the structure of perovskite NCs has proven to be a key parameter in the development of highly efficient CsPbX3 NC-based LEDs. Recently, the Zeng group106 further improved the efficiency of CsPbX3 NC-based LEDs to a record high EQE of up to 16.48% through a general organic–inorganic hybrid ligand strategy to passivate the CsPbX3 NCs. Typically, the passivation strategy decreased the surface defect sites effectively, which led to more radiative recombination and further enhancement in the recombination efficiency of electrons and holes in constructing EL devices.
For direct film fabrication, Lin and co-workers found that when a pre-synthesized CsPbBr3 perovskite was mixed with a MABr additive (where MA is CH3NH3), the different solubilities of the precursors led to a CsPbBr3/MABr quasi-core/shell structure. The MABr shell not only boosted the photoluminescence quantum efficiency, but also helped in balancing the charge injection. Based on the core/shell structure and passivation of MABr, LEDs with an EQE of 20.3% have been successfully fabricated, which is the highest efficiency based on the CsPbBr3 film reported so far.219 Additionally, some efforts have been devoted towards the design of new device structures. For example, some research studies have been focused on the employment of a new charge-transporting layer (CTL) and modification of the interfacial layer between the CTL and the emissive layer.220–223
These results showed that the efficiency of LED devices could be dramatically improved by optimizing the influential factors, indicating that CsPbX3 have a wide range of applications in future high definition NC displays and high-quality lightings.218 It is surprising that CsPbX3 NC-based LEDs are moving forward at such a remarkable speed and the industrial applications of CsPbX3 NC-based LEDs are expected in the near future. In spite of the great progress achieved in recent years, the highest EQE of CsPbX3-based green LEDs is up to 20%, which is now on a par with those of more mature technologies such as organic LEDs (22.62% for green QLEDs). But the performance of blue and red LEDs is expected to be further improved. Up to now, the EQEs of blue LEDs (with CsPbX3 NCs as the active layer) are just around 0.1%96,129 and those of red LEDs are around 11–13.5%,135,224,225 which are far below those of traditional QD based LEDs (19.8% for blue QLEDs,226 22.62% for green QLEDs,107 20.5% for red QLEDs227).
4.3 Photodetectors
Based on the remarkable achievements of diverse perovskites in photovoltaic and light-emitting areas, many works have addressed the state-of-the-art progress of their applications in photodetectors, which are sensors of light (ultraviolet, visible, or infrared) or other forms of electromagnetic energy.174,231–234 The p–n junction in photodetectors can convert light photons into photocurrent, which can be detected and measured to study the properties of light via the photoelectric effect. These devices are crucial for a variety of industrial and scientific applications, including imaging, optical communications and biological sensing.235,236 For photodetectors, their performance can be significantly affected by the composition, structure, and morphology of photoactive materials as well as device architecture. The key point to obtain highly efficient detectors mainly depends on the extraction of carriers before their recombination. A photoactive material should exhibit efficient carrier generation and a high carrier mobility and lifetime. As the newly emerging optoelectronic materials, CsPbX3 exhibit high absorption efficiency (2 × 105 cm−1) and large carrier mobility.237,238 Based on the excellent properties of CsPbX3, researchers have investigated their great potential in detection of light signals and several interesting related items.
Ramasamy et al.231 first demonstrated CsPbI3-based photodetectors in 2016. Red emitting CsPbI3 NCs were chosen as the active material, which have a relatively long radiative lifetime and can produce high photocurrents. CsPbBr3 NCs were synthesized first, followed by the addition of LiI into the CsPbBr3 NCs in hexane to form CsPbI3 NCs. The as-obtained NCs were drop-cast on a heavily doped Si substrate with pre-patterned gold electrodes and then annealed at 200 °C for 30 min in a N2 atmosphere. As a result, a photodetector device with CsPbI3 NC films was fabricated (Fig. 19a). The fabricated device possessed exceedingly good photosensitivity (high on/off ratio of 105) and relatively fast rise (trise = 24 ms) and decay times (tdecay = 29 ms) (Fig. 19b).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic and (b) rise and decay times of the CsPbI3 NC based photodetector device. (c) Schematic diagram of the CsPbBr3 nanosheet based photodetector. (d) Current spectra of the CsPbIBr2 based photodetector in the dark and under weak light. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 231. Copyright 2016 Royal Chemical Society. (c) Ref. 240. Copyright 2016 Wiley. (d) Ref. 233. Copyright 2018 Wiley. 
Li et al.239 developed a recyclable dissolution–recrystallization method to build compact and smooth carrier channels for optoelectronic devices via self-healing at room temperature, which greatly improved the performance of photodetectors. In the treated perovskite film-based photodetectors, the responsivity, EQE, response speed and stability were enhanced. Furthermore, the high photocurrent (>10 μA) made them promising for driving commercial LEDs efficiently.
Besides conventional nanocubes used in photodetectors, 2D materials have attracted much attention as outstanding materials for planar devices, because 2D NCs can be assembled into large-area, crack-free and high-quality films owing to their unique arrangement characteristics. Therefore, atomically thin 2D CsPbBr3 nanosheets were applied to light detection with high flexibility (as shown in Fig. 19c).240 These unique 2D features make the CsPbBr3 nanosheets more suitable for flexible and ultrathin devices. Photodetectors based on flexible CsPbBr3 nanosheets exhibited excellent electron-transport properties, high sensitivity, high stability and outstanding flexibility (>10000 cycles). Recently, the Gao group233 optimized the device engineering and film quality to fabricate high-performance photodetectors, which showed high sensitivity and fast response simultaneously (Fig. 19d). Based on CsPbIBr2 NCs, the optimized devices showed a practically measured detectable limit of 21.5 pW cm−2 and a fast response time of 20 ns, which is the highest reported device performance of perovskite-based photodetectors. Regardless of these achievements, more efforts need to be further devoted towards the development of high-performance photodetectors.
4.4 Lasers
Lasers are devices that can emit light through a process of optical amplification based on the stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation.241–247 The first laser was built by Theodore H. Maiman in 1960.248 Since then, lasers have been widely used in industry and daily life. Compared to other light sources, lasers are more coherent and spatial. In addition, lasers can emit light with a very narrow spectrum, which can be monochromatic.
In 2007, Kondo et al.249 first demonstrated room temperature stimulated emission from lead halide compounds in CsPbBr3 films prepared by crystallization from the amorphous phase. The strong stimulated emission of microcrystalline CsPbBr3 films can occur at room temperature, which makes them promising candidates as optical gain media. This work did not offer excellent results due to the low PLQY of perovskites, but it shed some light on the exploration of new laser media in metal halides.
Perovskite NCs have promising potential applications in lasers because of their size-tunable emission and flexibility afforded by colloidal synthesis, which brings a temperature-insensitive optical feature. In particular, CsPbX3 NCs have combined the advantages of perovskite materials and quantum confinement effect caused by minimal particle size. Up to now, CsPbX3 NCs have widely been used as gain media and coupled with another optical cavity to form laser devices. The Sun group250 demonstrated room-temperature amplification of spontaneous emission in the visible spectral range. CsPbX3 NCs around 10 nm were employed to fabricate thin films (470–620 nm). After the NCs were assembled into thin films, the preserved PLQY could still reach up to 85%. As shown in Fig. 20a, the PL spectra from the thin film varied at different pump intensities. The FWHM of the PL spectra became narrower (5 nm) when the pump intensity was increased.
 Fig. 20  (a) Pump intensity-dependent PL spectra from thin films fabricated from CsPbBr3 NCs. The inset shows the stripe pumping configuration. (b) Evolution from PL to WGM lasing with increasing pump intensity in a microsphere resonator covered with a film of CsPbBr3 NCs. (c) Lasing spectra and images of individual CsPbX3 perovskite nanoplates with different halide ions. (d) Single-mode lasing from an individual CsPbBr3 nanocuboid. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 250. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (b) Ref. 241. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (c) Ref. 247. 2016 Wiley. (d) Ref. 243. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In 2015, the Kovalenko group241 reported whispering-gallery-mode (WGM) lasing in which CsPbX3 NCs were coated onto silica spheres. The threshold could be as low as 5 μJ cm−2 (400 nm at 100 fs) (Fig. 20b). In addition, the device possessed high modal net gain values of at least 450 ± 30 cm−1. For WGM lasing, Zhang et al.247 obtained single crystalline WGM microcavities with multicolor (400–700 nm), low-threshold (2.2 μJ cm−2) and high-quality lasing action (Fig. 20c). CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) nanoplates with microscale edge lengths and sub-wavelength thicknesses were synthesized using the vapor-phase van der Waals epitaxy method. The lasing mode linewidth was about 0.14–0.15 nm, which is the highest value among single crystalline semiconductor microcavities in the visible region so far.
Recently, Liu et al.243 demonstrated a CsPbBr3 nanocuboid laser with all three dimensions smaller than the lasing wavelength. The modified device exhibited a high gain, a low threshold, a high quality factor and single-mode lasing action (Fig. 20d). Single-mode Fabry–Perot lasing at room temperature had laser thresholds of 40.2 μJ cm−2 (corresponding quality factor 2075) and 374 μJ cm−2 (corresponding quality factor 1859) for one- and two-photon excitation, respectively. All the above achievements suggest that perovskite CsPbX3 NC lasers hold promise for future nanophotonic exploration and development.
4.5 Photocatalysis for CO2 reduction
For the past few years, the increased atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration has attracted widespread attention. Many approaches have been investigated to control and normalize the atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Among them, photocatalytic reduction of CO2 has been regarded as one of the most promising ways. Although most of the recent studies have been focused on TiO2, copper(I) and copper(II) compounds,251,252 conventional quantum dots with reductive conduction bands have also been used as candidates for photocatalytic reduction of CO2, such as ZnSe, CdS, CdS/WO3 and Ag/CdS systems.253–257 Further research on perovskites has shown that their excellent photophysical properties, such as high absorption coefficients, broad absorption spectra, high charge carrier mobility and long charge diffusion lengths, make CsPbX3 NCs promising for photocatalysis. Additionally, the tunability of structures and physicochemical properties of perovskites lead to a better understanding of their structure–photocatalytic activity relationship.
In 2017, the Sun group258 reported the application CsPbBr3 NCs in photocatalytic conversion, in which CsPbBr3 NCs exhibited a high selectivity of CO greater than 99% and an efficient yield of 20.9 μmol g−1 h−1 towards CO2 reduction (Fig. 21a and b). The product formation rate was highly related to the particle size. This result was comparable to those of previously reported works. In the same year, Xu et al.78 used CsPbBr3/graphene oxide composites as photocatalysts to convert CO2 into solar fuels. Compared to CsPbBr3 NCs, the hybrid photocatalysts displayed a 25.5% and 28.57% enhancement of the rate of electron consumption and photocurrent response, respectively, because of the improved electron extraction and transport efficiency (Fig. 21c and d). The catalytic CO2 reduction occurred at a rate of 23.7 μmol g−1 h−1 and exhibited a selectivity (CH4 and CO) over 99.3%. However, the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reactions were carried out in expensive non-polar organic solvents, which seriously limited their practical applications. Besides, the use of organic solvents makes it very difficult to determine the source of the product since organic solvents may contain small molecules and contribute to the final product. Research in this field should be directed towards the preparation of water-stable CsPbX3 NCs that can be used to catalyze reactions in water or other polar solvents. The water resistance of CsPbX3 will also promote their utilization in many other fields. Meanwhile, lead-free perovskite Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs have also been used as photocatalysts for photocatalytic reduction of CO2.259 The performance of the catalyst was not as good as that of CsPbX3 NCs reported previously, but this work encouraged the development of eco-friendly perovskite NC based photocatalysts.
 Fig. 21  (a) Band diagram of CO2 reduction into fuels on CsPbBr3 NCs. (b) CO2 reduction into fuels on tunable CsPbBr3 NCs with different particle sizes. (c) Schematic diagram of charge transfer in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 graphene oxide/CsPbBr3 NCs. (d) I–t curves plotted at −0.4 VAg/AgCl of graphene oxide/CsPbBr3 NCs. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 258. Copyright 2017 Wiley. (c and d) Ref. 78. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
5. Conclusions and outlook
In this review, we have summarized recent advances in the synthesis, morphological control, surface engineering and applications of CsPbX3 NCs. During such a short research period (less than 4 years), lots of interesting research articles have been published in the field of CsPbX3 NCs. Despite the great success achieved up to now, addressing the issues which limit the performance has been the primary task before their widespread practical application. There is still plenty of room for further improvement of CsPbX3 NCs. We can predict that these problems will be resolved and many significant achievements are waiting for being discovered. In this part, based on our understanding, we will discuss the possible development trend in the CsPbX3 NC field.
Firstly, the most prominent issue of CsPbX3 NCs is their structural instability against moisture, oxygen, thermal and photo-disturbances. For surface chemistry, the relatively weak binding between ligands and particle surfaces always leads to damage to the nanostructure. In various systems, OA and OAm are the most widely used ligands for the synthesis of CsPbX3 NCs. However, the capping ligands could easily detach from the surface during the purification or post-treatment process, leading to their aggregation and structural collapse. Novel ligands and careful surface modification of CsPbX3 NCs are therefore needed to further improve their stability. Another effective way to improve the stability is the passivation provided by inert shells, such as SiOx and AlOx. Protected by these inert materials, the NCs can maintain their original properties or even exhibit better properties. Though various CsPbX3 NCs embedded in inert matrixes have been widely explored, full coating at the single-particle-level needs to be urgently developed due to the superiority of nanoscale size functional materials and their promising potential in many applications such as biotherapy. On the other hand, coating CsPbX3 NCs with semiconductors, such as ZnS and other stable II–VI semiconductor materials, at the single particle level to fabricate heterostructures is also a good strategy, which can not only provide protection to NCs but also tune the electronic structure for various applications.
Secondly, Pb is known as a toxic element which is a major bottleneck to the commercialization of CsPbX3 NCs. So far, some progress has been made in the preparation of eco-friendly CsPbX3 NCs through partial or complete substitution of Pb with other metals, such as germanium (Ge), tin (Sn), bismuth (Bi) and antimony (Sb).260–266 The as-obtained products may show similar optical properties. However, most of these non-toxic metal-based perovskites are not very stable compared to CsPbX3 because these metals can be easily oxidized. In 2017, a comprehensive theoretical calculation about the electronic and bandgap structures of lead-free CsMX3 NCs was reported, in which different kinds of quaternary optimal materials were predicted as promising candidates with intrinsic thermodynamic stability, suitable band gaps, small carrier effective masses and low exciton binding energies.267 However, experimental research studies based on the simulation results are still in progress. To achieve and stabilize lead-free all-inorganic perovskite NCs, more efforts should be devoted.
Lastly, most of the current investigations on their applications are still focused on their optical aspects, such as LEDs, solar cells and lasers. Considering the excellent properties of CsPbX3 NCs, more potential applications should be explored. How to exploit their potential in other practical applications, such as anti-counterfeiting, photocatalysis and light-induced polymerization, is still a key point in the future development.
Based on the above brief discussion, it can be concluded that much effort should be devoted towards the enhancement of the stability and tunable properties of CsPbX3 NCs. The exploration of Pb-free perovskite NCs and their potential application is still greatly needed. There is a long way to go in the future to overcome their challenges and explore more promising directions. We believe that all-inorganic CsPbX3 NCs are expected to have a bright future in various applications. From this review article, we hope that the readers could gain some new insight into the recent progress, and be encouraged to contribute more effort to this new field.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China (2016YFE0129600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21673150, 21611540336, 21703146) and the Thousand Youth Talents Plan. We acknowledge the financial support from the 111 Project, the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology (NANO-CIC), the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), and the Joint International Research Laboratory of Carbon-Based Functional Materials and Devices.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 8, 133–138 CrossRef .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
W. S. Yang, B. W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christians, P. Schulz, J. S. Tinkham, T. H. Schloemer, S. P. Harvey, B. J. Tremolet de Villers, A. Sellinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Seo, H. Kim, J. Lee, M. H. Park, S. H. Jeong, Y. H. Kim, S. J. Kwon, T. H. Han, S. Yoo and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605587 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, F. Zhao, L. Liu, F. Zhang, X. G. Wu, L. Shi, B. Zou, Q. Pei and H. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28128–28133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Chen, X.-g. Wu, X. Hu, H. Huang, J. Han, B. Zou and Y. Dong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T. S. Kim, N. Myoung, C. L. Lee, S. H. Im and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1248–1254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Liu, W. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Xu, K. L. Karen, Y. Zheng, S. Liu, S. Chen and K. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606405 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Deng, H. Fang, X. Jin, X. Zhang, X. Zhang and J. Jie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4831–4841 RSC .
D. P. Nenon, J. A. Christians, L. M. Wheeler, J. L. Blackburn, E. M. Sanehira, B. Dou, M. L. Olsen, K. Zhu, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2072–2082 RSC .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3608–3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, A. Di Carlo and C. Ducati, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15012 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun and W. J. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14905–14908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Koscher, J. K. Swabeck, N. D. Bronstein and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6566–6569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Ding, S. Kobayashi, T. Izuishi, N. Nakazawa, T. Toyoda, T. Ohta, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, S. Dai and Q. Shen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10373–10383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Xue, Q. Ou, L. Polavarapu, J. Zheng, X. Qi and Q. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13637–13655 RSC .
G. Nedelcu, L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. J. Grotevent and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5635–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, J. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, Y. Dong and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, E. Bladt, M. F. Ayguler, A. Manzi, K. Z. Milowska, V. A. Hintermayr, P. Docampo, S. Bals, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13887–13892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Möller, Nature, 1958, 182, 1436 CrossRef .
X. Li, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Gu, J. Song and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2435–2445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, B. J. Bohn, E. Bladt, K. Wang, P. Muller-Buschbaum, S. Bals, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13887–13892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yan, Y. Guo, C. Liu, Z. Deng, Y. Guo and X. Zhao, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 185 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Pan, H. Hu, Y. Zou, M. Chen, L. Wu, D. Yang, X. Yuan, J. Fan, B. Sun and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10947–10954 RSC .
H. Liu, Z. Wu, H. Gao, J. Shao, H. Zou, D. Yao, Y. Liu, H. Zhang and B. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42919–42927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Huang, S. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5833–5837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, Y. Zou, L. Wu, Q. Pan, D. Yang, H. Hu, Y. Tan, Q. Zhong, Y. Xu, H. Liu, B. Sun and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 1701121 CrossRef .
W. Zhai, J. Lin, Q. Li, K. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Yao, X. He, L. Li, C. Yu, C. Liu, Y. Fang, Z. Liu and C. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3714–3721 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, X. Chen, J. Li, X. Li and J. Zhong, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 9845–9849 RSC .
H. Zhou, S. Yuan, X. Wang, T. Xu, X. Wang, H. Li, W. Zheng, P. Fan, Y. Li and L. Sun, ACS Nano, 2016, 11, 1189–1195 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Fu, L. Samad, L. Dang, Y. Zhao, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 460–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Guan, D. Li, H.-C. Cheng, X. Duan, Z. Lin and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1223–1233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Shi, L. Lei, Z. Ma, F. Zhang, S. Li, D. Wu, T. Xu, X. Li and C. Shan, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 2524–2532 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rao, Y. Tang, C. Yan, J. Li, G. Zhong, K. Tang, B. Yu, Z. Li and J. Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 5375–5383 RSC .
A. Haque, V. K. Ravi, G. S. Shanker, I. Sarkar, A. Nag and P. K. Santra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 122, 13399–13406 CrossRef .
S. E. Creutz, E. N. Crites, M. C. De Siena and D. R. Gamelin, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4887–4891 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, H. Hu, Y. Xu, S. Jiang, M. Chen, Q. Zhong, D. Yang, Q. Liu, Y. Zhao and B. Sun, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5799–5804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Palazon, C. Urso, L. De Trizio, Q. Akkerman, S. Marras, F. Locardi, I. Nelli, M. Ferretti, M. Prato and L. Manna, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2445–2448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, L. Wu, H. Hu, M. Chen, Y. Tan, D. Yang, Q. Pan, Q. Zhong, T. Supasai and Q. Zhang, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 10363–10370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Huang, Z. Li, L. Kong, L. Jin, J. Wang, K. Wu and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23303–23310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Dirin, L. Protesescu, D. Trummer, I. V. Kochetygov, S. Yakunin, F. Krumeich, N. P. Stadie and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5866–5874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, D. Meggiolaro, Z. Dang, F. De Angelis and L. Manna, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2183–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Almeida, L. Goldoni, Q. Akkerman, Z. Dang, A. H. Khan, S. Marras, I. Moreels and L. Manna, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1704–1711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Ravi, A. Swarnkar, R. Chakraborty and A. Nag, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 325708 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shamsi, P. Rastogi, V. Caligiuri, A. L. Abdelhady, D. Spirito, L. Manna and R. Krahne, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10206–10213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, G. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, C. H. Sun, Y. G. Jin, S. C. Smith, J. Zou, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. M. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4078–4083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jana, M. Mittal, A. Singla and S. Sapra, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3046–3049 RSC .
J. S. Yao, J. Ge, B. N. Han, K. H. Wang, H. B. Yao, H. L. Yu, J. H. Li, B. S. Zhu, J. Z. Song, C. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. B. Zeng, Y. Luo and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3626–3634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. van der Stam, J. J. Geuchies, T. Altantzis, K. H. van den Bos, J. D. Meeldijk, S. Van Aert, S. Bals, D. Vanmaekelbergh and C. de Mello Donega, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4087–4097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das Adhikari, S. K. Dutta, A. Dutta, A. K. Guria and N. Pradhan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8746–8750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Z. Xia, C. Pan, Y. Gong, L. Gu, Q. Liu and J. Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11739–11746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Z. Xia, Y. Gong, L. Gu and Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9281–9287 RSC .
A. Bohun, J. Dolejší and Č. Barta, Czech. J. Phys., 1970, 20, 803–807 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kondo, K. Amaya and T. Saito, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 2093–2099 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Wang, L. Wu, L. Li, H. B. Yao, H. S. Qian and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8328–8332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ruan, J. Lin, W. Shen and Z. Deng, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7658–7665 RSC .
W. Shen, L. Ruan, Z. Shen and Z. Deng, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2804–2807 RSC .
Y. Zhang, M. I. Saidaminov, I. Dursun, H. Yang, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, E. Yengel, B. A. Alshankiti, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 961–965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, J. Almutlaq, S. Sarmah, I. Dursun, A. A. Zhumekenov, R. Begum, J. Pan, N. Cho, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 840–845 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, B. Xu, J. Zhang, Y. Gao, Y. Zheng, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4595–4600 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Yu, Z. Wang, X. Li, X. Chen, V. Nalla, H. Zeng and H. Sun, Small, 2017, 13, 1701587 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, S. Park, E. Radicchi, F. Nunzi, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis, R. Brescia, P. Rastogi, M. Prato and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1924–1930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Bekenstein, X. Ye, S. C. Nguyen, J. Swabeck, D. Zhang, S.-T. Lee, P. Yang, W. Ma and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5309–5312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, H. Wang, Z. Zhu, Y. Chang, T. Zhang, Z. Song and Y. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11296–11299 RSC .

          J. W. Lorimer, IUPAC solubility data series, IUPAC Solubility Data Series, Elsevier,  1991, vol. 47 Search PubMed .
T. Udayabhaskararao, L. Houben, H. Cohen, M. Menahem, I. Pinkas, L. Avram, T. Wolf, A. Teitelboim, M. Leskes and O. Yaffe, Chem. Mater., 2017, 30, 84–93 CrossRef .
L. Ruan, W. Shen, A. Wang, A. Xiang and Z. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3853–3860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, T. Qiao, D. Kim, D. Parobek, D. Rossi and D. H. Son, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3716–3722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, S. Zhao, Z. Xu, B. Qiao, P. Song, D. Gao and X. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28824–28830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, D. Yuan, Y. Xu, A. Wang and Z. Deng, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3648–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Xu, M.-Z. Yang, B.-X. Chen, X.-D. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5660–5663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, P. Jing, L. Zhang, H. Zhao, X. Fu and L. Wang, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 025014 CrossRef .
H. Huang, M. Liu, J. Li, L. Luo, J. Zhao, Z. Luo, X. Wang, Z. Ye, H. He and J. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 104–108 RSC .
A. Kostopoulou, M. Sygletou, K. Brintakis, A. Lappas and E. Stratakis, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18202–18207 RSC .
D. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, L. Dou and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9230–9233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Sun, S. Huang, X. Z. Liu, Q. Xu, Q. H. Zhang, W. J. Jiang, D. J. Xue, J. C. Xu, J. Y. Ma, J. Ding, Q. Q. Ge, L. Gu, X. Fang, H. Z. Zhong, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11705–11715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Bekenstein, Y. Yu, N. A. Gibson, A. B. Wong, S. W. Eaton, N. Kornienko, Q. Kong and M. Lai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7236–7239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Di Stasio, M. Imran, Q. A. Akkerman, M. Prato, L. Manna and R. Krahne, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2725–2729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Eaton, M. Lai, N. A. Gibson, A. B. Wong, L. Dou, J. Ma, L. W. Wang, S. R. Leone and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 1993–1998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Imran, F. Di Stasio, Z. Dang, C. Canale, A. H. Khan, J. Shamsi, R. Brescia, M. Prato and L. Manna, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6450–6454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Guo, S. Dong, X. Jiao, T. Wang and D. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7797–7802 RSC .
D. Amgar, A. Stern, D. Rotem, D. Porath and L. Etgar, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1007–1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, Y. Shu, Y. Tian, Y. Xin and B. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16385–16388 RSC .
V. K. Ravi, P. K. Santra, N. Joshi, J. Chugh, S. K. Singh, H. Rensmo, P. Ghosh and A. Nag, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4988–4994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, Y. Zheng, Z. Du, W. Liu, Z. Yang, F. Gao, L. Wang, K. C. Chou, X. Hou and W. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1611–1617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, S. Yuan, X. Wang, T. Xu, X. Wang, H. Li, W. Zheng, P. Fan, Y. Li, L. Sun and A. Pan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1189–1195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, Z. Zu, H. Shao, W. Hu, M. Zhou, M. Deng, W. Chen, Z. Zang, T. Zhu and J. Xue, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15158–15161 RSC .
Y. Bekenstein, B. A. Koscher, S. W. Eaton, P. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 16008–16011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, Y. Zou, P. Li, Q. Liu, L. Wu, H. Hu, Y. Xu, B. Sun, Q. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 235–242 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, X. Wang, P. Fan, Y. Li, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, W. Zheng, G. Xu, X. Wang, X. Zhu and A. Pan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3024–3031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pan, B. He, X. Fan, Z. Liu, J. J. Urban, A. P. Alivisatos, L. He and Y. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7943–7954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sheng, G. Chen, C. Wang, W. Wang, J. Hui, Q. Zhang, K. Yu, W. Wei, M. Yi, M. Zhang, Y. Deng, P. Wang, X. Xu, Z. Dai, J. Bao and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800283 CrossRef .
J. Shamsi, Z. Dang, P. Bianchini, C. Canale, F. D. Stasio, R. Brescia, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7240–7243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Li, E. Hofman, A. H. Davis, M. M. Maye and W. Zheng, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3854–3860 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, X. Xiong, R. Lin, Z. Zhang, C. Xu and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1865–1870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Su, C. Diederichs, J. Wang, T. C. H. Liew, J. Zhao, S. Liu, W. Xu, Z. Chen and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3982–3988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, M. Wang, H. Qiu, X. Yao, X. Lao, S. Xu, Z. Lin, L. Sun and J. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705908 CrossRef .
M. Chen, H. Hu, Y. Tan, N. Yao, Q. Zhong, B. Sun, M. Cao, Q. Zhang and Y. Yin, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 559–566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, T. Fang, J. Li, L. Xu, F. Zhang, B. Han, Q. Shan and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1805409 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Sun and S. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700610 CrossRef .
J. Pan, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, W. Peng, B. Murali, S. P. Sarmah, M. Yuan, L. Sinatra, N. M. Alyami, J. Liu, E. Yassitepe, Z. Yang, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. N. Hedhili, O. F. Mohammed, Z. H. Lu, D. H. Kim, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8718–8725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, X. Tang, P. Wangyang, Z. Yao, D. Zhou, F. Chen, S. Li, H. Lin, F. Zeng and D. Wu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800007 CrossRef .
H. Wu, Y. Zhang, M. Lu, X. Zhang, C. Sun, T. Zhang, V. L. Colvin and W. Y. William, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4173–4178 RSC .
J. Pan, S. P. Sarmah, B. Murali, I. Dursun, W. Peng, M. R. Parida, J. Liu, L. Sinatra, N. Alyami and C. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 5027–5033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H.-C. Wang, A.-C. Tang, S.-Y. Lin, H.-C. Tong, C.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Lee, T.-L. Tsai and R.-S. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8493–8497 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, N. Sui, X. Bai, Y. Zhang, Q. Rice, F. J. Seo, Q. Zhang, V. L. Colvin and W. Y. William, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4166–4173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Q. Zhong, D. Yang, M. Chen, H. Hu, Q. Pan, H. Liu, M. Cao, Y. Xu and B. Sun, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 12689–12696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, X. Shen, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Chen, C. Ji, H. Shen, H. Shi, Y. Wang and W. Y. William, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 365601 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhang, Z.-Q. Tian, D.-L. Zhu, H. He, S.-W. Guo, Z.-L. Chen and D.-W. Pang, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 9496–9500 RSC .
V. González-Pedro, S. A. Veldhuis, R. Begum, M. J. Bañuls, A. Bruno, N. Mathews, S. Mhaisalkar and A. N. Maquieira, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1409–1414 CrossRef .
A. Pan, J. Wang, M. J. Jurow, M. Jia, Y. Liu, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, L. He and Y. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2771–2780 CrossRef CAS .
D. Trots and S. Myagkota, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 2520–2526 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, Y. Shang, J. Yin, M. De Bastiani, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Sinatra, A. M. El-Zohry, M. N. Hedhili and A.-H. Emwas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 562–565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, A. S. Chesman and J. J. Jasieniak, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 232–235 RSC .
F. Krieg, S. T. Ochsenbein, S. Yakunin, S. Ten Brinck, P. Aellen, A. Süess, B. Clerc, D. Guggisberg, O. Nazarenko and Y. Shynkarenko, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 641–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Alpert, J. S. Niezgoda, A. Z. Chen, B. J. Foley, S. Cuthriell, L. U. Yoon and J. J. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4515–4526 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tan, Y. Zou, L. Wu, Q. Huang, D. Yang, M. Chen, M. Ban, C. Wu, T. Wu and S. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3784–3792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Woo, Y. Kim, J. Bae, T. G. Kim, J. W. Kim, D. C. Lee and S. Jeong, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7088–7092 CrossRef CAS .
F. Di Stasio, S. Christodoulou, N. Huo and G. Konstantatos, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7663–7667 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, M. Zhi, Y. Q. Chang, J.-P. Zhang and Y. Chan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4976–4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Bohn, Y. Tong, M. Gramlich, M. L. Lai, M. Döblinger, K. Wang, R. L. Hoye, P. Muller-Buschbaum, S. D. Stranks and A. S. Urban, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5231–5238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Wei, X. Li, Y. Li, S. Qiu, W. Shen, B. Cai, Z. Sun, D. Yang and Z. Deng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2030–2037 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, W. Chen, W. Wang, B. Xu, D. Wu, J. Hao, W. Cao, F. Fang, Y. Li and Y. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5168–5173 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Manser, J. A. Christians and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12956–13008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, E. Yassitepe, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, G. Walters, X. Gong, P. Kanjanaboos, A. F. Nogueira and E. H. Sargent, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25007–25013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ahmed, S. Seth and A. Samanta, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3633–3637 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, B. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. Li, A. Shan and L. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701106 CrossRef .
M. Lu, X. Zhang, X. Bai, H. Wu, X. Shen, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, H. Song, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1571–1577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Qian, X. Xing, J. Zhu, X. Huang, Q. Jing, W. Zhang, C. Zhang and Z. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 12994–13000 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, X. Cao, A. Honarfar, M. Abdellah, C. Chen, J. Avila, M. C. Asensio, L. Hammarström, J. Sa and S. E. Canton, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29574–29582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Y. Yu, Y. Bekenstein, A. B. Wong, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13155–13158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, L. Xu, T. Wang, J. Song, J. Chen, J. Xue, Y. Dong, B. Cai, Q. Shan, B. Han and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603885 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Chiba, K. Hoshi, Y.-J. Pu, Y. Takeda, Y. Hayashi, S. Ohisa, S. Kawata and J. Kido, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18054–18060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hoshi, T. Chiba, J. Sato, Y. Hayashi, Y. Takahashi, H. Ebe, S. Ohisa and J. Kido, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24607–24612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jing, M. Zhang, X. Huang, X. Ren, P. Wang and Z. Lu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7391–7396 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Liao, Z. Xu, H. Li, L. Zheng and H. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604382 CrossRef .
W. Yi, D. Xiaoran, X. Zhongxi, C. Xuechao, L. Sisi, M. Ping'an, H. Zhiyao, C. Ziyong and L. Jun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703535 CrossRef .
X. Yang, T. Xu, Y. Zhu, J. Cai, K. Gu, J. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Shen and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7971–7975 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. Huang, J. Cai, J. Zhu, X. Yang, J. Shen, H. Jiang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4253–4258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liao, S. Guo, S. Cao, L. Wang, F. Gao, Z. Yang, J. Zheng and W. Yang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 1800346 CrossRef .
J. C. Yu, A. Y. Lee, D. B. Kim, E. D. Jung, D. W. Kim and M. H. Song, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700003 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, M. Wang, Z. Yang, J. Li and H. Qiu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 748, 537–545 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ma, X.-Y. Du, Y.-W. Zhang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9398–9404 RSC .
M. Meyns, M. Perálvarez, A. Heuer-Jungemann, W. Hertog, M. Ibáñez, R. Nafria, A. Genç, J. Arbiol, M. V. Kovalenko and J. Carreras, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19579–19586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Raja, Y. Bekenstein, M. A. Koc, S. Fischer, D. Zhang, L. Lin, R. O. Ritchie, P. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 35523–35533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xin, H. Zhao and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4971–4980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hou, Y. Guo, Y. Tang and Q. Quan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18417–18422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Loiudice, S. Saris, E. Oveisi, D. T. L. Alexander and R. Buonsanti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10696–10701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, L. Kong, S. Huang and L. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8134–8138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, Y. Cheng, L. Shen, C. Shen, H. Zhang, W. Xiang and X. Liang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 400–406 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Wang, S. Y. Lin, A. C. Tang, B. P. Singh, H. C. Tong, C. Y. Chen, Y. C. Lee, T. L. Tsai and R. S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7924–7929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Malgras, J. Henzie, T. Takei and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8881–8885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, Y. Zhang, C. Ruan, C. Yin, X. Wang, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10088–10094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Yoon, S. Lee, J. K. Song, H. Yang and Y. R. Do, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11756–11767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Wang, H. Sun and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701185 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hu, L. Wu, Y. Tan, Q. Zhong, M. Chen, Y. Qiu, D. Yang, B. Sun, Q. Zhang and Y. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 406–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhong, M. Cao, H. Hu, D. Yang, M. Chen, P. Li, L. Wu and Q. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8579–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, W. Huang, P. Li, D. R. Onken, C. Dun, Y. Guo, K. B. Ucer, C. Lu, H. Wang and S. M. Geyer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703703 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, F. Zhang, Y. Ge, L. Shi, S. Huang, J. Tang, Z. Lv, L. Zhang, B. Zou and H. Zhong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706567 CrossRef .
T. Xuan, S. Lou, J. Huang, L. Cao, X. Yang, H. Li and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9840–9844 RSC .
C. Jia, H. Li, X. Meng and H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6300–6303 RSC .
S. Wang, C. Bi, J. Yuan, L. Zhang and J. Tian, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 245–251 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, K. Yu, F. Yang, J. Zheng, Y. Zuo, C. Li, B. Cheng and Q. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 1766–1769 RSC .
L. Zhou, K. Yu, F. Yang, H. Cong, N. Wang, J. Zheng, Y. Zuo, C. Li, B. Cheng and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6224–6233 RSC .
Z. J. Li, E. Hofman, J. Li, A. H. Davis, C. H. Tung, L. Z. Wu and W. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704288 CrossRef .
H. Wu, Z. Kang, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, H. Si, Q. Liao, S. Zhang, J. Wu, X. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1802015 CrossRef .
X. Song, X. Liu, D. Yu, C. Huo, J. Ji, X. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Zou, G. Zhu and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2801–2809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Hao, W. Hu, Z. Zang, X. Tang, L. Fang, T. Niu and M. Zhou, Small, 2017, 13, 1604085 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Tang, Z. Zu, Z. Zang, Z. Hu, W. Hu, Z. Yao, W. Chen, S. Li, S. Han and M. Zhou, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 245, 435–440 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Yu, J. Chen, Y. Wang, F. Cao, Y. Wei, Y. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Zhu and Z. Sun, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2015–2023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pan, M. J. Jurow, F. Qiu, J. Yang, B. Ren, J. J. Urban, L. He and Y. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6759–6765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, B. Chen, Z. Wang, T. F. Hung, A. S. Susha, H. Zhong and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 5699–5703 RSC .
H. Huang, H. Lin, S. V. Kershaw, A. S. Susha, W. C. Choy and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4398–4404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Roman, J. Otto, C. Galik, R. Downing and M. Sheldon, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5561–5566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, M. Yu, W. Yan, J. Song and J. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8187–8193 RSC .
J. Y. Sun, F. T. Rabouw, X. F. Yang, X. Y. Huang, X. P. Jing, S. Ye and Q. Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704371 CrossRef .
X. Shen, C. Sun, X. Bai, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Song and W. W. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16768–16775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Di, Z. Hu, J. Jiang, M. He, L. Zhou, W. Xiang and X. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11068–11071 RSC .
Y. Shi, P. Duan, S. Huo, Y. Li and M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705011 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Guhrenz, A. Benad, C. Ziegler, D. Haubold, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 9033–9040 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Veldhuis, Y. F. Ng, R. Ahmad, A. Bruno, N. F. Jamaludin, B. Damodaran, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 526–531 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gomez, C. de Weerd, J. L. Hueso and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 631–636 RSC .
Y. Wei, H. Xiao, Z. Xie, S. Liang, S. Liang, X. Cai, S. Huang, A. A. Al Kheraif, H. S. Jang and Z. Cheng, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701343 CrossRef .
D. Chen, S. Yuan, X. Chen, J. Li, Q. Mao, X. Li and J. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6832–6839 RSC .
S. Yuan, D. Chen, X. Li, J. Zhong and X. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18918–18926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hai, H. Li, Y. Zhao, F. Chen, Y. Peng and B. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5400–5403 RSC .
S. Muduli, P. Pandey, G. Devatha, R. Babar, D. C. Kothari, M. Kabir, P. P. Pillai and S. Ogale, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7682–7686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xuan, X. Yang, S. Lou, J. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Yu, H. Li, K.-L. Wong, C. Wang and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15286–15290 RSC .
S. Lou, T. Xuan, C. Yu, M. Cao, C. Xia, J. Wang and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7431–7435 RSC .
J. Kang and L. W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 489–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, Q. Wang and W. A. Saidi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1715–1722 CrossRef CAS .
A. Swarnkar, R. Chulliyil, V. K. Ravi, M. Irfanullah, A. Chowdhury and A. Nag, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 15644–15648 CrossRef .
S. Wei, Y. Yang, X. Kang, L. Wang, L. Huang and D. Pan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7265–7268 RSC .
L. Qu and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2049–2055 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bruchez Jr, M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1998, 281, 2013–2016 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kulbak, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharma, N. Weiden and A. Weiss, Z. Phys. Chem., 1992, 175, 63–80 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Q. Jiang, Q. Ye, Z. Chu, X. Li, X. Yang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2225 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, J. A. Christians, S. P. Harvey, P. N. Ciesielski, L. M. Wheeler, P. Schulz, L. Y. Lin, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao4204 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Choi, J. Jeong, H.-B. Kim, S. Kim, B. Walker, G.-H. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Nano Energy, 2014, 7, 80–85 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paternò, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695 RSC .
H. Bian, D. Bai, Z. Jin, K. Wang, L. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1500–1510 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Beal, D. J. Slotcavage, T. Leijtens, A. R. Bowring, R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 746–751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. Jin, D. Chen, D. Bai, H. Bian, J. Sun, G. Zhu, G. Wang and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1800007 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, X. Ling, D. Yang, F. Li, S. Zhou, J. Shi, Y. Qian, J. Hu, Y. Sun, Y. Yang, X. Guo, S. Duhm, Q. Zhang and W. Ma, Joule, 2018, 2, 2450–2463 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Lv, Z. Guo, L. Dong, J. Zheng, C. Chai, N. Chen, Y. Lu and C. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15888–15894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Yang, Q. Jiang, P. Wang, Z. Yin, X. Zhang, H. Tan, Y. M. Yang, M. Wei, B. R. Sutherland, E. H. Sargent and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Gao, X.-J. Ma, Y. Zhang, F.-X. Yu, Z.-Y. Xiong, Z.-Q. Wang, R. Wang, Y.-L. Jia, D.-Y. Zhou and Z.-H. Xiong, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 15698–15702 RSC .
X. Zhang, C. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, C. Ji, Y. Chuai, P. Wang, S. Wen, C. Zhang and W. W. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4602–4610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Qin, M. Jiang, L. Lin, T. Fu, X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Niu, H. Cao, Y. Jin, F. Zhao and X. Peng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2133–2138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, J. Li, L. Xu, J. Li, F. Zhang, B. Han, Q. Shan and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1800764 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. P. G. de Arquer, X. Gong, J. Lu, L. Xie, W. Zhao, D. Zhang and C. Yan, Nature, 2018, 562, 245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Cheng, C. H. Hsieh, Y. J. He, C. S. Hsu and Y. F. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17381–17383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zou, H.-L. Yip, Y. Zhang, Y. Gao, S.-C. Chien, K. O'Malley, C.-C. Chueh, H. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2804–2811 CrossRef CAS .
D. Belaineh, J.-K. Tan, R.-Q. Png, P.-F. Dee, Y.-M. Lee, B.-N. N. Thi, N.-S. Ridzuan and P. K. H. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5504–5511 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Lin, H. Huang, C. Reckmeier, Y. Zhang, W. C. H. Choy and A. L. Rogach, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1415–1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Guo, X. Shen, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1804691 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. Lu, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, X. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, V. L. Colvin and W. W. Yu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 1352–1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. Lin, Y. Hu, X. Guo, Y. Lv, Z. Tang, J. Zhao, Y. Fan, N. Zhang and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38755–38760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Niu, H. Cao, X. Liang, L. Chen, J. Wang and X. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, F. W. R. Rivarola, N. J. Davis, S. Bai, T. C. Jellicoe, F. de la Peña, S. Hou, C. Ducati, F. Gao and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3528–3534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, H. Wu, X. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Hu, V. L. Colvin, Y. Zhang and W. W. Yu, ChemNanoMat, 2018 DOI:10.1002/cnma.201800359 .
T. Chiba, Y. Hayashi, H. Ebe, K. Hoshi, J. Sato, S. Sato, Y.-J. Pu, S. Ohisa and J. Kido, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 681–687 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ramasamy, D. H. Lim, B. Kim, S. H. Lee, M. S. Lee and J. S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2067–2070 RSC .
H. J. Haugan, S. Elhamri, F. Szmulowicz, B. Ullrich, G. J. Brown and W. C. Mitchel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 071102 CrossRef .
C. Bao, J. Yang, S. Bai, W. Xu, Z. Yan, Q. Xu, J. Liu, W. Zhang and F. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1803422 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Chen, J. Wu, X. Ou, B. Huang, J. Almutlaq, A. A. Zhumekenov, X. Guan, S. Han, L. Liang, Z. Yi, J. Li, X. Xie, Y. Wang, Y. Li, D. Fan, D. B. L. Teh, A. H. All, O. F. Mohammed, O. M. Bakr, T. Wu, M. Bettinelli, H. Yang, W. Huang and X. Liu, Nature, 2018, 561, 88–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 687–694 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. De Roo, M. Ibanez, P. Geiregat, G. Nedelcu, W. Walravens, J. Maes, J. C. Martins, I. Van Driessche, M. V. Kovalenko and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2071–2081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, J. A. Peters, Z. Liu, M. Sebastian, J. Im, T. C. Chasapis, A. C. Wibowo, D. Y. Chung, A. J. Freeman, B. W. Wessels and M. G. Kanatzidis, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 2722–2727 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Yu, F. Cao, Y. Gu, Y. Wei, Y. Wu, J. Song and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5903–5912 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, Y. Dong, X. Li and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4861–4869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, L. Protesescu, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, G. Nedelcu, M. Humer, G. De Luca, M. Fiebig, W. Heiss and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, S. Xu, Z. Qi, C. Wang, C. Lu and Y. Cui, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10383–10388 RSC .
Z. Liu, J. Yang, J. Du, Z. Hu, T. Shi, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Tang, Y. Leng and R. Li, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5923–5931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, M. Shoaib, X. Wang, X. Zhang, M. He, Z. Luo, W. Zheng, H. Li, T. Yang, X. Zhu, L. Ma and A. Pan, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6170–6178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Du, S. Zhang, J. Shi, J. Chen, Z. Wu, Y. Mi, Z. Liu, Y. Li, X. Sui, R. Wang, X. Qiu, T. Wu, Y. Xiao, Q. Zhang and X. Liu, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 2051–2059 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Z. Zang, C. Han, Z. Hu, X. Tang, J. Du, Y. Leng and K. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, R. Su, X. Liu, J. Xing, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6238–6245 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Maiman, Nature, 1960, 187, 493–494 CrossRef .
S. Kondo, K. Takahashi, T. Nakanish, T. Saito, H. Asada and H. Nakagawa, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2007, 7, 1–5 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Li, J. Song, L. Xiao, H. Zeng and H. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7101–7108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Janáky, D. Hursán, B. Endrődi, W. Chanmanee, D. Roy, D. Liu, N. R. de Tacconi, B. H. Dennis and K. Rajeshwar, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 332–338 CrossRef .
A. Razzaq, A. Sinhamahapatra, T.-H. Kang, C. A. Grimes, J.-S. Yu and S.-I. In, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 215, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Kuehnel, C. D. Sahm, G. Neri, J. R. Lee, K. L. Orchard, A. J. Cowan and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 2501–2509 RSC .
M. F. Kuehnel, K. L. Orchard, K. E. Dalle and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7217–7223 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, J. Yu, D. Guo, C. Cui and W. Ho, Small, 2015, 11, 5262–5271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, J. Qin, M. Jiang, Z. Ding and Y. Hou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 572–579 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, S. Wang, P. Yang, C. Huang and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4928–4936 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, S. Cao, Y. Wu, Z. Gao, F. Liang, Y. Sun, Z. Lin and L. Sun, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 9481–9485 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. F. Xu, B. X. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Small, 2018, 14, e1703762 CrossRef .
C. C. Stoumpos, L. Frazer, D. J. Clark, Y. S. Kim, S. H. Rhim, A. J. Freeman, J. B. Ketterson, J. I. Jang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6804–6819 CrossRef CAS .
T. Krishnamoorthy, H. Ding, C. Yan, W. L. Leong, T. Baikie, Z. Zhang, M. Sherburne, S. Li, M. Asta, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23829–23832 RSC .
T. C. Jellicoe, J. M. Richter, H. F. Glass, M. Tabachnyk, R. Brady, S. E. Dutton, A. Rao, R. H. Friend, D. Credgington, N. C. Greenham and M. L. Bohm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2941–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Chung, J. H. Song, J. Im, J. Androulakis, C. D. Malliakas, H. Li, A. J. Freeman, J. T. Kenney and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8579–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bai, Y. Hu, Y. Hu, T. Qiu, X. Miao and S. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 184, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saparov, F. Hong, J.-P. Sun, H.-S. Duan, W. Meng, S. Cameron, I. G. Hill, Y. Yan and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5622–5632 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Yang, H. Deng, U. Farooq, X. Yang, J. Khan, J. Tang and H. Song, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9294–9302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Zhao, J. H. Yang, Y. Fu, D. Yang, Q. Xu, L. Yu, S. H. Wei and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2630–2638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† D. Y. and M. C. contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Di Yang
	Di Yang received her Bachelor's degree (2015) from the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science of Soochow University. She is now a PhD candidate of Materials Science and Engineering in the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. Her current research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of all-inorganic metal halide perovskite nanocrystals.

Muhan Cao
	Muhan Cao obtained her PhD degree in Environmental Science and Technology from Hohai University in 2015. Now she is a postdoctoral fellow in the College of Nano Science and Technology at Soochow University, working with Professor Qiao Zhang. Her current research interests focus on the design of metal and semiconductor nanocrystals and their catalytic applications.

Qixuan Zhong
	Qixuan Zhong received his BS degree (2016) from the Changshu Institute of Technology. He is now a graduate student in the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. His current research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of all-inorganic metal halide perovskite/oxide composite materials.

Pengli Li
	Pengli Li received her Bachelor's degree from Soochow University in 2017, and now she is a master's degree student in the Institute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM) in Soochow University. Her major is Materials Science and Engineering, and her research interests focus on the synthesis and modification of perovskite nanocrystals.

Xiaohong Zhang
	Xiaohong Zhang received his PhD degree from Beijing University of Technology in 1996. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Institute of Photographic Chemistry of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) during 1996–1998, and as a senior visiting scholar at City University of Hong Kong during 1998–2000. He became a full professor at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry of CAS in 2000, and worked in the Cavendish Laboratory of Cambridge University as a senior visiting scholar during 2003–2004. In 2014, he joined Soochow University as a full professor. His main research areas include organic optoelectronic materials and semiconductor nano-materials and devices.

Qiao Zhang
	Qiao Zhang is a professor in the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials, Soochow University, China. He received his PhD from the Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside. After being a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemistry, University of California Berkeley & Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (2012–2014), he joined the Institute of Functional and Soft Materials in 2014. His main research areas are molecular level studies of surface and heterogeneous catalysis, and controllable synthesis of all-inorganic perovskites with tunable optical properties and their application.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the hot injection method. The insets show the TEM image of CsPbBr3 NCs, and photographs and fluorescence spectra of samples with different halide compositions. (b) Schematic illustration showing the room temperature reprecipitation method. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 19. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Ref. 28. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of anion-exchange. (b) Bright emission covering the entire visible spectral region can be realized through the anion-exchange approach. (c) Photograph showing bright yellow emission of Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 NCs and an atomic model showing the placement of Mn2+ in the substitution position of Pb2+ in the CsPbCl3 crystal lattice. (d) Schematic of partial replacement of Pb2+ with divalent cations. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 23. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Ref. 57. Copyright 2017 Wiley. (d) Ref. 56. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram showing the evolution process from Cs4PbBr6 to CsPbBr3 upon addition of extra PbBr2. (b) XRD patterns (top) before and (bottom) after PbBr2 treatment. (c) TEM images of Cs4PbBr6 NCs with different sizes (top) before and (bottom) after PbBr2 treatment. The images were modified with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration and (b) photographs showing the interfacial transformation from Cs-rich Cs4PbX6 to CsPbX3. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra monitoring the transformation process. (d) TEM images showing Cs4PbBr6 nanospheres (left) and CsPbBr3 nanocubes (right). (e–g) Photographs showing the products obtained by using different solvents: (e) cyclohexane, (f) toluene and (g) chloroform. The images were modified with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the structure and typical transmission high-resolution electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of cubic CsPbBr3 NCs. (b) Sizes of CsPbBr3 NCs obtained by varying the concentrations of OAm and OA at different reaction temperatures. (c) TEM images and optical properties of CsPbBr3 NCs with different sizes. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 19. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Ref. 50. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Ref. 75. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM and HRTEM images and (b) UV-vis absorption (black line) and PL emission (blue line) spectra of CsPbBr3 nanospheres. (c) Schematic illustration of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) NCs with different morphologies by varying the organic acid and amine ligands at room temperature. (d) TEM and HRTEM images (inset) of CsPbBr3 nanospheres. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 76. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c and d) Ref. 77. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of CsPbBr3 nanowires. (b) Evolution of the optical absorption (solid lines) and PL (dashed lines) spectra of CsPbBr3 nanowires with different halide compositions. (c) Effect of increasing the ratio of short chain carboxylic acids to amine ligands on controlling the width of CsPbBr3 nanowires. (d) Schematic showing the effect of hydrohalic acids on the length of CsPbX3 nanowires. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 82. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Ref. 84. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Ref. 87. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) Ref. 89. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM images of CsPbBr3 nanoplates obtained at different temperatures. (b) Optical properties of CsPbBr3 nanoplates with different thicknesses obtained at different reaction temperatures. (c) TEM image of nanosheets with different lateral sizes by tuning the ratio of shorter ligands to longer ligands. (d) TEM image and (inset in d) schematic illustration of self-assembled CsPbClxBr3−x nanoplates. (e) Schematic of the formation of CsPbX3 nanosheets by the oriented attachment of CsPbX3 nanorods. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 95. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Ref. 96. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) Ref. 99. Copyright 2018 Wiley. (d) Ref. 100. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (e) Ref. 101. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of CsPbBr3 nanoflowers. The inset shows the HRTEM image of a single CsPbBr3 nanoflower. (b) SEM images and the corresponding 3D structure models of CsPbBr3 nanoflowers viewed from different angles (scale bar: 20 nm). (c) Schematic illustration of the formation of CsPbBr3 nanoflowers. The images were modified with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) HRTEM image and UV-vis absorption and PL spectra of TOP-capped CsPbI3 NCs. The inset shows the solution under daylight and UV light irradiation (365 nm). (b) PLQYs of OA/OAm- and TOP-capped CsPbI3versus particle size and storage time, respectively. (c) TEM and HRTEM images, and UV-vis absorption and PL spectra of zwitterionic ligand-capped CsPbBr3 NCs. (d and e) Schematic illustrations and top and side views of conventional ligand (OA/OAm) and zwitterionic (C3-sulfobetaine) ligand capping. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 14. Copyright 2018 Royal Chemical Society. (c–e) Ref. 122. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photographs of colloidal CsPbBr3 nanoplates and illustrations of nanoplates with different thicknesses. (b) PL spectra of the initial samples (dashed lines) and samples treated with PbBr2 (solid lines). (c) Enhancement factor as a function of layer number. (d) Illustration of the defects fixed with PbBr2 on the surfaces of nanoplates. (e) Demonstration of a [PbBr6]4− octahedron without and with the addition of HBr. (f) Diagram of the carrier recombination process in the presence of trap sites. The images were modified with permission from (a–d) ref. 128. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e and f) Ref. 129. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Morphological evolution of CsPbBr3 NCs during the stepwise purification, showing an increasing yield with the assistance of ethyl acetate. (b) Schematic of the Br-rich surface after etching I through the purification of acetone. (c) Normalized PL spectra of CsPbBrxI3−x NCs obtained from different purification procedures and (d) photographs of different samples stored under ambient conditions. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 138. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b–d) Ref. 142. Copyright 2017 Royal Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the swelling–shrinking strategy for the synthesis of CsPbX3 NCs/PS beads. (b) PL spectra of CsPbX3 NCs/PS beads with different degrees of crosslinking and diameters in the presence of water and PL spectra of composites with different halide ratios. The inset shows fluorescence images of the mixture. (c) Schematic of the formation of NCs/SiOx composites, the corresponding (d) TEM image and (e) the photographs of the red composite powder film under UV light showing its stability. (f) Diagram of the synthetic approach and fabrication of CsPbBr3/SiO2 spheres and the corresponding (g) TEM and HRTEM images. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 144. Copyright 2017 Wiley. (c–e) Ref. 160. Copyright 2016 Wiley. (f and g) Ref. 162. Copyright 2017 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the formation process with the transformation from Cs4PbBr6 to CsPbBr3 NCs and the formation of SiO2 on one end of NCs. (b) TEM, (c) HRTEM and (d) HAADF-STEM images and the corresponding elemental mapping images of Janus CsPbBr3/SiO2 NCs. (e) Photographs showing the stability against water of (I) Janus CsPbBr3/SiO2 and CsPbBr3 obtained from (II) water-triggered and (III) hot-injection methods. (f) Schematic illustration of a Janus CsPbBr3/SiO2 based WLED, PL spectra of the WLED operated at 5 mA, a CIE color diagram and time-dependent PL spectra of WLEDs based on CsPbBr3/SiO2 NCs and water-triggered and hot-injection CsPbBr3 NCs. The images were modified with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The formation mechanism of CsPbBr3/SiO2 core/shell NCs. (b) TEM image and (c) photographs showing the resistance against water under ultrasonication conditions – top: naked CsPbBr3 NCs, bottom: CsPbBr3/SiO2 core/shell NCs. The images were modified with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of heterostructure CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 NCs. (b) Photographs and (c) PLQYs of films fabricated from CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 NCs with different Cs:Pb ratios. (d) EQEs of different samples and radiative energy transition with CsPbBr3 imbedded Cs4PbBr6 in a conjectured heterostructure. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process. The images were modified with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2017 Wiley.	 

CsPbBrI2	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CsPbI3/[60]PCBM/BCP/Al	10.9	1.12	—	6.69	2016	
210

CsPbI3	FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/spiro-OMe TAD/MoMx/Al	13.47	1.23	65	10.77	2016	
26

CsPbI3	FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/spiro-OMe TAD/MoMx/Al	15.246	1.1626	76.63	13.43	2017	
206

CsPbI3	FTO/TiO2/graphene–CsPbI3/PTAA/Au	13.59	1.18	72.6	11.4	2018	
211

CsPbI3	FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3/HTM/MoO3/Ag	12.39	1.27	80	12.55	2018	
212

CsPbI2+xBr1−x/CsPbI3	FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br/CsPbI3/PTAA/Au	15.25	1.204	78.7	14.45	2018	
209


 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic and cross-sectional SEM image of the CsPbI3 solar cell with a PCE of up to 10.77%. (b) The current density–voltage curves of a device measured in air over the course of 15 days. (c) Schematic of the film deposition process and cation halide salt post-treatment. (d) J–V characteristics of high-voltage photovoltaic cells with high PCEs up to 13.43%. (e) Schematic comparing the CsPbI3 NCs with and without SCN− capping after removing the ligand chain. (f) J–V curves and related data for the CsPbI2Br-based solar cells. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 26. Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c and d) Ref. 206. Copyright 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e and f) Ref. 209. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

CsPbBr3	Hot-injection (170 °C)	Nanocubes (8 nm)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al	516 nm (23 nm)	0.12	0.43	946	4.2	2015	
24

CsPbBr3	Hot-injection (170 °C)	Nanocubes (19 nm)	ITO/ZnO/CsPbBr3/TFB/MoO3/Ag	523 nm (19 nm)	0.19	—	2335	4.5	2016	
228

CsPbBr3	Hot-injection (130 °C)	Nanocubes (10 nm)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al	527 nm (24 nm)	2.21	8.89	3853	3.4	2016	
67

CsPbBr3	Hot-injection (180 °C)	Nanocubes (10 nm)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al	515 nm (19 nm)	3.0	—	330	3.0	2016	
108

CsPbBr3	Hot-injection (170 °C)	Nanocubes (8 nm)	ITO/ZnO/CsPbBr3/ZnO/Al	512 nm (20 nm)	6.27	13.3	15185	3.4	2017	
139

CsPbBr3	Hot-injection (170 °C)	Nanospheres (10.8 nm)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al	516 nm (19 nm)	6.5	18.13	7085	2.8	2018	
124

CsPbBr3	Hot-injection (180 °C)	Nanocubes (9 nm)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/CsPbBr3/TPBI/lithium 8-quinolate/Al	513 nm (17 nm)	8.73	18.8	1490	2.6	2018	
140

CsPbI3	Hot-injection (160 °C)	Nanocubes (10–12 nm)	ITO/ZnO/PEI/CsPbI3/TCTA/MoO3/Ag	—	11.2	—	1106	—	2018	
135

CsPbBr3	Room temperature precipitation	Nanocubes (10 nm)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTAA/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al	515 nm (18 nm)	11.6	54.4	55800	2.6	2018	
218

CsPbBr3	Room temperature precipitation	Nanocubes (8 nm)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTAA/CsPbBr3/TPBI/LiF/Al	518 nm (18 nm)	16.48	66.7	76940	5.6	2018	
106

CsPbI3	Hot-injection (170 °C)	Nanocubes (13 nm)	Ag–photopolymer/ZnO/PEI/CsPbI3/TCTA/MoO3/Ag/MoO3	692 nm (37 nm)	8.2	0.8	827	2.0	2018	
229

CsPbI3	Hot-injection (160 °C)	Nanocrystals	ITO/ZnO/PEI/CsPbI3-0.1/CsPbI3/TCTA/MoO3/Ag	683 nm (34 nm)	11.8	0.81	1050	2.8	2018	
225

CsPbI3	Hot-injection (170 °C)	Nanocubes (12 nm)	ITO/ZnO/PEI/CsPbI3-0.1/CsPbI3/TCTA/MoO3/Ag	691 nm (35 nm)	13.5	—	1152	2.0	2018	
224

CsPbBr0.6I2.4	Hot-injection then anion exchange	Nanocubes (11 nm)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/CsPb(BrI)3/TPBI/LiF/Al	649 nm (31 nm)	21.3	10.6	500	2.8	2018	
230


 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration and (b) cross-sectional TEM image of an LED device. (c) Photographs and EL spectra (straight line) of LED devices with different halide compositions, and the PL spectra (dashed line) of NCs dispersed in hexane. (d) Schematic illustration of the surface ligand density control on CsPbBr3 surfaces and the corresponding changes of ink stability, PLQY, and carrier injection during the purification process. (e) The schematic and stability of OPA- and OA/OAm-capped CsPbX3 NCs. (f) J–V–L curve of devices based on different ligands, red: OPA, blue: OA/OAm. (g) EQE versus current density characteristics of an LED device based on CsPbBr3 NCs purified by butyl acetate. (h) EQE of the devices by using CsPbBr3 doped with FA+ as the active layer. The images were modified with permission from (a–c) ref. 24. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (d) Ref. 139. Copyright 2017 Wiley. (e and f) Ref. 124. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (g) Ref. 140. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (h) Ref. 218. Copyright 2018 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic and (b) rise and decay times of the CsPbI3 NC based photodetector device. (c) Schematic diagram of the CsPbBr3 nanosheet based photodetector. (d) Current spectra of the CsPbIBr2 based photodetector in the dark and under weak light. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 231. Copyright 2016 Royal Chemical Society. (c) Ref. 240. Copyright 2016 Wiley. (d) Ref. 233. Copyright 2018 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Pump intensity-dependent PL spectra from thin films fabricated from CsPbBr3 NCs. The inset shows the stripe pumping configuration. (b) Evolution from PL to WGM lasing with increasing pump intensity in a microsphere resonator covered with a film of CsPbBr3 NCs. (c) Lasing spectra and images of individual CsPbX3 perovskite nanoplates with different halide ions. (d) Single-mode lasing from an individual CsPbBr3 nanocuboid. The images were modified with permission from (a) ref. 250. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (b) Ref. 241. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (c) Ref. 247. 2016 Wiley. (d) Ref. 243. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Band diagram of CO2 reduction into fuels on CsPbBr3 NCs. (b) CO2 reduction into fuels on tunable CsPbBr3 NCs with different particle sizes. (c) Schematic diagram of charge transfer in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 graphene oxide/CsPbBr3 NCs. (d) I–t curves plotted at −0.4 VAg/AgCl of graphene oxide/CsPbBr3 NCs. The images were modified with permission from (a and b) ref. 258. Copyright 2017 Wiley. (c and d) Ref. 78. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† D. Y. and M. C. contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
