Effective stability enhancement in ZnO-based perovskite solar cells by MACl modification   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA02697F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA02697F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12161-12168Effective stability enhancement in ZnO-based perovskite solar cells by MACl modification†

        
          
            Chunyu 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dezhong 
            Zhang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhuowei 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guanhua 
            Ren
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenbin 
            Han
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Wenbin 
            Guo
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: guowb@jlu.edu
bCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun 130012, P. R. China
cState Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, P. R. China
Received 
      1st April 2021
    , Accepted 27th April 2021First published on 28th April 2021AbstractLow-temperature solution-processed ZnO has decided advantages in flexible and tandem solar cells, while its application encountered difficulties in perovskite optoelectronic devices due to chemical instability at the ZnO–perovskite interface. It has been proven to be a result of protonation reaction between ZnO and organic cations in perovskite materials, thus accelerating the perovskite decomposition. Herein, considering this degradation mechanism, the enhanced interface stability is demonstrated by eliminating the deprotonization ability of ZnO with the modification of methylammonium chloride (MACl), even contacting it with high acidic MA-based perovskite (MAPbI3). After thermal stressing, the film appearance, light absorbance and crystal structure of MAPbI3 on the modified ZnO layer can maintain their initial states, and the long-term stability of MAPbI3-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is greatly strengthened. Meanwhile, for CsPbI2Br-based PSCs without organic cations, an improved efficiency not only reveals the foreseeable defect passivation effect of residual Cl but also certifies the great potential of the MACl modified ZnO layer in inorganic PSCs. This study overcomes the shortcomings of ZnO in PSCs comprising organic cations-based perovskite photoactive layer and provides an excellent candidate for a variety of other optoelectronic fields based on perovskite materials.
1. Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with the rapidly increased power conversion efficiency (PCE) have attracted much attention, which primarily relies on the excellent features of perovskite materials, such as strong light absorption, high charge mobility, long carrier diffusion lengths and adjustable energy levels.1–4 Furthermore, it is also inseparable from the appropriate transport layers that enable photogenerated charge carriers extracted from the perovskite layer. ZnO with a series of more compatible properties of greater transmittance, higher mobility and more matched energy levels indicates promising applications in many fields.5–7 Meanwhile, the ZnO layer can be prepared at low temperatures, which also makes it have great advantages in tandem and flexible devices.6,8 However, it is always excluded from the alternative electron transport material in n-i-p structured PSCs, and gradually replaced with TiO2, SnO2, etc. It was found that ZnO can trigger the decomposition of the perovskite layer from the contact interface, especially under thermal stress, leading to poor thermal stability and long-term stability of PSCs.9–11 Along with stability deterioration, PSCs with ZnO electron transport layer (ETL) inevitably encounter a great challenge in achieving high efficiency. Thus, overcoming the interface instability between ZnO and perovskite layer will improve the thermal stability and device efficiency simultaneously, which are important factors for future commercialization.12
Some reports indicated that doping into ZnO or using interlayers can overcome the instability of the ZnO–perovskite interface.8,13,14 It's remarkable that doping or discontinuous interlayers cannot completely avoid direct contact between them, but the continuous interlayer will have a potential effect on the charge transport in the whole device. It has been proved that the amphoteric ZnO can abstract H+ from acid, indicating that ZnO will deprotonate the organic cations in perovskites, such as methylammonium (MA) and formamidinium (FA), which is the root cause of the interface instability and perovskite decomposition.9,15 The protonation degree is closely related to the acidity of the organic cations. Snaith et al. proposed that interface stability of ZnO-based PSCs can be enhanced by partially or completely replacing higher acidic MA cation with FA and Cs.15 Indeed, this method can significantly enhance the interface stability, while the slow reaction between ZnO and FA cation during annealing treatment and operation will be still a potential factor to cause the device failure that can't be ignored, and only all inorganic Cs-based perovskite can survive from degradation. Thus, simply decreasing or not using MA cation cannot completely avoid the decomposition of organic cation-based perovskites that is driven by ZnO. It has shown that the FA/MA/Cs-based perovskite is still more commonly used to fabricate highly efficient and stable PSCs.16–19 Therefore, it is necessary to enhance the stability of the ZnO–perovskite interface essentially.
Since the intrinsic degradation mechanism between ZnO and the perovskite layer has been revealed, it seems more feasible to strengthen the interface stability by eliminating the deprotonation ability of ZnO. Based on this consideration, methylammonium chloride (MACl) was used here to improve the surface properties of ZnO. It has been proved that ZnO prefers to react with MACl than methylammonium iodide (MAI) due to the different electronegativities of chlorine and iodine.20 At this moment, the MA cation will pre-react with ZnO in advance after annealing treatment, avoiding the further deprotonation of organic cations in perovskite. Cl is expected to leave and perform an effective defect passivation effect. We systematically characterized and analyzed the film appearance, light absorbance and crystal structure of MAPbI3, demonstrating a significantly enhanced stability. In the meantime, a series of control experiments were performed to reveal basic reasons for thermal stability and help to differentiate the roles of pre-protonation reaction and residual Cl. Inorganic CsPbI2Br-based PSCs were fabricated to further prove the positive effect of residual Cl on improved device efficiency. Ultimately, with the modification of MACl, improved efficiency and strengthened long-term stability of PSCs based on ZnO ETL are achieved simultaneously. These results successfully break the application limit of ZnO in PSCs comprising organic cations-based perovskite.
2. Experimental details
2.1 Materials
PbI2 (>99.99%), MAI (>99.5%), methylammonium bromide (MABr) (>99.5%), MACl (>99.5%), CsCl (>99.9%), CsI (>99.9%), PbBr2 (>99.99%), 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) (>99.8%), 4-tertbutylpyridine (TBP) (>96%) and bis(trifluoromethane)–sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI) (>99%) were purchased from Xi'an p-OLED Co. (China). Bathocuproine (BCP) (>99%), and fullerene (C60) (>99.9%) were bought from Lumtec Corp. (Taiwan). KCl (>99%) obtained from Jkchemical (China). All materials were used as received.
2.2 Device fabrication

MAPbI3-Based PSCs fabrication. 
ITO-Coated glasses were cleaned in deionized water, acetone and isopropanol by sonication for 15 minutes, respectively. Then, the pre-cleaned ITO substrates were treated with a UV–ozone cleaner for 20 min before spin-coating ZnO layers. ZnO with a concentration of 6 mg mL−1 was synthesized according to our previous reports.21,22 It was spin-coated onto ITO substrates at 1000 rpm for 3 s, followed immediately by 2000 rpm for 40 s. Then, the fabricated ZnO layer was placed into the UV–ozone cleaner for an extra 5 min prior to depositing the aqueous solution of MACl. MACl solutions with different molar concentrates were deposited onto the ZnO layer. MAPbI3 precursor solution was prepared by mixing PbI2 (553.2 mg) and MAI (190.6 mg) in 1 mL of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). It was spread onto different layers and spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s to obtain a perovskite layer. Then, the Spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer was subsequently prepared by spin-coating the mixed solution at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The hole transport layer solution was prepared by mixing Spiro-OMeTAD (72.3 mg), TBP (28.5 μL) and a solution of 520 mg mL−1 LiTFSI in acetonitrile (17.6 μL) in anhydrous chlorobenzene (1 mL). Except for the spin-coating of MACl aqueous solution, and all the film fabrication steps were completed in the glove-box. Finally, the fabrication of MoO3 and the Ag electrode with thicknesses of 10 nm and 100 nm, respectively, was completed by a thermal evaporation method from solutions.


Different interface modification layer fabrication. 
MABr, MAI, KCl and CsCl were employed as interface modification materials, and modification layers are fabricated with the same parameters as the MACl layer.


Inorganic CsPbI2Br-based PSC fabrication. 
Inorganic PSCs were fabricated by depositing the CsPbI2Br layer instead of MAPbI3. The CsPbI2Br precursor solution was prepared by dissolving CsI (260 mg), PbI2 (230.5 mg) and PbBr2 (183.5 mg) in 1 mL DMF and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) hybrid solvent. Then, it was spin-coated onto ZnO and ZnO–MACl ETL at 3000 rpm for 45 s, and 150 μL antisolvent of chlorobenzene was quickly dropped at 30th s. Ultimately, the film was annealed at 180 °C for 10 min for further crystallization.


Electron-only device fabrication. 
The electron-only devices were fabricated by replacing Spiro-OMeTAD and MoO3 with C60 and BCP layers.

2.3 Film and device characterization
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectrometer (UPS) analyses of ZnO and ZnO–MACl was conducted on a Thermo Scientific ESCALANTM 250Xi system. The light transmission of ETL and absorption spectra of perovskite layers were studied using a UV 1700, Shimadzu. The surface morphology of ZnO and ZnO–MACl were collected by SPI3800N atomic force microscopy (AFM) instrument (Seiko Instrument Inc.). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of perovskite layers were recorded on a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu Kα (λ = 1.5418 Å) as the X-ray source. The cross-sectional and surface morphologies were characterized using a JEOL JSM-7500 field-emission scanning electron microscope (SEM). Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of PSCs were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5G solar illumination with an Oriel 300 W solar simulator intensity of ≈100 mW cm−2. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured with a Crowntech QTest Station 1000 AD. The impedance spectroscopy was measured using a Precision Impedance Analyzer 6500B Series of Wayne Kerr Electronics. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra were analyzed using a Shimadzu RF 5301 fluorescence spectrophotometer.
3. Results and discussion
The MACl solution was spin-coated onto the ZnO layer and annealed for a period of time to promote further reaction with ZnO, and the annealing treatment is very necessary for the protonation reaction between ZnO and MACl, which will be proved later. This method is named MACl–A modification (MACl represents MACl spin-coating, and -A represents annealing treatment) in the following descriptions, and the modified ZnO ETL is labeled as ZnO–MACl. A schematic diagram of the protonation reaction between ZnO and MACl is shown in Fig. 1(a). After the MACl–A modification, ZnO can easily extract H+ from MA cation and release the CH3NH2 gas, then its deprotonation ability at the surface will be eliminated. To elucidate the chemical composition difference on the ZnO surface before and after the MACl–A modification, XPS measurements are performed and presented in Fig. 1(b)–(e). Zn 2p spectra were first analyzed and are shown in Fig. 1(b). The energy difference between Zn 2P1/2 and Zn 2P3/2 indicates that they all have the normal chemical state Zn2+.21,23 A 0.3 eV shift toward higher binding energy of ZnO–MACl means that more Zn atoms are bound to a more stable chemical state.24 In Fig. 1(c), O 1s spectra can be deconvoluted into two peaks of higher binding energy related to the O–H group and lower binding energy peak associated with the O–Zn group.15,25 After the MACl–A modification, the higher binding energy peak is obviously enhanced, which is direct evidence of protonation reaction between ZnO and MACl.15 When the concentration of MACl is further increased, the high binding energy peak will be gradually improved, as shown in Fig. S1.† Although it is helpful to improve the interfacial stability, it will affect the surface properties of ZnO, as well as the efficiency of PSCs. As the characteristic elements in MACl, N and Cl were also probed. As shown in Fig. 1(d), there was no N 1s signal for ZnO–MACl, just like that on the ZnO layer, which implies that MACl was completely converted to CH3NH2 gas. As seen from C 1s spectra in Fig. S2,† there was no evidence for C–N after MACl–A modification, which also proves that the MACl was completely converted to CH3NH2 gas. While Cl still exists on the surface of ZnO–MACl, as shown in Fig. 1(e), the residual Cl can passivate the interfacial defect states.25,26 The test results of XPS are in line with the protonation reaction described in Fig. 1(a).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of protonation reaction between ZnO and MACl. XPS spectra depicting the (b) Zn 2p1/2 and Zn 2p3/2 peaks, (c) O 1s peaks, (d) N 1s peaks and (e) Cl 2p peaks of ZnO and ZnO–MACl layers. 
The work function of ETL plays an important role in electron extraction and transport, which largely determines the efficiency of devices.27 ZnO and ZnO–MACl have similar work functions of 4.23 ± 0.02 eV and 4.28 ± 0.03 eV calculated from the secondary electrons cut-off, respectively, and as measured by UPS as shown in Fig. 2(a). The steady-state PL of perovskite layers was measured, which is an effective method to characterize the charge transfer between the two adjacent layers.28,29 In Fig. S3,† on contact with ITO, MAPbI3 demonstrates a strong PL emission peak, implying that the fabricated perovskite film has high-quality to generate a sufficient photogenerated charge carrier. Meanwhile, compared with the perovskite layer on ZnO ETL, a similar PL emission quenching for MAPbI3 on ZnO and ZnO–MACl was observed, demonstrating that ZnO and ZnO–MACl have strong electron extraction capacities. At the same time, as the underlying ETL, ZnO and ZnO–MACl should possess good light transmittance, which was measured and shown in Fig. 2(b). It can be found that they all have high transmittance in the visible light region and allow sufficient photons to reach the perovskite photoactive layer. These results indicate that the MACl–A modification will not damage the electrical and optical properties of ZnO. AFM measurements with low magnification and high magnification were performed to observe the surface morphologies of ZnO and ZnO–MACl, as shown in the inset of Fig. 2(b) and S4,† respectively. The ZnO layer consists of homogeneous nanoparticles, and the MACl–A modification has no obvious influence on the surface morphology and roughness of the ZnO layer. They all have relatively smooth surfaces with RMS roughness of about 2 nm, which is suitable for the deposition of the perovskite layer. Based on these properties, ZnO–MACl has the potential to achieve high efficiency as an excellent composite ETL.
 Fig. 2  (a) UPS measurements and (b) transmittance spectra of ZnO and ZnO–MACl, and insets are the AFM images of ZnO and ZnO–MACl layers. 
It has been confirmed that ZnO can trigger the perovskite decomposition by reacting with organic cations, especially with MA cation.10,15 It means that all MA-based perovskites are mostly thermally unstable when using ZnO as underlying ETL. Here, MAPbI3 was selected as the photoactive material. The surface SEM images of MAPbI3 on ZnO and ZnO–MACl are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), respectively. The grain size of the perovskite layer on ZnO–MACl is slightly larger than that on ZnO, proving that the crystallinity of MAPbI3 on ZnO–MACl is better due to the inhibited contact degradation during annealing treatment. The thickness of perovskite layers on ZnO and ZnO–MACl is also investigated and obtained by measuring the thicknesses of ETL and ETL/perovskite, as shown in Fig. S5.† After MACl–A modification, the thicknesses of ETL and ETL/perovskite layers have hardly changed. Then, we observed the appearance changes of perovskite layers on ZnO and ZnO–MACl at 100 °C thermal stressing for different times, and the corresponding photographs are displayed in Fig. 3(c). In order to exclude the synergistic effects of some ambient factors (water and oxygen),30,31 the thermal stability measurements were all performed in a glove-box. It can be noted that the color of MAPbI3 on ZnO–MACl is darker than that of the perovskite layer on ZnO before exerting thermal stress. Because the thickness of perovskite layers on ZnO and ZnO–MACl is similar, the darker color of the MAPbI3 layer can be attributed to the higher crystallinity, which is consistent with the surface SEM images. During thermal aging, MAPbI3 on the ZnO layer is quickly decomposed within 30 min, which will make it lose its photovoltaic properties. The perovskite layer on ZnO–MACl demonstrates enhanced thermal stability and maintains an initial appearance of dark brown and mirror-like surface throughout. The enhancement of thermal stability by MACl–A modification is extremely significant. Actually, the control experiments of MABr and MAI modification were also performed. As shown in Fig. S6,† after MABr and MAI modifications with the same molar concentration as that used for MACl, the thermal stabilities of perovskite layers on ZnO–MABr and ZnO–MAI improved, though they don't work as well as the MACl–A modification. It can be proved that the protonation reaction may play an important role in improving the thermal stability of the ZnO–perovskite interface. Meanwhile, we prolong the reaction time, but only a slight enhancement in stability was observed as shown in Fig. S7,† which was still negligible compared with that obtained on MACl–A modification. The stability of the perovskite layer on ZnO–MABr is always stronger than that of perovskite with MAI modification. Thus, we think that the capacity of protonation reaction between ZnO and MA cations will be affected by the different anions, and the selection of anion is most important, which can be attributed to the different electronegativities of anions.20 In the meantime, to exclude the effect of single Cl on enhancing thermal stability, KCl and CsCl are also used as the interface modification materials without the pre-protonation reaction. The thermal stability of perovskite layers on ZnO–KCl and ZnO–CsCl is not enhanced at all, as shown in Fig. S8.† Even if the concentration change of modification materials was relatively large, there was no significant difference in stability. Comprehensively analyzing, it can intuitively prove that the enhanced thermal stability is due to the eliminated deprotonation ability of ZnO as a result of the pre-protonation reaction, and the MACl is more effective for the protonation reaction. In addition, to prove that the annealing treatment of MACl is important to the protonation reaction, the stability of the perovskite layer on ZnO/MACl (ZnO is covered by MACl but without annealing treatment) was similarly investigated, as presented in Fig. S9.† We can find that the stability of perovskite is poor, just the same as that of perovskite on the bare ZnO layer. Meanwhile, to exclude the impact of possibly formed CH3NH2 on the stability of the perovskite layer, ZnO/MACl was put into vacuum apparatus to drive off CH3NH2 for 30 min and 60 min. Their thermal stabilities were not improved, which can be attributed to the insufficient protonation reaction. It can also be proved that thermal annealing is a necessary factor to promote the protonation reaction. The effect of perovskite decomposition on light absorbance was examined and the results are shown in Fig. 3(d). Clearly, the light absorbance of MAPbI3 on the ZnO–MACl layer is higher than that of the perovskite film on ZnO, which is consistent with the dark color of the perovskite film shown in Fig. 3(c). With thermal stress, the perovskite layer on ZnO–MACl has almost the same light absorption as the initial sample, while that of MAPbI3 on ZnO demonstrates apparent attenuation due to the poor interface stability when heating for more than 30 min. In order to further verify the perovskite decomposition, the corresponding XRD of MAPbI3 layer on ZnO was analyzed and plotted as shown in Fig. 3(e). After 5 min, an obvious peak of PbI2 appeared, suggesting that the MAPbI3 starts to gradually decompose into PbI2.15,32 After 30 min, the PbI2 peak intensity increased rapidly, which is the basic reason for the reduced light absorbance. However, there was just a small PbI2 peak over this period for the MAPbI3 on ZnO–MACl in Fig. 3(f), indicating enhanced interface stability.
 Fig. 3  Surface SEM images of MAPbI3 on (a) ZnO and (b) ZnO–MACl. (c) Photographs and (d) light absorbance spectra of MAPbI3 on ZnO and ZnO–MACl with 100 °C thermal stressing for different times, corresponding XRD spectra of perovskite layers in contact with (e) ZnO and (f) ZnO–MACl. 
To further investigate the effect of MACl–A modification on the improved efficiency of PSCs, the devices were fabricated with the structure of ITO/ZnO–MACl/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag, and the structure diagram is shown in Fig. 4(a). The cross-sectional SEM images of PSCs are given in Fig. S10.† The J–V characteristics of devices with ZnO and optimized ZnO–MACl are measured by forward and reverse scans, as plotted in Fig. 4(b), and the optimal molar concentration of MACl is 0.2 mmol mL−1. The detailed photovoltaic parameters are shown in Table S1.† The device with a ZnO layer achieves a common PCE of 16.55%, with a short-current density (Jsc) of 20.76 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.083 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 73.6%. After the MACl–A modification, it provides an average efficiency of 18.74%, with improved Jsc of 21.96 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.107 V and FF of 77.1%. The enhanced efficiency mainly results from the contribution of the improved crystal quality of the perovskite layer and the defect passivation effect of residual Cl. Due to the existing interface instability issue and lack of effective interface defect passivation, the efficiencies of PSCs based on ZnO–MABr and ZnO–MAI are lower than that of PSCs with MACl–A modification, as shown in Fig. S11.† The device hysteresis was obviously suppressed, which can be attributed to the minimized interfacial defect states density. For devices fabricated with other molar concentrations of MACl, the J–V characteristics are plotted in Fig. S12,† and corresponding photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S2.† EQE spectra in Fig. 4(c) further reveal the Jsc enhancement, especially in the short wavelength region, testifying the defect passivation effect of Cl and minimize charge recombination.
 Fig. 4  (a) Structure diagram of fabricated MAPbI3-based PSCs. (b) J–V characteristics curves of devices with ZnO or ZnO–MACl measured by forward and reverse scans. (c) Corresponding EQE spectra and integrated Jsc. (d) Steady-state PCE and photocurrent output of devices based on ZnO and ZnO–MACl at the maximum power point. (e) PCE distributions for 80 devices. (f) Long-term stability of PSCs. 
At the same time, the steady-state PCE and photocurrent output of PSCs based on ZnO and ZnO–MACl at the maximum power point are shown in Fig. 4(d). The results are consistent with the measured J–V characteristics in Fig. 4(b), and they all have constant PCE outputs and good light stability. Fig. 4(e) provides the efficiency distribution histogram of 80 devices based on ZnO and ZnO–MACl, showing that devices with ZnO–MACl ETL have better repeatability due to the improved crystal quality of the perovskite layer.33 In order to truly evaluate the stability enhancement of devices due to the improved surface properties of ZnO, here the fabricated MAPbI3-based PSCs with ZnO and ZnO–MACl were stored in the glove-box, and the PCE of these two aging PSCs are summarized in Fig. 4(f). The efficiency of PSCs based on the ZnO layer decreases rapidly after storing for 60 days, while the stability of PSCs based on ZnO–MACl is significantly enhanced. Though the devices were stored in a glove-box to avoid the interruption of water and oxygen, while the harms of ion migration, interface diffusion and electrode corrosion are still inevitable, thus a certain degree of efficiency degradation of PSCs with ZnO–MACl was observed.34–36 It testifies that the MACl–A modification can effectively protect the perovskite layer from degeneration and strengthen the device stability.
On the basis of measurements and characterization above, it has been fully proved that MACl–A modification can effectively inhibit the protonation reaction between ZnO and organic cations in perovskite, even MAPbI3 that includes all strong acidic MA cation, which makes ZnO–MACl have great potential in organic or organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs. In order to further estimate the effect of residual Cl on the device efficiency more intuitively, inorganic PSCs based on CsPbI2Br were fabricated, because there is no protonation reaction between ZnO and Cs cations, which can also explore the compatibility of ZnO–MACl in inorganic PSCs. We investigated the J–V characteristics of inorganic CsPbI2Br-based PSCs with ZnO and ZnO–MACl layers, as shown in Fig. 5(a). After the MACl–A modification, the device presents an improved PCE of 14.79%, with a high Voc of 1.22 V, which can prove the positive effect of residual Cl on enhanced device efficiency. The Jsc is consistent with the results of EQE in Fig. 5(b). At the same time, the long-term stability of inorganic PSCs based on ZnO–MACl is counted in Fig. S13.† Without the trouble of interface degradation due to the protonation reaction, inorganic PSCs demonstrate excellent stability after storing in glove-box for 60 days. The creditable device efficiency and stability further clarify the great potential of ZnO–MACl in inorganic PSCs.
 Fig. 5  (a) J–V characteristics under reverse scan and (b) EQE spectra of CsPbI2Br-based PSCs with ZnO and ZnO–MACl layers. 
In order to prove the effect of the Cl element on the defect passivation, the J–V characteristics of electron-only devices were measured to estimate the trap density (Nt), as shown in Fig. 6(a), as well as the device structure. Based on the relationship between Nt and trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL), Nt can be calculated from the ohmic region and trap-filled region by the following formula:37,38 VTFL = eNtL2/2εrε0(1)where e is the electronic charge, L is the thickness of the perovskite layer, ε0 and εr are the vacuum permittivity and relative dielectric constant of the perovskite layer, respectively. With the MACl–A modification, Nt was decreased from 2.59 × 1016 to 2.03 × 1016 cm−3, confirming the effective defect passivation effect of the residual Cl. The impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed on devices with ZnO and ZnO–MACl layers, and the results are shown in Fig. 6(b). The two arcs can be related to charge transport resistance (Rtr) (the left one at high frequency) and interface recombination resistance (Rrec) (the right one at low frequency), respectively.39,40 After the MACl–A modification, Rtr was lowered, and Rrec was enlarged, further indicating the facilitated charge transport and suppressed charge recombination due to the existence of Cl.41
 Fig. 6  (a) J–V characteristics of electron-only devices, and inset is the corresponding device structure diagram. (b) Impedance spectroscopy of PSCs employing ZnO and ZnO–MACl layers, and the inset is the equivalent circuit, consisting of the RS, Rtr and Rrec. 
4. Conclusions
Herein, we demonstrate an effective method to enhance the stability of the ZnO-perovskite interface by eliminating the deprotonation ability of ZnO with the help of MACl, and the pre-protonation reaction between ZnO and MACl is fully proved by XPS measurements. After MACl–A modification, the perovskite layer can maintain strong light absorbance and stable crystal structure. Meanwhile, the enhanced efficiency of MAPbI3-based PSCs is achieved due to the improved crystal quality of the perovskite layer and the effective defect passivation effect of Cl. In addition, the creditable efficiency and stability of inorganic CsPbI2Br PSCs not only prove the important role of Cl but verifies the compatibility of ZnO–MACl in inorganic PSCs. Our work provides the possibility for the application of ZnO in perovskite optoelectronic devices and makes it have more advantages in the fabrication of flexible and tandem devices based on perovskite materials, as well as device with Al-doped ZnO transparent electrodes.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFA0705900) funded by MOST, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62005093), the National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents (BX20190135), Scientific Research Planning Project of Education Department of Jilin Province (JJKH20200980KJ), Industrial Technology Research and Development Project of Jilin Province (2020C026-5), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M661207), the Special Project of the Province-University Co-constructing Program of Jilin Province (SXGJXX2017-3), and the International Cooperation and Exchange Project of Jilin Province (20170414002GH, 20180414001GH) for the support to this work.
Notes and references
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Z. Wu, J. Liu, C. J. Qin, X. D. Yang, A. Islam, Y. B. Cheng and L. Y. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 629–640 RSC .
P. W. Liang, C. C. Chueh, S. T. Williams and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402321 CrossRef .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. J. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, F. Cao, H. Wang, J. Kou, Z.-H. Zhang and X. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Seo, Y. Moon, S. Lee, C. Lee, D. Kim, H. Kim and Y. Kim, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 1221–1226 RSC .
H. Yu, Q. Liao, Z. Kang, Z. Wang, B. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Du, Y. Ou, M. Hong, J. Xiao, Z. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Small, 2020, 16, 2005520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Wen, S. M. Fang, Y. C. Xu, N. Zheng, L. L. Liu, Z. Q. Xie and F. Wurthner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34151–34157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis and T. L. Kelly, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4229–4236 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, B. H. Wu, R. H. Chen, Y. Y. Q. Wu, Y. Hui, B. W. Mao and N. F. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705596 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Ismail, J. F. Wei, X. Sun, W. S. Zha, M. Khalil, L. P. Zhang, R. Huang, Z. J. Chen, Y. B. Shen, F. S. Li, Q. Luo and C. Q. Ma, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000289 CrossRef CAS .
L. Meng, J. B. You and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Zhao, H. P. Shen, Y. Zhang, X. Li, X. C. Zhao, M. Q. Tai, J. F. Li, J. B. Li, X. Li and H. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7826–7833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Chen, J. Cao, Y. Duan, Y. Hui, T. T. Chuong, D. H. Ou, F. M. Han, F. W. Cheng, X. F. Huang, B. H. Wu and N. F. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 541–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Schutt, P. K. Nayak, A. J. Ramadan, B. Wenger, Y. H. Lin and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900466 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tumen-Ulzii, C. J. Qin, D. Klotz, M. R. Leyden, P. P. Wang, M. Auffray, T. Fujihara, T. Matsushima, J. W. Lee, S. J. Lee, Y. Yang and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, F. Zhang, H. Y. He, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and T. Xu, Nature, 2020, 578, 555–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
T. Ahmad, B. Wilk, E. Radicchi, R. Fuentes Pineda, P. Spinelli, J. Herterich, L. A. Castriotta, S. Dasgupta, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis, M. Kohlstaedt, U. Wuerfel, A. Di Carlo and K. Wojciechowski, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004357 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, H. W. Hu, B. C. Lin, J. N. Ding and N. Y. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14405–14408 RSC .
D. Z. Zhang, C. Y. Liu, K. Z. Li, Y. Chen, S. P. Ruan, X. D. Zhang and C. N. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6459–6466 RSC .
C. Y. Liu, D. Z. Zhang, Z. Q. Li, X. Y. Zhang, W. B. Guo, L. Zhang, S. P. Ruan and Y. B. Long, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22068–22075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Wu, Y. F. Wang, H. Sarvari, D. T. Liu, Z. D. Chen and S. B. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17368–17378 RSC .
Y. M. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Z. Zhang, X. D. Zhang, S. Bai, C. Y. Liu, Z. Q. Li, W. B. Guo and F. Gao, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900154 CrossRef .
H. R. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Z. Lan, F. P. G. de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. J. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. C. Zhao, F. J. Fan, P. C. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. B. Zhao, Z. H. Lu, Z. Y. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Tseng, C. H. Chiang, S. H. Chang and C. G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 311–318 CrossRef CAS .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, H. X. Wang, W. Li, X. F. Hu, K. Sun and Z. G. Zang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26421–26428 RSC .
J. M. Yang, Z. C. Yuan, X. J. Liu, S. Braun, Y. Q. Li, J. X. Tang, F. Gao, C. G. Duan, M. Fahlman and Q. Y. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16225–16230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Y. M. Xian, W. N. Yuan, Y. Long, K. Liu, N. U. Rahman, W. Z. Li and J. D. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, T. Chen, D. Q. Pan, J. Gao, C. T. Zhu, F. Y. Lin, C. H. Zhou, Q. D. Tai, S. Xiao, Y. B. Yuan, Q. L. Dai, Y. B. Han, H. P. Xie and X. Y. Guo, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104246 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, Q. Zhu, G. Z. Wu, D. F. Yin, M. M. Fu, W. P. Wang, J. L. He, L. J. Kong, X. L. Zheng, Y. Y. Cao, Y. P. Wu, C. M. Zhang, X. Li, Z. M. Wu and J. Y. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 1, 24132–24139 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, S. Bae, S. W. Lee, K. Cho, K. D. Lee, H. Kim, S. Park, G. Kwon, S. W. Ahn, H. M. Lee, Y. Kang, H. S. Lee and D. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1200 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Greenbank, N. Rolston, E. Destouesse, G. Wantz, L. Hirsch, R. Dauskardt and S. Chambon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2911–2919 RSC .
J. W. Li, Q. S. Dong, N. Li and L. D. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602922 CrossRef .
J. H. Heo, M. S. You, M. H. Chang, W. Yin, T. K. Ahn, S. J. Lee, S. J. Sung, D. H. Kim and S. H. Im, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 530–539 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Xu, G. Lei, C. Tao, J. D. Zhang, X. K. Liu, X. Xu, W. Y. Lai, F. Gao and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802320 CrossRef .
S. B. Li, P. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. F. Wang, D. T. Liu, J. Wu, H. Sarvari and Z. D. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 990–997 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, E. Mosconi, C. Wolff, J. M. Li, D. Neher, F. De Angelis, G. P. Suranna, R. Grisorio and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900990 CrossRef .
M. Forouzandeh, F. Behrouznejad, E. Ghavaminia, R. Khosroshahi, X. Li, Y. Zhan, Y. Liao, Z. Ning and N. Taghavinia, J. Power Sources, 2020, 475, 228658 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XPS spectra of O 1s and C 1s; PL spectra measurements; AFM images; films thickness measurements; stability comparison of perovskite layer on a different substrate; cross-sectional SEM images; device efficiency after MABr and MAI modification; devices optimization experiments; long-term stability of inorganic CsPbI2Br-based PSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta02697fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of protonation reaction between ZnO and MACl. XPS spectra depicting the (b) Zn 2p1/2 and Zn 2p3/2 peaks, (c) O 1s peaks, (d) N 1s peaks and (e) Cl 2p peaks of ZnO and ZnO–MACl layers.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) UPS measurements and (b) transmittance spectra of ZnO and ZnO–MACl, and insets are the AFM images of ZnO and ZnO–MACl layers.	 

 	Fig. 3  Surface SEM images of MAPbI3 on (a) ZnO and (b) ZnO–MACl. (c) Photographs and (d) light absorbance spectra of MAPbI3 on ZnO and ZnO–MACl with 100 °C thermal stressing for different times, corresponding XRD spectra of perovskite layers in contact with (e) ZnO and (f) ZnO–MACl.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Structure diagram of fabricated MAPbI3-based PSCs. (b) J–V characteristics curves of devices with ZnO or ZnO–MACl measured by forward and reverse scans. (c) Corresponding EQE spectra and integrated Jsc. (d) Steady-state PCE and photocurrent output of devices based on ZnO and ZnO–MACl at the maximum power point. (e) PCE distributions for 80 devices. (f) Long-term stability of PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) J–V characteristics under reverse scan and (b) EQE spectra of CsPbI2Br-based PSCs with ZnO and ZnO–MACl layers.	 
VTFL = eNtL2/2εrε0	(1)

 	Fig. 6  (a) J–V characteristics of electron-only devices, and inset is the corresponding device structure diagram. (b) Impedance spectroscopy of PSCs employing ZnO and ZnO–MACl layers, and the inset is the equivalent circuit, consisting of the RS, Rtr and Rrec.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XPS spectra of O 1s and C 1s; PL spectra measurements; AFM images; films thickness measurements; stability comparison of perovskite layer on a different substrate; cross-sectional SEM images; device efficiency after MABr and MAI modification; devices optimization experiments; long-term stability of inorganic CsPbI2Br-based PSCs. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta02697f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
