Organic fluorine compounds: a great opportunity for enhanced materials properties  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CS00221F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CS00221F
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3496-3508Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOrganic fluorine compounds: a great opportunity for enhanced materials properties

        
          
            Ricarda 
            Berger
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Giuseppe 
            Resnati
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Pierangelo 
            Metrangolo
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Edwin 
            Weber
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Jürg 
            Hulliger
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Berne, Freiestrasse 3, 3012 Berne, Switzerland. E-mail: juerg.hulliger@iac.unibe.ch;  Fax: +41 31 631 42 44;   Tel: +41 31 631 4241
bNFM Lab – DCMIC “G. Natta”, Politecnico di Milano, 7, via Mancinelli, I-20131 Milan, Italy
cCenter for Nano Science and Technology of IIT@PoliMi, via Pascoli 70/3, 20133 Milan, Italy
dInstitute of Organic Chemistry, TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Leipziger Str. 29, 09596 Freiberg, Germany
Received 
      21st December 2010
    First published on 30th March 2011AbstractInteractions of “organic fluorine” have gained great interest not only in the context of crystal engineering, but also in the systematic design of functional materials. The first part of this tutorial review presents an overview on interactions known by organic fluorine. This involves π–πF, C–F⋯H, F⋯F, C–F⋯πF, C–F⋯π, C–F⋯M+, C–F⋯CO and anion–πF interactions, as well as other halogen bonds. The effect of the exchange of H vs. F is discussed by means of several examples and a short introduction to the young field of “fluorous” chemistry is given. The second part is dedicated to numerous applications of fluorine and fluorous interactions. It is shown how application of fluorination is used to enable a number of reactions, to improve materials properties and even open up new fields of research.
Ricarda Berger
Ricarda Berger was born in 1982 in Germany. She studied chemistry at the Technical University Bergakademie Freiberg, Germany, and received her Diploma in 2006 working with Prof. Dr E. Weber. Currently, she is a PhD student in the group of Prof. Dr J. Hulliger at the University of Berne, working on the synthesis and property directed crystallization of fluorinated inclusion compounds.
Giuseppe Resnati
Giuseppe Resnati became full professor at the Politecnico di Milano in 2001. He was a NATO fellow at the University of Clemson (USA, 1990), visiting scientist at the Université Paris XI (France, 1993) and Nagoya University (Japan, 2001). He is on the Editorial Board of the Journal of Fluorine Chemistry and was awarded the 2008 Research Prize of the Division of Organic Chemistry of the Italian Chemical Society and the European Lectureship in Chemical Science by RSC in 2010. His research interests are fluorine chemistry, and self-assembly processes.
Pierangelo Metrangolo
Pierangelo Metrangolo became full professor at the Politecnico di Milano in 2010. He has been an EU Fellow at the University of Toulouse (France, 2001), visiting Professor at the University of York (UK, 2005) and at the University of Jyväskylä (FI, 2006). His awards include the 2005 “G. Ciamician” medal of the Division of Organic Chemistry of the Italian Chemical Society and the 2005 Journals Grant Award of the RSC. His research interests include crystal engineering, supramolecular and materials chemistry.
Edwin Weber
Edwin Weber was born in 1946 in Germany. He studied chemistry at the University of Würzburg (Germany) and obtained Diploma in 1973. In 1976, he received a PhD from the University of Würzburg under the supervision of Prof. F. Vögtle. Following post doctoral studies at the University in Bonn (Germany) and as a NATO-fellow at the University of Wisconsin, USA, spending time in the laboratories of Barry Trost, he qualified in 1984 as a Lecturer in Organic Chemistry at the University of Bonn. In 1986 he was promoted to Professor of Organic Chemistry. During 1992–1993, he temporarily substituted a Full Professorship at the University of Kiel (Germany). In 1993, he took up his present position as full Professor of Organic Chemistry at the Technical University Bergakademie Freiberg (Germany). His current research fields focus on different aspects of supramolecular chemistry including molecular recognition and inclusion, porous framework design, crystal engineering, chemical sensing and electronic materials properties.
Jürg Hulliger
Jürg Hulliger was born in 1953 in Zurich, Switzerland. At ETH Zurich he studied chemistry and graduated in physical chemistry. In 1984 he received a PhD from the University of Zurich. After a post-doctoral stay at the Pennsylvania State University he moved to the Institute of Solid State Physics (later Quantum-electronics) at ETH to conduct research in crystal growth. In 1993 he took up his position as a full professor of chemistry at the University of Berne (Switzerland). His research fields are: chemistry of materials, theory of stochastic polarity formation, physical properties of solids. In 2004 he became a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry.
1. Introduction
The relevance of fluoro compounds in science as well as in everyday life is increasing year by year. This class of compounds is of importance for all parts of our daily life, concerning alimentation, health care or leisure time as well as the alternative energy sector, which is of an increasing significance in times of limited resources and climate change. Due to the strength of the C–F bond, fluorine containing compounds exhibit a high thermal and oxidative stability, low polarity, weak intermolecular interactions and a small surface tension compared to hydrocarbons. These beneficial effects are utilized for the development of new compounds with unprecedented properties, e.g. liquid crystals, plastics, dyes, surfactants, membranes, conductive polymers, pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals.
Based on our review “Fluorine in crystal engineering—the little atom that could”1 we herewith provide an update on recent developments in the field with a focus on applications. Knowledge on interactions involving organic fluorine obtained in the last five years, i.e. the effect of the exchange of H vs. F, is thus reviewed. Some theoretical results on fluorine interactions are discussed within the corresponding chapters and a short introduction to the new field of “fluorous” chemistry will be addressed. The second part of the article is dedicated to applications of fluorine and fluorous interactions thus highlighting interesting new fluorinated materials. The positive effect of fluorination is described in detail by means of specific examples, such as liquid crystals, inclusion compounds or biomedical applications.
2. Interactions involving “organic fluorine”
2.1 π–πF-interactions
π–πF-interactions are stabilizing interactions between a perfluorinated and a non-fluorinated aromatic ring, involving a stabilizing energy of about 20–25 kJ mol−1.2 Thus, it is the second strongest synthon known in supramolecular chemistry, apart from hydrogen bonds in carboxylic acids or amides. In order to explore this further, Gavezzotti et al. have synthesized and examined a series of condensed polycyclic compounds containing unsubstituted or perfluorinated aromatic rings, as well as carboxylic acid and amide groups.3 By introducing a perfluorinated ring into a condensed polycyclic hydrocarbon, the packing mode can be modified from V-shaped arrangements to layered structures where fluorinated and non-fluorinated molecular moieties are overlapping in the known stacking fashion. In fact, the π–πF-synthon does not necessarily have to occur in crystal structures wherever there are opportunities to form them. When hydrogen bonding groups are present in molecules, the hydrogen bond will be the dominating packing motif and the π–πF-stacking “… becomes less important, or almost optional”.4 This means, the pure π–πF-overlap transforms into a πF–πF and π–π-overlap, which are less favourable but still energetically stabilizing.2 However, the existence of π–πF-stacking is not generally excluded whenever hydrogen bonds are present in the crystal. Coexistence is possible when the shape of the molecules allows for it, for example in the co-crystal of benzoic acid and pentafluorobenzoic acid.5 Furthermore, the π–πF-synthon requires a rather planar overall constitution of the molecule to establish the interaction.6 In the case of sterical hindrance, as a result of bulky substituents or large torsion angles between neighboring phenyl rings, the synthon is not realized and weaker interactions (C–H⋯F and C–H⋯π) are found.
The π–πF-interaction is stabilized by coulombic and dispersion forces, and recent calculations have shown that the dispersion interactions account for the larger fraction in comparison to the electrostatic interactions. With center-to-center distances between 3.4 and 4.8 Å,2,7 and inter-ring angles up to 20°, the synthon offers considerable flexibility in forming crystal structures.
2.2 C–F⋯H hydrogen bonds

          Hydrogen bonds can be classified into three categories:8 weak, moderate and strong hydrogen bonds. Weak hydrogen bonds have stabilization energies up to 16 kJ mol−1 and are rather soft interactions, which means there is a wide range of bond lengths and angles in the crystalline state. Moderate hydrogen bonds have stabilization energies up to 60 kJ mol−1 and strong hydrogen bonds up to about 200 kJ mol−1, which is the so-called covalent limit. They are formed by fragments with electron deficient donors or acceptors with an excess of electron density, which means that for the strong hydrogen bonds usually at least one of the interacting fragments is charged. Interactions with stabilization energies beyond the covalent limit are called “ion–ion hydrogen bonds”9 and can be found between two charged fragments with opposite sign.
Compared to typical hydrogen bond acceptors like oxygen or nitrogen, the organic fluorine undergoes only weak interactions. Following Desiraju,10 the C–F⋯H hydrogen bond can be classified into two categories: the C–F⋯H–X hydrogen bond (XN, O) with a strong donor and the C–F⋯H–C hydrogen bond with a weak donor, the latter being “at the limit of the phenomenon”.10 For this contact, D'Oria and Novoa calculated a stabilization energy of 2 kJ mol−19 with the dispersion being the dominant component compared to the electrostatic interactions. Besides this case of hydrogen bonds between two uncharged molecules, they investigated also contacts where at least one fragment is charged. Here it has to be differentiated between three types of interactions:
(a) Charge-assisted hydrogen bonds are moderate or strong hydrogen bonds with stabilization energies up to 200 kJ mol−1 and can be found in interactions between a charged and a non-charged fragment or between two charged fragments of opposite sign. Here, the electrostatic component is the strongest part of the stabilization energy.
(b) Contacts with stabilization energies above 200 kJ mol−1 are beyond the so-called covalent limit and have to be regarded as ion–ion hydrogen bonds. They occur exclusively between charged fragments of opposite sign but fulfill all structural, energetic and spectroscopic properties which are expected for hydrogen bonds, so they should not be equated with the all ionic interactions that can be found in inorganic salts like NaCl.
(c) Contacts with repulsive energies up to 200 kJ mol−1 are found between charged fragments of the same sign and cannot be regarded as hydrogen bonds, so they should be called C–H⋯F–C bridges, contacts or interactions. They are not contributing to lattice stabilization but can be found when the sum of all interactions in the complex exceeds these repulsive forces. However, it is doubtful to mention them here as they are just a byproduct of the overall packing.
Surprisingly, the directionality of the C–F⋯H–C hydrogen bonds does not depend on the charge of the fragments.9 Although the theoretically calculated ideal geometry is collinear, the found angular dependence of C–F⋯H–C interactions is non-collinear and similar for charged and uncharged complexes. However, the non-collinearity of the C–F⋯H–C hydrogen bond may be attributed to the predominance of other (stronger) interactions in a crystal and thus has to be ascribed to its small strength.
Furthermore, the strength–length correlation fails in charged complexes, that is the shortest contacts are not the strongest ones.9 This can be traced back to the complex situation in real crystals which usually depends on many interactions and thus suppresses the formation of rather weak contacts in favour of the stronger ones.
2.3 F⋯F contacts
Only very few structures show close F⋯F contacts shorter than the sum of the van der Waals-radii (2.94 Å). The question if they have a stabilizing nature or are just a consequence of the overall packing is still discussed controversially in the literature. In most cases they are regarded as a consequence of dense packing.6,11,12 However, there are examples in which the F⋯F contacts are the driving force for crystal packing or at least give some complementary stabilization within the crystallographic plane. Bayón et al.13 reported on liquid crystals which show very short F⋯F distances (2.66 Å) between perfluorinated aromatic rings within the same layer that appear to direct the crystal structure. Mariaca et al.14 described the crystal structures of several 4-bromo-4′-cyanostilbenes with different degrees of fluorination and found some stabilizing F⋯F interactions within the crystallographic layers, which were identified as weak driving forces that align flat molecules sidewise.
2.4 C–F⋯πF and C–F⋯π contacts
In a perfluorinated aromatic ring, the electron density distribution is inversed to that of a common aromatic system. Accordingly, the electronegative fluorine in a C–F containing compound can build up a stabilizing contact to the electropositive center of a πF-ring. As a consequence, a contact between the electronegative fluorine and an electronegative (non-fluorinated) π-ring is destabilizing. C–F⋯πF interactions can be found in numerous per-fluorinated compounds, for example in fluorinated benzophenones or N-phenylmaleimides and phthalimides.11 However, in most cases these contacts are considered to be secondary or even determined by close packing.
2.5 C–F⋯M+ interactions
The coordination chemistry of the organic fluorine has been extensively examined by Plenio15 and Takemura et al.16 C–F can act as a donor towards any kind of “hard” (Pearson concept) metal cations and its coordination behaviour towards alkali and alkaline earth metal ions is surprisingly extensive. Barrett et al.17 showed the coordination of a CF3-group to a calcium center, giving rise to a C–F bond elongation and activation which then results in a catalytic activity of the complex. Furthermore, complexes of transition metals are known, too. For example, Popeney et al.18 synthesized two new ethylene polymerization catalysts featuring a Ni(II) or Pd(II) metal center and a fluorinated cyclophane-based ligand.
Compared to their non-fluorinated parent compounds, the new catalysts exhibited a different catalytic behaviour, yielding higher molecular weight polymers with low branching densities, showing enhanced thermal stability. NMR experiments demonstrate the interaction of the fluorine with the axial site of the metal center, thus stabilizing a highly reactive intermediate state (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Structure of the 14 electron intermediate state of a new polymerization catalyst. The metal center is stabilized by an axial fluorine atom from the cyclophane ligand.18 
Brigaud et al.19 used a fluorinated chiral auxiliary for the α-alkylation of amide enolates, giving an extremely high diastereoselectivity of 99% de. This particular result was analyzed experimentally and theoretically, showing that the combination of a C–F⋯metal and a π⋯metal interaction is directing the reaction towards a Re face alkylation with an energetical advantage of 23 kJ mol−1 compared to a Si face attack.
2.6 C–F⋯CO interactions
The first discovery of an obviously attractive interaction between organic fluorine and a carbonyl group was made by Diederich et al. in 2003.20 While exploring the interaction of some variably fluorinated inhibitors with the active site of the enzyme thrombin, a close orthogonal contact of 3.5 Å between C–F and the carbonyl group of the amino acid Asn 98 was found. This raised the question if this contact was a stabilizing one. Due to the expected weakness of the interaction, a quantification with the help of a bimolecular system was not possible. Finally, an intramolecular orthogonal dipolar C–F⋯CO interaction was proven by use of a molecular torsion balance21 (Fig. 2). The strongest interaction was found in apolar solvents featuring stabilization energies of 0.78 ± 0.25 kJ mol−1 (C6D6) and 0.82 ± 0.25 kJ mol−1 (C2D2Cl4), respectively.
 Fig. 2  Molecular torsion balance which was used for the determination of the free enthalpy of interaction between a CF3 and a carbonyl group.21 
2.7 
          Fluorine as a halogen bonding acceptor and donor
According to Resnati et al.22 “halogen bonding is a non-covalent interaction where halogen atoms function as electrophilic species”. Numerous papers have appeared showing how fluorine can work as both a halogen bonding acceptor (nucleophile, Lewis base) and a halogen bonding donor (electrophile, Lewis acid). The two resulting interactions are orthogonal to each other.
This behaviour can be understood remembering that the electron distribution around covalently bonded halogens is anisotropic. In general, fluorine and other halogens are known as electron rich species and typically work as nucleophiles, for instance when functioning as hydrogen bond acceptors and coordinating metal ions. These interactions typically occur at an angle between 90 and 120° with respect to the covalent bond formed by the halogen. However, when halogens are bound to strongly electron withdrawing groups, such as perfluorinated fragments, they present a region of positive electrostatic potential located on the elongated C–X bond, the region of negative electrostatic potential being confined in a belt orthogonal to the C–X bond. Politzer et al.23 proposed the term σ-hole for this positive cap and established it to increase in the following order: F < Cl < Br < I. The halogen bonding interaction, arising when a nucleophile enters this cap, is thus highly directional24 and features an angle of about 180° with respect to the covalent bond formed by the halogen. One-, two- and even three-dimensional systems can be built up with the use of halogen bonding, and they can stabilize inclusion compounds, as well25 (see Section 5.5).

Halogen bonding has been widely examined by Resnati et al.22 and finds applications in such different fields as crystal engineering, materials chemistry and biological systems. The most common nucleophiles, i.e.halogen bonding acceptors, entering the σ-hole are anions, e.g.halides, and lone pair possessing atoms, e.g. the nitrogen of amine and pyridine derivatives. Also fluorine can function as a halogen bonding acceptor when one of its lone pairs enters the positive cap of iodine,26bromine,27 and chlorine28 atoms (Fig. 3) and an interaction nearly perpendicular to the C–F covalent bond develops.
 Fig. 3  Dimer formed by bis(trimethylamine)-(2,3,7,8,12,13,17,18-octabromo-5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrolato)-iridium(III)via C–F⋯Br–C halogen bonding. Fluorine works as a halogen bonding acceptor. The sum of van der Waals radii of fluorine and bromine is 3.32 Å.27 
Interestingly, fluorine can also interact attractively with electrophiles, i.e. work as a halogen bonding donor. Similar to other halogens, when bound to strong electron withdrawing residues (e.g. an ethynyl moiety), fluorine can develop an electropositive cap at the extension of the covalent bond it is involved in.29 F3−, wherein molecular fluorine works as an electrophile, is the prototype example of such halogen bonded adducts30 and fluorine has been noticed to form short contacts after the expected geometry for a halogen bonding donor also when bound to carbon.31

          Hydrogen and halogen bonding present numerous similarities. We have already discussed how fluorine is a weak hydrogen bonding acceptor (Section 2.2) and it is not surprising it is also a weak halogen bonding acceptor. Less surprising, both theoretical32 and experimental30 results show fluorine is a weak halogen bonding donor.
2.8 Anion–πF interactions (interactions of anions with electron-deficient aromatics)
The interaction of anions with electron-deficient aromatics (e.g. perfluorinated aromatics) is a current topic that has recently been reviewed by Dunbar et al.33 These non-covalent forces are energetically favorable with binding energies of up to 20–50 kJ mol−1 and are dominated by electrostatic and polarization contributions. Hereby, the electrostatic part becomes more and more important the more electron deficient the aromatic ring is. Studies by Deyà et al.34 on anion–π, anion–π2 and anion–π3 complexes revealed that the anion–π interaction is additive in geometry as well as in binding energies, thus offering a big potential for the design of neutral anion receptors.
Anion–π, cation–π and π–π interactions show a strong synergetic effect, i.e. the combined formation of these three types of interactions in one complex is favorable to the formation of the individual interactions (Fig. 4).35
 Fig. 4  Calculated interaction energies of the cation–π, anion–π and π–π complexes of Na+, Cl− and 1,3,5-trifluorobenzene and the combinations thereof.35 
These strong synergic effects can be ascribed to the interplay of ion–π and π–π interactions, which are an effect of the combination of electrostatic and polarization interactions.
3. Effect of exchange of H vs. F (complete or partial exchange)
When hydrogen is replaced by fluorine in a molecule, its physical and chemical properties can be changed dramatically due to the high electronegativity and low polarizability of the fluorine. For example, the electron density distribution of hexafluorobenzene is inversed to that of benzene, i.e. both molecules have a permanent quadrupole moment of the same value but opposite in sign. A few examples of the influence of the exchange of H by F shall be discussed below.
A recent study by Mariaca et al.14,36 has shown the influence of fluorination on the crystal packing of donor–acceptor substituted stilbenes. A series of substituted halogeno-cyano-stilbenes (Fig. 5) were synthesized and their crystal structures analyzed.
 Fig. 5  Donor–acceptor substituted stilbenes. Fluorination of R1 enhances the acceptor nature of the halogens and thus makes the halogen bonding stronger.14,36 
In this course, main results involve:36 Partial or complete fluorination of the parent compound changes the crystal structure significantly; and upon partial fluorination, molecules undergo a different packing depending on which phenyl ring is fluorinated. Most important conclusions are: (i) Upon fluorination of R1, the X⋯N halogen bonds between the halogen and the cyano group are shortened and thus strengthened due to the enhancement of the halogen atom's acceptor nature. (ii) Fluorine substitution on the benzonitrile side decreases the donor nature of the cyano group, resulting in longer X⋯N distances. (iii) In the case of the partially fluorinated stilbenes, fluorination on the benzonitrile ring increases the strength of other intermolecular interactions, such as H⋯F hydrogen bonds.
Schwarzer et al.11a studied a series of fluorinated benzophenones in comparison to the non-fluorinated parent-compound and found numerous weak interactions, such as F⋯F and C–F⋯π contacts as well as C–F⋯H–C hydrogen bonds and π–π contacts in the partially fluorinated benzophenones, stabilizing the crystal structure. However, the 4,4′-difluorobenzophenone does not show any of these contacts. It was therefore concluded that “a bottom limit of fluorine atoms seems to be necessary for successful competition with the hydrogen type of interaction”.11a
Different results were found when Chopra and Guru Row37 examined the influence of fluorine substitution on a series of isomeric benzanilides. In this study, the parent compound was substituted with one or two fluorine atoms, i.e. maximum one fluorine per phenyl ring (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Substituted benzanilides studied by Chopra and Guru Row.37 All possible combinations with a maximum of one fluorine atom per phenyl ring were examined. 
The variation of the number and positions of the fluorine atoms resulted in different crystal structures and in some cases a change from a centrosymmetric to a non-centrosymmetric space group took place. The authors concluded that interactions involving fluorine, like C–H⋯F hydrogen bonds or F⋯F contacts, are responsible for the altered crystal structures of otherwise isostructural molecules.
Vasylyeva and Merz 38 conducted an intensive study on the effect of fluoro substitution on benzonitrile concerning the crystal structure and melting behaviour. Benzonitrile molecules are arranged along a 4-fold screw axis and stabilized by C–H⋯N hydrogen bonds in the crystal structure. For fluorobenzonitriles it was shown that the position of fluorine significantly influences the packing structure. o-Fluorobenzonitrile exhibits a herringbone structure showing only weak C–H⋯N interactions between the cyano group and the proton being located meta to the cyano group. In contrast, m- and p-fluorobenzonitrile are arranged in layers, which are stabilized by C–H⋯N and C–H⋯F hydrogen bonds within the layers. These different interactions are also reflected in the melting points, which are increasing in the order o-, m- and p-fluorobenzonitrile (−13.7 °C, 12.5 °C and 38.5 °C).
4. “Fluorous” chemistry and “fluorous” interactions
Fluorous chemistry is a young field established by Horváth, Curran and Gladysz in the middle and late 1990s.39 The term “fluorous” was first introduced as a denotation for perfluorinated aliphatic solvents that are immiscible with water and most organic solvents at room temperature. This effect stems not only from attractive forces between the perfluorinated chains but also from the repulsion from other media,40 therefore, it's sometimes also called the “fluorophobic effect”. The field rapidly expanded and the idea of a “ponytail” was introduced, which was used for easy separation of reactants, products or catalysts from the reaction medium.
One of the biggest advantages is the temperature dependent miscibility of fluorous solvents with a number of commonly used organic solvents. This opens up the possibility of an easy work-up and/or separation from catalysts simply by phase separation after cooling of the reaction mixture, which is a homogenous mixture at elevated temperatures and thus allows for homogenous reaction performance. Furthermore, several new separation techniques, like fluorous solid state extraction or fluorous chromatography, were developed in order to separate libraries of compounds which have been labelled with fluorous tags of different sizes.
Nowadays, fluorous chemistry is an established field of research being applied by numerous research groups as well as industry. It is used in a variety of fields like liquid crystals, self-assembly, nano particles, surfactants or biomedical applications. In addition, fluorous interactions have an impact on crystallography, determining the packing mode of partially fluorinated substances by rigidifying Rf chains and aggregation as a result of exclusion from other moieties.40
5. Applications of fluorine and fluorous interactions
5.1 Solid state reactions
For photochemical [2+2]cycloadditions, the arrangement of the monomers in a parallel fashion with distances of 3.5 to 4.2 Å is necessary. To achieve this, π–πF stacking or fluorine segregation can be useful. For example, 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene is known to be photostable. However, Sonoda et al.41 accomplished the photopolymerization of substituted diphenylhexatrienes in the solid state by help of π–πF stacking interactions (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Molecular structures of 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (16), 1-phenyl-6-pentafluorophenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (17) and 1,6-bis(pentafluorophenyl)-1,3,5-hexatriene (18), used for photopolymerization, and the resulting dimers 19 from polymerization of 17 and 20 from polymerization of a co-crystal of 16 and 18.41 
The single crystals of 1-phenyl-6-pentafluorophenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (17) as well as the co-crystals of 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (16) and 1,6-bis(pentafluorophenyl)-1,3,5-hexatriene (18) are built up by alternating stacks of π and πF rings at a distance of 4.07 Å and 4.10 Å, respectively. By the irradiation of the crystalline material, dimers as well as higher oligomers could be achieved with a maximum degree of polymerization of about 15–20. For the photodimerization, the regio- and stereoselectivity was high giving the face-to-face dimer resulting from the reaction of the 1,2-position of the monomer (Fig. 7). However, for the formation of the trimers and higher oligomers there was no such selectivity. This was attributed to the disordered crystalline state of the dimer that makes the formation of higher oligomers to occur randomly.
π–πF stacking is not the only possibility to arrange polymerizable molecules in a way to achieve solid state polymerization upon UV irradiation. Jeannin and Fourmigué42 achieved [2 + 2] cycloaddition in CF3-substituted tetrathiafulvalene derivatives by fluorine segregation in the crystalline state. Hereby, only one or two of the very short CF3 substituents were needed to form layered structures suitable for cycloaddition reactions, whereas usually longer CnF2n+1 chains (n > 5) are needed. The authors concluded that this is a very robust synthon that could, for example, be utilized to search for molecular semiconductors, which is currently an issue of strong interest.
Not only C–C bond formation but also the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azide and alkyne to exclusively form the 1,4-triazole product is enabled by π–πF interactions without application of any catalyst.43 To show this regioselective “click” polymerization, a Schiff-base molecule substituted with azide and alkyne function at opposite ends and containing one perfluorinated phenyl ring was designed. After the polymerization took place, the imine bond was hydrolysed to give small molecules again that can easily be identified and characterized (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  “Click” polymerization of azide and alkyne substituted molecules to regioselectively form the 1,4-triazole polymer and successive hydrolysis of the imide group to give the 1,4-substituted triazole.43 
5.2 Catalysis and catalyst-immobilization
Using the easy phase separation techniques for catalyst recovery, fluorous chemistry is more and more used in catalysis. Numerous versions for reaction implementation and catalyst recovery have been developed and are implemented now. Taking profit of temperature dependent miscibilities of fluorous solvents and/or catalysts with common organic solvents, work-up procedures have been simplified considerably.39
Metal perfluorooctanesulfonates and metal bis(perfluorooctanesulfonyl)amides as well as fluorous phase transfer catalysts are a highly active field of research.44 Metal perfluorooctanesulfonates (M(OPf)x) are stable, barely hygroscopic Lewis acid-kind catalysts with a high affinity for the fluorous phase. Their general composition is M(OPf)x with the possibility to include numerous rare earth and transition metals, such as Sc, Y, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn and Pd. They can be used in such versatile organic reactions as aldol reactions, Friedel–Crafts acylations and alkylations, Knoevenagel reactions, Heck reactions, Diels–Alder reactions, esterifications, Mannich-type reactions, oxidations and many more.
Phase transfer catalysis processes offer great advantages concerning catalyst reuse and waste reduction. However, in many cases it has been difficult to recover the catalyst from the reaction mixture in a condition that is pure enough for efficient reuse. Therefore, fluorous phase transfer catalysts have been developed for efficient separation from the reaction mixture by simple phase separation. Quaternary fluorous ammonium [(RF)4N+X−] and phosphonium [(RF)4P+X−] salts have been developed for phase transfer catalysis in fluorous biphase systems. Perfluorinated crown ethers were prepared and investigated; and found to coordinate anions instead of cations which opens an enormous field of new applications. However, to bind cations in a fluorous medium, conventional crown ethers are substituted with one or two RF chains to render them soluble in the fluorous solvent (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Fluorous crown ethers. (a) Perfluoro 18-crown-6, (b) perfluoroalkane substituted 18-crown-6, (c) N-perfluoroalkyl substituted aza-18-crown-6.44 
The fluorous crown ethers can be applied in various kinds of reactions, such as functionalization of alkanes and alkenes, hydrocarbon oxidation or halogen exchange reactions.
Not only fluorous chemistry but also fluorine interactions are used in catalysis. Nocera et al.45 have reported on a perfluorophenyl substituted bisiron(III) μ-oxo porphyrin complex catalyzing the aerobic photooxidation of sulfides and olefins. The fact that the oxidizing power of metalloporphyrin complexes is increased by the introduction of electron withdrawing groups was used to develop a catalyst that promotes the oxidation without the need of an external co-reductant under mild conditions and with high turnover numbers as compared to other cofacial bisporphyrin photocatalysts. The photocatalytic reaction takes place at longer wavelengths in the visible region, thus preventing the need of applying UV-light.
5.3 Liquid crystals
Liquid crystals (LC) are materials that, in a certain temperature range, exist in the liquid state but exhibit anisotropic physical properties. They exhibit diverse degrees of ordering and thus offer fascinating dielectric, optical and visco-elastic properties.46 They are widely used for the fabrication of displays (LCD).

Fluoro substituents have been successfully incorporated into LC molecules because of the excellent stability that is offered by the C–F bond as well as the small size and the low polarizability of the fluorine, which gives rise to very low intermolecular dispersion interactions. Furthermore, the symmetry of perfluorinated aliphatic systems causes a mutual cancellation of the localized dipoles to give a non-polar system. These attributes of the fluoro substituent give rise to subtle modifications regarding fundamental chemical and physical properties of the liquid crystals, such as mesophase morphology, melting point and transition temperatures as well as dielectric, optical and visco-elastic properties and thus providing excellent conditions for use in active matrix thin film transistor (AM-TFT) displays.

Fluoro substituents can be located at different positions within the LC molecule, offering different strategies for influencing its properties (see also Fig. 10): (i) at a terminal position—as a single fluorine atom or within small groups; (ii) within a terminal chain; (iii) at a linking group; (iv) at a lateral position.
 Fig. 10  (a) General structure of a rod-like liquid crystal (A: core units, R: terminal units, X: linking groups, L: lateral substituents); (b) example for a LC molecule with fluorine at a terminal position; (c) LC molecule with a perfluorinated terminal chain; (d) LC molecule fluorinated at a linking group; (e) LC molecule fluorinated at a lateral position.47 
Kirsch et al.47 have recently presented a series of new superfluorinated materials (SFM) that were developed for the use in AM-LCDs. Due to the inclusion of a tetrahydropyran (THP) moiety combined with a very high degree of fluorination of the LC, materials with unprecedented properties could be achieved. They show a very high dielectric anisotropy (Δε), a low rotational viscosity (γ1), a high clearing point and an excellent solubility, which makes them ideal candidates for the utilization in liquid crystal mixtures, even when applied at large concentration without risking crystallization or conversion to smectic phases upon long-term storage at low temperatures. Examples for the new SFM can be seen in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Two examples of new superfluorinated materials containing a tetrahydropyran unit and fluorination at terminal and lateral positions and at the linking group.47 
5.4 Chirality
Yudin et al.48 have utilized polyfluorinated building blocks to form helically chiral molecules. Hereby, partially fluorinated binol-molecules were cyclized under basic conditions to give helically chiral substances (Fig. 12) that contain sterically separated donor–acceptor regions. The insertion of an additional bridge atom (compound 23 in Fig. 12) rendered the compound configurationally stable.
 Fig. 12  Partially fluorinated, helically chiral compounds formed by cyclization reactions from polyfluorinated binol precursors.48 
In crystals, molecules were arranged in columns, stabilized by offset face-to-face stacking and edge-to-face interactions, respectively, depending on the degree of fluorination of the naphthyl rings. Due to their donor–acceptor characteristics, the compounds exhibit interesting solid state properties and are potentially useful as photoluminescent dopant materials and for energy transfer studies.
Resnati et al.49 have for the first time shown the self-assembly of an artificial homochiral supramolecular double helix from achiral precursors stabilized by halogen bonding. The 4-tert-butylcalix[4]arenetetra-N,N-diethylacetamide (25) was co-crystallized with barium iodide dihydrate and 1,8-diiodoperfluorooctane to give the chiral 1∶1∶2 supramolecular complex (space groupI422). In the crystal structure, supercations 25⊂Ba2+ are arranged in stacks along the crystallographic c-axis. The I− counterions are linked to the fluorinated modules by I−⋯I–C halogen bonds and these units are stacked along the c-axis, too, parallel to the columns of the supercations. The 1,8-diiodoperfluorooctane moieties show a gauche conformation and arrange in homochiral archs, which then form the double helix.
5.5 
          Inclusion compounds

The formation of functional all-organic host–guest compounds is a well established field of research.50 However, issues of stability occur often which are limiting the use in many functional applications. Reichenbächer et al.51 have recently shown that the selective fluorination of an organic zeolite can improve thermal stability significantly. For the 2,4,6-tris(4-bromo-3,5-difluorophenoxy)-1,3,5-triazine (26), which is a fluorinated analog of the well known host 2,4,6-tris(4-bromophenoxy)-1,3,5-triazine (27), the open pore structure could be maintained up to a temperature of 110 °C in contrast to only 70 °C for the non-fluorinated parent compound. This significant increase in stability is attributed to the enhancement of the Br3-synthon upon fluorination as well as some H⋯F hydrogen bonds.
Furthermore, it was shown that the introduction of one or two fluorine atoms at specific positions can improve the inclusion behaviour of organic zeolites.25 While the non-fluorinated parent compound 27 includes only fullerenes C60 and C70 together with solvents, the fluorinated hosts 2,4,6-tris(4-bromo-3-fluorophenoxy)-1,3,5-triazine (28) and 26 can include C60 or C70 in combination with decamethylferrocene without solvent. Moreover, the bucky-ferrocene (C60(Me)5Fecp) is included (along with toluene) into the channels of 28 and 26, which is the first example of such a complex. This effect is attributed to the modified electrostatic potential of the phenyl substituents which line the channel walls.
5.6 Fluorinated fullerenes
Until today, a wide variety of fluorinated fullerenes from C60F2 up to C60F60 have been reported. The very commonly used C60F18 can be reacted with three equivalents of tris(methoxycarbonyl)methane and thus converted to a so-called “[18]trannulene”,52 which represents an 18π annulene ring with all the double bonds being planar and in a trans-relationship, which grants the molecule aromaticity. The electrons in the belt are highly conjugated, which causes an intense emerald green color and thus an increased absorption in the visible range compared to conventional fullerenes. All these “new” properties of the fluorinated fullerene make it a promising new candidate for the use as photoactive material in organic photovoltaic devices. C60F15[C(COOMe)3]3 (29) has been tested as acceptor material in photovoltaic devices using either substituted perylene bisimides or polyfluorene polymers as electron donor compounds. It was found that 29 acted as the photoactive component to withdraw electrons from the donors under excitation by light. This is the first example of trannulenes used as light harvesting components in organic solar cells. The still rather low efficiencies of these model devices may be increased significantly by careful optimization of the system, i.e. chemical modification of 29 or the search for other, better fitting electron donors. A special advantage of 29 is its stability towards moisture and air even at elevated temperatures which might in future lead to more stable organic photovoltaic devices, than presently on the market.
5.7 
          Macrocycles for molecular recognition and sensing
Molecular recognition is a key process in supramolecular chemistry as well as in nature and a basic requirement for sensors of any kind. Calixarenes are macrocyclic, adaptable scaffolds that can be used for a variety of sensing, recognition or inclusion applications. The most commonly used ones are calix[4]arenes but some variations, such as resorcinarenes, pyrogallolarenes or calixpyrrols, are known, as well. The fascinating, hydrophobic cavity has been used to incorporate a number of interesting guests, such as cations, anions or neutral molecules. By substitution of the upper or lower rim, the properties of these compounds can be varied nearly endlessly. Martin and Mecozzi53 have synthesized semifluorinated amphiphilic calix[4]arenes which self-assemble in aqueous solutions to form pH-dependent aggregation patterns. Hereby, the calix[4]arene scaffold was substituted with fluorous groups at the upper rim to render the molecule fluorophilic. The lower rim was functionalized with hydrophilic groups, such as phosphates or carboxylates. To investigate the pH-dependence of their self-assembly behaviour, the compounds were dissolved in different buffers (c = 100 μM) by sonication and then analyzed by dynamic light scattering (DLS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). For the calix[4]arene tetraphosphate, it was found that in most cases the solution contains small spherical micelles with a diameter of about 15–20 nm which further aggregate into larger clusters. However, at pH 4.1 the aggregates are less regular and do not have a constant shape and size. Most of the molecules are aggregated in a bilayer structure and only a small part is still forming micelles. For the calix[4]arene octacarboxylate the situation is more complex due to the different charged states formed at the various pH values. At acidic pH the compound forms spherical micelles with an average diameter of 17–20 nm. By increasing the pH, the diameter of the micelles increases to about 40–60 nm at pH 8.6. After that, a change in morphology appears and at pH 12 the majority of the micelles has a cylindrical shape. In addition to the micelles, some bilayered structures are formed, preferentially at extreme basic and extreme acidic pH values. This impressive example of the solvent dependence of a fluorous phase driven self-assembly of amphiphilic molecules stays at the beginning of potential applications of the “fluorophobic effect” for e.g. sensing and other fields.
A very interesting example can be found in waste extraction which was obtained by harnessing a set of non-covalent forces.54 Specifically, radioactive caesium is present in nuclear wastes and has to be separated from large amounts of non-radioactive potassium. Its extraction in fluorous solvents from water was obtained through the selective coordination of the caesium cation in the ionophoric pocket created by a crown ether loop and pycolyl residues appended at the lower rim of a calix[4]arene. In the presence of iodoperfluoroalkanes, the resulting naked anions were working as strong halogen bonding donors and fluorous supramolecular anions were formed. The affinity of these anions for the fluorous phase was high enough to positively affect the repartition of the salt between the water/fluorous solvent and allowed for its extraction.
The introduction of fluorous chains is not the only way for the efficient design of new sensor molecules. Sessler et al.55 have synthesized some fluorinated calix[n]pyrrols (n = 4–8) which show enhanced binding affinities for anions in comparison to their non-fluorinated parent compounds. For example, the octafluorocalix[4]pyrrole showed in solution a seven times higher binding constant towards chloride anions than the non-fluorinated calix[4]pyrrole. This effect is ascribed to the electron withdrawing effect of the fluorine substituents on the β-pyrrolic position, which improves the hydrogen bonding donor ability of the pyrrolic NH protons. These hydrogen bonds were shown by single crystal X-ray crystallography: the above mentioned octafluorocalix[4]pyrrole forms a 1∶1 complex with chloride ions, exhibiting exclusively the cone conformation and featuring an average N–H⋯Cl bond distance of 2.42 Å.
5.8 Complexation and MOFs
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are highly porous, crystalline materials with a large internal surface area, whose pore size can be adjusted accurately by the choice of the appropriate linkers. Therefore, they have possible applications in gas storage, catalysis or sensing. Non-fluorinated MOFs, however, have some limitations in the application due to their rigidity and other disadvantageous physical and chemical properties, whereas fluorous compounds exhibit several advantageous properties, such as enhanced light, thermal and air stability, low surface tension and surface energy as well as superacidity.
Omary et al.56 have recently presented a new fluorous metal–organic framework (FMOF) showing dynamic gas adsorption and thermal expansion. The first example thereof is 30, composed of Ag(I) and 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)-1,2,4-triazolate (Tz) with the overall composition (Ag2[Ag4-Tz6])n. 30 undergoes breathing upon gas adsorption and thermal expansion upon cooling of single crystals with large changes of unit-cell parameters and volume. The fluorine-lined inner surface contains flexible CF3 rotors that provide or prevent entry to their hydrophobic cavity, depending on the temperature. The unit cell volume exhibits an anisotropic thermal expansion of 13% upon cooling from 119 K to 90 K, which can be deduced to the opening of the toroid-shaped nanocages that are located within the channel walls. Hence, this gated small cage can function as a nanomachine for gas storage, mimicking the mammalian lung alveoli. Furthermore, the FMOFs have potential applications in sensing, catalysis and optoelectronics.
The presence of fluorous chains can be essential for the formation of a porous network. Fujita et al.57 have presented a new fluorous metal–organic framework, possessing long fluorous chains in the channels (Fig. 13). A solution of Co(NCS)2 in methanol was layered on a solution of ligand 32 in an ethylene glycol/methanol mixture (6∶1). After standing at room temperature, red crystals of the composition [Co(NCS)2(32)2·x(C2H6O2)]n (with x = 5.5) were formed and analyzed. The network contains fluorous pores with the Rf chains being disordered but all directing into the channels and forming a fluorous pseudo-liquid phase at the channel walls. Here, the fluorophobic effect is demonstrated impressively by the fact that the included ethylene glycol evaporates far below its own boiling point during TG analysis. This behaviour is in sharp contrast to typical inclusion compounds which often release guest molecules above their boiling points. To finally show the fluorophilic nature of the channels, perfluorohexane was included and a TG analysis showed the release of the guest molecules about 40 °C above the evaporation of the neat solvent.
 Fig. 13  Linkers used for the formation of a new metal–organic framework.57 
Furthermore, the porous network shown above is not formed if a similar linker with a non-fluorinated alkyl chain is introduced (31, Fig. 13), thus showing that the fluorine interactions are crucial for the formation of that channel structure.
5.9 Fluorinated materials for organic electronics and the alternative energy sector

Fluorination of functional materials can increase their performance significantly.58 First of all, the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of perfluorinated materials are lowered, facilitating electron injection. Secondly, the highly ordered π-stacking of perfluorinated aromatics in the solid state increases charge carrier mobilities. And thirdly, fluorinated materials are less amenable to oxidative degradation due to their low-lying HOMO levels. For example, fluorination of substituted pentacenes59 improves the π-stacking in the crystal, lowers the reduction potential and increases the charge–carrier mobility, thus improving the device performance of the pentacenes in a thin-film transistor configuration significantly.
Fluorinated polymers are showing very interesting chemical and physical properties. Thiophene and selenophene copolymers comprising fluorinated phenylene units have been developed for the utilization as semiconductor materials in organic field-effect transistors (OFETs).60 The usage of perfluorinated phenylene units improves the self-assembly, hole transport and electronic properties of the polymers in comparison to the non-fluorinated parent compounds. The HOMO levels are lowered leading to increased stability of the polymer and the perfluorophenyl group is leading to a good solubility and thus excellent processability of the material.
Organic photovoltaics (OPV) are promising alternatives to conventional, silicon based solar cells, because of their lower price and mechanical flexibility. However, there are still many obstacles to overcome until their successful commercialization. One of them is to improve the interfacial properties between the anode and the active layer and thus increase the hole extraction and enhance the open-circuit voltage. Until now, blends of poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) have been widely used. However, the material is highly acidic and corrodes the ITO electrodes. Moreover, spin-cast films of the material show large inhomogeneities resulting in the variation of morphology and conductivity by orders of magnitude. Kang et al.61 have now shown that the implementation of PTFE as the ITO buffer layer gives significant improvements regarding short-circuit current and open-circuit voltage. Thus, higher power conversion efficiencies are achieved compared to PEDOT:PSS containing devices. Further advantages of PTFE-layers are their thermal stability, low chemical reactivity, moisture resistance, light weight and flexibility.
However, fluoropolymers are not only used as components of the active layer, but also as encapsulating materials for photovoltaic devices.62 Their main tasks are to provide electrical insulation, physical protection and prevention of moisture penetration. Furthermore, they have to resist long-term UV radiation without a loss of adhesive stability or light transmittance. Fluoropolymers outperform conventional polymers mainly because of their high photostability and long-term chemical and moisture resistance. In addition, they tend to self-clean because of their low surface energy. The fluoropolymer used most often is polyvinyl fluoride (PVF), but polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and the ethylene-tetrafluoroethylene copolymer (ETFE) can be found, too. To reduce the price, laminates of PVF with polyesters, such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET), or aluminium foil are used. These are usually trilayer structures with the composition PVF/PET/PVF or PVF/Al/PVF for effective electrical isolation or high moisture applications, respectively. For demanding applications with maximum electrical isolation and minimum moisture permeation the combination of both in a four-layer structure has been realized: PVF/Al/PET/PVF.
5.10 Biomedical applications
Although fluorine is (with a few exceptions) not present in the living nature, it can be found in numerous pharmaceuticals.63 This can be ascribed to the unique properties that fluorine can induce in various compounds, such as metabolic stability, binding selectivity and potency, enhanced solubility, absorption, distribution and excretion characteristics. How can one atom (or small group of atoms) influence the properties of pharmaceuticals to such a great extent? First of all, it is the combination of the high electronegativity with its small size, making fluorine an ideal candidate for the replacement of hydrogen or oxygen. Its strongly electron withdrawing nature has a remarkable effect on the pKa value of the drug candidates. The inductive effect of the fluorine substituent reduces the basicity and increases the acidity of numerous compounds, influencing physicochemical properties of drug candidates. Of particular importance is the membrane penetration of central nervous system drugs which can be improved twofold with fluorine substitution: firstly, by increasing the lipophilicity and secondly by reducing the amount of charges present in the molecule. Furthermore, fluorine can improve the drug potency by direct binding interactions with, e.g., a protein. Fluorine substituents preferably orient towards electropositive and thus fluorophilic environments in peptides and such different interactions as C–F⋯H–N, C–F⋯CO and C–F⋯H–C contacts have been identified.64 Accordingly, fluorine can have an adverse effect on the binding affinity in regions of high electron density.
With all these positive effects numerous improved drug properties have been achieved, such as improved duration of action, enhanced potency, reduced risk for covalent protein binding and attenuation of biliary clearance. Countless examples of fluorinated drugs can be found in the literature, and the interested reader is referred to reviews in this section, for example the series recently published in J. Fluorine Chem.65 However, it is still not possible to predict the influence of a fluorine substituent on the pharmacological effect of a given component. This continues to be a trial and error process.
5.11 Crop protection
The most important requirements for modern agrochemicals are efficacy, environmental safety, economic viability and user friendliness.66 It has been shown in recent years that halogenation is an excellent tool to achieve this, and in particular fluorine substituted agrochemicals is a growing market in the 21st century. Amongst others this can be ascribed to the recent progress in the development of selective fluorination agents. Furthermore, the number of agrochemicals containing mixed halogens, i.e. one or more chlorine, bromine or iodine in addition to fluorine substituent(s), has increased significantly.
The effect of halogenation shall be shown in the following example: 4-hydroxy-[2H]-1,4-benzoxazin-3(4H)-one (34) has been found as a lead compound for herbicides.67 Phytotoxicity studies on different kinds of weeds, e.g.: Echinochloa crus-galli (barnyardgrass) which occurs in rice crops, have shown that halogenation and in particular fluorination of the parent compound leads to an increase in herbicidal activity and selectivity. Thus, 35 (Fig. 14) was more than 100 times more active than unsubstituted 34, and 37 was the most selective herbicide towards E. crus-galli in a row of 16 tested compounds, both outperforming the commercially available weed Propanil used as a reference compound.
 Fig. 14  
Benzoxazinone derivatives that were active towards Echinochloa crus-galli (barnyardgrass).67 
However, like for the pharmaceutical compounds, fluorination can lead to an increase or decrease of biological activity, depending on the interactions with the target as well as metabolic susceptibility and transformations.
6. Summary and conclusion
During recent years there has been a considerable progress in the field of crystal engineering and systematic design of functional materials. The field of fluorine chemistry is taking up a particular position in that domain because it opens up many new possibilities to modify a compound which are not offered by other substituents. The exchange of H vs. F can have a tremendous influence on crystal structures, physical and chemical properties of the particular compounds. Here, progress on fluorine interactions since the publication of our last review1 is shown and several chapters on less familiar but still important interactions are added. These are C–F⋯carbonyl and anion⋯πF interaction as well as halogen bonding. Furthermore, the young and very important field of “fluorous” chemistry is introduced briefly. In summary, one could say that strong hydrogen bonds are a very powerful tool to influence the packing mode of organic molecules. However, the formation of supramolecular structures depends on a large number of interactions, and the weaker forces can play a crucial role for the composition of the overall structure, because they are often numerous and act cooperatively.
A large part of the review is dedicated to the applications of fluorine containing compounds in diverse fields of current research, finding access to everyday life, such as liquid crystals, renewable energies, pharmaceuticals and crop protection. Significant advances are made in the targeted design of functional compounds in the materials chemistry and life science domain. In particular the advances in the alternative energy sector providing materials for organic electronics and photovoltaics have been huge in the past few years. However, there is still a lot of work needed to truly understand the impact of fluorine substituents on the physical, chemical, biological and structural properties of functional compounds and to transfer this knowledge into real world applications.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the European Commission, Human Potential Program (RTN “NanoMatch”, Contract No. MRTN-CT-2006-035884).
References
K. Reichenbächer, H. I. Süss and J. Hulliger, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 22 RSC .
S. Bacchi, M. Benaglia, F. Cozzi, F. Demartin, G. Filippini and A. Gavezzotti, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 3538 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cozzi, S. Bacchi, G. Filippini, T. Pilati and A. Gavezzotti, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 7177 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cozzi, S. Bacchi, G. Filippini, T. Pilati and A. Gavezzotti, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 1122 RSC .
L. S. Reddy, P. M. Bhatt, R. Banerjee, A. Nangia and G. J. Kruger, Chem.–Asian J., 2007, 2, 505 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schwarzer, P. Bombicz and E. Weber, J. Fluorine Chem., 2010, 131, 345 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Batsanov, I. A. I. Mkhalid and T. B. Marder, Acta Crystallogr., 2007, E63, o1196 CAS .

          G. Gilli and P. Gilli, The Nature of the Hydrogen Bond: Outline of a Comprehensive Hydrogen Bond Theory, Oxford University Press, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .
E. D'Oria and J. J. Novoa, CrystEngComm, 2008, 10, 423 RSC .
G. R. Desiraju, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 565 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Schwarzer, W. Seichter, E. Weber, H. Stoeckli-Evans, M. Losada and J. Hulliger, CrystEngComm, 2004, 6, 567 RSC ; 
  (b) A. Schwarzer and E. Weber, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2862 CrossRef CAS .
G. Asensio, M. Medio-Simon, P. Alemán and C. Ramírez de Arellano, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 2769 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bayón, S. Coco and P. Espinet, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 1079 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mariaca, N.-R. Behrnd, P. Eggli, H. Stoeckli-Evans and J. Hulliger, CrystEngComm, 2006, 8, 222 RSC .
H. Plenio, ChemBioChem, 2004, 5, 650 CrossRef CAS .
H. Takemura, T. Iwanaga and T. Shinmyozu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 8989 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. M. Barrett, M. R. Crimmin, M. S. Hill, P. B. Hitchcock and P. A. Procopiou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6339 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Popeney, A. L. Rheingold and Z. Guan, Organometallics, 2009, 28, 4452 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sini, A. Tessier, J. Pytkowicz and T. Brigaud, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 3363 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Olsen, D. W. Banner, P. Seiler, U. O. Sander, A. D'Arcy, M. Stihle, K. Müller and F. Diederich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2507 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Fischer, W. B. Schweizer and F. Diederich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8270 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.
P. Metrangolo, F. Meyer, T. Pilati, G. Resnati and G. Terraneo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6114 CrossRef CAS .
P. Politzer, P. Lane, M. C. Concha, Y. Ma and J. S. Murray, J. Mol. Model., 2007, 13, 305 CrossRef CAS .
P. Politzer, J. S. Murray and T. Clark, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7748 RSC .
K. Reichenbächer, A. Neels, H. Stoeckli-Evans, P. Balasubramaniyan, K. Müller, Y. Matsuo, E. Nakamura, E. Weber and J. Hulliger, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 1399 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyata, T. Minari, T. Nemoto, S. Isoda and K. Komatsu, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2007, 5, 2592 RSC .
J. H. Palmer, M. W. Day, A. D. Wilson, L. M. Henling, Z. Gross and H. B. Gray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7786 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Mariott, L. O. Gustafson and E. Y.-X. Chen, Organometallics, 2006, 25, 3721 CrossRef CAS .
P. Politzer, J. S. Murray and M. C. Concha, J. Mol. Model., 2007, 13, 643 CrossRef CAS .
S. Riedel, T. Köchner, X. Wang and L. Andrews, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 7156 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nockemann, B. Thijs, S. Pittois, J. Thoen, C. Glorieux, K. Van Hecke, L. Van Meervelt, B. Kirchner and K. Binnemans, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20978 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Lu, J.-W. Zou, Q.-S. Yu, Y.-J. Jiang and W.-N. Zhao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 449, 6 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Schottel, H. T. Chifotides and K. R. Dunbar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 68 RSC .
C. Garau, D. Quiñonero, A. Frontera, P. Ballester, A. Costa and P. M. Deyà, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 9341 CrossRef CAS .
D. Quiñonero, A. Frontera, C. Garau, P. Ballester, A. Costa and P. M. Deyà, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 2487 CrossRef .
R. Mariaca, G. Labat, N.-R. Behrnd, M. Bonin, F. Helbling, P. Eggli, G. Couderc, A. Neels, H. Stoeckli-Evans and J. Hulliger, J. Fluorine Chem., 2009, 130, 175 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chopra and T. N. Guru Row, CrystEngComm, 2008, 10, 54 RSC .
V. Vasylyeva and K. Merz, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 4250 CrossRef CAS   and references cited therein.

Handbook of Fluorous Chemistry, ed. J. A. Gladysz, D. P. Curran and I. T. Vorváth, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed .
M. Yano, T. Taketsugu, K. Hori, H. Okamoto and S. Takenaka, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 3991 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sonoda, M. Goto, S. Tsuzuki, H. Akiyama and N. Tamaoki, J. Fluorine Chem., 2009, 130, 151 CrossRef CAS  ; and references cited therein.
O. Jeannin and M. Fourmigué, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2994 CrossRef CAS .
B.-B. Ni, C. Wang, H. Wu, J. Pei and Y. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 782 RSC .
C. Cai, W.-B. Yi, W. Zhang, M.-G. Shen, M. Hong and L.-Y. Zeng, Mol. Diversity, 2009, 13, 209 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rosenthal, B. J. Pistorio, L. L. Chng and D. G. Nocera, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 1885 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hird, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 2070 RSC .
P. Kirsch, W. Binder, A. Hahn, K. Jährling, M. Lenges, L. Lietzau, D. Maillard, V. Meyer, E. Poetsch, A. Ruhl, G. Unger and R. Fröhlich, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2008, 3479 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rasmusson, L. J. P. Martyn, G. Chen, A. Lough, M. Oh and A. K. Yudin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7009 CrossRef CAS .
A. Casnati, R. Liantonio, P. Metrangolo, G. Resnati, R. Ungaro and F. Ugozzoli, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1915 CrossRef CAS .
G. Couderc and J. Hulliger, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1545 RSC .
K. Reichenbächer, G. Couderc, A. Neels, K. Krämer, E. Weber and J. Hulliger, J. Inclusion Phenom. Macrocyclic Chem., 2008, 61, 127 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Troshin, R. Koeppe, D. K. Susarova, N. V. Polyakova, A. S. Peregudov, V. F. Razumov, N. S. Sariciftci and R. N. Lyubovskaya, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7738 RSC .
O. M. Martin and S. Mecozzi, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 5539 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gattuso, A. Pappalardo, M. F. Parisi, I. Pisagatti, F. Crea, R. Liantonio, P. Metrangolo, W. Navarrini, G. Resnati, T. Pilati and S. Pappalardo, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 4951 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Sessler, W.-S. Cho, D. E. Gross, J. A. Shriver, V. M. Lynch and M. Marquez, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 5982 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, X. Wang and M. A. Omary, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jang, T. Yamaguchi, K. Ohara, M. Kawano and M. Fujita, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 1524 CrossRef CAS .
F. Babudri, G. M. Farinola, F. Naso and R. Ragni, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1003 RSC .
C. R. Swartz, S. R. Parkin, J. E. Bullock, J. E. Anthony, A. C. Mayer and G. G. Malliaras, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 3163 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Crouch, P. J. Skabara, J. E. Lohr, J. J. W. McDouall, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, D. Sparrowe, M. Shkunov, S. J. Coles, P. N. Horton and M. B. Hursthouse, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6567 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kang, L. W. Tan and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 133302 CrossRef .
M. DeBergalis, J. Fluorine Chem., 2004, 125, 1255 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Hagmann, J. Med. Chem., 2008, 51, 4359 CrossRef CAS .
K. Müller, C. Faeh and F. Diederich, Science, 2007, 317, 1881 CrossRef .
C. Isanbor and D. O’Hagan, J. Fluorine Chem., 2006, 127, 303 CrossRef CAS ; J.-P. Bégué and D. Bonnet-Delpon, J. Fluorine Chem., 2006, 127, 992 CrossRef CAS ; K. L. Kirk, J. Fluorine Chem., 2006, 127, 1013 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jeschke, Pest Manage. Sci., 2010, 66, 10 Search PubMed .
F. A. Macías, N. Chincilla, R. M. Varela, J. M. G. Molinillo, D. Marín and J. M. de Siqueira, Pest Manage. Sci., 2009, 65, 1104 Search PubMed   and references cited therein.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Ricarda Berger
	Ricarda Berger was born in 1982 in Germany. She studied chemistry at the Technical University Bergakademie Freiberg, Germany, and received her Diploma in 2006 working with Prof. Dr E. Weber. Currently, she is a PhD student in the group of Prof. Dr J. Hulliger at the University of Berne, working on the synthesis and property directed crystallization of fluorinated inclusion compounds.

Giuseppe Resnati
	Giuseppe Resnati became full professor at the Politecnico di Milano in 2001. He was a NATO fellow at the University of Clemson (USA, 1990), visiting scientist at the Université Paris XI (France, 1993) and Nagoya University (Japan, 2001). He is on the Editorial Board of the Journal of Fluorine Chemistry and was awarded the 2008 Research Prize of the Division of Organic Chemistry of the Italian Chemical Society and the European Lectureship in Chemical Science by RSC in 2010. His research interests are fluorine chemistry, and self-assembly processes.

Pierangelo Metrangolo
	Pierangelo Metrangolo became full professor at the Politecnico di Milano in 2010. He has been an EU Fellow at the University of Toulouse (France, 2001), visiting Professor at the University of York (UK, 2005) and at the University of Jyväskylä (FI, 2006). His awards include the 2005 “G. Ciamician” medal of the Division of Organic Chemistry of the Italian Chemical Society and the 2005 Journals Grant Award of the RSC. His research interests include crystal engineering, supramolecular and materials chemistry.

Edwin Weber
	Edwin Weber was born in 1946 in Germany. He studied chemistry at the University of Würzburg (Germany) and obtained Diploma in 1973. In 1976, he received a PhD from the University of Würzburg under the supervision of Prof. F. Vögtle. Following post doctoral studies at the University in Bonn (Germany) and as a NATO-fellow at the University of Wisconsin, USA, spending time in the laboratories of Barry Trost, he qualified in 1984 as a Lecturer in Organic Chemistry at the University of Bonn. In 1986 he was promoted to Professor of Organic Chemistry. During 1992–1993, he temporarily substituted a Full Professorship at the University of Kiel (Germany). In 1993, he took up his present position as full Professor of Organic Chemistry at the Technical University Bergakademie Freiberg (Germany). His current research fields focus on different aspects of supramolecular chemistry including molecular recognition and inclusion, porous framework design, crystal engineering, chemical sensing and electronic materials properties.

Jürg Hulliger
	Jürg Hulliger was born in 1953 in Zurich, Switzerland. At ETH Zurich he studied chemistry and graduated in physical chemistry. In 1984 he received a PhD from the University of Zurich. After a post-doctoral stay at the Pennsylvania State University he moved to the Institute of Solid State Physics (later Quantum-electronics) at ETH to conduct research in crystal growth. In 1993 he took up his position as a full professor of chemistry at the University of Berne (Switzerland). His research fields are: chemistry of materials, theory of stochastic polarity formation, physical properties of solids. In 2004 he became a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry.

 	Fig. 1  Structure of the 14 electron intermediate state of a new polymerization catalyst. The metal center is stabilized by an axial fluorine atom from the cyclophane ligand.18	 

 	Fig. 2  Molecular torsion balance which was used for the determination of the free enthalpy of interaction between a CF3 and a carbonyl group.21	 

 	Fig. 3  Dimer formed by bis(trimethylamine)-(2,3,7,8,12,13,17,18-octabromo-5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrolato)-iridium(III)via C–F⋯Br–C halogen bonding. Fluorine works as a halogen bonding acceptor. The sum of van der Waals radii of fluorine and bromine is 3.32 Å.27	 

 	Fig. 4  Calculated interaction energies of the cation–π, anion–π and π–π complexes of Na+, Cl− and 1,3,5-trifluorobenzene and the combinations thereof.35	 

 	Fig. 5  Donor–acceptor substituted stilbenes. Fluorination of R1 enhances the acceptor nature of the halogens and thus makes the halogen bonding stronger.14,36	 

 	Fig. 6  Substituted benzanilides studied by Chopra and Guru Row.37 All possible combinations with a maximum of one fluorine atom per phenyl ring were examined.	 

 	Fig. 7  Molecular structures of 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (16), 1-phenyl-6-pentafluorophenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (17) and 1,6-bis(pentafluorophenyl)-1,3,5-hexatriene (18), used for photopolymerization, and the resulting dimers 19 from polymerization of 17 and 20 from polymerization of a co-crystal of 16 and 18.41	 

 	Fig. 8  “Click” polymerization of azide and alkyne substituted molecules to regioselectively form the 1,4-triazole polymer and successive hydrolysis of the imide group to give the 1,4-substituted triazole.43	 

 	Fig. 9  Fluorous crown ethers. (a) Perfluoro 18-crown-6, (b) perfluoroalkane substituted 18-crown-6, (c) N-perfluoroalkyl substituted aza-18-crown-6.44	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) General structure of a rod-like liquid crystal (A: core units, R: terminal units, X: linking groups, L: lateral substituents); (b) example for a LC molecule with fluorine at a terminal position; (c) LC molecule with a perfluorinated terminal chain; (d) LC molecule fluorinated at a linking group; (e) LC molecule fluorinated at a lateral position.47	 

 	Fig. 11  Two examples of new superfluorinated materials containing a tetrahydropyran unit and fluorination at terminal and lateral positions and at the linking group.47	 

 	Fig. 12  Partially fluorinated, helically chiral compounds formed by cyclization reactions from polyfluorinated binol precursors.48	 

 	Fig. 13  Linkers used for the formation of a new metal–organic framework.57	 

 	Fig. 14  
Benzoxazinone derivatives that were active towards Echinochloa crus-galli (barnyardgrass).67	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
