Photosynthetic biofilms in pure culture harness solar energy in a mediatorless bio-photovoltaic cell (BPV) system   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01965A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01965A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4699-4709Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhotosynthetic biofilms in pure culture harness solar energy in a mediatorless bio-photovoltaic cell (BPV) system†

        
          
            Alistair J. 
            McCormick
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Paolo 
            Bombelli
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Amanda M. 
            Scott
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Alexander J. 
            Philips
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Alison G. 
            Smith
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Adrian C. 
            Fisher
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Christopher J. 
            Howe
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Hopkins Building, Downing Site, Cambridge, CB2 1QW, United Kingdom. E-mail: ajm283@cam.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 (0)1223 333 345;   Tel: +44 (0)1223 333 687
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge New Museums Site, Pembroke Street, Cambridge, CB2 3RA, United Kingdom
cDepartment of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Downing Site, Cambridge, CB2 3EA, United Kingdom
Received 
      16th June 2011
    , Accepted 6th September 2011First published on 27th September 2011AbstractMicrobial fuel cells are an emerging technology for converting organic substrates into electrical power. Recent research has shown that biofilms of some bacterial species are capable of self-mediated extracellular electron transfer. The prospect of exploiting this trait in photoautotrophic microbes that do not require an organic substrate has important implications for the future development of renewable solar energy technologies. Here we report on light-driven electrical power generated with biofilms grown from photosynthetic fresh water or marine species without the addition of an artificial electron-shuttling mediator. Green alga (Chlorella vulgaris, Dunaliella tertiolecta) or cyanobacteria (Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, Synechococcus sp. WH 5701) strains were grown directly on a transparent, conductive anode (indium tin oxide-coated polyethylene terephthalate) and power generation under light and dark conditions was evaluated using a single-chamber bio-photovoltaic cell (BPV) system. Increased power outputs were observed for all strains upon illumination, with the largest light effect observed for Synechococcus (maximum 10.3 mW m−2 total power output recorded under 10 W m−2 white light). Further experiments conducted with Synechococcus and C. vulgaris showed that photosynthetic oxygen evolution rates were consistent with BPV power outputs under different light regimes (red, green and blue light), indicating a direct link between power output and photosynthetic activity. Biofilm power generation in these BPV devices was self-sustained for several weeks and was highly sensitive to ambient light levels. When connected in series, four BPVs (each 0.011 m2) generated enough power to run a commercial digital clock.

Broader context
There is increasing interest in photosynthetic microbial fuel cells, also known as biophotovoltaic (BPV) devices, for electrical energy generation. These devices rely on photosynthetic microorganisms to use light energy to split water and provide electrons, some of which may ultimately be lost from the cell. Many BPV devices use free-living cells and exploit an exogenously supplied redox mediator, such as ferricyanide, to transfer electrons from the cell surface to the electrode that harvests them. Power outputs from these devices are still low, and the use of exogenous mediators is undesirable. It is possible to avoid the need for exogenous mediators by growing biofilms directly onto electrodes. This approach has been successful in several studies using consortium cultures. However, controlling the composition of a consortium may be difficult, and mechanistic studies also are more readily interpretable using defined pure cultures. This paper describes the growth of pure cultures of prokaryotic and eukaryotic photosynthetic microorganisms as biofilms on electrodes, and analyses their power outputs. It also describes the use of four BPV devices, connected in series, to run a domestic device, namely a small digital clock.

Introduction
Microbial fuel cells are an emerging bioelectrochemical technology that represents a potentially renewable source of energy production and transduction. Studies have demonstrated power production from both heterotrophic and photoautotrophic microbes, and combinations of the two in a single system.1–4 Heterotrophic microbial fuel cells (MFCs) produce power through the metabolic by-products of microbial respiration and therefore require a continual supply of organic carbon for energy and reducing equivalents. In contrast, bio-photovoltaic cells (BPVs) are MFCs that are able to access solar energy and require only water as an electron source. BPVs generate power by harvesting electrons from the photochemical and respiratory activities of photosynthetic microbes.5 BPV technologies offer several advantages over current photovoltaic cells, in that the catalytic microbes used in BPVs are self-sustainable, relatively inexpensive to culture and are capable of power production during the day and night.5 However, power outputs from BPVs (and MFCs) suffer from low efficiencies due to intrinsic metabolic losses and intracellular competition for energy resources. To scale up BPV technology for commercial application these efficiency limitations must be overcome.
Previously, BPV studies (both sub-cellular and whole cell) have utilised a variety of exogenous soluble mediator compounds to facilitate electron transfer from the biological material to the electrode surface.6 Over the last two decades BPV research has increasingly focused on whole cells,1,7,8 which provide an inherently more robust and potentially self-renewable platform for generating power. Although exogenous mediators facilitate electron withdrawal from whole cells, there are several disadvantages associated with their usage that have rendered this approach largely unfeasible for future commercial application.5,9,10 More recently, the use of exogenous mediators has been avoided by culturing microbial communities directly onto electrode surfaces to exploit the endogenous exoelectrogenic properties associated with biofilm development.9,11–13
Microbial biofilms are naturally occurring cell aggregations that have been shown to produce current in MFCs in the absence of mediators.14 Although the metabolic pathways involved are not yet fully understood, the ability of biofilms to function without a mediator has been shown to offer several electrochemical advantages, including: i) increased power outputs due to direct contact between cells and electrode,15,16 and ii) reduced internal potential losses, particularly mass transport limitations.17 In nature, biofilms are typically composed of a heterogeneous population of microbial species that can undergo several different stages of colonization over time.18,19 Consequently, most mediatorless BPV-type biofilm studies to date have primarily focused on the performance of consortia of photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic microbes, such as populations found in wastewater4,12 or marine sediments.3,13 Xing et al. (2009)20 recently showed that exposure of a mediatorless wastewater MFC system to light led to a greater abundance of photosynthetic microbes in the anodic biofilm community and increased power outputs. That study not only demonstrated that photosynthesis can be exploited to enhance energy production efficiencies in a consortium system, but that photosynthetic microbes may play a key role in increasing exoelectrogenic activities.
Although biofilm MFCs based on consortia typically generate increased power outputs compared to pure species,16,21 more information about the energy production mechanisms can be obtained when single strains are isolated from these consortia. High power outputs in MFC systems have been linked to the exoelectrogenic properties of a limited set of heterotrophic bacteria, including Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 and Geobacter sulfurreducens.10,22 The performances of pure cultures of these heterotrophic species have been widely studied using mediatorless MFCs (for review see Logan [2009]16). On the other hand, the potential to exploit the light harvesting electron transport chain of specific photosynthetic prokaryotes or eukaryotes has been much less explored. An investigation using nano-electrodes inserted directly into the chloroplast of single cells of the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii has highlighted the sizeable electron pool (ca. 20 A m−2) potentially available to exploit for power production.23 Nevertheless, to date no mediatorless BPV studies have demonstrated light-dependent power production from any pure eukaryotic algal strain. In cyanobacteria, Pisciotta et al. (2010)21 have recently compared the performance and light response of several cyanobacterial species in a BPV-type system under mediatorless conditions and demonstrated that exoelectrogenic activities are increased in the light, conserved across a diversity of genera, and enhanced particularly in cyanobacteria that readily formed biofilms on the anodic electrode.
A proper understanding of the dominant biological and electrochemical features of biofilms within microbial fuel cells is still lacking.24 Under natural conditions, development of a phototrophic biofilm community typically involves the initial attachment of ‘pioneer’ species.25 Thus, the ability of pure photosynthetic cultures to initiate biofilms on electrode materials may be species-dependent. In general, biofilm development is not well documented in MFC studies, and no BPV studies to date have attempted to characterise biofilm formation in the reactors used. An eventual goal would be the construction of a multispecies, photosynthetic biofilm community with defined compositions for optimized power outputs. To this end, the capacity of pure cultures to develop robust electrogenic biofilms on electrode surfaces must first be characterized.
In the current study, a mediatorless, single-chamber BPV system was designed to examine the potential exoelectrogenic properties of four photoautotrophic microbes from common genera under light and dark conditions following autotrophic biofilm cultivation on an anodic substrate. We have compared the capacity of different photosynthetic microbes to develop biofilms on indium tin oxide-coated polyethylene terephthalate (ITO-PET), a typical electrode material for organic and biological solar cells. Furthermore, we have demonstrated light-dependent power outputs from pure algal strains, and compared exoelectrogenic performances between prokaryotic and eukaryotic photoautotrophs. This is, to our knowledge, the first time these analyses have been reported. Generation of light-driven power was evident for all four species studied, with the strongest light effect observed for Synechococcus sp. WH 5701. Biofilm development differed substantially between species. Further analyses of Synechococcus and Chlorella vulgaris using a novel, open-air BPV device indicated that power productions could be maintained for long periods and were highly sensitive to ambient light levels. The ability to combine the outputs of smaller BPVs is an important requirement for scaling-up to yield useful levels of energy production. To this end, this study also presents an analysis of multiple BPVs connected in series or parallel. Notably, BPVs connected in series produced adequate potential and sufficient current to run a small electronic device. We believe this is the first report of such an analysis. The strong similarities between photosynthetic oxygen evolution and BPV peak power outputs under different light regimes suggested that the metabolic pathways involved in extracellular electron transfer are closely associated with the activity of the photosynthetic electron transport chain.
Results
Characterisation of biofilms
Aliquots of each culture containing equivalent amounts (150 nmol) of chlorophyll were inoculated onto an ITO-PET anode (50 × 50 mm) and allowed to grow under static conditions for eight days, and the growth of the biofilm monitored by measuring total chlorophyll. A significant correlation exists between chlorophyll a content and biofilm biomass accumulation.26,27 The largest increase was observed for C. vulgaris (268%), whereas Dunaliella tertiolecta did not show any significant increase over time (Table 1). Both cyanobacterial cultures had a similar increase in chlorophyll (47% and 62% for Synechococcus and Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, respectively).
Table 1 Planktonic cultures form biofilms on the anodic substrate. Cultures were inoculated (150 nmol Chl) onto PET-ITO (50 × 50 mm2) and grown under low light (5 W m−2; 12 h light/dark) for eight days under benthic conditions. Each value is the mean ± SE from measurements on three separate samples




Culture
Culture inoculation (nmol Chl)
Culture content following 8 days growth (nmol Chl)
Total growth (%)

                    Growth rate (nmol Chl d−1)
Attached to ITO (%)
Biofilm density (pmol Chl mm−3)





Chlorella
 vulgaris

150
551 ± 11
268 ± 7.3
50.2 ± 1.4
77 ± 4.1
25.5 ± 1.0



Dunaliella tertiolecta

150
156 ± 9
4.3 ± 3.9
1.43 ± 0.9
74 ± 10.5
4.3 ± 0.9



Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803
150
243 ± 8
62 ± 5.6
11.6 ± 1.1
8.5 ± 0.13
0.6 ± 0.02



Synechococcus sp. WH 5701
150
220 ± 11
47 ± 7.1
6.22 ± 2.7
82 ± 0.9
10.4 ± 0.6




Following incubation, a biofilm-like growth was evident for all cultures. Synechococcus, D. tertiolecta and C. vulgaris showed the highest proportion of cells attached as a biofilm to the anode (82%, 74% and 77% of the total culture, respectively). Conversely, Synechocystis appeared to have a very low fraction of cells attached (8.5%) and was easily detached following gentle shaking. This was not the case for the eukaryotic cultures, which both demonstrated relatively robust attachment to the anodic surface (Table 1; Supp. Fig. 1†). Confocal fluorescence imaging was used to measure the density of each biofilm (Table 1; Supp. Fig. 1†). Synechococcus and C. vulgaris demonstrated the highest overall biofilm densities (expressed as pmol Chl mm−3). Although biofilms of D. tertiolecta visually appeared dense and compact, the levels of fluorescence observed were relatively low. This may have been due to the relatively decreased growth rates and low overall chlorophyll contents observed for D. tertiolecta compared to the other strains. Although Synechocystis exhibited some fluorescence, the confocal images indicated that this was due to small cell clusters not fully attached to the anode, rather than any cohesive biofilm structure (Supp. Fig. 1†), which resulted in the low densities observed.
Light response and power analyses
The exoelectrogenic activities of different biofilm strains were characterised in a closed, single-chamber BPV device (Fig. 1a–c) under controlled temperature conditions (22 ± 2 °C). All biofilms were initially placed under a high resistance load (e.g. 1 MΩ) for at least 48 h prior to the start of experiments. Following stabilisation of the BPV at open circuit potential (OCP), polarization and power curves were generated for each species by applying different resistance loads to the external circuit in the dark or light (10 W m−2; white light). Significant power outputs were seen from algae and cyanobacteria in dark conditions, as previously observed (Bombelli et al.51). This is presumably due to heterotrophic breakdown of stored carbon intermediates (accumulated during the light period), as with bacteria-driven MFC systems (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 1  Construction of the bio-photovoltaic devices used to extract current from a biofilm culture attached to an ITO-coated PET anode. The anodic biofilm was either 1256 mm2 and connected to a Pt-coated gold cathode in a sandwich-like horizontal design filled with medium solution (a–c), or 0.011 m2 and connected to an open-air, Pt-coated carbon paper cathode above the biofilm in medium solution (d–f). 
 Fig. 2  Power outputs of BPV devices with different species under light and dark conditions. Power curves (left) and polarization curves (right) show the best performance of anodic biofilms cultured from C. vulgaris (a), D. tertiolecta (b), Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (c) or Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 (d) quantified under dark and light (10 W m−2) conditions. No light response was observed in control experiments using ITO-PET bearing no biofilm material. The external resistance applied at maximum power output for each culture (a–d) was 22 kΩ, 3 kΩ, 333 kΩ and 3 kΩ respectively. Histograms demonstrate the ratio between light and dark peak power densities (bottom left) and average peak power densities (bottom right) (D. tertiolecta and Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 [N = 2], C. vulgaris and Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 [N = 3]). 
Nonetheless, under illumination there was an increase in BPV power output for all four microbes (Fig. 2; Supp. Fig. 2†), with the greatest light response and highest overall power production observed for Synechococcus (8.5 ± 1 mW m−2). A peak power output of 10 mW m−2 for Synechococcus was established at a current density of 50 mA m−2, with a maximum current density of 93 mA m−2. Thus, under illumination at 10 W m−2, Synechococcus BPVs could generate energy from light at a total power conversion efficiency of 0.1–0.07%. Conversely, Synechocystis showed a weak light response and low peak power outputs under illumination of 114 ± 34 μW m−2. Control BPVs containing growth media but no microbes showed no response to light. The increased power output in the light was not directly linked to changes in oxygen concentration within the device. A comparison of power outputs of Synechococcus biofilms and oxygen concentrations within the device chamber demonstrated that light-dependent increases in power preceded oxygen diffusion towards the platinum cathode, whereas oxygen continued to accumulate even after a decline in power in the dark (Supp. Fig. 3†).
As expected, marine media exhibited increased conductivity compared to freshwater media, because of the larger concentration of electrolytes in the former (Supp. Table 1†). Furthermore, cultures grown in marine media (Synechococcus and D. tertiolecta) exhibited several fold higher power outputs compared to freshwater cultures. Similarly to previous MFC studies,16,17 these results suggest the conductivity of the medium may play an important role in improving overall BPV power outputs.
Sensitivity to ambient light
Based on cell growth rates, biofilm stability and power outputs, the green alga C. vulgaris and the cyanobacteriumSynechococcus were selected for further bio-photovoltaic analyses. BPV voltages were monitored over a 50 h diurnal period in a closed circuit bearing a resistance load of 1 MΩ (Fig. 3a, b). BPV power outputs closely followed the ambient sunlight levels in a laboratory without additional illumination (differences in ambient light in Fig. 3 can be attributed to the experiments being carried out on different days). Temperatures remained approximately constant (22 ± 2 °C) throughout the experiment and changes in power output did not correlate to the minor fluctuations in temperature observed. This indicates that the power responses observed were primarily light-dependent.
 Fig. 3  Photosynthetic biofilms are sensitive to ambient sunlight and produce power for extended periods. Chlorella vulgaris (a) and Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 (b) power outputs (solid line) closely followed ambient light conditions (dashed line), and changes were not correlated to fluctuations in temperature (dotted line). Under a 12 h dark/light (10 W m−2) cycle (c), biofilm power outputs persisted in a diurnal pattern for 32 days. 

          Photosynthesis
          vs. power
To investigate the relationship between power production from the anodic biofilms during the light and photosynthetic activity, the rate of oxygen evolution of planktonic cultures was compared to BPV performance under blue, green or red light (for filter transmittance see Supp. Fig. 4†). In this way, light-driven BPV power outputs could be directly compared with the light reactions of photosynthesis.
A correlation was observed between peak power outputs and photosynthetic oxygen evolution rates for both C. vulgaris and Synechococcus (Fig. 4). As expected, C. vulgaris activities were highest in red and blue light, and lower in green light. However, Synechococcus performed well in red light, but relatively poorly in both green and blue light. Synechococcus power outputs were also more reduced compared to photosynthetic activities when observed under blue and green light. Nevertheless, these results indicate that light-dependent power outputs in both species are related to the kinetics of the light reactions of photosynthesis.
 Fig. 4  Photosynthetic rates and BPV power outputs are comparable under different light wavelengths. Photosynthetic oxygen evolution (grey) and peak BPV power outputs (white) were recorded under blue, green or red filters for Chlorella vulgaris (a) and Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 (b). Culture absorbance is indicated (black line). All measurements (N = 3) were performed in the linear range of light response curves for each of the three filters used. Data are presented per μmol m−2 s−1PAR. 
Longevity
To facilitate gas exchange to the biofilm cultures, and allow long-term assessment of performance, an open-air BPV device28 was constructed (Fig. 1d–f). Cultures (150 nmol Chl) were inoculated onto 105 × 105 mm ITO-PET, grown under a 12 h dark/light (10 W m−2) cycle and supplemented daily with deionised H2O. The BPV was connected to a circuit under a resistance load of 560 kΩ, which corresponded to the peak power output following inoculation. Biofilm voltages developed a diurnal pattern that persisted for several weeks (Fig. 3c). Although C. vulgaris initially performed better, a consistent decrease in light-dependent power output was seen over time, whereas Synechococcus showed a six-fold increase in peak power after 19 days. The latter result may have been due to the visible increase in Synechococcus biofilm growth observed during the experiment. The peak power density for Synechococcus (day 19) was 55% greater than that measured for C. vulgaris (day 11). Synechococcus power outputs declined after 19 days, but remained higher than C. vulgaris for the remainder of the experiment. In total, Synechococcus produced 2.4 times more energy than C. vulgaris.
Connecting multiple BPVs in series and parallel

          MFC studies have shown that electrochemical losses and internal resistances typically increase when device size increases.29,30 Stacked smaller units produce more power than single large devices, thus there is a trend towards connecting smaller, more efficient devices, either in series and/or parallel.31 To test the ability of the devices to function together, the performances of four open-air, Synechococcus BPVs connected in series or parallel were examined under illumination (10 W m−2 white light) (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Bio-photovoltaic cells stacked in series and parallel under light. BPVs stacked in series were characterised by higher voltage potentials, however BPVs stacked in parallel produced more current (a). When stacked in series under 10 W m−2 white light enough current and potential was provided to power a small digital clock (b). 
The response of the connected BPVs to changing external resistance loads differed substantially depending on the configuration (Fig. 5a). BPVs connected in series stabilised at a higher OCP and exhibited additive voltage and averaged current for the individual BPV devices. Conversely, BPVs connected in parallel were characterised by the averaged voltage for the four BPVs and showed increased current densities and higher maximum power outputs compared to BPVs connected in series. The individual BPV cells connected in series differed in power outputs (Supp. Fig. 5†). Although overall the stacked voltage remained positive, the two lowest performing BPVs underwent cell reversal at lower resistances, resulting in two BPVs with reversed polarity. This phenomenon has been observed in MFCs stacked in series, when a unit cannot deliver the required current from the system and cell voltage becomes negative.32,33 However, the biological implications are not yet understood.
The connection of four BPVs in series, but not parallel, produced sufficient potential (2 V) and current (ca. 10 μA) to power a small digital clock (LCD008A LCD clock, Middlesex University Teaching Resources, Waltham Cross, UK) (Fig. 5b).
Discussion
This article documents the capacity of pure cultures of prokaryotic or eukaryotic photosynthetic microbes to produce current in a light-dependent manner in a mediatorless BPV system, using biofilms grown on ITO-PET. In our BPV devices, Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 showed a remarkable ability to produce significantly increased power outputs in the light (Fig. 2d) that were several-fold higher than those reported previously for other cyanobacteria.21,34 This response may be due to several factors, such as the ability of this Synechococcus strain readily to develop biofilms that were able to accumulate high levels of charge, the increased conductivity of the medium and differences in BPV design.16,17,35 In contrast, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 did not readily form biofilms on ITO-PET and exhibited 100-fold lower power outputs compared to Synechococcus (Supp. Fig. 1;†Fig. 2c). Power densities reported here are similar to those observed by Zou et al. (2009),34 where Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 showed a very weak light response compared to a biofilm forming pond culture.
Notably, this is the first study to our knowledge to demonstrate and extensively characterise mediatorless power production from biofilms of pure eukaryotic or prokaryotic photosynthetic cultures in the same device set-up (Fig. 2). The algal species C. vulgaris and D. tertiolecta both formed robust biofilms and exhibited increased power outputs upon illumination. Previously, C. vulgaris in combination with an uncharacterised bacterial consortium has been implicated as the primary solar energy converter in a photosynthetic algal microbial fuel cell system.36 Strik et al. (2008; 2010)4,36 also noted that biofilm formation was critical for high power outputs. In the current study, no obvious physiological differences in biofilm growth between cultures cultivated in isolation (Supp. Fig. 1†) or under load (Fig. 3c) were observed. However, evidence suggests that growth under potential may lead to changes in biofilm metabolism and structure. For example, biofilms of the heterotrophic bacterium Geobacter sulfurreducens grown on non-active electrodes showed differences in gene expression patterns to cultures on active anodes.37 Furthermore, gene expression appears to differ between biofilms grown on anodic and cathodic electrodes.38 It will be interesting to examine further the impact of different electrical potentials on the growth, structure and power outputs of pure photosynthetic cultures.
Our results indicate that light-dependent exoelectrogenic activity is not confined to prokaryotes,21 and raises interesting questions as to the extent to which exoelectrogenic properties are present in other eukaryotic photoautotrophs. For example, sediment MFCs in combination with vascular plants, such as of rice (Oryza sativa L. cv. Sasanishiki) or Reed mannagrass (Glyceria maxima L.), have previously demonstrated light-dependent power outputs.39,40 In these systems, the principal understanding is that plant roots penetrate the anode (typically graphite felt), produce rhizodeposits in the form of carbohydrates, and bacteria convert these rhizodeposits into electrical energy via the fuel cell. However, the extent to which roots are involved in power production remains unclear.
The BPV designs used in the current study were simple and robust, and facilitated production of power from photosynthetic microbes under artificial and natural light (Fig. 3). Previously, electricity production from a sunlit consortium BPV-type device was associated with changes in both ambient light and temperature.13 In our results, BPV performances were correlated with ambient light under controlled temperature conditions, demonstrating that changes in power output were primarily light-dependent (Fig. 3). The sensitivity of both C. vulgaris and Synechococcus to ambient light suggests that these species may be of future use in BPV-based biosensor applications. Comparison between BPV performance and photosynthetic oxygen evolution under different light regimes demonstrated that power outputs were related to oxygenic photosynthetic activities (Fig. 4). These correlations indicate that, in these species, electrons are generated from the photosynthetically-driven photolysis of water.21
Photosynthetic rates are closely linked to the ability of the light antennae systems present to utilise the available spectra of illumination. Green algae primarily possess chlorophyll a and chlorophyllb, while most cyanobacteria (including Synechococcus and Synechocystis) possess chlorophyll a and phycobilisomes, which contain additional pigments such as phycocyanin and allophycocyanin.41 Due to the excitation maxima of these pigments, photosynthesis in algae and cyanobacteria is largely driven by blue and red light, and less by green light. Thus, the poor performance observed for Synechococcus under blue light was unexpected. However, analyses of fluorescence emissions across the visible spectrum (370–750 nm) indicated that Synechococcus loses more energy by fluorescence under blue light than does C. vulgaris (Supp. Fig. 6†). Furthermore, a marked shoulder in the crude spectra of Synechococcus suggested the presence of carotenoids (absorbing blue light), which may consequently result in a dissipation of blue light as thermal radiation as a means of photoprotection.42 In addition, exposure to blue light has also previously been shown to down regulate photosynthesis in cyanobacteria through a carotenoid-mediated quenching mechanism associated with the phycobilisome complex.43,44 In Synechococcus, it is possible that competition with cell maintenance processes during a decreased availability of products from the photosynthetic electron transport chain compromises electrogenic activities under blue and green light. This hypothesis is supported by Bombelli et al.,51 who indicated that the end products of PSI (e.g. NADPH) are the primary source of light-dependent power output in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803.
Using C. vulgaris or Synechococcus, our open-air BPV device could deliver power for several weeks (Fig. 3c). An explanation for the observed power decline thereafter is currently unclear, but would need to be consistent with the observation that power output was stable or increased for the first three weeks. As these experiments were performed under non-sterile conditions, it is possible that bacterial contamination may have negatively influenced performance. However, no obvious infections (e.g. bacterial blooms) were evident in the biofilm suggesting alternative factors. It is also possible that oxygen build up in the anodic biofilm may have led to an inhibition of the cathodic reaction over time.34,36 Previous studies in single-chamber devices have also shown that crossover of organic substrates can lead to poisoning of the cathodic reaction in MFCs with platinum cathodes.45 It is possible that diffusion of soluble exudates from the developing biofilms may have eventually led to decreased cathode performances. Continuous light-dependent power outputs have been previously shown in mixed consortium BPV-type systems13,36 and in a single prokaryotic photosynthetic strain (Lyngbya).21 However, to our knowledge no other study to date has contrasted the long-term performances of prokaryotic and eukaryotic autotrophs in the same system. It would be interesting to see whether other cyanobacterial strains offer improved lasting power outputs compared to eukaryotic microbes. Our results are comparable with currently reported BPV-type devices, although much further improvement is required to match outputs observed in MFC systems.20
Electrochemical losses occur in both MFCs and BPVs, and in several forms: i) ohmic losses due to resistance of electrolyte solutions and the proton exchange membrane (PEM), ii) activation losses as a result of charge-transfer resistance due to slow activation reaction rates on anode and cathode electrodes, iii) metabolic losses from the potential difference between the microbial product and the final electron acceptor (i.e. the anode) and iv) transport losses due to resistance caused by diffusion limitations.17,46 Anodic biofilms are considered an effective strategy to reduce electrochemical potential losses, specifically mass transport limitations.17 Furthermore, high concentrations of electrolytes found in marine media can be used to reduce ohmic losses.36 In the current study we have also attempted to minimise electrochemical losses and increase efficiencies through specific improvements in reactor design (Bombelli et al.51). In our devices microbes were immobilised to the anode, thus the requirement for a proton permeable membrane to separate the electrodes was negated, resulting in a simple, single-chamber device (Fig. 1a–f). Electrode spacing between the cathode and anodic biofilm could therefore be minimized to reduce proton diffusion limitations. Nevertheless, additional improvements in future reactor designs will be required to increase power densities further. Notably, power outputs in the open-air BPVs were reduced several-fold compared to closed BPV systems (Fig. 2). Although a direct comparison of performance between the two designs is complicated due to differences in size and architecture, recent studies have suggested that smaller anode: cathode surface area ratios may lead to better energy yields.16 The relatively large anode area used in the open-air BPVs probably resulted in increased electrochemical losses; in addition, biofilm development appeared less homogenous over the larger surface.
Stacking four open-air BPVs in series produced enough energy to power a small clock (Fig. 5b). This is the first report of a BPV system powering an electronic device. These novel results clearly demonstrate the potential practical application of BPV technology. Future work should aim to examine the impact of stacking fuel cells on both biological and electrochemical performances. Connected chemical systems are well characterised and most large electronic equipment is powered by stacked batteries. However, linking biological devices like MFCs together can result in cell reversal and erratic operation.32,33 Such devices depend on stable biological activity for power generation, and to prevent cell reversal, individual, and electrical parameters need to be uniform.47 Currently, the effects of stacking on the electrochemistry and biological communities in BPV devices are largely unknown. Investigating these challenges is crucial to advance BPV technology.
Conclusions
This study advances previous work by clearly demonstrating exoelectrogenic activities present in both eukaryote and prokaryote photosynthetic microbes and their capacity to produce significant electrical power outputs without the requirement of additional organic fuel. This is an important step towards the goal of commercially harnessing photosynthesis for the conversion of light into energy. Much work still needs to be done to exploit fully the observed exoelectrogenic properties and improve BPV efficiencies for widespread use. From a biological perspective, an integrated understanding of the mechanisms involved in electron movement within the cell, across the plasma membrane and from the cell surface to the electrode is still lacking. Furthermore, identification and understanding of the physicochemical and genetic components that regulate biofilm development requires further attention in photosynthetic microbes. From an electrochemical perspective, further analyses should focus on measuring the individual anodic and cathodic electrode potentials in the dark and in the light, to uncover the role of each electrode reaction under the respective condition. Efforts should also be made to optimise reactor design, particularly the anodic chamber, to obtain biological compatible electrodes that are highly conductive, transparent (or at least translucent) and inexpensive. Ideally this will require screening of different photosynthetic microbes under identical conditions to evaluate future potential candidates.
Experimental
Cultures and biofilm growth

          Algal and cyanobacterial strains were obtained from the Culture Collection of Algae and Protozoa (CCAP; Oban, Scotland). All four strains were cultured and maintained at 22 ± 2 °C under low light (ca. 5 W m−2) in a 24 h light cycle (12 h light/dark) under sterile conditions. Planktonic and biofilm cultures were grown and analysed in media recommended by the CCAP (http://www.ccap.ac.uk) supplemented with 5 mM NaHCO3: C. vulgaris (3N:BBM + vitamins), D. tertiolecta (Mod F/2 + vitamins) Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (BG11), Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 (ASW:BG11 + vitamins). No organic supplements were added to facilitate planktonic or biofilm growth. Strains were periodically streaked and grown on agar plates containing agar (0.5–1%) and appropriate media, which were then used to inoculate fresh liquid cultures. Culture growth was monitored by spectrophotometric determination of chlorophyll content as described previously.48Chlorophyll was extracted from D. tertiolecta, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 in 99.8% (v/v) methanol (Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK) and from C. vulgaris in 99.9% (v/v) N,N, - dimethylformamide (Sigma-Aldrich, UK).
To initiate biofilm growth, planktonic cultures were concentrated by centrifugation (4000 g, 10 min) and resuspended in fresh medium. Cells were then pipetted onto indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) (Sigma), allowed to settle for approximately 30 min and then carefully submerged in fresh medium so as to disturb newly forming biofilms as little as possible.
To quantify biofilm growth, cultures (150 nmol Chl) were inoculated onto ITO-PET (50 × 50 mm) and grown for eight days in Petri dishes, then removed and gently rinsed in fresh medium, which was added to the original inoculum volume. Biofilms were either scraped and resuspended in a fixed volume of fresh medium or imaged. Inoculum and biofilm chlorophyll content were then quantified as above.
Biofilm imaging
Biofilms were placed onto a glass cover slip and immediately imaged on a Leica SPS Confocal microscope (Leica Biosystems Newcastle Ltd, UK) using a protocol modified from Barranguet et al. (2004).27 Red light (633 nm) was produced by a 5 mW He-Ne laser and excitation fluorescence collected in the 650–750 nm range. A series of optical sections were recorded (5 μm resolution) starting from the glass surface for each sample. 3D image z-stacks were then generated and average biofilm thickness estimated based on visible fluorescence. To estimate biofilm density, chlorophyll contents (above) were multiplied by the average thickness observed.

          BPV construction
Two similar BPV devices were used in this study (Fig. 1a–f). The closed, single-chamber BPV consisted of a 50 × 50 mm platinum-coated glass cathode placed in parallel with a 50 × 50 mm ITO-PET anode (10 mm apart) in a clear Perspex chamber sealed with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and then filled with medium. This design resulted in an anode and cathode area of 1256 mm2 and a total chamber volume of 12560 mm3 (Fig. 1a–c). The anode was connected to the external circuit by means of a 10 × 20 mm strip of hydrophobic carbon material (Johnson Matthey PCT, Cambridge, UK). The body of the open-air, single-chamber BPV was constructed of clear Perspex (110 × 110 × 10 mm) (Fig. 1d–e). The ITO-PET anode (11025 mm2) was fastened to the bottom of the chamber and submerged in medium. A thin strip of stainless steel (5 × 30 mm) was used as a connecting terminal. The cathode consisted of porous carbon paper (25 × 100 mm) coated with platinum on the open-air side (4 mg m−2; Johnson Matthey PCT) encased in Perspex, placed 5 mm above the anode. All devices were autoclaved between usage to ensure sterile starting conditions.

          BPV operation and measurements
For both BPV devices, gold alligator clamps and copper wire served as connections between anode and cathode. Prior to operation, the chambers were filled with fresh medium and maintained at 22 ± 2 °C for the duration of all experiments. Temperatures were monitored with a sensor probe positioned inside the BPV chamber (Uni-Trend Limited, Hong Kong, China). Voltages were recorded using an ADC-20 High Resolution Data Logger (HRDL) and PicoLog Data logging software version R5.21.5 (Pico Technology, St Neots, UK). To characterise power outputs, the BPV voltage was measured at variable external loads (270Ω–10MΩ). All cell potentials are presented as positive values, unless cell reversal has taken place. Power and polarization curves were generated as described previously by Logan et al. (2006)17 from either two or three separate biofilms for each strain.49,50 In spite of differences between replicate biofilms, the ratio between light and dark power outputs was generally consistent. Total power conversion efficiencies were calculated based on the peak BPV power outputs.
Artificial light was provided by a CL150 Fiber Optic Illuminator (Prior Scientific, Cambridge, UK). For coloured light, filters (Lee Filters Lighting Products, Andover, UK; blue - #119; green - #139; red - #106) were attached to the illuminator and maintained at a constant output of 10 W m−2. Light levels were measured in W m−2 and μmol m−2 s−1 with a UV203 Ultra-violet Radiometer (Irradian Ltd, East Lothian, UK) and a SKP 200 Light Meter (Skye Instruments Ltd, Llandrindod Wells, UK), respectively. Media conductivity was calculated using a Jenway conductivity meter 4310 (Jenway, Cambridge, UK) set at a reference temperature of 25 °C.

          Oxygen evolution
Photosynthetic oxygen exchange rates (O) were determined with an OXYV1 Hansatech Oxyview System (Hansatech Instruments Ltd, King's Lynn, UK) maintained at 20 °C. Light was provided by a Kodac Carousel S-AV 2010 Projector (Kodac Ltd, Hemel Hempstead, UK). Data were recorded with an ADC-20 HRDL. For oxygen measurements within the BPV single-chamber device a Dissolved Oxygen Meter (Extech Instruments Corporation, MA, USA) was used.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for funding provided by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC).
References
S. Tsujimura, A. Wadano, K. Kano and T. Ikeda, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2001, 29, 225–231 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Ieropoulos, J. Greenman, C. Melhuish and J. Hart, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2005, 37, 238–245 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, J. Kan, F. Mansfeld, L. T. Angenent and K. H. Nealson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 1648–1654 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 532–537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum and U. Schröder, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 844–855 CAS .
M. J. Cooney, V. Svoboda, C. Lau, G. Martina and S. D. Minteer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 320–337 CAS .
N. Martens and E. H. Hall, Photochem. Photobiol., 1994, 59, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yagishita, S. Sawayama, K. I. Tsukahara and T. Ogi, Sol. Energy, 1997, 61, 347–353 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Bond and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2003, 69, 1548–1555 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Jensen, A. E. Albers, K. R. Malley, Y. Y. Londer, B. E. Cohen, B. A. Helms, P. Weigele, J. T. Groves and C. M. Ajo-Franklin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 19213–19218 CrossRef CAS .
G. Reguera, K. P. Nevin, J. S. Nicoll, S. F. Covalla, T. L. Woodard and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2006, 72, 7345–7348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, X. Huang, N. Boon, P. Liang and M. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1392–1395 CrossRef CAS .
S. Malik, E. Drott, P. Grisdela, J. Lee, C. Lee, D. A. Lowy, S. Grayd and L. M. Tender, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 292–298 CAS .
A. E. Franks, N. Malvankar and K. P. Nevin, Biofuels, 2010, 1, 589–604 CrossRef CAS .
G. Reguera, K. D. McCarthy, T. Mehta, J. S. Nicoll, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Nature, 2005, 435, 1098–1101 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2009, 7, 375–381 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. Rozendal, U. Schröder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS .

          L. J. Stal, in The ecology of cyanobacteria: Their diversity in time and space, ed. B. A. Whitton and M. Potts, Kluwer, Boston, 1st edn,  2000, pp. 61–120 Search PubMed .
R. Sekar, V. P. Venugopalan, K. Nandakumar, K. V. K. Nair and V. N. R. Rao, Hydrobiologia, 2004, 512, 97–108 CrossRef .
D. Xing, S. Cheng, J. M. Regan and B. E. Logan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 105–111 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pisciotta, Y. Zou and I. V. Baskakov, PLoS One, 2010, 5, e10821 Search PubMed .
L. Shi, D. J. Richardson, Z. Wang, S. N. Kerisit, K. M. Rosso, J. M. Zachara and J. K. Fredrickson, Environ. Microbiol. Rep., 2009, 1, 220–227 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ryu, S. J. Bai, J. S. Park, Z. Huang, J. Moseley, T. Fabian, R. J. Fasching, A. R. Grossman and F. B. Prinz, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1137–1143 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vandecandelaere, O. Nercessian, M. Faimali, E. Segaert, A. Mollica, W. Achouak, P. De Vos and P. Vandamme, Bioelectrochemistry, 2010, 78, 62–66 CrossRef CAS .
G. Roeselers, M. C. M. van Loosdrecht and G. Muyzer, Microb. Ecol., 2007, 54, 578–585 CrossRef CAS .
N. Goto, O. Mitamura and H. Terai, J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol., 2001, 257, 73–86 CrossRef CAS .
C. Barranguet, S. A. M. van Beusekom, B. Veuger, T. R. Neu, E. M. M. Manders, J. J. Sinke and W. Admiraal, Aquat. Microb. Ecol., 2004, 34, 1–9 CrossRef .
P. Clauwaert, D. van der Ha, N. Boon, K. Verbeken, M. Verhaege, Korneel Rabaey and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 7564–7569 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dewan, H. Beyenal and Z. Lewandowski, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 7643–7648 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Nevin, H. Richter, S. F. Covalla, J. P. Johnson, T. L. Woodard, A. L. Orloff, H. Jia, M. Zhang and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 10, 2505–2514 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Ieropoulos, J. Greenman and C. Melhuish, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 1228–1240 CrossRef CAS .
P. Aelterman, K. Rabaey, H. T. Pham, N. Boon and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 3388–3394 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dekker, A. T. Heijne, M. Saakes, H. V. Hamelers and C. J. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 9038–9042 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, J. Pisciotta, R. B. Billmyre and I. V. Baskakov, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 104, 939–946 CrossRef CAS .
V. J. Watson and B. E. Logan, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2010, 105, 489–498 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. Terlouw, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 81, 659–668 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Nevin, B.-C. Kim, R. H. Glaven, J. P. Johnson, T. L. Woodard, B. A. Methé, R. J. DiDonato, S. F. Covalla1, A. E. Franks, A. Liu and D. R. Lovley, PLoS One, 2009, 4, e5628 Search PubMed .
S. M. Strycharz, R. H. Glaven, M. V. Coppi, S. M. Gannon, L. A. Perpetua, A. Liu, K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Bioelectrochemistry, 2011, 80, 142–150 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kaku, N. Yonezawa, Y. Kodama and K. Watanabe, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 79, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. V. M. Hamelers, J. F. H. Snel and C. J. N. Buisman, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 870–876 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Kühl, M. Chen and A. W. D. Larkhum, in Algae and cyanobacteria in extreme environments, ed. J. Seckbach, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  2007, pp. 103–123 Search PubMed .

          J. Hirschberg, D. Chamovitz, in The molecular biology of cyanobacteria, ed. D. A. Bryant, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 559–579 Search PubMed .
M. G. Rakhimberdieva, I. N. Stadnichuk, I. V. Elanskaya and N. V. Karapetyan, FEBS Lett., 2004, 574, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
M. Scott, C. McCollum, S. Vasil'ev, C. Crozier, G. S. Espie, M. Krol, N. P. A. Huner and D. Bruce, Biochemistry, 2006, 45, 8952–8958 CrossRef CAS .
F. Harnisch, S. Wirth and U. Schröder, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2253–2256 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, N. Wagner, S. D. Minteer and L. T. Angenent, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5212–5217 CrossRef CAS .
P. Clauwaert, P. Aelterman, T. H. Pham, L. De Schamphelaire, M. Carballa, K. Rabaey and W. Verstraete, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 79, 901–913 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Porra, W. A. Thompson and P. E. Kriedemann, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1989, 975, 384–394 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, X. Huang, P. Liang, N. Boon, M. Fan, L. Zhanga and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 498–501 CAS .
F. Zhang, K. S. Jacobson, P. Torres and Z. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1347–1352 CAS .
P. Bombelli, R. W. Bradley, A. M. Scott, A. J. Philips, A. J. McCormick, S. M. Cruz, A. Anderson, K. Yunus, D. S. Bendall, P. J. Cameron, J. M. Davies, A. G. Smith, C. J. Howe and A. C. Fisher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011 10.1039/C1EE02531G .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01965aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
There is increasing interest in photosynthetic microbial fuel cells, also known as biophotovoltaic (BPV) devices, for electrical energy generation. These devices rely on photosynthetic microorganisms to use light energy to split water and provide electrons, some of which may ultimately be lost from the cell. Many BPV devices use free-living cells and exploit an exogenously supplied redox mediator, such as ferricyanide, to transfer electrons from the cell surface to the electrode that harvests them. Power outputs from these devices are still low, and the use of exogenous mediators is undesirable. It is possible to avoid the need for exogenous mediators by growing biofilms directly onto electrodes. This approach has been successful in several studies using consortium cultures. However, controlling the composition of a consortium may be difficult, and mechanistic studies also are more readily interpretable using defined pure cultures. This paper describes the growth of pure cultures of prokaryotic and eukaryotic photosynthetic microorganisms as biofilms on electrodes, and analyses their power outputs. It also describes the use of four BPV devices, connected in series, to run a domestic device, namely a small digital clock.



Chlorella
 vulgaris
	150	551 ± 11	268 ± 7.3	50.2 ± 1.4	77 ± 4.1	25.5 ± 1.0

Dunaliella tertiolecta
	150	156 ± 9	4.3 ± 3.9	1.43 ± 0.9	74 ± 10.5	4.3 ± 0.9

Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803	150	243 ± 8	62 ± 5.6	11.6 ± 1.1	8.5 ± 0.13	0.6 ± 0.02

Synechococcus sp. WH 5701	150	220 ± 11	47 ± 7.1	6.22 ± 2.7	82 ± 0.9	10.4 ± 0.6

 	Fig. 1  Construction of the bio-photovoltaic devices used to extract current from a biofilm culture attached to an ITO-coated PET anode. The anodic biofilm was either 1256 mm2 and connected to a Pt-coated gold cathode in a sandwich-like horizontal design filled with medium solution (a–c), or 0.011 m2 and connected to an open-air, Pt-coated carbon paper cathode above the biofilm in medium solution (d–f).	 

 	Fig. 2  Power outputs of BPV devices with different species under light and dark conditions. Power curves (left) and polarization curves (right) show the best performance of anodic biofilms cultured from C. vulgaris (a), D. tertiolecta (b), Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (c) or Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 (d) quantified under dark and light (10 W m−2) conditions. No light response was observed in control experiments using ITO-PET bearing no biofilm material. The external resistance applied at maximum power output for each culture (a–d) was 22 kΩ, 3 kΩ, 333 kΩ and 3 kΩ respectively. Histograms demonstrate the ratio between light and dark peak power densities (bottom left) and average peak power densities (bottom right) (D. tertiolecta and Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 [N = 2], C. vulgaris and Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 [N = 3]).	 

 	Fig. 3  Photosynthetic biofilms are sensitive to ambient sunlight and produce power for extended periods. Chlorella vulgaris (a) and Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 (b) power outputs (solid line) closely followed ambient light conditions (dashed line), and changes were not correlated to fluctuations in temperature (dotted line). Under a 12 h dark/light (10 W m−2) cycle (c), biofilm power outputs persisted in a diurnal pattern for 32 days.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photosynthetic rates and BPV power outputs are comparable under different light wavelengths. Photosynthetic oxygen evolution (grey) and peak BPV power outputs (white) were recorded under blue, green or red filters for Chlorella vulgaris (a) and Synechococcus sp. WH 5701 (b). Culture absorbance is indicated (black line). All measurements (N = 3) were performed in the linear range of light response curves for each of the three filters used. Data are presented per μmol m−2 s−1PAR.	 

 	Fig. 5  Bio-photovoltaic cells stacked in series and parallel under light. BPVs stacked in series were characterised by higher voltage potentials, however BPVs stacked in parallel produced more current (a). When stacked in series under 10 W m−2 white light enough current and potential was provided to power a small digital clock (b).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01965a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
