Themed issue: solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B911726C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B911726C
(Editorial)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5276-5278Themed issue: solar cellsBy combining favourable efficiencies with high-speed roll-to-roll processing on flexible substrates organic solar cells will be a future alternative to inorganic semiconductor based technologies in cost-effective, large scale conversion of sunlight into electricity. Most organic solar cells utilize a light induced electron transfer reaction between two complementary semiconductors that are in close proximity to create charges in a process that mimics the initial step of natural photosynthesis. To reach high power conversion efficiency organic solar cells, electrons and holes have to be generated with high quantum and energy efficiency, and subsequently be transported and collected selectively at opposite electrodes. This complex sequence of events poses significant challenges to the optical and electronic properties of the photoactive and electrode materials, their mutual interactions, and the cell architecture. Past that stage, issues of materials and cell stability and production technologies for large area modules provide further areas of important research at present.Within this rapidly advancing field, this themed issue contains contributions relating to the science and technology of virtually all types of organic solar cells. The issue comprises the most recent advances in liquid and solid state dye-sensitized solar cells, bilayer cells based on small molecules, and bulk-heterojunction polymer solar cells. Several topics are addressed, ranging from the synthesis and properties of new materials, to surface modification of metal oxides, morphology of active layers, inverted and series connected cell architectures, and large scale production involving inkjet and roll-to-roll printing. The issue contains one feature article and twenty-one original research articles that provide new insights and truly advance the state-of-the-art in this field.In their feature article on the history and development of (gel) polymer electrolytes for dye-sensitized solar cells Nogueira, De Paoli et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b900928k) demonstrate that these are interesting alternatives to substitute liquid electrolytes. Recent improvements achieved by modification of the composition and by introduction of additives such as inorganic nanofillers, organic molecules, and ionic liquids are described and the stabilities of dye-sensitized solar cells assembled with these materials are discussed.The synthesis and application of novel dye molecules for sensitized solar cells is described in this issue by Müllen et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b823498a), Thelakkat et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b901988j) and Chou et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b822813b). In the first case, Müllen et al. describe metal-free organic dye molecules based on perylene sensitizers of various molecular sizes, derived from the introduction of different groups in the 1,6-positions of the perylene core. The same donor and acceptor moieties in these perylene sensitizers render them highly similar spectroscopic and electrochemical properties, but with different sizes they have been used to compare the effect of the dye loading on the TiO2 surface and assess the complex relationship between photovoltaic performance and molecular size of the sensitizer. In the second contribution, Thelakkat et al. present a series of new bipyridyl donor-antenna molecules that are incorporated in heteroleptic ruthenium dye complexes. The optical and electrochemical properties of the molecules are described in detail and preliminary tests of the novel dyes in solid state dye-sensitized solar cells yield power conversion efficiencies up to 1.37%. Finally, Chou et al. report on a new series of tridentate bipyridine pyrazolate coupled ruthenium complexes that have increased extinction coefficients in the visible part of the spectrum and exhibit a relatively small energy gap. These advantages allow them to reduce the thickness of the TiO2 layer and obtain power conversion efficiencies of 8.07%.Zakeeruddin and Grätzel et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b905196a) describe the preparation of highly ordered, vertically oriented TiO2 nanotube arrays by potentiostatic anodization of titanium and how these can be applied successfully in the fabrication of solid state dye-sensitized solar cells, reaching a power conversion efficiency of 1.67%. An efficiency of 3.8% is obtained with a thin TiO2 nanotube array film based on a metal-free organic dye using an ionic liquid electrolyte. Further, Palomares et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b818968d) report the preparation of conformal coatings of the TiO2 electrode by trifluoroacetic acid. This creates a hydrophobic barrier on the TiO2 surface that prevents direct contact with the electrolyte. Interestingly, in combination with a ruthenium dye as sensitizer, the presence of this layer accelerates the recombination reaction of photoinjected electrons at the TiO2 and the oxidized electrolyte.Durrant and Nelson et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b902271f) present a new approach for improving the infiltration of a conjugated polymer into the pores of a nanostructured metal oxide electrode to create an active layer that combines the design principles of both dye-sensitized and bulk-heterojunction solar cells. They prepare the polymer directly inside the porous oxide film by in situ chemical polymerization. Transient and steady state optical studies show that the light absorption and emission properties of the polymer so produced are similar to those of the polymer synthesised ex situ, while the photoinduced charge separation yield and photocurrent are improved by the situ polymerisation relative to devices prepared with pre-synthesised polymer because of the improved infiltration.For use in bilayer, small molecule, organic solar cells Verreet et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b902342a) characterize chloroboron subnaphthalocyanine films by ellipsometry, absorption, and photoluminescence measurements. In planar bilayer heterojunctions, with fullerene as acceptor, the material combines a strong red absorption with high open circuit voltage (∼0.8 V) leading to a power conversion efficiency of 2.5%, making the subnaphthalocyanine an interesting material for future tandem cells. The effect of surface modification of indium tin oxide (ITO) on the performance of pentacene/fullerene bilayer heterojunctions is studied by Kippelen et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b823148f). The solar cell parameters are found to be insensitive to variations in work function in the range 4.50 to 5.40 eV, achieved through the use of surface modifiers. This is correlated to an invariance of the barrier height (∼0.6 eV) due to Fermi level pinning at the ITO/pentacene interface.Several papers in this issue address the design and performance of new materials for polymer : fullerene bulk-heterojunction solar cells, with the emphasis on controlling the band gap and charge carrier mobility. One popular approach is using donor–acceptor type copolymers to adjust the band gap. Along this line, Inganäs and Andersson et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b823137k) describe a novel copolymer based on alternating fluorene and donor–acceptor–donor segments. The balanced electron and hole mobility in blends with fullerene derivatives leads to a power conversion efficiency of 2–3% under solar illumination. Jenekhe et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b900073a) describe blends of a new low band gap donor–acceptor copolymer based on alternating bithiophene-phthalimide units. Blends of this polymer with fullerene derivatives were found to exhibit a crystalline nanoscale morphology with high hole mobilities that reach a power conversion efficiency of 2%. Their example evidences that phthalimide-based semiconductors form a new promising strategy towards more efficient bulk-heterojunction solar cells. Janssen et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b821979f) also report copolymers based on bithiophene units, but alternating with bisquinoxaline or thienopyrazine units, to obtain a photovoltaic response in the near-infrared region with efficiency of 1.5%. Finally, Tao and Leclerc et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b901302d) describe the effect of polymer molecular weight, and the composition and thickness of the active layer, on the device performance of an alternating poly(2,7-carbazole) derivative. By optimizing these parameters a high power conversion efficiency of 4.6% was obtained.Rupert et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b903427g) describe new thiophene-based π-conjugated dendrimers in which they use acetylene spacers to relieve strain in sterically congested systems to decrease the band gap. They also explore the use of electron-withdrawing cyano groups at the core and electron-donating groups at the periphery to control the maximum energy, width, and intensity of the absorption spectrum. In a more fundamental study, Cornil and Janssen et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b901374a) present a combined experimental and theoretical study on a series of well-defined small band gap oligomers, to study the relation between singlet and triplet excited states. It is shown that the singlet–triplet splitting remains very significant when going to smaller band gaps. Hence low band gaps are accompanied by low triplet energies, which can cause charge recombination into a triplet state to become an important loss mechanism in the application of small band gap materials in organic solar cells.It is well established that the performance of bulk-heterojunction polymer solar cells strongly depends on the three-dimensional morphological organization of the compounds within the active layer. The ultimate way to control the morphology is by defining it in advance via the molecular structure of the polymer. Accordingly, Heeger and Wudl et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b901732a) report on new well-defined rod-coil block copolymers consisting of polythiophene donor and fullerene acceptor chromophores (Fig. 1). In thin films of the resulting block copolymer, reproducible self-assembly into well-defined nanofibrils is observed. They investigate the potential utility of the block copolymer as a “surfactant” for controlling the interface morphology of the P3HT : PCBM donor–acceptor phase domains within the composite and find substantial improvement in device performance when 5% of block copolymer is introduced to the P3HT : PCBM blend system, resulting in ca. 35% improved efficiency. Fig. 1  The donor–acceptor rod-coil diblock copolymer (reproduced from the article of Yang, Lee, Heeger and Wudl (DOI: 10.1039/b901732a)). In a related approach, Haque et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b905708k) describe a series of donor–acceptor diblock copolymers with varying molecular weight to demonstrate a correlation between low molecular weight block copolymers and increased yields of long lived free charges. Electron microscopy reveals phase segregated microdomains for these materials whose size and periodicity are determined by their molecular weight. Photovoltaic devices based on these materials show that the efficiency is a trade off between charge generation and transport and collection.Few techniques exist that enable the study of the desired co-continuous networks of bulk heterojunctions with nanoscale phase separation to sustain effective charge generation at the donor/acceptor interface and charge carrier transport from any place in the photoactive layer to the corresponding electrodes. In this respect Loos et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b900901a) make an important contribution in describing the use of electron tomography to visualize the organization in the photoactive layers directly with nanometre resolution in three dimensions (Fig. 2) aiming at identifying the critical morphology parameters that contribute to high efficiency. Fig. 2  Electron tomography of PF10TBT : PCBM bulk-heterojunction films (227 nm × 227 nm × 75 nm) showing polymer strands (reproduced from the article of van Bavel et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b900901a)). Further related to morphology, Vanderzande et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b900670b) study fibre formation for regioregular poly(3-alkylthiophene)s (P3ATs) with alkyl chain lengths (A) between three and nine carbon atoms in several solvents. The fibres can be separated from the remaining non-organised polymer by centrifugation. The crystalline fibres are about 20 nm wide with lengths up to 4 µm. Interestingly, they observe that for alkyl chain lengths above six, the crystal structure is initially slightly different, while these fibres exhibit a blue-shifted optical absorption, but that annealing in the solid state at 70 °C or in solution around 50 °C coverts these initial crystalline phases to the common type.With respect to novel device architectures, Malliaras et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b822949j) use an acid-sensitive photoresist for photolithographic patterning to create a serial connected array of 300 polymer solar cells, with a period of 50 µm, using a polymer : fullerene blend as the active layer. With this solar array they obtain very high open circuit voltages of 90 V and a power conversion efficiency of 0.3%.Two papers address printing of solar cells. In one contribution Brabec et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b823495g) report the impact of P3HT regioregularity on the performance of bulk-heterojunction solar cells with inkjet printed and doctor bladed layers. They find that for inkjet printing the best efficiencies (3.5%) are not obtained for the highest regioregularity, but rather for the 96% sample, while doctor blading of the most regioregular sample results in efficiencies as high as 4.4%. In the second paper, Krebs et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b823001c) investigate the stability of normal and inverted devices using aluminium and silver top electrodes, respectively. For normal devices stable operation in dry oxygen was achieved but not in the presence of humidity, while the inverted devices behaved oppositely. The inverted device is also used to develop a new process giving access to fully roll-to-roll processed polymer solar cells entirely by solution processing to give large area modules comprising eight serially connected cells (Fig. 3). Fig. 3  Large area roll-to-roll printed polymers solar cells with an inverted cell design (reproduced from the article of Krebs et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b823001c)). We hope that this collection of articles will be a source of ideas and motivation for scientists across different fields in academia and industry to embark or continue further research on organic solar cells. The Guest Editors are very thankful to all authors that have contributed to this issue with high-quality articles, often describing important, novel results that advance the present state-of-the-art in the field. We are particularly indebted to the staff of Journal of Materials Chemistry for their professional and timely support in assembling this themed issue on solar cells.  Michael Grätzel, Switzerland  René Janssen, The NetherlandsThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The donor–acceptor rod-coil diblock copolymer (reproduced from the article of Yang, Lee, Heeger and Wudl (DOI: 10.1039/b901732a)).	 

 	Fig. 2  Electron tomography of PF10TBT : PCBM bulk-heterojunction films (227 nm × 227 nm × 75 nm) showing polymer strands (reproduced from the article of van Bavel et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b900901a)).	 

 	Fig. 3  Large area roll-to-roll printed polymers solar cells with an inverted cell design (reproduced from the article of Krebs et al. (DOI: 10.1039/b823001c)).	 

 		 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
