Ultrafast polaron-pair dynamics in a poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) device influenced by a static electric field: insights into electric-field-relate ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP03736E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP03736E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 21236-21248Ultrafast polaron-pair dynamics in a poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) device influenced by a static electric field: insights into electric-field-related charge loss†

        
          
            Debkumar 
            Rana
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Patrice 
            Donfack
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Vladislav 
            Jovanov
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Veit 
            Wagner
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Arnulf 
            Materny
          
        
      *
      Physics and Earth Sciences, Jacobs University Bremen, Campus Ring 1, 28759 Bremen, Germany. E-mail: a.materny@jacobs-university.de
Received 
      2nd July 2019
    , Accepted 11th September 2019First published on 11th September 2019AbstractThe generation and decay mechanisms of polaron pairs in organic semiconductor-based optoelectronic devices under operational conditions are relevant for a better understanding of photophysical processes affecting the device performance, since the possible occurrence of a polaron pair introduces an intermediate step in exciton dissociation into fully separated charge carriers. The role played by static electric fields in polaron-pair dynamics is important but poorly understood or not investigated in detail. In this work, insights into the polaron-pair dynamics in neat poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) thin films and P3HT films sandwiched between electrical contacts with an applied external static electric field are probed using femtosecond pump–probe transient absorption spectroscopy. Asymmetric contacts result in P3HT devices with application-related diode characteristics. Consistent with the electric field-induced dissociation of oppositely charged species, we show that polaron-pair dissociation into charge carriers occurs in the P3HT device more significantly with increasing reverse bias, and that this process follows an initial instantaneous polaron-pair photoabsorption quenching due to a pronounced immediate loss of primary photoexcitation species (hot excitons). Furthermore, we show that the net-electric field present in the P3HT diode (including built-in-potential at 0 V bias) results in a more complex dynamics with new findings as compared to the neat-P3HT thin film case. Indeed, besides polaron pairs directly originating from hot excitons, we experimentally observe polaron-pair formation during exciton dissociation via a field-mediated generation process, resulting in a slower contribution to the overall decay dynamics. Moreover, unlike in the external electric field-free P3HT film, bimolecular annihilation processes clearly appear as an additional loss channel when a field is applied and hence have an impact on carrier generation performance in a working device.
1 Introduction
Conjugated polymeric organic semiconductors have attracted a lot of attention owing to their commercial advantages for optoelectronic devices such as low manufacturing costs and easier and sustainable fabrication processes. Polymeric organic semiconductors are used as the active medium in solar cells,1 and more commonly in light emitting diodes2,3 and field effect transistors.4,5 In particular, poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) is widely explored especially for solar cell technology as a very promising donor material. The semiconductor properties strongly depend on structure. Regioregular P3HT (rr-P3HT), which has a well-defined substitution order (e.g. head-to-tail) for the hexyl side groups along the polymer chain, forms predominantly two-dimensional (2D) lamellar crystalline structures embedded within amorphous domains in solid thin films and shows significantly improved charge carrier mobility. In contrast, regiorandom P3HT (rra-P3HT), which shows a random substitution order for the side groups, forms amorphous structures with rather poor carrier mobility. rr-P3HT has a good power conversion efficiency (up to 10%),6,7 which can be further improved via flexible solution-based fabrication processes.8–12 Electronic and spectroscopic properties of P3HT have previously been studied extensively by different techniques including among others microwave conductivity, photoconductivity, femtosecond fluorescence, and time-resolved transient absorption measurements.13–19
Charge-generation efficiency in organic semiconductors is determined by different physical processes happening between electronic excitation (exciton) and the formation of charge carriers. The mechanisms resulting in the generation of charge carriers in the bulk of conjugated polymers upon photoexcitation are complex. Excitons, polaron pairs, and polarons are observed after photoexcitation in P3HT20–23 and form different photoinduced absorption (PA) bands. Recent studies on organic semiconductors show an increased interest in polaron pairs with regard to the primary photoexcitation nature and charge carrier formation.
A PA band at 650 nm has been shown to bear the signature of polaron pairs and has been widely used to probe their dynamics.20–24 Note however that the interpretation of the 650 nm PA band is complicated by various overlapping contributions to the overall optical absorption from different origins, including electro-absorption25 and other photogenerated species such as two-dimensional delocalized polarons (DP2)25 and excimers.26 For P3HT, a weak and broad polaronic absorption band edge can stretch as far as the electronic absorption red-edge, as recently observed by Herrmann et al.27 In rr-P3HT, polymer chains form weakly inter-lamellae coupled H-aggregates28,29 as opposed to regiorandom P3HT (rra-P3HT), which shows negligible interchain coupling due to its amorphous structure. The interchain interlamellae coupling in rr-P3HT favors the delocalization of photoexcited species along the pi-stacking direction, resulting in the formation of more structured and intense 2D-delocalized polaron bands with one of the bands appearing near 650 nm.25 Also, the H-aggregates in rr-P3HT show electronic band-red-edge absorption toward 610 nm. A pump–probe transient measurement cannot separate the various overlapping contributions to optical absorption near the 650 nm PA; however, insights into the transient dynamics happening on different time scales can still be gained. Nevertheless, based on the 650 nm PA, not only the understanding of polaron-pair generation may not be straightforward, but also their possible decay pathways have been a subject of partially contradicting discussions.16–18,20 Therefore, further investigations in this respect can contribute to a better interpretation of the PA results.
For the discussion of the fundamentals of polaron-pair generation in a p-channel semiconductor like P3HT, it is helpful to recall some basic details. The traditional simple picture of a polaron pair is often restricted to the region near a donor–acceptor interface, where the separated electron and hole are coupled with their respective lattice distortions to form polarons (positive in the donor and negative in the acceptor domain), which in turn experience a weak mutual Coulomb interaction akin to the exciton. In this regard, it is obvious that a polaron pair features a charge transfer (CT) exciton. However, the subtle difference is that a given lattice distortion can be associated to each partner of the polaron pair separately rather than being shared by both as in the exciton and the CT exciton and that the polaron pair has a full charge transfer character, while the CT exciton arises from a partial charge separation of the exciton. Therefore, a CT exciton could be viewed as an intermediate state between an exciton and a polaron pair state. In this regard, the polaron-pair formation does not necessarily have to originate solely from initially independent opposite-sign polarons; otherwise, the picture of a polaron pair in the bulk of an organic semiconductor material like P3HT would be complicated to envisage without a prior creation of such charges (e.g. by charge injection or photoionization). Indeed, it is well established that polaron pairs can also be inter-chain photoexcitation species appearing among other common products following photoexcitation in the bulk of neat conjugated polymers20,22,23,30,31 and several models for their formation have been discussed in previous studies, as detailed below.
Regarding polaron-pair formation upon electronic photoexcitation (i.e. upon exciton formation), one widely suggested possibility is ultrafast polaron-pair generation from hot excitons within 100 fs via coupling to the structural dynamics.20,32,33 Ruseckas et al.15 have reported that inter-chain polaron pairs are generated with 20% efficiency within 100 fs after photoexcitation in polythiophene films within an inter-lamellae inter-chain distance as short as approx. 4 Å. This is in line with several other studies showing that hot excitons are the primary photoexcited species, which may form not only charge carriers (separated electrons and holes) and singlet excitons but also polaron pairs on an ultrafast femtosecond time scale.34 Alternatively, separated electrons and holes originating from ultrafast dissociation of hot excited states can quickly self-trap forming polarons, which are then stabilized to form polaron pairs via a weak mutual Coulomb interaction.34 Several studies show that polaron-pair generation typically involves promptly generated excitations in two adjacent polymer chains close to their contact zone where the interchain distance is the shortest.21 Hence, polaron pairs are formally regarded as inter-chain excited species in conjugated polymers. Nevertheless, they are also believed to occur between different adjacent segments on the same polymer chain as found in poly(2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene) (MEH-PPV).35 Note however that Schweitzer et al. found that a high external electric field is also required to stabilize the polaron pair in ladder-type poly(para-phenylene) (LPPP).36
The understanding of possible consequences of polaron-pair formation on the electrical performance of conjugated polymer-based semiconductor devices is relevant. Though some considerable efforts have been made in this regard,22,23,26,33 the effect of the applied voltage in such devices, which is supposed to separate bound electron–hole pair states into charge species, needs to be considered in all aspects. However, possible effects of an applied external electric field have been explored with a focus mainly on the primary (excitons) and final photoexcitation products (charge carriers). Here, we would like to make some general remarks: unlike polyphenylenevinylene (PPV) and ladder-type poly(para-phenylene) (LPPP) derivatives, which require the application of a sufficiently strong external electric field for the formation of charges,26 polythiophenes (PT) such as P3HT form an interesting category of conjugated polymers, which have so far been reported to show no significant threshold for the electric field to enable charge separation.22 The available experimental evidence shows that the generation of charge carriers may be separated into an ultrafast and a longer time window, in which different photoexcitation products play a role33,37 and can exhibit different sensitivity to applied external fields. Some insights in this connection were previously obtained via terahertz time-domain spectroscopy, which provides direct access to the complex conductivity including the contributions from charge carriers as well as bound electron–hole species such as polaron pairs.38 Recently, in a study on P3HT, Ogata et al.22 suggested that polaron pairs even in their thermally relaxed state can contribute to charges on a picosecond time scale. Overall, the possible effects of polaron pairs on device performance should depend on their decay characteristics (pathways and rates), which in turn are found to differ fundamentally for PT as compared to PPV and LPPP derivatives and appear to be correlated to the polymer microstructure and structural dynamics.22,26
It is undoubtedly necessary to also explore the role of external electric fields in polaron-pair generation and decay mechanisms in order to reach a more holistic understanding of the different elementary physical processes playing a role in organic semiconductor devices. It is the goal of this study to address this issue in the case of P3HT. The reason why charge carriers are formed in PT derivatives such as P3HT even without an electric field appears to be non-trivial22 and whether the electric field present in the corresponding devices would change this situation is clearly of interest. Note that the overall decay in this context can occur by recombination and dissociation processes and the latter are expected to be influenced by the applied external electric field.
In many works, which focused extensively on PPV and LPPP semiconductors33,39–42 but very rarely on PT semiconductors,31 the effect of external electric fields on the generation and decay mechanisms of charge carriers43–45 (as the final photogenerated products) rather than on polaron pairs was studied. However, the formation process of the charge species can of course involve intermediate loosely bound states such as CT excitons, as observed by Causa et al.46 after initial photoexcitation in C60 films under an applied reverse bias. As discussed above, the neutral exciton and its dissociation products represent two limits separated by a continuum of states with different CT character, which typically evolve from CT excitons to polaron pairs. Hence, like CT excitons, polaron pairs also perfectly qualify as intermediate loosely bound pair species between the exciton and separated charge carriers in the bulk of conjugated polymers, and one should expect that the effect of an applied external electric field not just on the formation but also on the decay of polaron pairs can impact photogeneration of charge carriers. Indeed, while in the presence of an external electric field, CT excitons readily dissociate into charge carriers in practice, the same may not be said about polaron pairs without a detailed study because of the additional structural stabilization that they experience.
The careful literature analysis summarized above shows that establishing a complete and detailed picture of polaron-pair generation and decay mechanisms in conjugated polymers is a rather complex task. It is difficult to extrapolate the observations made even within the same polymer category because of the structural flexibility during the deposition of conjugated polymer films and the structural sensitivity of the polaron-pair generation and decay dynamics. In this work, we have performed traditional (zero-field) and (external and internal) electric field-dependent transient absorption spectroscopy measurements in order to gain insights into the fate of the polaron pairs in P3HT. Recent studies of an applied electric field effect in P3HT have focused on the exciton and/or charge carrier dynamics using time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy.47,48 The results of our study can be discussed taking into account the results obtained by Zaushitsyn et al.,31 who have performed similar measurements on another polythiophene analog, namely poly(3-(2′-methoxy-5′-octylphenyl)thiophene), and observed a field-induced formation of polaron pairs a couple of picoseconds after photoexcitation. In our present study, we address the dynamics of polaron pairs in P3HT by monitoring the photoinduced transient absorption at 650 nm in order to gain insights into polaron-pair generation and the change of their overall decay (via dissociation processes) caused by the applied external static electric field.
2 Experimental section
2.1 Femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy
The details of the experimental setup used for time-resolved transient absorption measurements are sketched in Fig. 1. A commercial regenerative amplifier Ti:sapphire laser system (CPA 2010, Clark MXR) was used to generate femtosecond laser pulses at a central wavelength of 775 nm with 1 mJ pulse energy, 1 kHz repetition rate, and 150 fs pulse duration. The generated laser output was split by a 50:50 beam splitter into two beams used to pump two optical parametric amplifiers (OPAs) (TOPAS, Light Conversion) capable of producing different laser wavelengths from UV to near infrared. In order to correct for the dispersion caused by nonlinear effects in the different optical components, the output of each TOPAS was compressed through a standard two-pass prism-compressor setup, resulting in nearly Fourier-transform limited femtosecond pulses of about 80–90 fs pulse width. One TOPAS was used for producing pump pulses at 520 nm and the other for generating probe pulses at 650 nm. Pump and probe pulses were then focused and spatially overlapped in the sample. The timing between the pump and the probe beams was achieved by using computer-controlled translation delay stages in a Michelson-type setup which can allow up to about max 500 ps time delay. Following the initial photoexcitation of the sample by the pump pulse, the time-delayed probe pulse transmission through the sample was detected by a photodiode in order to monitor the dynamics of the photogenerated species in the sample. A boxcar amplifier was used for pulse averaging in order to optimize the signal to noise ratio.
 Fig. 1  Experimental pump–probe spectroscopy setup. 
2.2 Sample and device fabrication
P3HT (Mw = 34–41k, average regioregularity = 89–94%, polydispersity index PDI = 1.5) purchased from Rieke Metal and dissolved in chlorobenzene was used for P3HT thin-film fabrication via a solution-processed layer deposition. Device fabrication and the preparation of all solutions needed for thin-film deposition were carried out under ambient conditions. The P3HT device was fabricated using a solar cell layer stack approach. Here, in the first step, we clean a glass substrate coated with ITO (as the cathode contact) with acetone and 2-propanol followed by 10 min cleaning in an UV-ozone cleaner to remove any organic residue. After this cleaning step, a solution processed electron transport layer (ETL) is spin coated at 5000 rpm for 30 s onto the ITO layer and then annealed for 30 min at 180 °C, resulting in a layer thickness of around 20 nm. The ETL layer is based on sol–gel-derived ZnO, and the corresponding solution is prepared by dissolving the precursor zinc acetate dihydrate (0.5 g) in a mixture of 5 ml of 2-methoxyethanol and 0.16 ml of ethanolamine according to reported protocols.49,50 In the next step, a P3HT layer is doctor bladed onto the ETL layer at a speed of 50 mm s−1 using a 35 mg ml−1 P3HT solution in chlorobenzene. After doctor blading, the so-formed P3HT layer is initially dried for 3 min at 75 °C and then annealed for 2 min at 100 °C to remove any remaining solvent. The resulting thickness of the P3HT layer is around 200 nm. A solution-processed hole-transport layer (HTL) is then deposited onto the P3HT layer by spin coating at 5000 rpm for 60 s and annealed for 10 min at 75 °C, resulting in a HTL thickness around 50 nm. The HTL solution is a mixture of PEDOT:PSS (Heraeus, Clevios HTL solar) and Zonyl FSN-100 (Sigma-Aldrich). In the last step, the semi-transparent anode contact is made by sputtering a 10 nm thick layer of silver through a shadow mask onto the HTL layer. Finally, before electrical and spectroscopic measurements, in order to minimize oxygen doping, the fabricated layer-stack sample is immediately stored overnight in a glove box under a N2 atmosphere where it is then air-bubble-free encapsulated with a top layer consisting of epoxy resin and a glass sheet followed by 3 min curing in an UVA cube. Fig. 2 shows the schematic representation of the fabricated P3HT device; it features a diode-like behavior because of the asymmetric ETL and HTL layers and can be referred to as a P3HT diode. The IV characteristics are given in Fig. S1 (ESI†). For standard (zero-field) transient absorption measurements, a neat P3HT layer with identical deposition parameters is doctor-bladed on a cleaned glass substrate and stored under a N2 atmosphere until spectroscopic measurements (in this case, encapsulation as described for the P3HT device was only needed when the sample had to be handled for many days under ambient conditions). The UV-vis spectrum of this P3HT sample is given in Fig. S2 (ESI†) and is similar to the spectra of regioregular P3HT thin films reported in other studies.22,30,51
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the organic semiconductor diode with only P3HT as the active medium. 
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Photoinduced polaron-pair dynamics in neat P3HT films
P3HT thin films show photoinduced transient absorption at 650 nm, which is very often associated with polaron pairs (besides several other species as discussed in the introduction) generated instantaneously (beyond our measurement time resolution), in agreement with previous studies.20,21,23,25,26 We have investigated the PA dynamics first in a neat P3HT film on a glass substrate. Fig. 3 shows normalized dynamics patterns in a neat P3HT film. In order to exclude any possible ground state contribution to the probe pulse absorption, the excited state absorption is modeled by calculating the relative differential probe pulse transmission (ΔT/T) using the following equation:  where Tpump-on and Tpump-off represent the transmitted probe pulse intensities with and without an initial pump pulse interaction, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Normalized differential probe pulse transmission showing the photoinduced transient absorption measured at 650 nm in a neat P3HT film with 24 μJ cm−2 initial pump excitation at 520 nm. 
As Fig. 3 shows, a steep decrease of the 650 nm probe pulse transmission can be observed, which is due to photoinduced absorption by instantaneously photogenerated species. The signal intensity then quickly recovers (less transmission) for positive time delays since most of the absorbing species decay. The detected PA decay dynamics consists of a fast and an ultraslow component; the ultraslow component is flat within our measurement time window limited to a few hundreds of picoseconds by the delay stages used and can be regarded as an offset. Hence, for simplicity, it appears that the observed overall dynamics are rather well approximated by a unimolecular decay process and are found to be well described by a mono-exponential decay fitting function, y = Y0 + A1exp(−t/t1), where y is the relative differential transmission ΔT/T. As can be seen from recently suggested kinetic models,22,23,52 we would again like to point to the fact that the dynamics of polaron-pair generation and decay arise from rather complex processes. Therefore, a detailed description of all involved pathways is not possible in this study where we limit the probing to 650 nm only. Hence, for simplicity, we resort here to the use of exponential fitting models without explicitly accounting for all possible individual first-order and higher-order processes (e.g. bimolecular deactivation processes). The fitting parameters Y0 (offset), A1 (amplitude) and t1 (time constant) are given in Table 1.
Table 1 Exponential fitting parameters of the photoinduced transient absorption at 650 nm describing the ultrafast polaron-pair decay dynamics in a neat P3HT film and in a P3HT device, after 520 nm initial excitation with different fluences. For the P3HT device, different values of reverse and forward bias have been applied




Neat P3HT film (mono-exponential fit)a


Excitation fluence

t
1 (fs)

A
1 (%)

Y
0 (%)





a Mono-exponential fit: y = Y0 + A1exp(−t/t1), bi-exponential fit: y = Y0 + A1exp(−t/t1) + A2exp(−t/t2).





24 μJ cm−2
890 ± 100
78 ± 2
21.8 ± 0.3






P3HT device (bi-exponential fit)a


Excitation fluence
Applied reverse bias (V)

t
1 (fs)

t
2 (ps)

A
1 (%)

A
2 (%)

Y
0 (%)




12 μJ cm−2
0
684 ± 80
4.4 ± 0.3
57 ± 4
11 ± 3
32 ± 0.2


1
590 ± 90
3.9 ± 0.5
54 ± 6
15 ± 6
31 ± 0.4


2
451 ± 86
3.2 ± 0.4
53 ± 5
12 ± 5
35 ± 0.3






24 μJ cm−2
0
712 ± 100
3.7 ± 0.3
52 ± 5
15 ± 4
33 ± 0.1


1
546 ± 90
3.5 ± 0.5
49 ± 5
30 ± 4
21 ± 0.3


2
457 ± 104
3.0 ± 0.4
49 ± 8
27 ± 8
23 ± 0.3






P3HT device (mono-exponential fit)a


Excitation fluence
Applied forward bias (V)

t
1 (fs)

A
1 (%)

Y
0 (%)




24 μJ cm−2
0.8
1264 ± 30
71 ± 4
29 ± 0.4




The decay parameters given in Table 1 represent the average value from three transient absorption curves with each curve recorded as an average of 30 loops (statistical errors are given in each case). The estimated time constant of the ultrafast decay component of the detected 650 nm PA in the neat P3HT film is 890 ± 100 fs. Since the obtained time constant is ultrashort, the fast component of the detected PA dynamics can surely be attributed to polaron pairs in the rr-P3HT because all other species which can contribute to the photoabsorption at 650 nm (also see introduction above) are very long-lived far beyond our measurement time window. For this reason and because in our remaining measurements we only observe transient dynamics showing a noticeable decaying trend only in the few hundreds fs to several ps window, we will from now on refer to the detected 650 nm PA decay band as the polaron-pair PA decay dynamics. The obtained polaron-pair decay time constant is comparable to values reported in other studies.20,30 Gao et al.30 have recently reported that the decay of polaron pairs corresponds to a recombination to the ground state, whereas Guo et al.20 previously suggested that these species would recombine back to form singlet excitons. However, other studies21 including some most recent ones22,23 strongly support a model according to which the ultrafast decay component of polaron pairs in P3HT would correspond to deactivation caused by polaron-pair dissociation or up-conversion to polarons in addition to bimolecular diffusion. Consequently, even though we may confidently assume that dissociation of polaron pairs would be the most likely pathway for the ultrafast decay at early time scales, we would like to point out that this study is limited to data about the polaron pair dynamics at 650 nm only, and that a precise determination of the nature of the polaron-pair decay, which would also require the measurement of the electronic ground state bleaching dynamics, was beyond our goal. Instead, we focus on the study of the influence of an external electric field on the polaron-pair decay on average where the comparison to the neat P3HT case is a starting point. A more detailed study of the pathways of the decaying polaron pairs also requires a very careful consideration of structural details since earlier studies show that the occurrence of polaron pairs in conjugated polymers is influenced by the polymer microstructure and structural dynamics.13,16,17,20,32,34 While for the neat P3HT film a simple mono-exponential decay sufficiently describes the dynamics, the situation becomes more complicated in the presence of an applied external electric field as we will discuss later.
For the polaron-pair decay observed in the neat P3HT film, we can state the following in summary. The dynamics pattern shown in Fig. 3 and the corresponding estimated decay parameters given in Table 1 clearly show that polaron pairs represent at least 78% of the decay dynamics, showing an ultrafast femtosecond decay time scale. As explained above, we attribute the observed polaron-pair decay mainly to a dissociation process, which is influenced by the static electric field, but cannot exclude any eventual recombination decay process. About 22% of the decay dynamics describe long-lived states, which show no trend of decaying within our measurement time window; the signal in Fig. 3 still remains unchanged even at 300 ps, the maximum time delay applied close to the practical limit of our delay stages (see the corresponding transient in Fig. S3, ESI†). Previous works have shown that trapped polaron-pair species can survive throughout typical exciton lifetimes and beyond21,53 and that the trapping of polaron pairs can occur at sites of intrinsic or photoinduced defects or distortions in the organic matrix.54–56 Alexandrou et al.53 have shown that the long-lived states in P3HT vanish with the addition of single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) in the P3HT matrix, in which the SWCNTs act as acceptors at the donor-(P3HT)/acceptor heterojunctions, suggesting that the long-lived states in their samples were trapped polaron pairs.57 However, our data do not allow ruling out the possibility that the long-lived tail in our transients may also be caused by other long-lived species whose optical absorption overlaps with the polaron pair PA, as we have discussed in the introduction. For example, some polaron pairs may quickly decay into 2D-delocalized polarons, a possibility also envisaged by Korovyanko et al.24
In agreement with previous works,20,21 the dynamics of polaron pairs probed at 650 nm in a neat P3HT film are independent of the pump-excitation intensity. Since the polaron-pair formation is usually believed to arise from the initial photoexcitations produced by the pump pulse, this observation suggests that the formation of nearly all of these excited species occurs on an ultrafast time scale,33 being less sensitive to bimolecular deactivation processes (annihilation) that may affect primary photoexcitations (excitons). The lack of dependence of the dynamics on the excitation intensity has usually been used to support the assignment of the 650 nm PA band to polaron pairs in P3HT.20 In addition, due to localization caused by geometrical reorganization, polaron pairs should exhibit reduced mobility and are thereby more unlikely to undergo a bimolecular annihilation process as compared to excitons.
3.2 Photoinduced polaron-pair dynamics in the P3HT device
The ultimate goal of our work was to investigate the polaron-pair dynamics under the influence of an applied electric field in order to study the ultrafast processes under a condition comparable to that of electronic devices during operation. To this end, we have used a P3HT device in a solar cell configuration. There, a P3HT layer identical to the neat P3HT film discussed above is sandwiched between two matching layers for either electron or hole transport allowing for the application of an external electric field across the P3HT layer. These asymmetric contacts result in diode-like electric current–voltage characteristics. As revealed by the current-vs.-voltage (IV) characterization (see Fig. S1, ESI†), the P3HT-only diode exhibits a built-in potential of approximately 0.8 V and features IV characteristics typical of a solar cell. In our experiment, the strength of the applicable external electric field is limited by the maximum voltage for normal operation of the diode (i.e. without damage); we show measurements where 0, 1, and 2 V have been applied to the diode in reverse bias. The corresponding applied electric field across the P3HT layer is given by the ratio of the applied voltage to the layer thickness and corresponds to 0.05 and 0.1 MV cm−1, respectively. The experiments were carried out three times repeatedly by varying the reverse bias voltages up and down in the range from 0 to 2 V; all the measured transient absorption curves at each bias voltage were reproducible. Compared to the situation in a neat P3HT film, different polaron-pair dynamics in the P3HT layer inside the P3HT device have been found (also at zero external bias), which now also depend on the excitation pump fluence. Hence, in the following, we will also present results obtained at different pump laser intensities.

Fig. 4 shows the transient absorption dynamics of the P3HT layer in the P3HT device started by a pump pulse with 12 μJ cm−2 excitation fluence at different reverse biases. These dynamics exhibit polaron-pair decay patterns, which on the first sight appear to be similar in shape to those observed in the neat P3HT film (each with an ultrafast decay part and a practically flat component not decaying within the measurement time window). As in the case of the neat P3HT film, we fit the overall decay trend in the P3HT device by applying exponential functions. Interestingly, a close analysis reveals that the polaron-pair dynamics in this case are well described by a bi-exponential decay model using fitting functions of the form of y = Y0 + A1exp(−t/t1) + A2exp(−t/t2), where again Y0 is the offset, A1 and A2 are the amplitudes, and t1 and t2 are the decay times characterizing the two exponential decay components. We have used these fits to extract the decay parameters for the transient dynamics observed at different applied voltages, as summarized in Table 1. As explained for the neat P3HT case, we resort to fitting the overall decay using exponential functions for simplicity. Indeed, the bi-exponential model well reproduces the experimental data and allows for a simple comparison between the polaron-pair dynamics in the neat P3HT film and in the P3HT film within a P3HT device where a static electric field has been applied.
 Fig. 4  Differential transient transmission dynamics ΔT/T (a) and normalized counterparts (b–d) obtained from the P3HT device for an applied external electric field in reverse bias with 0 (i.e. only built-in potential), 1, and 2 V at 12 μJ cm−2 excitation fluence. The inset in panel (a) shows the ΔT/T peak value at 0 ps as a function of the applied bias, revealing instantaneous electric field-induced quenching of photoinduced absorption. 
We first highlight the overall field-induced change in the P3HT polaron-pair decay patterns before discussing a more comprehensive physical interpretation later. Overall, in the P3HT device (in which the P3HT layer experiences an electric field), the polaron-pair decay dynamics feature a composite ultrafast decay part with two sub-components (as opposed to just one such component in the neat P3HT film where there is no electric field) on top of a very long-lived tail. The latter is correctly approximated as an offset within the measurement time window as in the neat P3HT case and assigned to possible long-lived states as discussed for the neat P3HT. The fastest (t1) component in this case physically describes the dynamics of the same ultrafast generated polaron pairs seen in the neat P3HT film without any static electric field and for this reason we refer to them from now on as “nascent” polaron pairs. The somewhat slower (t2) component, which can be also extracted from the ultrafast decay regime, arises from the fact that the electric field inside the P3HT device induces the formation of polaron pairs within a few picoseconds, as observed in a previous study on a similar PT derivative.31 Next to this field-induced polaron-pair formation, the electric field inside the P3HT device also affects the decay of both nascent and field-induced polaron pairs, resulting in a faster decay for both components with increasing bias voltage as seen in Table 1. As discussed hereafter, both the observed effects in the P3HT device are consistent with the fact that an applied electric field mainly results in the separation of the bound electron–hole states in agreement with the well-known electric field-induced dissociation resulting in the quenching of the optical signal from these states.39,46,58
Let us first consider the ultrafast decay regime and the immediate decrease of polaron-pair concentration. As depicted in the inset of Fig. 4(a), the clearest evidence of the immediate field-induced dissociation is given by the observation that the optical density of the photoinduced absorption of polaron pairs in the P3HT device decreases significantly at 0 ps (i.e. immediately after excitation) with increasing efficiency for increasing electric field strength. An ultrafast field-induced dissociation of the primary excitons competes with the formation of the nascent polaron pairs from the primary excitation and explains the polaron-pair absorption reduction at 0 ps. Compared to the neat P3HT film, the fast (nascent) polaron-pair decay in the P3HT device is faster, which becomes more obvious when the electric field strength increases. A faster t1 decay component can already be observed at 0 V external bias since the net minimum electric field is non-zero due to the built-in potential across the P3HT film (0.8 V in the fabricated P3HT device). This is due to the faster dissociation also of the polaron pairs caused by the internal and external field. Therefore, the electric field strength also influences the polaron-pair decay. However, their dissociation is less affected by the electric field than the dissociation of the primary photoexcitation species preceding the formation of the nascent polaron pairs. The field-induced dissociation efficiency drastically changes within an ultrashort time scale. This is because the primary photoexcited species (hot excitons and eventually higher excited states reached by multiphoton absorption), from which polaron pairs are instantaneously generated (i.e. within the thermalization time of less than 100 fs, which is beyond our time resolution), have a high CT character and hence a more dissociative behavior. They readily dissociate in contrast to the thermalized excitons or the already formed polaron pairs. We recall that polythiophenes like P3HT are unique in the sense that photoexcited species in these polymers can noticeably dissociate even in the absence of an electric field.
Now, we carefully consider the slower component (within the polaron-pair ultrafast decay regime), which obviously is missing in the field-free case and therefore must be field-induced. As previously proposed in an earlier study, a polaron pair can be formed during exciton dissociation.59 For the present work, the electric field present in the P3HT device can induce the dissociation of thermalized excitons, and as a consequence, not only charge carriers are formed, but also polaron pairs, which are structurally stabilized temporarily during the field-induced exciton dissociation. This delayed polaron-pair formation happens on a timescale longer than the exciton thermalization time as opposed to the ultrafast generation of nascent polaron pairs (i.e. those originating instantaneously from the primary photoexcitations). The possibility for polaron-pair formation during exciton dissociation can be understood by regarding the dissociation of excitons into charges as a transition through a continuum of CT states, and among these states, a polaron pair is the one with a complete CT character as described in the introduction.34 Of course, soon after formation, these polaron pairs stabilized temporarily during the external electric-field-induced exciton dissociation also decay in a similar way as the nascent polaron pairs and their decay is again field dependent. This means that the slower decay component observed is due to a more complex combination of dynamical processes: there is the field-induced diffusion-controlled slower generation process starting with some delay and then decreasing due to the consumption of thermalized excitons. Then, there is the eventual decay of the so-formed polaron pairs. Therefore, unlike the fast t1 component, caution must be taken to not directly interpret t2 as a pure decay time constant even though the bi-exponential fitting function nicely reproduces the transients measured in the P3HT device. We can however conclude that for the ultrafast regime of the detected 650 nm PA dynamics, both the immediately formed polaron pairs (nascent polaron pairs) and the polaron pairs induced by the applied electric field eventually experience a faster decay due to field-induced dissociation. Meanwhile, the field effect during the ultraslow decay regime (seen as an offset on the time scale of our experiments) is not noticeable within the time delay window accessed in the experiment.
That the dynamics observed for the case when an internal or external electric field is present (P3HT device) are even more complex becomes obvious when looking at the dependence of the dynamics on the pump laser intensity (excitation fluence). In the case of the neat P3HT film, the fluence does not noticeably influence the observed dynamics as we have pointed out above.20,21 However, a change of the excitation fluence in the case of the P3HT device also has consequences for the observed dynamics. Fig. 5 shows the results obtained from an experiment where we have doubled the laser fluence from 12 to 24 μJ cm−2. Table 1 lists the corresponding fitting parameters obtained from a fit using the bi-exponential model introduced above.
 Fig. 5  Differential transient transmission dynamics ΔT/T (a) and normalized counterparts (b–d) obtained from the P3HT device for an applied external electric field in reverse bias with 0 (i.e. only built-in potential), 1, and 2 V at 24 μJ cm−2 excitation fluence. The inset in panel (a) shows the ΔT/T peak value at 0 ps as a function of the applied bias, revealing instantaneous electric field-induced quenching of photoinduced absorption. 
Looking at the two variables t1 and t2, we find that within the fitting error, no significant changes occur for the faster decay component. This is not surprising, since we have assumed that the underlying process (formation of nascent polaron pairs and their decay) is the same as that observed for the neat P3HT film where the excitation fluence did not have a recognizable influence. However, t2 characterizing the slower decay component of the dynamics is clearly getting smaller not only with the applied voltage but also with excitation fluence. This observation points to a contribution of bimolecular annihilation processes, which on the picosecond time scale add an additional deactivation channel, becoming more efficient when the concentration of excitons increases due to higher excitation fluence. Since these annihilation processes also mean a decrease of created charges, they are unwanted when it comes to an optimization of the efficiency of electronic devices. Obviously, due to these processes, also the weighting of the respective contribution to the polaron-pair dynamics slightly shifts toward the field-induced polaron-pair generation, which is reflected in the amplitude A2, where now also more influence of the field strength can be observed.
In the experiments described above, even for the case of an external voltage of 0 V, still a non-zero internal field due to the built-in potential of 0.8 V remains active inside the P3HT device. In order to see if the field-induced effects described above can be eliminated also in the diode setup of the P3HT device, we have operated the P3HT device with an external voltage of 0.8 V in forward bias compensating the built-in voltage. Fig. 6 shows the transient-absorption dynamics of the polaron pairs observed under these conditions. As for the neat-P3HT case, now a mono-exponential fitting model best describes the observed decay behavior. I.e., as a further confirmation of our model, which assumes the field-dependent formation part of the polaron pairs being responsible for the additional and somewhat slower component in the polaron-pair ultrafast dynamics regime, we only find the fast component for a net zero field inside the P3HT device (see Table 1). The decay time constant is somewhat longer in the forward-biased P3HT device (at net zero electric field) as compared to that found in the neat P3HT film. This change can be attributed to charge injection resulting in an inter-lamellae current flow, which should affect the partly localized polaron pairs, which are understood to bear an inter-lamellae character in P3HT.21,60
 Fig. 6  Differential transient transmission dynamics ΔT/T obtained from the P3HT device for a forward bias of 0.8 V compensating the built-in potential excited with 24 μJ cm−2 excitation fluence. 
3.3 Transient absorption anisotropy measurement
A pump–probe transient absorption anisotropy measurement may provide further information about polaron-pair dynamics and the effect of an external electric field on it. The pump–probe anisotropy r(t) has been calculated using the following equation:  where (ΔT/T)‖ and (ΔT/T)⊥ are the differential probe pulse transmissions for the probe pulse polarization parallel and perpendicular to that of the pump pulse, respectively. The polarization memory obtained from the anisotropy measurement is correlated with energy transport quantities (free path length, energy transfer rate and hence mobility) and the conformational disorder of the polymer chain.31,61–68

Fig. 7 shows the anisotropy decay patterns for the 650 nm PA detected in the neat P3HT thin film and P3HT device. Similar to the pump probe results discussed above they are averages over three measurements. In the case of the neat P3HT film, the initial anisotropy of about 0.43 ± 0.01 at 0 ps obtained in our work is close to a theoretical estimate by Hwang et al.68 The fast decay of the measured anisotropy suggests that polaron pairs diffuse quickly and transfer their initial energy to lower energy sites and eventually lose their polarization memory.69 This agrees with the fact that polaron pairs formed in the crystalline phase of P3HT are rather mobile. The mono-exponential anisotropy decay time constant of approx. 1.4 ± 0.2 ps is longer than that of the polaron pair decay mentioned above; this may well be an indication of other species’ contribution to the PA at 650 nm. Fig. 7 also shows the transient anisotropy patterns obtained for the P3HT device at various external electric fields and reveals a vanishing constant anisotropy of only 0.08 in comparison to an initial value of 0.43 for polaron pairs in the neat P3HT film (see the extracted 0 ps field-induced anisotropy values given in Table S1, ESI†). These results provide an even clearer picture of the effect of the applied electric field. Namely, the field-induced dissociation of the photoexcitation species leads to very low anisotropy, which can be explained by the possibility that a reduced population density would facilitate the polarization reorientation along the direction orthogonal to the excitation polarization. At a first glance, one might think that the applied electric field drives the polarization of the photogenerated species. However, because the probe beam with a given polarization is detected in the anisotropy experiment, it is clear that not all the photoexcited species would be immediately driven by the applied electric field polarization (otherwise no absorption of the probe light pulse would be observed). Instead, we believe that the polarization of the photogenerated species at creation is still driven by the excitation pump pulse polarization; then two scenarios follow: an immediate polarization reorientation for some of the species along the applied field which is inseparable from the simultaneous ultrafast field-induced dissociation which we cannot resolve (seen as the field-induced absorption quenching at 0 ps), and an ultrafast field-induced loss of the excitation polarization memory resulting in a fixed polarization configuration (different from that of the applied electric field) with comparable proportions for parallel and orthogonal components with respect to the excitation polarization. These scenarios provide the reason why a vanishing and constant anisotropy value was obtained (according to the equation for calculating the anisotropy). This situation appears to be obviously already saturated by the action of the built-in potential present in the P3HT device so that higher applied voltages make no more difference. After compensating the built-in potential by applying 0.8 V in forward bias, a twice as high anisotropy (0.18) in comparison to the reverse-biased P3HT device is obtained at 0 ps. Although this value is still smaller by a factor of approx. two than that obtained in the neat P3HT film, the overall anisotropy decay is similar to that in the neat film and the smaller initial anisotropy can be attributed to the photoexcitation polarization memory loss due to the interference caused by the electrically injected charge carriers in the forward biased device.
 Fig. 7  Anisotropy decay of the 650 nm transient absorption in the neat P3HT thin film and P3HT device under applied external voltage in both reverse and forward bias after an initial pump excitation with 24 μJ cm−2 fluence. 
3.4 Polaron-pair dynamics showing competing static electric-field effects in a diode-like P3HT device as opposed to neat P3HT film

Fig. 8 depicts the relevant photophysical processes concluded from the transient absorption experiments probing the dynamics of polaron pairs at 650 nm in rr-P3HT for a P3HT thin film without an electric field (neat P3HT thin film, panel a) and for a P3HT film under an applied electric field (P3HT device, panel b).
 Fig. 8  Schematic energy diagram (not to scale) depicting physical processes contributing to the transient absorption dynamics of polaron pairs in (a) a neat P3HT film (i.e. without an electric field) and (b) the P3HT layer of a P3HT device (i.e. under the influence of an applied electric field). For more details, see text. Black line: ultrafast formation of nascent polaron pairs; dotted blue lines: polaron-pair decay (unimolecular processes); dashed grey lines: bimolecular annihilation processes; red lines: electric field-induced processes; S0: electronic ground state; S1: thermalized singlet exciton state; Sn; high-energy exciton state; PP: polaron-pair state; LLS: long lived states; PPn: high-energy polaron-pair state; P+ + P−: polaron states. The energy levels given are only schematic and the energy scale is therefore not reflecting quantitative values. 
We would like to point out the following contributions to the dynamics. (i) In both neat P3HT film and P3HT device, the ultrafast formation of nascent polaron pairs (black lines) occurs mainly from hot excitonic states within 100 fs (i.e. beyond the time resolution of our experiments). (ii) An electric field present in the P3HT device (inherent built-in field and field due to the applied additional reverse bias) causes an ultrafast dissociation of hot excitons and higher energy states (dashed straight red lines). Therefore, increasing the pump-laser field strength results in a decrease of the time-zero photoinduced absorption (due to the reduced concentration of polaron pairs). (iii) In the P3HT device, an additional polaron-pair generation channel exists, where the slower field-induced dissociation of the thermalized excitons (in the S1 state) results in both free charges (not observed at 650 nm probe wavelength within the experimental time window) and polaron pairs (wavy solid red line). This generation process slowly decreases due to the consumption of the thermalized excitons and contributes to the slower decay dynamics (t2). (iv) The subsequent ultrafast decay regime of the polaron pairs (all dotted lines) has just one fast component (t1, blue dotted line) in the neat P3HT film but two components including a fast (t1, blue dotted line) and a slower one (t2, red wavy dotted line) in the P3HT device. A practically flat offset below the polaron-pair ultrafast decay dynamics is present in the overall 650 nm PA dynamics recorded in the experimental time window and represents an ultraslow decay of long lived states (such as localized polaron-pair states “PPtrap” or “2D-delocalized polarons” formed possibly from the ultrafast decaying polaron pairs, etc.; the dynamics of the ultraslow decay are not noticeable in our time window and hence not shown in Fig. 8). Like the dissociation of the excitons, also the loss of polaron pairs is accelerated when an electric field is applied. In the schemes, the red color marks processes induced by the electric field (field-induced dissociation, field-induced polaron-pair generation). (v) Finally, bimolecular annihilation (grey dashed lines) influences the field-induced polaron-pair generation and decay dynamics in the P3HT device, adding an additional loss channel to the slower decay component (t2) of the polaron pairs in the device. This process (i.e. bimolecular annihilation) does not influence the polaron-pair dynamics in the neat P3HT film, since there polaron pairs, which we have referred to as nascent polaron pairs, are formed on an ultrafast time scale. This is consistent with the fact that within the polaron-pair ultrafast decay regime also in the P3HT device, the fast (t1) decay component assigned to the same nascent ultrafast-generated polaron pairs is found to be unaffected by bimolecular annihilation.
4 Conclusions
We have performed transient absorption experiments on a neat P3HT film and on a P3HT device (P3HT-only diode), choosing a pump-laser wavelength of 520 nm to excite hot excitons and tuning the probe wavelength to the absorption of polaron pairs at 650 nm. In order to study the effect of electric fields, we have applied an external field to the P3HT device, which we have varied to achieve a reverse bias condition (internal field + external field) and a field-free condition (forward bias compensating internal field). With our experiments, we wanted to shed light on the influence of electric fields on the polaron-pair dynamics, since such fields will always be present in realistic semiconductor devices.
We find clear evidence of an effect of internal and external electric fields by comparing the results obtained from the neat P3HT film and P3HT device. While the polaron-pair dynamics in the neat P3HT film and in the P3HT layer of the P3HT device for the field-free case in the device can be described by a simple mono-exponential decay function, an additional slower contribution to the dynamics is observed in the transient absorption measured for varying electric fields. The most important process in all cases is the generation of “nascent” polaron pairs from hot excitons and their decay due to dissociation. However, already here we see a clear influence of the electric field, which results in an ultrafast loss of hot excitons and thus a reduced transient absorption at time-zero within our temporal resolution. Additionally, the polaron-pair dissociation, which is on the order of several hundreds of femtoseconds, is getting faster due to the field. When a field is applied, a field-induced generation of polaron pairs from thermalized excitons slowly decreasing due to the consumption of the available excitons results in a slower contribution to the dynamics on the order of a few picoseconds. Besides these fast processes, a long-lived signal (offset) arising from long-lived states (e.g. localized polaron pairs, 2D-delocalized polarons, etc.) determines the long-time behavior of the transient absorption signal. Interestingly, while an increase of the pump-laser-excitation fluence does not affect the polaron-pair dynamics in the neat P3HT film, it influences the field-induced slower part of the dynamics in the P3HT device. This observation is explained by annihilation processes forming a loss channel.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. Bradley, A. Brown, R. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. Burns and A. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tasch, E. List, O. Ekström, W. Graupner, G. Leising, P. Schlichting, U. Rohr, Y. Geerts, U. Scherf and K. Müllen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 2883–2885 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and P. R. Malenfant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
F. Garnier, R. Hajlaoui, A. Yassar and P. Srivastava, Science, 1994, 265, 1684–1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. Dusastre, Materials for sustainable energy: a collection of peer-reviewed research and review articles from Nature Publishing Group, World Scientific,  2011 Search PubMed .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, A. Dodabalapur and A. J. Lovinger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 4108–4110 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu, J. M. Fréchet and M. F. Toney, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 3312–3319 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. Brown, R. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. Langeveld-Voss, A. Spiering, R. A. Janssen, E. Meijer and P. Herwig, Nature, 1999, 401, 685 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bom, M. Ortel and V. Wagner, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 1634–1639 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gburek and V. Wagner, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 814–819 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, S. Phillips, H. Tomozawa and A. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 42, 3004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kanner, X. Wei, B. Hess, L. Chen and Z. Vardeny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 69, 538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ruseckas, M. Theander, M. R. Andersson, M. Svensson, M. Prato, O. Inganäs and V. Sundström, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 322, 136–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seixas de Melo, H. Burrows, M. Svensson, M. Andersson and A. Monkman, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 1550–1556 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cook, A. Furube and R. Katoh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 294–299 RSC .
S. Pittner, D. Lehmann, D. R. Zahn and V. Wagner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 115211 CrossRef .
N. Banerji, S. Cowan, E. Vauthey and A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9726–9739 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16869–16880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Jiang, R. Österbacka, O. Korovyanko, C. P. An, B. Horovitz, R. A. Janssen and Z. V. Vardeny, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 587–597 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ogata, D. Kawaguchi and K. Tanaka, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8436 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Menšík, J. Pfleger and P. Toman, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2017, 677, 87–91 CrossRef .
O. Korovyanko, R. Österbacka, X. Jiang, Z. Vardeny and R. Janssen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 235122 CrossRef .
R. Österbacka, C. P. An, X. Jiang and Z. V. Vardeny, Science, 2000, 287, 839–842 CrossRef PubMed .
O. G. Reid, R. D. Pensack, Y. Song, G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 561–575 CrossRef .
D. Herrmann, S. Niesar, C. Scharsich, A. Köhler, M. Stutzmann and E. Riedle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18220–18233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Spano, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 234701 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Clark, C. Silva, R. H. Friend and F. C. Spano, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206406 CrossRef PubMed .
B.-R. Gao, H.-Y. Wang, H. Wang, Z.-Y. Yang, L. Wang, Y. Jiang, Y.-W. Hao, Q.-D. Chen and H.-B. Sun, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2011, 48, 425–432 Search PubMed .
Y. Zaushitsyn, V. Gulbinas, D. Zigmantas, F. Zhang, O. Inganäs, V. Sundström and A. Yartsev, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 075202 CrossRef .
K. Vandewal, S. Albrecht, E. T. Hoke, K. R. Graham, J. Widmer, J. D. Douglas, M. Schubert, W. R. Mateker, J. T. Bloking and G. F. Burkhard, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 63 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moses, A. Dogariu and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 9373 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Neukirch, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, K. Appavoo, H. Tsai, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Katan, L. Pedesseau, J. Even and J. J. Crochet, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3809–3816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hu, J. Yu, K. Wong, B. Bagchi, P. J. Rossky and P. F. Barbara, Nature, 2000, 405, 1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Schweitzer, V. Arkhipov and H. Bässler, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 304, 365–370 CrossRef CAS .
V. Arkhipov, E. Emelianova and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 1321 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hendry, J. M. Schins, L. Candeias, L. Siebbeles and M. Bonn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 196601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kersting, U. Lemmer, M. Deussen, H. Bakker, R. Mahrt, H. Kurz, V. I. Arkhipov, H. Bässler and E. Göbel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 73, 1440 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Barth, H. Bässler, U. Scherf and K. Müllen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barth and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 79, 4445 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yan, L. Rothberg, F. Papadimitrakopoulos, M. Galvin and T. Miller, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 72, 1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gulbinas, Y. Zaushitsyn, V. Sundström, D. Hertel, H. Bässler and A. Yartsev, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 107401 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Graupner, G. Cerullo, G. Lanzani, M. Nisoli, E. List, G. Leising and S. De Silvestri, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 3259 CrossRef CAS .
T. Virgili, G. Cerullo, L. Lüer, G. Lanzani, C. Gadermaier and D. Bradley, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 247402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Causa’, I. Ramirez, J. F. Martinez Hardigree, M. Riede and N. Banerji, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1885–1892 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Iimori, K. Awasthi, C.-S. Chiou, E. W.-G. Diau and N. Ohta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 5695–5704 RSC .
T. Iimori, K. Awasthi, C.-S. Chiou, E. W.-G. Diau and N. Ohta, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6136–6151 CrossRef .
V. Vohra, K. Kawashima, T. Kakara, T. Koganezawa, I. Osaka, K. Takimiya and H. Murata, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 403 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jinno, K. Fukuda, X. Xu, S. Park, Y. Suzuki, M. Koizumi, T. Yokota, I. Osaka, K. Takimiya and T. Someya, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 780 CrossRef CAS .
S. Falke, P. Eravuchira, A. Materny and C. Lienau, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2011, 42, 1897–1900 CrossRef CAS .
K. Karki, M. Namboodiri, T. Zeb Khan and A. Materny, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 153103 CrossRef .
I. Alexandrou, E. Lioudakis, D. Delaportas, C. Zhao and A. Othonos, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kaake, P. F. Barbara and X.-Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 628–635 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Motti, M. Gandini, A. J. Barker, J. M. Ball, A. R. Srimath Kandada and A. Petrozza, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 726–730 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Nicolai, M. Kuik, G. Wetzelaer, B. De Boer, C. Campbell, C. Risko, J. Brédas and P. Blom, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, D. Polli, D. Fazzi, J. Cabanillas-Gonzalez, G. Cerullo and G. Lanzani, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1099–1105 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cabanillas-Gonzalez, T. Virgili, A. Gambetta, G. Lanzani, T. Anthopoulos and D. De Leeuw, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 106601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Deibel, D. Mack, J. Gorenflot, A. Schöll, S. Krause, F. Reinert, D. Rauh and V. Dyakonov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 085202 CrossRef .
G. Donati, D. B. Lingerfelt, A. Petrone, N. Rega and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 7255–7261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Collini and G. D. Scholes, Science, 2009, 323, 369–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ruseckas, P. Wood, I. Samuel, G. Webster, W. Mitchell, P. Burn and V. Sundström, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 115214 CrossRef .
M.-L. Grage, P. Wood, A. Ruseckas, T. Pullerits, W. Mitchell, P. Burn, I. Samuel and V. Sundström, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 7644–7650 CrossRef CAS .
S. Westenhoff, W. J. Beenken, R. H. Friend, N. C. Greenham, A. Yartsev and V. Sundström, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 166804 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Gulbinas, D. Hertel, A. Yartsev and V. Sundström, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 235203 CrossRef .
M.-L. Grage, T. Pullerits, A. Ruseckas, M. Theander, O. Inganäs and V. Sundström, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 339, 96–102 CrossRef CAS .
M. M.-L. Grage, Y. Zaushitsyn, A. Yartsev, M. Chachisvilis, V. Sundström and T. Pullerits, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 205207 CrossRef .
I. Hwang and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 610–620 CrossRef .
V. Gulbinas, I. Minevičiūtė, D. Hertel, R. Wellander, A. Yartsev and V. Sundström, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 144907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp03736eThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Experimental pump–probe spectroscopy setup.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the organic semiconductor diode with only P3HT as the active medium.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Normalized differential probe pulse transmission showing the photoinduced transient absorption measured at 650 nm in a neat P3HT film with 24 μJ cm−2 initial pump excitation at 520 nm.	 



24 μJ cm−2	890 ± 100	78 ± 2	21.8 ± 0.3


12 μJ cm−2	0	684 ± 80	4.4 ± 0.3	57 ± 4	11 ± 3	32 ± 0.2
1	590 ± 90	3.9 ± 0.5	54 ± 6	15 ± 6	31 ± 0.4
2	451 ± 86	3.2 ± 0.4	53 ± 5	12 ± 5	35 ± 0.3


24 μJ cm−2	0	712 ± 100	3.7 ± 0.3	52 ± 5	15 ± 4	33 ± 0.1
1	546 ± 90	3.5 ± 0.5	49 ± 5	30 ± 4	21 ± 0.3
2	457 ± 104	3.0 ± 0.4	49 ± 8	27 ± 8	23 ± 0.3


24 μJ cm−2	0.8	1264 ± 30	71 ± 4	29 ± 0.4

 	Fig. 4  Differential transient transmission dynamics ΔT/T (a) and normalized counterparts (b–d) obtained from the P3HT device for an applied external electric field in reverse bias with 0 (i.e. only built-in potential), 1, and 2 V at 12 μJ cm−2 excitation fluence. The inset in panel (a) shows the ΔT/T peak value at 0 ps as a function of the applied bias, revealing instantaneous electric field-induced quenching of photoinduced absorption.	 

 	Fig. 5  Differential transient transmission dynamics ΔT/T (a) and normalized counterparts (b–d) obtained from the P3HT device for an applied external electric field in reverse bias with 0 (i.e. only built-in potential), 1, and 2 V at 24 μJ cm−2 excitation fluence. The inset in panel (a) shows the ΔT/T peak value at 0 ps as a function of the applied bias, revealing instantaneous electric field-induced quenching of photoinduced absorption.	 

 	Fig. 6  Differential transient transmission dynamics ΔT/T obtained from the P3HT device for a forward bias of 0.8 V compensating the built-in potential excited with 24 μJ cm−2 excitation fluence.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Anisotropy decay of the 650 nm transient absorption in the neat P3HT thin film and P3HT device under applied external voltage in both reverse and forward bias after an initial pump excitation with 24 μJ cm−2 fluence.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic energy diagram (not to scale) depicting physical processes contributing to the transient absorption dynamics of polaron pairs in (a) a neat P3HT film (i.e. without an electric field) and (b) the P3HT layer of a P3HT device (i.e. under the influence of an applied electric field). For more details, see text. Black line: ultrafast formation of nascent polaron pairs; dotted blue lines: polaron-pair decay (unimolecular processes); dashed grey lines: bimolecular annihilation processes; red lines: electric field-induced processes; S0: electronic ground state; S1: thermalized singlet exciton state; Sn; high-energy exciton state; PP: polaron-pair state; LLS: long lived states; PPn: high-energy polaron-pair state; P+ + P−: polaron states. The energy levels given are only schematic and the energy scale is therefore not reflecting quantitative values.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp03736e

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
