Electronic effect of substituents on the charge-transfer dynamics at the CsPbBr 3 perovskite–small molecule interface   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP04599K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP04599K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 4121-4131Electronic effect of substituents on the charge-transfer dynamics at the CsPbBr3 perovskite–small molecule interface†

        
          
            Soumi 
            Roy
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Malay Krishna 
            Mahato
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Edamana 
            Prasad
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IITM), Chennai 600036, India. E-mail: pre@iitm.ac.in;  Fax: +91-44-2257-4202;   Tel: +91-44-2252-4232
Received 
      3rd October 2022
    , Accepted 6th January 2023First published on 10th January 2023AbstractTo push the boundary of the efficiency of perovskite nanocrystal-based photovoltaics, understanding the charge transfer at the interface of these nanocrystals is necessary. In an effort to understand the electronic effects of the substituents in the charge acceptor moiety, three electronically different small molecules (namely, chloranilic acid (CA), p-benzoquinone (BQ), and duroquinone (DQ)) were chosen and their detailed charge transfer dynamics were studied at the CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystal–small organic molecule interface using steady state and time-resolved spectroscopic methods. The steady-state absorption and time-resolved emission studies reveal that all three molecules interact with the NCs in the excited state. Femtosecond transient absorption experiments indicate a faster ground-state bleach recovery in the presence of the three acceptors, compared with the pristine NCs. Utilizing band alignment analysis, the faster bleach recovery of the NCs in presence of the acceptors was confirmed to be because of electron transfer from the photo-excited NCs to the acceptor molecules. Moreover, the electron transfer rates fall in the Marcus normal region and can be explained based on the electronic effects of the substituents present on the acceptor molecules.
1. Introduction
Lead halide perovskite nanocrystals (PNCs) have received great research interest in the area of optoelectronics,1–3 with a major focus in photovoltaics,4–6 due to their impressive optical and electronic properties which include a high absorption coefficient,7,8 a narrow and intense emission,9 an outstanding charge carrier ability, a lower exciton binding energy,10 and a long ambipolar charge diffusion length.11–13 In addition, the ease of solution processibility of these PNCs has enabled researchers to tune their optical and electronic properties with respect to their size, shape, and dimensionality through altering the reaction conditions.14,15 Due to advancements in technology and material processing over the past few years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite based solar cells has exceeded 25%.16 The PCE of perovskite based light harvesting devices depends mainly on three major processes: (i) the generation of excitons, (ii) the dissociation of these excitons, and (iii) the transportation of these excitons towards the counter electrode. In real situations, the above-mentioned processes compete with electron–hole internal recombination and charge carrier trapping into defect states.17,18 Thus, to overcome such competitive processes, in an optoelectronic device, PNCs have been sandwiched between electron- and hole-transporting layers, which extract the excitons from the nanocrystals prior to their trapping and internal recombination.
It has been observed that the performance of a perovskite is enhanced when it is coupled with different systems such as metal oxides (MOs),19,20 quantum dots (QDs),21–23 2D layered materials,22–25 and small organic molecules.15,26–30 For example, Liu et al. have demonstrated that when CsPbI3 QDs are coupled with TiO2 nanoparticles, ∼99% of the photoexcited electrons from the CsPbI3 QDs are transferred to the TiO2 nanoparticles, leading to an enhancement of the photocurrent in perovskite–metal oxide hybrid systems.19 The enhancement of the PCE has also been explained by Ding et al. through interfacial engineering in CsPbBr3 NC–CuInS2/ZnS QD composites.31 More importantly, these studies also reflect that it is not only the exciton formation in the NCs but also the dissociation of the excitons that plays a pivotal role in deciding the performance of the perovskite based photovoltaic devices. The key points for improving the device performance are the rapid dissociation of the excitons, suppressed internal radiative recombination, and reduced trapping of the charge carriers into defect states. Understanding the charge carrier dynamics at the interface of the PNCs in presence of acceptors is therefore crucial to fully exploit the potential of the PNCs.
In this context, there have been studies to understand the role of the metal oxide as an electron transporting layer. Charge transfer dynamics at the perovskite NC–metal oxide interface have been investigated by Liao et al. using three different metal oxides, and the electron transfer rate was found to be maximum for CsPbBr3–SnO2 composites.20 The effect of the dimensionality of the PNCs on the ultrafast electron transfer has also been studied using 0D, 1D, and 2D CdSe nanoplates. The study revealed that the rate of electron transfer is maximum in the 2D PNC–2D CdSe nanoplate composite compared with the 0D–0D composite.23 Analysis of the charge transfer dynamics at the perovskite nanocrystal–MO/QDs interface becomes complex due to the presence of continuous and quasi-continuous energy states in the metal oxide (MO) and quantum dots (QDs), respectively. Therefore, to understand the movement of the charge carriers at the interface of PNCs, small organic molecules with discrete energy levels were introduced and detailed charge transfer dynamics were studied at such PNC–organic molecule interfaces.15,26–30,32,33 Although the dependence of the charge transfer on the size,34 shape,15,23 and composition27 of the NCs and the distance between the NCs and the acceptor30 have been studied extensively, the electronic effects of the substituents in the acceptor moiety on regulating the charge transfer dynamics have not yet been explored, to the best of our knowledge.
Here, three different 1,4-benzoquinone based acceptor molecules,26,35 namely, chloranilic acid (CA), p-benzoquinone (BQ), and duroquinone (DQ) (Chart 1), were chosen to understand the effect of the substituents present on the electron transfer dynamics at the perovskite nanocrystal–molecular acceptor interface. The effects that the electron-withdrawing and -donating substituent groups present on the acceptor molecules have on the charge transfer dynamics are investigated using steady state UV-visible absorption and emission, time resolved emission decay and femto-second transient absorption spectroscopy. We believe that the conclusions arrived at in our study will help in the design of promising small organic molecule-based electron acceptors for PNCs, which can be used in light emitting and light harvesting systems.
 Chart 1  Structure of the organic acceptor molecules investigated. 
2. Results and discussion
2.1 Synthesis of CsPbBr3 NCs
CsPbBr3 NCs were synthesised using a hot injection method as reported by Protesescu et al.14 In brief, Cs2CO3 (0.1103 g) was loaded into a 50 mL two-neck round-bottom (RB) flask along with octadecene (ODE; 5 mL) and oleic acid (OA; 312.5 μL), which was dried under vacuum for 1 h at 120 °C before being heated at 150 °C under an N2 atmosphere until the Cs2CO3 was dissolved. This solution was kept above 100 °C before injection to avoid the precipitation of Cs-oleate. In another 50 mL RB flask, PbBr2 (0.069 g) was taken with ODE (5 mL), OA (0.5 mL) and OLA (oleylamine; 0.5 mL). This mixture was dried under vacuum at 120 °C for 1 h. Then the temperature was increased to 165 °C under an N2 atmosphere. After complete dissolution of the PbBr2, 0.4 mL Cs-oleate solution was swiftly injected into the reaction vessel, and after 10 s the reaction was quenched using an ice-bath. The synthesised NCs were extracted by centrifuging the reaction mixture at ∼8500 rpm for 10 min and then the precipitate was dispersed in toluene for the subsequent studies.
2.2 Characterisation
The structures of the small organic molecules used in this study are shown in Chart 1. Prior to understanding the photophysical interaction between the NCs and the organic molecules, the NCs were characterized using different microscopic and spectroscopic techniques. Fig. 1A shows the absorption and photoluminescence spectra of the CsPbBr3 NCs. The absorption spectrum of the NCs shows a well-defined excitonic peak at ∼505 nm and a broad absorption at a shorter wavelength, consistent with an earlier report.28 The corresponding photoluminescence (PL) spectrum exhibits a sharp emission with the maximum at 509 nm and a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of ∼17 nm, corresponding to band edge electron–hole recombination. The absolute PL quantum yield (QY) of the NCs was measured to be 77 ± 5% at 405 nm excitation, suggesting presence of a relatively low number of defect states in the NCs. Fig. 1B displays the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the CsPbBr3 NCs, which shows the cubic morphology of the NCs. The size of the NCs was calculated using the size distribution histogram of the TEM image (ESI,† Fig. S1) yielding the average edge length of the NCs of 8.16 ± 0.14 nm. The high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) image shows the high crystallinity of the NCs. The interplanar distance of 0.58 nm corresponds to (100) planes of the CsPbBr3 NCs (Fig. 1B, inset).36 Furthermore, powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) analysis was carried out and the diffraction patterns are displayed in Fig. 1C. The results show sharp peaks at 2θ = 15.2, 21.5 and 30.7°, which correspond to the (100), (110), (200) planes, respectively, suggesting the formation of cubic NCs based on a previous literature report.14
 Fig. 1  (A) Steady-state UV-visible absorption (black) and luminescence (red) spectra of the CsPbBr3 NCs in toluene. (B) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the CsPbBr3 NCs (inset: high-resolution TEM image showing the lattice fringes of the CsPbBr3 NCs). (C) Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) pattern of the CsPbBr3 NCs. 
2.3 Steady-state measurements
To unfold the ground state interaction between the NCs and the small organic molecules, which act as quenchers, steady state absorption spectra of the NCs were recorded with an increasing concentration of the quenchers. Fig. 2A–C show the steady state absorption response of the NCs upon successive addition of CA, BQ, and DQ, respectively. The concentration of the NCs solution used in the steady state experiments was 2.21 × 10−8 M (details of the calculation are given in the ESI†). In presence of each of the three quenchers, the shape of the NCs absorption spectrum remains unchanged and no additional peaks are observed. As reported in the literature, ground state complex formation requires an electronic interaction between the donor and the acceptor moiety in the ground state, which is usually reflected in the absorption spectra.37 It is evident from Fig. 2A–C that the wavelength of the excitonic peak of the NCs remains the same with the successive addition of each quencher, and hence the possibility of the ground state complex formation can be excluded. However, these NCs can interact with their chemical surroundings, i.e., quencher molecules, through their surface capping ligands.29 In our case also, although the absorption spectra reveal no ground state interactions, the quencher molecules interact with the surface ligands of the NCs, which is established later in Section 2.4.
 Fig. 2  (A–C) Steady state absorption spectra of the CsPbBr3 NCs upon successive addition of the quencher molecules (λex = 405 nm). (D–F) Steady state photoluminescence spectra of the NCs upon gradual addition of the quenchers. (G–I) Stern–Volmer graphs of steady state luminescence quenching of the CsPbBr3 NCs with successive addition of the quenchers. 
Furthermore, steady state luminescence measurements of the NCs were performed with increasing concentrations of the quenchers. Fig. 2D–F, respectively, display the emission spectra of the NCs with an increasing concentration of CA, BQ and DQ. In all three cases, the samples were excited at 405 nm. At this excitation wavelength, the quencher molecules do not have any emission around the emission of the NCs (509 nm) (ESI,† Fig. S2). The NC emission (with a maximum at 509 nm) was quenched in the presence of increasing concentrations of each of the three quenchers. However, CA results in maximum quenching compared with the other two quenchers. Meanwhile, the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) values of the three NC-acceptor composite systems were measured (ESI,† Table S1). The PLQY of pristine NCs decreased from 77% to 30%, 45% and 58% in presence of 0.38 mM CA, BQ and DQ, respectively, which again indicates that the maximum emission quenching occurs in presence of CA. In a colloidal solution of the donor–acceptor system, a decrease in the fluorescence emission of the donor in presence of the acceptor can occur either via static or dynamic pathways. In the static pathway, the donor and acceptor form a complex in the ground state, whereas in the dynamic pathway the excited state of the donor moiety collides with the quencher and deactivates to the ground state.15 To understand the quenching mechanism in the present study, Stern–Volmer (SV) analysis was performed according to eqn (1A), (1A)where I0 and I are PL intensities of the NCs in absence and presence of the quenchers, τ and τ0 are the average PL lifetimes of the NCs with and without the quenchers, [q] is the concentration of the quenchers, and KSV is the SV constant. The bimolecular quenching rate constant, kq, is related to KSV according to eqn (1B) KSV = kqτ0.(1B)

Fig. 2G–I show the results of the SV plots for CA, BQ and DQ, respectively, which show a linear response for all the three quenchers. Although the data points for the NC–CA composite deviate a little from the linear fit, the linear fitting gives an acceptable value of χ2 (0.995), hence the linear eqn (1A) is used to fit the data points. These linear SV plots suggest that the quenching of the NCs emission may occur either in a static or a dynamic way.38,39 However, as noted from the absorption spectra, no sign of any ground state complex formation between the NCs and the acceptor molecules was seen; therefore, it can be concluded from the steady state experiments that the quenchers interact with the NCs in the excited state and that the possible quenching pathway is dynamic. The Stern–Volmer constants  were calculated from the slope of the SV plot of steady state luminescence quenching for each of the three acceptors, and the values obtained are 3451.15 M−1, 1350.98 M−1 and 367.71 M−1 for CA, BQ and DQ, respectively, suggesting highest quenching ability for CA compared with BQ and DQ.
2.4 Time resolved photoluminescence measurements
In order to gain a deeper insight into the quenching mechanism, the time resolved photoluminescence spectra of the NCs were recorded in absence and presence of the quenchers. Fig. 3A–C show the time resolved decay spectra of the CsPbBr3 NCs in the presence of CA, BQ and DQ, respectively. The results indicate faster decay in presence of each of the three quenchers compared with the pristine NCs, indicating the excited state interaction of the NCs with each of the three quenchers. Since the SV plot of steady state luminescence quenching also appears to be linear in all cases, it is customary to recognise the quenching mechanisms as being solely dynamic in nature, for all three cases. However, careful analysis of the decay profiles tells a slightly different story. All of the decay profiles were fitted with a tri-exponential function using eqn (S1), and the time constants with their weightages (amplitudes) are given in the ESI† (Table S2). The intermediate time constant of 8 ns for the pristine CsPbBr3 NCs is for band-edge electron–hole recombination, whereas the two extreme time constants of 2 ns and 30 ns occur due to different trap state mediated radiative recombinations of electrons and holes.40 Upon the gradual addition of each of the quenchers, the time constants of the individual components are found to decrease successively (ESI,† Fig. S3). Now, if we look at the relative amplitudes of the individual components (ESI,† Table S2), we see that the relative contribution of τ1, i.e., A1, increases gradually with addition of the quencher. This increase in A1 is more pronounced in the case of CA. The component τ1 arises due to the recombination of electrons and holes via surface defect states of the NCs. An increase in the amplitude of this component suggests that the quencher molecules induce more defect states in the NCs via surface tuning. To support this inference, FTIR spectra of the NCs before and after the addition of the quencher molecules were recorded (ESI,† Fig. S4). Although no new peaks in the FTIR spectra appear, the extensive reduction in the intensities of the peaks at 2926 cm−1 and 2856 cm−1, however, suggests significant removal of the original surface ligands oleic acid and oleylamine. The morphology of the NCs remains unchanged upon removal of the surface ligands, which is confirmed by the TEM image of the NC–CA composite (ESI,† Fig. S5). CA can interact with the surface ligands more efficiently as it has more binding sites (Fig. 4). As a result, CA can introduce more surface defect states into the NCs, which is again confirmed by the transient absorption spectroscopic measurements (as explained in Section 2.5). Furthermore, the average lifetime values were calculated and the corresponding time resolved SV graphs (τ0/τ vs. quencher concentrations) are plotted in Fig. 3D–F. All three SV graphs show good linear fits with χ2 values of 0.99. The slight deviation of the points from the linear fit in the case of CA addition indicates that the excited state of the NCs is perturbed by the quencher molecules because of the interactions prevailing between the surface ligands of the NCs and the CA molecules (Fig. 4). Thus, this observation tells us that quenching of the PL lifetime does not always signify the dynamic nature of quenching mechanism. The interaction of the surface ligands with the quencher molecules can also give rise to PL lifetime quenching. The Stern–Volmer quenching constants derived from the PL lifetime quenching plots  are 3690 M−1, 1639.17 M−1 and 743.53 M−1 for CA, BQ and DQ, respectively. These KSV values  are in good agreement with those obtained via steady state luminescence quenching  (ESI,† Fig. S6).
 Fig. 3  (A–C) Time-resolved photoluminescence decay traces of the CsPbBr3 NCs in presence of the individual acceptors (λex = 450 nm, emission collected at 509 nm). (D–F) Stern–Volmer graphs of time resolved PL quenching of the CsPbBr3 NCs in presence of the quenchers. 
 Fig. 4  Probable interactions of (A) CA, and (B) BQ (R1 = H) and DQ (R1 = CH3) with the CsPbBr3 NCs surface ligands. The oleate anion binds with the NCs surface Cs or Pb ions, whereas the oleylammonium cation binds with Br ions. These ligands binding with the NCs surface is very dynamic in nature.42 The quencher molecules interact with the carboxylic and ammonium groups via H-bonding-type interactions and tend to desorb them from the NC surface. 
Excited state interactions may occur either through charge transfer from the photoexcited donor to the acceptor or via energy transfer from the excited donor to the acceptor. For efficient energy transfer there must be significant spectral overlap between the donor emission and the acceptor absorbance. As shown in ESI,† Fig. S7, the spectral overlap between the NCs emission and the quenchers absorption is negligible. Furthermore, a short distance (∼1 nm) between the donor and acceptor is required for efficient energy transfer to occur in the solution phase.41 However, the presence of large surface passivating ligands like oleic acid and oleylamine results in a large separation distance between the donor and acceptor systems. Therefore, we have excluded the probability of energy transfer and confirm that the excited state interaction is entirely due to charge transfer from the photoexcited NCs to each of the three quenchers.
2.5 Thermodynamics of charge transfer
Upon photoexcitation, electrons from the valence band of the NCs move to the conduction band, leaving behind holes in the valence band. In the presence of a suitable acceptor, either of these photo-generated charge carriers can be transferred depending on the thermodynamic feasibility of the processes. Previous studies have shown that both the charge carriers, electrons and holes, in the CsPbBr3 NCs have nearly equal effective masses (me* = 0.15m0, and mh* = 0.14m0; m0 = rest mass of the electron),26 unlike cadmium chalcogenide NCs (i.e., CdS, CdSe or CdTe NCs) where the holes have heavier effective masses than the electrons (for CdTe, mh*/me* = 4).43 Hence the mobility of the electrons and holes is identical in the CsPbBr3 NCs, in contrast to the cadmium chalcogenide NCs where the motion of the holes is retarded due to their heavier effective mass value. In the present study, either both electrons and holes or either of these two charge carriers can be transferred from the photoexcited CsPbBr3 NCs to the quencher molecules. To identify the type of charge carrier being transferred from the NCs to the acceptors, band energy level analysis was performed. Fig. 5 shows a schematic representation of the relative band energy alignment of the NCs and the three acceptor molecules. The positions of the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) for the NCs was taken from the literature,33 and the band energies of all the molecular acceptors were calculated using density functional theory (details are given in the ESI†). The band energy level alignment shows that the VBM of the NCs lies above the HOMOs of all the molecular acceptors, which rules out the possibility of hole transfer from the photoexcited CsPbBr3 NCs to any of the acceptors. However, the LUMOs of all three acceptors lie below the CBM of the NCs, which makes electron transfer thermodynamically feasible from the photoexcited CsPbBr3 NCs to all three acceptors.
 Fig. 5  Band energy alignment of the CsPbBr3 NCs and HOMO–LUMO levels of the quencher molecules. 
The Gibbs free energy change of electron transfer (ΔG) was calculated, and negative values are obtained for all the quenchers (details of the calculation are given in the ESI†). −ΔG is maximum for CA (1.06 eV) followed by BQ (0.72 eV) and DQ (0.17 eV), respectively.
2.6 Transient absorption measurements
Next, to unfold the excited state charge carrier dynamics on an early timescale, femtosecond transient absorption experiments (TA) were performed. The samples were dispersed in toluene with continuous stirring to avoid photobleaching; a 350 nm laser pulse was used for excitation of all the samples. The concentration of the quenchers used for this study was 0.1 mM in all three cases. Here, it should be noted that the three quencher molecules have negligible absorbance at 350 nm (close to zero, for the concentration of the quenchers used for TA experiment), whereas the NCs have a large absorption at 350 nm (ESI,† Fig. S8). Hence, the excitation wavelength is absorbed only by the NCs and the transient absorption profile gives the picture of the exciton dynamics of the NCs in the excited state selectively. The possibility of contamination of the TA profile due to quencher molecule absorption is thus eliminated. The pump fluence was kept low (6 μJ cm−2) to minimize the multiple excitons generation per nanocrystal. Fig. 6A and B show the transient absorption (TA) spectra of the bare NCs and the NC–CA composite systems, respectively. The transient absorption spectra show a negative absorption ranging from 470 to 560 nm centred at 505 nm for all the samples, which is in accordance with the excitonic peak position of the ground state absorption. In addition, significant photoinduced absorption (PA) signals are observed on either side of the ground state bleach signal, which appear due to absorption from the lowest excitonic states (on the lower wavelength side) and from the hot-excitonic states (on the longer wavelength side).44 The observed negative signal is ascribed to the ground state bleach signal, originated due to the state filling of the photo-generated charge carriers in the valence band and conduction band edges.26,29,45 Stimulated emissions of the photo-induced excitons are also known to make a small contribution towards the negative bleach signal.46 Although the spectral shape of the ground state bleach signal of the NCs remains same, the OD value (negative value) decreases in the presence of the quenchers (the TA spectra of the NC–BQ and NC–DQ composites are given in ESI,† Fig. S9). The magnitude of ΔA of the ground state bleach signal at a particular delay time is proportional to the photoexcited carrier density at the band edge level.20,47 Hence, this decrease in the OD value suggests that the charge carriers in the band edge level of the NCs are involved in an additional deactivation channel in presence of the quenchers, along with their normal deactivation process. The recovery of the ground state bleach signal of the NCs in presence of each of the three quenchers becomes faster, which confirms the excited state charge transfer interaction between the NCs with the three quenchers. However, the bleach signal recovers at a faster rate in the case of CA compared with the other two quenchers. This indicates that charge transfer from the photoexcited NCs occurs at a faster rate to CA than to BQ and DQ.
 Fig. 6  Femtosecond-transient absorption spectra of the (A) CsPbBr3 NCs, and (B) CsPbBr3–CA composite system at different delay times after 350 nm excitation. 
Then, to obtain quantitative information on the charge carrier time constants at the interface of the NCs–quencher systems, the ground state bleach recovery positioned at 505 nm was monitored and the corresponding bleach recovery kinetics were analysed. Fig. 7A–C represents the ground state bleach recovery kinetics of the NCs in absence and presence of CA, BQ, and DQ, respectively. It is evident that the ground state bleach signal recovers at a faster rate in the presence of each of the three quenchers compared with the pristine NCs. All the bleach recovery kinetics were fitted using a multi-exponential function, and the fitting parameters are given in Table 1. The kinetics of the ground state bleach signal are characterized by a growth (rise) component and two decay components. The growth time of the perovskite NCs mainly arises due to thermalisation of the hot charge carriers in the band edge level.47,48 Therefore, the time constant of 894 ± 28 fs for the pristine NCs is assigned for hot electron relaxation to the band edge level. In presence of the quenchers, the observed growth time decreases, suggesting hot carrier transfer from the NCs to the acceptors, which is in agreement considering the fact that a 350 nm laser pulse was used for the sample excitation, which is much above the band edge excitation energy (the band gap, Eg, is 2.41 eV for the CsPbBr3 NCs; ESI,† Fig. S10). Here, it should be noted that although the rise time decreases in the presence of the quenchers, the changes are within the error bars, which indicates a negligible amount of hot electron transfer from the NCs to the acceptors (ESI,† Fig. S11). This may appear to be contradictory since excitons much above the band edge are generated by the 350 nm excitation pulse. However, a recent study has shown that CsPbBr3 NCs have discrete localized and continuous trap states beyond the band edge49 which can trap the hot excitons and prevent their transfer to the acceptors.
 Fig. 7  Bleach recovery kinetic traces for (A) CsPbBr3–CA, (B) CsPbBr3–BQ, and (C) CsPbBr3–DQ at 506 nm. 
Table 1 Fitted parameters of the bleach recovery kinetics for the CsPbBr3 NCs and the CsPbBr3–acceptor composites measured at the corresponding bleach position (506 nm); (λex = 350 nm)




System

τ
rise (fs)

τ
decay1 (ps)

τ
decay2 (ps)




CsPbBr3
894.1 ± 28 (100%)
42.0 ± 0.3 (37.3%)
1811 ± 150 (62.7%)


CsPbBr3–CA
817.0 ± 20 (100%)
30.7 ± 0.2 (84.1%)
259 ± 58 (15.9%)


CsPbBr3–BQ
864.3 ± 22 (100%)
36.5 ± 0.2 (70.3%)
622 ± 82 (29.7%)


CsPbBr3–DQ
870.3 ± 24 (100%)
38.0 ± 0.5 (68.5%)
1475 ± 125 (31.5%)




Of the two components in the bleach recovery decay kinetics, the longer component arises due to either (i) band edge electron–hole recombination in the NCs or (ii) back electron transfer from the acceptor to NC.50,51 In the absence of an acceptor, the longer lifetime component (1.8 ns) is attributed to the band edge electron–hole recombination. The value of the time constant of the longer component decreases in the presence of the acceptors, which reflects band edge electron transfer from the NCs to the acceptors. The values of the time constants given in Table 1 suggest that the band edge electrons are transferred to CA at the highest rate followed by BQ and DQ, respectively. The shorter decay component in the pristine NCs (∼42 ps) originates due to trapping of the electrons into the defect states of the nanocrystals. The time constant value of the shorter decay component decreases in presence of each of the three acceptors, suggesting trap state mediated electron transfer from the NCs to the acceptors.
It is to be noted that the maximum delay time in the femtosecond experimental set up is 5 ns, which brings an inherent limitation in estimating the larger decay components above 1 ns, and this leads to the apparent difference between the time constants for band edge electron–hole recombination from time-resolved fluorescence decay and TA measurements.
Besides the values of the time constants, their amplitudes are also noteworthy in this context. As given in Table 1, the amplitude of the faster and slower decay components increases and decreases, respectively, in presence of the quencher molecules. This observation suggests that the quencher molecules introduce more surface defect states into the NCs by interacting with the surface ligands, as shown in Fig. 4. The possibility of the formation of deep trap states in the NCs by quencher molecules is eliminated because the deep trap states are formed due to antisite defects (when Br− occupies the position of Pb2+ or vice versa) during the synthesis of the NCs, and the quencher molecules do not enter into the crystal structure to modify the lattice points (as evidenced by the TEM image of the CsPbBr3–CA composite in ESI,† Fig. S5).
The density of the defect states induced by CA is more than for the other two quenchers. This finding supports the results obtained from the PL lifetime quenching study and the FTIR spectra of the NC–acceptor composites with respect to pristine NCs, as discussed in the earlier section. The introduction of defect states into the NCs by loosening the NC surface protective ligands, although it helps charge transfer from the NCs to acceptors, it comes at a cost to the stability of the NCs. Hence, it is always desirable to design an acceptor molecule that does not create trap states on the NC surfaces, which decreases the stability of the NCs.
2.7 Calculation of the rate of electron transfer using Marcus theory
The rate of electron transfer (kET) from the NCs is calculated using the Marcus semiempirical equation (eqn (2)), where kET is the rate of charge transfer, h is the Planck constant, H(E) denotes the overlap matrix (2)element, kB is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature, λ is the system reorganisation energy, and ΔG is the free energy change between the donor and acceptor systems. The rate of electron transfer (kET) is found to be the highest for CA (6.76 × 108 s−1) then BQ (3.25 × 107 s−1) followed by DQ (1.32 × 104 s−1) (details of these calculations are given in the ESI†), which is in accordance with the observations obtained from the steady state and time resolved experiments. The small value of kET from the NCs to DQ supports the observation of less PL intensity quenching of the NCs in presence of DQ. The overall charge carrier dynamics of the NC–acceptor composite systems, based on the kinetic analysis of the TA experiment as described above, is summarised in Scheme 1. According to Marcus theory, the rate of electron transfer (kET) increases with an increase in the driving force in the normal region. In the present study, as shown in Fig. 5, the driving force is observed to be maximum for CA, followed by BQ and DQ, respectively, consistent with the observed electron transfer time constants considering in the Marcus normal region (ESI,† Fig. S12). This order of the electron transfer rate from the NCs to the three separate quenchers can also be explained by the electronic effects of the substituents present in the quencher molecules. Upon accepting one electron, the p-benzoquinone moiety forms the resonating structure (II) shown in Fig. 8, where the π-electron density is delocalised over the ring. When the substituent groups (–Ri) are electron withdrawing in nature, the anionic form becomes more stable. In CA, two mutually para chlorine atoms (Cl) are present along with two hydroxyl (–OH) groups in the quinone moiety. The inductive effect (−I) of the electronegative chlorine atoms makes the quinoid ring electrophilic in nature. Thus, it can efficiently extract the electrons from the NCs. By contrast, DQ has four methyl (–CH3) groups that can release electron density towards the quinoid ring, leaving the ring less susceptible towards accepting more electron density. Therefore, the rate of electron transfer was the highest for CA and the lowest for DQ, with BQ in the middle.
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the overall charge carrier dynamics in CsPbBr3 NCs in presence of the molecular acceptors (CR, band edge charge recombination; PA, photoinduced absorption; HETr, hot electron trapping; CETr, cold (band edge) electron trapping; kET, rate of band edge electron transfer). 
 Fig. 8  Resonating structure of the 1,4-benzoquinone ring upon accepting one electron. 
3. Conclusion
In summary, the detailed charge transfer dynamics between CsPbBr3 NCs and three electronically different small acceptor molecules (namely, CA, BQ, and DQ) have been studied using a set of steady state and time-resolved spectroscopic techniques. The steady state absorption and time-resolved emission experiments confirmed that the CsPbBr3 NCs interact with the quencher molecules in the excited state, although hydrogen-bonding interactions exist between the surface ligands of the NCs and the quencher molecules. These H-bonding-type interactions tend to detach the surface ligands of the NCs. Furthermore, in femtosecond transient absorption, the faster ground state bleach recovery of the NCs in presence of each of the three quenchers confirmed the electron transfer from the photoexcited NCs to the quenchers, which was again supported by the band alignment analysis of all the components. The rate of electron transfer calculated from the Marcus theory is highest for CA, then BQ, and the lowest for DQ, and the trend of this electron transfer rate was explained using the electronic effects of the substituents present in the acceptor moieties. Although the rate of electron transfer is the highest in the presence of CA as it has the lowest lying LUMO, but the electronegative –OH group is involved in H-bonding interactions with the NCs surface ligands which affects the stability of the NCs. We believe that this study will help to identify suitable charge transporting materials depending on their core structure and different functionalities for perovskite based solar cells, which can improve the efficiency and the cost-effectiveness of the solar cell without compromising the stability of the NCs.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the funding from the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India [DST/TMD/SERI/HUB/1(G)]. Thanks to the Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering and the Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras for TEM and PXRD facilities. We thank Prof. Ashok Kumar Mishra, Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras for providing the TCSPC facility and Prof. Thalappil Pradeep Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras for giving the HR-TEM facility. S. R. thanks DST INSPIRE, and M. K. M. thanks CSIR for their fellowships.
References
Z. K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos and D. Credgington, 
            et al., Bright Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Organometal Halide Perovskite, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Low-Temperature Solution-Processed Wavelength-Tunable Perovskites for Lasing, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, R. Sakidja, R. Goul, D. Ewing, M. Casper, A. Stramel, A. Elliot and J. Z. Wu, High-Performance All-Inorganic CsPbCl3 Perovskite Nanocrystal Photodetectors with Superior Stability, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1772–1783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Sequential Deposition as a Route to High-Performance Perovskite-Sensitized Solar Cells, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, High-Performance Photovoltaic Perovskite Layers Fabricated through Intramolecular Exchange, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H. L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, High-efficiency solution-processed perovskite solar cells with millimeter-scale grains, Science, 2015, 347, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Unique Properties of Halide Perovskites as Possible Origins of the Superior Solar Cell Performance, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, G. Xing, S. S. Lim, W. K. Chong, D. Giovanni and H. A. Dewi, Spectral Features and Charge Dynamics of Lead Halide Perovskites: Origins and Interpretations, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 294–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Koscher, J. K. Swabeck, N. D. Bronstein and A. P. Alivisatos, Essentially Trap-Free CsPbBr3 Colloidal Nanocrystals by Postsynthetic Thiocyanate Surface Treatment, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Sum, S. Chen, G. Xing, X. Liu and B. Wu, Energetics and dynamics in organic−inorganic halide perovskite photovoltaics and light emitters, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 342001 CrossRef PubMed .
G. C. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Y. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Long-Range Balanced Electron and Hole-Transport Lengths in Organic-Inorganic CH3NH3PbI3, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Electron-Hole Diffusion Lengths Exceeding 1 Micrometer in an Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Absorber, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Electron-hole diffusion lengths > 175 μm in solution-grown CH3NH3PbI3 single crystals, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nanocrystals of Cesium Lead Halide Perovskites (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I): Novel Optoelectronic Materials Showing Bright Emission with Wide Color Gamut, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Ahmed, J. Liu, M. R. Parida, B. Murali, R. Bose, N. K. AlYami, M. N. Hedhili, W. Peng, J. Pan, T. M. D. Besong, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, Shape-Tunable Charge Carrier Dynamics at the Interfaces between Perovskite Nanocrystals and Molecular Acceptors, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3913–3919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html (accessed October 2021).
H. Uratani and K. Yamashita, Charge Carrier Trapping at Surface Defects of Perovskite Solar Cell Absorbers: A First-Principles Study, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 742–746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, Recombination in Perovskite Solar Cells: Significance of Grain Boundaries, Interface Traps, and Defect Ions, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Ding, T. Toyoda, Y. Ogomi, T. S. Ripolles, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, S. Dai and Q. Shen, Ultrafast Electron Injection from Photoexcited Perovskite CsPbI3 QDs into TiO2 Nanoparticles with Injection Efficiency near 99%, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 294–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Liao, Y. F. Xu, X. D. Wang, H. Y. Chen and D. B. Kuang, CsPbBr3 Nanocrystal/MO2 (M = Si, Ti, Sn) Composites: Insight into Charge-Carrier Dynamics and Photoelectrochemical Applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces., 2018, 10, 42301–42309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dana, P. Maity, B. Jana, S. Maiti and H. N. Ghosh, Concurrent Ultrafast Electron- and Hole-Transfer Dynamics in CsPbBr3 Perovskite and Quantum Dots, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 2706–2714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Najafi, B. Taheri, B. Martín-García, S. Bellani, D. D. Girolamo, A. Agresti, R. Oropesa-Nuñez, S. Pescetelli, L. Vesce, E. Calabro, M. Prato, A. E. D. R. Castillo, A. D. Carlo and F. Bonaccorso, MoS2 Quantum Dot/Graphene Hybrids for Advanced Interface Engineering of a CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cell with an Efficiency of over 20%, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10736–10754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Brumberg, B. T. Diroll, G. Nedelcu, M. E. Sykes, Y. Liu, S. M. Harvey, M. R. Wasielewski, M. V. Kovalenko and R. D. Schaller, Material Dimensionality Effects on Electron Transfer Rates Between CsPbBr3 and CdSe Nanoparticles, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4771–4776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Peng, G. Yu, Y. Zhao, Q. Xu, G. Xing, X. Liu, D. Fu, B. Liu, J. R. S. Tan, W. Tang, H. Lu, J. Xie, L. Deng, T. C. Sum and K. P. Loh, Achieving Ultrafast Hole Transfer at the Monolayer MoS2 and CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Interface by Defect Engineering, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6383–6391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Schulz, A. M. Dowgiallo, M. Yang, K. Zhu, J. L. Blackburn and J. J. Berry, Charge Transfer Dynamics between Carbon Nanotubes and Hybrid Organic Metal Halide Perovskite Films, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 418–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, Q. Liang, Q. Shang, Y. Ren, D. Kong and T. Lian, Ultrafast Interfacial Electron and Hole Transfer from CsPbBr3 Perovskite Quantum Dots, J.
Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12792–12795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Begum, M. R. Parida, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, N. M. Alyami, G. H. Ahmed, M. N. Hedhili, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, Engineering Interfacial Charge Transfer in CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals by Heterovalent Doping, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 731–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. De, N. Mondal and A. Samanta, Hole Transfer Dynamics from Photoexcited Cesium Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals: 1-Aminopyrene as Hole Acceptor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13617–13623 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kobosko, J. T. DuBose and P. V. Kamat, Perovskite Photocatalysis. Methyl Viologen Induces Unusually Long-Lived Charge Carrier Separation in CsPbBr3 Nanocrystals, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 221–223 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, S. R. Valandro, R. He, Y. Zhao, P. Yang and K. S. Schanze, Charge-Transfer Dynamics between Cesium Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals and Surface-Anchored Naphthalimide Acceptors, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125(27), 14778–14785 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, J. Duan, C. Guo and Q. Tang, Toward charge extraction in all-inorganic perovskite solar cells by interfacial engineering, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21999–22004 RSC .
P. Maity, J. Dana and H. N. Ghosh, Multiple Charge Transfer Dynamics in Colloidal CsPbBr3 Perovskite Quantum Dots Sensitized Molecular Adsorbate, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 18348–18354 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mandal, L. George and N. V. Tkachenko, Charge transfer dynamics in CsPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots–anthraquinone/fullerene (C60) hybrids, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 862 RSC .
Y. X. Zhang, H. Y. Wang, Z. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Sun, Y. Y. Yue, L. Wang, Q. D. Chen and H. B. Sun, Photoluminescence quenching of inorganic cesium lead halides perovskite quantum dots (CsPbX3) by electron/hole acceptor, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 1920 RSC .
S. Sarkar, V. K. Ravi, S. Banerjee, G. R. Yettapu, G. B. Markad, A. Nag and P. Mandal, Terahertz Spectroscopic Probe of Hot Electron and Hole Transfer from Colloidal CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5402–5407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Y. Zhu, J. Huang, Y. Gong, J. Shen and C. Li, Synthesis of CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals with the sole ligand of protonated (3-aminopropyl)-triethoxysilane, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7201 RSC .
M. K. Mahato, C. Govind, V. Karunakaran, S. Nandy, C. Sudakar and E. Prasad, Enhanced Charge Transport and Excited-State Charge-Transfer Dynamics in a Colloidal Mixture of CdTe and Graphene Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(33), 20512–20521 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Devi, S. K. Das and A. B. Mandal, Impact of Surface Functionalization of AgNPs on Binding and Conformational Change of Hemoglobin (Hb) and Hemolytic Behavior, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 29739–29749 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Sharma, Photoinduced Charge Transfer Mechanism in PPV [poly(p-phenylinevinylene)] Polymer: Role of Iodide Species, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2006, 284, 853–861 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ahmed and S. Seth, A. Samanta, Boosting the Photoluminescence of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) Perovskite Nanocrystals Covering a Wide Wavelength Range by Postsynthetic Treatment with Tetrafluoroborate Salts, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3633–3637 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mase, K. Okumura, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Triplet Sensitization by Perovskite Nanocrystals for Photon Upconversion, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8261–8264 RSC .
J. D. Roo, M. Ibáñez, P. Geiregat, G. Nedelcu, W. Walravens, J. Maes, J. C. Martins, I. V. Driessche, M. V. Kovalenko and Z. Hens, Highly Dynamic Ligand Binding and Light Absorption Coefficient of Cesium Lead Bromide Perovskite Nanocrystals., ACS Nano., 2016, 10, 2071–2081 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, Optical Nonlinearities and Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics in Semiconductor Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6112–6123 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mondal and A. Samanta, Complete ultrafast charge carrier dynamics in photo-excited all-inorganic perovskite nanocrystals (CsPbX3), Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1878–1885 RSC .
J. Butkus, P. Vashishtha, K. Chen, J. K. Gallaher, S. K. K. Prasad, D. Z. Metin, G. Laufersky, N. Gaston, J. E. Halpert and J. M. Hodgkiss, The Evolution of Quantum Confinement in CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3644–3652 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Manser, J. A. Christians and P. V. Kamat, Intriguing Optoelectronic Properties of Metal Halide Perovskites, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12956–13008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mondal, A. De, S. Das, S. Paul and A. Samanta, Ultrafast carrier dynamics of metal halide perovskite nanocrystals and perovskite-composites, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9796 RSC .
A. De, S. Das and A. Samanta, Hot Hole Transfer Dynamics from CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2246–2252 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liao, B. Shan and M. Li, Role of Trap States in Excitation Wavelength-Dependent Photoluminescence of Strongly Quantum-Confined All-Inorganic CsPbBr3 Perovskites with Varying Dimensionalities, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125(38), 21062–21069 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tvrdy, P. A. Frantsuzov and P. V. Kamat, Photoinduced Electron Transfer from Semiconductor Quantum Dots to Metal Oxide Nanoparticles, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 29–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Mahato, J. S. Arya, S. Nandy, C. Sudakar and E. Prasad, Ultrafast Charge Transfer Dynamics and Charge Transport with Pyrediyne (PDY): Revealing the Role of a Novel Carbon-Based Electron Acceptor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 10408–10418 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional experimental results and discussion, size distribution histogram of the CsPbBr3 NCs, optical characterization of the quencher molecules, PLQYs of NCs and NC–acceptor composites, time-resolved PL decay titrations and the fitting parameters, overlap spectra, TA spectra, DFT study of quencher molecules, Tauc plot, calculation of the rate constant of electron transfer, growth kinetics and kETvs. ΔG plot. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp04599kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

 	Chart 1  Structure of the organic acceptor molecules investigated.	 

 	Fig. 1  (A) Steady-state UV-visible absorption (black) and luminescence (red) spectra of the CsPbBr3 NCs in toluene. (B) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the CsPbBr3 NCs (inset: high-resolution TEM image showing the lattice fringes of the CsPbBr3 NCs). (C) Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) pattern of the CsPbBr3 NCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A–C) Steady state absorption spectra of the CsPbBr3 NCs upon successive addition of the quencher molecules (λex = 405 nm). (D–F) Steady state photoluminescence spectra of the NCs upon gradual addition of the quenchers. (G–I) Stern–Volmer graphs of steady state luminescence quenching of the CsPbBr3 NCs with successive addition of the quenchers.	 
	(1A)
KSV = kqτ0.	(1B)

 	Fig. 3  (A–C) Time-resolved photoluminescence decay traces of the CsPbBr3 NCs in presence of the individual acceptors (λex = 450 nm, emission collected at 509 nm). (D–F) Stern–Volmer graphs of time resolved PL quenching of the CsPbBr3 NCs in presence of the quenchers.	 

 	Fig. 4  Probable interactions of (A) CA, and (B) BQ (R1 = H) and DQ (R1 = CH3) with the CsPbBr3 NCs surface ligands. The oleate anion binds with the NCs surface Cs or Pb ions, whereas the oleylammonium cation binds with Br ions. These ligands binding with the NCs surface is very dynamic in nature.42 The quencher molecules interact with the carboxylic and ammonium groups via H-bonding-type interactions and tend to desorb them from the NC surface.	 

 	Fig. 5  Band energy alignment of the CsPbBr3 NCs and HOMO–LUMO levels of the quencher molecules.	 

 	Fig. 6  Femtosecond-transient absorption spectra of the (A) CsPbBr3 NCs, and (B) CsPbBr3–CA composite system at different delay times after 350 nm excitation.	 

 	Fig. 7  Bleach recovery kinetic traces for (A) CsPbBr3–CA, (B) CsPbBr3–BQ, and (C) CsPbBr3–DQ at 506 nm.	 

CsPbBr3	894.1 ± 28 (100%)	42.0 ± 0.3 (37.3%)	1811 ± 150 (62.7%)
CsPbBr3–CA	817.0 ± 20 (100%)	30.7 ± 0.2 (84.1%)	259 ± 58 (15.9%)
CsPbBr3–BQ	864.3 ± 22 (100%)	36.5 ± 0.2 (70.3%)	622 ± 82 (29.7%)
CsPbBr3–DQ	870.3 ± 24 (100%)	38.0 ± 0.5 (68.5%)	1475 ± 125 (31.5%)
	(2)

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the overall charge carrier dynamics in CsPbBr3 NCs in presence of the molecular acceptors (CR, band edge charge recombination; PA, photoinduced absorption; HETr, hot electron trapping; CETr, cold (band edge) electron trapping; kET, rate of band edge electron transfer).	 

 	Fig. 8  Resonating structure of the 1,4-benzoquinone ring upon accepting one electron.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional experimental results and discussion, size distribution histogram of the CsPbBr3 NCs, optical characterization of the quencher molecules, PLQYs of NCs and NC–acceptor composites, time-resolved PL decay titrations and the fitting parameters, overlap spectra, TA spectra, DFT study of quencher molecules, Tauc plot, calculation of the rate constant of electron transfer, growth kinetics and kETvs. ΔG plot. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp04599k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
