Ultrahigh-resolution quantum dot patterning for advanced optoelectronic devices  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC05874J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC05874J
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2023, 59, 2697-2710Ultrahigh-resolution quantum dot patterning for advanced optoelectronic devices

        
          
            Tae Won 
            Nam
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Min-Jae 
            Choi
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yeon Sik 
            Jung
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ysjung@kaist.ac.kr
bDepartment of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Dongguk University, Seoul 04620, Republic of Korea. E-mail: minjae.choi@dgu.ac.kr
Received 
      29th October 2022
    , Accepted 24th January 2023First published on 27th January 2023AbstractQuantum dots have attracted significant scientific interest owing to their optoelectronic properties, which are distinct from their bulk counterparts. In order to fully utilize quantum dots for next generation devices with advanced functionalities, it is important to fabricate quantum dot colloids into dry patterns with desired feature sizes and shapes with respect to target applications. In this review, recent progress in ultrahigh-resolution quantum dot patterning technologies will be discussed, with emphasis on the characteristic advantages as well as the limitations of diverse technologies. This will provide guidelines for selecting suitable tools to handle quantum dot colloids throughout the fabrication of quantum dot based solid-state devices. Additionally, epitaxially fabricated single-particle level quantum dot arrays are discussed. These are extreme in terms of pattern resolution, and expand the potential application of quantum dots to quantum information processing.
Tae Won Nam
Tae Won Nam received his PhD degree (2020) in Materials Science and Engineering from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, under the supervision of Prof. Yeon Sik Jung. He then joined the group of Prof. Jeffrey C. Grossman at Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a post-doctoral fellow (2020–). Nam's research focuses on nanopatterning and nanotransfer-printing of organic and inorganic materials including quantum dots, polymers, and silicon nanowires for advanced opto-electric devices and biosensors.
Min-Jae Choi
Min-Jae Choi obtained his PhD (2017) from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology under the supervision of Prof. Yeon Sik Jung. He then joined the group of Prof. Edward H. Sargent at the University of Toronto, Canada for three years as a post-doctoral fellow. He began his independent career in 2020 as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical & Biochemical Engineering at the Dongguk University, South Korea. Choi's research interests are focused on building advanced devices using colloidal quantum dots by tuning their surface chemistry and composition.
Yeon Sik Jung
Prof. Yeon Sik Jung is a full professor at the Dept. of Materials Science and Engineering of Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). His research areas include sub-10 nm nanofabrication based on the directed self-assembly of block copolymers and nanotransfer-printing, printable sensor devices, nanopatterned catalysts, and quantum-dot optoelectronic devices. He joined KAIST as an assistant professor in 2010, and has published more than 140 journal papers and earned more than 50 patents including 7 US patents mostly in the field of nanofabrication and devices. He received his PhD degree (2009) in materials science and engineering from Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
1. Introduction
Semiconductor nanocrystal quantum dots (QDs) exhibit unique electronic and optical properties thanks to the quantum confinement effect, which is observed when the size of QDs is smaller than the Bohr radius. This results in discrete energy levels in QDs, leading to narrow emission spectra and tunable absorption and emission wavelengths depending on the size and composition. The colloidal synthesis of monodisperse QDs has opened new directions to utilize QDs as building blocks for a range of applications in the fields of photonics,1 nanoelectronics,2 optoelectronics,3 quantum information processing,4 biomedicines,5 and catalysts.6
The solution-phase synthesis of colloidal QDs has mostly relied on the hot-injection method or heating up method.7–9 In these methods, cations and ligands form organometallic complexes first, and then these complexes react with anion precursors, initiating burst nucleation and the subsequent growth of QDs. As-synthesized QDs are capped with surface ligands that provide a colloidal form of the QDs. Various types of colloidal QDs including CdSe, PbSe, PbS, and InP QDs have been explored for optoelectronic devices.10–12 CdSe and InP QDs have attracted attention as promising light-emitting semiconductors owing to their narrow emission spectra and high quantum yields. The emission characteristics of QDs could be further improved by forming core/shell structures. The shell structure generates a type-I heterojunction with the core, dramatically reducing surface passivation and non-degenerated carrier recombination.13 Recently, InP/ZnSe/ZnS core/shell QDs achieved a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of 35 nm and near-unity photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY), which is sufficient for their employment in next-generation display applications.11 QDs have been also employed in devices for generating photocarriers such as photovoltaic devices and photodetectors. PbSe and PbS QDs have been mostly used for these devices thanks to their high dielectric constants, which facilitate exciton separation.14 For example, a PbS QD solar cell achieved a power conversion efficiency of over 15%, showing its promise in the operation of next-generation photovoltaics.15
All these QD applications are based on the solution-processed fabrication of QD thin films, which is cost-effective and can be used for large areas. However, utilization of QDs is not limited to continuous thin films, but often necessitates structural engineering into an ensemble of specifically positioned QDs with reference to their target applications. Diverse resolutions of QD arrays with structural arrangements provides advanced functionalities in device applications including light-emitting diodes,3 photodetectors,16 lasers,17 biosensors,18 and single photon emitters.19 The development of high-performance quantum dot light-emitting diodes (QLEDs) is approaching a satisfactory level in terms of the device efficiency, while demonstration of high-resolution full-color pixel arrays remains a challenge. Since colloidal QDs are incompatible with the well-established vacuum deposition processes, new patterning technology is required for the industrial use of QLEDs.
Analogous advancements in patterning technology are necessary to realize QD photodetectors exhibiting high-resolution and bandwidth-tunable characteristics. QDs are also among the promising candidates for gain media in the field of laser physics owing to their high PLQY. Compact laser structures based on patterned gain media provide desired polarization patterns, which can facilitate nanoscale lasing with the advantages of tunable wavelengths, miniaturization, and low-threshold coherent sources. Patterned QDs offer micrometer/nanometer scale fluorescent arrays, which can monitor and quantify biological analytes, and probe cellular dynamics such as spreading, migration, and division. The development of the fabrication of geometrically defined patterns of QDs that retain fluorescence and exhibit bioaffinity for the formation of an interface between the array and biomaterials are reported. Quantum information processing technologies focus on the collection of acute responses to fundamental physical properties of QDs, which requires delicate control over QD size, shape, composition, and positioning. In particular, the precise positioning of individual QDs and large-area arrays with perfect long-range ordering are crucial to minimize fluctuation in quantum information applications. Based on the fundamentals of QD composition, surface chemistry determined by ligands, synthesis methods, and target surfaces on which the QDs should be patterned, appropriate deposition techniques are primarily selected. In addition, advanced or novel methods are developed with the goals of satisfying the specific requirements for fabricated QD patterns with reference to their target applications.
In this review, we discuss the patterning technologies of colloidal QDs, divided into five categories depending on the patterning principles: (1) optical patterning, (2) direct patterning, (3) transfer printing, (4) serial writing. For the fifth category, we included views on epitaxially fabricated QDs, which can be considered as an alternative to colloidal QDs. In particular, we highlight the recent advances in the patterning methods, with the aim of fabricating ultra-high resolution QD patterns, which exhibit great potential for advanced functionalities, yet have been challenging to achieve using conventional patterning techniques. We investigate the methods with respect to a set of patterning criteria as follows: (1) resolution, (2) film profile uniformity, (3) multicomponent patterning capability, (4) material and substrate limitation, and (5) throughput. Throughout the review, we emphasize the relationships between the adopted patterning strategies and their advantages via the above criteria in order to frame the requirements for specific applications. An overview of the reviewed technologies is presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the QD patterning technologies




Approaches
Optical patterning
Direct patterning
Transfer printing
Serial writing
Epitaxy


Photolithography
Direct optical lithography
Soft lithography
Capillary-force self-assembly
Selective wetting
e-beam lithography
Inkjet printing
Dip pen lithography






Strategies
PR modification (EBL or UV)
Photo responsive functional ligands
Lithography of QD-polymer composites
QD confinement by capillary-driven lateral force
UV-assisted photo programming on CTLs
Electron-sensitive resist/functional ligands
Kinetic/thermodynamic driven adhesion switching
Electro hydrodynamic inkjet
AFM tip
MBE on AAO membranes


nonphysical, local property-patterning
Contour patterning by imprint
Viscosity engineering to mitigate coffee-ring-effect
Polymer pen
AFM-assisted templates






Applications
QLEDs
QLEDs, photodetectors
Polarization detectors
QLEDs
QLEDs
Biosensors
QLEDs, Photoconductors, Biosensors
QLEDs, photodetectors
N/A
CMOS silicon photonic chips


plasmonic circuits






Resolution (μm)
0.03–5
1.5–20
0.15–1.2
0.85–1
0.8–5
0.03–4
0.01–50
0.12–5
0.5–5
0.02–0.5






Film profile uniformity
High uniformity attributed to Langmuir–Blodgett or layer by layer deposition
High uniformity attributed to spin-coating
High uniformity attributed to pressure-driven flattening
Limitation due to pinning effect
High uniformity attributed to evaporation kinetics engineering
High uniformity attributed to direct binding of QDs to electron-activated posts
High uniformity attributed to initially prepared QD donor films using spin-coating
Limitation due to coffee-ring-effects
Solution morphology is severely distorted during the release of the tips
Molecular self-assemble enables atomic scale uniformity


Freestanding QD patterns are limited
Intensive advancements on kinetics engineering in progress
Limited to single-particle






Multi-component patterning capability
O (Demonstrated)
O
X (Limited or not demonstrated)
X
O
X
O
O
X
X


Pressure-driven patterning steps hinder non-destructive sequential patterning
Consecutive use of solvents damages previous QDs
Anti-stain strategy by surface encapsulation to protect pre-pattern from consecutive wetting
Epitaxial growth templating steps hinder consecutive patterning






Material and substrate selection
Limited to hydrophilic QDs to avoid damage from hydrophobic solvents
QDs modified with functional ligands
QD-polymer composites
Substrate chemistry and topology design for effective confinement
Programmable surface required to induce chemisorption
Electron-sensitive resists or functional ligands
Transfer media with hydrophobic surface
QD ink solution engineering for wetting, viscosity, and solvent evaporation control
QD ink solution engineering for wetting, viscosity, and solvent evaporation control
Surface modification of growth sites via patterning-assisted lattice engineering


Transfer media which dissolve at QD-orthogonal solvents


Ref.

20–24


16 and 25–28


29–32


33–37


38 and 39


40–43


3, 24 and 44–49


27 and 50–61


62–64


65–73





2. QD patterning technologies
2.1. Optical patterning

2.1.1. Photolithography. 
Traditional photolithography is considered a powerful method in the electronics industry owing to its high resolution down to the optical limit and high throughput based on parallel processing. The characteristic methodology – transferring pattern information from a photomask to a photoresponsive material – has been employed to pattern QDs.20–24 However, conventional photolithography technologies cannot be directly applied to colloidal QDs, thus a new approach is required for QD patterning technologies. One simple method is to modify the conventional photolithography technologies, which consist of the deposition of photoresists (PRs), followed by exposure and lift-off process. Xie et al. combined electron beam lithography (EBL) based photoresist (PR) patterning, Langmuir–Blodgett deposition of QD films, and lift-off process to demonstrate QD monolayer nanopatterns with feature sizes down to 30 nm.22 As shown in the process scheme in Fig. 1a, they used a diluted ZEP 520A resist film with a film thickness of 40 nm on which a desired pattern was written using EBL. Then, a close-packed monolayer of QDs formed via Langmuir–Blodgett deposition was transferred onto the PR pattern. The final lift-off process was carried out to remove the resist leaving the QD patterns. The SEM images of the resulting QD patterns are shown in Fig. 1b–e. In particular, they optimized the lift-off process and the resist film thickness to successfully demonstrate QD nanopatterns with various shapes and sizes with a pattern resolution down to 30 nm (Fig. 1c). They claimed that the Langmuir–Blodgett deposition results in well-defined lift-off compared to that of spin-coating because, during the Langmuir–Blodgett deposition, the QD film can bend and break up at the side walls of the PR pattern resulting in exposed sidewalls without continuous QDs. In contrast, spin-coating results in over deposition of QDs near the pattern edges, which causes peeling on the pattern areas resulting in poor pattern quality.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the photolithography based QD patterning. SEM images of the (b) line and (d) ring QD patterns with different widths, and enlarged views for the line (c) and ring (d) patterns. The insets at the right lower corners in (b and d) show the respective micro-PL. Reprinted with permission.22 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of the photopatterning process using a PDMS stamp. (g) PL images of a circular edge-profile photopattern at different stages of pattern development. Reprinted with permission.20 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Park et al. employed QD patterning, using fabrication by PR patterning, spin-coating based QD deposition, and PR lift-off, to build pixelated QLEDs.23 This report addressed the challenge of utilizing conventional photolithography to realize repeatable, multicolored QD patterning. This is because the non-polar organic solvents used for PR development or lift-off in the second round of photolithography damage the first QD patterns. To overcome this issue, the researchers utilized hydrophilic QDs, which are orthogonal to, and hence not dissolved by, the chemicals used in conventional photolithography processes. Another unique fabrication technology based on photolithography termed “PR contact printing” was demonstrated by Keum et al.24 They adopted conventional photolithography steps and fabricated a PR pattern on an elastomer substrate, which was then used to dry-stamp and detach the QDs in the contacted domains.
The nonphysical patterning of QD films has also been developed, which involves the projection of photopatterns onto a continuous QD film and induces distinct optical properties of the exposed and non-exposed domains. Malak et al. introduced a photopatterning approach based on interference-lithography, which enables high resolution photopatterning on QD-polymer composites.20 As shown in Fig. 1f, they utilized patterned PDMS stamps as photomasks, which modulated the exposure light in defined regions, causing a localized contrast in PL recovery on the light-sensitive QD-polymer film. They demonstrated edge-profile patterns with sub micrometer widths, whose PL development stages were controlled by the exposure time (Fig. 1g). Moreover, the same group demonstrated multicolored emissive photopatterns based on selective or collective modification of PL emission from a mixed green and red QD-polymer composite.21 The QD patterns exhibiting different colors within the same composite layer were tailored by either selecting specific excitation wavelengths or utilizing different recovery rates for the two QDs. The nonphysical patterning strategies suggested in these reports provide high resolution and high throughput methods to manipulate the local properties of a continuous QD film, which can show potential in anticounterfeiting and light sensing applications.


2.1.2. Direct optical lithography. 
Although nonphysical patterning methods effectively demonstrate high resolution and high throughput PL patterns owing to the PR-free fabrication process, a wide range of advanced nanodevices require physically isolated QD pixels as a part of integrated circuit components. Direct optical lithography methods have been recently developed, which do not require a guiding process using PRs but instead utilize QDs functionalized with photoresponsive ligands. Wang et al. developed the direct optical lithography of functional inorganic nanomaterials (DOLFIN), which allows efficient patterning of colloidal QDs by adopting photochemically active functional ligands.25 As shown in Fig. 2a, they combined QD surface-binding anions and photochemically active cations which function as photoacid generators (PAGs) for the functional ligands. The PAGs decompose upon photon absorption and change the QD solubility, which provides washing conditions selectivity to the exposed domain. The SEM image of the patterned QD film after selective lift-off, and the PL image of the full-color QD patterns fabricated using DOLFIN are shown in Fig. 2b and c, respectively. The group further developed the technique into an advanced DOLFIN method for patterning highly efficient QLEDs.26 They introduced photopatternable emissive nanocrystals (PENs) as the modified QD solution, which was optimized from previous nanocrystal inks in order to maintain a high PL quantum efficiency (PLQY) after the patterning process. They demonstrated high resolution QD patterns with feature sizes of 1.5 μm (Fig. 2d). The PLQY of the QDs is maintained at 85% due to the well-preserved QD film morphology after the non-destructive DOLFIN.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of a nanocrystal with ion pair surface ligands. (b) SEM image of an edge of a photopatterned layer. (c) Red (R), green (G), and blue (B) QDs patterned on an SiO2 substrate by using photoactive ligands. Scale bars, 5 mm. Reprinted with permission.25 Copyright 2017, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Fluorescence optical microscopy images of QD patterns fabricated using direct optical patterning. Reprinted with permission.26 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) Schematic of the ligand crosslinking process between neighboring QDs based on the C–H insertion reaction of the nitrene moiety of LiXer. (f) Schematic of the photo-patterning processes of QDs using LiXer. (g) Laterally positioned patterns of RGB QDs, achievable from consecutive applications of the photo-patterning process.28 
Yang et al. reported that light-driven ligand crosslinking can provide domain selective lift-off of the QD films in another approach in the direct optical patterning method.28 The fluorinated aryl azide in the functional ligand forms a reactive nitrene intermediate upon UV exposure, which leads to a C–H insertion reaction and crosslinking of the neighboring ligands (Fig. 2e). They established an effective patterning technique satisfying the resolution (>1400 ppi), preservation of inherent optical properties (14.6% EQE), and multicomponent patterning capability, which are the most critical requirements for industrial standard QLEDs (Fig. 2f and g). Application of the precise patterning of multicomponent QDs can be extended to broadband photodetectors with high photon transfer efficiency.
A CMOS-compatible direct optical lithography method was developed to fabricate photodetector arrays by utilizing photochemically reactive Sn2S6-functional ligands of QDs.16 This report demonstrated a full-color (UV-to-IR), in-pixel charge-integrating circuit (CIC) for highly sensitive color discrimination; high-resolution QD patterning technology is key to achieving the monolithic integration of QDs and amorphous oxide semiconductors (AOSs). Benefiting from the accumulated technological maturity of conventional photolithography, the primary intention to apply the method to the parallel patterning of colloidal QDs has progressed to multiple generations. There are still obstacles to be overcome; the light-exposure and the ligand functionalization processes induce the degradation of the optical properties of the QDs. Nonetheless, parallel fabrication is still the most attractive approach from the perspectives of the electronic device industries. The light-driven nature of the patterning technique, however, restricts the resolution to the optical limit, so resolution of the single-particle level feature size required for applications such as quantum information processing cannot be achieved.

2.2. Direct patterning
Direct patterning approaches benefit from processes simplified by avoiding the use of PRs, etching, and removal. Thus, the formation of an extra QD/resist interface, and QD/PR-removing solvent interaction can be eliminated, which improves the accuracy and yield of the final pattern. In order to construct a fabrication system in which deposited QD films obtain pattern information in a direct manner, it is necessary to introduce external guiding techniques such as nanoimprinting, capillary-force induced self-assembly, and EBL. Note that the direct optical patterning methods summarized in section 2.1.2 can also be included in this category.

2.2.1. Soft lithography. 
Early generation micropatterning designed for the fabrication of flexible electronics utilizes physical stamping of thermoplastic materials to transfer geometrical patterns.74 To apply this nanoimprinting method to QD patterning, QDs were combined with a polymer matrix to form a flexible hybrid with improved processability. However, the QD-polymer composite suffers from the reduced fluorescence due to nonradiative processes in the densely packed polymer chains of the matrix. Moreover, the aggregation of QDs in the polymer matrix causes optical scattering and losses from Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET). Therefore, studies on the development of ultrahigh resolution QD patterns using composites via nanoimprinting have focused on effective strategies to enhance the optical properties of the fabricated arrays. Cho et al. demonstrated an ultrahigh resolution QD-polymer composite array with enhanced fluorescence intensity by hybridizing ultrathin plasmonic Au nanowalls around the composite pixels (Fig. 3a–c).29 As shown in Fig. 3d, the Au thin films are etched and coated on the sidewalls of the imprinted QD-polymer patterns using a low-energy Ar ion bombardment strategy. It was found that the Au layer provides strong near-field excitation, leading to 7-fold enhancement of the fluorescence signal of the composite arrays. As a method of reducing the optical scattering within the patterned QD-polymer composite, cross-linked polymer networks are used as the polymer matrix to suppress QD aggregation.30 Thiol-end chemistry within the crosslinkable polymer matrix allows rapid trapping of well-dispersed QDs by rapid crosslinking, which results in uniform PL emission. Another simple approach to enhance the optical properties of the QD-polymer composite is maximizing the QD content within the hybrid. It has been difficult to load QDs at more than 5 vol% in QD-polymer composites due to excessive phase separation, however, a report by the Davis group demonstrated the nanopatterning of ZnO QD-PMMA hybrids via nanoimprinting with a ZnO content of up to 50 vol%, thus exhibiting strong PL luminescence responses.31 They engineered the solvent ligand interaction of the ZnO QDs to preserve the colloidal stability at high QD volume content by increasing the steric repulsion of the particles through oleic acid ligand grafting.
 Fig. 3  (a–c) Confocal microscopy images and cross-sectional fluorescence intensity profiles of QD nanostructures of the spin-coated film, QD/PS pattern, and hybridized QD/PS pattern. (d) Schematic representation of the Au patterning using wide-angle sputtering. Reprinted with permission.29 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) Imprinted quasi-3D patterns on QDs. The bottom panel shows the cross-sectional height profile along the white dashed line. (f) Cross-sectional SEM image of imprinted QDs highlighting the difference between the original and imprinted QDs. Scale bar, 100 nm. (g) Schematic of the two-channel polarization detector with embedded bilayer wire grid polarizer. Simulation of e-field distribution passing through the wire-grid polarizer for s-/p-polarized light is shown on the right. Reprinted with permission.32 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Recently, Tang et al. reported innovative advanced nanoimprint-based patterning of a homogeneous QD film.32 They demonstrated a direct fabrication of functional quasi-3D nanophotonic structures via the one-step imprinting of QD films. As shown in Fig. 3e and f, the adoption of imprinting, while not expected to be compatible with granular solids, enables the direct patterning of homogeneous QD films with significant contours in the vertical direction. The researchers investigated the deformation of QD films in the vertical direction with a small Poisson ratio, indicating decent preservation of lateral resolution when the technique is applied for ultrahigh resolution QD patterning. The maximum plastic deformation strain was 35%, above which invasive cracks or peeling of QD films occurred. Such a window for the less invasive deformation in the QD film morphology is attributed to the voids within the spun-cast QDs due to imperfect packing and solid-state ligand exchange. The researchers also demonstrated mid-wave infrared two-channel polarization detectors by fabricating bilayer wire grid polarizers within QD patterns as shown in Fig. 3g. The versatility of the nanoimprinting technology to pattern QDs not only in 2D arrays but also in 3D stacked structures suggests the possibility of the use of the method for novel nanophotonic devices based on QDs.


2.2.2. Capillary-force self-assembly. 
The capillary-force that occurs during the drying of colloidal QDs can guide QDs for their self-assembly on chemically or physically selective domains, which directly produces dried QD patterns after deposition.33 Chen et al. have reported ring-shaped QD patterns fabricated using an evaporative templating method as shown in Fig. 4a.34 By using microsphere templates, the wedge-like region between the microsphere and the substrate can accommodate QDs with smaller particle radii. This geometric design allows capillary forces to drag the QDs from the water/air interface towards the wedge region, which leads to the successful formation of a QD ring pattern when the capillary force exceeds the sum of the particle/planar substrate adhesion and double-layer forces (Fig. 4b). After the direct patterning via capillary-force self-assembly, the microsphere templates are removed leaving behind the QD ring structures as shown in Fig. 4c.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the evaporation templating procedure employed for forming CdSe nanorings using microsphere templates. (b) Schematic diagram showing the forces involved in dragging the QDs to the PS spheres. (c) AFM topographical image and cross section of CdSe nanorings. Reprinted with permission.34 Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of a single liquid bridge with asymmetric contact angles between the template θ1 and substrate θ2. (e) PL image of patterned QD microarrays with a 375 nm laser as the excitation source. Reprinted with permission.35 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, the Jiang group has utilized an asymmetric QD liquid bridge between a physical template and a substrate to induce the selective wetting of QDs within the bridge domain, where the liquid/air interface causes capillary-force on the QDs (Fig. 4d).35 They demonstrated large-scale, ultrahigh resolution (1 μm) microwire QD arrays, which are applied to patterned QLED devices with high electroluminescence values (Fig. 4e). Many studies on the capillary-force-driven behavior of colloidal particles suggest that interface engineering enables the precise localization of colloidal QDs.3,36–38 Although the above strategies demonstrate the potential as next-generation nanometer scale QD patterning technologies, the realization of a uniform film profile and multicomponent patterning capability without cross invasion of the previous patterns are still challenging.


2.2.3. Selective wetting. 
Selective wetting methods combined with surface programming have been used to achieve the direct and high-resolution patterning of various material systems such as colloidal nanoparticles, small molecules, and polymers.38,75–78 Lee et al. have demonstrated the selective wetting-based fabrication of QD patterns. They improved the area selectivity of conventional self-assembled monolayer (SAM) assisted patterns by decreasing the spin-coating temperature, which controlled the solvent evaporation kinetics during the last stage of spin-coating. Although selective wetting is a facile approach to pattern solution-based materials, its application to more complex device fabrication has been challenging due to several obstacles. The surface programming steps often introduce undesired invasiveness to the target surface, which leads to degradation in the device performance. In addition, the coffee-ring-effects in evaporation-based processes cause non-uniform film profiles. Finally, multicomponent patterning is challenging due to the undesirable wetting of later-deposited materials on the pre-existing patterns. To overcome these challenges, Song et al. developed a QD patterning process based on the selective-wetting principle, and demonstrated full-color QLEDs.39 They adopted deep ultra-violet (UV) induced photo-programming to modify the surface of HTLs. The control of the UV irradiation time minimized the damage to the HTLs while maintaining the surface energy selectivity. A uniform film profile was achieved by evaporation kinetics engineering, enabling improvement of the device performance. An anti-stain strategy was also developed by using surface-specific encapsulation using perfluorodecanethiol (PFDT) ligands, which prevents the contamination of pre-patterned QD films during consecutive wetting processes.


2.2.4. e-beam lithography. 
EBL is a powerful tool to prepare a pre-programmed domain on which QDs can be directly deposited and patterned owing to the precise manipulation of the surface of a given medium using the focused electron beam. The primary advantage of EBL is its direct writing function to provide custom patterns with sub-10 nm resolution, which corresponds to single or double QDs in terms of size; therefore, EBL-based QD patterning techniques are intensively employed for emerging quantum devices requiring particle-level resolution. To date, EBL-based QD patterning methods have relied on either pre-patterning electron sensitive resists to fabricate nanometer scale metal posts or direct patterning of QD films with the functionalized ligands that react with the exposed electron beam. The working principle of the first method is analogous to that of conventional photolithography with the substitution of the masked light source by the serial writing of the focused electron beam. As shown in Fig. 5a, the fabrication process introduced by Kramer et al. employs PMMA as an electron sensitive resist, which is developed and deposited with Au after the EBL.43 The Au patterns are then functionalized by DNAs to induce DNA-directed self-assembly of QDs via a key-lock system of single-stranded DNAs. The researchers used streptavidin-conjugated QDs to selectively attach to the biotin groups of the functional DNAs on the Au patterns and achieved nanoscale localization of the QDs. Using a similar method, the Hone group achieved QD arrays with single particle resolution.40 They reduced the prepatterned Au/Pd dot size down to 30 nm and formed a biotinylated-thiol self-assembled monolayer (SAM) on the dots for directed self-assembly of streptavidin conjugated QDs. The size of the minimized metal site is small enough to support the binding of at most a few QDs as depicted in Fig. 5b. An alternative QD patterning method based on direct EBL on functional QD films was also suggested. Nandwana et al. introduced trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) as surface ligands of QDs to develop resist-free direct writing of an electron beam on the spun-cast QD films.41 The TOPO ligands can cross-link upon exposure to the electron beams, and are selectively intact during the subsequent washing step (Fig. 5c). Instead of using functional ligands, the Mihaela Delcea group combined water soluble QDs with electron beam sensitive polyethylene glycol (PEG) to form a QD composite resist, on which EBL was applied to crosslink the exposed domains followed by washing of the unexposed domains (Fig. 5d).42 They fabricated up to 50 nm resolution QD arrays, which were applied for monitoring human blood derived neutrophil. This showed adhesion and migration behavior of the cells at the QD-PEG micropatterned surfaces with different geometries (Fig. 5e). The advantages related to the resolution and the limitations of serial processing of EBL make it clear that the technique is more suited to applications or fields requiring precisely localized fluorescent arrays benefiting from the highly efficient QD emitters.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic showing EBL patterning on a PMMA surface and subsequent QD binding. Reprinted with permission.43 Copyright 2010 IOP Publishing Ltd. (b) Schematic of a monolayer formation and quantum dot assembly process flow. Reprinted with permission.40 Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic of the steps involved in the EBL based micropatterning of QD-PEG. (d) Adherence of neutrophils on PLL-PEG:QD-PEG micropatterns. (e) Live cell time-lapse images of the specific attachment of neutrophils (green) on the micropatterns. Reprinted with permission.42 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Overall, the direct patterning methods discussed in this section have shown promise for ultrahigh-resolution QD patterns using various approaches that are favorable for colloidal QDs. The simplified fabrication steps generally offer reduction in the yield-loss and improvement in pattern fidelity. However, some of the methods rely on the mass transport of QDs during the solvent evaporation steps, which inevitably requires careful engineering of the involved kinetics to satisfy the high pattern quality.

2.3. Transfer printing
The characteristic feature of transfer printing methods when applied to QD patterning is the delivery of solid-state QD films to the target surface. The implantation of pattern information is generally conducted during the physical contact of the transfer media with either QD donor films or the target surface. Therefore, the feature size and shape of the QD patterns fabricated using transfer printing depend on the surface morphology of the transfer media. Since the initial donor QD films can be prepared with uniform thickness by using spin-coating, the transferred QD patterns also exhibit highly uniform film profiles, which is critical for high-performing device operation. Moreover, a dry fabrication environment is beneficial for achieving a multicomponent array without cross-contamination because the solvent-driven mass transport of QDs can be avoided. Therefore, transfer printing methods have been widely adopted for applications needing multicomponent arrays arranged in a parallel structure.44,79–82 In particular the field of full-color QLEDs has significantly benefited from the multicomponent printability of transfer printing methods.3,24,44–49 The Bulovic group developed first-generation transfer printing-based QD patterning using a poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) transfer mold.45 QD inks were simply spin-coated on the PDMS mold, which was then contacted with the final substrate to selectively deliver deposited QDs on the protruded domains of the mold. However, when using this strategy, the filling of the trench domains of the mold cannot be avoided, which could lead to contact with the target surface and thus reduce the pattern quality. To overcome this issue, the second-generation transfer printing-based method was developed. As shown in Fig. 6a, Kim et al. demonstrated the first full-color QLEDs fabricated via a solvent-free transfer printing method, which uses a PDMS transfer mold to selectively detach QD patterns from donor QD films under controlled pressure.46 The follow-up studies of this method focused on minimizing the pressure used to prevent damage to the underneath organic charge transport layers required for high performance QLEDs.44 Kinetic engineering, being fundamental to the above contact-based transfer printing methods, confronts a pixel discrepancy issue, especially near the edges of the contacted mold where the propagation of cracks begins. Recent studies on transfer printing-based QD patterning methods attempted to improve the edge definition and resolution of patterns by adopting unique transfer systems. Choi et al. developed a modified version termed intaglio transfer printing, as shown in Fig. 6b.47 They extracted the non-contacted QD domains to retain a pattern using a specially designed “intaglio” template. In contrast to the previous generation printing, they achieved uniform QD patterns even at ultra-high resolution with feature sizes of 5 μm, and they demonstrated full-color QD arrays with resolutions of up to 2460 ppi.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of solvent-free transfer printing. Reprinted with permission.46 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic of intaglio transfer printing.47 (c) Schematic of immersion transfer printing. (d) SEM images of the patterned QDs using immersion transfer printing. (e) Schematic of the thermodynamic-driven transfer mechanism.3 (f) Schematics and respective confocal fluorescence images of PMMA-probe-QD patterns of the multiplex miRNA detection platform. Reprinted with permission.18 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
In order to improve both the yield and patterning resolution, Nam et al. suggested a transfer printing method which eliminates the physical detachment process by isolating the patterning step from the contact-involving transfer steps.3 As shown in Fig. 6c and d, they developed a dewetting-controlled patterning of QDs in Si trenches and subsequent delivery of the patterns on a target surface via immersion transfer printing (iTP). Owing to the well-defined QD patterns with uniform film profiles achieved prior to the transfer process, the patterned films avoid damage during the picking step. During the later stage of the delivery from the transfer media to the target surface, the kinetic-induced damage to the QD films is once again mitigated by the iTP, which employs orthogonal solvent-driven selective removal of the transfer media in a pressure-free manner (Fig. 6e). The iTP technology is also adopted to demonstrate a multiplex microRNA (miRNA) biosensor with polychromatic QD patterns.18Fig. 6f shows the multicomponent printing of QD-probe-PMMA arrays, which serve as a fluorescence library to selectively detect miRNAs in a quantitative manner. While the majority of the transfer printing methods handle dry state QD films, Kim et al. introduced a wet technique for QD patterning, which transfers the solution state QD inks using nanoporous stamps.83 They developed carbon nanotube nanoporous microstructures, which function as transfer stamps capable of wetting solution state inks. Unlike the conformal contact required between elastomer molds and dry ink films, the porosity of the carbon nanotube forest structure enables the capillary-driven loading of ink and nanoscale contact-mediated printing on the target surface.
The development of complex transfer printing systems has enabled sub-micrometer resolution QD patterns with high film uniformity. The dry nature of the fabrication processes also enables multi-color patterning, which is critical to demonstrate full-color QLEDs and other multicomponent applications. However, the large-scale fabrication of such high-quality patterns has to be accompanied by conformal lamination with consistent pressure throughout the whole substrate, which is challenging, especially when scaled up. An effective roll-to-roll process also needs to be developed in order to meet industrial requirements.
2.4. Serial writing
Serially releasing a controlled volume of QD solution on a target substrate is a promising approach to patterning QDs, because the selection of a desired location to deposit the QD ink can be controlled by the mechanical motion of the releasing source. In this section, various solution-based serial writing techniques such as inkjet printing, dip pen lithography, and bubble printing are introduced.

2.4.1. Inkjet printing. 
Inkjet printing utilizes a pipette nozzle through which the ink material is ejected by the activation of a pulse from the solution bank module. The conventional inkjet printing mainly developed in the computer graphic printing industry adopted piezoelectrically or thermally driven ejection of ink materials, which limits the resolution of the printed pattern depending on the diameter of the nozzle. On the other hand, an advanced inkjet printing technique based on electric field driven drop formation, termed electrohydrodynamic (EHD) inkjet printing, is capable of generating ink-drops a few orders of magnitude smaller than conventional inkjet printing. Therefore, most QD inkjet printing techniques employ the EHD system to achieve ultra-high resolution patterning.27,50–61 Kress et al. demonstrated a subdiffraction QD light source by precisely locating nanoscale QD patterns using EHD inkjet printing.54 They explored the plasmonic and photonic behaviors of QDs on both flat and structured surfaces to study the electrostatic guiding effect of QD plasmonic devices. It was found that inkjet printing enables the deposition of ultrahigh resolution QD patterns on surfaces with arbitrary structures, while other QD patterning techniques using stamping, EBL, and self-assembly are not capable of this. Fig. 7a and b shows the patterning capability of EHD printing on both flat and pyramid shaped Au surfaces. Interestingly, an auto focusing behavior was observed in patterned QDs on the structured surface, which is caused by the local electromagnetic field interaction between the strong electrostatic fields at the nozzle and the field lines on the edges or tips of the Au plasmonic structure hot spots (Fig. 7c). The advantages of inkjet printing in terms of geometrical registration and multicomponent printability offer a promising route to the fabrication of full-color QLEDs. Kim et al. utilized EHD inkjet printing to fabricate multicolored QD patterns, which are incorporated into QLEDs with resolutions down to a few micrometers (Fig. 7d).56
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs patterned via EHD printing.54 (b) SEM image showing the deflection of printed CdSe/CdS QD lines when the printing nozzle is translated near the tip of a sharp template-stripped Au pyramid.54 (c) Axi-symmetric electrostatic simulations of the total electric field between the printing nozzle and a triangular tip.54 (d) Optical micrographs of the electroluminescence of green QLEDs.56 (e) Schematic of the printed pixel drying process.27 (f) OM image of salt-encapsulated QDs on a PET film. (g) OM image of the film under UV illumination. Reprinted with permission.34 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of the three-step process for depositing ink on a nanostructured surface using dip pen lithography. Reprinted with permission.63 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In QLEDs, it is necessary to fabricate QD patterns with nanometer scale thicknesses. However, this is difficult for inkjet printing methods because pinholes or discontinuities induced by the coffee-ring effect during solvent evaporation deteriorates the uniformity of the nanometer scale film. Follow up studies on QLEDs fabricated using inkjet printing emphasized the improvement of the film profile uniformity either by engineering the ink solution or by using physical guiding wells patterned on the substrate. Liu et al. reported the dispersion of a QD solution in a mixture of cyclohexylbenzene and decane, a traditional non-polar solvent, which enables the boiling points and viscosity of the QD inks to be increased.57 The coffee ring effect was efficiently suppressed in such a high viscosity QD ink by slowing the outward capillary flow, which enables the deposition of a uniform QD film on a charge transport layer of a QLED device. The Kraus group also designed a QD ink with a mixture of cyclohexylbenzene and octane, the composition ratio of which is controlled to optimize the viscosity, density, and surface tension of the ink.27 As shown in Fig. 7e, they used the mixed solvents to induce the Marangoni flows towards the center of the droplet, which suppresses the coffee ring effect. As another strategy, Azzellino et al. demonstrated an array pattern of PR wells, which provides confinement and prevents uncontrolled spreading of the QD inks deposited by inkjet printing.58 Moreover, such well-shaped structures function as pixel definition layers with good insulation to avoid short circuiting in the QLEDs.61 Recently, an interesting manipulation of QD inks was reported by the Chen group.34 They introduced NaCl as an additional medium for a QD ink, which enables the spontaneous self-encapsulation of QDs in the salt crystal after the ink is deposited by inkjet printing. They demonstrated a RGB full-color micro-LED display using the QD-salt pixels, as shown in Fig. 7f and g. Benefiting from the additive nature of inkjet printing, a demonstration of 3D-printed QD nanopixels was recently reported by Bae et al.59 They utilized a femtoliter meniscus to induce the liquid solidification of QD embedded polymer nanowires, forming vertically freestanding nanopillar QD pixels. The 3D QD pixels exhibit a 2-fold increase in the luminance without an increase in the spatial resolution of the pixels, and such dimensional flexibility could provide the inkjet printing method with further potential in a wide range of applications including displays, information storage, cryptography, and image sensors.


2.4.2. Other solution-based serial writing techniques. 
Dip pen lithography is another type of solution-based direct patterning, which enables precise positioning of ink media without the need for a resist.62,63 In particular, dip pen nanolithography utilizes an atomic force microscopy (AFM) tip to fabricate patterns with nanometer scale resolution. The Fuchs group has reported a QD patterning method using AFM tip-based dip-pen lithography and fabricated QD arrays with dot sizes down to 500 nm.62 In addition, they developed polymer pen lithography by employing micro contact printing to fabricate a pyramid shaped PDMS mold. The mold medium with parallel pyramid tips in a single pen substrate enables parallel QD patterning with printing processes of individual dots involving a principle analogous to that for AFM tip-based dip pen lithography. Beyond the basic capability to directly write QD patterns on a flat surface using dip-pen lithography, a method of precisely navigating the tip to the desired position has been developed by Dawood et al.63 They introduced a reading-inking-writing process to selectively deposit a small number of QD emitters at an exact location above Si nanoantennae to fabricate periodic arrays of hybrid nanostructures (Fig. 7h). The substrate topography of the Si structure is first “read” by AFM imaging, which provides a 3D map of the surface at a resolution below the optical limit of the microscope used to guide the dip-pen lithography. The AFM tip is then loaded with QD ink and relocates the topographical antenna to selectively deliver the QDs on the target domain. The integration between the primary characteristic of the AFM as an analytic tool and the new function of the precise patterning method provides a synergistic outcome; the navigation and alignment steps are critical in fabricating multicomponent QD arrays, but present a challenge when the pattern resolution exceeds the optical limit of a conventional alignment system. Considering that advanced microscopies beyond the optical limit such as SEM and TEM operate in a vacuum, AFM based monitoring could be a valuable tool for the precise alignment of nanoscale QD arrays. Rajeeva et al. demonstrated a unique type of solution-based serial writing technique using microbubbles.64 The bubble printing method employs a light-generated microbubble at the interface of a QD solution and a surface to directly write the QD patterns. This work suggests that tip-writing platforms are not necessarily limited to those of solid–liquid–solid interfaces, but can employ diverse interfaces, including liquid–liquid–solid, to deliver QD patterns.

2.5. Epitaxy
While solution-synthesized colloidal QDs have been studied by the chemistry community, the epitaxial synthesis of QDs has been addressed by the physics community. However, both communities have sought to control the strength of the carrier confinement of synthesized QDs and apply the unique building blocks in advanced optic, optoelectronic, and quantum information applications. Therefore, an analogous interest in controlling the spatial relationship between the dots and fabricating QD patterns with desired resolutions and shapes has been discussed for epitaxial QDs.65–73 The epitaxial QDs are fabricated by self-assembly in the Stranski–Krastanov growth mode, which is mainly achieved by the combination of semiconductor elements with a lattice mismatch of a few percent. This self-assembly principle requires a surface with nucleation site arrays to direct and confine the growth of QDs, and hence, the prerequisite of patterning epitaxial QDs is precise patterning of the template array. The Xu group reported an InAs QD pattern grown by molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) on an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane-based nanolithography template.65 The Asakawa group demonstrated an AFM probe-assisted fabrication of In nano-dot template arrays on which the irradiation of As flux was utilized for the MBE of InAs QD arrays.66 The nucleation site growth nature of the MBE is distinct from the colloidal QDs, in that the synthesis and positioning of the QDs take place in parallel. This removes the complexity of the post-synthesized mobility control of QDs, especially in terms of single particle localization. On the other hand, QD patterns which require the aggregation of several QDs within a single pixel are very limited for epitaxial QDs because epitaxy on a template pattern with a larger pixel domain would only lead to the continuous growth of semiconductor elements without geometrical confinement. Therefore, many studies focused on the development of single particle resolution layouts of epitaxial QDs, which are needed for emerging quantum functional devices related to quantum information technologies.67–70 Schramm et al. have employed nanoimprint lithography to fabricate a GaAs template with nanometer scale patterns, on which InAs QDs are grown via MBE. Fig. 8a shows the single InAs QDs grown on a structured hole pattern with a 1.5 μm period. Depending on the size and shape of the template confinement, diverse pattern arrangements such as QD lines with single particle width resolution and nanoslot patterns with anisotropic direction in relation to the substrate lattice parameters have been demonstrated by different groups (Fig. 8b and c).68,71 It is important to note that epitaxial QDs are typically flat-shaped with growth in the vertical direction less than that in the in-plane direction.84 Unlike the strong isotropic quantum confinement exhibited in colloidal QDs, epitaxial QDs exhibit a mid-confinement regime in the horizontal direction, often exhibiting inferior optical properties. Moreover, the mostly studied InAs/GaAs system exhibits wavelengths ranging from 0.85 to 1.3 μm, meaning its target applications are optoelectronic devices covering the visible spectrum.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of single InAs QDs grown on a NIL structured hole pattern. Reprint with permission.69 Copyright 2012, IOP Publishing Ltd. (b) AFM image of QDs grown on UV-NIL processed groove patterns. Reprint with permission.68 Copyright 2010, AIP Publishing. (c) Tilted SEM image of InP nanostructure arrays with nanoslots, grown using selective area epitaxy. Reprint with permission.71 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
3. Perspectives and challenges of QD patterning with reference to applications
Although the fundamentals of the quantum confinement properties of semiconducting nanocrystals are shared, the direction of research into patterning strategies to utilize the building blocks varies, sometimes significantly, to fulfil the needs of a broad range of applications.
To date, the evolution of QLEDs has shown the most promising utilization of patterned QDs with the demonstration of prototype devices reported by several groups. As the device performance of QLEDs has recently reached its theoretical limit, QD patterning technologies have now attracted new attention for the realization of high-resolution QLEDs.85–88 Frontier patterning methods including direct optical lithography, transfer printing, and inkjet printing are competing through the characteristic advantages of each technology. The strengths of the direct optical lithography methods are ultrahigh resolution with feature size down to a few micrometers, uniform film profile enabled by established casting methods, and full color patterning capability enabled by functional ligands. A drawback of this method is the inevitable adoption of an inverted device structure with an inorganic electron transport layer at the bottom of the patterned emissive layer. The QD casting step and the washing step are accompanied by exposure to organic solvents, which can be invasive to the underneath organic hole transport layer, prohibiting the adoption of the normal device structure. Typically, QLEDs with inverted device structures exhibit inferior performance due to the limited material selection for vacuum deposition-compatible organic hole transport layers on top of the emissive layer. Transfer printing methods also satisfy the requirements of the full-color patterning of ultrahigh-resolution QD arrays with uniform film profiles. The pressure-assisted transfer of dry QD patterns can be used to readily fabricate patterned QLEDs in a normal device structure; however, the kinetic-driven principle is also considered a drawback due to the difficulty in achieving industrial level patterning yields. The strengths of inkjet printing methods are efficient management of the ink usage, multicomponent patterning capability (with perhaps the lowest degree of cross-invasion between pixels), and inter-pixel defect control benefiting from the serial pixel to pixel deposition regime (ink dropping can be monitored and readily intervened with when desired). However, controlling the evaporation kinetics of the deposited QD solution to prevent intra-pixel defects remains a challenge. Moreover, ultrahigh-resolution patterns with feature sizes of a few micrometers using EHD inkjet printing have room for improvement in terms of uniformity. The gold standard method to effectively pattern full-color QDs for QLED displays still needs to be developed. In terms of the type of QDs used for emerging QLEDs, InP QDs are promising alternatives to the widely studied CdSe QDs, owing to their reduced toxicity. While the device performances of InP QD-based QLEDs have reached industrial standards, PR used in the conventional patterning process reduces the PL intensity of InP QDs.89 Therefore, challenges are proposed to adopt non-Cd based QDs in developed patterning technologies. These challenges include, but are not limited to, the development of photo-active ligands applicable to InP QD surfaces while preserving the PLQY of the QDs, and confirming the stability of InP QDs under widely used polar and nonpolar solvents.
The importance of photodetectors is drawing more attention with the inception of the fourth industrial revolution because a vast amount of analogue information is required to be delivered to processors. In particular, photodetectors are primary devices that receive an optical signal and convert it to an electrical signal. QDs are excellent building blocks for accurate responses to a broad range of spectra, and thus patterning QD arrays in device circuits could be essential techniques for the next generation of photodetector devices. In contrast to QLEDs requiring a maximum of three color patterning, a superior multicomponent patterning capacity is required for photodetectors due to the wider range of spectra extending from UV to IR, depending on the purpose of the secondary applications. Due to the fact that advanced photodetectors comprehensively utilize various photoresponsive materials not limited to QDs, patterning techniques should be mutually compatible with various materials in order to construct hybrid structures in a nondestructive manner. Therefore, at the current stage, QD patterns are embedded with a limited number of other photoresponsive materials with the aid of patterning methods such as dry transfer printing, inkjet printing, and photolithography. The challenge in the field of photodetectors is to develop a universal patterning tool applicable to a large number of photosensitive materials and effectively assemble the modules into a compact array structure.
Microarray technology in biosensor applications is crucial to develop nano- and micro-scale patterns with defined geometric properties, which enable the high-throughput screening of biomarkers. Patterning surfaces using fluorescent materials including QDs provides optically and electrically active platforms on which target biomolecules can position and selectively alter the local outcome signal. Therefore, the ideal shape and resolution of QD patterns vary depending on the characteristics of the target molecules and the signal transducing mechanisms of the different biosensor platforms.42 The limits of detection of biosensors are determined by the credibility of the control signal; therefore, reproducibility and uniformity of QD patterns, both inter-pixel and inter-chip, are considered very important to minimize the false positive signals of biosensors.18 The adoption of advanced nanopatterning technologies already matured for electronic devices is anticipated to further improve the performances of screening-based biosensors, which is critical for point-of-care testing.
Intensive physical observation of QDs as effective single photon sources has been conducted owing to their potential as key elements in quantum computation, quantum communication, and information processing. Regardless of their clear suitability, it has been challenging to properly integrate them into practical devices due to the difficulty in demonstrating an ideal single dot array. Significant progress on achieving a perfect (ideal) QD array has been made by addressing each of the following criteria: (a) minimization of defects, (b) accurate positioning of individual QDs, (c) uniform size, shape, and composition, (d) long-range ordering, and (e) capability to control the QD size and array density as required. QD arrays for single-photon applications are routinely formed by epitaxial growth using vapor phase MBE or MOCVD because the location of each of the ‘to-be-grown’ semiconductor crystals can be predetermined before the self-assembly. However, this method still suffers from QD size variance, and the inevitable needs of the wetting layer and consequent restriction of the material selection. Moreover, the distribution of nucleation sites can only be localized by high-precision techniques such as EBL, which is difficult to achieve in large-area fabrication. As an alternative, solution-processed colloidal QDs can offer additional advantages for quantum information science such as a wider selection of material compositions, structural and size uniformity, and greater flexibility in device integration. However, positional control of individual colloidal particles after they are stably prepared in a solution state is a big challenge. The precision of the arrangement of colloidal particles has progressed through the aid of size-comparable and geometrically controllable nanoscale templates such as block copolymers or other analogous topographic patterns.90–92 In addition to positional control, the multicomponent single particle arrays and their device integration should also be considered. A universal synthesis and patterning method that meets all of the requirements for an ideal single QD array still requires further development.
4. Conclusion
Ultrahigh-resolution QD patterning is a key technology for the implementation of advanced QD functional devices. As each QD pixel acts as an individual device, ultrahigh resolution QD patterns enable the high density integration of devices and thus provide greater performance and functionality to the next generation of QD-based applications. Micrometer-scale pattern resolution has been achieved using conventional methods compatible with those available in present industries. However, scaling down QD patterns to the nanometer-scale or even down to the single particle level had not been achieved until recent developments in advanced patterning techniques such as shorter wavelength lithography, self-assembly-based patterning, and serial writing methods. Many pioneering groups have developed innovative patterning technology by revealing hidden principles including the surface chemistry of QDs, confinement effect of guiding templates, and printing kinetics in contact-based patterning. Thanks to this research progress, QD patterning technologies have rapidly advanced with demonstrations of promising applications, yet there are still a number of remaining challenges. We believe that consistent research effort in QD patterning will result in the commercialization of this technology and play vital roles in various next generation high-performing QD devices.
Author contributions
T. W. N., M. C., and Y. S. J. wrote the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by Nano Material Technology Development Program (NRF-2021M3H4A3A01062963) of the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT.
References
J. Kim, S. Song, Y. Kim and S. Park, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2000024 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hull, J. Floro, J. Graham, J. Gray, M. Gherasimova, A. Portavoce and F. Ross, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2008, 11, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nam, M. Kim, Y. Wang, G. Kim, W. Choi, H. Lim, K. Song, M. Choi, D. Jeon, J. Grossman and Y. Jung, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Scappucci, C. Kloeffel, F. Zwanenburg, D. Loss, M. Myronov, J. Zhang, S. De Franceschi, G. Katsaros and M. Veldhorst, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 926–943 CrossRef CAS .
X. He and N. Ma, Colloids Surf., B, 2014, 124, 118–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Rao, N. Reddy, M. Kumari, K. Cheralathan, P. Ravi, M. Sathish, B. Neppolian, K. Reddy, N. Shetti, P. Prathap, T. Aminabhavi and M. Shankar, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 248, 109246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Murray, D. Norris and M. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hines and G. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, M. Zaman, F. Yan, D. Johnston, G. Li, X. Wu, D. Leek, C. Ratcliffe, J. Ripmeester and K. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13805–13811 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lin, B. Song, H. Wang, F. Zhang, F. Chen, L. Wang, L. Li, F. Guo and H. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7223–7229 RSC .
Y. Won, O. Cho, T. Kim, D. Chung, H. Chung, H. Jang, J. Lee, D. Kim and E. Jang, Nature, 2019, 575, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Choi, F. de Arquer, A. Proppe, A. Seifitokaldani, J. Choi, J. Kim, S. Baek, M. Liu, B. Sun, M. Biondi, B. Scheffel, G. Walters, D. Nam, J. Jo, O. Ouellette, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, S. Kelley, Y. Jung and E. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bae, L. Padilha, Y. Park, H. McDaniel, I. Robel, J. Pietryga and V. Klimov, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3411–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, J. Luria, B. Hyun, A. Bartnik, L. Sun, Y. Lim, J. Marohn, F. Wise and T. Hanrath, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1805–1811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ding, D. Wang, D. Liu, H. Li, Y. Li, S. Hayase, T. Sogabe, T. Masuda, Y. Zhou, Y. Yao, Z. Zou, R. Wang and Q. Shen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2201676 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. Kwon, Y. Kang, Y. Kim, M. Lee, K. Han, A. Facchetti, M. Kim and S. Park, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, 11 Search PubMed .
Y. Wan, C. Xiang, J. Guo, R. Koscica, M. Kennedy, J. Selvidge, Z. Zhang, L. Chang, W. Xie, D. Huang, A. Gossard and J. Bowers, Laser Photonics Rev., 2021, 15, 2170042 CrossRef .
T. Nam, Y. Park, Y. Jung and H. Park, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 11115–11123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Aharonovich, D. Englund and M. Toth, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 631–641 CrossRef CAS .
S. Malak, G. Liang, R. Thevamaran, Y. Yoon, M. Smith, J. Jung, C. Lin, Z. Lin, E. Thomas and V. Tsukruk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 13370–13380 CrossRef CAS .
S. Malak, J. Jung, Y. Yoon, M. Smith, C. Lin, Z. Lin and V. Tsukruk, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 608–619 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, R. Gomes, T. Aubert, S. Bisschop, Y. Zhu, Z. Hens, E. Brainis and D. Van Thourhout, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7481–7487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, J. Kyhm, H. Kim, S. Jeong, J. Kang, S. Lee, K. Lee, K. Park, N. Barange, J. Han, J. Song, W. Choi and I. Han, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6946–6953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Keum, Y. Jiang, J. Park, J. Flanagan, M. Shim and S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10024–10031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, I. Fedin, H. Zhang and D. Talapin, Science, 2017, 357, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, J. Pan, H. Wu, X. Lan, I. Coropceanu, Y. Wang, W. Cho, E. Hill, J. Anderson and D. Talapin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, L. Zhang, D. Kong, R. Strahl and T. Krause, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901429 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Hahm, K. Kim, S. Rhee, M. Lee, S. Kim, J. Chang, H. Park, J. Lim, H. Kim, J. Bang, H. Ahn, J. Cho, J. Kwak, B. Kim, C. Lee, W. Bae and M. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, H. Jeon, H. Yoo, K. Cho, W. Jung, J. Kim and H. Jung, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7273–7280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Smith, S. Malak, J. Jung, Y. Yoon, C. Lin, S. Kim, K. Lee, R. Ma, T. White, T. Bunning, Z. Lin and V. Tsukruk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17436–17449 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, K. Lu and R. Davis, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 5855–5863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, M. Chen, M. Ackerman, C. Melnychuk and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vyawahare, K. Craig and A. Scherer, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 271–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, W. Liao, X. Chen, T. Yang, S. Wark, D. Son, J. Batteas and P. Cremer, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 173–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, B. Hu, Z. Du, Y. Wu and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28520–28526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lambert, I. Moreels, D. Van Thourhout and Z. Hens, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5961–5966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Weng, X. Lai, G. Chen, X. Zhou, Q. Yan, C. Wu, T. Guo, J. Sun and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 1504–1514 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Choi, C. Lee, S. Song, J. Lee, D. Huh, Y. Nam, D. Jeon, H. Lee and Y. Jung, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8224–8233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Song, M. Kim, H. Cho, H. Shin, G. Kim, S. Yim, T. Nam and Y. Jung, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 16598–16607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Abramson, M. Palma, S. Wind and J. Hone, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2207–2211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nandwana, C. Subramani, Y. Yeh, B. Yang, S. Dickert, M. Barnes, M. Tuominen and V. Rotello, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16859–16862 RSC .
R. Palankar, N. Medvedev, A. Rong and M. Delcea, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4617–4628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kramer, N. Pholchai, V. Sorger, T. Yim, R. Oulton and X. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21 Search PubMed .
H. Cho, J. Kwak, J. Lim, M. Park, D. Lee, W. Bae, Y. Kim, K. Char, S. Lee and C. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10828–10833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kim, P. Anikeeva, S. Coe-Sullivan, J. Steckel, M. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4513–4517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kim, K. Cho, E. Lee, S. Lee, J. Chae, J. Kim, D. Kim, J. Kwon, G. Amaratunga, S. Lee, B. Choi, Y. Kuk, J. Kim and K. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choi, J. Yang, K. Kang, D. Kim, C. Choi, C. Park, S. Kim, S. Chae, T. Kim, J. Kim, T. Hyeon and D. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6 Search PubMed .
P. Anikeeva, J. Halpert, M. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2532–2536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, S. Nam, N. Oh, S. Cho, K. Yu, C. Lee, J. Zhang, K. Deshpande, P. Trefonas, J. Kim, J. Lee, J. Shin, Y. Yu, J. Lim, S. Won, Y. Cho, N. Kim, K. Seo, H. Lee, T. Kim, M. Shim and J. Rogers, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4920–4925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Haverinen, R. Myllyla and G. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 073108 CrossRef .
C. Jiang, Z. Zhong, B. Liu, Z. He, J. Zou, L. Wang, J. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26162–26168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cook, M. Gong, D. Ewing, M. Casper, A. Stramel, A. Elliot and J. Wu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 3246–3252 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, W. Zhou, Y. Tao, L. Mao, J. Chang, H. Hu, C. Li and Q. Dai, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901472 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kress, P. Richner, S. Jayanti, P. Galliker, D. Kim, D. Poulikakos and D. Norris, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5827–5833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Galliker, J. Schneider, H. Eghlidi, S. Kress, V. Sandoghdar and D. Poulikakos, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, M. Onses, J. Lim, S. Nam, N. Oh, H. Kim, K. Yu, J. Lee, J. Kim, S. Kang, C. Lee, J. Lee, J. Shin, N. Kim, C. Leal, M. Shim and J. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 969–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, F. Li, Z. Xu, C. Zheng, T. Guo, X. Xie, L. Qian, D. Fu and X. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25506–25512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Azzellino, F. Freyria, M. Nasilowski, M. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800727 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, S. Lee, J. Ahn, J. Kim, M. Wajahat, W. Chang, S. Yoon, J. Kim, S. Seol and J. Pyo, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10993–11001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ho, H. Hsu, C. Yeh and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33346–33351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Duan, Z. Shao, G. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Huang and Z. Yin, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000401 CrossRef CAS .
S. Biswas, F. Brinkmann, M. Hirtz and H. Fuchs, Nanofabrication, 2015, 2, 19–26 Search PubMed .
F. Dawood, J. Wang, P. Schulze, C. Sheehan, M. Buck, A. Dennis, S. Majumder, S. Krishnamurthy, M. Ticknor, I. Staude, I. Brener, P. Goodwin, N. Amro and J. Hollingsworth, Small, 2018, 14, 1801503 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Rajeeva, L. Lin, E. Perillo, X. Peng, W. Yu, A. Dunn and Y. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16725–16733 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liang, H. Luo, R. Beresford and J. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5974–5976 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohkouchi, Y. Sugimoto, N. Ozaki, H. Ishikawa and K. Asakawa, Phys. E, 2008, 40, 1794–1796 CrossRef CAS .
E. Selcuk, A. Silov and R. Notzel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 263108 CrossRef .
T. Hakkarainen, J. Tommila, A. Schramm, A. Tukiainen, R. Ahorinta, M. Dumitrescu and M. Guina, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 173107 CrossRef .
A. Schramm, J. Tommila, C. Strelow, T. Hakkarainen, A. Tukiainen, M. Dumitrescu, A. Mews, T. Kipp and M. Guina, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23 Search PubMed .
J. Tempeler, S. Danylyuk, S. Brose, P. Loosen and L. Juschkin, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 275601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, X. Yuan, X. Zhang, Q. Gao, B. Zhao, L. Li, M. Lockrey, H. Tan, C. Jagadish and P. Caroff, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7261–7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Katsumi, Y. Ota, A. Osada, T. Yamaguchi, T. Tajiri, M. Kakuda, S. Iwamoto, H. Akiyama and Y. Arakawa, Apl Photonics, 2019, 4, 036105 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, I. Han, C. Jin and M. Hopkinson, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 4739–4746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chou, P. Krauss and P. Renstrom, Science, 1996, 272, 85–87 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, J. Lee, H. Yun, J. Kim, J. Park, C. Choi, D. Kim, H. Seo, H. Lee, J. Yu, W. Lee and D. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702902 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, M. Kanehara, C. Liu, K. Sakamoto, T. Yasuda, J. Takeya and T. Minari, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6568–6573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamada, K. Fukuhara, K. Matsuoka, H. Minemawari, J. Tsutsumi, N. Fukuda, K. Aoshima, S. Arai, Y. Makita, H. Kubo, T. Enomoto, T. Togashi, M. Kurihara and T. Hasegawa, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, L. Li, X. Du, A. Welle and P. Levkin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3202–3208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sung, H. Yoon, J. Lim and K. Char, Small, 2012, 8, 826–831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahmoud, W. Walravens, J. Kuhs, C. Detavernier, Z. Hens and G. Roelkens, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 299–306 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rizzo, M. Mazzeo, M. Palumbo, G. Lerario, S. D’Amone, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1886–1891 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pattani, C. Li, T. Desai and T. Vu, Biomed. Microdevices, 2008, 10, 367–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, H. Sojoudi, H. Zhao, D. Mariappan, G. McKinley, K. Gleason and A. Hart, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 11 Search PubMed .
M. Bayer, Ann. Phys., 2019, 531, 1900039 CrossRef .
X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Niu, H. Cao, X. Liang, L. Chen, J. Wang and X. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bae, Y. Park, J. Lim, D. Lee, L. Padilha, H. McDaniel, I. Robel, C. Lee, J. Pietryga and V. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2661 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Zheng, W. Cao, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, J. Manders, J. Xue, P. Holloway and L. Qian, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim, K. Kim, S. Kim, S. Choi, H. Jang, H. Seo, H. Lee, D. Chung and E. Jang, Nature, 2020, 586, 385–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, E. Kim, J. Han, Y. Choi, D. Hahm, C. Kang, W. Bae, J. Lim and S. Cho, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 9 CAS .
A. Horechyy, B. Nandan, N. Zafeiropoulos, P. Formanek, U. Oertel, N. Bigall, A. Eychmuller and M. Stamm, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 483–490 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mai and A. Eisenberg, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1657–1666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nam, J. Jeong, M. Choi, K. Baek, J. Kim, Y. Hur, Y. Kim and Y. Jung, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 7938–7944 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Tae Won Nam
	Tae Won Nam received his PhD degree (2020) in Materials Science and Engineering from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, under the supervision of Prof. Yeon Sik Jung. He then joined the group of Prof. Jeffrey C. Grossman at Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a post-doctoral fellow (2020–). Nam's research focuses on nanopatterning and nanotransfer-printing of organic and inorganic materials including quantum dots, polymers, and silicon nanowires for advanced opto-electric devices and biosensors.

Min-Jae Choi
	Min-Jae Choi obtained his PhD (2017) from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology under the supervision of Prof. Yeon Sik Jung. He then joined the group of Prof. Edward H. Sargent at the University of Toronto, Canada for three years as a post-doctoral fellow. He began his independent career in 2020 as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical & Biochemical Engineering at the Dongguk University, South Korea. Choi's research interests are focused on building advanced devices using colloidal quantum dots by tuning their surface chemistry and composition.

Yeon Sik Jung
	Prof. Yeon Sik Jung is a full professor at the Dept. of Materials Science and Engineering of Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). His research areas include sub-10 nm nanofabrication based on the directed self-assembly of block copolymers and nanotransfer-printing, printable sensor devices, nanopatterned catalysts, and quantum-dot optoelectronic devices. He joined KAIST as an assistant professor in 2010, and has published more than 140 journal papers and earned more than 50 patents including 7 US patents mostly in the field of nanofabrication and devices. He received his PhD degree (2009) in materials science and engineering from Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Strategies	PR modification (EBL or UV)	Photo responsive functional ligands	Lithography of QD-polymer composites	QD confinement by capillary-driven lateral force	UV-assisted photo programming on CTLs	Electron-sensitive resist/functional ligands	Kinetic/thermodynamic driven adhesion switching	Electro hydrodynamic inkjet	AFM tip	MBE on AAO membranes
nonphysical, local property-patterning	Contour patterning by imprint	Viscosity engineering to mitigate coffee-ring-effect	Polymer pen	AFM-assisted templates


Applications	QLEDs	QLEDs, photodetectors	Polarization detectors	QLEDs	QLEDs	Biosensors	QLEDs, Photoconductors, Biosensors	QLEDs, photodetectors	N/A	CMOS silicon photonic chips
plasmonic circuits


Resolution (μm)	0.03–5	1.5–20	0.15–1.2	0.85–1	0.8–5	0.03–4	0.01–50	0.12–5	0.5–5	0.02–0.5


Film profile uniformity	High uniformity attributed to Langmuir–Blodgett or layer by layer deposition	High uniformity attributed to spin-coating	High uniformity attributed to pressure-driven flattening	Limitation due to pinning effect	High uniformity attributed to evaporation kinetics engineering	High uniformity attributed to direct binding of QDs to electron-activated posts	High uniformity attributed to initially prepared QD donor films using spin-coating	Limitation due to coffee-ring-effects	Solution morphology is severely distorted during the release of the tips	Molecular self-assemble enables atomic scale uniformity
Freestanding QD patterns are limited	Intensive advancements on kinetics engineering in progress	Limited to single-particle


Multi-component patterning capability	O (Demonstrated)	O	X (Limited or not demonstrated)	X	O	X	O	O	X	X
Pressure-driven patterning steps hinder non-destructive sequential patterning	Consecutive use of solvents damages previous QDs	Anti-stain strategy by surface encapsulation to protect pre-pattern from consecutive wetting	Epitaxial growth templating steps hinder consecutive patterning


Material and substrate selection	Limited to hydrophilic QDs to avoid damage from hydrophobic solvents	QDs modified with functional ligands	QD-polymer composites	Substrate chemistry and topology design for effective confinement	Programmable surface required to induce chemisorption	Electron-sensitive resists or functional ligands	Transfer media with hydrophobic surface	QD ink solution engineering for wetting, viscosity, and solvent evaporation control	QD ink solution engineering for wetting, viscosity, and solvent evaporation control	Surface modification of growth sites via patterning-assisted lattice engineering
Transfer media which dissolve at QD-orthogonal solvents
Ref.	
20–24
	
16 and 25–28
	
29–32
	
33–37
	
38 and 39
	
40–43
	
3, 24 and 44–49
	
27 and 50–61
	
62–64
	
65–73


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the photolithography based QD patterning. SEM images of the (b) line and (d) ring QD patterns with different widths, and enlarged views for the line (c) and ring (d) patterns. The insets at the right lower corners in (b and d) show the respective micro-PL. Reprinted with permission.22 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of the photopatterning process using a PDMS stamp. (g) PL images of a circular edge-profile photopattern at different stages of pattern development. Reprinted with permission.20 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of a nanocrystal with ion pair surface ligands. (b) SEM image of an edge of a photopatterned layer. (c) Red (R), green (G), and blue (B) QDs patterned on an SiO2 substrate by using photoactive ligands. Scale bars, 5 mm. Reprinted with permission.25 Copyright 2017, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Fluorescence optical microscopy images of QD patterns fabricated using direct optical patterning. Reprinted with permission.26 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) Schematic of the ligand crosslinking process between neighboring QDs based on the C–H insertion reaction of the nitrene moiety of LiXer. (f) Schematic of the photo-patterning processes of QDs using LiXer. (g) Laterally positioned patterns of RGB QDs, achievable from consecutive applications of the photo-patterning process.28	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–c) Confocal microscopy images and cross-sectional fluorescence intensity profiles of QD nanostructures of the spin-coated film, QD/PS pattern, and hybridized QD/PS pattern. (d) Schematic representation of the Au patterning using wide-angle sputtering. Reprinted with permission.29 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) Imprinted quasi-3D patterns on QDs. The bottom panel shows the cross-sectional height profile along the white dashed line. (f) Cross-sectional SEM image of imprinted QDs highlighting the difference between the original and imprinted QDs. Scale bar, 100 nm. (g) Schematic of the two-channel polarization detector with embedded bilayer wire grid polarizer. Simulation of e-field distribution passing through the wire-grid polarizer for s-/p-polarized light is shown on the right. Reprinted with permission.32 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the evaporation templating procedure employed for forming CdSe nanorings using microsphere templates. (b) Schematic diagram showing the forces involved in dragging the QDs to the PS spheres. (c) AFM topographical image and cross section of CdSe nanorings. Reprinted with permission.34 Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of a single liquid bridge with asymmetric contact angles between the template θ1 and substrate θ2. (e) PL image of patterned QD microarrays with a 375 nm laser as the excitation source. Reprinted with permission.35 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic showing EBL patterning on a PMMA surface and subsequent QD binding. Reprinted with permission.43 Copyright 2010 IOP Publishing Ltd. (b) Schematic of a monolayer formation and quantum dot assembly process flow. Reprinted with permission.40 Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic of the steps involved in the EBL based micropatterning of QD-PEG. (d) Adherence of neutrophils on PLL-PEG:QD-PEG micropatterns. (e) Live cell time-lapse images of the specific attachment of neutrophils (green) on the micropatterns. Reprinted with permission.42 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of solvent-free transfer printing. Reprinted with permission.46 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic of intaglio transfer printing.47 (c) Schematic of immersion transfer printing. (d) SEM images of the patterned QDs using immersion transfer printing. (e) Schematic of the thermodynamic-driven transfer mechanism.3 (f) Schematics and respective confocal fluorescence images of PMMA-probe-QD patterns of the multiplex miRNA detection platform. Reprinted with permission.18 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs patterned via EHD printing.54 (b) SEM image showing the deflection of printed CdSe/CdS QD lines when the printing nozzle is translated near the tip of a sharp template-stripped Au pyramid.54 (c) Axi-symmetric electrostatic simulations of the total electric field between the printing nozzle and a triangular tip.54 (d) Optical micrographs of the electroluminescence of green QLEDs.56 (e) Schematic of the printed pixel drying process.27 (f) OM image of salt-encapsulated QDs on a PET film. (g) OM image of the film under UV illumination. Reprinted with permission.34 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of the three-step process for depositing ink on a nanostructured surface using dip pen lithography. Reprinted with permission.63 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of single InAs QDs grown on a NIL structured hole pattern. Reprint with permission.69 Copyright 2012, IOP Publishing Ltd. (b) AFM image of QDs grown on UV-NIL processed groove patterns. Reprint with permission.68 Copyright 2010, AIP Publishing. (c) Tilted SEM image of InP nanostructure arrays with nanoslots, grown using selective area epitaxy. Reprint with permission.71 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
