Insight into the correlation of Pt–support interactions with electrocatalytic activity and durability in fuel cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA01530J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA01530J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9420-9446Insight into the correlation of Pt–support interactions with electrocatalytic activity and durability in fuel cells

        
          
            Subramaniam 
            Jayabal
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Govindarajan 
            Saranya
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dongsheng 
            Geng
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lu-Yin 
            Lin
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Xiangbo 
            Meng
          
          
        
      *d
aBeijing Advanced Innovation Center for Materials Genome Engineering, Beijing Key Laboratory for Magneto-Photoelectrical Composite and Interface Science, School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: dgeng@ustb.edu.cn
bBeijing Computational Science Research Center, Beijing 100193, China
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei 10608, Taiwan. E-mail: lylin@ntut.edu.tw
dDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA. E-mail: xbmeng@uark.edu
Received 
      8th February 2020
    , Accepted 16th April 2020First published on 16th April 2020AbstractResearchers have identified that the interactions between metals and their supports have significant impacts on the electrocatalytic activity and durability. However, their interactions have not been well studied. In the case of platinum (Pt) nanoparticles supported on carbon in fuel cells, they suffer from issues in activity and durability due to carbon corrosion and Pt dissolution, which can be improved by tuning the interactions between Pt and its supports. However, a rational design of Pt–support composites requires an in-depth understanding of the relations between Pt and its supports, particularly on their interfaces. Based on these considerations, this review aims at providing an overview of the interactions between Pt and its supports from experimental and theoretical results, in the hope of revealing how the metal–support interactions affect the activity and durability of the composite catalysts. In this work, we first discuss the fundamentals of Pt–support interactions and enhanced catalytic activity and durability through modifying Pt–support interactions. Then, we summarize the conventional and advanced characterizations of Pt–support interactions. Finally, we provide an outlook for future studies to improve electrocatalytic performance by manipulating the Pt–support interaction. This review will benefit peer researchers in designing new-generation electrocatalysts with better activity and long-term stability for fuel cells.Subramaniam JayabalSubramaniam Jayabal received his M.Sc. (2007), M.Phil. (2008), and PhD (2016) degrees in Chemistry from Madurai Kamaraj University. Currently, he is working as a postdoctoral researcher under the OCPC-Postdoctoral International Exchange Program with Professor Dongsheng Geng's group at the University of Science and Technology Beijing. His current research interests include the design of smart materials and their electrocatalytic applications in electrolyzers and fuel cells.Dongsheng GengDr Dongsheng Geng is currently a professor at the University of Science and Technology Beijing. He has two PhD degrees in Physical Chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007 and in Mechanical & Materials Engineering from the University of Western Ontario in 2013. Dr Geng worked at Shinshu University as a NEDO researcher, the University of Western Ontario as a postdoctoral fellow, and the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (A*STAR) as a research scientist. His research is mainly focused on investigating the structure–performance relationship of various electrocatalysts and understanding the electrocatalytic mechanisms by combining advanced microscopic and spectroscopic techniques.Lu-Yin LinDr Lu-Yin Lin is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology at the National Taipei University of Technology (Taipei Tech). Her research focuses on developing novel nanomaterials for electrochemical applications such as supercapacitors, rechargeable batteries, dye-sensitized solar cells and catalysis. Dr Lin was a postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) (2013–2014) under the supervision of Professor Peidong Yang with the main field of photocatalysis. She earned her PhD degree in the Department of Chemical Engineering from National Taiwan University (2009–2012) under the supervision of Professor Kuo-Chuan Ho with the main research field of dye-sensitized solar cells.Xiangbo MengDr Xiangbo (Henry) Meng is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Arkansas (Fayetteville, AR). His research focuses on developing novel nanoscale materials for energy applications such as rechargeable batteries, fuel cells, and catalysis. Dr Meng was a postdoctoral research fellow in the Energy Systems Division at Argonne National Laboratory (2012–2016) and in the Chemistry Division at Brookhaven National Laboratory (2011–2012). He earned two PhD degrees in Mechanical & Materials Engineering and Chemical & Biochemical Engineering from the University of Western Ontario (2005–2011). He was an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow and an awardee of several prestigious honors.
1. Introduction
Fuel cells represent a unique opportunity for highly reliable energy distribution, which is ascribed to their high conversion efficiency, power density, fuel flexibility, and quiet operation. Among various fuel cells, proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) have been highly regarded as one of the most promising power sources for automotive and portable electrical appliances due to their high-power densities, low weight, and small volume.1–3 However, the commercialization of PEMFCs faces challenges related to their lifetime, reliability and cost.4 The lifetime of fuel cells is critical because of the ceiling of 5000 operating hours for cars, 20000 operating hours for buses, and 40000 operating hours for stationary applications.5 Thus, investigating the degradation of fuel cell electrocatalysts is urgent.6 As carbon-supported platinum (Pt) nanoparticles (Pt/C) have been widely used as electrocatalysts for both the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) at the anode side and the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode side in fuel cells,1,7–9 the degradation of Pt/C catalysts is most widely studied because the degradation significantly reduces the operating life of PEMFCs.4
The activity and durability of Pt/C to a large extent depend on the type of carbon support materials and their structure-related properties.4,10 To date, the limited durability of Pt/C catalysts, especially under harsh operating conditions, remains a key issue that needs to be resolved.4 Several degradation mechanisms are believed to be responsible for the limited durability.11 They can be classified into a primary degradation process due to the corrosion of the carbon support at potentials higher than 0.9 V (vs. RHE) and a secondary loss of activity due to Pt particle detachment and sintering.11–13 The detachment of Pt particles is caused by the instability of the carbon support and a weak Pt–support interaction.14,15 The strength of the metal–support interaction depends on the type of functional groups that are present at the surface that act as anchoring sites for the Pt nanoparticles.14,16–18 In addition, a direct metal–support interaction is produced via the formation of coordination bonds between the d-orbitals of Pt nanoparticles and the π bond of the carbon support.19 Both the catalytic kinetics and the corrosion stability of the catalyst need to be improved significantly to make fuel cells cost-competitive devices for automotive and stationary applications.
In the case of Pt/C catalysts, the stability can be improved by changing the carbon structure and tuning the metal–support interactions.1,20,21 The nature of the metal–support interactions in the Pt/C catalyst relies on the interface effects between Pt and the carbon support, which could greatly affect the surface properties of electrocatalysts.14,21 Generally, the Pt–support interactions are explained on the basis of electronic and geometric effects.18,22,23 However, electronic and geometric effects cannot often be divided as independent factors. For example, increasing the size of metal nanoparticles might not only result in an electron bandwidth increase and a decrease in the binding energy of core electrons, but also change the exposed facets and the topology of the surface-active sites.22 Here, the support produces a bifunctional effect, which promotes the specific electronic and geometric effects of the supported metal nanoparticles. Therefore, it is considered that the electronic and geometric effects caused by the metal–support interaction of carbon-supported metal nanoparticles can modify the adsorption energies of the reactants and reaction intermediates on the catalytically active sites located at the catalyst surface, which affect the activity and durability of the catalyst. Thus, the research into Pt/C-based electrocatalysts reveals that metal–support interface effects have experienced rapid development in recent years.14,16,20,21,24–33
Although the presence of metal–support interactions in Pt/C catalysts has been analyzed by various characterization techniques and theoretical simulations, an in-depth understanding regarding the metal–support interactions and the relevant structure–activity relationship is presently not available. Several papers on designing strong metal–support interactions for improved activity and durability have emerged in recent years.14,20,21,24,27,34,35 In addition, significant progress has been made in the metal-supported catalysts for fuel cell applications and there has been increasing interest in the various combinations of metal–support interfaces.1,20,34,35 Specifically, a strong metal–support interaction appears to improve the catalytic activity and durability of the Pt/C catalysts. However, a systematic comparison of catalytic performance and coherent interpretation of the role of the metal–support interaction in the electrocatalysis have not been discussed clearly yet. In this context, we are motivated to summarize the recent advances of metal–support interactions and the noteworthy synergistic role of metal–support interfaces in electrocatalysis in this review (Fig. 1). We expect that this work will help realize a hydrogen economy in the near future.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of metal–support interaction in the electrocatalysts. 
Our attempt in this work is to give a clear understanding on the role of metal–support interactions in the activity and durability of fuel cell electrocatalysis. In this review, we discuss several key issues related to metal–support interactions towards the activity and durability in this introductory section. Then, we discuss the well-defined Pt–support interactions regarding the electronic and geometric effects in the second section. Subsequently, we summarize a collection of examples reporting the role of the carbon support in enhancing Pt–support interactions towards activity and durability in the third part. Then, the recent advances in conventional and advanced characterization techniques for probing Pt–support interactions are summarized in the fourth section. Finally, we suggest potential pathways for high catalytic activity and durability and provide some perspectives on the commercialization of Pt/C-based catalysts for fuel cell applications in the future.
2. Metal–support interface
2.1. The role of supports in Pt/C
Pt is so far the most viable choice of electrocatalyst for application in fuel cells.4,36,37 However, the high cost and limited reserve of Pt has posed significant concerns and hindered the implementation of fuel cell technologies.1,9,38–40 In addition, increasing Pt loading usually leads to the agglomeration of Pt nanoparticles and thus a decrease in the surface area, which limits the catalytic performance.41,42 Previous studies have suggested that the catalyst support, in addition to having an impact on the dispersion of Pt nanoparticles, plays an important role related to the catalytic activity and durability in electrocatalysis.1,14,43 A strong interaction between Pt and its support not only enhances catalytic activity but also decreases catalyst degradation.44 To achieve durable and highly efficient catalysts, a desirable catalyst support needs to fulfill some general requirements, including (i) high specific surface area to allow for the effective dispersion of Pt nanoparticles, (ii) low combustive reactivity under both dry and humid air conditions at a temperature of 150 °C or lower, (iii) high electrochemical stability under fuel cell operating conditions, (iv) high electronic conductivity, and (v) easy recovery from the used Pt catalyst.4,44,45 Typically, there are two types of catalyst supports: primary supports such as carbon-based materials and secondary supports such as oxide-based materials. The secondary supports are generally used to modify and promote the compatibility of the primary support with the catalyst besides being used as independent supports.
Among carbon supports, carbon black is one of the most popular primary supports, owing to its high surface area, high conductivity, and low cost. However, carbon black is limited by its vulnerability against corrosion, which can result in fast catalyst degradation and reduced catalytic activity.46,47 Alternatively, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have also been used as a catalyst support due to their ultrahigh crystallinity and exceptional electrical conductivity.26,44,48–54 It was found that compared to catalysts using carbon black as the support, catalysts supported by CNTs are more resistant to electrochemical oxidation and also exhibit higher electrocatalytic performance and better durability.55 This is related to the higher durability of CNTs and the specific interaction between Pt and CNTs.56,57 CNTs are rolled graphene sheets with a co-axis and less dangling bonds and defects. As a consequence, it is difficult for oxidative atoms/groups to attack the CNT closed structures.50,58 It is also suggested that the delocalized π bond of CNTs is much stronger due to their higher degree of graphitization than that of carbon black.57 More recently, graphene has been investigated as a promising crystalline catalyst support, enabling for the good dispersion of catalyst nanoparticles with increased accessibility to edge sites and improving electron transport at the interfaces for enhanced catalytic performance.44,59–64 Shao et al.65 summarized several important kinds of novel support materials for PEMFCs including various carbon materials and conductive oxides. In addition, they proposed strategies to improve catalyst support materials at that time, which established fundamental guidelines for the future development of catalyst supports for PEMFCs. Moreover, carbon-supported Pt catalysts also suffer from the corrosion of the carbon support, which causes durability issues and therefore limits the commercialization of Pt/C catalysts in the large-scale production of fuel cells.11,65 To summarize, the principal roles of the primary support include increasing the metal catalyst dispersion and enhancing the electron transfer between the support and catalyst nanoparticles. In addition, presently it is understood that the interactions between the metal (e.g. Pt) and the support can manipulate the electronic structure of the catalyst and thereby influence the catalytic activity and durability.14,66
2.2. Metal–support interaction
The strong metal–support interaction was first demonstrated by Tauster in 1978 to correlate the catalytic activity and chemisorption properties of group VIIIB noble metals on titanium dioxide (TiO2) supports.67 Subsequently, the concept of metal–support interaction was extended to reduced transition metal oxides to correlate the effects of the support materials on the catalytic activity, chemisorption properties, and morphology of the metallic nanoparticles.68,69 Then, investigations on metal–support interaction were also extended to alumina-doped metal oxides as supports for metal catalysts,70 carbon supports for nickel catalysts,71 reducible oxides as supports for metal catalysts,72 and carbon supports for Pt catalysts73 in order to describe the electronic interaction between the supports and metal catalysts that facilitate their catalytic activities. The effects of metal–support interaction on the catalytic activity and durability may lie in the following two aspects: (i) electronic effects and (ii) geometric effects.18,22,23,74 The electronic effect arises from the energy difference between a metal and its support, resulting in an electron transfer from the metal to its support or from the support to the supported metal in order to attain equilibrium at their interface.20,22,23 The geometric effect arises from the heterogeneity of lattice mismatch between the metal particles and the support that makes a change in the morphology of the metal particles to boost the interaction with the support material.75–78 Therefore, the resulting exposed crystallographic facets and coordination number of metal atoms at the surface of the metal particles influence their catalytic activities.23,75,79,80 Nevertheless, the electronic and geometric effects are closely interrelated and it is difficult to clearly differentiate between them.22

2.2.1. Electronic effects. 
The generation of metal–support interaction certainly results in a change of the electronic structure of the catalyst.20 Usually, a catalyst undergoes a change in its band structure or position.18,22 The structural change in metal catalysts directly alters the catalytic properties of supported metal catalysts via the metal–support interfaces.18,20 The change in the electronic structure of supported metal catalysts can also alter the binding energy of adsorbates or the charge distribution in the catalyst.81 As shown in previous studies, the catalytic activity of electrocatalysts mainly depends on the adsorption and desorption energies of the reactant species.82–84 Thus, altering the binding energy of the reactant and intermediate species has a significant influence on the catalytic activity of catalysts.81 Noticeably, manipulating the metal–support interaction in the catalyst has been demonstrated to be an efficient approach to change the electronic structure of the catalysts and thereby tune the binding energy of the reaction intermediates.82,85
Furthermore, the interaction between a metal and support effectively changes the surface electron density by their electron donation or acceptance. Due to the different affinities of various components toward electrons, the interface between two different components can be divided into the electron donor and electron acceptor. The electron density at the surface of the catalysts plays an important role in their electrocatalytic activity.82,86–88 Particularly, an electron-rich catalyst surface with a good electron-donating ability to the reactant species is most appropriate for the ORR. Thus, inducing a change in the surface electron density of the electrocatalyst using metal–support interactions can influence the catalytic performance. In the electronic theory of catalysis, the key point lies in the strength of the interaction between the d-band of the metal and the molecular orbitals of the support material.23,85 For simplicity, the strong metal–support interaction may arise from the overlap between the π-orbitals of the carbon support and the d-electrons of the transition metals, thereby allowing for electron transfer between the metal and carbon support, which is reflected in the performance of the Pt nanoparticles supported on carbon in the electrocatalysis (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Interaction of Pt nanoparticles with carbon support that leads to electron transfer between them. 
The introduction of metal nanoparticles onto the surface of a carbon support generates an interface and it is strictly related to the electronic structures of the metal nanoparticles and carbon supports.22,77,89 The electronic structures of these metal nanoparticles and carbon support is usually described in terms of electronic bands.22,23 According to the metal–semiconductor boundary theory, a thermodynamic equilibrium will be attained when two components come into contact.70 Namely, the Fermi energy (EF) levels of the electrons of the two components are the same at the interface.20,70,77 The equalization of EF levels involves electron transfer across the interface from one material to the other.89,90 In particular, where the EF level of the electrons in the metal is higher than in the support, electrons will transfer from the metal to the support until the EF level at the interface is equilibrated, and vice versa as shown in Fig. 3. The extent of electron transfer is determined by the electronic structure of the support and the size of metal nanoparticles.18 From these characteristics, we can understand the basis of the electronic effects at the metal–support interface. Recently, Jackson et al.20 reported that Pt nanoparticles supported on graphite-rich boron carbide show improved catalytic activity and stability towards the ORR, which is mainly due to the electronic effects; i.e., electron transfer from graphite-rich boron carbide to the Pt nanoparticles at the interface.
 Fig. 3  Energy level diagrams at the metal–support interface with electron transfer from metal to support (a) and support to metal (b). 


2.2.2. Geometric effects. 
The geometric changes (morphology or size) in the metal nanoparticles reveal the nature of the metal–support interaction as shown in Fig. 4.18,22,77,91 The formation of various morphologies can result in a decrease in unsaturated metal atoms, which could be the reason for the higher stability towards electrocatalytic reactions.18,92,93 The activation energy of the catalytic reaction should be lower for metal nanoparticles that possess planes with a lower coordination number of metal atoms at the surface. The metal–support interaction usually occurs with small-sized metal nanoparticles where there is an alteration in the electronic properties of atoms close to the metal–support interfaces; whereas most of the surface is further away from the metal–support interface in large-sized metal nanoparticles, therefore there is only a minor change in the electronic properties of the catalyst.18 Thus, with the decrease of metal nanoparticle size, the strong metal–support interaction becomes more prominent.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of geometric effects in metal–support interaction. 
For example, Lykhach et al.94 reported the size-dependent effects of metal species, ranging from sub-nanometer clusters to nanoparticles, on the electronic metal–support interaction (EMSI) between Pt and CeO2 (Fig. 5). The electrons transferred per Pt atom shows a maximum of up to 0.11 electrons at particle sizes between 30 to 70 Pt atoms. Moreover, for smaller particles, electron transfer is partially suppressed by nucleation at the defects, whereas for larger particles the charge transfer intrinsic limit is set by the support.
 Fig. 5  (a) The number of electrons transferred per Pt particle to the CeO2 support increases with increasing particle size (green squares). The partial charge per Pt atom reaches a maximum for particles with 30 to 70 atoms (yellow circles). (b) At higher Pt coverage, the total amount of transferred charge approaches a limit as ‘charge transfer limit’ (red squares). The atomic models show schematically the average particle sizes in different regions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 

3. Intimate connection between the activity of Pt/C and metal–support interaction
The strong interfacial interaction between Pt and its support is able to alter the energy level of Pt d-band states and in turn influence the adsorption and desorption of the intermediates on the surface of the Pt nanoparticle and thereby improve the electrocatalytic activity.74,95 In most of the electrocatalytic ORR studies, it has been reported that the Pt–C interaction is attributed to an electron transfer from the Pt nanoparticle to the carbon support. Thus, the binding energy of the reactant molecule to Pt nanoparticle decreases when the electron density on the Pt decreases due to the electron transfer from the Pt to the support (downshift of the Pt d-band energy level) and consequently facilitates better electrocatalytic activity.74 Hence, the electrocatalytic activity strongly depends on interfacial electron transfer from the Pt nanoparticles to the support that influences the electronic interactions between the catalyst surface and reaction intermediates and varies with the structures and morphologies of the Pt and the carbon support.74,96
4. Intimate connection between the degradation of Pt/C and metal–support interaction
Despite the progress of research into electrocatalytic applications for Pt/C-based materials, the present understanding of their stability is insufficient since the materials can involve chemical or structural changes during the catalytic process, which affects the efficiency of fuel cells.4,11 Several degradation mechanisms are responsible for the limited activity and durability of the Pt/C catalysts.4,56,97 The degradation of carbon-supported Pt nanoparticle catalysts includes two primary processes: carbon corrosion and Pt dissolution (Fig. 6).4,11,56,98 The carbon corrosion usually occurs at potentials near the open-circuit voltage of a fuel cell and may be more severe with increasing potential.99 Particularly, Pt nanoparticles catalyze the oxidation of carbon and the oxidation of carbon accelerates Pt dissolution. Therefore, Pt metals or Pt alloys and carbon supports influence each other.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the degradation mechanisms for Pt nanoparticles on carbon support in fuel cells. Reproduced from ref. 11, https://doi.org/10.3762/bjnano.5.5, under the terms of the CC BY 2.0 license, http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/. 
The primary degradation process of carbon corrosion can cause a secondary process such as Pt particle detachment and agglomeration.4,98,100,101 Thus, carbon corrosion should lead to the weakening of interaction between Pt particles and the carbon support.46,98 During the process of carbon oxidation, either CO2 or CO is formed, which decreases the amount of available carbon for the loading of Pt particles, and in turn induces the detachment of Pt particles from the carbon support and decreases active sites for catalytic activity.46 The detachment of Pt particles is caused by the instability of the carbon support and weak metal–support interaction.98 Conversely, the primary degradation process of Pt dissolution causes another secondary process, namely Ostwald ripening.4,11,51 Pt dissolution occurs especially for smaller Pt particles due to the higher surface energy, where they are dissolved at lower potentials than bulk Pt.4 These dissolved Pt particles contribute to significant particle growth to form larger Pt particles known as Ostwald ripening. When dissolved Pt atoms travel through the electrolyte, it is 3D Ostwald ripening, and when Pt atoms diffuse along with the carbon, it is 2D Ostwald ripening.11 Moreover, carbon corrosion and Pt dissolution will decrease the electrical conductivity at the metal–support interface and thereby decrease the electric contact with the current collector. Without a doubt, the durability of electrocatalysts is strongly dependent on the properties of both the Pt nanoparticles and the carbon support materials and the specific interaction between them.
5. Strategies of tailoring Pt–support interactions for improving electrocatalytic performance
5.1. Doping or functionalization engineering
Doping with heteroatoms, such as nitrogen (N), boron (B), phosphorus (P), or sulfur (S), on the surface of the carbon support has proven to be an effective way to alter the chemical and electrical properties of carbon supports.18,23,24,102–104 Moreover, carbon-based materials doped with heteroatoms have been reported to be good supports for Pt nanoparticles.1,44 The doping of carbon supports with heteroatoms modifies the physical and chemical properties of carbon and also creates new active sites, which tunes the catalytic activity and durability of the catalyst.23,105,106 Thus, it is essential to study the metal–support interaction between heteroatom-doped carbon supports and Pt nanoparticles to understand its role in the catalytic activity and durability.
The incorporation of heteroatoms in the carbon supports causes defects that not only alter the surface geometric structure via localized electron re-distribution and intermediate adsorption energies, but also act as new active sites and strong interactive sites for Pt nanoparticles.27,81,102,107–109 In addition, the introduction of heteroatoms such as N, B, P, and S in the carbon supports can disturb the d-spacing and the porous surface of the resulting structures, but maintain their high surface area.102 Among several heteroatom doping examples, the doping of N has become more interesting due to the fact that N doping induces a favorable alteration of both the electronic and structural properties, such as surface polarity, electronic conductivity and electron-transfer ability, of the carbon supports to achieve a novel catalyst with improved activity and durability.24,110 It has been reported that N-doped carbon can greatly boost the affinity of Pt precursors onto carbon supports through electrostatic interactions, which dominates the critical size of the nanoparticles. As a result, the particle dimensions are dependent on the electronic interaction between the Pt and support.27,108,109,111 Moreover, in the case of B-doped carbon nanotube supports, the high Pt adsorption is attributed to the strong hybridization between the d-orbital of Pt and the p-orbital of B, which results in the high dispersion of Pt nanoparticles on the B-doped carbon nanotubes.103,112,113
Melke et al.27 reported that N-doped carbon nanofibers with Pt nanoparticles show an enhanced electrocatalytic activity and durability towards the ORR. Their results show that Pt interacts with the N-groups, shifting the electrons from Pt nanoparticles into the π-conjugated system, which increases its electron density. In addition, the N-groups act as nucleation centers for Pt nanoparticles and the strong interaction of Pt atoms with N-groups explain the high dispersion of Pt nanoparticles on the carbon nanofibers. He et al.33 reported that co-doping of iron/cobalt/nitrogen on a carbon substrate (FeCo/C/N) can significantly enhance the electrocatalytic ORR activity of Pt by changing its electronic structure in comparison with nitrogen/carbon and carbon supports. Moreover, the co-doped FeCo/C/N substrate causes a negative shift of the Pt 4f binding energy and increases the electron density of the Pt outer orbital, which results in a weaker absorption energy of ORR intermediates on the Pt surface. Recently, Park et al.114 also reported similar results in which the improved ORR activity of Pt particles supported by an iron/nitrogen-doped porous carbon (FeNC) nanostructure might be synergistically attributed to the homogeneous dispersion of Pt nanoparticles on the FeNC, the enhanced electronic effect between the Pt and FeN doped carbon support, and the dual catalytic effect of both Pt and the FeNC. In addition, the presence of oxygenated functional groups on the carbon support might modify the surface electron density of the carbon support, and in turn, affect the interaction between the Pt particles and the support.115–118 The surface oxygen functionalities, such as carboxylic, anhydride, phenolic, and carbonyl groups, can act as anchoring sites for the metal catalysts and aid in their adsorption on the surface of carbon by various mechanisms, including adsorption, ion-exchange or coordination reactions.119
Hence, the presence of the heteroatoms or functional groups affects the geometric and electronic properties of the carbon supports. Specifically, the geometric changes lead to a slight increase in the lattice parameters and bond distances.17,23 More obviously, the changes in the electronic structure facilitate the effective interaction between Pt nanoparticles and carbon supports due to the presence of more electronegative functional groups and doping atom such as N.16,17,31,32,120
5.2. Carbon support combined with or replaced by metal oxide supports
Metal oxides are attractive materials for electrocatalyst supports in fuel cell cathodes due to their chemical and electrochemical stability against corrosion.21,121–127 The main drawback of metal oxides as supports in a fuel cell electrode is the limited electronic conductivity due to their semiconductor behavior, which can usually be avoided by the formation of composite or mixed materials with carbon or doping with aliovalent ions.21,128–132 SnO2-based supports have attracted much attention recently due to their high surface area and the interaction between these oxides with Pt might promote electrocatalytic activity and durability through the strong metal–support interaction.131,132Fig. 7 shows a schematic illustration of strong metal–support interaction. The strong metal–support interaction of Pt on TiO2 induced high stability for fuel cell applications.68,133 However, the low electronic conductivity of TiO2 limits their further use in fuel cells.43 The doping of TiO2 with metal such as tantalum (Ta) can increase its electronic conductivity and further improve the electrocatalytic activity and stability.28 Also, combined with conductive carbon (e.g. graphene), the homogeneous dispersion of Pt particles on the surface of the graphene-supported TiO2 particles exhibited high electrocatalytic activity and durability towards the ORR.134 Furthermore, the strong interaction between the Pt and the metal oxide support typically involves surfaces that can be reduced to form cations (e.g. Ti3+ or Nb4+) by the electron transfer from the corresponding metal oxide to the Pt nanoparticle, which leads to intense changes in the adsorption properties and the morphology of the Pt nanoparticles.135,136 Jia et al.137 developed a Pt/NbOx/C system with tunable structural and electronic properties through a modified arc plasma deposition sputtering method. They showed that Pt interacts with O in the nearly saturated NbOx, and in turn promotes interaction with Nb when the O atoms enter into the Pt clusters. In addition, Pt mainly interacts with the Nb in the unsaturated NbOx due to the oxygen deficiency, which results in exposing some Nb at the metal/metal-oxide interface. The Pt–O interactions improved the ORR activity by decreasing the Pt–Pt bond distance; whereas electrons were transferred from Pt to NbOx in both the Pt–Nb and Pt–O cases and the resultant electron deficiency stabilized the low-coordinated Pt sites, thereby maintaining the small Pt particle tolerance. Thus, the Pt atoms that interact either with the O or Nb in the NbOx strongly depend on the composition of the metal oxide at the interface. However, in some cases, the strong metal–support interaction through the dispersion of Pt particles by oxide supports might suppress the catalytic activity.138 Guo et al.139 developed a facile strategy to efficiently embed Pt nanocrystals into N-doped porous carbon/carbon nanotubes (Pt@CNx/CNT) as stable electrocatalysts for the ORR. The fixation of Pt nanocrystals inside a porous CNx layer limited the Pt nanocrystal detachment, dissolution, migration, and aggregation during accelerated durability tests. The interaction between the embedded Pt nanocrystals and the encapsulating CNx layer was found in Pt@CNx/CNT, which significantly altered the electronic structure of Pt nanocrystals and thus improved the catalytic activity and stability of Pt@CNx/CNT for the ORR (Fig. 8a–f).
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of strong metal–support interaction. 
 Fig. 8  (a) Polarization curves of Pt@CNx/CNT, Pt/C and (b) polarization curves of Pt@CNx/CNT at different rotation speeds in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at a sweep rate 10 mV s−1. (c and d) ORR polarization curves of Pt/C and Pt@CNx/CNT before (black) and after (red) durability test. (e and f) The comparison of (e) specific activities and (f) mass activities at 0.85 V vs. RHE before and after the durability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 Copyright 2015, The American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, Perazzolo et al.140 developed Pt nanoparticles deposited on N and S-doped or co-doped mesoporous carbons (Pt/N-MC, Pt/S-MC, and Pt/N,S-MC) towards active and durable electrocatalysts for the ORR in PEMFCs. The Pt/S-MC presented a comparable mass activity and specific activity with commercial Pt/C; their higher catalytic activity and durability compared to that of Pt/N-MC and Pt/N,S-MC (Fig. 9a–f) was related to a stronger interaction between Pt nanoparticles and a thiophenic group present in the Pt/S-MC. The Pt/S-MC was also tested for oxygen reduction as the cathode material in a fuel cell, but the catalytic performance was lower (Fig. 9g and h) since the improved catalytic activity (RDE conditions) due to Pt nanoparticles/support was lost with the ohmic drop and mass-transfer resistance.
 Fig. 9  Accelerated durability tests: first LSV (red line) and after 10000 cycles (black line), for (a) Pt/C, (b) Pt/S-MC, (c) Pt/N-MC, and (d) Pt/N,S-MC. Variation of the (e) mass activity and (f) specific activity. (g) Cell polarization curves and (h) power density curves for Pt/S-MC and Pt/C at 80% relative humidity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2018, The American Chemical Society. 
Alternatively, as the size of Pt nanoparticles further decreases to the nanoclusters and ultimately to an atomic level, the ORR electrocatalytic performance can be impacted by the maximum Pt utilization.77,141–145 For example, Liu et al.146 reported a cost-effective, efficient and durable carbon black-supported Pt single-atom electrocatalyst (Pt1-N/BP) with carbon monoxide/methanol tolerance for the cathodic ORR in a fuel cell. The acidic single-cell with such a catalyst as the cathode delivered high performance with a power density of up to 680 mW cm−2 at 80 °C with a low Pt loading of 0.09 mgPt cm−2 and high Pt utilization of 0.13 gPt kW−1 (Fig. 10). In addition, theoretical calculations suggested that the main active sites are single-pyridinic-N-atom-anchored on single-Pt-atom centers, which are highly active for the ORR, but are tolerant to CO/methanol.
 Fig. 10  (a) Polarization curves of BP, N/BP, Pt1/BP, Pt1-N/BP and commercial Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and rotation speed of 1600 rpm. (b) The tolerance of Pt1-N/BP to CO (saturated) and methanol (0.5 M). (c) Long-term operation stability of Pt1-N/BP. (d) Polarization curves of BP, N/BP, Pt1-BP, Pt1-N/BP and commercial Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. (e) The tolerance of Pt1-N/BP to CO (saturated) and methanol (0.5 M) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. (f) The voltages and power densities of H2/O2 fuel cells with Pt1-N/BP (marked with solid squares) and commercial Pt/C (marked with stars) as cathodes in acidic fuel cells with H2 and O2 in 100% RH. Inset: the acidic fuel cell durability test at 0.5 V and 80 °C for 200 h. Reproduced from ref. 146, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15938, under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license, http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. 

Table 1 correlates the recent studies on ORR activities for supported Pt catalyst systems. Many studies have been conducted to decrease the amount of Pt and vary the carbon supports and thus, improve the electrocatalytic performance of carbon-supported Pt towards the ORR. A variety of carbon supports have been used with Pt-based catalysts for improved electrocatalytic performance, including carbon black, carbon nanofibers, CNTs, mesoporous carbon and graphene supports. In addition, N-doped carbon-supported Pt nanoparticles displayed improved catalytic activity and durability towards the ORR, particularly when compared to un-doped carbon-supported Pt nanoparticles. Moreover, as shown in Table 1, the ORR catalytic activities and durabilities of supported Pt catalysts are strongly related to the interaction between the metal and support, the electronic structure of Pt, the dispersion of Pt on the support, and the size of Pt nanoparticles. In addition, the size effect can be correlated with the ORR activity and the durability. In general, the activity increases with decreasing particle size, whereas the durability increases when the nanoparticle size increases to a certain level. Thus, the enhancements in activity and durability of supported Pt catalysts are attributed to alterations in the electronic and geometric effects caused by the metal–support interaction.
Table 1 Metal–support interaction effects towards ORR on various Pt/support catalystsa




Metal/support catalysts
Effects/interactions
Electrolyte and electrochemical cell
Catalyst loading
Temperature
Activity test results
Durability test results
Ref.





a RDE: rotating disk electrode; M.A.: mass activity; DMFC: direct methanol fuel cell; MEA: membrane electrode assembly; SAC: single atom catalysis; R.M.: room temperature; N.M.: not mentioned.





Pt/carbon nanofibers
High dispersion of Pt nanoparticles and change in the electronic property of Pt
O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 0.15 mg cm−2 of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt; C: Vulcan XC72R)
R.M.
Increased activity (M.A. = 48 A gPt−1) compared with Pt/C (M.A. = 18 A gPt−1)
Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 40 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 32 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–1.2 V vs. RHE, 1000 cycles)

147



Pt/carbon black
High dispersion of Pt nanoparticles and small-size Pt nanoparticles
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 20 wt% of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt) from ETek
23 °C
Increased activity (ECSA = 123.1 m2 g−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 86 m2 g−1). (Potential scanning 0.05–1 V vs. NHE, rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
—

148



Pt/carbon nano-onion
Suppressed Ostwald ripening and electron transfer from carbon nano-onion to Pt
O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH and 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 955 μg cm−2 (10 wt% of Pt). Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt; C: Vulcan XC72R) from ETek
N.M.
Increased activity (ECSA = 58 m2 g−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 50 m2 g−1). (Potential scanning – 0.1–1.2 V vs. RHE, rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 58 m2 g−1 (before cycling) and 48 m2 g−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.1–1.2 V vs. RHE, 5000 cycles)

47



Pt nanoparticles/reduced graphene oxide
Small size Pt nanoparticle and uniform dispersion of Pt nanoparticle
O2 saturated 0.1 M H2SO4 (DMFC condition)
Catalyst = 1.8 and 1.2 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and cathode. Commercial Pt/C (75 wt% of Pt) from Johnson Matthey
60 °C
Fuel cell: increased activity (ECSA = 113 m2 gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 74 m2 gPt−1). (Anode fuel feeding, 1 M methanol at 1.0 cm3 min−1; cathode fuel feeding, air at 100 cm3 min−1, rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
—

59



Pt nanoparticles/N-doped carbon nanofibers
High dispersion of Pt nanoparticles and interaction of Pt with N groups
O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH (RDE condition)
Catalyst = N.M. Commercial Pt/C (Hispec 3000, 20 wt% Pt) from Alfa Aesar
N.M.
Increased activity Pt nanoparticles/N-doped carbon nanofibers compared with commercial Pt/C
—

27



Pt nanoparticles/N-doped porous carbons
Suppressed carbon corrosion
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 12.5 μgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R)
N.M.
Increased activity (M.A. = 0.23 A mgPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (M.A. = 0.20 mgPt−1). (Potential scanning 0.05–1.0 V vs. RHE, rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
Accelerated durability test: M.A. = 0.23 A mgPt−1 (before cycling) and 0.21 A mgPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–0.95 V vs. RHE, 30000 cycles)

149



Pt nanoparticles/N-doped mesoporous carbon
Strong interaction between pyridinic N and Pt nanoparticles
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 15 mgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (46 wt% of Pt) from TKK
N.M.
Increased activity (ESCA = 74.1 m2 gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 69 m2 gPt−1) (potential scanning 0.2–1.05 V vs. RHE, rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
—

16



Pt/S-doped ordered mesoporous carbon
Change in the electronic property of Pt and the interaction of Pt with S-doped carbon
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 60 wt% of Pt loading
N.M.
Increased activity (ECSA = 100 m2 gPt−1) compared with Pt/ordered mesoporous carbon (98 m2 gPt−1)
Accelerated durability test (N2 environment), ECSA = 100 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 50 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.05–1.2 V vs. RHE, 2000 cycles)

150



Pt nanoparticles/N,S-co-doped mesoporous carbons
Electron transfer from Pt nanoparticles to doped support
O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (RDE and PEMFC conditions)
Catalyst = 15 μgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (46 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R) from TKK
25 °C
Fuel cell: ECSA for Pt/S-mesoporous carbon and commercial Pt/C is 27.9 m2 g−1 and 58 m2 g−1. (MEA consists of 50 μm thick Nafion membrane, commercial Pt/C catalyst on the anodic side and the Pt/S-doped mesoporous carbon on the cathodic side, Pt loading is 0.1 mg cm−2 at the anode and 0.3 mg cm−2 at the cathode)
Accelerated durability test (O2 environment), MA = 78 A gPt−1 (before cycling) and 52 A gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–1.0 V vs. RHE, 10000 cycles)

140



Pt nanocrystals/N-doped porous carbon/CNTs
Electronic interaction between the Pt nanocrystals and the CNx layer
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 22 μgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt) from Johnson Matthey
R.M.
ECSA of Pt/N-doped porous carbon/CNT are 74.29 m2 g−1 and commercial Pt/C (86.65 m2 g−1). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
Accelerated durability test (N2 environment), MA = 0.1105 mA μg−1 (before cycling) and 0.1100 mA μg−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0–1.2 V vs. RHE, 1500 cycles)

139



Pt nanoparticles/Fe,N-doped porous carbon
High dispersion of Pt nanoparticles and interaction between the Pt and the doped porous carbon
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 or 0.1 M NaOH (RDE and PEMFC conditions)
Catalyst = 200 μg cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt)
25 °C
ECSA of Pt/Fe,N-doped porous carbon and commercial Pt/C is 104.08 m2 gPt−1 and 78.04 m2 gPt−1 (acidic medium). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
—

114



Fuel cell: MA for Pt/Fe,N-doped porous carbon and commercial Pt/C is 18.76 and 15.61 A mgPt−1. (H2/O2 PEM fuel cell at 80 °C using Pt/Fe,N-doped porous carbon and Pt/C as cathode catalysts and a solid-state Nafion membrane)


Pt nanoparticles/Fe,Co-co-doped C–N
Change of Pt electronic structure
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 0.2 mg cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (10 wt% of Pt) from TKK
25 °C
Increased activity (Tafel slope = 52 mV dec−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (61 mV dec−1). (Rotating speed = 1500 rpm)
—

33



Pyrene-functionalized alkylamine-Pt nanoparticles/C
Strong interaction with the Pt and carbon
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = N.M. Commercial Pt/C (30 wt% of Pt)
N.M.
Increased activity (MA = 518 A gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (MA = 284.8 A gPt−1). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
—

151



Pt/C-Sb-doped SnO2 nanoparticles
Change in the electronic property of Pt and high surface area
O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 20 wt% of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R)
R.T.
Increased activity (ESCA = 78 m2 gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 62 m2 gPt−1) (rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
Stability test: ECSA = 78 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 50 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.35–0.85 V vs. SHE, 3000 cycles)

131



MoOx–Pt/C and TiOx–Pt/C
Interaction between the Pt and oxide materials
0.5 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = N.M. Commercial Pt/C (16.6 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R)
25 °C
Increased activity of MoOx–Pt/C (M.A. = 89 mA mgPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (M.A. = 33 mA mgPt−1) (rotating speed = 3785 rpm)
—

128



Pt/TiO2-functionalized graphene sheets
High dispersion of Pt particles
O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M KOH (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 20 μgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (46 wt% of Pt, C: Ketjen black) from TKK
23 °C
Increased activity (S.A. = 69 mA cm−2) compared with commercial Pt/C. (S.A. = 40 mA cm−2). (Rotating speed = 1900 rpm)
Stability test: (potential cycling 0.05–1.3 V vs. RHE, 1000 cycles)

134



Pt/NbOx/C
Pt–O interactions, smaller size Pt particles and geometrical mismatch between the metal and metal oxide
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 2.0–4.0 μg of Pt. Commercial Pt/C (47 wt% of Pt) form TKK
R.T.
Increased activity (ESCA = 80 m2 gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 63 m2 gPt−1) (rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
Accelerated durability test: (potential cycling 0.1–1.0 V vs. RHE, 25000 cycles)

137



SnO2/Pt nanoparticles/carbon fibers
Suppressed carbon corrosion and metal–metal oxide interaction
O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 32 μg of Pt loading. (20 wt% of Pt)
N.M.
Increased activity (ESCA = 29 m2 gPt−1) compared with Pt/carbon fibers (ESCA = 27 m2 gPt−1). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 100% (before cycling) and 60% (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–1.2 V vs. RHE, 10000 cycles)

132



Nb-TiO2/Pt
Electronic and geometric factors of the catalyst
O2 saturated 0.5 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 8 g of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt)
25 °C
Increased activity (M.A. = 172 mA mgPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (M.A. = 33 mA mgPt−1). (Rotating speed = 2500 rpm)
—

130



Pt nanoparticle/Nb-doped TiO2 nanofibers
Enhanced corrosion resistance and Pt–TiO2 metal–support interaction
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 87 mg cm−2 of Pt loading
R.M.
Increased activity (M.A. = 2.4 A gPt−1) compared with Pt/carbon nanofibers (M.A. = 1.7 A gPt−1). (Rotating speed = 900 rpm)
Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 36 m2 g−1 (before cycling) and 27 m2 g−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.05–1.2 V vs. RHE, 1000 cycles)

129



Pt nanoparticles/N-doped Ta2O5/C
Electron transfer from Pt to N–Ta2O5/C support
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = N.M. Commercial Pt/C (23.7 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R)
N.M.
Increased activity (M.A. = 0.28 A mgPt−1) compared with Pt/C (M.A. = 0.21 A mgPt−1). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
Accelerated durability test: M.A. = 0.28 A mgPt−1 (before cycling) and 0.25 A mgPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–1.0 V vs. RHE, 10000 cycles)

15



Pt–ITO–graphene nanocomposites
High dispersion of Pt nanoparticles and unique triple-junction structure
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 3 μg of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt) from ETek
R.M.
Increased activity (M.A. = 108 A gPt−1) compared with Pt/graphene (M.A. = 78 A gPt−1). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)
Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 67 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 36.4 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0–1.1 V vs. RHE, 22 hours)

152



Pt nanoparticles/graphite-rich boron carbide
Strong electron transfer from boron carbide to Pt nanoparticles
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = N.M. Commercial Pt/C (10, 20, 40 wt% of Pt) from Alfa Aesar
R.M.
Increased activity (M.A. = 199 A gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (M.A. = 139 A gPt−1)
Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 69.8 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 61.3 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–1.0 V vs. RHE, 6000 cycles)

20



Pt nanoparticles/Nb,Sb-doped SnO2
Electron transfer from doped SnO2 to Pt nanoparticles
O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 21.3 mg cm−2 of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (57 wt% of Pt) from Johnson Matthey
N.M.
Improved activity (M.A. = 0.20 A mgPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (M.A. = 0.18 A mgPt−1)
Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 47 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 40 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 1.0–1.6 V vs. RHE, 6000 cycles)

21



(Pt nanoparticles/MOx/C (MOx = CeO2, SnO2, TiO2, ZrO2 and WO3)
Electron transfer to the Pt nanoparticles for SnO2/C and CeO2/C supports, and from the Pt nanoparticles to TiO2/C and ZrO2/C
O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M KOH (RDE condition)
Catalyst = 28 mg cm−2 of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R)
R.M.
Increased activity of Pt/CeO2/C (kinetic current density = 0.21 mA cmPt−2) compared with Pt/TiO2/C, Pt/SnO2/C, Pt/ZrO2/C Pt/WO3/C and Pt/C (0.11, 0.15, 0.1, 0.12, 0.12 mA cmPt−2). (Potential cycling 0.1–1.0 V vs. RHE)
—

153



Pt/MWCNT
Different morphology and high dispersion of Pt in MWCNT-supported Pt catalyst
Anode fuel, 1.0 M MeOH; flow rate, 1.0 mL min−1; no back pressure; oxygen pressure, 0.2 MPa. (DMFC condition)
Cathode catalyst: 1.0 mg cm−2 of Pt loading. Anode catalysts were Pt–Ru/C (20 wt% of Pt, 10 wt% of Ru) with Nafion-115 from Johnson Matthey (2.0 mg cm−2 metal loading)
90 °C
Fuel cell: increased current density (186 mA cm−2) and power density (103 mW cm−2) for the Pt/MWCNT compared with the Pt/XC-72 catalyst (136 mA cm−2 and 87 mW cm−2)
—

154



Pt(SAC)–N/carbon black
Synergistic effect between Pt single atoms and pyridinic-N
O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 or 0.1 M KOH (RDE and fuel cell conditions) (back pressure: 0.2 bar, 80 °C) fuel cells with H2 and O2 in 100% RH)
Catalyst: 24 μgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C catalyst, (20 wt% of Pt) from E-TEK
80 °C
Fuel cell: maximum power density of 0.68 W cm−2 with a high Pt utilization efficiency of 0.13 gPt kW−1 (Pt–N/CB as cathode (10 mgPt cm−2) and commercial Pt/C as anode (80 mgPt cm−2)) and commercial Pt/C (as both cathode (200 mgPt cm−2) and anode (100 mgPt cm−2)) higher power density of 1.02 W cm−2 with lower Pt utilization efficiency of 0.29 gPt kW−1
Durability test: 74% of the current remains in the fuel cell. (Fixed potential of 0.5 V, 200 h)

146



Carbon defect-anchored Pt single-atom
Pt single atoms anchored by four carbon atoms in carbon divacancies (Pt–C4 site) are the main active sites
O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE and fuel cell conditions)
Catalyst: 0.39 mg cm−2. Commercial Pt/C catalyst, (20 wt% of Pt) from E-TEK
80 °C
Fuel cell: maximum power density of the Pt1.1/BP defect-based PEMFC reaches 520 mW cm−2 with highest Pt utilization (0.09 gPt kW−1). (Acidic single cell with Pt1.1/BP defect as cathode (27 μgPt cm−2) catalyst and commercial Pt/C (20 wt%, Johnson Matthey) as anode catalyst (20 μgPt cm−2))
Durability test: Pt1.1/BP defect presents an increased durability (∼9 mV negative shift for E1/2) compared with the commercial Pt/C (∼37 mV negative shifts for E1/2). (Potential cycling 0.5–1.1 V vs. RHE, 10000 cycles, 1600 rpm)

155





6. Characterization of Pt–support interactions
The combination of different complementary analytical techniques represents the most suitable approach to probe the Pt–support interface. The characterization process should provide details on the electronic phenomena and structural rearrangements occurring at the Pt–support interface. For convenience, the characterization methods are classified into two types; (i) conventional characterization methods and advanced characterization methods.
6.1. Conventional characterization methods
The most commonly used techniques are X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), thermal techniques, and electrochemical techniques. These techniques effectively show the local environment, the oxidation state or charge density of the catalyst, which can reflect the overall electron density change between Pt–support interfaces.14 Electron microscopies are the ideal tools to give a direct illustration of the morphology and structure of the metal–support interface and also the dispersion of Pt particles on the support.156 However, these theoretical and experimental techniques provide only indirect information on the Pt–support interfaces. The direct observation of beneficial effects from the metal–support interface during catalysis has rarely been reported. One of the important issues in Pt/C-based electrocatalysts is detecting and understanding the phenomena within the metal–support interface and surface of catalysts. To address this problem, several in situ surface analysis techniques based on X-ray spectroscopy have proved to be effective to observe the real-time structure of the catalyst. In addition, the existence of electronic effects in the Pt–support interface have been described by theoretical calculations.

6.1.1. X-ray diffraction (XRD). 
XRD analysis reveals the state and dimension of Pt particles on the carbon support and thus appears to be an effective technique for understanding the interactions between the metal and carbon support.14,157Fig. 11a shows the XRD patterns of three different Pt/C catalysts. The broadening of Pt diffraction peaks is the lowest for carbon-A, higher for carbon-C, and most severe for carbon-B, which shows amorphous-like Pt nanoparticles. The (111) peak in Pt/carbon-B and Pt/carbon-C is shifted toward lower angles. The (111) peak exhibits a low-intensity shoulder at the low angle side in Pt/carbon-A and Pt/carbon-C. The nature of this shoulder peak was found to be due to the presence of a PtO phase. The largest shift of this peak was observed for the Pt/carbon B sample, indicating that it possessed the highest content of the PtO phase. Moreover, the Pt crystallite sizes were derived from the XRD analysis. Pt/carbon-A shows the most defined Pt diffraction pattern and smallest broadening of the reflections, indicating particles were ∼3 nm, whereas Pt/carbon-C contains ∼2.3 nm particles. In addition, the Pt (111) diffraction peak maximum of the Pt/carbon-C sample shows a triangular shape that indicates inhomogeneity in the size of Pt particles.
 Fig. 11  XRD patterns of the Pt-loaded supports (a) Pt/carbon A, red pattern; Pt/carbon B, green pattern; Pt/carbon C, blue pattern; Pt fcc reference, black pattern; PtO reference, gray pattern. XPS spectra of Pt 4f Pt/carbons A–C measured at room temperature (b) and after annealing at 110 °C (c). The black experimental curves are deconvoluted into peaks corresponding to Pt0 metallic states (blue curves), Pt2+ states (red curves) due to formation of PtO/Pt(OH)2, Pt4+ states (green curves) due to PtO2/OH groups, and Pt2+ states due to some Pt–Cl groups (magenta curves). XPS spectra and deconvolution of Pt 4f region for (d) Pt/C, (e) Pt/N-MC, (f) Pt/S-MC, and (g) Pt@N,S-MC. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. (b–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2018, The American Chemical Society. 


6.1.2. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). 
XPS is an important technique for identifying the elemental composition at the surface, oxidation state, and electronic nature of metal and carbon materials.23 The significant shift of the binding energy is a clear indication of the electronic structure change resulting from metal–support interactions.23,158 It has been reported in several papers that a strong interaction exists between Pt metal and N-doped carbon supports. Usually, a shift of the Pt 4f to higher energy has been observed and attributed to an alteration in the electronic structure or coordination environment that leads to a partial electron transfer from the N-doped carbon support to the Pt metal and the stabilization of electron-rich Pt atoms at the surface.27

Fig. 11b and c shows the XPS analysis of Pt–carbon supports for a comparison of Pt 4f XPS spectra recorded from different samples at room temperature and at 110 °C under vacuum. It can be seen that the surface of all three samples contains metallic Pt with different contributions due to PtO2/PtO and Pt (OH)x according to the deconvolution of XPS spectra recorded at room temperature.14 The quantitative XPS analysis of Pt species indicates that in the case of sample-B, the largest spectral weight is due to Pt2+ states at around 73.0 and 76.7 eV, which is in agreement with the XRD results. Pt on samples A and C is much less oxidized in comparison with sample-B, though it still contains similar fractions of Pt2+ and metallic Pt states (Fig. 11b). Comparatively, the XPS analysis of Pt/carbon-A after annealing at 110 °C exhibits a 0.2 eV downshift of the metallic Pt 4f peak (blue line in Fig. 11c). Such a shift indicates an interatomic electron transfer from carbon-A to Pt, meaning a strong interaction exists between the Pt and carbon-A. Also, Perazzolo et al.140 reported that the XPS analysis of Pt/C revealed a binding energy shift (0.1–0.3 eV), indicating an interaction is present between Pt and S or N defects, involving the charge transfer from Pt orbitals to the S or N-doped support. Moreover, these binding energy shifts were observed in the single-doped catalysts but not in the co-doped Pt/N, S–C (Fig. 11d–g).


6.1.3. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). 
XAS is a widely used technique for determining the local geometric and electronic structure of materials. From the XAS analysis, the individual environments of atoms, the interaction between inter-molecules, binding distances, binding geometry, and coordination number of investigated elements can be obtained.159,160 XAS is generally classified into two types: X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) or near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS). Specifically, the detailed information of chemical and electronic structure at the Pt/C interface can be identified by the XANES spectra together with the EXAFS.
Taking Pt/N-doped carbon nanofibers as an example, the C K-edge and N K-edge NEXAFS spectra clearly show the electrons shifting from Pt nanoparticles into the π-conjugated system of N-doped carbon supports and thereby increasing the electron density of N-doped carbon supports, which indicates that there is a strong interaction between the Pt and N-groups in the carbon nanofibers.27 Also, using in situ XANES measurements, Sasaki et al.161 found that Pt nanoparticle surfaces were oxidized to α-PtO2-type oxide from metallic Pt during the potential sweep from 0.41 to 1.5 V, and the transition state of O or OH adsorbs on Pt. Only the top layers of Pt nanoparticles were oxidized, while the inner Pt atoms remained intact. At a higher potential over 1.9 V, α-PtO2-type surface oxides dissolved due to local acidification caused by the electrocatalytic reaction and carbon corrosion. As shown in Fig. 12a and b, upon increasing the potential, the intensity of the white line increases and the adsorption peaks shift to higher energies as a consequence of depleting the Pt d-band for the Pt oxide formation. They start to decrease with declining potentials as a result of filling the d-band due to the reduction of the Pt oxide. The intensity of the white line at 0.41 V is almost identical before and after the potential cycling, but irreversible reduction as the potential decreases results in hysteresis and a relative change of the white line intensity.
 Fig. 12  
In situ XANES for the Pt L3 edge of carbon-supported Pt nanoparticles at potentials (a) ascending from 0.41 to 1.51 V and (b) descending from 1.51 to 0.41 V in 1 M HClO4. The yellowish-green dashed line is the ex situ XANES for commercial PtO2. (c) k3-Weighted Pt-LIII edge XAFS oscillation of Pt foil, PtCo, PtCu, PtNi alloy foils, Pt/C, PtCo/C, PtCo/C-HTs, PtCu/C, PtCu/C-HT, and PtNi/C at 0.4 V. (d) Fourier transform of k3-Weighted Pt-LIII edge XAFS oscillation of Pt foil, PtCo, PtCu, PtNi alloy foils, Pt/C, PtCo/C, PtCo/C-HTs, PtCu/C, PtCu/C-HT, and PtNi/C at 0.4 V. HT: heat treatment. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 161 Copyright 2016, The American Chemical Society. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 162 Copyright 2011, The American Chemical Society. 
Besides the XANES analysis, the local coordination information provided by EXAFS can be used to determine the active sites of electrocatalysts and the role of various metal elements. Kaito et al.162 identified the Pt–Pt bond distance as the main descriptor for ORR activity irrespective of the atomic ordering or morphology of the different Pt alloys by in situ EXAFS (Fig. 12c and d). A linear trend was revealed in the increasing ORR activity as the Pt–Pt bond decreased. For instance, Pt2Co/C with the shortest Pt–Pt bond distance exhibits the highest ORR activity, which is approximately ten times more active per unit surface area than the commercial Pt/C at the reaction condition of 0.4 V versus RHE.


6.1.4. Transmission electron microscopy. 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is one of the important techniques that can reveal the morphological and structural characteristics of the metal–support interface at the atomic level.14,163–165 Moreover, TEM involves the model technique to understand the electronic and geometric effects at the metal–support interfaces.166 TEM images of supported Pt nanoparticles provide important evidence about the size and homogeneous distribution of Pt particles on the support. The combination of high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) analysis, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), and electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) can give information about the geometric relationship between Pt nanoparticles and support, and also examine the presence of defects, heteroatoms, and functional groups on the support.23,156 Besides, EELS can also be used to study the distribution of heteroatoms, the graphitization degree of nanocarbon, and the interface between the Pt nanoparticles and the support.156,167,168 In particular, it has been shown that STEM and EELS are well suited for supported metal catalyst degradation studies since it allows the imaging analysis of identical catalyst particles.
Willinger et al.14 prepared three different Pt/C catalysts with similar Pt loading and Pt particle sizes, but different structural characteristics of the carbon supports and they correlated the electrocatalytic performance with the characteristics of the respective carbon support. From Fig. 13, the Pt particle distribution varies for the three different carbon supports and a good dispersion of Pt is achieved on carbons B and C in comparison to carbon-A. The samples of carbons B and C are close to spherically-shaped Pt particles (Fig. 13c and e), whereas Pt/carbon-A displays elongated Pt particles or raft-like agglomerates of Pt particles on the graphitic carbon support (Fig. 13a). From the HRTEM images and the corresponding FFT filtered images, it is very clear that the carbon support structure strongly influences the shape of supported Pt particles and therefore their wetting. Particle shape varies from well-defined cuboctahedra, particularly for defective, highly curved carbon-C, to raft-like elongated, multiply twinned particles on the low surface-area, highly graphitic carbon-A. The highly defective carbon-B exhibits roundish Pt particles in a nearly amorphous state. Furthermore, particles on carbon-B are generally covered with a few layers of disordered carbon. The observed carbon overgrowth can be described by the highly oxidized state of Pt particles on carbon-B, resulting in the formation of a kind of Pt–O–C interface. The encapsulation of the Pt particle should reduce Pt detachment or sintering and also result in reduced electrochemical activity. However, the coating layer is not stable under cyclic voltammetric and chronoamperometric conditions. In fact, the nonmetallic state of the particles with a highly oxidized surface in the initial state of Pt on carbon-B could enhance the corrosion of the Pt–C interface and subsequently enable the sintering and detachment of Pt. Furthermore, the highly defective carbon is more prone to corrosion, which additionally leads to Pt detachment. The metallic Pt particles on carbon-C are mainly cuboctahedra-shaped with eight (111) and six (100) faces. Moreover, from Fig. 13, some interrupted graphene layers are attached to the (111) Pt planes, indicating that a Pt–C covalent bond formed. However, the presence of such covalent connections does not help to stabilize Pt on the highly curved carbon-C. Interestingly, the Pt/carbon-A catalyst shows the formation of flat, raft-like aggregates of Pt particles on the carbon support and the highest stability was a result. The low degree of Pt sintering and detachment are indicative of a strong Pt–carbon support interaction. A strong interaction between the carbon support and Pt is confirmed by the observed typical particle shapes and the wetting of the support (Fig. 13d). Moreover, the raft-like Pt particle shape is a result of the formation of numerous twins that enable the (111) particle facets to follow the orientation and curvature of the (001) basal planes of the carbon support. The HRTEM investigations of numerous Pt raft-like particles show that the contact planes of the Pt with the graphitic carbon are the (111) planes. The strong metal–support interactions involving π back-bonding, in which the electron in the d-orbital of the metal is shared with a π* antibonding orbital from the carbon support, may help to partially inhibit Pt oxidation under electrochemical corrosion conditions.
 Fig. 13  HRTEM images and corresponding filtered images of Pt particles on the corresponding carbon supports: (a and d) Pt/carbon-A; (b and e) Pt/carbon-B; (c and f) Pt/carbon-C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. 
The most stable Pt/carbon-A catalyst exhibits the strongest Pt–carbon interaction through the attachment of Pt particles to graphitic prisms with hydrogen-terminated edges. This Pt–H–C junction together with the highest degree of graphitization of carbon-A provides the best Pt particle wetting and also low Pt particle sintering and detachment upon the electrochemical corrosion. The other two Pt/carbon-B and Pt/carbon-C catalysts with low stability possess two different structural weaknesses that lead to similar degradation behaviors. Pt/carbon-B, with a highly defective and functionalized carbon structure, is decorated with incompletely reduced PtOx particles.
The high-angle annular dark-field imaging (HAADF) study clearly shows the presence of different microstructural forms of Pt, namely atomically dispersed Pt clusters and Pt nanoparticles.14 In Fig. 14a–i the amount of these atomic clusters increases in the following order: carbon-A, carbon-C, and carbon-B. This finding also provides indirect information on the surface state with regard to the degree of defects present and the functional groups on the different carbon supports. The Pt particles on carbon-B do not exhibit clear lattice fringes, indicating that the ill-defined structure of the Pt particles is close to the amorphous state. In the case of A and C, crystalline particles exhibit only a disordered surface layer, indicating that they are oxidized. Moreover, the FFT patterns obtained from the HAADF images have crystalline Pt reflections in the case of the Pt/carbon-A and Pt/carbon-C samples, whereas only barely visible Pt reflections are present in the case of Pt/carbon-B, confirming its disordered state.
 Fig. 14  Comparison of high-resolution HAADF images before and after electrochemical aging: (a–c) Pt/carbon-A initial, after CV, and after CA, respectively; (d–f) Pt/carbon-B initial, after CV, and after CA, respectively; (g–i) Pt/carbon-C initial, after CV, and after CA, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 Copyright 2014, The American Chemical Society. 
Specifically, the TEM analysis used to study carbon-supported Pt-based catalysts with atomic resolution has certain limitations since the carbon-based materials are very sensitive to electron beam radiation. The long-time exposure of carbon-supported Pt-based catalysts in the electron beam might create defects that will change the size distribution of the supported catalyst, and thereby alter the structure of the Pt nanoparticles on the support.156 Thus, advanced device recording systems are required to decrease the electron beam irradiation time upon capturing images.


6.1.5. Other methods. 
Electrochemical characterization techniques such as cyclic voltammetry (CV) allow investigators to observe the electrical behavior of the supported metal species and then deduce the effect resulting from the interactions with the support.14 In the case of Pt/C, the main changes from the CV are the hydrogen desorption region Hde. The peak currents dropped upon potential cycling, showing a degradation of the electrocatalytic activity. A peak shifts toward higher potentials, which is associated with Pt oxide reduction, within the potential range between 0.6 and 0.9 V (vs. RHE). According to the literature, such a shift can be related to an increase in the Pt particle size. No significant changes are observed in the double-layer capacitance region for the Pt/C catalysts, indicating that no substantial carbon corrosion took place. Moreover, the electrochemical active surface area (ECSA) losses show a strong dependence on the nature of carbon support. Thus, from the ECSA loss during CV measurements upon longer cycles, one can identify the stability of the Pt/C catalysts. Infrared spectroscopy, as well as thermal techniques (thermal programmed desorption (TPD) or thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)), can be used to detect the adsorption of functional group molecules on the Pt surfaces, thus providing indirect information on the electronic structure of Pt and on subsequent changes induced by Pt–carbon interaction.14
Although these techniques provided insights into different degradation processes such as carbon corrosion, metal nanoparticle detachment and sintering in a typical and efficient way, detailed atomistic information regarding the metal–support interaction and the appropriate structure–performance relationship of the carbon-supported Pt catalysts is not accessible using the above characterization techniques.

6.2. Advanced characterization methods

6.2.1. Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) spectroscopy. 
Neutron spectroscopic techniques are believed to be very suitable for investigating basic research questions. However, the use of neutron spectroscopic techniques for tackling catalytic problems is still quite limited since neutron beam time is rather scarce and expensive. INS spectroscopy has been used in catalysis research principally due to its sensitivity to the vibrations of hydrogen atoms.169–171 INS studies on the proton dynamics of carbon-based materials have revealed important details on the surface/interface of the supported metal catalysts.169 INS spectroscopy is a complementary form of IR and Raman spectroscopic techniques. In this technique, the scattering takes place between a neutron and the atomic nucleus.172 Thus, the electronic nature of the catalyst is not important; either they can be a metal, semiconductor, or insulator.172 Moreover, INS is not limited by the selection rules and even the silent modes in both infra-red and Raman can have a noticeable INS intensity.173 Even at the low energy vibrational modes, i.e., below 20 cm−1, INS can be measured (translational modes, deformation modes, optical, acoustic phonons in solids, etc.) to provide evidence on the micromorphological properties and catalytic significance of carbon supports.172,174,175 INS spectroscopy can probe the catalysts in-depth rather than surface-deep since neutrons have a high penetrating power and neutral charge. This technique differentiates itself from other neutron scattering techniques by resolving the change in kinetic energy that occurs when the collision between neutrons and the sample is an inelastic one. In addition, the incoherent inelastic scattering cross-section and the amplitude of vibration determine the scattering intensity.172 Neutrons have a different relative sensitivity to different atoms and thus heavier and lighter elements can have comparable scattering power.172,176 Moreover, elements with very similar atomic numbers can have different scattering lengths in INS spectroscopy. The key point of this technique is that the scattering is dominated by modes that involve hydrogen and all other elements present in these samples only make a minor influence on the spectrum in the catalysis.176 The high hydrogen sensitivity allows for the measurement of the vibrational modes of hydrogen-containing structures and to receive information on the sp2/sp3 nature of carbon and the properties of the Pt/C catalysts.177 Therefore, INS spectroscopy covers the whole range of inter- and intra-molecular vibrational spectra from 0 to 4000 cm−1.175–179 It is also suitable for providing valuable information on carbon-based supports, which has not been achieved by any other conventional methods. One of the major limitations of this technique is the weak signal due to a lower flux existing in neutron sources that need long beamtimes, and also a lack of knowledge to interpret the data.180
Carosso et al.169 reported a Pt/C (5 wt%) industrial catalyst used for hydrogenation reactions by coupling H2 adsorption measurements with INS spectroscopy. The difference spectra 1′A, 1′B, 2′A, and 2′B magnified in the low energy region are characteristic of rotations (Fig. 15a and c). The sharp peak observed in all the spectra at around 120 cm−1 in the presence of hydrogen (‘free H2’ in Fig. 15a and c) is assigned to the rotational transition of free molecular hydrogen from the rotational state J = 0 to the triply degenerate J = 1 state. Two additional bands are observed in the spectra 1′A, 1′B, 2′A and 2′B at the sides of the peak at 120 cm−1, around 107 and 132 cm−1 (‘H2@C’ in Fig. 15a and c), i.e., they are shifted ca. 13 cm−1 with respect to the free hydrogen rotor. These bands are attributed to a perturbed J (0 → 1) rotational transition that accounts for molecular hydrogen physisorbed on the carbon surface. In the spectra 1′A, 1′B, 2′A, and 2′B, the peak at 107 cm−1 has approximately double the intensity of that at 132 cm−1, indicating that most of the hydrogen physisorbed on the carbon lies parallel to the surface. Finally, two broad peaks around 90 and 150 cm−1 are clearly observed in spectra 2′A and 2′B, which are absent in 1′A and 1′B spectra. They (H2@PtHx) are more clearly observable in the difference of spectra (2′A–1′A) and (2′B–1′B) (Fig. 15b and d), indicating that the contributions of both free H2 rotor and hydrogen physisorbed on the carbon support have been removed. Moreover, the INS spectra for chemisorbed hydrogen, the difference of spectra (2′A–1′A) and (2′B–1′B) (Fig. 15e) in the vibrational energy region, shows that the peaks in the 500–750 cm−1 spectral range are mainly ascribed to vibrations involving the Pt–hydride species formed upon the dissociative chemisorption of molecular hydrogen. The INS spectra of both Pt/C and carbon support (Fig. 15) in the presence of hydrogen at two different equilibrium pressures indicate that (i) the Pt nanoparticles are mainly located at the regular edges of the sp2 graphitic domains on the activated carbon, (ii) most of H2 physisorbed on the carbon lies parallel to the surface, (iii) H2 molecules are adsorbed on hydride-covered Pt nanoparticles, (iv) Pt–hydrides are observed and (v) there is evidence for the occurrence of spillover of atomic hydrogen from the Pt surface to unsaturated reactive sites on the carbon support located at the irregular borders.
 Fig. 15  (a) INS spectra collected at 20 K of the bare carbon support (1′A, grey) and of the Pt/C catalyst (2′A, orange) in the presence of 230 mbar of molecular H2, magnified in the 40–200 cm−1 region, (b) the difference spectrum 2′A–1′A, (c) INS spectra at 420 mbar of molecular hydrogen: bare carbon support (1′B, grey) and Pt/C catalyst (2′B, yellow), and (d) the difference spectrum 2′B–1′B. (e) INS spectra collected at 20 K showing only the chemisorbed hydrogen signals for the Pt/C catalyst at an H2 equilibrium pressure of 230 (2′A–1′A, violet) and 420 mbar (2′B–1′B, red), respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

6.3. Density functional theory (DFT) studies
In the last several years, more and more studies have been focused on the theoretical calculation methods aiming to understand the fundamentals of the interaction between Pt nanoparticles and carbon supports.16,17,26,47,140,181 DFT is one of the most commonly used techniques to determine the electronic interaction between the metal and support. In addition, adsorption and binding interactions of adsorbates on the surface of the catalyst can also be calculated by DFT.182 Thus, many studies on supported metal catalysts applied DFT calculations for discussing the correlation between metal–support interactions and the catalytic activity and durability.183 From the calculated electronic structures, the relative electron density at the surface of the supported metal catalysts can also be estimated. Conversely, these calculations are not entirely adequate to explain the real electronic state of the supported metal catalyst.82 In addition, from the density of states (DOS) of the Pt d-band energy level, the valence electrons near the Fermi energy level have a significant influence on the reactant adsorption and desorption.74,184 Combining the theoretical calculations with experimental results is an effective way to explain the extent of the metal–support interaction towards improved catalytic activity and durability.
Perazzolo et al.140 studied the influence of N and/or S incorporated into the carbon support on the nucleation and growth of Pt nanoparticles using DFT simulations and experimental methods. The adsorption energy between Pt and carbon (Eads) is usually used as a descriptor for representing the nucleation energy for Pt growth on the defect site. The interaction energy is defined as the energy difference between the two optimized structures (ΔEads,Pt). From their results, both N and S in the Pt/N- and S-doped carbon involves a clear stabilization of the Pt nanoparticles and resulted in the formation of Pt nanoparticles in the range of 1.8–2.5 nm. In contrast, bigger Pt nanoparticles (3.5 nm) were formed on Pt/N,S-co-doped carbon, which would be the result of a destabilized Pt nucleus on a surface co-doped with N and S. This analysis suggests that the adsorption energy is affected by the interplay of the following aspects: (i) the number of bonds with the surface atoms (C, N, S), (ii) the formation of Pt–H bonds, (iii) the eventual break of electronic delocalization, (iv) the local deformations of the surface observed upon adsorption, (v) the partial charges on the atoms, and (vi) the top, bridge, or hollow position of the Pt atoms closest to the surface. The DFT simulations provided insights on the fact that when a carbon co-doped with N and S is employed, the close proximity of the two hetero defects destabilizes the formation of small Pt nuclei, resulting in the bigger particles (3.5 nm) observed on Pt/N, S co-doped carbon.
Kim et al.185 investigated the tolerance against CO poisoning and particle migration of Pt nanoparticles dispersed on a defective graphene support in HOR using ab initio calculations. The binding energy of Pt13 on B or N defects is about three times higher than that of −1.5 eV on pristine graphene. The strong binding of Pt to defective graphene prevents particle migration, which is a dominant process in the degradation of Pt catalysts. These theoretical calculations agree with the experimental results. Thus by optimizing binding energy, Pt nanoparticle-based catalysts can be designed to be more resistant to degradation and less sensitive to CO poisoning. Ma et al.17 investigated the effect of the chemical nature of the graphene support on the ORR kinetics at a Pt nanoparticle surface using both theoretical and experimental methods. A Pt38 cluster with a ∼0.8 nm diameter was interacted with a 3N-doped (3% @ N) and 6N-doped (6% @ N) graphene support. The presence of the functional groups and dopants in the carbon-based substrate lead to a slight increase in the lattice parameters and bond distances. The changes in the electronic structure are more evident as the functional groups and N are more electronegative. The addition of various N concentrations leads to the formation of new states (Fig. 16a–c), especially near the Fermi level, and those are enhanced for the N at higher concentrations. These new states will be responsible for the enhancement of the electric conductivity as they increase the metallic behavior of the system.
 Fig. 16  Partial DOS of the support (a) graphene, (b) 3N-doped graphene and (c) 6N-doped graphene. Insets show the structure, carbon atoms in brown and N in blue spheres. Final configuration of the adsorption of oxygen at the Pt cluster–support interface (Pt, C, and O in blue, gray and red spheres) and the initial geometry of the supported Pt cluster without oxygen is showed in the back as green shadows as (d) Pt38–graphene, (e) Pt38–3N-doped graphene and (f) Pt38–6N-doped graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. 
Moreover, the DFT calculations demonstrated that the molecular and atomic oxygen adsorption is weaker for the N-containing substrates. The DFT results reveal that the O–O distance is more elongated in the case of the N-doped substrates, which suggests that lower barriers exist for O2 dissociation. This is a prior point for discussing the increased electrocatalytic activity of Pt/N-reduced graphene oxide toward the ORR (Fig. 16d–f). The analysis of the interaction of a small Pt cluster with doped and functionalized supports concludes that charge transfers from the support to the adsorbed molecule. If the dopant or functional groups retain the electrons very strongly, the cluster will have a limited capacity to donate electrons to O2. In contrast, if the cluster can receive electrons from the support, it will be able to donate them during the catalytic reaction, resulting in enhanced catalytic activity.
The first-principle calculation by Li et al.103 reveals that both N- and B-doped CNTs can assist the reactivity of Pt on the CNT surface. A reduction in electron delocalization and a weakening of π–π interactions of the neighboring carbon atoms occur due to the large electron affinity of N, which results in an enhanced reactivity between the neighboring carbon and Pt atoms. The effect of N-assisted Pt adsorption on a CNT can be further enhanced when more N atoms substitute for carbon atoms in the CNT. It is found that the binding energy increases to +0.66 eV and +0.77 eV for CNT structures containing two and three N atoms, respectively. Thus, doped N atoms help to facilitate the enhancement in Pt adsorption by activating N-neighboring carbon atoms, due to the large electron affinity of N. Whereas in B-doped CNT, the d-orbital of Pt is strongly hybridized with the p-orbital of B. Thus, an adsorbed Pt atom will have a larger binding energy, when it is close to a B atom in a B-doped CNT. This effect can also be further enhanced when more B atoms are doped into the CNT. The binding energies for Pt atom adsorption on B-doped CNTs with two (three) B atoms are found to increase to +1.33 eV (+1.58 eV). Hence, the enhanced Pt adsorption in B-doped CNTs can be mainly attributed to a strong hybridization between the d-orbitals of Pt and p-orbitals of B, leading to direct chemical bonding between the Pt and B atoms. Thus, these results described the enhanced adsorption of Pt clusters on N-containing CNTs and also suggested that B-doped CNTs would be a better candidate for maximum Pt adsorption in fuel cell applications.
7. Summary and outlooks
This review aims to secure a better understanding of the correlation between the Pt–support interactions and both electrocatalytic activity and durability (Fig. 17). In addition to the experimental characterization techniques, the current advances in theoretical calculations also helped to outline the role of metal–support interactions in manipulating the catalytic activity and durability in fuel cell research. Although many improvements in catalytic activity on the ORR can be expected, the durability of the catalysts appears to present a key problem. Doping heteroatoms in the carbon support is a significant tactic to improve the durability of the supported metal catalysts. Although some of the papers reported that the doping of N into the carbon support improves both the catalyst dispersion and catalytic activity towards the ORR through experimental characterization techniques and theoretical calculations, more advanced characterization studies are necessary to clearly understand the role of N atoms in the metal–support interaction on an atomic level. Furthermore, more attention should be paid to the study of defect-rich carbon materials as unique supports for metal nanoparticles, which effectively facilitate electron transfer at the interfaces. In addition, Pt–metal oxide support catalysts have proved that the improved electrocatalytic activity and stability are due to strong metal–support interaction. However, the combination of characterization techniques using XPS, HRTEM, INS, and theoretical studies should be exploited to further understand the nature of the interaction between Pt and metal-oxides and the electron transfer at the interfaces.
 Fig. 17  Design principles of electrocatalysts through metal–support interaction tactics. 
The development of in situ characterization methods and real-time observation techniques at the metal–support interface of electrocatalysts would greatly expand our knowledge and understanding of the nature of the electronic effects at metal–support interfaces, due to the very short-range bonding distance between the reactants and catalyst surface and reversible nature of electrocatalytic reactions steps such as absorption, electron transfer, and desorption. In addition, with the development of new generation synchrotron X-ray sources with higher flux, stronger coherence, and better time-resolution, XAS can be applied in merging fields to explore new frontiers in supported metal catalysts and the related restructuring of these catalysts to facilitate the understanding of structure–property relationships.
Although the theoretical calculations provide useful information to correlate the experimental results, great efforts should be made to develop new theoretical models to explore the nature of the interaction between the metal and support for enhanced activity and durability at atomic and molecular levels. Moreover, the theoretical models should consider some important features, such as the model structure should be more similar to a real catalyst structure, the role of long-range dispersion forces at the interface or the reciprocal influence of defects, heteroatoms, and impurity or molecules adsorbed in the proximity of the interface.
In summary, the recent advances in Pt–support interactions have helped scientists gain a better understanding of the structure–property relationship in electrocatalysis. Particularly, metal–support interaction has proven to play a vital role in affecting the catalytic activity and durability of supported metal catalysts. Recent developments in XPS and TEM techniques for well-defined model systems have provided details that can be used to reveal metal–support interactions. With the development of neutron scattering spectroscopy, the particular binding of Pt nanoparticles with functional groups and even the interfacial atomic details related to the metal–carbon interactions can be unraveled during catalytic reactions. Optimizing the electronic interaction between the Pt and support, combined with energy level d-band theory, is a promising approach to design innovative electrocatalysts with high activity and durability. This review may open a new door for a deeper understanding of the metal–support interactions, by which one can design catalysts more effectively for application in fuel cells and other important industrial fields.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by USTB-NTUT Joint Research Program. DG appreciates the financial research support from the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. FRF-BR-19-003A) and 111 Project (No. B170003). SJ acknowledges the Office of China Postdoctoral Council (OCPC) for the postdoctoral international exchange program and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation for funding a research grant (No. 2018M631334).
References
Y. Zhou, K. Neyerlin, T. S. Olson, S. Pylypenko, J. Bult, H. N. Dinh, T. Gennett, Z. Shao and R. O'Hayre, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1437–1446 RSC .
U. Eberle, B. Müller and R. Helmolt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8780–8798 RSC .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, G. Yin and Y. Gao, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 558–566 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Knights, K. M. Colbow, J. St-Pierre and D. P. Wilkinson, J. Power Sources, 2004, 127, 127–134 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, T. Matsuura, Y. Yoshikawa, M. N. Islam and M. Hori, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 373–378 RSC .
V. R. Stamenkovic, D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 57–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 891–898 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu and H. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qi, S. Yan, Q. Jiang, Y. Liu and G. Sun, Carbon, 2010, 48, 163–169 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Meier, C. Galeano, I. Katsounaros, J. Witte, H. J. Bongard, A. A. Topalov, C. Baldizzone, S. Mezzavilla, F. Schüth and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 44–67 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Z. G. Sial, M. A. U. Din and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6175–6200 RSC .
S. Sui, X. Wang, X. Zhou, Y. Su, S. Riffat and C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1808–1825 RSC .
E. Willinger, A. Tarasov, R. Blume, A. Rinaldi, O. Timpe, C. Massue, M. Scherzer, J. Noack, R. Schlogl and M. G. Willinger, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4395–4407 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, M. N. Banis, L. Zhang, B. Wang, L. Yang, D. Banham, Y. Zhao, J. Liang, M. Zheng, R. Li, S. Ye and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 716–725 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brandiele, C. Durante, M. Zerbetto, N. Vicentini, T. Kosmala, D. Badocco, P. Pastore, G. A. Rizzi, A. A. Isse and A. Gennaro, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 277, 287–300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, A. Habrioux, Y. Luo, G. Ramos-Sanchez, L. Calvillo, G. Granozzi, P. B. Balbuena and N. Alonso-Vante, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11891–11904 RSC .
C.-J. Pan, M.-C. Tsai, W.-N. Su, J. Rick, N. G. Akalework, A. Agegnehu, S.-Y. Cheng and B.-J. Hwang, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2017, 74, 154–186 CrossRef CAS .
S. Navalon, A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 312, 99–148 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jackson, G. T. Smith, D. W. Inwood, A. S. Leach, P. S. Whalley, M. Callisti, T. Polcar, A. E. Russell, P. Levecque and D. Kramer, Nat. Commun., 2016, 8, 15802–15811 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Jimenez-Morales, S. Cavaliere, D. Jones and J. Roziere, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 8765–8772 RSC .

Metal-Ligand Interactions in Chemistry, Physics and Biology, ed. N. Russo and D. R. Salahub, Springer, Dordrecht,  2000 Search PubMed .
S. Campisi, C. E. Chan-Thaw and A. Villa, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 1159 CrossRef .
L. Perini, C. Durante, M. Favaro, V. Perazzolo, S. Agnoli, O. Schneider, G. Granozzi and A. Gennaro, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1170–1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, F. Weniger, H. Neumann and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12582–12594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Campos-Roldan, G. Ramos-Sanchez, R. G. Gonzalez-Huerta, J. R. V. García, P. B. Balbuena and N. Alonso-Vante, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23260–23269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Melke, B. Peter, A. Habereder, J. Ziegler, C. Fasel, A. Nefedov, H. Sezen, C. Woll, H. Ehrenberg and C. Roth, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 82–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar and V. Ramani, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1516–1525 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hornberger, A. Bergmann, H. Schmies, S. Kuhl, G. Wang, J. Drnec, D. J. S. Sandbeck, V. Ramani, S. Cherevko, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9675–9683 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, Y. Su, Y. Guo, L. Zhang, T. Li, K. Zang, F. Liu, L. Li, J. Luo, B. Qiao and J. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6679–6684 RSC .
X. Ning, Y. Li, B. Dong, H. Wang, H. Yu, F. Peng and Y. Yang, J. Catal., 2017, 348, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
T. Asset, R. Chattot, F. Maillard, L. Dubau, Y. Ahmad, N. Batisse, M. Dubois, K. Guerin, F. Labbe, R. Metkemeijer, S. Berthon-Fabry and M. Chatenet, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F3346–F3358 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, X. He, L. Liu, B. Hu, F. Bai, P. Zhang and Y. Zhao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F247–F252 CrossRef .
P. Chen, A. Khetan, F. Yang, V. Migunov, P. Weide, S. P. Sturmer, P. Guo, K. Kahler, W. Xia, J. Mayer, H. Pitsch, U. Simon and M. Muhler, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1197–1206 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, Y. Su, B. Zhang, A. F. Lee, M. A. Isaacs, K. Wilson, L. Li, Y. Ren, J. Huang, M. Haruta, B. Qiao, X. Liu, C. Jin, D. Su, J. Wang and T. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700231 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Colic and A. S. Bandarenka, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5378–5385 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Chung, J. M. Yoo and Y.-E. Sung, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704123 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jayabal, G. Saranya, J. Wu, Y. Liu, D. Geng and X. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24540–24563 RSC .
H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli and F. T. Wagner, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 9–35 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, X. Shen, Y. Pan and Z. Peng, Front. Energy, 2017, 11, 268–285 CrossRef .
N. Jung, D. Y. Chung, J. Ryu, S. J. Yoo and Y.-E. Sung, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 433–456 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, Q. Lv, L. Liu, B. Liu, Y. Wang, A. Liu and G. Wu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 15–30 RSC .
K. Singh, E. B. Tetteh, H.-Y. Lee, T.-H. Kang and J.-S. Yu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8622–8645 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma and B. G. Pollet, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 96–119 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Stevens, M. T. Hicks, G. M. Haugen and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2309–A2315 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, G. Yin, Y. Shao, S. Zhang, Z. Wang and Y. Gao, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 331–339 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, S. H. Kim, S. K. Kwak and H.-K. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23302–23308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Arrigo, M. E. Schuster, Z. Xie, Y. Yi, G. Wowsnick, L. L. Sun, K. E. Hermann, M. Friedrich, P. Kast, M. Havecker, A. Knop-Gericke and R. Schlogl, ACS Catal., 2014, 5, 2740–2753 CrossRef .
C. Bittencourt, M. Hecq, A. Felten, J. J. Pireaux, J. Ghijsen, M. P. Felicissimo, P. Rudolf, W. Drube, X. Ke and G. Van Tendeloo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 462, 260–264 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1035–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Hansen, A. T. Delariva, S. R. Challa and A. K. Datye, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1720–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Li, Z. Chen, M. Waje and Y. Yan, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, B. Zhang, Y. Lin, Q. Wang, Q. Zhang and D. S. Sheng Su, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7844–7854 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hasche, M. Oezaslan and P. Strasser, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 15251–15258 RSC .
L. Li and Y. Xing, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1823–A1828 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, G. Yin, Y. Gao and P. Shi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1093–A1097 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nakamura and T. Kondo, Top. Catal., 2013, 56, 1560–1568 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Wildgoose, C. E. Banks and R. G. Compton, Small, 2006, 2, 182–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Ha, I. Y. Kim, S.-J. Hwang and R. S. Ruoff, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, B70–B73 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Choi, A. Abdelhafiz, P. Buntin, A. Vitale, A. W. Robertson, J. Warner, S. S. Jang and F. M. Alamgir, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902274 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nam, D.-C. Kim, H. Yun, D. H. Shin, S. Nam, W. K. Lee, J. Y. Hwang, S. W. Lee, H. Weman and K. S. Kim, Carbon, 2017, 111, 733–740 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Grosan, T. Radu, A. R. Biris, M. Dan, C. Voica, F. Watanabe, A. S. Biris and A. Vulcu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 40, 81–88 CrossRef .
N. Seselj, C. Engelbrekt and J. Zhang, Sci. Bull., 2015, 60, 864–876 CrossRef .
J. Feng, C. Gao and Y. Yin, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20492–20504 RSC .
Y. Shao, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 46–59 RSC .
Y. Luo and N. A. Vante, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 179, 108–118 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tauster, S. C. Fung and R. L. Garten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tauster, Acc. Chem. Res., 1987, 20, 389–394 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tauster, S. C. Fung, R. T. K. Baker and J. A. Horsley, Science, 1981, 211, 1121–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. E. Verykios, F. P. Stein and R. W. Coughlin, J. Catal., 1980, 66, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Joyner, J. B. Pendry, D. K. Saldin and S. R. Tennison, Surf. Sci., 1984, 138, 84–94 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Haller and D. E. Resasco, Adv. Catal., 1989, 36, 173–235 CAS .
M. C. R. Martinez, D. C. Amoros, A. L. Solano and C. S. Lecea, Carbon, 1995, 33, 3–13 CrossRef .
I. C. Gerber and P. Serp, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 1250–1349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Hayden, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1858–1866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Morrow and A. Striolo, Mol. Simul., 2009, 35, 795–803 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Arrigo, S. Wrabetz, M. E. Schuster, D. Wang, A. Villa, D. Rosenthal, F. Girsgdies, G. Weinberg, L. Prati, R. Schlögl and D. S. Su, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10523–10532 RSC .
S. Schauermann, N. Nilius, S. Shaikhutdinov and H. Freund, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1673–1681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Campbell, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1712–1719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xie, D. Yan, W. Chen, Y. Zou, R. Chen, S. Zang, Y. Wang, X. Yao and S. Wang, Mater. Today, 2019, 31, 47–68 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kwon, M. Jun, J. Joo and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5090–5110 RSC .
J. Liu, H. Liu, H. Chen, X. Du, B. Zhang, Z. Hong, S. Sun and W. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1901614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kulkarni, S. Siahrostami, A. Patel and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2302–2312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Miller, B. L. Mojet, D. E. Ramaker and D. C. Koningsberger, Catal. Today, 2000, 62, 101–114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jayabal, G. Saranya, Y. Liu, D. Geng and X. Meng, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2100–2110 RSC .
R. Wang, L. Wang, W. Zhou, Y. Chen, H. Yan, Z. Ren, C. Tian, K. Shi and H. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9999–10010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xiang, L. Peng and Z. Wei, Chem.–Eur. J., 2019, 25, 9799–9815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fu and T. Wagner, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62, 431–498 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukerjee, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1990, 20, 537–548 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Gates, M. F. Stephanopoulos, D. A. Dixon and A. Katz, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4259–4275 RSC .
A. M. Gómez-Marín and J. M. Feliu, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 9, 166–172 CrossRef .
Y. Lykhach, S. M. Kozlov, T. Skála, A. Tovt, V. Stetsovych, N. Tsud, F. Dvořák, V. Johánek, A. Neitzel, J. Mysliveček, S. Fabris, V. Matolín, K. M. Neyman and J. Libuda, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 284–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, B. Lu, N. Wang, L. Li and S. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 9336–9348 RSC .
A. Y. Stakheev and L. M. Kustov, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 188, 3–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao-Horn, W. C. Sheng, S. Chen, P. J. Ferreira, E. F. Holby and D. Morgan, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 285–305 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu and S. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 145–154 CrossRef CAS .
L. Castanheira, W. O. Silva, F. H. B. Lima, A. Crisci, L. Dubau and F. Maillard, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2184–2194 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Siroma, K. Ishii, K. Yasuda, Y. Miyazaki, M. Inaba and A. Tasaka, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1153–1156 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Cherstiouka, A. N. Simonova, N. S. Mosevaa, S. V. Cherepanovaa, P. A. Simonova, V. I. Zaikovskiia and E. R. Savinova, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 8453–8460 CrossRef .
Z. Qiang, Y. Xia, X. Xia and B. D. Vogt, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10178–10186 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Li, T.-H. Hung and C.-W. Chen, Carbon, 2009, 47, 850–855 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Qu, T. Yuan, W. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 1486–1511 CAS .
K. Kakitani, T. Kimata, T. Yamaki, S. Yamamoto, T. Taguchi, T. Kobayashi, W. Mao and T. Terai, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2018, 355, 259–263 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, S. Mao, M. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8090–8112 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Bulushev, M. Zacharska, A. S. Lisitsyn, O. Y. Podyacheva, F. S. Hage, Q. M. Ramasse, U. Bangert and L. G. Bulusheva, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3442–3451 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Bolzan, G. Abarca, W. D. G. Goncalves, C. F. Matos, M. J. L. Santos and J. Dupont, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 1365–1372 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, K.-H. Wu, J. Xu, Q. Zhang, B. Zhang and D. S. Su, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8670–8678 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Wiggins-Camacho and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19082–19090 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Groves, A. S. W. Chan, C. Malardier-Jugroot and M. Jugroot, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 481, 214–419 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Acharya, D. I. Sullivan and C. H. Turner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13607–13622 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Acharya, W. Li, Z. Liu, G. Kwon, C. H. Turner, A. M. Lane, D. Nikles, T. Klein and M. Weaver, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 324–329 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Park, D.-H. Kwak, K.-B. Ma, S.-B. Han, G. S. Chai, S.-K. Kim, D.-H. Peck, C.-S. Kim, A. Kucernak and K.-W. Park, J. Catal., 2018, 359, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Antonucci, V. Alderucci, N. Giordano, D. L. Cocke and H. Kim, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1994, 20, 58–65 Search PubMed .
J. Nicole, D. Tsiplakides, C. Pliangos, X. E. Verykios, C. Comninellis and C. G. Vayenas, J. Catal., 2001, 204, 23–34 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guha, W. Lu, T. A. Zawodzinski Jr and D. A. Schiraldi, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1506–1517 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, L. Chen, Q. Liu, J. Lin, K.-L. Tan, S. C. Ng, H. S. O. Chan, G.-Q. Xu and T. S. A. Hor, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 718–722 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Figueiredo, M. F. R. Pereira, M. M. A. Freitas and J. J. M. Órfão, Carbon, 1999, 37, 1379–1389 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Higgins, D. Meza and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21982–21988 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Saito, C. Chen, K. Inoue, K. Akagi and Y. Ikuhara, Acta Mater., 2019, 179, 237–246 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Goodman, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 523–536 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujiwara, K. Okuyama and S. E. Pratsinis, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 2076–2092 RSC .
S. Bernal, J. J. Calvino, M. A. Cauqui, J. M. Gatica, C. Larese, J. A. P. Omil and J. M. Pintado, Catal. Today, 1999, 50, 175–206 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nagai, T. Hirabayashi, K. Dohmae, N. Takagi, T. Minami, H. Shinjoh and S. Matsumoto, J. Catal., 2006, 242, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Farmer and C. T. Campbell, Science, 2010, 329, 933–936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pacchioni and H.-J. Freund, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8474–8502 RSC .
N. R. Elezovic, B. M. Babic, V. R. Radmilovic, L. M. Vracar and N. V. Krstajic, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2404–2409 CrossRef CAS .
I. Savych, J. B. d'Arbigny, S. Subianto, S. Cavaliere, D. J. Jones and J. Rozière, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 147–155 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Elezović, B. M. Babić, L. Gajić-Krstajić, V. Radmilović, N. V. Krstajić and L. J. Vračar, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3961–3968 CrossRef .
M. Yin, J. Xu, Q. Li, J. O. Jensen, Y. Huang, L. N. Cleemann, N. J. Bjerrum and W. Xing, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 112–120 CrossRef CAS .
C. Marichy, G. Ercolano, G. Caputo, M. G. Willinger, D. Jones, J. Rozière, N. Pinna and S. Cavaliere, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 969–975 RSC .
S.-Y. Huang, P. Ganesan, S. Park and B. N. Popov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13898–13899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tiido, N. Alexeyeva, M. Couillard, C. Bock, B. R. MacDougall and K. Tammeveski, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 509–517 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lykhach, A. Bruix, S. Fabris, V. Potin, I. Matolínová, V. Matolín, J. Libuda and K. M. Neyman, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4315–4345 RSC .
Z. Jiang, Z. Sun, Y. Yang, S. Chen, W. Shangguan and X. Wu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14272–14279 RSC .
Q. Jia, S. Ghoshal, J. Li, W. Liang, G. Meng, H. Che, S. Zhang, Z.-F. Ma and S. Mukerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7893–7903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Willinger, W. Zhang, O. Bondarchuk, S. Shaikhutdinov, H.-J. Freund and R. Schlogl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5998–6001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Guo, W.-J. Jiang, Y. Zhang, J.-S. Hu, Z.-D. Wei and L.-J. Wan, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2903–2909 CrossRef CAS .
V. Perazzolo, R. Brandiele, C. Durante, M. Zerbetto, V. Causin, G. A. Rizzi, I. Cerri, G. Granozzi and A. Gennaro, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1122–1137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. J. Tak, J. Kim, A. Soon and H. Lee, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1301–1307 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Yang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Carcamo and P. Serp, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 5058–5091 CrossRef .
M. Liu, L. Wang, K. Zhao, S. Shi, Q. Shao, L. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2890–2923 RSC .
L. Zhang, K. D. Davis and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 492–517 RSC .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, L. Lu, H. M. Barkholtz, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Jiang, Z. Wu, D. Liu, L. Zhuang, C. Ma, J. Zeng, B. Zhang, D. Su, P. Song, W. Xing, W. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang and G. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sebastiána, A. G. Ruíza, I. Suelvesa, R. Molinera, M. J. Lázaroa, V. Bagliob, A. Stassi and A. S. Aricò, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 115–116, 269–275 CrossRef .
M. Wang, F. Xu, Q. Liu, H. Sun, R. Cheng, H. He, E. A. Stach and J. Xie, Carbon, 2011, 49, 256–265 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schmies, E. Hornberger, B. Anke, T. Jurzinsky, H. N. Nong, F. Dionigi, S. Kuhl, J. Drnec, M. Lerch, C. Cremers and P. Strasser, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7287–7295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kwon, S. Jin, C. Pak, H. Chang, S. H. Joo, H. I. Lee, J. H. Kim and J. M. Kim, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 186–189 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyabayashi and M. Miyake, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 707–710 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kou, Y. Shao, D. Mei, Z. Nie, D. Wang, C. Wang, S. Park, I. A. Aksay, Y. Lin, Y. Wang and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2541–2547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. B. Ometto, E. A. Carbonio, E. Teixeira-Neto and H. M. Villullas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2075–2086 RSC .
W. Li, C. Liang, W. Zhou, J. Qiu, Z. Zhou, G. Sun and Q. Xin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6292–6299 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, B. Mei, Y. Tong, Y. Li, M. Ruan, P. Song, G. Sun, L. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang, L. Gu, Z. Zhou and W. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1163–1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang and D. S. Su, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 3639–3645 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukerjee, S. Srinivasan and M. P. Soriaga, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 4577–4589 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lewera, L. Timperman, A. Roguska and N. Alonso-Vante, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20153–20159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, L. Árnadóttir, Z. J. Xu and Z. Feng, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 47 CrossRef .
S. Mukerjee and J. McBreen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 448, 163–171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sasaki, N. Marinkovic, H. S. Isaacs and R. R. Adzic, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 69–76 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kaito, H. Tanaka, H. Mitsumoto, S. Sugawara, K. Shinohara, H. Ariga, H. Uehara, S. Takakusagi and K. Asakura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11519–11527 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Wood, S. T. Christensen, S. Pylypenko, T. S. Olson, A. A. Dameron, K. E. Hurst, H. N. Dinh, T. Gennett and R. O'Hayre, MRS Commun., 2012, 2, 85–89 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. K. Baker, E. B. Prestridge and L. L. Murrell, J. Catal., 1983, 79, 348–358 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Shi, W. Zhang, C. Zhang, W. T. Zheng, H. Chen and J. G. Qi, J. Microsc., 2016, 262, 203–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Resasco, S. Dai, G. Graham, X. Pan and P. Christopher, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25143–25157 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Ou, T. Mori, H. Togasaki, M. Takahashi, F. Ye and J. Drennan, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3859–3866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang and D. S. Su, Small, 2014, 10, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
M. Carosso, A. Lazzarini, A. Piovano, R. Pellegrini, S. Morandi, M. Manzoli, J. G. Vitillo, M. J. Ruiz, C. Lamberti and E. Groppo, Faraday Discuss., 2018, 208, 227–242 RSC .
P. W. Albers, Adv. Catal., 2007, 51, 99–132 CAS .
S. F. Parker, S. Mukhopadhyay, M. Jimenez-Ruiz and P. W. Albers, Chem.–Eur. J., 2019, 25, 6496–6499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Jones, S. Iqbal, S. A. Kondrat, G. M. Lari, P. J. Miedziak, D. J. Morgan, S. F. Parker and G. J. Hutchings, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 17259–17264 RSC .

Neutron Applications in Materials for Energy, ed. G. J. Kearley and V. K. Peterson, Springer International Publishing, Switzerland,  2015 Search PubMed .
A. J. Renouprez and H. Jobic, J. Catal., 1988, 113, 509–516 CrossRef CAS .
P. Albers, E. Auer, K. Ruth and S. F. Parker, J. Catal., 2000, 196, 174–179 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Parker, D. Adroja, M. Jimenez-Ruiz, M. Tischer, K. Mobus, S. D. Wielandd and P. Albers, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 17196–17201 RSC .
P. C. H. Mitchell, A. J. Ramirez-Cuesta, S. F. Parker, J. Tomkinson and D. Thompsett, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6838–6845 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Ramirez-Cuesta, P. C. H. Mitchell, S. F. Parker, J. Tomkinson and D. Thompsett, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2001, 138, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Hamilton, R. Warringham, I. P. Silverwood, J. Kapitán, L. Hecht, P. B. Webbb, R. P. Tooze, W. Zhou, C. D. Frost, S. F. Parker and D. Lennon, J. Catal., 2014, 312, 221–231 CrossRef CAS .

In-Situ Characterization of Heterogeneous Catalysts, ed. J. A. Rodriguez, J. C. Hanson and P. J. Chupas, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey,  2013 Search PubMed .
C. Poidevin, P. Paciok, M. Heggen and A. A. Auer, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 150, 041705–041713 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Chen, L. X. Chen, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 23782–23802 RSC .
Y. Tian, Y. Liu, J. Zhao and Y. Ding, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34070–34077 RSC .
J. K. Nørskov, F. A. Pedersen, F. Studt and T. Bligaard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 937–943 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Kim and S.-H. Jhi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 805–810 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Subramaniam Jayabal	Subramaniam Jayabal received his M.Sc. (2007), M.Phil. (2008), and PhD (2016) degrees in Chemistry from Madurai Kamaraj University. Currently, he is working as a postdoctoral researcher under the OCPC-Postdoctoral International Exchange Program with Professor Dongsheng Geng's group at the University of Science and Technology Beijing. His current research interests include the design of smart materials and their electrocatalytic applications in electrolyzers and fuel cells.
Dongsheng Geng	Dr Dongsheng Geng is currently a professor at the University of Science and Technology Beijing. He has two PhD degrees in Physical Chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007 and in Mechanical & Materials Engineering from the University of Western Ontario in 2013. Dr Geng worked at Shinshu University as a NEDO researcher, the University of Western Ontario as a postdoctoral fellow, and the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (A*STAR) as a research scientist. His research is mainly focused on investigating the structure–performance relationship of various electrocatalysts and understanding the electrocatalytic mechanisms by combining advanced microscopic and spectroscopic techniques.
Lu-Yin Lin	Dr Lu-Yin Lin is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology at the National Taipei University of Technology (Taipei Tech). Her research focuses on developing novel nanomaterials for electrochemical applications such as supercapacitors, rechargeable batteries, dye-sensitized solar cells and catalysis. Dr Lin was a postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) (2013–2014) under the supervision of Professor Peidong Yang with the main field of photocatalysis. She earned her PhD degree in the Department of Chemical Engineering from National Taiwan University (2009–2012) under the supervision of Professor Kuo-Chuan Ho with the main research field of dye-sensitized solar cells.
Xiangbo Meng	Dr Xiangbo (Henry) Meng is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Arkansas (Fayetteville, AR). His research focuses on developing novel nanoscale materials for energy applications such as rechargeable batteries, fuel cells, and catalysis. Dr Meng was a postdoctoral research fellow in the Energy Systems Division at Argonne National Laboratory (2012–2016) and in the Chemistry Division at Brookhaven National Laboratory (2011–2012). He earned two PhD degrees in Mechanical & Materials Engineering and Chemical & Biochemical Engineering from the University of Western Ontario (2005–2011). He was an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow and an awardee of several prestigious honors.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of metal–support interaction in the electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  Interaction of Pt nanoparticles with carbon support that leads to electron transfer between them.	 

 	Fig. 3  Energy level diagrams at the metal–support interface with electron transfer from metal to support (a) and support to metal (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of geometric effects in metal–support interaction.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The number of electrons transferred per Pt particle to the CeO2 support increases with increasing particle size (green squares). The partial charge per Pt atom reaches a maximum for particles with 30 to 70 atoms (yellow circles). (b) At higher Pt coverage, the total amount of transferred charge approaches a limit as ‘charge transfer limit’ (red squares). The atomic models show schematically the average particle sizes in different regions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the degradation mechanisms for Pt nanoparticles on carbon support in fuel cells. Reproduced from ref. 11, https://doi.org/10.3762/bjnano.5.5, under the terms of the CC BY 2.0 license, http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of strong metal–support interaction.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Polarization curves of Pt@CNx/CNT, Pt/C and (b) polarization curves of Pt@CNx/CNT at different rotation speeds in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at a sweep rate 10 mV s−1. (c and d) ORR polarization curves of Pt/C and Pt@CNx/CNT before (black) and after (red) durability test. (e and f) The comparison of (e) specific activities and (f) mass activities at 0.85 V vs. RHE before and after the durability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 Copyright 2015, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Accelerated durability tests: first LSV (red line) and after 10000 cycles (black line), for (a) Pt/C, (b) Pt/S-MC, (c) Pt/N-MC, and (d) Pt/N,S-MC. Variation of the (e) mass activity and (f) specific activity. (g) Cell polarization curves and (h) power density curves for Pt/S-MC and Pt/C at 80% relative humidity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2018, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Polarization curves of BP, N/BP, Pt1/BP, Pt1-N/BP and commercial Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and rotation speed of 1600 rpm. (b) The tolerance of Pt1-N/BP to CO (saturated) and methanol (0.5 M). (c) Long-term operation stability of Pt1-N/BP. (d) Polarization curves of BP, N/BP, Pt1-BP, Pt1-N/BP and commercial Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. (e) The tolerance of Pt1-N/BP to CO (saturated) and methanol (0.5 M) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. (f) The voltages and power densities of H2/O2 fuel cells with Pt1-N/BP (marked with solid squares) and commercial Pt/C (marked with stars) as cathodes in acidic fuel cells with H2 and O2 in 100% RH. Inset: the acidic fuel cell durability test at 0.5 V and 80 °C for 200 h. Reproduced from ref. 146, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15938, under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license, http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.	 


Pt/carbon nanofibers	High dispersion of Pt nanoparticles and change in the electronic property of Pt	O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 0.15 mg cm−2 of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt; C: Vulcan XC72R)	R.M.	Increased activity (M.A. = 48 A gPt−1) compared with Pt/C (M.A. = 18 A gPt−1)	Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 40 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 32 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–1.2 V vs. RHE, 1000 cycles)	
147

Pt/carbon black	High dispersion of Pt nanoparticles and small-size Pt nanoparticles	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 20 wt% of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt) from ETek	23 °C	Increased activity (ECSA = 123.1 m2 g−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 86 m2 g−1). (Potential scanning 0.05–1 V vs. NHE, rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	—	
148

Pt/carbon nano-onion	Suppressed Ostwald ripening and electron transfer from carbon nano-onion to Pt	O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH and 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 955 μg cm−2 (10 wt% of Pt). Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt; C: Vulcan XC72R) from ETek	N.M.	Increased activity (ECSA = 58 m2 g−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 50 m2 g−1). (Potential scanning – 0.1–1.2 V vs. RHE, rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 58 m2 g−1 (before cycling) and 48 m2 g−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.1–1.2 V vs. RHE, 5000 cycles)	
47

Pt nanoparticles/reduced graphene oxide	Small size Pt nanoparticle and uniform dispersion of Pt nanoparticle	O2 saturated 0.1 M H2SO4 (DMFC condition)	Catalyst = 1.8 and 1.2 mgPt cm−2 at the anode and cathode. Commercial Pt/C (75 wt% of Pt) from Johnson Matthey	60 °C	Fuel cell: increased activity (ECSA = 113 m2 gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 74 m2 gPt−1). (Anode fuel feeding, 1 M methanol at 1.0 cm3 min−1; cathode fuel feeding, air at 100 cm3 min−1, rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	—	
59

Pt nanoparticles/N-doped carbon nanofibers	High dispersion of Pt nanoparticles and interaction of Pt with N groups	O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH (RDE condition)	Catalyst = N.M. Commercial Pt/C (Hispec 3000, 20 wt% Pt) from Alfa Aesar	N.M.	Increased activity Pt nanoparticles/N-doped carbon nanofibers compared with commercial Pt/C	—	
27

Pt nanoparticles/N-doped porous carbons	Suppressed carbon corrosion	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 12.5 μgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R)	N.M.	Increased activity (M.A. = 0.23 A mgPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (M.A. = 0.20 mgPt−1). (Potential scanning 0.05–1.0 V vs. RHE, rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	Accelerated durability test: M.A. = 0.23 A mgPt−1 (before cycling) and 0.21 A mgPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–0.95 V vs. RHE, 30000 cycles)	
149

Pt nanoparticles/N-doped mesoporous carbon	Strong interaction between pyridinic N and Pt nanoparticles	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 15 mgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (46 wt% of Pt) from TKK	N.M.	Increased activity (ESCA = 74.1 m2 gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 69 m2 gPt−1) (potential scanning 0.2–1.05 V vs. RHE, rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	—	
16

Pt/S-doped ordered mesoporous carbon	Change in the electronic property of Pt and the interaction of Pt with S-doped carbon	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 60 wt% of Pt loading	N.M.	Increased activity (ECSA = 100 m2 gPt−1) compared with Pt/ordered mesoporous carbon (98 m2 gPt−1)	Accelerated durability test (N2 environment), ECSA = 100 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 50 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.05–1.2 V vs. RHE, 2000 cycles)	
150

Pt nanoparticles/N,S-co-doped mesoporous carbons	Electron transfer from Pt nanoparticles to doped support	O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (RDE and PEMFC conditions)	Catalyst = 15 μgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (46 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R) from TKK	25 °C	Fuel cell: ECSA for Pt/S-mesoporous carbon and commercial Pt/C is 27.9 m2 g−1 and 58 m2 g−1. (MEA consists of 50 μm thick Nafion membrane, commercial Pt/C catalyst on the anodic side and the Pt/S-doped mesoporous carbon on the cathodic side, Pt loading is 0.1 mg cm−2 at the anode and 0.3 mg cm−2 at the cathode)	Accelerated durability test (O2 environment), MA = 78 A gPt−1 (before cycling) and 52 A gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–1.0 V vs. RHE, 10000 cycles)	
140

Pt nanocrystals/N-doped porous carbon/CNTs	Electronic interaction between the Pt nanocrystals and the CNx layer	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 22 μgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt) from Johnson Matthey	R.M.	ECSA of Pt/N-doped porous carbon/CNT are 74.29 m2 g−1 and commercial Pt/C (86.65 m2 g−1). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	Accelerated durability test (N2 environment), MA = 0.1105 mA μg−1 (before cycling) and 0.1100 mA μg−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0–1.2 V vs. RHE, 1500 cycles)	
139

Pt nanoparticles/Fe,N-doped porous carbon	High dispersion of Pt nanoparticles and interaction between the Pt and the doped porous carbon	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 or 0.1 M NaOH (RDE and PEMFC conditions)	Catalyst = 200 μg cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt)	25 °C	ECSA of Pt/Fe,N-doped porous carbon and commercial Pt/C is 104.08 m2 gPt−1 and 78.04 m2 gPt−1 (acidic medium). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	—	
114

Fuel cell: MA for Pt/Fe,N-doped porous carbon and commercial Pt/C is 18.76 and 15.61 A mgPt−1. (H2/O2 PEM fuel cell at 80 °C using Pt/Fe,N-doped porous carbon and Pt/C as cathode catalysts and a solid-state Nafion membrane)
Pt nanoparticles/Fe,Co-co-doped C–N	Change of Pt electronic structure	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 0.2 mg cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (10 wt% of Pt) from TKK	25 °C	Increased activity (Tafel slope = 52 mV dec−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (61 mV dec−1). (Rotating speed = 1500 rpm)	—	
33

Pyrene-functionalized alkylamine-Pt nanoparticles/C	Strong interaction with the Pt and carbon	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = N.M. Commercial Pt/C (30 wt% of Pt)	N.M.	Increased activity (MA = 518 A gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (MA = 284.8 A gPt−1). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	—	
151

Pt/C-Sb-doped SnO2 nanoparticles	Change in the electronic property of Pt and high surface area	O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 20 wt% of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R)	R.T.	Increased activity (ESCA = 78 m2 gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 62 m2 gPt−1) (rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	Stability test: ECSA = 78 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 50 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.35–0.85 V vs. SHE, 3000 cycles)	
131

MoOx–Pt/C and TiOx–Pt/C	Interaction between the Pt and oxide materials	0.5 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = N.M. Commercial Pt/C (16.6 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R)	25 °C	Increased activity of MoOx–Pt/C (M.A. = 89 mA mgPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (M.A. = 33 mA mgPt−1) (rotating speed = 3785 rpm)	—	
128

Pt/TiO2-functionalized graphene sheets	High dispersion of Pt particles	O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M KOH (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 20 μgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C (46 wt% of Pt, C: Ketjen black) from TKK	23 °C	Increased activity (S.A. = 69 mA cm−2) compared with commercial Pt/C. (S.A. = 40 mA cm−2). (Rotating speed = 1900 rpm)	Stability test: (potential cycling 0.05–1.3 V vs. RHE, 1000 cycles)	
134

Pt/NbOx/C	Pt–O interactions, smaller size Pt particles and geometrical mismatch between the metal and metal oxide	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 2.0–4.0 μg of Pt. Commercial Pt/C (47 wt% of Pt) form TKK	R.T.	Increased activity (ESCA = 80 m2 gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (ECSA = 63 m2 gPt−1) (rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	Accelerated durability test: (potential cycling 0.1–1.0 V vs. RHE, 25000 cycles)	
137

SnO2/Pt nanoparticles/carbon fibers	Suppressed carbon corrosion and metal–metal oxide interaction	O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 32 μg of Pt loading. (20 wt% of Pt)	N.M.	Increased activity (ESCA = 29 m2 gPt−1) compared with Pt/carbon fibers (ESCA = 27 m2 gPt−1). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 100% (before cycling) and 60% (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–1.2 V vs. RHE, 10000 cycles)	
132

Nb-TiO2/Pt	Electronic and geometric factors of the catalyst	O2 saturated 0.5 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 8 g of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt)	25 °C	Increased activity (M.A. = 172 mA mgPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (M.A. = 33 mA mgPt−1). (Rotating speed = 2500 rpm)	—	
130

Pt nanoparticle/Nb-doped TiO2 nanofibers	Enhanced corrosion resistance and Pt–TiO2 metal–support interaction	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 87 mg cm−2 of Pt loading	R.M.	Increased activity (M.A. = 2.4 A gPt−1) compared with Pt/carbon nanofibers (M.A. = 1.7 A gPt−1). (Rotating speed = 900 rpm)	Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 36 m2 g−1 (before cycling) and 27 m2 g−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.05–1.2 V vs. RHE, 1000 cycles)	
129

Pt nanoparticles/N-doped Ta2O5/C	Electron transfer from Pt to N–Ta2O5/C support	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = N.M. Commercial Pt/C (23.7 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R)	N.M.	Increased activity (M.A. = 0.28 A mgPt−1) compared with Pt/C (M.A. = 0.21 A mgPt−1). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	Accelerated durability test: M.A. = 0.28 A mgPt−1 (before cycling) and 0.25 A mgPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–1.0 V vs. RHE, 10000 cycles)	
15

Pt–ITO–graphene nanocomposites	High dispersion of Pt nanoparticles and unique triple-junction structure	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 3 μg of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt) from ETek	R.M.	Increased activity (M.A. = 108 A gPt−1) compared with Pt/graphene (M.A. = 78 A gPt−1). (Rotating speed = 1600 rpm)	Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 67 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 36.4 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0–1.1 V vs. RHE, 22 hours)	
152

Pt nanoparticles/graphite-rich boron carbide	Strong electron transfer from boron carbide to Pt nanoparticles	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = N.M. Commercial Pt/C (10, 20, 40 wt% of Pt) from Alfa Aesar	R.M.	Increased activity (M.A. = 199 A gPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (M.A. = 139 A gPt−1)	Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 69.8 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 61.3 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 0.6–1.0 V vs. RHE, 6000 cycles)	
20

Pt nanoparticles/Nb,Sb-doped SnO2	Electron transfer from doped SnO2 to Pt nanoparticles	O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 21.3 mg cm−2 of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (57 wt% of Pt) from Johnson Matthey	N.M.	Improved activity (M.A. = 0.20 A mgPt−1) compared with commercial Pt/C (M.A. = 0.18 A mgPt−1)	Accelerated durability test: ECSA = 47 m2 gPt−1 (before cycling) and 40 m2 gPt−1 (after cycling) (potential cycling 1.0–1.6 V vs. RHE, 6000 cycles)	
21

(Pt nanoparticles/MOx/C (MOx = CeO2, SnO2, TiO2, ZrO2 and WO3)	Electron transfer to the Pt nanoparticles for SnO2/C and CeO2/C supports, and from the Pt nanoparticles to TiO2/C and ZrO2/C	O2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 and 0.1 M KOH (RDE condition)	Catalyst = 28 mg cm−2 of Pt loading. Commercial Pt/C (20 wt% of Pt, C: Vulcan XC72R)	R.M.	Increased activity of Pt/CeO2/C (kinetic current density = 0.21 mA cmPt−2) compared with Pt/TiO2/C, Pt/SnO2/C, Pt/ZrO2/C Pt/WO3/C and Pt/C (0.11, 0.15, 0.1, 0.12, 0.12 mA cmPt−2). (Potential cycling 0.1–1.0 V vs. RHE)	—	
153

Pt/MWCNT	Different morphology and high dispersion of Pt in MWCNT-supported Pt catalyst	Anode fuel, 1.0 M MeOH; flow rate, 1.0 mL min−1; no back pressure; oxygen pressure, 0.2 MPa. (DMFC condition)	Cathode catalyst: 1.0 mg cm−2 of Pt loading. Anode catalysts were Pt–Ru/C (20 wt% of Pt, 10 wt% of Ru) with Nafion-115 from Johnson Matthey (2.0 mg cm−2 metal loading)	90 °C	Fuel cell: increased current density (186 mA cm−2) and power density (103 mW cm−2) for the Pt/MWCNT compared with the Pt/XC-72 catalyst (136 mA cm−2 and 87 mW cm−2)	—	
154

Pt(SAC)–N/carbon black	Synergistic effect between Pt single atoms and pyridinic-N	O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 or 0.1 M KOH (RDE and fuel cell conditions) (back pressure: 0.2 bar, 80 °C) fuel cells with H2 and O2 in 100% RH)	Catalyst: 24 μgPt cm−2. Commercial Pt/C catalyst, (20 wt% of Pt) from E-TEK	80 °C	Fuel cell: maximum power density of 0.68 W cm−2 with a high Pt utilization efficiency of 0.13 gPt kW−1 (Pt–N/CB as cathode (10 mgPt cm−2) and commercial Pt/C as anode (80 mgPt cm−2)) and commercial Pt/C (as both cathode (200 mgPt cm−2) and anode (100 mgPt cm−2)) higher power density of 1.02 W cm−2 with lower Pt utilization efficiency of 0.29 gPt kW−1	Durability test: 74% of the current remains in the fuel cell. (Fixed potential of 0.5 V, 200 h)	
146

Carbon defect-anchored Pt single-atom	Pt single atoms anchored by four carbon atoms in carbon divacancies (Pt–C4 site) are the main active sites	O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (RDE and fuel cell conditions)	Catalyst: 0.39 mg cm−2. Commercial Pt/C catalyst, (20 wt% of Pt) from E-TEK	80 °C	Fuel cell: maximum power density of the Pt1.1/BP defect-based PEMFC reaches 520 mW cm−2 with highest Pt utilization (0.09 gPt kW−1). (Acidic single cell with Pt1.1/BP defect as cathode (27 μgPt cm−2) catalyst and commercial Pt/C (20 wt%, Johnson Matthey) as anode catalyst (20 μgPt cm−2))	Durability test: Pt1.1/BP defect presents an increased durability (∼9 mV negative shift for E1/2) compared with the commercial Pt/C (∼37 mV negative shifts for E1/2). (Potential cycling 0.5–1.1 V vs. RHE, 10000 cycles, 1600 rpm)	
155


 	Fig. 11  XRD patterns of the Pt-loaded supports (a) Pt/carbon A, red pattern; Pt/carbon B, green pattern; Pt/carbon C, blue pattern; Pt fcc reference, black pattern; PtO reference, gray pattern. XPS spectra of Pt 4f Pt/carbons A–C measured at room temperature (b) and after annealing at 110 °C (c). The black experimental curves are deconvoluted into peaks corresponding to Pt0 metallic states (blue curves), Pt2+ states (red curves) due to formation of PtO/Pt(OH)2, Pt4+ states (green curves) due to PtO2/OH groups, and Pt2+ states due to some Pt–Cl groups (magenta curves). XPS spectra and deconvolution of Pt 4f region for (d) Pt/C, (e) Pt/N-MC, (f) Pt/S-MC, and (g) Pt@N,S-MC. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. (b–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2018, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  
In situ XANES for the Pt L3 edge of carbon-supported Pt nanoparticles at potentials (a) ascending from 0.41 to 1.51 V and (b) descending from 1.51 to 0.41 V in 1 M HClO4. The yellowish-green dashed line is the ex situ XANES for commercial PtO2. (c) k3-Weighted Pt-LIII edge XAFS oscillation of Pt foil, PtCo, PtCu, PtNi alloy foils, Pt/C, PtCo/C, PtCo/C-HTs, PtCu/C, PtCu/C-HT, and PtNi/C at 0.4 V. (d) Fourier transform of k3-Weighted Pt-LIII edge XAFS oscillation of Pt foil, PtCo, PtCu, PtNi alloy foils, Pt/C, PtCo/C, PtCo/C-HTs, PtCu/C, PtCu/C-HT, and PtNi/C at 0.4 V. HT: heat treatment. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 161 Copyright 2016, The American Chemical Society. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 162 Copyright 2011, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  HRTEM images and corresponding filtered images of Pt particles on the corresponding carbon supports: (a and d) Pt/carbon-A; (b and e) Pt/carbon-B; (c and f) Pt/carbon-C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Comparison of high-resolution HAADF images before and after electrochemical aging: (a–c) Pt/carbon-A initial, after CV, and after CA, respectively; (d–f) Pt/carbon-B initial, after CV, and after CA, respectively; (g–i) Pt/carbon-C initial, after CV, and after CA, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 Copyright 2014, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) INS spectra collected at 20 K of the bare carbon support (1′A, grey) and of the Pt/C catalyst (2′A, orange) in the presence of 230 mbar of molecular H2, magnified in the 40–200 cm−1 region, (b) the difference spectrum 2′A–1′A, (c) INS spectra at 420 mbar of molecular hydrogen: bare carbon support (1′B, grey) and Pt/C catalyst (2′B, yellow), and (d) the difference spectrum 2′B–1′B. (e) INS spectra collected at 20 K showing only the chemisorbed hydrogen signals for the Pt/C catalyst at an H2 equilibrium pressure of 230 (2′A–1′A, violet) and 420 mbar (2′B–1′B, red), respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Partial DOS of the support (a) graphene, (b) 3N-doped graphene and (c) 6N-doped graphene. Insets show the structure, carbon atoms in brown and N in blue spheres. Final configuration of the adsorption of oxygen at the Pt cluster–support interface (Pt, C, and O in blue, gray and red spheres) and the initial geometry of the supported Pt cluster without oxygen is showed in the back as green shadows as (d) Pt38–graphene, (e) Pt38–3N-doped graphene and (f) Pt38–6N-doped graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015.	 

 	Fig. 17  Design principles of electrocatalysts through metal–support interaction tactics.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
