 In situ investigation of the formation and metastability of formamidinium lead tri-iodide perovskite solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE01079B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE01079B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2372-2382
In situ investigation of the formation and metastability of formamidinium lead tri-iodide perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Jeffery A. 
            Aguiar‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Sarah 
            Wozny‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Terry G. 
            Holesinger
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Toshihiro 
            Aoki
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Maulik K. 
            Patel
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Mengjin 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Joseph J. 
            Berry
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mowafak 
            Al-Jassim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weilie 
            Zhou
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Kai 
            Zhu
          
        
      *a
aNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA. E-mail: Jeffery.Aguiar@nrel.gov; Kai.Zhu@nrel.gov;   Tel: +1 (303) 384-6485  Tel: +1 (303) 384-6353
bAdvanced Materials Research Institute, University of New Orleans, New Orleans, LA 70148, USA. E-mail: wzhou@uno.edu;   Tel: +1 (504) 280-1068
cLos Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 80465, USA
dLeRoy Eyring Center for Solid State Science, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
eDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
Received 
      12th April 2016
    , Accepted 23rd May 2016First published on 23rd May 2016AbstractOrganic–inorganic perovskites have emerged as an important class of next generation solar cells due to their remarkably low cost, band gap, and sub-900 nm absorption onset. Here, we show a series of in situ observations inside electron microscopes and X-ray diffractometers under device-relevant synthesis conditions focused on revealing the crystallization process of the formamidinium lead-triiodide perovskite at the optimum temperature of 175 °C. Direct in situ observations of the structure and chemistry over relevant spatial, temporal, and temperature scales enabled identification of key perovskite formation and degradation mechanisms related to grain evolution and interface chemistry. The lead composition was observed to fluctuate at grain boundaries, indicating a mobile lead-containing species, a process found to be partially reversible at a key temperature of 175 °C. Using low energy electron microscopy and valence electron energy loss spectroscopy, lead is found to be bonded in the grain interior with iodine in a tetrahedral configuration. At the grain boundaries, the binding energy associated with lead is consequently shifted by nearly 2 eV and a doublet peak is resolved due presumably to a greater degree of hybridization and the potential for several different bonding configurations. At the grain boundaries there is adsorption of hydrogen and OH− ions as a result of residual water vapor trapped as a non-crystalline material during formation. Insights into the relevant formation and decomposition reactions of formamidinium lead iodide at low to high temperatures, observed metastabilities, and relationship with the photovoltaic performance were obtained and used to optimize device processing resulting in conversion efficiencies of up to 17.09% within the stability period of the devices.

Broader context
Organic–inorganic perovskites have emerged as an important class of next generation solar cells reaching beyond 22% efficiency. Further advancement requires an in-depth understanding of the complex correlations among various physical, chemical and electro-optical properties, as well as their impacts on device characteristics. In this study, we combine and apply advanced in situ characterization techniques to understand and elucidate the properties of this emerging class of high efficiency organic–inorganic hybrid photovoltaics. The fundamental study reveals that differences in thermal and environmental processing have detailed effects on the combined microstructure and chemistry of grain boundaries due to the presence of residual trapped water vapor measured by both atomic contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy and high resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy. To realize a high-efficiency formamidinium lead tri-iodide perovskite solar cell on the bench top, sequentially annealing in an inert dry environment provides an opportunity for redistributing the lead containing species along grain boundaries, which we suspect promotes crystallization and subsequent charge carrier transport. State of the art characterization provides not only new insights into the growth of an emerging class of photovoltaics, but offers perspectives into how to develop a processing routine to gain control over grain boundary chemistry and ultimately apply this knowledge to assemble low cost high efficiency solar cells.

Introduction
The development of new photovoltaic (PV) materials is intertwined with major technological achievements in energy and semiconductor device fabrication.1–3 Today's photovoltaics and electronic devices have similar requirements for energy: highly efficiency (>15%), a low cost, manufacturing on a large scale, and reliability.2–7 Perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) are attractive PV materials due to their impressive properties such as light harvesting ability, high device efficiencies, and low-cost, industry-scalable processing.2–14 However, the development of successful and scalable technologies requires an understanding of the formation dynamics of materials that occur during processing of the materials and their subsequent impact on the device applications, which is limited in the literature.9,15–21 Fundamental materials-based studies are needed to reveal the relationship between the microstructure, chemistry, and resulting device properties as a function of processing environment to underpin the rational process design required for manufacturing.
Perovskite-based solar cells and associated technologies should therefore greatly benefit from direct observation of fundamental processes that occur during the synthesis and crystallization process, especially as the range of perovskite-based materials expands. Observations of formation dynamics across the various successful Edisonian recipes devised for device fabrication can provide a framework for creating a unified understanding of the process design of these materials.6,22–24 However, direct insights of this type into the mechanisms for perovskite formation from the inorganic and organic components are still lacking.6,22 It has been widely reported that the performance of finished devices varies with time, temperature, humidity, and other details of the synthetic conditions.17,25–27 Understanding the related phase and structural equilibria is required to minimize the physical, electrical, and chemical barriers to higher efficiencies across multiple cell processes.18,23,26,28–33
To address these challenges, we undertook a series of in situ synthesis and characterization experiment studies using transmission electron microscopy (S/TEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) that provided direct observation of the crystallization and ensuring formation pathways associated with FAPbI3 (FA-based perovskite).34,35 This in situ effort enabled a thorough, in-depth approach to (1) directly observe perovskite formation and identify key process-relevant temperatures, (2) probe the fine details, time-dependent attributes, and metastability of phase formation with well-defined, variable temperature experiments, (3) provide the needed context for conventional specimen characterization of samples taken from fixed points in the preparation process, and (4) inform and guide the optimization of perovskite solar cell fabrication. Thin perovskite films were fabricated from FAI/PbI2 precursor solutions on titania-coated Si3N4 chips that were placed in a specialized in situ gas S/TEM hot cell that allowed for gas flow around the specimen at atmospheric pressures.36 We specifically show that (i) optimal processing of FAPbI3 occurs at 175 °C. This temperature measured inside the in situ gas cell is directly related to the mobility, metastability, and subsequent intergranular diffusion of lead to the grain boundaries. We also detail (ii) that the grain boundaries are lead-rich and that at this optimum temperature (175 °C) a partially reversible process occurs involving the exchange of lead along boundary interiors and surfaces. We also observe that (iii) beyond 175 °C, coarse particle nucleation and growth occurs with the formation of precipitates following conventional nucleation and kinetics. After formation these precipitates are only partially reincorporated into the material following a longer annealing at 175 °C. Finally, there is direct evidence (iv) of the adsorption of hydrogen and OH− ions at grain boundaries. This process appears to result from residual water vapor trapped as a non-crystalline material remaining at the grain boundaries during formation. The presence of disorder and/or other elements at the grain boundaries is elucidated in this study, to provide inputs for a more complete material understanding of the stability of inorganic–organic perovskites and related devices. Taken together, these results identify several key aspects associated with the formation and subsequent effect of temperature on the final film morphology and measured device performance of the inorganic organic perovskite, FAPbI3.

In situ observation of perovskite formation

Fig. 1a is an illustrative schematic of the beam conditions for observing perovskite formation inside a specialized in situ gas S/TEM hot stage from 50 °C to 225 °C, at nominal atmospheric pressure with purified argon gas flowing at 0.1 cm3 min−1. The temperature profile during thermal cycling of the FAPbI3 thin film is shown in Fig. 1b. Fig. 1c contains a series of S/TEM plan-view images that show snapshots of the FAPbI3 film structure over time and temperature, where the brighter contrasted regions are grain boundaries. Normalized image intensity histograms were produced for each snapshot and are shown in Fig. 1d. The image histograms are calculated by sampling five areas containing grain boundaries or interiors. Each pixel y-value corresponds to the fractional number of pixels with a specific gray value, normalized from 0 to 1 for the entire image. In this manner, the series of histograms can be compared. Each S/TEM HAADF image was acquired under low beam dose conditions (<236 e− per nm2 per frame) with the 300 kV electron beam blanked between snapshots. These are low electron beam conditions considering this is an in situ experiment, where the total thickness of the entire cell, including the two 50 nm SiNx windows and air gap, is roughly 1165 nm. The bottom SiNx window was coated with compact titania. The thickness of the deposited FAPbI3 film on the compact titania coated SiNx window was measured to be 65 nm on average to allow electron transmission for in situ TEM measurements. Within each snapshot the contrast is directly related to the atomic number of the material. The bright contrasted regions (grain boundaries and precipitates) are lead-rich, while the darker regions corresponded to the FAI precursor or FAPbI3. It is worth noting that the precipitates that form contain Pb, but for average atomic contrast imaging we cannot clearly differentiate between PbI3 or Pb inclusions. Subsequent chemical imaging shows both are possible (see Fig. S5 in the ESI†). This is consistent with a significant difference in the atomic number, between Pb (Z: 82) and C (Z: 6). Sequential changes in the distribution of the lead composition throughout the film are resolved by observing the differences in image contrast and subsequently comparing the image histograms in Fig. 1d from the grain interiors (blue solid line) and boundary (red solid line) regions.
 Fig. 1  Experimental in situ setup, temperature profile, and STEM imaging of FAPbI3. (a) To resolve the evolving microstructure and evolution of FAPbI3 we performed a controlled temperature study of a FA-based PSC inside a heated in situ gas cell from 50 °C to 225 °C while flowing inert argon gas. (b) A specific temperature profile. (c) To track the microstructure, we performed atomic contrast STEM plane-view imaging, tracking a specific region, outlined by a white box, zoomed-in micrographs from a to i are shown below. (d) In addition, an accompanying series of normalized image histograms for micrographs are provided for comparison from grain interiors (blue curve) and areas containing multiple grain boundaries (red). The x-axis is the normalized gray scale from 0 to 1 and the y-axis is the number of pixels with that gray value taken from either an area containing a grain interior (blue curve) or boundary (red curve). 
Starting at room temperature (25 °C, Fig. 1c(a)), the material is polycrystalline and FAPbI3 has not yet formed. At this low temperature, no electron beam effects were observed. Increasing the temperature to 50 °C (Fig. 1c(b)) and then 150 °C (Fig. 1c(c)), with 10 minutes temperature dwells at each temperature, we observe a slight redistribution of lead. This is verified based on the bright contrast observed in the accompanying image histograms, from 50 °C (Fig. 1d(b)) to 150 °C (Fig. 1d(c)) that show a slight shift of the blue/grain interior curve to a lower value or higher darkness value, with an additional sharpening of the profile further iterating a change in the composition. Increasing the temperature to 175 °C (Fig. 1c(d)), we observe the further migration of lead where the accompanying image histograms (Fig. 1d(d)) show a shift of the red/grain boundary curve to a higher value or higher brightness value. A temperature increase to 200 °C (Fig. 1c(e)) shows the formation of lead-rich segregation along the boundaries. The accompanying image histograms between 175 °C (Fig. 1d(d)) and 200 °C (Fig. 1d(e)) show a significant shift of the blue/grain interior curve to lower contrast, representative of a greater portion of the dark contrasted area or depletion of lead from the grain interiors. The red/grain boundary curve widens, indicative of a greater portion of grain boundary ripening with additional lead. Dropping the temperature back to 175 °C (Fig. 1d(f)) allows then for the material to recover and reincorporate some of the lead back into the perovskite grain interiors, leading to a slight decrease in the intensity of the accompanying red/grain boundary image histogram shown in Fig. 1d(f). At this point, in the series there is observed overall improvement in material composition, based on comparing the image contrast and histograms starting at 25 °C, against the outlining grain contrast in subsequent images and accompanying image histograms. This is indicative yet again of the general lack of stability due to mobile lead and other elemental species in the material.
In this study we targeted both the understanding of the initial film formation and the subsequent stability under device-relevant synthesis conditions; therefore we extended the in situ experiment beyond the optimal temperature (175 °C), to examine the extent of the reversibility in the segregation of the lead species. Sequentially increasing the temperature again from 175 °C to 200 °C (Fig. 1c(g)) and then above to 225 °C (Fig. 1c(h)), we observe additional, larger lead containing particles at the grain boundaries. The associated image histograms for this change from 200 °C (Fig. 1d(g)) to 225 °C (Fig. 1d(h)) show an increase in the maximum of the blue/grain boundary histogram with the same overall shape. This behavior is further indicative of lead mobility at temperatures higher than 200 °C. At this point, a subsequent drop and annealing at 175 °C for 10 minutes (Fig. 1c(i)) shows a decrease in the blue/grain interior curve in Fig. 1d(i) with the addition of a second peak in the blue curve. This is indicative of an increasing lead content in the grain interior. The red/grain boundary curve widens which suggests an incomplete reduction in the size of the particles that have formed and coarsened at the boundaries. The dissolution of the lead-containing particles is only partially reversible if they have proceeded into the coarsening phase. After this second annealing at 175 °C, we increased the temperature to 200 °C (Fig. 1c(j)) followed by 225 °C (Fig. 1c(k)) demonstrating that the lead is still mobile within the film, despite the presence of a greater number of relatively large and proportionally more stable lead-containing particles produced at this elevated temperature. Again the change in the intensity of accompanying image histograms from 200 °C (Fig. 1d(j)) to 225 °C (Fig. 1d(k)) shows a change in both the red/grain boundary and blue/grain interior curves. The red/grain boundary curve shifts to a lower value or darker contrast and narrows, and a second peak emerges, all indicative of a larger amount of high atomic mass at the boundary, i.e. segregation of lead-containing species at the grain boundaries. Over the same temperature sequence, the blue/grain interior curve lowers in intensity and broadens, and the second peak is lost, which suggests lead segregating back to the grain boundary region. Completing the experiment, the temperature of the cell was dropped to 50 °C (Fig. 1c(l)) with a narrowed red/grain boundary and blue/grain interior curves (Fig. 1d(f)) indicative yet again of the lack of stability and mobility of lead and elemental species in the material. Following the drop in temperature to 50 °C the morphology is quenched. From the perspective of device processing and performance, the grain morphology is mostly uniform following annealing of the material at the optimum temperature of 175 °C.
To aid in establishing the crystallographic structure of the films we undertook in situ XRD experiments that tracked the same temperature sequences as shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 2 is a complementary structural timeline focused on the formation of FAPbI3 by collecting accompanying in situ X-ray diffraction profiles. The temperatures at which the XRD patterns were collected are indicated in the legend. The Miller indices are provided for the perovskite alpha cubic phase, while ‘PbI2’ and the hexagonal phase are labeled as lead iodide and the starting perovskite phase. The XRD data collected at 25 °C show peaks originating only from the precursor phase. Upon increasing the temperature to 135 °C the precursors react to crystallize into the FAPbI3 perovskite phase. The phase separation of the PbI2 phase is then initiated at about 145 °C and is almost complete at 175 °C, which corresponds to in situ TEM observation at 150 °C and 175 °C. The PbI2 phase can be indexed to a CaCl2 type crystal structure belonging to the Rm space group, while the FAPbI3 phase can be indexed to a perovskite alpha phase type crystal structure belonging to the P3m1 space group. The other phase of perovskite can be indexed to a hexagonal space group P63mc. Based on the diffraction profiles, we show that FAPbI3 started to form at a lower temperature, in proximity of 135 °C and the lead-containing species can phase separate above this temperature and matches the higher atomic contrast at the grain boundaries observed using in situ STEM at 150 °C.
 Fig. 2  
In situ diffraction. In situ XRD confirms the material microstructure for the generated devices as a function of temperature starting with the precursor material. The perovskite peaks are indexed to the patterned recorded at series of temperatures and the hexagonal phase perovskite peaks at 11.7°, 26.45°, 33.64°, and 51.41° 2θ are labeled as Y. Note that the spectra are labelled by temperature and numbered to help with referencing. 
Detailed structures and composition of polycrystalline FAPbI3 PSC annealed at 175 °C
To elucidate the impact of the chemical variations in the structure and the apparent precipitation of Pb at the grain boundaries on the electronic properties of FAPbI3 we undertook high resolution, point-resolved valence electron energy loss spectroscopy (VEELS). These measurements complement the in situ HAADF images by elucidating the chemistry at grain interiors and boundaries. However to mitigate damage from the electron beam, a low-energy, triple aberration-corrected, energy filtered 40 kV scanning transmission electron microscope was used. Valence and chemistry measurements traversing a grain boundary are collected as shown in Fig. 3a. Shown is a static image of the as-grown polycrystalline, 175 °C annealed perovskite material, where the bottom grain is tilted close to a one zone-axis configuration, and the areas from which the VEELS spectra were collected are outlined. The STEM probe was rastered over the sample area within 1024 × 1024 pixels, with a less than 8 pA beam current, and a 3 μs dwell time, which constituted a total estimated electron beam dose of less than 64 e− per nm2 per frame. Fig. 3b is the raw normalized VEELS spectral scan that characterizes the low loss region of the electron energy-loss spectrum (0–35 eV), where features due to optical modes, valence band transitions, OH−, and H+ ions can be detected.37–39 The VEELS STEM-based spectral scans result from horizontally summed and averaged 2-dimensional images over and near the grain boundary as indicated in Fig. 3a. Following a modified linear-least squares routine to subtract both the zero-loss and background VEELS signal associated with the silicon nitride substrate background subtraction, we identified three specific electronic energy loss regimes for comparison of the signals spanning two adjacent grains with a common boundary.40Fig. 3c is a comparison of the VEELS spectra from the collected grain interiors and the boundary region extending from 0 to 35 eV. This residual spectral comparison contains the band-edge onset associated with PbI2 at roughly 2.36 eV, an OH− spectral feature at 6.2 eV, discussed in detail by Bradley et al., and the H1sK and lead ionization thresholds.41 The presence of the hydroxyl group (OH−) is localized to the boundary region. Furthermore, the OH− spectral feature is broadened at the boundary, which would be expected from a multiple bonding state configuration as well the delocalized nature of VEELS. We suspect that the presence of this feature is due to residual water vapor that is trapped in the material during processing. At slightly higher energy loss we can compare the resolved H1sK ionization edge profiles, which is a narrower peak within the perovskite domain compared to the boundary. The difference in hydrogenic profiles can be attributed to the presence of a strong singlet bonding state within the perovskite interior. Given the electronic open shell configuration of hydrogen and presumed differences in atomic ordering at the boundary, several free-surface like bonding configurations are possible including the effects discussed associated with the broadened OH− profile and shift in the H1sK ionization edge profile. The third region of interest resolved in Fig. 3c extends from 17 to 30 eV and contains a comparison of the bonding state associated with lead between the grain interior and boundary. At the boundary, we resolve the presence of both the PbO5 and PbO4 ionization edges, which not only suggest the presence of lead at the boundary, but a split bonding state. The split bonding state is indicative of bonds between Pb and neighboring atoms, such as trapped residual oxygen, at the grain boundary. The spectra from the grain interiors of the perovskite show only the PbO5 ionization edge, suggesting a singlet bonding state with neighboring iodine atoms.41 The PbO5 peaks are shifted relative to the grain interior and boundary, due to a chemical bonding state shift associated with lead and its surrounding chemical environment.
 Fig. 3  STEM imaging and high resolution VEELS. Tracking in situ studies, static imaging of a representative as-grown perovskite device material annealing at 175 °C for 10 minutes was imaged with (a) higher resolution aberration corrected gentle STEM and (b) profiled across a grain with point resolved energy filtered valence electronic energy loss spectroscopy (VEELS) spectral imaging at 60 kV. (b) Under these imaging conditions, a highly polycrystalline sample was thereby oriented to a nearly kinematic condition and high resolution VEELS (HR-VEELS) line profiling was performed near and at a grain boundary. (c) Following analyses of the collected raw VEELS profiles processed to subtract the residual background from the supporting silicon nitride substrate, resolving and comparing the presence of carbon, hydrogen, OH−, and lead between the perovskite grain interior and boundary region. (d) Higher resolution aloof beam VEELS confirms PbI2 as an identified segregated species, as well as perovskite, in line with the in situ observations. Note that the bright grain has been oriented close to a zone-axis configuration. 
Based on these identified chemical differences, we performed high-resolution aloof beam VEELS.42 An aloof beam condition is when the electron beam is not directly positioned over the sample. This defines a no dose beam condition. The VEELS spectra collected between 0 eV to 4.5 eV identify the near band gap valence electronic structure of the sample.42Fig. 3d is the VEELS spectra collected from an area enriched in perovskite and PbI2. These spectra clearly identify both the subtle yet sharp band-edge onset at 2.36 eV associated with PbI2 and the onset of the valence band of perovskite at roughly 1.4 eV. Each of these reported values is based on extending a linear fit to the VEEL spectra, with a significant broadening up to the band-edge onset of PbI2. The band gap associated with the perovskite has been measured to be roughly 1.5 eV.27 More importantly the measured spectral fine structure is consistent with the previous dose conditions, iterating that the physical conditions used to image and characterize the sample have no observable impacts on the chemistry or electronic structure of the material.
Impact of processing temperature on the device
FA-based PSCs were processed in a manner derived from the observed microstructural development from in situ work (Fig. 1–3). Fig. 4a compares the effect of temperature on the typical photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves (under simulated one sun illumination) of FA-based devices prepared with annealing temperatures of 150 °C, 175 °C, 200 °C, and 225 °C, respectively. A group of devices (about 8–12 cells for each annealing temperature) were fabricated for annealing at each temperature to quantify statistically device performance and characteristics. The typical device performance values corresponding to the J–V curves in Fig. 4a are shown in Table 1. Additional information on mean values and standard deviations are provided in Table S2 in the ESI.† Devices annealed at 175 °C showed cell efficiencies with the best short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF). The Jsc values of these cells are consistent with the integrated current densities from their corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra (Fig. 4b). These are also consistent with the in situ studies shown in Fig. 1–3, suggesting that a uniform FA-based perovskite material along with the existence of PbI2 (to certain degree) at the grain boundaries are best for achieving higher efficiency FAPbI3 based solar cells. An illustration of the overall process based on our results is shown in Fig. 4c. Note with the optimum annealing temperature around 175 °C, we obtained in one device a perovskite solar cell efficiency (PCE) with an output of 17.09% based on the reverse scan of the J–V curve (Fig. S8a in the ESI†). It is worth noting that there is a noticeable (and expected) hysteresis behavior (Fig. S8a in the ESI†); the forward J–V scan only displays a PCE of about 13.18%. Because of this hysteretic behavior, a stabilized power output was measured over time near the maximum power output point to verify the performance of the PSC. Fig. S8b (ESI†) shows that a 16.6% PCE was steadily recorded over several minutes, which matches the reverse-scan J–V curve reasonably well.
 Fig. 4  Organic inorganic PSC device measurements and schematic of the cell growth process. (a) Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of planar perovskite solar cells based on FAPbI3 films prepared at various annealing temperature as indicated. Measurements were done under simulated 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 irradiation. (b) Typical EQE curves at different temperatures. (c) In summary, the use of in situ S/TEM provides the level of detail to resolve the detailed mobility of lead to and from PSCs grain boundaries that ultimately degrade the measured performance associated with these FAI-based PSC photovoltaics. 
Table 1 Measured device characteristics as a function of annealing temperature for a fixed time interval of 10 minutes




Temperature (°C)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




150
19.45
1.067
59.7
12.39


175
21.84
1.048
73.6
16.84


200
20.23
1.040
65.6
13.81


225
18.40
1.001
59.1
10.88




Discussion
From this collection of measurements we are able to resolve the inhomogeneities in as-formed FAPbI3 films (Fig. 1c and 2). We find that these variations are commensurate with the grain structure of the material. Grain boundary regions show both excess Pb as well as evidence for OH− inclusion (Fig. 3a). This permits us to resolve the inhomogenity associated within the material, containing FA-based perovskite and PbI2. Several scenarios are possible for explaining the measureable differences in the bonding nature based on the collected VEELS line profiles. Lead is bonded in the grain interior to iodine in a tetrahedral configuration, as a singlet which results in a single ionization peak. At the boundary, the binding energy associated with lead is shifted by ∼2 eV and a doublet peak is observed. Presumably, there is a greater degree of hybridization and several possible bonding configurations that lead to a potentially different orbital overlap with the lead 5d unoccupied states, as well as the effect of neighboring residual oxygen containing species. The relative peak positions in the valence spectrum are also potentially perturbed by the formation of other stable molecules (e.g., H-PbI2), which leads to an increase in the binding energy due to charge screening of the interface core.43 The detection of the hydroxyl (OH−) localized to the grain boundaries suggests two important points. The first is the importance of maintaining the phase purity of the starting materials and processes by which devices are made. The second important point is the presence of water vapor which is likely one of the degradation pathways for these devices that are directly exposed to ambient environmental conditions.27,44,45 Collectively, active control over environmental conditions as well as the materials used in the process need to be carefully chosen to mitigate the presence of impurities and water vapor.
Effect of temperature and annealing time
The high-quality (PCE > 16.5%) FAPbI3 films examined here are polycrystalline containing a range of nanometer to micron sized grains. One of the key observations from the in situ experimental studies is that we (i) show optimized processing of FAPbI3 including annealing at 175 °C and is directly related to the mobility and segregation of lead at boundaries. The agreement between the multiple datasets suggests that our efforts to minimize electron beam dose were successful in removing its effects on the observed formation process. J–V curves reveal that the device performances are correlated and influenced by the temperature, where a change of ±10 °C will have an impact on both the short-circuit current (Jsc) and open-circuit voltage (Voc) significantly. At 150 °C, the J–V curve shows that the device has an efficiency of 12.39%. In correlation with the in situ S/TEM and XRD observations, it is clear that PbI2 and FAI are not yet fully crystallized into FAPbI3, leading to a reduced efficiency due to an unfinished crystallization process. However, when the temperature is increased to 175 °C, an improvement can be seen in the J–V curves both in the Jsc and the fill factor (FF), leading to an average device group efficiency of 16.84%. When the temperature is further increased to 200 °C and 225 °C, the degradation of the FAPbI3 perovskite is initiated and the device performance showed similar degradation. This is strongly correlated to microscopy, where PbI2 migrates to the grain boundaries to form points of nucleation leading to subsequent particle growth into individual nanometer precipitates, also observed in the chemical decomposition of MAPbI3 compounds.46 This degradation leads to a loss in key device parameters: Jsc, Voc and fill factor which directly have an impact on the efficiencies of the PSCs.
Temperature dependent chemical equilibria
Given the above results, possible scenarios, and explanations, FA-based perovskite materials evolve with temperature. The mobility of lead following heating of the material we suspect is due to the presence of hydroxyl ions trapped at grain boundaries, the consequence of residual water. The presence of a lead complex at FAPbI3 grain boundaries results in an altered local electronic environment at interfaces, which is otherwise distinct from the surrounding bulk polycrystalline material. At the grain boundaries there is direct evidence of the adsorption of hydrogen and lead, owing to the idea (i) there is exchange of H+ and FA+ cations under thermal cycling, leading to a degradation of the structural integrity of the trigonal perovskite framework, also suggested in similar studies.19,21 In particular, the degree of intermixing between the PbI2 and FA depends significantly on the processing conditions. (ii) Upon heating, FAPbI3 can dissociate into FA+, HI and PbI2 or its ionic version (PbI3−, PbI4−, and PbI6−), where ionic lead iodide can be hydrolyzed and react with neighboring site-specific residual O to form PbI(OH) crystals. PbI(OH) crystals however cannot undergo a reversible crystallization process, leading to a permanent degradation of the FAPbI3 domain interior. (iii) The reaction of PbI2 with HI may also lead to the formation of HPbI3 precursor material (iv) upon cooling, via the FA cation reacting with PbI2 species (HPbI3, PbI3−, PbI4−, and PbI6−) and recrystallizing the FAPbI3 perovskite. In line with these ideas we have summarized in Fig. 4c the preferred pathway to a higher efficiency FA-based PSC through sequential annealing leading to the eventual redistribution of lead and hydrogen for FA-based perovskites. In particular, the degree of intermixing between the lead iodide and FA depends significantly on the processing conditions. Consistent with this idea and the main conclusion of our study is that the influence of process temperature on measured device properties directly follows from the microstructure of FA-based PSCs, where the distribution of chemical species importantly affects the final measured device efficiency.
Conclusions
The in situ experiments presented here using (scanning) transmission electron microscopy (S/TEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) provided an in-depth, direct observation under device-relevant synthesis conditions of the crystallization and ensuing formation pathways associated with FAPbI3 (FA-based perovskite) thin films. It was found that optimal processing of FAPbI3 occurs at 175 °C. The grain boundaries are lead-rich relative to the grain interiors and at 175 °C a partially reversible process occurs involving the exchange of lead along boundary interiors and surfaces. At temperatures above 175 °C, nucleation and growth of lead-rich precipitates occur. These precipitates can only be partially reincorporated into the material following longer annealing at 175 °C. The results from the in situ experiments were used to develop optimized device processing procedures based on synthesis around 175 °C. Within the stability period of the devices, devices with efficiencies up to 17.09% were obtained with this improved process.
The microstructural characterization also revealed that hydrogen and OH− ions are readily absorbed at grain boundaries. During synthesis, this process appears to result from residual water vapor trapped in the non-crystalline material remaining at the grain boundaries during formation. However, these absorption pathways may also explain observed degradations reported in the literature for PSC devices exposed to typical, every-day environmental conditions.
Experimental methods
Analytical materials characterization and transmission electron microscopy
An in situ S/TEM approach has been used to directly visualize nucleation, crystallization, and growth of FAPbI3 using the commercially available Hummingbird Scientific in situ gas hot-stage system. Samples suitable for use in the system were studied for their response to heat stimuli under an inert argon gas flow of 0.1 cm3 min−1. A cross-section of the differentially pumped cell (ESI†) depicts how the electron beam interacts through the silicon nitride (SixNy) windows and how elastically scattered electrons are collected for bright field (BF) and annular dark field (ADF) atomic contrast S/TEM imaging with a 1.4 Å probe. Each collected HAADF image's histogram was integrated and normalized to the same constant value. Individual image selective histograms were performed by selecting multiple areas consistent over the image stack distinguishing between areas containing grain boundaries and interiors. These image histograms are formed by normalizing the gray scale along the x-axis and counting the number fractional pixels based on the overall image for these two separate areas. A direct comparison can be made based on this analysis. Analytical transmission electron imaging and diffraction were carried out on an image-corrected FEI Titan, FEI Tecnai, and the monochromated energy filtered Nion UltraSTEM. The image-corrected FEI Titan was operated in S/TEM mode at 300 kV with a 30 mrad convergence angle under low beam dose conditions. These conditions included beam blanking between images, working at low magnification <15000 and dispersing the beam using the monochromator to lower incident dose. Follow-up in situ and post mortem experiments were also performed on the super-twin FEI Tecnai and Nion Hermes UltraSTEM in similar low-dose S/TEM imaging and diffraction modes.
The microstructures from fully formed FAI films were imaged using low voltage 40 and 60 kV STEM on the newly installed monochromated Nion UltraSTEM at the LeRoy Center for Solid State Science at Arizona State University. Air sensitive sample handling procedures were followed to ensure that the sample was stored and transported under special instructions, including packaging and handling of the material under low residual water vapor conditions. On the gentle S/TEM, we performed high resolution valence electron energy loss spectroscopy (HR-VEELS) with 0.02 eV per pixel dispersion with better than 20 meV energy resolution defined by the FWHM of the zero loss peak (ZLP) using roughly a 1.7 Å probe at 60 kV and aloof beam conditions at 40 kV with 0.001 eV per pixel.47–50 Due to the higher energy dispersion and coincidentally limited spectral range the collected VEELS spectra were normalized to the integrated intensity associated with the zero loss peak (ZLP) from −1 eV to 1 eV. A multiple linear least squares routine as discussed in detail by Aguiar et al.40 was used to determine the band-gap onsets and spectral features. Coincident chemical imaging was also performed based on both atomic contrast STEM and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) to acquire chemical composite images based on the C-K, N-K, Pb-M, and I-L edges (ESI†).
Sample growth and in situ gas cell preparation
Silicon nitride (Si3N4) microchip spacers and standard windows were both prepared first by spray coating compact titania on the hot SiN microchips (450 °C) using 0.2 M solution of Ti(IV) bis(ethyl acetoacetate)-diisopropoxide in 1-butanol and subsequently annealed in air at 450 °C for 1 hour. Following annealing, a 30 minute ultraviolet (UV) treatment was performed to roughen the surface of the compact titania layer. A 0.7 M perovskite solution was prepared from the stoichiometric amount of lead iodide (PbI2) and FAI in DMF and immediately deposited on the surface of the microchip with the help of a micropipette. Optical imaging confirmed that the presence of perovskite suspended over the hole was intact with no visible ruptures or cracks. This approach was quite effective, with more than 80% of dropping attempts yielding perovskite solution after SEM and optical inspection. The quality of the dropped perovskite was then evaluated using transmission electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction. The in situ S/TEM conditions were then chosen to bracket the conditions of a comparative study on fabricating PSCs based solar cells. Note that the current in situ holder setup does not allow for controlled ramp rates and temperature changes occur within seconds. Following inspection, the as-treated Si3N4 microchips were assembled and joined with a calibrated heater microchip (±3 °C uncertainty) containing a large Si3N4 window obtained from Hummingbird Scientific for the in situ gas and heating platform. Inert argon gas was then passed through the holder at 0.5 cm3 min−1 for at least 30 minutes prior to observation and initial heating. During observation, inert argon gas continually flowed at 0.1 cm3 min−1 and the temperature was ramped and held at various temperatures between 50 °C and 225 °C.
The electron beam dose conditions were minimized during in situ S/TEM observation by keeping our imaging conditions below 100k× with a 300 kV defocused and energy-filtered STEM probe. All experiments were performed using a 1 μs pixel dwell time, an image size of 2048 × 2048 pixels, and a flyback time of 70 μs, which translates to a 4.34 s total frame time. Based on the incident beam current and total frame time, the incident electron beam dose was 256 e− per nm2 per f, where f is the frame number. In the case of TEM imaging and diffraction, nominal magnifications were kept below 20k× and 330 mm camera length on the LaB6 equipped FEI Tecnai. Static imaging at 50 °C under these conditions was further performed prior to and after in situ experiments. No differences in the structure and morphology were found, confirming that the low-dose imaging conditions helped to mitigate electron beam induced effects. A background subtracted azimuthal integration of the SAD images was performed as discussed in detail by Gammer et al.51 The SAD series was obtained to track the in situ phase evolution as a function of increasing temperature under the same environmental conditions used in the STEM imaging study. Note that there is finite time needed to collect a SAD pattern which added some a small amount of uncertainity in tracking the microstructural changes during controlled in situ growth.

In situ X-ray diffraction

In situ high temperature XRD was used to identify the phases that evolved during the synthesis of the FAPbI3 films. The setup included an Anton Parr HTK 1200N oven heated stage mounted on the Panalytical Empyrean XRD system. The high temperature stage was mounted on a z-stage to allow for automatic sample height adjustment during the high temperature cycle in order to account for the thermal expansion of the material. Thin films of precursors (FAI/PbI2) deposited on a compact titania/FTO glass substrate were mounted on an Al2O3 sample holder and heated from room temperature (25 °C) to 225 °C in air with a heating rate of 30 °C min−1. XRD measurements were performed in a conventional 2θ–ω configuration since the films were thick enough to prevent the X-rays from interacting with the substrate. The measurements were performed using Cu-Kα X-rays and an incident beam configuration comprised of an elliptical focusing mirror with a 1/16° divergence slit, a beam mask of 4 mm and 0.04° soller slits. The diffracted X-rays were detected using a position sensitive PIXcel3D detector in a linear 1D scanning mode capable of simultaneously collecting data over a 3.35° region. The data were collected in the 2θ range of 10° to 70° with a step size of 0.013° and a step time of 48.2 s per step which resulted in a total collection time of 15 min for each of these XRD patterns. XRD data were also collected with a very short step time of 18.9 s per step, for a total collection time of 6 min for the XRD patterns, to examine in further detail the dynamic evolution of the phases in the film.
Device fabrication and characterization
Parallel to and informed by the microscopy studies, PSC devices were prepared by spray coating a compact-TiO2 blocking layer on a pre-patterned 1 × 1 inch fluorine-doped SnO2-coated transparent conducting glass (FTO/glass) substrate.52 The perovskite thin films were then spin-coated from a 0.7 M solution of lead iodide (PbI2) and formamidinium iodide (FAI) in N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF). The substrate was subsequently furnace annealed in temperatures ranging from 150 °C to 225 °C for 10 min.27 The film was cooled for 1 min, before spin-coating the 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-dip-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) solution on the warm substrate for 30 seconds at 4000 rpm. Finally, silver electrodes were thermally evaporated to evaluate the performance of the device.27 The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) characteristic of FAPbI3 PSCs were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter connected to a Oriel Sol3A class AAA solar simulator under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (light irradiation of 100 mW cm−2) over a 0.12 cm2 masked area.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory as a part of the Non-Proprietary Partnering Program under Contract No. DE-AC36-08-GO28308 within the U.S. Department of Energy. Other parts of the TEM work were performed at the LeRoy Eyring Center for Solid State science at Arizona State University. The in situ high temperature X-ray diffraction experiments were performed using the instruments that were procured through the general infrastructure grant of DOE-Nuclear Energy University Program (DE-NE0000693). TGH and the hot-stage in situ (S)TEM work was supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division under grant number 2013LANL8400. We would also like to acknowledge helpful discussion and editorial support from Michelle Hanenburg, Shiva Adireddy, and Taylor Woehl.
References

          J. L. Sawin and F. Sverrisson, Renewable 2014 Global Status Report,  2014 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T.-Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Boix, K. Nonomura, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .

          D. B. Mitzi, Progress in Inorganic Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2007, pp. 1–121 Search PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12241–12244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9412–9418 CAS .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jung and N.-G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705–710 CAS .
J. You, Y. Yang, Z. Hong, T.-B. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
J. A. Christians, P. A. Miranda Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, H. Yu, H. Xu and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1120–1126 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 CAS .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
S. Aharon, A. Dymshits, A. Rotem and L. Etgar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9171–9178 CAS .
A. Dualeh, P. Gao, S. I. Seok, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6160–6164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wozny, M. Yang, A. M. Nardes, C. C. Mercado, S. Ferrere, M. O. Reese, W. Zhou and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4814–4820 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561–5568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. J. Ramos, D. Cortes, A. Aguirre, F. J. Castano and S. Ahmad, Fabrication and encapsulation of perovskites sensitized solid state solar cells,  2014 Search PubMed .
A. Pisoni, J. Jaćimović, O. S. Barišić, M. Spina, R. Gaál, L. Forró and E. Horváth, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2488–2492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, K. Manabe and H. Nishino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16995–17000 CAS .
W. Li, H. Dong, L. Wang, N. Li, X. Guo, J. Li and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13587–13592 CAS .
N. Chander, A. F. Khan, P. S. Chandrasekhar, E. Thouti, S. K. Swami, V. Dutta and V. K. Komarala, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 033904 CrossRef .
T. W. Hansen, J. B. Wagner, P. L. Hansen, S. Dahl, H. Topsøe and C. J. H. Jacobsen, Science, 2001, 294, 1508–1510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Alsem, N. J. Salmon, R. R. Unocic, G. M. Veith and K. L. More, Microsc. Microanal., 2012, 18, 1158–1159 CrossRef .
R. D. Leapman and S. Sun, Ultramicroscopy, 1995, 59, 71–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Yin and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 2629–2631 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hojou, S. Furuno, K. N. Kushita, N. Sasajima and K. Izui, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 1998, 141, 148–153 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Aguiar, B. W. Reed, Q. M. Ramasse, R. Erni and N. D. Browning, Ultramicroscopy, 2013, 124, 130–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Bradley, H. A. Ishii, J. J. Gillis-Davis, J. Ciston, M. H. Nielsen, H. A. Bechtel and M. C. Martin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 1732–1735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Garcia de Abajo and A. Howie, Inst. Phys. Conf. Ser., 1999, 161, 327–330 Search PubMed .
L. Pedesseau, J. Even, C. Katan, F. Raouafi, Y. Wei, E. Deleporte and J. M. Jancu, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 541, 9–11 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bordas, J. Robertson and A. Jakobsson, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1978, 11, 2607 CrossRef CAS .
M. Scrocco, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1989, 48, 363–374 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schoonman, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 619, 193–195 CrossRef CAS .
R. Erni, S. Lazar and N. D. Browning, Ultramicroscopy, 2008, 108, 270–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. L. Krivanek, T. C. Lovejoy, N. Dellby, T. Aoki, R. W. Carpenter, P. Rez, E. Soignard, J. Zhu, P. E. Batson, M. J. Lagos, R. F. Egerton and P. A. Crozier, Nature, 2014, 514, 209–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. L. Krivanek, J. P. Ursin, N. J. Bacon, G. J. Corbin, N. Dellby, P. Hrncirik, M. F. Murfitt, C. S. Own and Z. S. Szilagyi, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2009, 367, 3683–3697 CrossRef PubMed .
O. L. Krivanek, N. Dellby, M. F. Murfitt, M. F. Chisholm, T. J. Pennycook, K. Suenaga and V. Nicolosi, Ultramicroscopy, 2010, 110, 935–945 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gammer, C. Mangler, C. Rentenberger and H. P. Karnthaler, Scr. Mater., 2010, 63, 312–315 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zeng, C.-S. Jiang, N. P. Padture and K. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6363–6370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee01079b‡ Joint authorship.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
Organic–inorganic perovskites have emerged as an important class of next generation solar cells reaching beyond 22% efficiency. Further advancement requires an in-depth understanding of the complex correlations among various physical, chemical and electro-optical properties, as well as their impacts on device characteristics. In this study, we combine and apply advanced in situ characterization techniques to understand and elucidate the properties of this emerging class of high efficiency organic–inorganic hybrid photovoltaics. The fundamental study reveals that differences in thermal and environmental processing have detailed effects on the combined microstructure and chemistry of grain boundaries due to the presence of residual trapped water vapor measured by both atomic contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy and high resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy. To realize a high-efficiency formamidinium lead tri-iodide perovskite solar cell on the bench top, sequentially annealing in an inert dry environment provides an opportunity for redistributing the lead containing species along grain boundaries, which we suspect promotes crystallization and subsequent charge carrier transport. State of the art characterization provides not only new insights into the growth of an emerging class of photovoltaics, but offers perspectives into how to develop a processing routine to gain control over grain boundary chemistry and ultimately apply this knowledge to assemble low cost high efficiency solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  Experimental in situ setup, temperature profile, and STEM imaging of FAPbI3. (a) To resolve the evolving microstructure and evolution of FAPbI3 we performed a controlled temperature study of a FA-based PSC inside a heated in situ gas cell from 50 °C to 225 °C while flowing inert argon gas. (b) A specific temperature profile. (c) To track the microstructure, we performed atomic contrast STEM plane-view imaging, tracking a specific region, outlined by a white box, zoomed-in micrographs from a to i are shown below. (d) In addition, an accompanying series of normalized image histograms for micrographs are provided for comparison from grain interiors (blue curve) and areas containing multiple grain boundaries (red). The x-axis is the normalized gray scale from 0 to 1 and the y-axis is the number of pixels with that gray value taken from either an area containing a grain interior (blue curve) or boundary (red curve).	 

 	Fig. 2  
In situ diffraction. In situ XRD confirms the material microstructure for the generated devices as a function of temperature starting with the precursor material. The perovskite peaks are indexed to the patterned recorded at series of temperatures and the hexagonal phase perovskite peaks at 11.7°, 26.45°, 33.64°, and 51.41° 2θ are labeled as Y. Note that the spectra are labelled by temperature and numbered to help with referencing.	 

 	Fig. 3  STEM imaging and high resolution VEELS. Tracking in situ studies, static imaging of a representative as-grown perovskite device material annealing at 175 °C for 10 minutes was imaged with (a) higher resolution aberration corrected gentle STEM and (b) profiled across a grain with point resolved energy filtered valence electronic energy loss spectroscopy (VEELS) spectral imaging at 60 kV. (b) Under these imaging conditions, a highly polycrystalline sample was thereby oriented to a nearly kinematic condition and high resolution VEELS (HR-VEELS) line profiling was performed near and at a grain boundary. (c) Following analyses of the collected raw VEELS profiles processed to subtract the residual background from the supporting silicon nitride substrate, resolving and comparing the presence of carbon, hydrogen, OH−, and lead between the perovskite grain interior and boundary region. (d) Higher resolution aloof beam VEELS confirms PbI2 as an identified segregated species, as well as perovskite, in line with the in situ observations. Note that the bright grain has been oriented close to a zone-axis configuration.	 

 	Fig. 4  Organic inorganic PSC device measurements and schematic of the cell growth process. (a) Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of planar perovskite solar cells based on FAPbI3 films prepared at various annealing temperature as indicated. Measurements were done under simulated 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 irradiation. (b) Typical EQE curves at different temperatures. (c) In summary, the use of in situ S/TEM provides the level of detail to resolve the detailed mobility of lead to and from PSCs grain boundaries that ultimately degrade the measured performance associated with these FAI-based PSC photovoltaics.	 

150	19.45	1.067	59.7	12.39
175	21.84	1.048	73.6	16.84
200	20.23	1.040	65.6	13.81
225	18.40	1.001	59.1	10.88
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee01079b
‡ Joint authorship.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
