Developing sustainable, high-performance perovskites in photocatalysis: design strategies and applications   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00684C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00684C
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 13692-13729Developing sustainable, high-performance perovskites in photocatalysis: design strategies and applications†

        
          
            Haoxin 
            Mai
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dehong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yasuhiro 
            Tachibana
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hajime 
            Suzuki
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ryu 
            Abe
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Rachel A. 
            Caruso
          
          
        
      *a
aApplied Chemistry and Environmental Science, School of Science, STEM College, RMIT University, GPO Box 2476, Melbourne, Victoria 3001, Australia. E-mail: dehong.chen@rmit.edu.au; rachel.caruso@rmit.edu.au
bSchool of Engineering, STEM College, RMIT University, Bundoora, Victoria 3083, Australia
cDepartment of Energy and Hydrocarbon Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University, Katsura, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan
Received 
      31st August 2021
    First published on 29th November 2021AbstractSolar energy is attractive because it is free, renewable, abundant and sustainable. Photocatalysis is one of the feasible routes to utilize solar energy for the degradation of pollutants and the production of fuel. Perovskites and their derivatives have received substantial attention in both photocatalytic wastewater treatment and energy production because of their highly tailorable structural and physicochemical properties. This review illustrates the basic principles of photocatalytic reactions and the application of these principles to the design of robust and sustainable perovskite photocatalysts. It details the structures of the perovskites and the physics and chemistry behind photocatalytic reactions and describes the advantages and limitations of popular strategies for the design of photoactive perovskites. This is followed by examples of how these strategies are applied to enhance the photocatalytic efficiency of oxide, halide and oxyhalide perovskites, with a focus on materials with potential for practical application, that is, not containing scarce or toxic elements. It is expected that this overview of the development of photocatalysts and deeper understanding of photocatalytic principles will accelerate the exploitation of efficient perovskite photocatalysts and bring about effective solutions to the energy and environmental crisis.
Haoxin Mai
Haoxin Mai received his MSc degree in Information Technology and Computer Science from the University of Technology Sydney, and PhD degree in Materials Chemistry from the Research School of Chemistry at the Australian National University in 2019. He has worked at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT) University as a research assistant from 2019. His research interests include perovskite photocatalysis and photoluminescence, ferroelectric thin films, controllable synthesis of inorganic colloid nanocrystals and machine learning.
Dehong Chen
Dehong Chen is a research fellow in the Applied Chemistry & Environmental Science discipline at RMIT University, Australia. He received his PhD degree in chemistry from Fudan University in 2006. Before joining RMIT University, he conducted research work at the University of Melbourne and the Australian National University. He currently has interests in design and synthesis of diverse functional materials for a range of applications including clean energy utilization, energy storage, environmental remediation and sensors.
Yasuhiro Tachibana
Yasuhiro Tachibana is a Professor at RMIT University. He received his BEng and MEng from Osaka University in 1992 and 1995, and his PhD in chemistry at Imperial College London in 2000. His research interests include developing photoactive nanomaterials and solar energy conversion devices such as dye or semiconductor quantum dot sensitized solar cells, perovskite solar cells and photocatalysis for water splitting and CO2 reduction by employing time-resolved laser spectroscopies.
Hajime Suzuki
Hajime Suzuki received his BS (2013), MS (2015), and PhD (2018) degrees from Kyoto University. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow (2018–2019) at Osaka University. He is currently an assistant professor at Kyoto University. His current research focuses on the development of novel photocatalysts and cocatalysts for water splitting.
Ryu Abe
Ryu Abe received his BS (1996), MS (1998) and PhD (2001) degrees from Tokyo Institute of Technology. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow (2001–2002) and as a researcher (2002–2005) at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan. In 2005, his academic career as an associate professor began at the Catalysis Research Center, Hokkaido University. He was then promoted to a Professor at Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University, in 2012. His research mainly focuses on the development of new visible-light-responsive photocatalysts and reaction systems for water splitting.
Rachel A. Caruso
Rachel Caruso is a materials chemist and has expertise in advanced porous materials. She has led teams of scientists at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, The University of Melbourne, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation and RMIT University. Her research interests include materials such as porous oxides, perovskites and carbon materials for energy and environmental applications. She is currently the Director of the Advanced Materials Enabling Capability Platform at RMIT University.
1. Introduction
Our ever increasing need for energy and its associated environmental pollution are two pressing problems we face with an increasing population and industrialization in the 21st century.1 It is estimated that by the end of this century, the worldwide energy demand is going to exhaust the non-renewable energy sources (coal, oil and gas) on which we rely heavily.1–3 In addition, the greenhouse gases produced by burning these traditional energy sources, as well as the SOx and NOx produced from the impurities in the fossil fuels, are significant contributors to the current environmental problems.4,5 Therefore, considerable research is being conducted to determine renewable energy sources to circumvent an energy crisis, while maintaining an inhabitable planet. Among the alternative energy sources, solar energy is most attractive because the sun provides free, renewable, abundant and sustainable energy.1–3,5–7 Since the energy from sunlight that reaches the earth's surface is 10000 times more than what we currently consume, it is expected that solar energy could satisfy a large portion of the requirements for worldwide energy consumption in the future.8 One feasible way to utilize solar energy is to convert it into chemical energy. Taking advantage of photocatalysis, where light is used to instigate or improve chemical reactions, hydrogen can be extracted from water as a clean fuel, or CO2 can be reduced to generate chemical fuel.1,5,7,9–15 In addition to producing fuel from sunlight, photocatalytic reactions can be used in water purification for pollutant degradation, bacteria destruction and heavy-metal ion reduction.12,16 Thus this approach can be used to assist where there is a shortage of clean water or in areas where water pollution due to industry spread, population growth and long-term droughts is an issue. Photocatalysis is also a promising alternative to promote green organic synthesis.17,18 Therefore, it is important to continue to develop photocatalysts working towards high efficiency, stability and low cost for a sustainable future.
Pioneering work on photocatalysts was carried out in the 1930s: Baur and Rebmann used UV light to demonstrate photo assisted water splitting for AgCl/TlCl in water, but the field did not progress until the discovery of the photocatalytic properties of TiO2 in 1972.19 Many efforts have been devoted to modulating the bandgap and the structure of the TiO2-based photocatalysts to improve their photoactivity for water splitting and pollutant degradation.16,20,21 Besides, since photocatalysts comprising abundant elements and exhibiting good catalytic performance are expected to be cheaper and more suitable for application, a range of efficient photocatalytic materials have been discovered, such as Ta3N5,22,23 Y2Ti2O5S2,24 BiVO4,25 AgPO4,26 Ag/AgCl,27 quantum dots,28 and metal-free catalysts including carbon nitride,11,29,30 boron carbide,31 P-doped graphene,32 phosphorus33 and organic polymer.34–36 To further enhance the photocatalytic efficiency and to enable practical application, heterostructures have been used to adjust the redox ability of the catalysts and modify the path of charge transport,37–39 while Z-scheme systems can spatially separate the generated H2 and O2 in the water splitting reaction.40,41 Despite many photocatalysts being developed and studied, most are still far from industrial application due to their low conversion efficiency.42 Considering the ever increasing need for clean energy and environmental remediation, effective photocatalysts that possess well-aligned band structure for the reaction of interest, large surface area, high crystallinity and can be produced and applied large-scale, are still highly sought after.
Perovskites and their derivatives have received substantial attention as photocatalytic materials for both wastewater treatment and water electrolysis because of their highly tailorable structural and physicochemical properties.5,9,43 Perovskite refers to the family of materials having the same type of structure as CaTiO3. It has a cubic structure with a general chemical formula ABX3, in which A and B are two cations with different sizes (A is usually larger than B) and X is an anion connecting cations A and B. Owing to the flexibility of this crystal structure, most of the metal elements in the periodic table can reside at the A or B sites, resulting in a large number of perovskite materials. In addition to the cubic structure, some perovskites exhibit distorted structures that relate to the ratio of the radii of cation A and B, such as orthorhombic, tetragonal, hexagonal and monoclinic perovskites.43 Such structural distortion can induce variation in the physical, electrical and photocatalytic properties, by which the photocatalytic activities can be tuned by ion substitution. Moreover, introducing metal ions with appropriate radius and valence in A and B sites generates perovskite derivatives such as double perovskites,43 and layered perovskites form when the ABX3 units repeat infinitely in-plane producing perovskite slabs, but extension of the ABX3 units in the third dimension is interrupted by metal ion or metal oxide layers.9 These layered perovskites (comprised of alternate layers of 2D perovskite slabs and metal ions or metal oxides) have anisotropic charge transfer properties and spatially separated valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB), both of which significantly impact on their photocatalytic performance. Because of this structure, the optical, electrical and catalytic properties of these perovskite derivatives can be significantly varied by ion substitution or intercalation of functional compounds. To date, hundreds of perovskite-based photocatalysts have been reported with some achieving high photocatalytic efficiency.44 Therefore, perovskite-based photocatalytic materials show promise for practical use.
In this review, an overview of the recent progress (from 2017 to 2021) in perovskites for application in photocatalytic reactions, such as water splitting and water degradation, is provided. There are some excellent reviews regarding perovskite photocatalysts,5,9,45–47 however few of them distinguish the earth-abundant nontoxic perovskites from the perovskites containing rare or toxic elements that would be difficult to scale up and apply.48 Aiming at providing a practical guideline for the construction of low cost, sustainable and high efficiency photocatalysts, this review will not discuss perovskites consisting of the rarest elements (Fig. 1),49 toxic elements (such as Pb, Cd and Hg), or the elements of which the annual production is less than 5000 tons.50 A comprehensive description and comparison of the strategies for constructing perovskite-based photocatalysts and development of the synthesis, application and mechanism of these photocatalysts, including oxide, halide and oxyhalide, in recent years are still lacking. Given the substantial literature contributions in the last few years, it is important to review the progress in this quickly developing area. Therefore, the goal of this review is to summarize recent progress (last five years) on the earth-abundant, nontoxic, perovskite-based photocatalysts. This will provide the reader with a strong understanding of the design strategies by discussing their advantages, limitations and applications, and give a perspective for future investigation of earth abundant, nontoxic perovskite materials for photocatalytic energy conversion and environmental clean-up. This review consists of five sections. This section has briefly introduced photocatalysis and perovskites. In the next section, the structure of perovskites and their derivatives are classified and described. In addition to reviewing the well-known theories, new theories proposed through data-driven method are described. Section 3 gives a brief introduction to the principles of the photocatalytic reactions and elaborates on current strategies for enhancing the photocatalytic activities and stability of the perovskite materials. In Section 4, progress in the field of photocatalysis is exemplified by a variety of earth-abundant, nontoxic perovskite oxides, halides and oxyhalides, in which the effects of varied strategies on photoactivity are emphasized. Here the focus will be on how the design of the perovskite structure can alter the band structure and charge transfer properties and illustrate the relationship between photoactivity and the structure and components of the photocatalysts. It is worth mentioning that studies involving the utilization of dopants or co-catalysts that contain toxic or rare elements may be cited as demonstrations of certain design strategies, but we will suggest environmentally friendly substitutes, if possible, to ensure the sustainability and the commercial feasibility of the materials. In the last section, summaries are given and perspectives for current challenges and future developments in the design of perovskite photocatalysts composed of earth-abundant, nontoxic elements are proposed.
 Fig. 1  Abundance of the elements on earth given in atom fraction as a function of the atomic number. The rare earth elements are indicated in blue. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2005, U.S. Geological Survey. 
2. Structure of perovskites
2.1. Crystal structure and tolerance factor
In the typical perovskite structure, the B cation is 6-fold coordinated and the A cation is 12-fold cuboctahedral coordinated with the X anions.43 Large ions, normally alkali, alkaline earth, rare earth ions or organic cations, situate at the A-site, while small ions, such as transition metal ions, would be found at the B-site.
To estimate the stability of a perovskite structure, a tolerance factor (t) is introduced:51 (1)where rA, rB and rX are the ionic radii of the A cation, B cation and X anion, respectively. In most of the cases, t is not equal to 1, resulting in structure distortion and accordingly, orthorhombic or rhombohedral structures may form.43 Generally, it is believed that perovskite will be stable when 0.75 < t < 1, but there are also reports revealing that perovskite structures may not be stable even when t is in the range of 0.8–0.9.52 It therefore indicates that the stability of the perovskite structure cannot be predicted based on one index. The octahedral factor (μ), has been used to estimate the perovskite stability as well:53 μ = rB/rX(2)The ability to form perovskites from different cations and anions can therefore be determined from the t–μ mapping, where the perovskite would be stabilized for a t-value ranging between 0.813 and 1.107, and the μ-value ranging from 0.442 and 0.895.53,54
Since the tolerance factor and the octahedral factor are geometrical descriptors but ignore the contributions of the other chemical properties, such as the coordinating numbers of the constituent ions, a perovskite in which the interatomic distances fulfil both the t and μ-values may not be chemically stable. New structural factors with higher accuracy have been developed by material informatics approaches. Based on a dataset of 185 experimentally labelled ABX3 compounds, Pilanlia et al. constructed a machine learning model to classify the perovskites from non-perovskites, but this model could not provide a new structural factor to assess the stability of perovskites.55 Lu et al. used a gradient boosting classification algorithm to analyse 132 features of 1109 compounds and summarized a revised tolerance factor workable for mixed X-site perovskites.56 Bartel et al. disclosed a new tolerance factor, τ, which incorporates both the geometric factors and chemical nature, through a data-driven approach:57 (3)where nA is the oxidation state of A, rA must be larger than rB by definition and τ < 4.18 indicates a stable perovskite structure. This data-driven descriptor showed much better performance in the prediction of the stability of the single and double perovskites compared with the t–μ mapping. More importantly, due to the low complexity of this one-dimension tolerance factor, thousands of undiscovered perovskites were selected out from the arbitrary combination of the A, B and X elements, and their stabilities were confirmed by the density functional theory (DFT) calculation.57 Due to the highly predictive accuracy and fast speed of screening, the material informatic methods have become important strategies for the discovery of new perovskite photocatalysts.55,57,58
2.2. Cation and anion defects in perovskites
Considering the constraints of the tolerance factors, a wide range of elements can be placed into the ABX3 perovskite structure. Other than distorting the cubic structure, both cation and anion defects would be generated under ion substitution to ensure the electroneutrality of the compounds. Also, intrinsic defects will form under cation-poor or cation-rich conditions.43
Regarding the cation defects, the formation of A-site vacancies is frequent as the large A cation distributed in the stable BX6 array can be partially removed. When the A-site cation is substituted by cations (noted as A′) with higher valence, the A-site vacancies will form as acceptors, giving compounds with a stoichiometry of .59 Alternatively, when the A-site cation is replaced with the lower valence cations, X vacancies (donor) will be introduced giving compounds of stoichiometry of . Besides ion substitution, A-site vacancies can also form in B-rich perovskites.60 In contrast to the A-site vacancies, B-site vacancies in perovskites are not thermodynamically favoured in most cases. This is because the B-site cations are of small size and large charge, and the corner-shared BX6 octahedra form a firm network. Instead of B-site vacancies, B-site substitution tends to induce X vacancies or interstitials.9,43
The anion defects in perovskites are generated to fulfil the charge balance in the ion substitution. A general formula AnBnX3n−1 is used to describe the X-deficient perovskite, in which the stacking manner is dependent on the intrinsic properties of the perovskite such as size, electronic configurations and coordination numbers of A and B cations. In addition to compensating for the excess charges present due to the cation substitution, anion defects are also generated from anion substitution.61 Note that both the cation and anion defects may change the crystal structures and band structures of perovskites, and thus have significant effects on their photocatalytic activities. Moreover, such defects can induce a defect-dipole, which can then give rise to local electric fields, promoting carrier transport and charge separation, and accordingly affect photoactivities.62
Intrinsic defects derived from the cation-poor or cation-rich conditions have significant effects on their photoelectronic properties. For example, in CsSnI3 the intrinsic acceptor defects (Sn and Cs vacancies) forming under Sn-poor conditions will become electron–hole recombination centres, while the intrinsic donor defects, Sn(I) forming under Sn-rich conditions, can trap photogenerated electrons, leading to photocatalysis deterioration.63 In SrTiO3 crystals, Sr vacancies can cause antisite Ti defects and subsequently local dipole moments would form due to small off-centre displacement of the Ti ions.64 Although normally no special properties stemming from such local dipole moment can be found in the bulk materials because all the intrinsic defect regions are isolated, abnormal electrical properties, such as considerable polarization, are observed when the size of the material is similar to the intrinsic defect regions (a few nanometres).65 This research therefore strongly inspires the application of ultra-small particles in photocatalysis, as the intrinsic defects may play an important role in the photocatalytic activities.
2.3. Perovskite derivatives

2.3.1 Double perovskites. 
When the single perovskite structure is modified by two types of B ions with suitable size and charge, double perovskite structures, with the general formula A2BB′X6, will form.43 The crystal structure of the double perovskite is determined by the arrangement of the B and B′ ions (Fig. 2).66,67 A disordered double perovskite forms when the B and B′ ions are randomly distributed in the B sublattice (e.g., Ca2FeMoO6,68Fig. 2a). In most of the cases, an ordered rock salt structure is adopted, where the unit cell can be viewed as an alternating arrangement of the BX6 and B′X6 octahedra in all three dimensions (e.g., Cs2AgBiBr6,69Fig. 2b). Two other ordered double perovskite structures are also observed: when the BX6 and B′X6 octahedra only alternate in one direction producing double perovskites with layered order (e.g., La2CuSnO6,70Fig. 2c), and in rare cases where the A-sites are occupied by different ions, columnar order may take place, in which the BX6 and B′X6 octahedra alternate in two directions (e.g., NdSrMn3+Mn4+O6, Fig. 2d).67 In these ordered structures, the X anions will move slightly toward the more charged cation to avoid the electronic instabilities when the charge of B and B′ is different.43
 Fig. 2  Crystal structures of examples of A2BB′X6 perovskites with different B-site cation orderings: (a) random, (b) rock-salt, (c) layered and (d) columnar order. The purple spheres represent A-site element, the red spheres represent X-site element, and the green and blue octahedra represent BX6 and B′X6 octahedra respectively in (b), (c) and (d). 
The formation of double perovskites can bring advantages for the design of photocatalysts. First, a greater selection of elements can be lodged into double perovskites.71 Second, the intricate structures of double perovskites allow the existence of some unusual electronic structures. For example, the alternate octahedral of BX6 and B′X6 may lead to two symmetries for A-site cations and variation of the bandgap and band energy.72 Third, in photocatalytic reactions, which are frequently carried out under a highly reducing/oxidizing atmosphere or strong acidic/basic solutions, the stability of double perovskites is higher than the single perovskites.69,73 Moreover, perovskite properties, such as band alignment, electronic transfer and polarization, are mainly governed by the B-site cations, and thus a plethora of interesting and useful materials can be designed by manipulation of cation order, structure distortion and changing the combination of different elements in the B-site.45,74
To design double perovskites with various cation orders, the entropy and enthalpy in the system must be considered simultaneously. Generally, a random arrangement would be favoured in regard to entropy, but the electrostatic repulsion between the B-site cations may force one B-site cation to be situated away from the other. Currently, it is widely accepted that the difference in the B and B′ cation oxidation states, ΔQ = |QB′ − QB|, is the main factor influencing the cation order.71 An ordered arrangement is preferred when ΔQ > 2, while a random arrangement is dominant when ΔQ < 1.66,67 Apart from ΔQ, the ionic radii difference, Δr, is also a common noted factor affecting the cation order. When the difference in the ionic radii of the B and B′ cations is larger, the probability of the compound exhibiting an ordered arrangement increases, in that the increase of the lattice strain in a random A2BB′X6 structure surpasses the increase of the entropy.75 Based on these two factors, double perovskites with appropriate cation order can be designed by selecting suitable elements.


2.3.2 Layered perovskites. 
Layered perovskites, consisting of two-dimensional (2D) perovskite slabs with alternating cations or cationic structural units, have received tremendous attention due to their photocatalytic activity, ionic conductivity, inductivity, magnetic and optic properties.9,76,77 According to the layered orientation relative to the principal axis of the cubic perovskite, layered perovskite structures can be classified as {100}, {110} and {111} type. Most of the layered perovskites are of the {100} type, which includes the Aurivillius series (AL), the Ruddlesden–Popper series (RP) and the Dion–Jacobson series (DJ) (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Crystal structures of layered perovskite compounds (red spheres: X-site element; purple octahedra: BX6; dark green and pink spheres: A-site element): (a) Aurivillius, (b) Ruddlesden–Popper, (c) Dion–Jacobson, (d) {110} type and (e) {111} type. 
The general formula of AL perovskites is  (A′ is Bi3+ in most cases), which can be described as the intergrowth of pseudo-perovskite blocks: the An−1BnX3n+1 slabs and the  layers (Fig. 3a). AL perovskites feature visible light absorption on account of the hybridization between the p orbitals of the X ions and the outermost s orbitals provided by the A′ ions (Bi3+) negatively shifting the VB, and the internal field derived from the distorted structure of perovskite layers that boosts the charge separation.9
RP perovskites have interleaving perovskite ABX3 slabs and rock salt A′X layers (Fig. 3b). The general formula is . The high performance of the photoelectronic devices based on RP hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites has attracted tremendous attention for their promising application in photovoltaics, photoluminescence and photocatalysis.78–80 Much effort has focused on the materials photoactivity due to the characteristics of anisotropic charge transfer and cation exchange, which can provide more active sites for the reduction half reaction.81 In addition, the ultrathin 2D nanostructure with large surface area can be readily obtained by an exfoliation process, intercalating bulky cations to form the rock salt layer.82 Exposure of the A′X terminated surface gives a low barrier for electrocatalytic water dissociation.82
DJ perovskites have attracted less attention as photocatalysts. These compounds can be described by the general formula A′(An−1BnX3n+1). DJ perovskites have a layer of A′ metal ions as the intermediate spacing layer (Fig. 3c), and thus cation exchange and exfoliation occur more readily.83
The general composition of the {110} type perovskites is AnBnX3n+2, and it has an interlayer parallel to the (110) planes of the cubic perovskite structure (Fig. 3d).84 The general composition of {111} type oxide perovskites is A5B4O15 or ALa4Ti4O15, where A is Ca, Sr and Ba while B is Nb or Ta. The structure is considered a cubic perovskite cut parallel to the (111) planes (Fig. 3e).85 Compared to the oxides, {111} type halide perovskites such as Cs4CuSb2Cl12, exhibit narrow bandgaps and excellent photoelectronic properties, making them of interest in photocatalytic applications.86 Moreover, choosing appropriate cations to improve the structural anisotropy is also an effective strategy to increase the photoactivity of these materials.

3. Current strategies for the design of perovskite-based photocatalysts
3.1. Fundamentals of photocatalysis
Photocatalysis uses light to initiate chemical processes, such as water splitting, reduction of CO2, degradation of pollutants, bacterial disinfection and organic synthesis. Normally, photocatalysis takes place in the presence of a photocatalyst, which absorbs light and generates electron–hole pairs. Due to the many different reactions that can be conducted, there are a wide range of photocatalyst designs and compositions (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Absolute and relative (respect to standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), pH = 0) energy levels of valence and conduction bands of some perovskite-based photocatalysts and other representative photocatalysts. 

3.1.1 Factors that affect the efficiency of photocatalysts. 
To design an effective photocatalyst, it is important to understand the fundamentals of photocatalytic processes and identify the critical factors affecting the photocatalyst efficiency (see Notes S1 and S2 in ESI†). In brief, reducing the bandgap of the photocatalysts to absorb more incident light and adjusting the energy levels of the VB and CB to maximize reduction and oxidation ability are two key approaches to enhance the photocatalytic activity. In addition, the bulk and surface charge recombination must be minimized. High crystallinity and low defect concentrations can eliminate the recombination centres, while shortening the charge diffusion distance via reducing the particle size is beneficial for less charge recombination. The separation of anode and cathode reactions is another effective strategy to prevent surface recombination, especially in water splitting, but it is not effective in photocatalytic degradation due to the small diffusion coefficient of the superoxide radicals. To expose more active sites, large surface area and the prevalence of active facets are required. Scavengers may also be employed to drive the reactions.


3.1.2 Evaluation of photocatalysts. 
There are three metrics that can be used to evaluate the performance of a photocatalyst: photocatalytic activity, selectivity and stability.
To evaluate the efficiency of a photocatalytic reaction, the amount of product generated within a certain time can be monitored. For example, in photocatalytic water splitting, the H2 evolution rate and O2 evolution rate with the unit μmol h−1 or μmol h−1 gcatalyst−1 are two of the most widely adopted metrics. However, gas evolution rates are also affected by many factors such as light source, wavelength of incident light, shape and volume of the reactor. These factors complicate the comparison of the results among different research groups. Apparent quantum yield (AQY) is thus employed as another important metric to evaluate the efficiency of the photocatalytic reactions. AQY is defined by eqn (4):87 (4)In water splitting, as the generation of one H2 molecule and one O2 molecule requires two and four electrons, respectively, eqn (4) can be rewritten as: (5) (6)In addition, solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency (STH) is useful for H2 evolution reactions under solar light:15 (7)Both AQY and STH can be used to compare the results regardless of different photocatalytic reactor setups.
In some cases, multiple photocatalytic reactions occur under similar conditions. For example, photocatalytic CO2 reduction competes with H2 evolution, resulting in the formation of CO, CH4 and H2. Therefore, selectivity (S) is used to evaluate the ability of a photocatalyst to yield a particular product, and an efficient photocatalyst should have good selectivity to the target product. Assuming there are n competing products generated, the selectivity of a photocatalyst towards the jth product (Sj) is given by eqn (8):88 (8)where ni and nj are the numbers of electrons involved in forming the ith and the jth products respectively, and Ni and Nj are the evolution rates of the ith and the jth products, respectively.
Besides high photocatalytic activity and selectivity, efficient photocatalysts should have good stability during photocatalytic reactions. To determine the stability of photocatalysts, long-time experiments or repeated experiments are conducted. Although most oxide perovskites exhibit good stability, many halide perovskites are inclined to decompose in the presence of oxygen or moisture and under illumination.89 Therefore, the development of stable halide perovskites for photocatalytic applications is a major challenge for photocatalysis research.

3.2. Strategies for designing highly active photocatalytic perovskites
The key factors to improve the efficiency of photocatalytic reactions are to suppress the electron–hole recombination and tailor the bandgap to ensure sufficient solar energy is absorbed while retaining the required energy levels for oxidization and reduction of the redox reactions. Numerous strategies have been proposed for the design of efficient perovskite photocatalysts, which will be summarized below.

3.2.1 Band structure engineering. 
To achieve visible light-driven photocatalytic reactions, the bandgap of the photocatalysts must be <3 eV with the CB energy level being more negative than the potential of the reduction half reaction, and the VB energy level being more positive than the potential of the oxidation half reaction. In the ABX3 perovskites, the VB consists of the outermost A s + B d + X p hybrid orbitals, and the CB is formed by the unoccupied B d orbitals.5 Hence, doping of foreign elements into perovskites can alter the band structure in two ways: (1) the formation of new intermediate levels between the CB and VB, and (2) adjusting the position of the CB and VB through hybridizing the orbitals of the dopant and the host elements. Based on the elemental contributions to the CB and VB of perovskites, B-site substitution would be the most effective method to modulate the bandgap energy. When the B cation is partially substituted by dopants of lower valence (M), new donor levels at a lower potential than the valence band maximum (VBM) will form due to the generation of the  defects, thereby reducing the apparent bandgap.90 Other than B-site substitution, A-site doping can also modify the bandgap of perovskites and promote the carrier mobility, in that the difference in size of the A-site ions can induce deformation of the BX6 octahedra, thus affecting the bandgap and other photoelectronic properties.91,92 Nevertheless, since X vacancies may form to balance the charge induced by the substitutional defects, more recombination centres will emerge when increasing the dopant amount.5 Moreover, undesirable ions with high oxidation state may also form during the synthesis, which will then become recombination centres for the photogenerated electrons and holes.93 To suppress these undesired species, a co-doped ion of higher valence is introduced. The appearance of co-doped ions with high oxidation state contributes to the charge balance and thus prevents the formation of X defects and the change of the valence of doped ions.94,95 In particular, co-doping of the A-site and B-site is widely applied.91,96,97 Despite the high activity and stability of the A-site and B-site co-doped photocatalysts, the homogeneity of the dopant and the co-dopant ions is essential for effective charge compensation, and thus preparation methods for the homogeneous co-doped perovskites must be explored carefully.
In addition to the A/B site doping, X-site doping is also considered an effective approach to modulate the band structure of perovskites. As the VB of perovskites is mainly determined by the p orbitals of the X element, substitution of the X anion alters the energy level of the VB.5 Generally, when the electronegativity of the dopant X′ is higher than that of the X anion, the energy level of the VB increases, promoting the oxidizing power and increasing the bandgap. A negative shift of the VB is observed when the electronegativity of X′ is lower than that of the X anion, which results in a smaller bandgap.98 Hence anion dopants can be selected to vary the energy levels to suit the requirements of the specific reaction.9,15 For photocatalytic water splitting and most pollutant degradation reactions, due to the intensive oxidizing power of the oxide perovskites, anions with lower electronegativity, such as halides, N3− and S2−, will be chosen as the dopant ions to reduce the bandgap.99–103 It should be noted that a reduced bandgap does not guarantee the high photoactivity of the mixed-anion perovskites, because a small bandgap from a negative shift of the VB may correlate to insufficient overpotential for the redox reactions at the surface to occur.


3.2.2 Tuning size and morphology. 
To improve photocatalytic activity, suppressing electron–hole recombination and concurrently increasing the surface-active sites are key factors for the design of photocatalysts. The size and morphology of the particle are varied by doping foreign elements into the photocatalyst.5 In perovskites, A-site doping has significant effects on size and morphology.104,105 The decrease of the particle size influences the photocatalytic activity, in that bulk recombination is decreased when the diffusion distance of the charge to the surface is shortened, and the increased surface area increases active site and reactant contact. It should be pointed out, however, that the benefit of doping has limits as too many foreign ions in the structure may generate more recombination centres, thus decreasing the photocatalytic activity.
The method of preparation affects the perovskite nanostructure.5 Various methods have been used to synthesise perovskites with controllable morphologies and sizes. The most common methods include solid state reaction, molten salt synthesis, sol–gel chemistry and hydrothermal methods. Among them, the hydrothermal method is promoted to improve the homogeneity and reproducibility of the products and to gain better nanostructure control. A wealth of parameters can be tuned to vary the growth of the nanocrystals. Additives, such as chelating agents or surfactants that can either be adsorbed on the surface of the nuclei or self-assemble, restrict the aggregation of the nuclei, initiate growth into a specific morphology, and facilitate the assembly of various components thereby contributing to the formation of heterostructures.37,46,106 Hard templates, such as layered titanates, nanospheres, nanofibers and viruses, can manipulate size and morphology of the perovskite.107–109
Colloidal synthesis is important for the synthesis of high-quality halide perovskite nanoparticles. This includes two common methods, hot injection and ligand assisted reprecipitation (LARP). Hot injection has been used for halide nanoparticle synthesis for more than ten years.110,111 This approach is based on rapid injection of one reactant into a hot solution containing the rest of the reactants, ligands and high boiling point solvent, protected by inert gases or nitrogen. In the LARP method, the halide precursor is dissolved into a polar solvent (e.g., dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)) which is added into a non-polar solvent (e.g., toluene, hexane) in the presence of ligands.111 Halide nanoparticles with controllable size (with narrow size distribution) and morphology can be obtained by these methods, but the influence of the ligands on the photoactivities of the particles are still unclear.


3.2.3 Type II heterojunction and Z-scheme system. 
To enhance the photocatalytic performance, two semiconductors can be combined to form heterojunctions, allowing the electron–hole pairs to be separated spatially over the two semiconductors.112 The heterojunctions of interest, which vary according to the electron–hole transfer mechanism, are the type II and Z-scheme heterojunctions.40,41,113,114
A type II heterojunction has the bandgaps of the semiconductors at the junction overlapping but offset, forming a staggered gap. Therefore, the difference in energy between the CBs would drive the photoexcited electrons from one semiconductor to another while the difference in energy between the VBs would force the holes to migrate in the opposite direction (Fig. 5a). Thus, the reduction and oxidation reactions occur at different semiconductors. A suitable band structure of the two semiconductors has both the CB and the VB of semiconductor “A” more negative than semiconductor “B” (vs. SHE), and the work function of semiconductor “A” should be larger. The free electrons will move from semiconductor “B” to semiconductor “A” until their Fermi levels are equilibrated, thereby resulting in the downward bending of the CB of semiconductor “A” that can drive the photogenerated electrons from the CB of semiconductor “A” to the CB of semiconductor “B”.113,115 In most cases, narrow bandgap semiconductors with suitable band structure are used to construct type II heterojunction, as they can also serve as the light sensitizer for better light harvesting.116
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the (a) type-II heterojunction, (b) Z-scheme system with shuttle redox mediators, (c) Z-scheme system with solid state electron mediators and (d) direct Z-scheme system. The dotted lines denote the Fermi level of the components. 
Also important for successful construction of type II heterojunctions is the connection between the two components, which is determined by the effective interfaces.11 The effective interfaces can be increased through surface modification. Surfaces with opposite charges, or a 2D–2D face contact would lead to the formation of stable heterojunctions.117–121 Nevertheless, several problems in the type II heterojunction structure obstruct its further application.40,113,114 The construction of type II heterojunctions reduces the reducing and oxidizing power of the combined semiconductor photocatalysts. Electron migration to a potentially electron-rich component (or holes migration to a hole-rich component) may slow charge movement across the heterojunction due to the electrostatic repulsion. Thus, the efficiency of the photocatalytic reactions may not be maximized in the type II heterojunction system.
The Z-scheme photocatalytic system is promoted to provide stronger redox ability and better charge separation. In a typical Z-scheme system, the photogenerated electrons in semiconductor B, which has higher oxidizing power but more positive CB, recombine with the holes in semiconductor “A”, which has higher reducing power but more negative VB (Fig. 5b–d).40,113,114 Therefore, the photogenerated electrons in semiconductor “A” with higher reducing power, as well as the photogenerated holes in the semiconductor “B” with higher oxidizing power, are preserved. Moreover, the charge migration in the Z-scheme system is physically more favourable than that in the type II heterojunction system due to the electrostatic attraction between the electrons and the holes. Z-scheme photocatalysts can be classified into three types depending on the mediators involved in the system: Z-scheme with shuttle redox mediators (1st generation), Z-scheme with solid state electron mediators (2nd generation) and direct Z-scheme photocatalysts (3rd generation), shown schematically in Fig. 5b–d.40
The 1st generation Z-scheme system consists of two independent semiconductors with the shuttle redox mediators that provide electron acceptor/donor pairs and act as the electron transport in the Z-scheme water splitting reactions (Fig. 5b).40,41,113,114 Fe3+/Fe2+, IO3−/I− and VO2+/VO2+ are shuttle redox mediators widely used in this Z-scheme system.122–124 Although the reported apparent quantum efficiency of the 1st generation Z-scheme system is progressing, several problems have been found in this system.40 The introduction of redox couples adds intricacies to the system. The low diffusion rate of these ions and the back reactions, such as Fe2+ → Fe3+ or I− → IO3−, which compete with the reactants for reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively, will consequently reduce the photocatalytic efficiency. This Z-scheme system requires liquid phase reaction and thus its application in the solid and gas phases is limited. The 1st generation Z-scheme system cannot be used for photocatalytic pollutant degradation.
Tada et al. proposed the concept of 2nd generation Z-scheme system, which is composed of two different semiconductors and a solid state electron mediator instead of the shuttle redox mediators (Fig. 5c).125 The ohmic contact between the semiconductors and the mediator allow for rapid recombination between the photogenerated electrons on Semiconductor B and the photogenerated holes on Semiconductor A. Noble metals or reduced graphene oxide (r-GO) are excellent solid state electron mediators for this system.126,127 Utilization of high conductivity solid state materials as electron mediators inhibits backward reactions. However, the light absorption ability of these materials may compete for light harvesting with the semiconductors, consequently decreasing the photocatalytic efficiency.40
The mediator-free Z-scheme was proposed by Yu et al.128 In this system, the electrons and holes can directly transfer between two photocatalysts without the assistance of electron mediators (Fig. 5d). The direct Z-scheme system inherits almost all the advantages in the previous two generation systems, including the effective charge separation and optimized redox ability,40 and no light-shielding effects as solid state mediators are removed. In designing the direct Z-scheme system, the band structure of the components must be considered carefully. Distinct from the type II heterojunction, in order to construct an effective direct Z-scheme system, the work function of semiconductor “A” must be smaller than that of semiconductor “B” (Fig. 5d).113 In this scenario, after their contact, free electrons will move from Semiconductor “A” to Semiconductor “B” to flatten the Fermi level, and thus the CB of semiconductor “B” bends downward, and the CB of Semiconductor “A” bends upward. As a result, the transfer of the photogenerated electrons from the CB of Semiconductor “A” to the CB of Semiconductor “B” is forbidden. Instead, the photogenerated electrons at the CB of Semiconductor “B” can readily move to the VB of Semiconductor “A” and recombine with the photogenerated holes therein. As a consequence, electrons with higher reducing power and holes with higher oxidizing power are preserved.129–133 Despite the high efficiency of charge transfer in theory, relaxation and charge recombination at the interface may impede the charge transport,114 and the formation of a homojunction may be an approach to address these issues.134,135


3.2.4 Extending light absorption. 
The breadth of light absorption and the ability to perform both half reactions need to be considered for photocatalysts. The optimal bandgap for harvesting sunlight is around 1.4 eV, whereas the bandgap for most of the efficient photocatalysts is much wider to ensure sufficient redox potential for the required reaction, and thus the light absorption of these photocatalysts is poor. One feasible way to overcome this dilemma without altering the band structure of the photocatalyst is to introduce a light sensitizer to the system, from which photoelectrons will be generated and injected into the CB of the photocatalyst.
Dye sensitization is a popular strategy to more effectively utilize solar light.136 In these dye-sensitized photocatalysts, dye molecules are adsorbed on the semiconductor with the required redox potential. When the photocatalytic reaction system is exposed to light, electrons of dye molecules move to occupy the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), then are injected into the CB of the semiconductor to participate in the reduction half reaction (Fig. 6a). Nevertheless, the introduction of the dye molecules and the electron donors increases the complexity of the system, and more back reactions or undesired reactions may take place. Several prerequisites must be satisfied to construct a successful dye-sensitized photocatalyst. First, the dye molecules should have an absorption spectrum widely overlapping with solar radiation and a high molar extinction coefficient. Second, the LUMO of the dye molecules must be more negative than the CB of the semiconductor, while the highest occupied molecular orbital, HOMO, must be more positive than the redox potential of the sacrificial regents. Third, the dye molecules should have long term stability under illumination. Fourth, the dye used for solar energy transfer should be economical. Metal organic dyes such as Ru- or Pt-complexes and metal-free organic dyes such as xanthene-based dyes are frequently used as the light sensitizer.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the energy or electron transfer from different sensitizers to perovskite photocatalysts: (a) dye molecules, (b) plasmonic metal (Ef denotes the Fermi level of the metal particle), (c) quantum dots (QDs) and (d) upconversion particles. 
Plasmonic nanostructures are another effective component for charge injection. Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) is the collective oscillation of valence electrons at the surface induced by the resonant photon.137 When the frequency of the photon matches the natural frequency of the oscillation of the surface electrons, the surface electrons will be pushed to the excited state (surface plasmon states) through the SPR process. As the energy of the SPR excited electrons is between −1.0 eV and −4.0 eV on the vacuum scale, while the CB of most photocatalysts is between 0 V and −1.0 V vs. SHE (∼−3.5 eV – −4.5 eV on the vacuum scale), the transfer of the excited electrons from the plasmonic particles to the CB of the photocatalysts is allowed. Thus, the energetic electrons are injected into the photocatalyst and play a role in the reduction half reactions (Fig. 6b). Noble metals are plasmonic metal candidates.138,139 Because of the excellent mobility of the charge carriers, the high absorption cross-section and good stability under illumination, these metallic nanoparticles represent more reliable sensitizers than dye molecules. Moreover, as the resonant wavelength and the SPR intensity are size and shape dependent, there is a probability that the entire solar spectrum can be utilized by careful design of the nanostructures of the plasmonic metal sensitizers.137 Note that as noble metals are expensive, we suggest that copper,140 bismuth141 and some semiconductors with high free carrier concentrations, such as titanium nitride, which shows better SPR than noble metals in certain applications,142 can be used sustainably as plasmonic candidates.
Quantum dots (QDs) can also be used as light sensitizers for charge injection due to their high absorption coefficient in visible light and the tuneable bandgap that is able to match the whole solar spectrum.100,143 The energy level of the CB of the QDs can also be tuned by varying their sizes, therefore other than light absorption, the introduction of the QDs may improve the charge separation as well (Fig. 6c).100 The toxicity of some QDs (containing Pb2+, Cd2+ and As3−), however, are still environmental concerns.
Upconversion nanoparticles have been exploited in the context of light harvesting, especially infrared light harvesting, in photocatalysis.144,145 Upconversion is an anti-Stokes optical process converting a few low energy photons into one high energy photon (Fig. 6d).146,147 When in contact with the photocatalyst, provided that the energy of the excited ion overlaps the bandgap of the photocatalyst, the upconverted energy will transfer from the upconversion particles to the photocatalyst (Fig. 6d).148 Therefore, more of the solar spectrum is utilized. Luminescent lanthanide (Ln3+)-doped rare-earth fluorides and oxides, such as NaYF4:Yb,Er, are the most well-known upconversion materials used in photocatalytic systems.147 Nonetheless, the use of upconversion nanoparticles as light sensitizers is limited. High excitation intensity, such as concentrated sunlight or laser, has to be employed in these systems due to the low efficiency of the upconversion process.149 The narrow absorption wavelength and the upconverted energy restricted to visible-infrared regions are also obstacles for further application of upconverters.

3.3. Strategies for improving the stability of photocatalytic perovskites
Most of the oxide perovskites are stable during photocatalytic reactions. However, due to the ionic bond structure, many halide perovskites are sensitive to humidity, oxygen, temperature and illumination, hampering their photocatalytic applications.150 When a halide perovskite ABX3 is exposed to polar solvent, such as H2O or DMSO, the solvent molecules can be adsorbed on the surface of ABX3, and form a monohydrate structure by reacting with the BX6 octahedra:151 ABX3 + H2O → ABX3·H2O(9)The monohydrate structure will then quickly decompose through hydrolysation:89,150–152 ABX3·H2O → BX2 + AX + H2O(10)If A is methylammonium (MA) or formamidine (FA), the AX can be further hydrolysed, e.g.:152 CH3NH3X → CH3NH2 + HX(11)In addition, the X ions and the CH3NH3–X hydrogen bonds will become unstable under illumination because of the charge transfer from halide (VB) to metal (CB), leading to rapid material breakdown.153 The oxidation half reactions also have negative effects on the perovskite structure. Some X ions (e.g., iodine) and B ions (e.g., Sn2+) may be oxidized, allowing oxygen to enter into the crystal lattice, resulting in variation of properties or even decomposition.154,155
To address these issues, and to produce stable halide perovskites as photocatalysts, a number of strategies have been adopted. First, the replacement of the MA or FA with Cs or Rb ions in the A-site, forming an all-inorganic chemical structure, can significantly increase the stability of the halide perovskites.156 Second, as the polar solvent molecules are the major factors causing structure degradation, carrying out the photocatalytic reactions in non-polar solvents or saturated halo acid solutions is an alternative way to minimize the probability of material breakdown.157–159 Third, replacing the low-valent B ions with stable ions (e.g., Bi3+, Sb3+), or introducing anions with higher electronegativity in X-site (e.g., Cl−, O2−) can enhance the tolerance of illumination and the oxidizer generated during photocatalytic reactions.160–162 Fourth, the formation of heterojunctions, which can prevent the oxidation reactions from occurring on the halide perovskites, benefits the stability of halide perovskites and suppresses electron–hole recombination.163–166 Lastly, forming a core–shell structure that encapsulates the halide perovskites within a stable shell protects halide perovskites from contacting polar molecules and oxidizer.167–170
4. Application of earth-abundant nontoxic perovskites in photocatalysis
4.1. Titanates
Titanium is one of the most abundant metal elements in the earth's crust. Due to its abundance, stability and environmentally friendly characteristics, there has been a large family of titanate perovskites produced, and most of them exhibit excellent structure-dependent photocatalytic activities. Therefore, titanate perovskites and their derivatives have been extensively applied in the areas of photocatalytic water splitting and pollutant degradation (Table S1, ESI†). In this subsection, as a simple and representative perovskite, strontium titanate, SrTiO3 and its development as a photocatalyst illustrate how the above strategies are applied to improve photocatalytic performance. The recent findings and advances of other titanate perovskites and derivatives in photocatalytic applications will also be discussed.

4.1.1 SrTiO3. 
SrTiO3 (STO), is a typical perovskite with a basic framework of Ti–O polyhedron as TiO2. As an n-type semiconductor, its CB minimum (CBM) is more negative than TiO2 and thus it presents a stronger reducing ability than TiO2.97 Therefore, STO has attracted significant interest for photocatalysis and has been recognized as a representative photocatalyst for a few decades. Photocatalytic H2 production was observed on a single crystal STO in a solution with high hydroxide concentration.171 By reducing the diffusion distance of the charge carriers and increasing the surface area, the photocatalytic activities of STO improved.108 However, Townsend et al. reported that 30 nm STO particles were about 35% less active than the bulk sample, and 6 nm particles have only 10% of the activity.172 They suggested that the key factor resulting in the decrease of activity was the quantum size effect in the nanoparticles, which extended the bandgap and reduced the light absorption, meanwhile the water oxidation overpotential was increased with reduction in particle size.
The morphology of the STO nanoparticles also have significant impact on their photocatalytic activity. Yu et al. synthesised the three-dimensionally ordered macroporous STO photocatalyst via sol–gel methods with polymer colloidal crystal templates. The highest hydrogen evolution rate was 3599 μmol g−1 h−1 for the optimized sample.173 The high photocatalytic activity of this nanostructure was attributed to the exact overlap between the stop band of the macroporous STO and the bandgap of STO, by which the slow photon effect was triggered and light absorption was increased.
More precise control of the morphologies enabled the STO nanoparticles to expose specific facets, and hence spatial charge separation would be encouraged due to the different location of the oxidation and reduction active sites. Wang et al. reported the synthesis of STO nanoparticles enclosed with {023} facets and {001} facets through a solvothermal method, showing high H2 and O2 evolution rate.174 This was ascribed to the spatial separation of photoreduction and photooxidation active sites on different facets. Li et al. further confirmed the locations of the active sites for reduction and oxidation by facet-selective photo-deposition of metals and oxides. They concluded that reduction reactions preferred to take place on the {001} facets and oxidation reactions tend to occur on the {110} facets provided that the nanoparticles were enclosed by both of these facets, but the distribution of the active sites of the reduction and oxidation would be even had the nanoparticles exposed only the {001} facets (Fig. 7).175 Therefore, the AQY in photocatalytic water splitting of the 18-facet STO nanoparticles (composed of {001} and {110} facets) was five times more than that of the 6-facet STO nanoparticles (composed of {001} facet).
 Fig. 7  The SEM images of the (a–f) 6-facet and (g–l) 18-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals with photo-deposition of noble metals or metal oxides. Reprinted with permission.175 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
STO has been doped to achieve visible light activity with a number of simple B-site doping options attempted, such as Cr, Ni, Al, Fe and Mn.90,95,176–180 To prevent formation of recombination centres with the introduction of lower valence dopants, B-site co-doping (such as Cr/Ta,94 Cr/Sb,181 and Ni/Nb,95) and A/B-site co-doping (such as La/Cr,96,97 Ag/Nb,91 La/Rh,44 and La/Ni182) were explored. Ye et al. reduced the bandgap of STO to 2.1 eV by co-doping La3+ and Cr3+, and the AQY of H2 evolution reached 25.6% in aqueous CH3OH solution containing 5 M NaOH under visible light.96 Takata et al. achieved an AQY of 96% of the UV region, using Al-doped STO photocatalysts (Fig. 8).183 X-site doping with N or F has also been intensively studied for adjusting the bandgap and the VBM,9,15 while the A/B-site and X-site co-doping with La/N and Cr/N were utilized to compensate the charge induced by the anion defects.184,185 In addition to the introduction of foreign elements, self-doped or electron-doped SrTiO3−x samples were prepared by co-precipitation then calcination at 1200 °C in an Ar atmosphere.186 An optimum concentration of oxygen vacancies can improve the charge separation of the carriers and visible light absorption, resulting in enhanced photoactivity.187,188
 Fig. 8  (a) Reflectance spectrum of STO:Al (black solid line) and wavelength vs. water splitting AQY on Al-doped STO photocatalyst (red spots). (b) STEM and EDS mappings of the Al-doped STO photocatalyst. EDS data were obtained from the area in the red dashed box. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 
The formation of heterojunctions with co-catalysts is essential for the improved performance of the photocatalytic reactions. The Ni@NiOx core–shell structure is a highly efficient co-catalyst on STO, whose efficiency is comparable with that of noble metal co-catalysts (e.g., Pt, Rh),189–191 and thus we suggest that Ni@NiOx can be a potential substitute for noble metal co-catalysts. Type II heterojunctions were achieved by combining Cr-doped STO with Ag3PO4 which can spatially separate the electrons and holes.192 Wei et al. developed a STO-TiO2 heterogeneous hollow multi-shelled structure, in which the AQY is 8.5% (Fig. 9).193 The large surface area, the charge separation induced by the hollow structure, and the hierarchical shells enabling multiple reflections of the incident light increasing light harvesting were attribute to the high photocatalytic performance.193 Coupling STO with carbon QDs exhibited enhanced photocatalytic performance on Rhodamine B (RhB) degradation, ascribed to the visible light absorption and the electron extraction of the carbon QDs.194
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the hydrothermal synthesis of STO@TiO2 hollow multi-shelled structures (HoMSs); (b) The band structure and (c) the TEM image for STO@TiO2 HoMSs. (d) Photocatalytic water splitting performance of single-shelled (1S), double shelled (2S) and triple shelled (3S) STO@TiO2 HoMSs. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Z-scheme systems have been constructed to simultaneously optimize redox ability and spatial charge separation for the STO-based photocatalysts.129,179,195 Chen et al. used the Ta/Cr co-doped STO as a H2 evolution photocatalyst, WO3 as the O2-evolution photocatalyst, and IO3−/I− as the shuttle redox mediator to build a 1st generation Z-scheme system. The H2 evolution rate achieved was 122.6 μmol h−1.195 An all solid state Z-scheme heterojunction, Ag3PO4@MWCNT@Cr:STO with excellent visible light photocatalytic activity was synthesised, in which the MWCNT served as a solid state electron mediator, the holes were found in Ag3PO4 and superoxide radicals formed on Cr:STO, indicating superior charge separation.179 Loading plasmonic metallic nanoparticles on the surface of STO can further improve photoreduction due to charge injection from the nanoparticles to the CB of STO via SPR.196,197


4.1.2 Other ATiO3. 
Other titanates including CaTiO3 and BaTiO3 have been reported as UV and visible light photocatalysts. CaTiO3 due to its low cost, facile synthesis and high chemical stability, is considered as a promising photocatalyst, especially in moist environments.198 Compared with STO, CaTiO3 possesses a more negative CBM (−0.94 V vs. SHE) and more positive VBM (+2.76 V vs. SHE), and thus it is extensively applied for water splitting and pollutant removal.199 To extend the light absorption, size/morphology control and doping (Cu, Zn, Pr, Ag/La, La/Cr, Na/Er, etc.) were reported.198–203 Noble metal particles have been loaded on titanates for visible light harvesting via SPR.204,205 A Z-scheme heterojunction was obtained for AgCl/Ag/CaTiO3 and under UV light irradiation excellent enhancement of photocatalytic hydrogen production was achieved.126 These results indicate that AgCl/Ag/CaTiO3 can serve as a photocatalyst for both water splitting and pollutant degradation under different incident light.
BaTiO3 is another attractive titanate in photocatalysis due to its relatively smaller bandgap and piezoelectric properties.206,207 To enhance the optical properties and increase photocatalytic activity, doping is commonly applied and Fe, Ce or Cr-doped BaTiO3 have been studied in detail.208–210 Heterojunctions combining BaTiO3 with other functional semiconductors have been investigated to boost the light absorption and suppress the electron–hole recombination. CuBi2O4, due to its narrow bandgap and more negative CBM (−0.63 V vs. SHE), was coupled with BaTiO3 and BiFeO3 to form a double Z-scheme.211 The CuBi2O4 served as the light sensitizer absorbing visible light and capturing electrons from the CB of BaTiO3 and BiFeO3, enhancing charge separation and reduction ability. By taking advantage of the ferroelectric polarization of BaTiO3, the charge separation efficiency can be increased further.212–214 Intriguingly, Xu et al. synthesised an Aux/BaTiO3 photocatalyst, in which the formation of OH˙ was promoted by the piezoelectric field originating from BaTiO3 and the SPR-induced enhancement of carrier separation, resulting in a strong oxidizing ability for pollutants.215


4.1.3 Ti-based double perovskites. 
The Ti-based double perovskites are beginning to demonstrate their superior photocatalytic performance and the flexibility of structure–property adjustment. La2FeTiO6 showed superior visible light photocatalytic reactions for the degradation of p-chlorophenol to that of the LaFeO3.216 The high surface area, small particle size, narrow bandgap and the high concentration of oxygen vacancies of La2FeTiO6 were deemed to be the reasons for this improved photocatalytic performance. Hailili et al. selected CaCu3Ti4O12 as a model to study the effects derived from defects due to the abundant oxygen vacancies and metal ion defects (Cu+ and Ti3+) on the surface.217 Further investigations along with the DFT calculation indicated that both the bandgap and the potential of the CB and VB are distinct in the {001} and {111} facets of CaCu3Ti4O12, while the formation of oxygen vacancies was preferred on the {001} facets and the formation of metal defects was on the {111} facets.218 For these reasons, the electrons in the CB of the {001} facets would move to the CB of the {111} facets through a type II heterojunction mechanism, and thus electron–hole pairs could be separated effectively. More importantly, defect-dipoles would form with increasing defect concentration, and such defect-dipoles effected the charge separation by creating an internal field on the surface.


4.1.4 Layered Ti-based perovskites. 
Layered perovskites, due to the anisotropic charge transfer and electronic properties caused by the alternating layers, exhibit intriguing photocatalytic activities. There are four types of layered Ti-based perovskites: RP, AL, {110} and {111} perovskites. A2La2Ti3O10 (A = alkali metal) is a series of typical RP Ti-based perovskites presenting high UV water splitting activity. They are composed of octahedral perovskite-layers (La2Ti3O102−), between which A+ ions are located.219 These perovskites are easily hydrated in water, i.e., the A+ can be exchanged with the protons in the H2O molecules. Therefore, they are excellent water splitting photocatalysts.220 Nevertheless, A2La2Ti3O10 photocatalysts usually operate under UV irradiation due to their wide bandgap. To enhance their photoactivities under visible light, transition metal ions and N were selected to dope the A2La2Ti3O10.221–225 Alternatively, water molecules were intercalated between the perovskite layers of A2La2Ti3O10 to increase the interlayer space, resulting in better charge separation.226
Another well-documented RP Ti-based perovskite is Sr2TiO4. Sr2TiO4 has the highest level of structure lamination among all Srn+1TinO3n+1 (1 ≤ n ≤ ∞), where n denotes the thickness of the perovskite layer (n × SrTiO3) terminated on both sides by SrO.227 This special layered structure endows Sr2TiO4 with anisotropic charge transportation (the charge can only transfer in-plane rather than along the c axis), in that the CBM and VBM of Sr2TiO4 are buried in the TiO6 octahedron layers.227 Therefore, the interlayer charge recombination is prohibited, thereby contributing to the photocatalytic activities. A/B and A/X co-doped Sr2TiO4 were reported for the visible-light driven hydrogen production.227–229 Importantly, a type II heterojunction combining La/Cr co-doped STO and La/Cr co-doped Sr2TiO4 was prepared to improve the charge transfer and alleviate the electron–hole recombination.230 The H2 evolution rate of this heterojunction increased 6.4 times and 3.0 times compared to the individual La/Cr co-doped STO and La/Cr co-doped Sr2TiO4, respectively.
AL Ti-based perovskites possess good optical, ferroelectric and optoelectronic properties. Among them, Bi4Ti3O12 has been widely studied due to its unique structure.231 Bi4Ti3O12 consists of the alternate stacking of the (Bi2Ti3O10)2− triple perovskite slab and a monolayer of Bi2O22+. The (Bi2Ti3O10)2− layer is composed of three TiO6 octahedral perovskite layers with the Bi3+ at the A-site and sandwiched between the Bi2O22+ layers along the c axis. The ferroelectricity derived from the perovskite layers and the anisotropic charge transfer behaviours along the ab-plane contribute to the charge separation. Simultaneously, the involvement of the Bi 6p orbitals in the CB and the Bi 6s orbitals in the VB reduce the bandgap, and the large number of oxygen vacancies from the Bi2O22+ layer extend the wavelengths of absorption.232 As a result, this compound was considered as a promising photocatalyst for water splitting by Kudo et al.233 The Fe-doped Bi4Ti3O12 achieved visible-light photodegradation of phenol and bisphenol A due to the emergence of the occupied Fe 3d orbitals in the middle of the bandgap.234 Increasing exposure of the active {001} facet by tuning the morphology, on the other hand, contributed to the photocatalytic activities through offering more active sites and suppressing recombination rates.235 Interestingly, an increase of the Cr3+ dopants led to particle agglomeration during synthesis, resulting in more exposure of the inactive {010} facet.236 As a multiferroic material, the band alignment and the charge transport of Bi4Ti3O12 are also affected by the piezoelectric effect. By introducing ultrasonic waves to the system, the piezoelectric effect was triggered and accelerated the separation of the electrons and holes.237
To gain better photocatalytic performance, Bi4Ti3O12 was coupled with plasmonic metallic particles or narrow bandgap semiconductors such as CuS and BiVO4 to form type II heterojunctions.238–240 In particular, due to the stable 2D–2D face contact, the formation of heterojunctions between Bi4Ti3O12 and the other layered compounds with narrow bandgap, including g-C3N4 and BiOI, was in high preference.241,242 The enhancement of the photocatalytic activities of these 2D–2D heterojunctions was attributed to more effective charge transfer between the two components and the establishment of polarization fields.242
Considering the large bandgap and the weak polarization of Bi4Ti3O12, another AL Ti-based perovskite with smaller bandgap, Bi5FeTi3O15, was investigated. Bi5FeTi3O15 has a four layer perovskite unit of (Bi3FeTi3O13)2− (formed by inserting one BiFeO3 unit into the (Bi2Ti3O10)2− triple perovskite slab) sandwiched by two (Bi2O2)2+ layers along the c-axis.243 The hybridization of Fe 3d orbitals with Ti 3d orbitals reduces the CBM, and the Fe3+ existing in the perovskite slabs helps to enhance the ferroelectricity, which plays an essential role in charge separation.243 Recently, a Z-scheme system was constructed by a 2D/2D Bi5FeTi3O15/g-C3N4 heterojunction with Ag particles as the solid state electron mediator for photocatalytic pollutant degradation.244 The high efficiency of the photocatalytic reaction was ascribed to the high-speed Z-scheme path that accelerated the charge transfer in the 2D/2D heterojunction. Other AL Ti-based perovskites, such as BaLa4Ti4O15,233 Bi3TiNbO9,245 and Sr2Ba2Nb2TiO12,246 have also been investigated.
For the Ti-based {110} type perovskites, La2Ti2O7 is one of the most frequently used in photocatalysis. In La2Ti2O7, the perovskite slabs are formed by the corner-shared TiO6 octahedrons and La ions stack along the [110] direction.247 Abe et al. showed that such a corner-shared perovskite network played pivotal roles in the high performance photocatalysts, however the wide bandgap of this compound hampered its photocatalytic application.248 The bandgap of La2Ti2O7 was reduced by introducing various dopants.61,249 Type II heterojunctions combining La2Ti2O7 with other 2D narrow bandgap semiconductors, forming N-doped La2Ti2O7/g-C3N4,250 La2Ti2O7/Bi2WO6,251 and La2Ti2O7/BiOBr,252 were synthesised to extend light absorption and improve charge separation. To further enhance the photocatalytic efficiency, Meng et al. described a combination of Au@N-doped La2Ti2O7/r-GO extending the wavelength of the incident light absorption to 600 nm.253 In this structure, r-GO served as an electron mediator, extracting electrons from the N-doped La2Ti2O7 and facilitating the reduction reaction, and hot electrons were generated by Au particles through SPR then transferred to the CB of La2Ti2O7, resulting in synergistic enhancement of the photocatalysis. Zhu et al. anchored black phosphorus onto Au@La2Ti2O7 as a near infrared (NIR) light sensitizer.254 Therefore, SPR could be induced by NIR light and this heterojunction exhibited photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution at wavelengths up to 780 nm. Besides noble metal particles, metal hydroxides were loaded on La2Ti2O7 as well. Boppella et al. sandwiched the La2Ti2O7 nanosheets with a Ni/Fe double hydroxide layer (as hole capturer) and r-GO layer (as electron extractor) to effectively separate electrons and holes.255 The H2 evolution rate of this novel heterostructure was 532 μmol g−1 h−1, which was a 9-fold increase compared to the pure La2Ti2O7.
La4Ti3O12 and ALa4Ti4O15 (where A is Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+) are the typical {111} type perovskites. The bandgaps of CaLa4Ti4O15, SrLa4Ti4O15 and BaLa4Ti4O15 were 3.78, 3.82 and 3.85 eV, which was reverse in order of bandgap change to that of ATiO3.85 The positions of La3+ and A2+ in the crystal structure of ALa4Ti4O15 affect their bandgap and electronic properties. In BaLa4Ti4O15, the large radius of Ba2+ enlarges the layer distance, and thus reduces the interaction between layers, resulting in more localized excited energy states. Therefore, BaLa4Ti4O15 possesses a wider bandgap than CaLa4Ti4O15 and SrLa4Ti4O15. On the other hand, the ratio of La3+ and Ba2+ was 1:1 at the interlayer and only La3+ exists in the perovskite layer, whereas due to the approximately similar radius of La3+ and Ca2+, Ca2+ and La3+ exist randomly in both the interlayer and perovskite layer.85 The ordered distribution of the La3+ ions and Ba2+ ions endows BaLa4Ti4O15 with stronger anisotropic properties than CaLa4Ti4O15 and SrLa4Ti4O15, whereby the active sites of oxidation and reduction are separated. Besides, the anisotropic structure of BaLa4Ti4O15 enhances its polarization ability. Therefore, BaLa4Ti4O15 shows strong photocatalytic activities in water splitting, pollutant degradation and CO2 reduction.85,256,257 Co-catalysts were loaded on BaLa4Ti4O15 to further improve the efficiency.257,258 The highest AQY (16%) was achieved by the Rh2−xCrxO3 loaded 1.3 nm BaLa4Ti4O15, but the cost of Rh-based co-catalyst would be a practical concern.258 A ternary heterojunction Au@Cr2O3–BaLa4Ti4O15 was also prepared, in which the Cr2O3 shell was able to prevent the backward reaction of O2 evolution.259 The water splitting photoactivity of this novel structure therefore was improved 19 times compared with the Au@Cr2O3–BaLa4Ti4O15 sample.

4.2. Ferrites
Ferrite perovskites, primarily BiFeO3 or LaFeO3, have found application in photocatalysis. The doping or formation of heterojunctions have been studied to improve the photocatalytic performance of these ferrites, as will be outlined in the sections below and are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†).

4.2.1 BiFeO3. 
BiFeO3 is one of the best known Fe-based perovskites due to its relatively narrow bandgap, large remnant polarization and high Curie temperature.260 As a multiferroic material, BiFeO3 possesses the combination of ferroelectricity, antiferromagnetism and ferroelasticity, and therefore it has been investigated for application in photovoltaic cells, memristive devices and photocatalysis. BiFeO3 is a p-type semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.0–2.8 eV, determined by the separation of the top of the O 2p–Fe 3d hybridized VB located at around +2.3 V vs. SHE and the bottom of the CB composed of Fe 3d orbitals with a potential around +0.3 V vs. SHE.261 As a result, the band structure of BiFeO3 strongly depends on the Fe–O bonding interaction. In other words, the band structure of BiFeO3 would be affected by size, morphology and even method of synthesis, which may impact the Fe–O bonds.262 In the BiFeO3–graphene heterostructures, an enhanced coupling between BiFeO3 and graphene resulted in strong covalent O–C bonds and decreased charge transfer from oxygen to the Fe ion, and therefore the bandgap of BiFeO3 was reduced.263 In addition to modulation of the Fe–O bonds, other strategies have been attempted to increase light absorption. Mesoporous BiFeO3 hollow spheres were prepared by aerosol-spraying.264 The multiple light reflections in the hollow sphere caused more pronounced light absorption. Due to the increased light absorption and the large surface area, these mesoporous BiFeO3 hollow spheres showed strong activities in the photodegradation of RhB and 4-chlorophenol.
Doping is an alternative strategy to reduce the bandgap of BiFeO3 and enhance the photoactivity. BiFeO3 nanoparticles doped with Ba, Ca, Mn, Ln or Gd/Sn, Sr/Co, La/Se have shown good photocatalytic activities in the degradation of pollutants (e.g., Congo red (CR), RhB, phenol, etc.) due to a decrease in bandgap:265–273 among them the La/Se co-doped BiFeO3 exhibited a tunable bandgap from 2.06 to 1.94 eV by changing the La3+ and Se4+ content.271 Notwithstanding the narrow bandgap and the high photoactivity, BiFeO3 has been utilized more for photocatalytic degradation than water splitting because the CB of BiFeO3 is more positive than the redox potential of H2/H2O (Fig. 4). To achieve photocatalytic water splitting, the potential of the CBM must be shifted to a more negative position. Vishwakarma et al. investigated the Gd/Co co-doped BiFeO3 prepared by a facile sol–gel method, where the H2 evolution rate was 74 μmol cm−2 h−1.274 The high photocatalytic activity for H2 production was ascribed to the distortion of Fe–O octahedrons induced by the doping ions that affected the position of the CBM. Lu et al. developed a novel BiFeO3–SrTiO3 solid solution via a hydrothermal method. In this solid solution, the orbital hybridization of Ti 3d and Fe 3d gave a more negative CBM, meanwhile the mixture of O 2p orbitals and the spin-polarized band of Fe ensured the bandgap was in the range of visible light.275 The H2 evolution rate was recorded as 50 μmol h−1.
Despite the inferior photocatalytic activity compared with the Ti-based perovskites, the superior ferroelectricity of BiFeO3 facilitates the charge separation, and thus BiFeO3 has been extensively integrated with other semiconductors for better photocatalytic performance. One of the most documented BiFeO3-based heterojunctions is the combination of p-type BiFeO3 with n-type TiO2 as a p–n junction.276,277 To increase the contact area to improve charge transfer, BiFeO3 particles were deposited on TiO2 with various nanostructures, such as BiFeO3–TiO2 nanotubes,278 nanofibres,279 and multilayer films.280 A heterojunction of porous BiFeO3 and TiO2 with enhanced visible light activities was synthesised by Humayun et al.276 The built-in electric field at the BiFeO3/TiO2 interface could drive the visible-light generated electrons to the CB of TiO2, significantly suppressing the recombination and raising the reducing power. The photocatalytic activity of the BiFeO3–TiO2 heterojunction was further improved by the piezoelectric polarization feature of BiFeO3. Liu et al. showed that ultrasonic vibration introduced to the photocatalytic degradation system with the BiFeO3–TiO2 core–shell structure as catalyst caused piezoelectric polarization that resulted in a steeper bending of the bands at the p–n junction interfaces, whereby the separation of the electrons and holes were significantly enhanced (Fig. 10).277 In addition to TiO2, other n-type semiconductors having strong photocatalytic activity, such as BiVO4 and g-C3N4, were combined with BiFeO3.281–284
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of the BiFeO3/TiO2 core/shell nanocomposites; (b) the piezo-phototronic degradation activity for various structures (MPs: micrometre-sized particles, NPs: nanoparticles, NCs: nanocomposites, P: poling); (c) and (d) the piezo/photo-catalysis process of the BiFeO3/TiO2 core/shell structures for the different polarization direction. Reproduced with permission.277 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
To further enhance light absorption, light sensitizers are deposited on BiFeO3. For example, loading Au nanoparticles on BiFeO3 extended the absorbance to 600 nm, enhancing the photocatalytic water oxidation under visible light.285 As the absorbance of BiFeO3 spectrally overlaps with the upconversion emission of NaYF4:Yb,Er, a NaYF4:Yb,Er@BiFeO3 core@shell structure was fabricated to photodegrade 4-chlorophenol and methylene orange under 980 nm irradiation.173 The combination of BiFeO3 with upconversion materials would be a promising design for the utilization of infrared radiation in photocatalysis.


4.2.2 Other Fe-based perovskites. 
There are a number of ferrites that have been prepared as visible light catalysts for water splitting and pollutant degradation: LaFeO3, PrFeO3, SrFeO3−x and GaFeO3.106,286–289 LaFeO3 is a p-type semiconductor with a bandgap of ∼2.3 eV.290 Due to its low cost, high stability, non-toxicity and narrow bandgap, LaFeO3 is considered as a promising photocatalyst under visible light. However, the activity of LaFeO3 in the reduction half reactions is weak (CBM: ∼+0.2 V vs. SHE).291 Several approaches have been developed to modulate the band structure of LaFeO3. Garcia-Muñoz et al. found that Ti-doped LaFeO3 showed visible light activity in photocatalytic wet peroxide oxidation and photodegradation simultaneously.292 The high activity of this catalyst was attributed to the Ti dopants that affected the CBM and provided more electrons for the Fe3+ to facilitate the Fe3+/Fe2+ reduction. Heterojunctions integrating LaFeO3 with another n-type semiconductor having a more negative CB is an alternative route to enhance the reducing power. Humayun et al. prepared Bi-doped porous LaFeO3 coupled with ZnO.291 Since ZnO is an n-type semiconductor and the CBM is −0.1 V vs. SHE, a built-in field will be established at the LaFeO3/ZnO interface, driving the photogenerated electrons from the CB of LaFeO3 to the CB of ZnO, hence the reduction activity was improved. This photocatalyst therefore exhibited good activity for 2,4-DCP degradation and CO2 conversion. Direct Z-scheme systems were constructed through the combination of LaFeO3 and g-C3N4.293,294 Higher photocatalytic activities compared with either g-C3N4 or LaFeO3 for photocatalytic pollutant degradation and water splitting were displayed in these composites. Other ferrites, such as GaFeO3, were also reported to be active in photocatalytic water splitting. Interestingly, the GaFeO3 nanoparticles with a distinctive morphology, truncated hexagonal bipyramid, could be prepared by a facile hydrothermal method. The presence of the defects at the exposed facets might be responsible for the high activity of these GaFeO3 nanoparticles.295

4.3. Niobates
The niobate perovskites discussed here include KNbO3, NaNbO3, AgNbO3, Sr2Nb2O6, Sr2Nb2O7 and layered derivatives. Photocatalytic studies of these niobates, doped forms of these materials and heterojunctions including these niobates are listed in Table S3 (ESI†).

4.3.1 KNbO3. 
Potassium niobates, KNbO3, are nontoxic and have high stability, variant phases, strong ferroelectricity and corner-shared octahedral units of NbO6 in the network, therefore have attracted substantial interest in photocatalysis research.296 In particular, KNbO3 possesses a CBM as negative as −0.8 V vs. SHE,297 which allows KNbO3 to be used as a photocatalyst for water splitting and pollutant degradation, as well as to achieve photocatalytic N2 fixation (Table S3, ESI†). In general, bulk KNbO3 presents a number of temperature-dependent phases such as monoclinic, orthorhombic, tetragonal and cubic.298,299 Various phases of KNbO3 nanoparticles can be synthesised by carefully controlling the experimental parameters, with the cubic KNbO3 giving the best photocatalytic performance.298 According to DFT calculation, the CB in cubic KNbO3 was highly delocalized and involved the orbitals of both O and Nb, resulting in facile electron excitation and transfer as the electrons were capable of moving in all three dimensions. When the crystal symmetry was low, the CB was localized and restricting the electron mobility to one direction, reducing electron activity. Nevertheless, the orthorhombic KNbO3 displayed higher activity than the tetragonal KNbO3, because the facets enclosing the orthorhombic KNbO3 were more active than those exposed in the tetragonal KNbO3. In the case of monoclinic KNbO3, charge separation was impaired due to decreased ferroelectricity compared with the orthorhombic KNbO3, leading to lower photocatalytic activity.299 Morphology also contributes to the photoactivity of KNbO3. In the 1D KNbO3 nanostructures, the anisotropic nature improved electron transfer along the longitudinal direction, while the holes would drift laterally to the surface.299,300 Due to high photoactivity and anisotropic nature, most studies used the orthorhombic phase to produce 1D KNbO3 nanostructures. Photocatalytic activity was dependent on the aspect ratio of the 1D orthorhombic KNbO3 nanostructure: the larger the aspect ratio, the more active the KNbO3 nanostructure.300
Doping has been considered as one of the most effective ways to reduce the bandgap of KNbO3. The bandgap of the N-doped KNbO3 nanocubes could be reduced to 2.76 eV,301 and the carbon-doped KNbO3 showed high photocatalytic activity with a hydrogen generation rate of 142 μmol g−1 h−1 and 211 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible light and UV light, respectively.302 Deposition of metal particles on KNbO3 is another way to enhance light absorption and charge separation.300,303 Xing et al. demonstrated the excellent performance of plasmonic Ag-loaded KNbO3 nanorods in photocatalytic N2 fixation, H2 production and pollutant degradation.303 Piggott et al. reported a novel Au/KNbO3 photocatalyst with superior activity in nitroarene reduction due to the efficient charge transfer from the CB of KNbO3 to Au.304 However, replacement of the noble metal co-catalysts with other earth-abundant materials would be required to lower production cost. In addition, heterojunctions were constructed for broadening the wavelengths of absorption and achieving more efficient charge separation. Zhang et al. revealed that in the heterojunction of KNbO3/r-GO, the extent of reduction of r-GO influenced the bandgap of KNbO3 due to the number of O atoms present in the graphene layer.305 Hence KNbO3/r-GO exhibited UV activity in water splitting and visible light activity in pollutant degradation.306,307 Other heterojunctions, such as KNbO3/MoS2, KNbO3/g-C3N4 and KNbO3/carbon QDs, were also synthesised for photocatalytic water splitting and pollutant degradation.297,308,309


4.3.2 NaNbO3. 
Due to the fast charge transfer caused by the NbO6 octahedron network, similar to KNbO3, NaNbO3 is expected to have potential for photocatalytic water splitting and pollutant degradation.310 Compared to KNbO3, however, NaNbO3 showed relatively lower photocatalytic activity because of its larger bandgap and antiferroelectric property.311 Nevertheless, because of its high stability in redox reactions, NaNbO3 attracted attention in the development and investigation of high efficiency Nb-based photocatalysts in recent years. Similar to KNbO3, cubic NaNbO3 displayed higher activity for H2 production under UV light than the orthorhombic NaNbO3, which was ascribed to the more delocalized CB and less distorted O–Nb–O bonds that shifted the VB to a more negative level, thus reducing the bandgap.310 By taking advantage of the difference in bandgap between cubic and orthorhombic NaNbO3, a type II heterojunction of cubic-NaNbO3/orthorhombic-NaNbO3 was established, enhancing the charge separation.312 Moreover, doping cations (such as Ca or V) or anions (such as N) into NaNbO3 also contributed to the reduction of bandgap.313–315
Significant effort has focused on the construction of heterojunctions to improve the photocatalytic activity of NaNbO3. Shi et al. reported enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction using the NaNbO3/g-C3N4 nanocomposite, which forms a type II heterojunction,316 and investigations showed the NaNbO3/g-C3N4 nanocomposite removed organic pollutants in water under visible light.317 As both NaNbO3 and g-C3N4 are n-type semiconductors, however, the charge transfer between these two components was not efficient. To improve the charge transfer efficiency and acquire higher redox ability, some narrow bandgap p-type semiconductors were considered for the formation of p-n junctions. Sun et al. combined the n-type NaNbO3 with p-type BiOI, giving nearly 100% methylene blue degradation after 100 min under visible light.318 Kumar et al. prepared NaNbO3/MoS2 and NaNbO3/BiVO4 core–shell structures and compared their photoactivities (Fig. 11).319 Due to suitable lattice matching and the formation of p–n junctions, NaNbO3/MoS2 was more compatible for photocatalytic applications, and the H2 evolution rate was 61 μmol h−1. Regarding the NaNbO3/BiVO4 core–shell structure, BiVO4 exhibited p-type behaviour in this heterojunction despite being an n-type semiconductor, as the Fermi level of BiVO4 was lower than that of NaNbO3. Therefore, the electron transfer from BiVO4 to NaNbO3 was not as thermodynamically favourable as that in the NaNbO3/MoS2 structure. An alternative way to overcome the issues of connecting two n-type semiconductors was to form a Z-scheme system.320,321 A ternary heterojunction was also attempted. Yang et al. constructed the Pt/N-doped NaNbO3/N-doped r-GO structure, in which r-GO and Pt served as electron extractors and triggered the reduction reactions.314 This ternary heterojunction exhibited 9-fold higher activity than the pristine NaNbO3 and the quantum efficiency reached 5.1%.
 Fig. 11  FESEM images of (a) bare NaNbO3, (b) NaNbO3/MoS2 and (c) NaNbO3/BiVO4 composite nanostructures; (d) Schematic band alignment between NaNbO3/MoS2 and NaNbO3/BiVO4 nanomaterials (Ef: Fermi level); (e) photocatalytic activity of bare NaNbO3, Degussa (Evonik) P25, NaNbO3/BiVO4 and NaNbO3/MoS2 core–shell heterostructures. Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


4.3.3 Other Nb-based perovskites. 
Different from the alkaline niobates, AgNbO3 has a smaller bandgap (2.8 eV) and is deemed as a prospective visible-light-sensitive photocatalyst, but fast charge annihilation and relatively low reducing power restrict its application.322 Kato et al. first reported that AgNO3 could be used for water oxidation under visible light,322 then Ye et al. improved its activity by forming solid solutions with other perovskites, such as NaNbO3 or SrTiO3.91 Later, AgNbO3 nanocubes exposing the high energy (100) facet were hydrothermally prepared, and showed enhanced activity.323 To further hinder the charge recombination, AgCl, AgBr and g-C3N4 were added to AgNbO3.324–326 Co-catalysts, such as NiO and plasmonic metallic particles, such as Ag were also loaded on AgNbO3 to gain higher activity and more light absorption.327
SrNb2O6 and Sr2Nb2O7 have also been reported as promising candidates for photocatalytic water splitting because of the high energy Nb 4d orbitals, which are beneficial for H2 production and the specific layered structure with the chains of corner-shared distortable NbO6 octahedrons.328–330 Ye et al. hydrothermally synthesised 1D monoclinic SrNb2O6 nanorods and orthorhombic Sr2Nb2O7 nanoribbons and both showed UV-light driven water splitting.329 Cho et al. prepared single-crystalline SrNb2O6 nanotubes and demonstrated increased optical absorption,330 claiming this was due to the longer Nb–O bond in the 1D nanostructure, resulting in a smaller bandgap. The large surface area of the nanotubes was also responsible for the superior photocatalytic evolution of H2. Pang et al. discovered that the anisotropic structure of the SrNb2O6 nanorods contributed to the charge separation.331 Quantum confinement in the 1D materials had electrons moving preferentially along the rods and thus reduction reactions primarily occurred at the top planes of the rods, while the holes on the side planes of the rods initiated oxidation reactions. Therefore, the selectivity of water oxidation at the side planes and the CO2 reduction at the top planes were detected.
Besides 1D nanostructures, layered perovskites, in particular the DJ and RP phases, are a diverse source of nanosheets with molecular thickness. The anisotropic feature of nanosheets is considered to be useful for photocatalytic applications, in that the nanoscale thickness allows for prompt migration of the photogenerated charges to the surface. KCa2Nb3O10 is a typical DJ perovskite. It consists of (Ca2Nb3O10)− perovskite slabs with K+ embedded in between.332 To improve the visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity, N-doped KCa2Nb3O10 nanosheets with a reduced bandgap were fabricated.333,334 Intercalation of active compounds into the perovskite interlayers contributes to the high photoactivity, because the nanospaces of the interlayers in the layered perovskites give access to the highly active sites. RuO2 and Rh(OH)3 nanoparticles were first intercalated into the KCa2Nb3O10 to enhance H2 evolution rate,335,336 but the introduction of these rare elements is not commercially preferred. Oshima et al. demonstrated a simple solution-based method to decollate the layered nanospaces of KCa2Nb3O10 with 1 nm Pt nanoclusters by the assistance of tetra(n-butyl)ammonium cations.337 Such nanostructures displayed high stability in photocatalytic water splitting for more than 30 h, and the total H2 and O2 evolution was 19.7 μmol h−1. Ongoing investigations to develop active compounds consisting of earth abundant elements for intercalation are required.
Ba5Nb4O15 is an alternative photocatalyst for water splitting with the {111} type layered perovskite structure, but the wide bandgap (∼3.85 eV) endows Ba5Nb4O15 with merely UV activity.338 By loading the co-catalyst NiO, Ba5Nb4O10 split water under UV irradiation with the H2 evolution rate of 4.8 mmol g−1 h−1.338 Strategies for enhancing visible-light photocatalytic activity include co-doping (the bandgap of the P/Mo co-doped Ba5Nb4O15 was 2.31 eV) and heterojunction construction (H2 evolution rate was 2.67 mmol g−1 h−1).339,340

4.4. Other oxide perovskite photocatalysts
In addition to the previously discussed perovskites, there are a number of perovskite oxides that have shown promising photocatalytic activities. These are discussed below and summarized in Table S4 (ESI†).

4.4.1 Bi2WO6. 
Bi2WO6 is the simplest member in the AL perovskite series with an extraordinary layered structure constructed by (WO4)2− perovskite slabs sandwiched between the (Bi2O2)2+ rock-salt layers.341 The bandgap of Bi2WO6 is about 2.8 eV, and the CB is constituted of W 6d orbitals while the VB is formed by the hybridization of Bi 6s and O 2p orbitals, which is largely delocalized and thus contributes to the mobility of photogenerated holes.342 Therefore, the particular layered structure of Bi2WO6 benefits the charge separation. The VBM of Bi2WO6 is ∼+3.2 V vs. SHE, indicating a strong oxidation capacity, and thus Bi2WO6 is chosen as a model photocatalyst for pollutant degradation and oxygen generation from water splitting, whereas the relatively positive CBM (∼+0.5 V vs. SHE) limits its application.233,343,344 There are numerous reports pertaining to the synthesis of Bi2WO6-based photocatalysts (Table S4, ESI†), demonstrating that controlling the morphology is a key factor to tune its electronic structure.341 Various nanostructured Bi2WO6 materials, including 1D (nanofibers, nanotubes), 2D (nanosheets, nanoplates) and 3D (flower-like, hollow spheres) structures have been prepared by different methods including hydrothermal, solvothermal, molten salt and sol–gel, with many displaying interesting photocatalytic performances.345–353 Notably, compared with the 1D and 3D structure, 2D Bi2WO6 was deemed to perform better photocatalytically due to geometric factors.341,353,354 Liu et al. showed that photocatalytic CO2 reduction was largely increased on the surface of the cetyltrimethylammonium bromide modified Bi2WO6 nanosheets due to the short diffusion distance and the selective adsorption of CO2.353 A Bi2WO6 2D array was also built as the photoanode for photoelectrochemical water splitting, on which a much higher photocurrent density and increased photon-to-H2 conversion efficiency were detected.355 Intriguingly, the 2D Bi2WO6 nanostructure could serve as a support for the intercalation of active compounds. Yi et al. synthesised 2D Bi2WO6 nanostructures and anchored the hemin on their surface to form hemin-bismuth tungstate nanocomposites via a facile one step hydrothermal method.354 The enhanced light absorption and the faster electron and oxygen transfer resulting from the 2D structure and the assistance of hemin boosted the photocatalytic performance for tetracycline removal from water under illumination.
To increase the light absorption and improve charge separation, doping is utilized to control the defect levels and modulate the band structure. A series of elements, including Zn, Fe, Ln, F and N, were doped into Bi2WO6 for the creation of visible-light-driven photocatalysts.356–361 Loading plasmonic metal particles on Bi2WO6 was also an effective route to boost the photocatalytic performance.362–364 Wang et al. developed an intriguing method to control the oxygen vacancies in Bi2WO6 nanosheets through a reduction reaction following the hydrothermal synthesis.365 By depositing Bi metal particles on the oxygen-vacancy-rich Bi2WO6 nanosheets, these nanocomposites exhibited remarkably enhanced activity for selective oxidation of aromatic alcohols to carbonyl compounds in aqueous medium under visible-light irradiation. The synergetic effect of Bi particles and oxygen vacancies was considered to be the major factor for such an improvement, where the oxygen vacancies narrowed the bandgap and improved reactant adsorption while the Bi particles improved light harvesting and provided more active sites. Oxygen vacancies can be introduced by forming heterojunctions. Cao et al. reported a novel Bi2WO6/amorphous BiOCl heterojunction (Fig. 12a),366 where abundant WO6−x units were generated due to the rich crystalline-amorphous boundaries. These units facilitate charge separation by capturing electrons hence the heterojunction showed remarkable enhancement in photocatalytic toluene oxidation, with a conversion rate 166 times higher than that of the pristine Bi2WO6.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of Bi2WO6/amorphous BiOCl. Reproduced with permission.366 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic fabrication of the black phosphorus (BP)/monolayer Bi2WO6 (MBWO) heterojunction. Reproduced with permission.367 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The formation of Bi2WO6-based heterojunction has been extensively used to elevate photocatalytic activity for pollutant degradation. A 2D/2D p-La2Ti2O7/n-Bi2WO6 heterojunction showed excellent photocatalytic performance for RhB degradation due to substantial contact between the 2D components and the formation of a p–n junction that accelerates the electron transfer.251 Hu et al. integrated the ultrathin Bi2WO6 nanosheets with black phosphorus and showed that the NO removal ratio was increased 2.6 times that of the pure Bi2WO6 nanosheets (Fig. 12b).367 Zhou et al. established a WO3/Bi2WO6 Z-scheme system with Ag particles as light sensitizers.344 The surface plasmon resonance induced by the Ag particles and the efficient Z-scheme mechanism for charge transfer were considered key to the high photoactivity of this photocatalyst. Other heterojunctions such as Bi2Fe4O9/Bi2WO6, WO3/Cu/Bi2WO6, NaBiO3/Bi2WO6, TiO2/Bi2WO6, MXenes/Bi2WO6 have also been constructed for diverse photocatalytic reactions.343,368–371


4.4.2 Bi2MoO6. 
Bi2MoO6 possesses an AL perovskite layered structure similar to Bi2WO6, composed of the (Bi2O2)2+ layers linking with the corner-shared (MoO6)2− slabs.372 According to DFT calculations, the VB of Bi2MoO6 is primarily constituted by the O 2p orbitals and its CB consists of mainly the Mo 4d orbitals in the MoO6 octahedra with contribution from the Bi 6p orbitals in the (Bi2O2)2+ layers. Therefore, the photo absorption and the charge transfer are sensitive to the composition and the length of the Mo–O and Bi–O bonds. Due to the wider bandgap of Bi2MoO6 than that of Bi2WO6, the photoactivity of Bi2MoO6 generally is not as good as Bi2WO6, but since the CBM of Bi2MoO6 is −0.32 V vs. SHE, H2 production can be observed even for unmodified Bi2MoO6.373 Many strategies have been developed for improving its photocatalytic activity. Analogous to Bi2WO6, morphology control is one of the most usual strategies to tune the electronic structure and optical properties of Bi2MoO6, and a variety of Bi2MoO6 nanostructures have been synthesised.374–379 In particular, Xie et al. prepared the Bi2MoO6 nanosheets with the thickness of a few nanometres via a hydrothermal route. Due to the reduction of the diffusion distance of the charge carriers and the exclusion of any grain boundaries and interfaces in the nanosheets, the recombination rate was greatly suppressed.377 Defect engineering, especially the introduction of oxygen vacancies, has also been investigated. Since the Bi–O bonding interaction is not strong, oxygen vacancies can be readily formed in an environment lacking oxygen.380 By precise control of the amount of oxygen vacancies, the bandgap of Bi2MoO6 can be tailored.381 These defect states can also trap charge carriers, improving the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.381 More importantly, oxygen vacancies can serve as the electron donors to enhance the adsorption and the activation of the reactant molecules.382 Fu et al. deposited Fe2O3 clusters on the Bi2MoO6 with rich oxygen vacancies and unveiled a new path of electron transfer from oxygen vacancies to Fe2O3 clusters, by which charge separation and the photocatalytic activity were increased (Fig. 13).383 Jing et al. produced Bi2MoO6 hierarchical balls with abundant oxygen vacancies, which were then used as the photocatalysts for the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol under visible light.382 Doping is another effective strategy for defect engineering. Many foreign elements have been introduced in to Bi2MoO6 to generate controllable defects and improvement in photocatalytic efficiency is achieved in those defect-rich samples on account of the extension of light absorption and the acceleration in electron–hole pair separation.384–386
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of Fe2O3/Bi2MoO6 with surface oxygen vacancies (F/BMO-SOVs); (b) FESEM images of the F/BMO-SOVs nanocomposites, the inset scale bar is 100 nm; (c) total organic carbon (TOC) removal of phenol by BMO, BMO-SOVs, F/BMO-SOVs and F/BMO under visible light illumination. Reproduced with permission.383 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Meanwhile, a variety of Bi2MoO6-based heterojunctions, such as Bi2MoO6/AgX (X = Cl, Br, I),387,388 Bi2MoO6/Ag2O,389 Bi2MoO6/Ag3XO4 (X = P, V),390,391 Bi2MoO6/g-C3N4,392 Bi2MoO6/TiO2,393 and Bi2MoO6/MOFs,394 were developed and showed strong optical absorption and excellent photocatalytic activity. In addition, a solid-state Z-scheme system of Bi2MoO6/CdS with Bi metal particles as electron mediators was formed.395 In this system, due to the dual role of the Bi particles – electron mediators and the source of SPR – the H2 evolution rate was enhanced, but substitution of the toxic CdS by other narrow bandgap semiconductors should be considered for sustainable catalyst production. Taking advantage of the stronger redox ability under visible light, more Z-scheme systems were established recently, such as Ag3PO4/Ag/Bi2MoO6 and AgI/Bi2MoO6.396,397 Light sensitizers (Ag, Au, Bi, etc.) were also deposited on Bi2MoO6 and the photocatalytic performance was found to be elevated in many different reactions.395,398,399


4.4.3 ASnO3. 
Alkaline earth stannates, ASnO3 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba), have been extensively investigated due to their wide application in ceramic dielectric bodies, gas-sensitive materials, ferromagnetic materials and anode materials for lithium ion batteries.400–402 Because the 3D network of the corner-shared SnO6 octahedra are able to facilitate the electron transfer, and the dipole moment induced by the distortion of the SnO6 units benefits the charge separation, ASnO3 has already been used as a photocatalyst in various photocatalytic reactions (Table S4, ESI†). Among the ASnO3 materials, CaSnO3 have the highest activity in photocatalytic degradation, which was attributed to the small radius and the largest electronegativity of the Ca2+ ions that elongated the Sn–O bonds and distorted the SnO6 octahedra.403,404 Moshtaghi et al. described a facile and green co-precipitation method for the synthesis of CaSnO3 nanocubes, which showed good activity in azo dye degradation under UV light.405
Despite the mild distortion of SnO6 units, the orthorhombic SrSnO3 nanoparticles prepared by solution-based methods under relatively low temperature exhibit more attractive photocatalytic properties due to their anisotropic nature.406 Furthermore, the VBM of SrSnO3 is +2.69 V vs. SHE and the CBM is −1.37 V vs. SHE.407 Such band edge positions make SrSnO3 a well-suited material for many photocatalytic reactions, especially water splitting, under UV irradiation. Alammar et al. synthesised a series of SrSnO3 nanorods and nanoparticles in different ionic liquids by microwave heating.407 All these SrSnO3 nanocrystals had good UV activity after loading with Rh, and the H2 evolution rates were in the range of 99 to 110 μmol h−1. Peanut-shaped SrSnO3 nanoparticles were also obtained by co-precipitation and annealing, and the H2 evolution rate under UV light was 236.5 μmol g−1 h−1 with NiOx as co-catalyst.408 Moreover, active facets play an important role in the photocatalytic performance of SrSnO3 nanorods. The SrSnO3 nanorods that only exposed {001} facets had the best activity and stability (Fig. 14).409 To increase the light absorption, Zhang et al. synthesised N-doped SrSnO3 nanorods by a facile in situ heat treatment method. The incorporation of nitrogen extended the light absorption to the visible region because of the formation of the in-gap states resulting from the mixture of the N 2p and O 2p orbitals. This improved the photocatalytic degradation from 20.10% (undoped samples) to 91.29% (N-doped SrSnO3 nanorods).410
 Fig. 14  (a) HRTEM image of SrSnO3; (b) degradation activities of samples synthesised at different temperatures (SSO-calcination temperature); and (c) schematic representation for the synthesis of the SrSnO3 microstructures. Reproduced with permission.409 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Compared to CaSnO3 and SrSnO3, BaSnO3 possesses the standard SnO6 octahedra and the smallest bandgap (∼3.1 eV).411 Due to the position of the CBM (−0.69 V vs. SHE), BaSnO3 can serve as a candidate for photocatalytic water splitting. Nevertheless, the wide bandgap and the fast recombination rate lead to poor efficiency. Defect engineering was proposed to introduce oxygen vacancies into the BaSnO3 nanocrystals in a controllable way to reduce the bandgap and produce more active sites. Ion substitution, such as doping Sb and Fe in the B-site, or La in the A-site, is the most common technique to generate oxygen vacancies, but the generated oxygen vacancies will distribute randomly in bulk and on the surface.412–414 Kim et al. developed an effective chemical reduction method by using NaBH4 to introduce oxygen vacancies into BaSnO3 in a controlled way to gain more surface active sites.415 By optimizing the oxygen vacancy level, the bandgap was reduced to 2.17 eV with excellent photocatalytic activity for the water splitting reaction. The formation of a solid solution is another way to increase the photocatalytic performance. Currently, the microwave-assisted ionic liquid method allows the formation of a homogeneous SrSnO3–BaSnO3 solid solution at low temperature over a short period.407,416 Although the octahedral tilting distortion increased with Sr content, which contributed to the charge separation, the Ba content in the solid solution was beneficial for the surface area, thus optimized performance was from the Sr0.8Ba0.2SnO3 sample.416


4.4.4 BaZrO3. 
Barium zirconate, BaZrO3, is a typical cubic perovskite oxide with a Zr–O–Zr bond angle of 180°, which is beneficial for the delocalization of the photogenerated carriers, thereby transferring charges to initiate redox reaction.417 Since the VBM of BaZrO3 (O 2p orbitals) is situated at about +3.0 V vs. SHE and the CBM (Zr 4d orbitals) is located at around −1.8 V vs. SHE, BaZrO3 is considered as a promising photocatalyst for water splitting.418 Many efforts have since focused on improving its photocatalytic activity by doping, forming solid solution, constructing heterojunctions and morphology control. Chen et al. synthesised the hollow BaZrO3 nanocrystals via a facile solvothermal method using ethylenediamine as solvent.419 The large surface area and the large amount of surface oxygen vacancies of these hollow BaZrO3 nanocrystals gave a H2 evolution rate of 67.98 μmol g−1 h−1, 14.8 times higher than the commercial BaZrO3. The photoactivity of different facets were also compared through morphology control. The polyhedral BaZrO3 dominated with {001} and {110} facets exhibited 9.4 times higher photocatalytic activity than the BaZrO3 nanoparticles enclosed primarily by {110} facets.420 According to DFT calculations, the CB of the samples exposing {001} facets was about 0.31 V more negative than those with only {110} facets, and thus the high reduction energy stemming from the {001} facets was responsible for the high activity. It is worth noting that the absorption threshold of BaZrO3 is in the UV region of the light spectrum. To enhance the visible-light activity of BaZrO3, attempts have been made to modify its band positions by incorporating dopants (e.g., Bi, Ce, Fe and Sn) and creating oxygen vacancies in the lattice.418,421–423


4.4.5 Other oxide perovskites. 
There are numerous reports on other earth-abundant nontoxic perovskite oxides active for photocatalytic degradation and water splitting, such as LaCoO3, LaNiO3, LaMnO3 and their doped counterparts (Table S4, ESI†).424–428 Of these perovskites, the AL layered perovskite Bi4V2O11 has attracted attention due to its particular structure, narrow bandgap and intense ferroelectricity. Bi4V2O11 can be expressed as [(Bi2O2)(VO3.5□0.5)]2 (where □ stands for oxygen vacancy), and in general it is considered to be composed of alternate layers of the (Bi2O2)2+ rock-salt layers and the (VO3.5□0.5) perovskite slabs.429 Although the bandgap of Bi4V2O11 is in the regime of visible light (∼2.2 to 2.4 eV), the inefficient charge transfer and the fast recombination due to the existence of many oxygen vacancies hinder it from being used as a sole photocatalyst.430 Therefore, many studies concentrate on the fabrication of Bi4V2O11-based heterojunctions. For example, a 1D Bi2O3–Bi4V2O11 type II heterojunction showed enhanced photocatalytic degradation, ascribed to anisotropic charge transport and efficient charge separation induced by the 1D heterostructure.431 The Z-scheme heterojunction AgI–Bi4V2O11 showed visible-light photocatalytic activities for degradation of sulfonamide antibiotics.432 Other heterostructures, such as Bi2MoO6–Bi4V2O11, Bi2WO6–Bi4V2O11, Bi QDs–Bi4V2O11, BiVO4–Bi4V2O11 and dye-sensitized TiO2–Bi4V2O11 have been reported with improved photocatalytic pollutant degradation.433–437 More importantly, since oxygen vacancies can trap electrons in the metastable states, these electrons may be able to inject into an antibonding orbital of adsorbed N2, thereby weakening the N–N triple bond for subsequent activation.438 Therefore, Bi4V2O11 may be a potential photocatalyst for nitrogen fixation.439 Noting that BiVO4, a well-documented photocatalyst with high efficiency in water splitting and pollutant degradation, is an intermediate of the synthesis of Bi4V2O11 bulk samples when increasing temperature,440 indicating small quantities of Bi4V2O11 could be present in the BiVO4 samples as it is thermodynamic stable. Investigations indicate that the existence of Bi4V2O11 in the BiVO4 nanocrystals had positive effects on the photocatalytic activity,435,441 and a recent study illustrated that the presence of the Bi4V2O11 nanoregions in ultrathin BiVO4 produce intensive photovoltaic voltage and current due to the synergy of charge separation in the Bi4V2O11 regions and the light absorption ability in the BiVO4 region.442 Such advances are expected to be applied in the field of photocatalytic degradation and water splitting in the future.

4.5. Halide perovskites
Most photocatalysts based on perovskite oxides harvest very little visible light due to their wide bandgap. This is primarily attributed to the dominant contribution of O-2p orbitals to the density of states (DOS) around the VBM of perovskite oxides, which basically fix their VBM levels at around +3.0 V vs. SHE.443 The perovskite oxides that do have visible light activity (Eg < 3.0 eV) possess a CBM that is lower than the potential of H2/H+, O2/O2− and CO2/CO. Hence in the last decade researchers have investigated non-oxide perovskites, such as halide perovskites, that demonstrate impressive optoelectronic properties.150,444,445 The general formula of halide perovskites is ABX3, in which A is a monovalent cation, such as MA, FA, Cs+, or Rb+; B represents divalent metal ions, which can be Pb2+ or Sn2+; and X is a halogen ions (Cl−, Br− and I−). Halide perovskites feature low synthesis cost, widely tuneable bandgap, long carrier lifetime and diffusion distances, large absorption coefficient and good charge mobility, making them attractive candidates for application in solar cells, LEDs, lasers and photodetectors.446–452 In particular, the power conversion efficiency of the halide perovskite solar cells has recently reached 25.2%,453 indicating that both the light absorption and energy conversion of these compounds are highly efficient. This success has inspired the study of halide perovskites in solar-to-chemical energy conversion and environment remediation.
Halide perovskites embody numerous desirable advantages for photocatalysis, such as narrow bandgap, slow electron–hole recombination and fast charge carrier transport.454–458 In addition, most of the halide perovskites exhibit excellent reduction ability, that is, their CBM is usually more negative than the potential of H2/H+, O2/O2− and CO2/CO due to the more negative potential of the p-orbitals (e.g., X-3p) compared to O-2p in the perovskite oxides, enabling them to trigger H2 evolution, superoxide radical generation and CO2 reduction.150,444 Nevertheless, several constraints limit the application of halide perovskites in photocatalytic systems. First, the VBM of some halide perovskites is too negative to oxidize the water molecules or produce OH radicals, thereby making these perovskites unsuitable for water oxidation and pollutant degradation.150,444 Second, the instability of most of the halide perovskites hinders their photocatalytic utility.150,444,445 Third, most of the commonly used halide perovskites contain lead, hence toxicity remains the primary concern for large-scale applications.459
To produce environmentally friendly and stable halide perovskites as photocatalysts, lead-free halide perovskites are developed.155,460–462 Among them, tin-, bismuth- and antimony-based halide perovskites have shown good resistance to humidity, oxygen and illumination, and outstanding activities in many photocatalytic reactions, and thus they have been extensively used in H2 generation, CO2 reduction and pollutant degradation (Table S5, ESI†).

4.5.1 Sn-based halide perovskites. 
Sn-based halide perovskites are preferred over the Pb-based halides that are widely used in perovskite-based solar cells and photocatalysis due to the low toxicity of Sn2+.463–465 Reyes-Perez et al. prepared CsSnBr3 for the photocatalytic degradation of violet blue in water and showed a good adsorption rate to the dye molecules: the adsorption rate was positively related to the efficiency of photocatalytic degradation.466 Nevertheless, both +2 and +4 oxidation states for Sn were confirmed in the crystal lattice, and adsorbed oxygen was observed at the crystal surface as well, resulting in low crystallinity at the surficial region, which might affect the photocatalytic performance of the CsSnBr3 particles. Hong et al. synthesized a 2D Sn-based halide perovskite by intercalating 1-hexadecylammonium (HDA) cations between the inorganic layers and studied its photocatalytic dehydrogenation activity. The instability of Sn(II), however, impaired the product yields.159 To enhance the stability, Ju et al. used CH3NH2CH3+ (DMA) as the A site ion and synthesised DMASnI3 for photocatalytic water splitting.467 Interestingly, while the fresh DMASnI3 was yellow rod-like crystals, it turned black when exposed to air because the generated iodide defects reduced the bandgap. Despite the formation of iodide defects, the as-obtained DMASnI3 crystals remained stable even when immersed in water for 16 h. Therefore, these crystals could be applied to photocatalytic water splitting in pure water, rather than in the saturated halo acid solution. The H2 evolution rate was 0.64 μmol h−1 with good recycling stability, but SnI4 was found after the H2 evolution due to the formation of oxygen.
The stability and charge separation can be improved by forming a heterojunction. Zhang et al. obtained a MASnI3/TiO2 p–n heterojunction by a wet chemical process, and studied the photoactivity using the degradation of RhB in water under visible light.468 Compared with the MASnI3 and TiO2 samples, the MASnI3/TiO2 heterojunction exhibited the fastest reaction rate. More importantly, no oxidation state +4 Sn was detected after the degradation, indicating that the combination of the two components contributed to the stability of the samples. The enhanced stability of the heterojunction was attributed to the superoxide radicals being generated on the n-type TiO2 rather than on the p-type MASnI3. That is, aqueous oxygen would only acquire electrons on TiO2 (which were transferred from photoexcited MASnI3) instead of oxidizing the Sn(II) to Sn(IV) on MASnI3.
Sn-based halide perovskite heterojunctions have also been employed in solar-to-chemical fuel conversion. Wang et al. synthesised a Cs2SnI6/SnS2 hybrid by mixing a CsI ethanol solution with SnS2 nanosheets (Fig. 15a).469 Here, Cs2SnI6 possesses a derivative structure from the rock-salt double perovskite (A2BB′X6) in which the B′ ions are taken away, and thus all the SnX6 octahedra in the crystal lattice are isolated.470 As the oxidation state for Sn in this halide perovskite was +4, this compound was more stable than Sn-based halide perovskites containing +2 Sn. Owing to the outstanding stability of Cs2SnI6 and the pronounced charge separation ability attributed to the type II heterojunction (Fig. 15c), the optimized Cs2SnI6/SnS2 structure showed a 5.4-fold enhancement in the methane rate compared with the original SnS2 nanosheets (Fig. 15b).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustrating the synthesis procedure for the Cs2SnI6/SnS2 heterojunction (PVK denotes halide perovskites). (b) The methane production rate of different samples. (c) Scheme of photocatalytic CO2 reduction on the Cs2SnI6/SnS2 heterojunction. Reproduced with permission.469 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


4.5.2 Bi-based halide perovskites. 
Although Sn-based halide perovskites have been studied in photovoltaics and photocatalysis, the instability of the Sn ions is the main obstacle for their practical use. Bi-based halide perovskites, having outstanding stability and superior optoelectronic properties, have gained attention as alternatives in photovoltaic and photocatalytic applications.463,464,471 Note that the use of Bi ions does not result in charge neutrality of ABX3, and therefore structural variants rather than the typical ABX3-type perovskites are prevalent in the Bi-based halide perovskites. Guo et al. synthesised MA3Bi2I9 particles via the co-precipitation of MAI and BiI3 in a HI and H3PO2 solution.472 The structure of MA3Bi2I9 can be depicted as a defective ABX3 structure, in which the Bi ions residing at the BiI6 octahedra along the space diagonal in a perfect ABX3 crystal lattice are removed.473 This compound displayed photocatalytic water splitting activity under visible light in a saturated HI solution. Besides water splitting, MA3Bi2I9, as well as Rb3Bi2I9 and Cs3Bi2I9 were used in visible light driven CO2 reduction.474 Intriguingly, Rb3Bi2I9 had the highest yield of methane production, while Cs3Bi2I9 exhibited the highest CO production rate as well as the best photocatalytic activity. Detailed investigations of the reaction mechanism pinpoint that when using Rb3Bi2I9 as photocatalyst, monodentate CO2 adsorption was preferred (Fig. 16(1)) and formate was the most important intermediate for the formation of methane, whereas with respect to Cs3Bi2I9, bidentate CO2 interaction was of higher priority (Fig. 16(2)), and when the reaction went through monodentate adsorption the CO formation occurred directly from the carbondioxy radical (Fig. 16(1), bypass channel) due to its excellent electron mobility, and therefore the yield of CO was high. Based on these studies, halide perovskites can be designed for selective production of various fuel gases. A Z-scheme system was developed to improve the CO2 reduction efficiency. Liu et al. combined Cs3Bi2I9 with Bi2WO6 to form a direct Z-scheme heterojunction. The efficient charge transfer ability derived from the sharing of the Bi ions at the interfaces, as well as the preserved redox ability by the Z-scheme structure, significantly improved the production of CO.475 Aside from CO2 reduction, Cs3Bi2I9 is also active in photocatalytic H2 generation and pollutant degradation.476–478
 Fig. 16  Plausible mechanisms of photocatalytic CO2 reduction via Rb3Bi2I9 and Cs3Bi2I9 catalysts. Reproduced with permission.474 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Cs3Bi2Br9 possesses good stability and recyclability, and has been widely applied for photocatalytic organic synthesis. Dai et al. demonstrated the visible-light activity of Cs3Bi2Br9 for the ring-opening reactions of epoxides. The high activity and high selectivity (≥86%) of this photocatalyst were ascribed to the Bi-based Lewis acid sites that could coordinate the O atom in the three-membered heterocyclic ring.479 To further increase the contact between the catalysts and reactants, Cs3Bi2Br9 nanoparticles (2–5 nm) were dispersed into the channels of a mesoporous silica, SBA-15.480 This composite showed visible-light activity for toluene oxidation, with a conversion rate reaching 32900 μmol gcat−1 h−1 and high aldehyde and ketone selectivity (>99%).
The Cs2AgBiX6 double perovskite is another promising photocatalyst. Compared to Cs3Bi2X9 (X = Br and I), Cs2AgBiX6 has a substantial absorption coefficient, longer electron–hole recombination lifetime and better stability under illumination and moisture. This is attributed to the silver incorporation that induces structural transformation from the 2D layered structure to a rock-salt double perovskite structure.481 As the Ag 4d orbitals raise the VBM, Cs2AgBiX6 exhibits a narrower bandgap, higher charge carrier mobility and lower exciton binding energy.482 Thus, Cs2AgBiX6 is widely applied to photocatalysis. Zhou et al. obtained Cs2AgBiBr6 nanoparticles via a hot injection route, and these nanoparticles demonstrated fair photocatalytic activity in CO2 reduction.69 Wu et al. synthesised ∼4.6 nm Cs2AgBiI6 nanoparticles via an anti-solvent recrystallization approach, which exhibited a CO yield of 18.9 μmol g−1 in photocatalytic CO2 reduction with 100% selectivity.483 Zhang et al. developed an ethanol-based photocatalytic system, in which Cs2AgBiBr6 significantly improved the degradation of RhB under visible light.484 To further boost the electron mobility and promote the charge separation ability of the photocatalysts, r-GO serving as electron mediator was combined with Cs2AgBiBr6 nanoparticles.485,486 On account of the superior conductivity of r-GO, photoelectrons could be rapidly extracted from Cs2AgBiBr6 and transferred into r-GO, facilitating electron–hole separation and contributing to H2 evolution and CO2 reduction.


4.5.3 Sb-based halide perovskites. 
Similar to the Bi-based halide perovskites, Sb-based halide perovskites have good stability and excellent photovoltaic performance.463,464,487 As an alternative lead-free halide perovskite, Sb-based halide perovskites have also been employed for photocatalytic application recently. Zhang et al. reported A3Sb2Br9 (A: Cs or MA) nanoparticles synthesised by an anti-solvent recrystallization method.488 The effects of the A-site cations (CsxMA3−x, x = 0–3) on the photocatalytic activity for hydrocarbon oxidation were carefully investigated. They found that the octahedron distortion induced by the A-site cations played critical roles in photocatalytic efficiency, and Cs2.3MA0.7Sb2Br9 exhibited the best performance for photocatalytic toluene oxidation. Cs3Sb2I9 was also synthesised for CO2 reduction under visible light.489 The CO yield of 7.1 μmol g−1 with 100% selectivity was ascribed to the low electron–hole recombination rate, efficient charge separation and suitable VBM/CBM positions of this perovskite.
By substituting some Sb3+ with Bi3+ to form Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9, the photocatalytic activity of perovskite catalysts could be improved further. Chen et al. synthesised Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9 perovskite, and assessed its photocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution in a HI solution (Fig. 17).490 Compared to Cs3Bi2I9 and Cs3Sb2I9, the Sb3+ ions effectively reduced the contribution of Bi3+ ions on the CB, thereby reducing population of mid-gap states derived from the Bi vacancies and narrowing the bandgap. During the H2 evolution, the highly reducing species (I−) in the reaction solution prevented the oxidation of Sb3+ to Sb5+. Cs2CO3 was added to decrease the concentration of Bi3+ and suppress the Bi3+/Bi side reaction by adjusting the solution equilibrium between Cs+ and (Bi2I9)3−. After loading with Pt nanoparticles, Cs3Bi0.6Sb1.4I9 showed a H2 evolution rate of 92.6 μmol h−1, significantly higher than that of Cs3Bi2I9 under the same condition (∼4 μmol h−1).
 Fig. 17  (a) SEM images of Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9 (CBSI-x). (b) H2 evolution rate of Cs3Bi2I9 (CBI) and CBSI-0.3 in HI solution (solution 1) and HI solution with Cs2CO3 (solution 2). (c) Stability assessment of CBSI-0.3 in Solution 2. (d) H2 evolution activity (HER) for CBSI-0.3 versus wavelength and diffuse reflectance spectrum (DRS) of CBSI-0.3. Reprinted with permission.490 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

4.6. Oxyhalide perovskites
Mixed-anion perovskites, such as perovskite oxynitrides and oxysulfides have been studied as promising photocatalysts with sufficient redox potential, visible-light response, and high photocatalytic stability.491,492 In these perovskites, the VB is formed via the hybridization of non-oxide p-orbitals and O-2p orbitals. Such hybrid VB give these perovskites higher durability against oxidation than non-oxides (i.e., nitrides and sulfides), as well as an elevated VBM that leads to a narrower bandgap than oxides. However, for many mixed-anion compounds, deactivation induced by oxidation is still in competition with the desired photocatalytic reactions. Although some surface modifications, such as co-catalyst loading, have proven effective for suppressing the self-oxidative deactivation to some extent,493,494 sufficiently high durability at a practical level has not yet been achieved. This unavoidable problem results from the fact that the photogenerated holes are prone to localize at the DOS around the VBM of the non-oxide anions after the energy relaxation, leading to the accumulation of holes on the unstable non-oxide anions, which is followed by self-oxidation (Fig. 18a). In other words, to avoid the self-oxidation, the formation of stable VB structure is necessary (Fig. 18b).
 Fig. 18  Schematic VB structures and reaction scheme on (a) conventional mixed-anion compounds (unstable) and (b) Sillén–Aurivillius oxyhalide perovskites such as Bi4NbO8Cl (stable). The “Red” and”Ox” denotes H2/H2O or reductant/oxidant of redox mediators such as Fe2+/Fe3+ and I−/IO3−. 
Recently, a series of layered perovskite oxyhalides such as Bi4MO8X (M = Nb, Ta, X = Cl, Br) have emerged as promising photocatalysts.495–497 These compounds fulfil the necessary conditions of photocatalysts, i.e., sufficiently high stability and appropriate band levels for visible-light-induced water splitting, due to their unique VB structures.495 For example, Bi4NbO8Cl belongs to the n = 1 members of the Sillén–Aurivillius perovskite family [(Bi2O2)2X]3+[An−1BnO3n+1]3−, which is composed of fluorite [Bi2O2], perovskite [NbO4] and halogen [Cl] layers as depicted in Fig. 19a. The electrochemical measurement revealed that the VBM of Bi4NbO8Cl is located at a more negative energy level (ca. 2.2 V vs. SHE) than most oxide perovskites (∼3.0 V vs. SHE in most cases) or conventional oxychlorides (e.g., BiOCl, ∼3.0 V vs. SHE). Consequently, Bi4NbO8Cl possesses both a narrow bandgap (∼2.4 eV) for visible light absorption up to ca. 500 nm and a more negative CBM (ca. −0.2 V vs. SHE) than the water reduction potential.495 The O2 evolution activity of Bi4NbO8Cl in an aqueous Fe3+ (electron acceptor) solution was as high as that of conventional O2-evolving photocatalysts, such as WO3, even without any cocatalyst.495 No change in crystal structure and composition was observed after the photocatalytic reaction, confirming the stability of this material was good. Visible-light-driven Z-scheme water splitting was also demonstrated using the Bi4NbO8Cl as an O2-evolving photocatalyst and the Rh-doped SrTiO3 as a H2-evolving photocatalyst in the presence of the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox mediator (Fig. 19b).495
 Fig. 19  (a) Crystal structure of Bi4NbO8Cl. (b) Visible-light-driven Z-scheme water splitting using Bi4NbO8Cl-based and SrTiO3-based photocatalysts, in the presence of Fe3+/Fe2+ redox mediator. Reproduced with permission.495 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
All of the Bi4MO8X (M = Nb, Ta, X = Cl, Br) series can function as stable O2-evolving photocatalysts under visible light without suffering from deactivation by self-oxidation.495 This distinct feature originates from the unique VB structure (Fig. 18b). Fig. 20a shows the DFT-calculated band structure of Bi4NbO8X.496 As expected from the electronegativities of Br and Cl, the Br-4p orbitals in Bi4NbO8Br are located at a higher energy level than the Cl-3p in Bi4NbO8Cl. However, the DOS around the VBMs of Bi4NbO8X are predominantly composed of O-2p orbitals, in stark contrast to the simple oxyhalides BiOCl and BiOBr, in which Cl-3p and Br-4p orbitals mainly contribute to the DOS near the VBM. These results differ from the conventional understanding that the potentials of the VBM formed by O-2p orbitals are fixed at deeply positive levels of ca. +3.0 V vs. SHE.443 However, the DFT calculation on Bi4NbO8X (Fig. 20a) indicated that there was an overlap in similar shapes between Bi-6s and O-2p orbitals at a lower energy region from −11 to −7 eV. Additionally, a contribution of Bi-6p orbitals, as well as O-2p and Bi-6s, was seen around the VBM. According to the revised lone pair model proposed by Walsh et al., there is an s–p interaction between 5s2 or 6s2 electrons of post-transition metals (e.g., Sn, Sb and Bi) and O-2p electrons in oxides such as BiVO4.498 The bonding and anti-bonding orbitals are formed by the interaction between Bi-6s and O-2p orbitals, and the resultant anti-bonding orbital (of Bi-6s + O-2p) can be concurrently stabilized through the interaction with the unoccupied Bi-6p orbital, leading to an energy level elevation of the original O-2p orbital (Fig. 20b).496 In addition, Madelung site potential analysis for Bi4NbO8Cl indicated that the oxygen sites in Bi4NbO8Cl were electrostatically destabilized, which also probably contributed to the elevation of the VBM that mainly consists of O-2p.499 In other words, the strong hybridization between Bi-6s and O-2p, as well as electrostatic destabilization of oxygen, endows Bi4NbO8X with a unique VBM that is composed mainly of O-2p orbitals, but located at more negative potentials compared to conventional oxides and oxyhalides.
 Fig. 20  (a) Density of states (DOS) of Bi4NbO8X (X = Cl, Br) (b) Interactions among Bi-6s, Bi-6p and O-2p orbitals based on the revised lone pair model. 
These studies on Sillén–Aurivillius oxyhalide perovskite Bi4NbO8X provide new strategies for developing stable photocatalysts for visible light-induced water splitting, by manipulating the interaction between s orbitals of post transition metals (e.g., Bi-6s) and O-2p orbitals in the specific crystal structure, e.g., the Sillén–Aurivillius compounds. This strategy has been partially proven by the studies on the oxyhalide perovskites with various layered structures. For example, Bi6NbWO14Cl, which has a different stacking sequence to Bi4NbO8Cl, has shown stable O2 evolution activity under visible light.500 In addition, it can also be used as an O2-evolving photocatalyst in a Z-scheme water splitting system.500 More oxyhalide perovskites in this family with various stacking sequences and perovskite layers (n) were explored. However, the reports on the synthesis of double layered (n = 2) perovskites were limited compared with the single layered ones, probably due to the severe conditions required for their synthesis in the conventional solid state reaction. To solve this problem, a new two-step synthesis method including polymerized complex synthesis was recently developed, in which fine particles of a precursor oxide (e.g., SrBi2Ta2O9) were first prepared via the polymerized complex method, followed by heating with an oxyhalide (e.g., SrBiO2Cl) to form Sr2Bi3Ta2O11Cl.501 By employing this two-step method, 14 compounds of A4A′M2O11Cl (A and A′ = Sr2+, Ba2+, Pb2+ and Bi3+; M = Ti4+, Nb5+ and Ta5+), including 10 unreported compounds, were successfully synthesised.502 In stark contrast to the previously discussed Bi4MO8X in which the VBM and CBM levels are almost unchanged, both the VBM and CBM of A4A′M2O11Cl were variable to some degree with the change of composition. Furthermore, it was noted that the photoconductivity could be controlled by changing the concentration of 6s electron-containing cations and the electrostatic repulsion between the metal cations.
These results on double layered perovskite oxyhalides strongly suggest the potential of extending cation substitution for achieving optimized photocatalytic performance for visible light-induced water splitting. Very recently, a triple-layered (n = 3) Sillén–Aurivillius oxyhalide and simple Sillén oxyhalides have also shown functionality as photocatalysts for water oxidation and/or reduction,122,503 suggesting a broad range of possibilities for tailoring the band structures and resulting photocatalysis performances by manipulating the stacking pattern of the layers in these layered oxyhalide perovskites.
5. Conclusions and perspective
5.1. Summary of perovskite photocatalysts
The conversion of solar energy to chemical energy by the generation of clean fuel from water or carbon dioxide and pollutant degradation will bring both economic and environmental benefit. Given that redox reactions are initiated by the photo-induced electrons and holes generated in nanoparticle photocatalysis, this requires the photocatalysts to have the capacity of light absorption, charge separation and transfer, and sufficient accessible active sites. Perovskites that feature a range of structures and structure-dependent properties are considered promising photocatalysts for various photocatalytic reactions. For perovskite oxides, the distinctive 3D network of BO6 octahedra facilitates the charge transfer, and the facile deformation of these BO6 octahedra contributes to charge separation. As the VB of perovskite oxides is usually formed by the O 2p orbitals while the CB is derived from the 3d orbitals of the transition metal ions, most of them exhibit strong oxidizing power and good reducing ability to drive photocatalytic reactions. For a smaller bandgap and the ability to harvest more visible light, perovskite halides have been studied, in which the p-orbitals of the X anions contribute to the more negative VBM, however the stability of these compounds under oxygen, moisture and illumination is a major concern. Alternatively, perovskite oxyhalides are considered as promising photocatalysts with both intrinsically high stability and appropriately positioned band structures for many photocatalytic applications.
5.2. Summary of design strategies
Photocatalytic reactions consist of three primary steps: light absorption; charge separation and transportation to the catalyst surface; and reduction and oxidation of reactants. Based on the principles of photocatalytic reactions, effective strategies have been established to design efficient perovskite photocatalysts.
For catalysts viable in visible-light photocatalytic applications, these materials must possess a bandgap in the range of 1.5–2.5 eV. Since the bandgap of most oxide perovskites is over 3 eV, bandgap engineering achieved by introducing foreign ions into A, B or X-sites can reduce their bandgap and extend the light absorption.96,177,253 However, doping foreign ions may impair photoactivity by forming recombination centres, and thus the type and amount of dopant must be carefully controlled. An alternative approach combines the perovskite with a narrow bandgap compound (e.g., bismuth oxyhalides, QDs),194,242 dye molecules,436 plasmonic metals303 or upconversion materials,149 to enhance light absorption.
Efficient photocatalysts should have fast charge transport and low charge recombination rates. Reducing particle sizes to shorten the diffusion length of charge carriers can effectively suppress charge recombination,216 while enhancing crystallinity eliminates recombination centres,504 resulting in longer-lived charge carriers. The formation of 1D or 2D nanoparticles can encourage anisotropic charge diffusion, decreasing charge recombination.331 Charge recombination can also be avoided by spatial separation of the reduction and oxidation reactions. The construction of type II heterojunctions and Z-scheme systems, where reduction and oxidation occur on different components, is beneficial for charge separation.179,505 Note that in most cases narrow bandgap compounds are preferred, as they can serve as light absorbers as well. Conductive materials, such as r-GO, have been integrated with perovskites as electron extractors to facilitate charge transport.314
The activities of the reduction and oxidation reactions are affected by the CB/VB positions and number of accessible active sites. Doping is one of the most frequently used approaches to tune the CB/VB positions, in particular anion dopants with higher electronegativity result in more positive VBM and stronger oxidizing ability.359 Besides, more active sites are exposed with smaller particles and growth of specific crystal facets.175,216 Intriguingly, facet engineering also contributes to the selectivity and spatial separation of reduction and oxidation reactions,174 in that active sites for reduction and oxidation would be on different facets, hence separated. Loading co-catalysts on perovskite photocatalysts is another common approach to enhance activity (noting that noble metals, e.g., Pt, Ru, and Rh, are frequently used co-catalysts. Although small amounts (0.1–1 wt%) are required, this leads to high production cost). To reduce the cost and ensure sustainability, we suggest the use of earth-abundant co-catalysts such as Ni@NiOx.190
As a practical photocatalyst, the as-designed perovskites should exhibit good stability during photocatalytic reactions. This is the major concern for halide perovskite photocatalyst development. Several strategies have been adopted to improve the stability, including forming an all-inorganic chemical structure, doping stable ions, constructing heterojunctions and exploring photocatalytic reactions in non-polar environments or saturated halo acid solutions.
By applying these effective strategies, many excellent perovskite-based photocatalysts have been synthesized, showing superior efficiency and stability. Based on the principles of these design strategies, researchers can select earth-abundant, non-toxic materials as precursors and use simple routes to synthesize the target photocatalysts.
5.3. Perspective
From the point of commercial use, in addition to high efficiency, the photocatalysts must be stable in redox reactions and composed of earth-abundant elements that are low cost and meet sustainability requirements. Because of the structural simplicity and flexibility of perovskites, a wide variety of compositional elements can be chosen to produce novel perovskites or optimize the photocatalytic performances of the reported perovskites for practical uses. In contrast to the traditional synthesis and characterization approach, which has been extensively used in photocatalyst development but becomes a slow process in investigating the continuously emerging perovskite candidates, theoretical prediction by which models are established on the basis of the profound understanding of the structure–property relation is a powerful tool for the design of improved photocatalysts. By using DFT calculations, Abe et al. revealed that in the layered oxyhalides ABiO2X (A = Pb, Sr, Ba; X = Cl, Br, I), the interaction between O 2p orbitals and outermost s orbitals of A lead to the shift of the VBM, and thus photocatalysts with narrow bandgap and the required VBM could be designed by constructing layered perovskites containing post transition metal cations with variation in stacking sequence and number of perovskite layers.122,502 Singh et al. proposed a data-driven strategy based on first principle calculations that rapidly screened 68860 candidates to find synthesizable materials for CO2 photocatalytic reduction.506 By estimating the thermodynamic stability, bandgap, aqueous stability and band edge of the candidates, 43 novel promising materials, including some perovskites, were identified for further investigation. This data-driven screening strategy undoubtedly paves the way for the fast development of photocatalysts.
Apart from DFT calculations, machine learning techniques can be used to discover relationships, interpret patterns and extract knowledge from multidimensional material databases and the vast amount of published results.507,508 Currently, supervised and unsupervised natural language processing has been applied for the retrieval of information from scientific literature and the discovery of the underlying development in some regimes.509,510 Distinct models have been built through machine learning algorithms, which exhibited remarkable agreement between the experimental and predicted values.511–514 Extracting useful information from the photocatalysis literature and determining how to represent the perovskites by descriptors that involve compositional and structural variables uniquely for the establishment of model, will be challenges for designing perovskite photocatalysts by machine learning.507 The lack of unified standards for comparison of photocatalytic systems will be a substantial obstacle for using machine learning techniques to optimize photocatalysts. As a result, it is important to establish standardization protocols for perovskite photocatalysis measurement and evaluation.
The perovskite photocatalytic mechanism and the relationship between crystal structure, the behaviours of the photoelectrons at the surface, and the photocatalytic activity should also be investigated. In situ technologies, including photoluminescence spectroscopy and surface potential detection, are important to study the photophysics of excited states and the transfer and recombination of the photo-induced charges. These techniques provide information for the surface defects, surface states and the processes of charge separation and recombination. Parameters that are important to the understanding of the photocatalytic mechanism and the further investigation of the correlation between the photocatalytic activity and the ferroelectric, piezoelectric and ferromagnetic properties.515–517 Earth-abundant nontoxic perovskite photocatalysts should play a significant role in future sustainable energy supply and for environmental pollutant degradation, but will require collective standardization by photocatalysis researchers and further focus on the material design and understanding of the mechanism.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Funding from an Australian Research Council Discovery Project, DP180103815, is acknowledged.
References
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Furlan and C. Mortarino, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1879–1886 CrossRef .
M. Meinshausen, N. Meinshausen, W. Hare, S. C. B. Raper, K. Frieler, R. Knutti, D. J. Frame and M. R. Allen, Nature, 2009, 458, 1158–1162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, M. O. Tade and Z. P. Shao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5371–5408 RSC .
D. J. Martin, G. G. Liu, S. J. A. Moniz, Y. P. Bi, A. M. Beale, J. H. Ye and J. W. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7808–7828 RSC .
X. Li, J. G. Yu, M. Jaroniec and X. B. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3962–4179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kannan and D. Vakeesan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 62, 1092–1105 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Z. Wang and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5951–5984 RSC .
S. S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater, 2017, 2, 17050 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Fu, J. G. Yu, C. J. Jiang and B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701503 CrossRef .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601694 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Goto, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, T. Higashi, K. Ishikiriyama, T. Maeda, Y. Sakata, S. Okunaka, H. Tokudome, M. Katayama, S. Akiyama, H. Nishiyama, Y. Inoue, T. Takewaki, T. Setoyama, T. Minegishi, T. Takata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Joule, 2018, 2, 509–520 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nat. Catal, 2019, 2, 387–399 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and K. Domen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 919–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, H. I. Kim, G. H. Moon and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 411–433 RSC .
J. M. R. Narayanam and C. R. J. Stephenson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 102–113 RSC .
L. Marzo, S. K. Pagire, O. Reiser and B. König, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10034–10072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Ge, Q. S. Li, C. Y. Cao, J. Y. Huang, S. H. Li, S. N. Zhang, Z. Chen, K. Q. Zhang, S. S. Al-Deyab and Y. K. Lai, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600152 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wei, W. A. McMaster, J. Z. Y. Tan, D. Chen and R. A. Caruso, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7236–7245 RSC .
S. S. Chen, S. Shen, G. J. Liu, Y. Qi, F. X. Zhang and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3047–3051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Inoue, T. Hisatomi, R. Ishikawa, Q. Wang, T. Takata, S. Chen, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Nat. Catal, 2018, 1, 756–763 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, M. Nakabayashi, T. Hisatomi, S. Sun, S. Akiyama, Z. Wang, Z. Pan, X. Xiao, T. Watanabe, T. Yamada, N. Shibata, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 827–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K. S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Yi, J. H. Ye, N. Kikugawa, T. Kako, S. X. Ouyang, H. Stuart-Williams, H. Yang, J. Y. Cao, W. J. Luo, Z. S. Li, Y. Liu and R. L. Withers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 559–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, B. B. Huang, X. Y. Qin, X. Y. Zhang, Y. Dai, J. Y. Wei and M. H. Whangbo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7931–7933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Zhao, Y. B. Sun, W. Zhou, X. K. Wang, K. Chang, G. G. Liu, H. M. Liu, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703258 CrossRef PubMed .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Liu, S. H. Wen, Y. Hou, F. Zuo, G. J. O. Beran and P. Y. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3241–3245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Latorre-Sanchez, A. Primo and H. Garcia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11813–11816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1513–1514 RSC .
S. Ghosh, N. A. Kouame, L. Ramos, S. Remita, A. Dazzi, A. Deniset-Besseau, P. Beaunier, F. Goubard, P. H. Aubert and H. Remita, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 505–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sprick, J. X. Jiang, B. Bonillo, S. J. Ren, T. Ratvijitvech, P. Guiglion, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3265–3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Y. Wan, Y. J. Ding, S. K. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. L. Zhang, G. Q. Zhang, Y. J. Xiong, X. J. Wu, J. L. Yang and H. X. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702428 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Wang, L. S. Zhang, Z. G. Chen, J. Q. Hu, S. J. Li, Z. H. Wang, J. S. Liu and X. C. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. A. Moniz, S. A. Shevlin, D. J. Martin, Z. X. Guo and J. W. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 731–759 RSC .
J. X. Low, C. Jiang, B. Cheng, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. G. Yu, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700080 CrossRef .
Y. O. Wang, H. Suzuki, J. J. Xie, O. Tomita, D. J. Martin, M. Higashi, D. Kong, R. Abe and J. W. Tang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5201–5241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. B. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. L. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 RSC .
M. A. Pena and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1981–2017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. X. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Z. Wang, Z. H. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. B. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, B. C. Weng, J. Ge, Q. D. Sun, Z. Z. Li and Y. F. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 442–462 RSC .
E. Grabowska, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 186, 97–126 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, A. Kumar and V. Krishnan, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 10253–10315 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Ran, J. Zhang, J. G. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .

          G. B. Haxel, J. B. Hedrick and G. J. Orris, Rare earth elements – critical resources for high technology, in Department of the Interior, http://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/2002/fs087-02/.
Commodity Statistics and Information, https://www.usgs.gov/centers/nmic/commodity-statistics-and-information.
V. M. Goldschmidt, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1927, 60, 1263–1296 CrossRef .
C. Li, K. C. K. Soh and P. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 372, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Li, X. G. Lu, W. Z. Ding, L. M. Feng, Y. H. Gao and Z. G. Guo, Acta. Crystallogr. B: Struct. Sci. Cryst. Eng. Mater., 2008, 64, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Travis, E. N. K. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. O. Scanlon and R. G. Palgrave, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4548–4556 RSC .
G. Pilania, P. V. Balachandran, C. Kim and T. Lookman, Front. Mater, 2016, 3, 19 Search PubMed .
S. Lu, Q. Zhou, L. Ma, Y. Guo and J. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900360 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Bartel, C. Sutton, B. R. Goldsmith, R. H. Ouyang, C. B. Musgrave, L. M. Ghiringhelli and M. Scheffler, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav0693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun and W.-J. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14905–14908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Neagu, G. Tsekouras, D. N. Miller, H. Menard and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 916–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Sharma, N. H. Chan and D. M. Smyth, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1981, 64, 448–451 CrossRef CAS .
F. K. Meng, Z. L. Hong, J. Arndt, M. Li, M. J. Zhi, F. Yang and N. Q. Wu, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 213–221 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dong, D. Cortie, T. Lu, Q. B. Sun, N. Narayanan, W. B. Hu, L. Jacob, Q. Li, D. H. Yu, H. Chen, A. P. Chen, X. Y. Wei, G. M. Wang, M. G. Humphrey, T. J. Frankcombe and Y. Liu, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1717–1725 RSC .
P. Xu, S. Chen, H.-J. Xiang, X.-G. Gong and S.-H. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6068–6072 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, V. R. Cooper, H. X. Xu, H. Y. Xiao, Y. W. Zhang and W. J. Weber, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15590–15596 RSC .
D. Lee, H. Lu, Y. Gu, S. Y. Choi, S. D. Li, S. Ryu, T. R. Paudel, K. Song, E. Mikheev, S. Lee, S. Stemmer, D. A. Tenne, S. H. Oh, E. Y. Tsymbal, X. Wu, L. Q. Chen, A. Gruverman and C. B. Eom, Science, 2015, 349, 1314–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Anderson, K. B. Greenwood, G. A. Taylor and K. R. Poeppelmeier, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1993, 22, 197–233 CrossRef CAS .
G. King and P. M. Woodward, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5785–5796 RSC .
D. Rubi, J. Nogués, J. S. Muñoz and J. Fontcuberta, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2006, 126, 279–282 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. F. Xu, B. X. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Small, 2018, 14, 1703762 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Anderson and K. R. Poeppelmeier, Chem. Mater., 1991, 3, 476–482 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vasala and M. Karppinen, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2015, 43, 1–36 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maignan, C. Martin, D. Pelloquin, N. Nguyen and B. Raveau, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 142, 247–260 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grimaud, K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, Y. L. Lee, M. Risch, W. T. Hong, J. G. Zhou and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2439 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xu, Y. Zhong and Z. Shao, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 410–424 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Cussen and P. D. Battle, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1210–1214 RSC .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1455–1471 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, L. Mao, X. Guan, K. A. Tucker, H. Xie, X. Wu and J. Shi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 119, 109527 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1800793 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, C. M. M. Soe, J. Yoo, J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, J. Even, A. Sadhanala, G. Azzellino, R. Brenes, P. M. Ajayan, V. Bulović, S. D. Stranks, R. H. Friend, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704217 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shimizu, S. Itoh, T. Hatamachi, T. Kodama, M. Sato and K. Toda, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5161–5166 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. He, Y. G. Wang, K. Li, X. Wang, P. Liu, Y. J. Yang, Q. Liao, T. Y. Zhai, J. N. Yao and H. B. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15905–15912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ebina, T. Sasaki, M. Harada and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4390–4395 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miseki, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 306–314 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
T. Cai, W. Shi, S. Hwang, K. Kobbekaduwa, Y. Nagaoka, H. Yang, K. Hills-Kimball, H. Zhu, J. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, D. Su, J. Gao and O. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11927–11936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Li, Q. Cao, G. Zhou, B. V. K. J. Schmidt, W. Zhu, X. Yuan, H. Huo, J. Gong and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14549–14555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, H. Liu, S. Wang and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 10281–10304 RSC .
R. Konta, T. Ishii, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8992–8995 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Wang, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2724–2725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, L. Nienhaus, R. C. Kurchin, S. S. Shin, S. Wieghold, N. T. Putri Hartono, M. Layurova, N. D. Klein, J. R. Poindexter, A. Polizzotti, S. Sun, M. G. Bawendi and T. Buonassisi, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3734–3742 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iwashina and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13272–13275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishii, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A: Chem., 2004, 163, 181–186 CrossRef CAS .
R. Niishiro, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 2241–2245 RSC .
S. X. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, J. Y. Cao, P. Li, Y. P. Bi, Y. J. Zhang and J. H. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1974–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Reunchan, S. X. Ouyang, N. Umezawa, H. Xu, Y. J. Zhang and J. H. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4221–4227 RSC .
S. Pasternak and Y. Paz, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 2059–2070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Li, D. R. Liu, G. M. Gao, B. Xue and Y. S. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 104–111 CrossRef .
J. G. Hou, S. Y. Cao, Y. Z. Wu, F. Liang, L. Ye, Z. S. Lin and L. C. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 59–68 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, M. O. Tade and Z. P. Shao, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 92, 33–63 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Z. Wang, J. Song, J. Qu, T. Takata and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10666–10670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ogawa, A. Nakada, H. Suzuki, O. Tomita, M. Higashi, A. Saeki, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5642–5650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Su, B. L. Zhu, K. Guan, S. S. Gao, L. Lv, C. F. Du, L. M. Peng, L. C. Hou and X. J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18508–18517 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Wang, H. Xu, C. Y. Shao and J. Cao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 649–657 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thirumalairajan, K. Girija, N. Y. Hebalkar, D. Mangalaraj, C. Viswanathan and N. Ponpandian, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7549–7561 RSC .
N. Nuraje, X. N. Dang, J. F. Qi, M. A. Allen, Y. Lei and A. M. Belcher, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2885–2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kuang and S. H. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3683–3690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Kucuk, S. Teber, I. C. Kaya, H. Akyildiz and V. Kalem, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 765, 82–91 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, R. Si, Z. G. Yan, L. D. Sun, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6426–6436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shamsi, A. S. Urban, M. Imran, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3296–3348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
Q. L. Xu, L. Y. Zhang, J. G. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 1042–1063 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fajrina and M. Tahir, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 540–577 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang and Y. J. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2893–2939 RSC .
W. J. Yin, S. Bai, Y. J. Zhong, Z. Q. Li and Y. Xie, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Sun, Y. Qi, C. J. Jia, Z. Jin and W. L. Fan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2649–2659 RSC .
J. X. Low, S. W. Cao, J. G. Yu and S. Wageh, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10768–10777 RSC .
D. L. Jiang, T. Y. Wang, Q. Xu, D. Li, S. C. Meng and M. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 617–628 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Yang, C. G. Niu, D. W. Huang, H. Zhang, C. Lianga and G. M. Zeng, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 585–595 RSC .
J. T. Lee, Y. J. Chen, E. C. Su and M. Y. Wey, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 21413–21423 CrossRef CAS .
H. Suzuki, H. Kunioku, M. Higashi, O. Tomita, D. Kato, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5862–5869 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, M. Higashi and K. Domen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 228–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Miseki, S. Fujiyoshi, T. Gunji and K. Sayama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9691–9697 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Jiang, J. Q. Pan, B. B. Wang and C. R. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 436, 519–526 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Jo, S. Kumar, S. Eslava and S. Tonda, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 586–598 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, S. H. Wang, J. X. Low and W. Xiao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 16883–16890 RSC .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, S. S. K. Ma, Y. B. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Jia, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 1513–1519 RSC .
A. Rauf, M. Ma, S. Kim, M. S. A. S. Shah, C. H. Chung, J. H. Park and P. J. Yoo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3026–3036 RSC .
M. L. Li, L. X. Zhang, X. Q. Fan, Y. J. Zhou, M. Y. Wu and J. L. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5189–5196 RSC .
W. K. Jo, J. Y. Lee and T. S. Natarajan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 1000–1016 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 998–1013 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mai, T. Lu, Q. Sun, J. Langley, N. Cox, F. Kremer, T. Duong, K. Catchpole, H. Chen, Z. Yi, T. J. Frankcombe and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13182–13191 RSC .
X. H. Zhang, T. Y. Peng and S. S. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2365–2402 RSC .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lu, S. X. Ouyang, H. Xu, D. W. Li, X. L. Zhang, Y. X. Li and J. H. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9506–9513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Y. Huang, L. F. Xu, J. J. Cao, W. K. Ho and S. C. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4165–4174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Zhang, S. Li, B. P. Zhang, D. F. Yu, Z. T. Zhang and J. F. Li, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 5045–5052 RSC .
G. Jiang, X. Li, M. Lan, T. Shen, X. Lv, F. Dong and S. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 532–540 CrossRef CAS .
A. Comin and L. Manna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3957–3975 RSC .
G. Sreedhar, A. Sivanantham, S. Venkateshwaran, S. K. Panda and M. Eashwar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13476–13482 RSC .
X. F. Liu and J. R. Qiu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8714–8746 RSC .
J. K. Stolarczyk, S. Bhattacharyya, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3602–3635 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Huang, S. Y. Han, W. Huang and X. G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 173–201 RSC .
H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13721–13729 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Mai, T. Lu, Q. Li, Q. B. Sun, K. Vu, H. Chen, G. M. Wang, M. G. Humphrey, F. Kremer, L. Li, R. L. Withers and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29786–29794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Zhang, Y. Huang, L. Jin, F. Rosei, F. Vetrone and J. P. Claverie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8142–8150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, B. Pradhan, J. Hofkens, M. B. J. Roeffaers and J. A. Steele, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1107–1123 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z.-K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808843 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, S. Tan, P. D. Lund and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2284–2311 RSC .
J. S. Manser, M. I. Saidaminov, J. A. Christians, O. M. Bakr and P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 330–338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
Y.-F. Xu, M.-Z. Yang, B.-X. Chen, X.-D. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5660–5663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, Y. Lin, J. San Martin, Y. Sun, D. Zhu and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2843 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hong, W. K. Chong, A. Y. R. Ng, M. Li, R. Ganguly, T. C. Sum and H. S. Soo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3456–3460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, W. Zhang, H. Yang, Q. Fan, F. Xiong, S. Liu, D.-S. Li and B. Liu, EcoMat, 2021, 3, e12079 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. McClure, M. R. Ball, W. Windl and P. M. Woodward, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1348–1354 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogawa, H. Suzuki, C. Zhong, R. Sakamoto, O. Tomita, A. Saeki, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8446–8453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ou, W. G. Tu, S. M. Yin, W. N. Xing, S. Y. Wu, H. J. Wang, S. P. Wan, Q. Zhong and R. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13570–13574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Tan, M. Cao, H. Hu, L. Wu, X. Yu, L. Wang, B. Sun and Q. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5366–5374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pan, X. Ma, S. Huang, Y. Wu, M. Jia, Y. Shi, Y. Liu, P. Wangyang, L. He and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 6590–6597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, J. Zhao, Y. Du, C. Zhou, M. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Weng, J. Long, J. Hofkens, J. A. Steele and M. B. J. Roeffaers, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 16689–16697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Li, E. Hofman, J. Li, A. H. Davis, C.-H. Tung, L.-Z. Wu and W. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704288 CrossRef .
L.-Y. Wu, Y.-F. Mu, X.-X. Guo, W. Zhang, Z.-M. Zhang, M. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9491–9495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-C. Kong, J.-F. Liao, Y.-J. Dong, Y.-F. Xu, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2656–2662 CrossRef CAS .
I. Poli, U. Hintermair, M. Regue, S. Kumar, E. V. Sackville, J. Baker, T. M. Watson, S. Eslava and P. J. Cameron, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2097 CrossRef PubMed .
F. T. Wagner and G. A. Somorjai, Nature, 1980, 285, 559–560 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Townsend, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7420–7426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yu, C. X. Zhang, Y. Chang, Y. J. Feng, Z. Q. Yang, T. Yang, L. L. Lou and S. X. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 514–520 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, S. H. Shen and L. J. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 320–326 CrossRef .
L. C. Mu, Y. Zhao, A. L. Li, S. Y. Wang, Z. L. Wang, J. X. Yang, Y. Wang, T. F. Liu, R. T. Chen, J. Zhu, F. T. Fan, R. G. Li and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2463–2469 RSC .
U. Sulaeman, S. Yin and T. Sato, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 105, 206–210 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lyu, T. Hisatomi, Y. Goto, M. Yoshida, T. Higashi, M. Katayama, T. Takata, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada, Y. Sakata, K. Asakura and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 3196–3201 RSC .
P. Li, C. B. Liu, G. L. Wu, Y. Heng, S. Lin, A. Ren, K. H. Lv, L. S. Xiao and W. D. Shi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 47615–47624 RSC .
Y. Lin, S. H. Wu, X. Li, X. Wu, C. P. Yang, G. M. Zeng, Y. R. Peng, Q. Zhou and L. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 557–570 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Ma, X. L. Cui, Z. Q. Zhao, M. A. Melo, E. J. Roberts and F. E. Osterloh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5774–5781 RSC .
H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5029–5034 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Jia, X. Zhang, F. Li and Y. J. Wang, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 7409–7418 RSC .
T. Takata, J. Jiang, Y. Sakata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, V. Nandal, K. Seki, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nature, 2020, 581, 411–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miyauchi, M. Takashio and H. Tobimatsu, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 232–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, S. C. Yan, Z. S. Li, T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 12120–12127 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xie, N. Umezawa, N. Zhang, P. Reunchan, Y. J. Zhang and J. H. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4211–4219 RSC .
H. Q. Tan, Z. Zhao, W. B. Zhu, E. N. Coker, B. S. Li, M. Zheng, W. X. Yu, H. Y. Fan and Z. C. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19184–19190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nishioka, J. Hyodo, J. J. M. Vequizo, S. Yamashita, H. Kumagai, K. Kimoto, A. Yamakata, Y. Yamazaki and K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7190–7200 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domen, A. Kudo, T. Onishi, N. Kosugi and H. Kuroda, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 292–295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Han, T. Kreuger, B. T. Mei and G. D. Mul, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1610–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Han, D. M. Haiber, J. Knöppel, C. Lievens, S. Cherevko, P. Crozier, G. Mul and B. Mei, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 11049–11058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Guo, S. X. Ouyang, P. Li, Y. J. Zhang, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 134, 286–292 CrossRef .
Y. Z. Wei, J. Y. Wang, R. B. Yu, J. W. Wan and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1422–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, L. Ge, Q. Guo, L. Li, G. Hu and J. Li, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 20157–20165 RSC .
W. Chen, H. Liu, X. Li, S. Liu, L. Gao, L. Mao, Z. Fan, W. Shangguan, W. Fang and Y. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Zhong, K. Ueno, Y. Mori, X. Shi, T. Oshikiri, K. Murakoshi, H. Inoue and H. Misawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10350–10354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kang, T. Wang, P. Li, L. Q. Liu, K. Chang, M. Li and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 841–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Yang, J. X. Fu, C. J. Jin, J. A. Chen, C. L. Liang, M. M. Wu and W. Z. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14279–14287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Zhuang, Q. F. Tian, S. Lin, W. B. Yang, L. H. Chen and P. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156, 108–115 CrossRef .
J. P. Zou, L. Z. Zhang, S. L. Luo, L. H. Leng, X. B. Luo, M. J. Zhang, Y. Luo and G. C. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 17068–17077 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Lim, S. A. Song, Y.-C. Jeong, H. W. Kang, S. B. Park and K. Y. Kim, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 6096–6103 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Wang, S. Ni, G. Liu and X. X. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Q. Xiong, Z. Liu, K. Qiu and X. Xiao, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 12111–12119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. G. Niu, L. Wang, Y. Wang, X. G. Zhang and G. M. Zeng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 47873–47882 RSC .
S. Wang, Y. Gao, S. Miao, T. Liu, L. Mu, R. Li, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11771–11778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Cohen, Nature, 1992, 358, 136–138 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Spanier, V. M. Fridkin, A. M. Rappe, A. R. Akbashev, A. Polemi, Y. B. Qi, Z. Q. Gu, S. M. Young, C. J. Hawley, D. Imbrenda, G. Xiao, A. L. Bennett-Jackson and C. L. Johnson, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 611–616 CrossRef CAS .
C. Srilakshmi, R. Saraf, V. Prashanth, G. M. Rao and C. Shivakumara, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 4795–4805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Senthilkumar, D. A. Jency, T. Kavinkumar, D. Dhayanithi, S. Dhanuskodi, M. Umadevi, S. Manivannan, N. V. Giridharan, V. Thiagarajan, M. Sriramkumar and K. Jothivenkatachalam, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12032–12043 CAS .
I. C. Amaechi, A. Hadj Youssef, G. Kolhatkar, D. Rawach, C. Gomez-Yañez, J. P. Claverie, S. Sun and A. Ruediger, Catal. Today, 2021, 360, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Chai, S. Xue, R. Wang, L. Jiang, J. Wang, Z. Zhang and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 119017 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, S. Sun, Y. Chen, P. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, J.-J. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000214 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, S. Wang, X. Zhang, A. Qi, X. Qiao, Z. Liu, M. Wu, L. Li and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 29–38 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lin, Z. Kang, J. Wu, R. Huang, N. Qin and D. Bao, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 285, 119823 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, L. Guo, Q. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808737 CrossRef .
R. S. Hu, C. Li, X. Wang, Y. Sun, H. X. Jia, H. Q. Su and Y. L. Zhang, Catal. Commun., 2012, 29, 35–39 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hailili, Z. Q. Wang, Y. X. Li, Y. H. Wang, V. K. Sharma, X. Q. Gong and C. Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 422–432 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hailili, Z. Q. Wang, X. Q. Gong and C. Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 86–97 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gopalakrishnan and V. Bhat, Inorg. Chem., 1987, 26, 4299–4301 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takata, Y. Furumi, K. Shinohara, A. Tanaka, M. Hara, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1063–1064 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kumar and S. U. Govind, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 189, 502–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, W. Q. Cui, Y. H. Liang and F. L. Qiu, Acta Chim. Sin., 2010, 68, 211–216 CAS .
Y. H. Yang, Q. Y. Chen, Z. L. Yin and J. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 488, 364–369 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, C. S. Li, D. Hirabayashi and K. Suzuki, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 3306–3312 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oshima, T. Ichibha, K. Oqmhula, K. Hibino, H. Mogi, S. Yamashita, K. Fujii, Y. Miseki, K. Hongo, D. Lu, R. Maezono, K. Sayama, M. Yashima, K. Kimoto, H. Kato, M. Kakihana, H. Kageyama and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9736–9743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Rodionov, E. V. Mechtaeva, A. A. Burovikhina, O. I. Silyukov, M. A. Toikka and I. A. Zvereva, Monatsh. Chem., 2018, 149, 475–482 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, S. Ni, Y. L. Mi and X. X. Xu, J. Catal., 2018, 359, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Sun and X. X. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 149–159 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Y. Mi, F. Jiao and X. Xu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3209–3221 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jia, S. Shen, D. G. Wang, X. Wang, J. Y. Shi, F. X. Zhang, H. X. Han and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7905–7912 RSC .
B. H. Park, B. S. Kang, S. D. Bu, T. W. Noh, J. Lee and W. Jo, Nature, 1999, 401, 682–684 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, Y. Dai and B. B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5658–5663 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and S. Hijii, Chem. Lett., 1999, 1103–1104 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, G. Zhu, J. Gao, M. Hojamberdiev, R. Zhu, X. Wei, Q. Guo and P. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 72–82 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, H. Jiang, W. L. Jin and C. K. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 698–706 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, X. Y. Jiang, C. B. Zhu and C. K. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 241–251 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Tu, H. W. Huang, T. R. Zhang and Y. H. Zhanga, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 550–562 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, J. J. Wu, H. B. Fang, X. H. Zhang, Y. Z. Zheng and X. Tao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
K. Das, D. Majhi, Y. P. Bhoi and B. G. Mishra, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 362, 588–599 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Gao, J. Shen, X. Pu, Z. Zhang, H. Lin and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118876 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. H. Li, Z. Q. Gao, X. Zhu, Y. Liu, Z. B. Wei, W. Zhao and C. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 57–71 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Keisy, L. Ren, X. Xu, W. C. Hao, S. X. Dou and Y. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 517–525 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hailili, Z.-Q. Wang, M. Xu, Y. Wang, X.-Q. Gong, T. Xu and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21275–21290 RSC .
K. Wang, J. Li and G. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27686–27696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, S. Ni, G. Liu and X. X. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 342–352 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yu, J. Y. Li, Y. H. Zhang, S. Q. Yang, K. L. Han, F. Dong, T. Y. Ma and H. W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3880–3884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Hwang, J. S. Lee, W. Li and S. H. Oh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4963–4970 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, M. Higashi, K. Sayama, Y. Abe and H. Sugihara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2219–2226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, Y. Li, Y. Lv, R. Sa, Q. Li and K. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39327–39335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Cai, J. Y. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 191–198 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Li, Y. X. Zhao, M. Y. Xia, H. An, H. C. Bai, J. J. Wei, B. L. Yang and G. D. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 261, 118244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ao, K. D. Wang, P. F. Wang, C. Wang and J. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 157–168 CrossRef CAS .
F. K. Meng, S. K. Cushing, J. T. Li, S. M. Hao and N. Q. Wu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zhu, X. Y. Cai, M. Fujitsuka, J. Y. Zhang and T. Majima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2064–2068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Boppella, C. H. Choi, J. Moon and D. H. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oka, Y. Miseki, K. Saito and A. Kudo, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 407–411 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iizuka, T. Wato, Y. Miseki, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20863–20868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kurashige, Y. Mori, S. Ozaki, M. Kawachi, S. Hossain, T. Kawawaki, C. J. Shearer, A. Iwase, G. F. Metha, S. Yamazoe, A. Kudo and Y. Negishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 7076–7082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kurashige, R. Kumazawa, D. Ishii, R. Hayashi, Y. Niihori, S. Hossain, L. V. Nair, T. Takayama, A. Iwase, S. Yamazoe, T. Tsukuda, A. Kudo and Y. Negishi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13669–13681 CrossRef CAS .
G. Catalan and J. F. Scott, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2463–2485 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiao, S. Zhang, H. Y. Xiao, D. J. Singh, K. H. L. Zhang, Z. J. Liu, X. T. Zu and S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1239–1247 RSC .
S. Li, Y. H. Lin, B. P. Zhang, Y. Wang and C. W. Nan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2903–2908 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Li, Y. Shen, Y. H. Guan, Y. H. Hu, Y. H. Lin and C. W. Nan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1967–1973 RSC .
Y. N. Huo, M. Miao, Y. Zhang, J. A. Zhu and H. X. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2089–2091 RSC .
Y. N. Feng, H. C. Wang, Y. Shen, Y. H. Lin and C. W. Nan, Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2014, 11, 676–680 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Feng, H. C. Wang, Y. D. Luo, Y. Shen and Y. H. Lin, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 146101 CrossRef .
C. Ponraj, G. Vinitha and J. Daniel, Int. J. Green Energy, 2019, 17, 71–83 CrossRef .
W. W. Meng, R. S. Hu, J. Yang, Y. F. Du, J. J. Li and H. Y. Wang, Chinese J. Catal., 2016, 37, 1283–1292 CrossRef CAS .
S. Irfan, S. Rizwan, Y. Shen, L. L. Li, A. Asfandiyar, S. Butt and C. W. Nan, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Puhan, B. Bhushan, S. Satpathy, S. S. Meena, A. K. Nayak and D. Rout, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 493, 593–604 CrossRef CAS .
S. Irfan, L. L. Li, A. S. Saleemi and C. W. Nan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11143–11151 RSC .
M. Umar, N. Mahmood, S. U. Awan, S. Fatima, A. Mahmood and S. Rizwan, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 17148–17156 RSC .
Y. X. Yang, L. Kang and H. Li, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 8017–8022 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Vishwakarma, P. Tripathi, A. Srivastava, A. S. K. Sinha and O. N. Srivastava, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 22677–22686 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Lu, M. L. Lv, D. Wang, G. Liu and X. X. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 412–419 CrossRef CAS .
M. Humayun, A. Zada, Z. J. Li, M. Z. Xie, X. L. Zhang, Y. Qu, F. Raziq and L. Q. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Liu and J. M. Wu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 74–81 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Zhu, Q. D. Zhao, X. Y. Li and Y. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 671–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Yang, Y. Liu, J. H. Wei, C. X. Pan, R. Xiong and J. Shi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 31941–31947 RSC .
Y. L. Zhang, A. M. Schultz, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4168–4174 RSC .
T. Fan, C. C. Chen and Z. H. Tang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 9994–10000 RSC .
X. F. Wang, W. W. Mao, J. Zhang, Y. M. Han, C. Y. Quan, Q. X. Zhang, T. Yang, J. P. Yang, X. A. Li and W. Huang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 448, 17–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Deng, C. Song, Y. L. Tong, G. L. Yuan, F. Gao, D. Q. Liu and S. T. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 3648–3657 RSC .
H. Sepahvand and S. Sharifnia, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 23658–23668 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, J. M. Zhang, M. G. Kibria, Z. T. Mi, M. Chaker, D. L. Ma, R. Nechache and F. Rosei, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5856–5858 RSC .
F. Deganello, M. L. Tummino, C. Calabrese, M. L. Testa, P. Avetta, D. Fabbri, A. B. Prevot, E. Montoneri and G. Magnacca, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 877–885 RSC .
S. Thirumalairajan, K. Girija, V. R. Mastelaro and N. Ponpandian, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 5480–5490 RSC .
L. Li, M. Zhang, P. Tian, W. Gu and X. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 13813–13817 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghaffari, P. Y. Tan, M. E. Oruc, O. K. Tan, M. S. Tse and M. Shannon, Catal. Today, 2011, 161, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
S. Afzal, X. Quan and J. L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 692–703 CrossRef CAS .
M. Humayun, N. Sun, F. Raziq, X. L. Zhang, R. Yan, Z. J. Li, Y. Qu and L. Q. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 231, 23–33 CrossRef CAS .
P. Garcia-Munoz, F. Fresno, C. Lefevre, D. Robert and N. Keller, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 262, 118310 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu and J. Feng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 45369–45376 RSC .
Y. Wu, H. Wang, W. Tu, Y. Liu, Y. Z. Tan, X. Z. Yuan and J. W. Chew, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 347, 412–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mishra, I. Mukherjee, A. K. Mall, A. Mitra, S. Dash, S. Chatterjee, S. Mukherjee and A. Roy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13467 RSC .
J. W. Liu, G. Chen, Z. H. Li and Z. G. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2269–2272 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Shi, C. L. Zhang, C. P. Zhou and G. Q. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 93615–93622 RSC .
T. T. Zhang, K. Zhao, J. G. Yu, J. Jin, Y. Qi, H. Q. Li, X. J. Hou and G. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8375–8383 RSC .
T. T. Zhang, W. Y. Lei, P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, J. G. Yu, Y. Qi, G. Liu and M. H. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4118–4123 RSC .
J. Y. Lan, X. M. Zhou, G. Liu, J. G. Yu, J. C. Zhang, L. J. Zhi and G. J. Nie, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 5161–5167 RSC .
R. W. Wang, Y. F. Zhu, Y. F. Qiu, C. F. Leung, J. He, G. J. Liu and T. C. Lau, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 226, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Yu, Z. G. Chen, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Ma, Z. Feng, Y. Wu, H. J. Lin, L. H. Zhao and Y. M. He, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 179, 45–56 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Xing, S. J. Wu, Y. J. Chen, P. F. Chen, X. Hu, H. J. Lin, L. H. Zhao and Y. M. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12408–12418 CAS .
E. K. Piggott, T. O. Hope, B. W. Crabbe, P.-M. Jalbert, G. Orlova and G. L. Hallett-Tapley, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 5758–5765 RSC .
P. Zhang, Y. Q. Shen, W. J. Wu, J. Li and Z. X. Zhou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 434, 932–939 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Li, T. Y. Zhang, S. W. Gu, S. Z. Kang, G. D. Li and J. Mu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 108, 139–142 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hong, X. Q. Li, S. Z. Kang, L. X. Qin, G. D. Li and J. Mu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 14297–14304 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Jia, Y. P. Su, B. P. Zhang, Z. C. Zhao, S. Li, Y. F. Zhang, P. C. Li, M. Y. Xu and R. Ren, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7690–7700 RSC .
Z. Qu, J. Wang, J. Tang, X. Shu, X. Liu, Z. Zhang and J. Wang, Mol. Catal., 2018, 445, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, S. X. Ouyang, G. C. Xi, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7621–7628 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huan, X. H. Wang, W. C. Hao and L. T. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 72410–72415 RSC .
P. Li, H. Xu, L. Q. Liu, T. Kako, N. Umezawa, H. Abe and J. H. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5606–5609 RSC .
A. S. Vig, N. Rani, A. Gupta and O. P. Pandey, Sol. Energy, 2019, 185, 469–479 CrossRef .
F. L. Yang, Q. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. T. Cao, Q. Q. Liu and W. L. Dai, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117901 CrossRef CAS .
F. Opoku, K. K. Govender, C. G. C. E. van Sittert and P. P. Govender, Carbon, 2018, 136, 187–195 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Shi, G. Q. Chen, C. L. Zhang and Z. G. Zou, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3637–3643 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Song, M. S. Fan, B. Hu, T. J. Chen, L. P. Wang and W. D. Shi, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 4575–4583 RSC .
M. Sun, Q. Yan, Y. Shao, C. Q. Wang, T. Yan, P. G. Ji and B. Du, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 416, 288–295 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, T. Malik, D. Sharma and A. K. Ganguli, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2651–2662 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Chen, L. Ji, W. M. Tang and X. L. Fu, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 10759–10768 RSC .
S. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Qu, C. Piao, J. Liu, D. Xu, X. Li, J. Wang and Y. Song, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A: Chem., 2020, 389, 112246 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12441–12447 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, D. Hu, C. Xiao, D. Li, B. Lin, Y. Chen and Y. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2019, 135, 109083 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Yang, J. B. Liu, H. B. Chang and S. S. Tang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 59970–59975 RSC .
C. Wang, J. Yan, X. Y. Wu, Y. H. Song, G. B. Cai, H. Xu, J. X. Zhu and H. M. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 273, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Chen, P. X. Xing, Z. Q. Chen, X. Hu, H. J. Lin, L. H. Zhao and Y. M. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 534, 163–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Yu, B. W. Zhan, B. H. Ge, Y. T. Zhu, Y. Dai, G. J. Zhou, F. P. Yu, P. Wang, B. B. Huang and J. Zhan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 488, 485–493 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, H. Kato and S. Nakagawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 571–575 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen and J. H. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2327–2333 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Cho, S. Lee, J. H. Noh, D. W. Kim, D. K. Lee, H. S. Jung, D. W. Kim and K. S. Hong, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3979–3983 RSC .
R. Pang, K. Teramura, H. Asakura, S. Hosokawa and T. Tanaka, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 770–778 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fukuoka, T. Isami and S. Yamanaka, J. Solid State Chem., 2000, 151, 40–45 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ida, Y. Okamoto, S. Koga, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11521–11524 RSC .
Y. N. Zhou, T. Wen, Y. Z. Guo, B. C. Yang and Y. G. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 64930–64936 RSC .
Y. Ebina, N. Sakai and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17212–17216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hata, Y. Kobayashi, V. Bojan, W. J. Youngblood and T. E. Mallouk, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 794–799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Oshima, D. L. Lu, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2698–2702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Miseki, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Lett., 2006, 1052–1053 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Li, W. B. Cao, C. D. Wang and H. Qiu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 644, 757–762 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Y. Li, J. Li and G. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 117730 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, R. Ciriminna, M. Pagliaro and Y. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5276–5287 RSC .
T. Saison, P. Gras, N. Chemin, C. Chaneac, O. Durupthy, V. Brezova, C. Colbeau-Justin and J. P. Jolivet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22656–22666 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Li, C. Lai, G. M. Zeng, L. Qin, H. Yi, D. L. Huang, C. Y. Zhou, X. G. Liu, M. Cheng, P. Xu, C. Zhang, F. L. Huang and S. Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18824–18836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Zhou, Z. P. Wen, J. Liu, J. Ke, X. G. Duan and S. B. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Liu, Y. F. Hou, S. L. Zheng, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 4124–4130 RSC .
G. J. Dong, Y. J. Zhang and Y. P. Bi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20594–20597 RSC .
A. P. Jakhade, M. V. Biware and R. C. Chikate, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 7219–7229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z. R. Tang and Y. J. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1820–1824 RSC .
Y. H. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 2904–2910 RSC .
H. Lv, Y. M. Liu, J. Guang, Z. W. Ding and J. J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 80226–80233 RSC .
M. Zargazi and M. H. Entezari, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 507–517 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Huang, C. Zhou, X. C. Jiao, H. F. Yuan, J. W. Zhao, C. Q. He, J. Hofkens, M. B. J. Roeffaers, J. L. Long and J. A. Steele, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1439–1443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, D. Shen, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin and F. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 283, 119630 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yi, M. Yan, D. L. Huang, G. M. Zeng, C. Lai, M. F. Li, X. Q. Huo, L. Qin, S. Y. Liu, X. G. Liu, B. S. Li, H. Wang, M. C. Shen, Y. K. Fu and X. Y. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 52–62 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Zhang and D. Bahnemann, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 283–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Z. Ren, J. H. Zhang and Y. X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 29058–29065 RSC .
H. Tian, Y. F. Wang, Y. Liu, X. G. Xi, J. C. Zhao and B. X. Jiao, Chinese J. Struc. Chem., 2017, 36, 751–760 CAS .
M. Wang, Z. Y. Qiao, M. H. Fang, Z. H. Huang, Y. G. Liu, X. W. Wu, C. Tang, H. Tang and H. K. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 94887–94894 RSC .
H. W. Huang, K. Liu, K. Chen, Y. L. Zhang, Y. H. Zhang and S. C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14379–14387 CrossRef CAS .
F. Z. Wang, W. J. Li, S. N. Gu, H. D. Li, X. Wu and X. T. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 12859–12867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, H. Li, N. Du and W. Hou, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 3040–3048 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. H. Wang, Y. M. Chen, J. Dai and S. H. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 9771–9782 RSC .
D. Sun, Y. Le, C. J. Jiang and B. Cheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 441, 429–437 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Wu, Y. Cui, L. M. Yang, G. Y. Zhang and D. Z. Gao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 142, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Wang, H. Liang, C. Zhang, B. Jin and Y. Men, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117874 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Z. Chen, R. Lin, W.-C. Cheong, S. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Peng, C. Chen, T. Han, X. Tong, Y. Wang, R. Shen, W. Zhu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 704–710 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Hu, D. Y. Chen, Z. Mo, N. J. Li, Q. F. Xu, H. Li, J. H. He, H. Xu and J. M. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2073–2077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Teh, Y. W. Goh, X. Y. Kong, B. J. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6431–6438 CrossRef .
X. Y. Gu, Q. Wang, D. P. Zhang, X. X. Geng, Z. X. Zha, Y. Li, J. Yang and S. H. Cui, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2020, 20, 3105–3116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, B. Weng, J. C. Colmenares, Y. G. Sun and Y. J. Xu, Small, 2017, 13, 1702253 CrossRef PubMed .
S. W. Cao, B. J. Shen, T. Tong, J. W. Fu and J. G. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800136 CrossRef .
H. B. Yu, L. B. Jiang, H. Wang, B. B. Huang, X. Z. Yuan, J. H. Huang, J. Zhang and G. M. Zeng, Small, 2019, 15, 1901008 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shimodaira, H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17790–17797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Chen, Q. Hao, Z. H. Wang, H. Ding and Y. F. Zhu, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 1976–1986 RSC .
K. Q. Jing, J. H. Xiong, N. Qin, Y. J. Song, L. Y. Li, Y. Yu, S. J. Liang and L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8604–8607 RSC .
Y. L. Jia, Y. Ma, J. Z. Tang and W. B. Shi, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5542–5547 RSC .
Y. Y. Xie, X. T. Shang, D. Liu, H. B. Zhao, Y. Y. Gu, Z. Z. Zhang and X. X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118087 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Li, L. Q. Bai, N. Ji, S. X. Yu, S. Lin, N. Tian and H. W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9268–9277 RSC .
G. Yang, Y.-A. Zhu, Y. Liang, J. Yang, K. Wang, Z. Zeng, R. Xu and X. Xie, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 539, 148038 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Yang, S. Y. Wang, N. Yang, W. Zhou, P. Wang, K. Jiang, S. Li, H. Song, X. Ding, H. Chen and J. H. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118088 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, X. Ding, X. L. Yang, P. Wang, S. Li, Z. X. Lu and H. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 364, 691–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Q. Jing, W. Ma, Y. H. Ren, J. H. Xiong, B. B. Guo, Y. J. Song, S. J. Liang and L. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fu, H. D. Shen, X. Sun, W. W. Xue, A. Shoneye, J. N. Ma, L. Luo, D. J. Wang, J. G. Wang and J. W. Tang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 150–162 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, F. Qin, H. P. Zhao, J. Ding, Y. L. Liu and R. Chen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3180–3192 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. S. Hu and X. H. Huang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 32349–32357 RSC .
D. P. Dutta, A. Ballal, S. Chopade and A. Kumar, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A: Chem., 2017, 346, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Li, S. M. Fang, L. Ge, C. C. Han, P. Qiu and W. L. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176, 62–69 CrossRef .
R. X. Yang, F. Dong, X. You, M. Liu, S. Zhong, L. S. Zhang and B. J. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2019, 252, 272–276 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Zhang, H. Liu and Z. Ma, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 424, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, J. N. Wan, J. Jia, C. Pan, X. Hu, J. N. Fan and E. N. Liu, Mater. Des., 2017, 119, 113–123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jonjana, A. Phuruangrat, S. Thongtem, O. Wiranwetchayan and T. Thongtem, Mater. Lett., 2016, 180, 93–96 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ding, P. Chen, F. Liu, L. Chen, J.-K. Guo, S. Shen, Q. Zhang, L.-H. Meng, C.-T. Au and S.-F. Yin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 490, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
L.-N. Song, F. Ding, Y.-K. Yang, D. Ding, L. Chen, C.-T. Au and S.-F. Yin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 17044–17050 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. J. Niu, S. R. An, W. Y. Chen, J. Wang and W. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 2943–2952 RSC .
J. L. Lv, J. F. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Li, K. Dai and C. H. Liang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 696–706 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, J. Hou, S. S. Jiang, Z. Lin, M. Wang and G. B. Che, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 104815–104821 RSC .
J. L. Liang, F. Y. Liu, J. Deng, M. Li and M. P. Tong, Water Res., 2017, 123, 632–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Cai, J. Y. Huang and Y. K. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16412–16421 RSC .
D. J. Wang, H. D. Shen, L. Guo, C. Wang, F. Fu and Y. C. Liang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 436, 536–547 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Udawatte, M. Kakihana and M. Yoshimura, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 128, 217–226 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Prokopalo, Ferroelectrics, 1976, 14, 683–685 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishihara, H. Fujita, H. Nishiguchi and Y. Takita, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 65, 319–324 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Wang, S. J. Liang, K. N. Ding, J. H. Bi, J. C. Yu, P. K. Wong and L. Wu, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 1893–1902 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Sales, V. Bouquet, S. Deputier, S. Ollivier, F. Gouttefangeas, M. Guilloux-Viry, V. Dorcet, I. T. Weber, A. G. de Souza and I. M. G. dos Santos, Solid State Sci., 2014, 28, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moshtaghi, S. Gholamrezaei and M. S. Niasari, J. Mol. Struct., 2017, 1134, 511–519 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen and J. H. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4585–4591 CrossRef CAS .
T. Alammar, I. Hamm, V. Grasmik, M. Wark and A. V. Mudring, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 6920–6932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Lee, D. W. Kim, I. S. Cho, S. Park, S. S. Shin, S. W. Seo and K. S. Hong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 10557–10563 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Zhang, J. D. Hu, Y. L. Cao, J. Xie, W. Jia, S. Q. Wang and D. Z. Jia, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 14111–14118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Zhang, A. J. Liu, Y. L. Cao, J. Xie, W. Jia and D. Z. Jia, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 10965–10972 RSC .
W. F. Zhang, J. W. Tang and J. H. Ye, J. Mater. Res., 2007, 22, 1859–1871 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mizoguchi, P. Chen, P. Boolchand, V. Ksenofontov, C. Felser, P. W. Barnes and P. M. Woodward, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3858–3866 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Moura, L. Chantelle, D. Rosendo, E. Longo and I. M. G. dos Santos, Mater. Res-Ibero-Am. J., 2017, 20, 317–324 Search PubMed .
B. Hadjarab, A. Bouguelia, A. Benchettara and A. Trari, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 461, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, B. Lee, H. Ju, J. Y. Kim, J. Kim and S. W. Leek, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903316 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Alammar, I. I. Slowing, J. Anderegg and A. V. Mudring, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3387–3401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Yuan, X. L. Zhang, L. F. Liu, X. J. Jiang, J. Lv, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 5941–5946 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Yuan, Z. Y. Zhao, J. Zheng, M. Yang, L. G. Qiu, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6772–6779 RSC .
T. Chen, J. Meng, Q. Y. Lin, X. Wei, J. X. Li and Z. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 780, 498–503 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meng, Z. Y. Lan, Q. Y. Lin, T. Chen, X. Chen, X. Wei, Y. H. Lu, J. X. Li and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 1967–1976 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meng, X. Q. Fu, K. Du, X. Chen, Q. Y. Lin, X. Wei, J. X. Li and Z. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 9224–9232 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Patra, M. S. Chauhan, S. Keene, G. Gogoi, K. A. Reddy, S. Ardo, D. L. V. K. Prasad and M. Qureshi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 233–249 CrossRef CAS .
R. Borja-Urby, L. A. Diaz-Torres, I. Garcia-Martinez, D. Bahena-Uribe, G. Casillas, A. Ponce and M. Jose-Yacaman, Catal. Today, 2015, 250, 95–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Wu, M. P. Luo, M. X. Guo and L. S. Jia, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 11558–11565 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Xu, C. F. Sun, Z. Y. Wang, Y. D. Hou, Z. X. Ding and S. B. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18512–18517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, J. L. Zhou, J. F. Geng, R. Y. Bao, Z. H. Wang, J. X. Xia and H. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 503, 144287 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J. Chen, R. Guo, Y. Qiu, W. Li, X. Zhou, X. Ning and L. Zhan, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 211, 882–894 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Dhiman and S. Singh, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2019, 216, 1900012 CrossRef .
M. Touboul, J. Lokaj, L. Tessier, V. Kettman and V. Vrabel, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1992, 48, 1176–1179 CrossRef .
C. D. Lv, G. Chen, J. X. Sun, Y. S. Zhou, S. Fan and C. M. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, K. K. Wang, T. Liu, J. Xu and B. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 946–954 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Wen, L. Qian, X.-X. Lv, J. Sun, J. Guo, Z.-H. Fei and C.-G. Niu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 385, 121508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Ri, S. G. Kim, K. S. Ju, H. S. Ryo, C. H. Mun and U. H. Kim, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 5433–5440 RSC .
C. N. Ri, K. Song-Gol, J. Ju-Yong, S. N. Pak, S. C. Ri and J. H. Ri, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 647–653 RSC .
W. S. dos Santos, M. Rodriguez, A. S. Afonso, J. P. Mesquita, L. L. Nascimento, A. O. T. Patrocinio, A. C. Silva, L. C. A. Oliveira, J. D. Fabris and M. C. Pereira, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Liang, Z. Y. Yang, Y. Mei, H. R. Zhou and S. J. Yang, Nano, 2018, 13, 1850028 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Z. Duan and L. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 10402–10409 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cheng, C. Xiao and Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19616–19633 RSC .
C. D. Lv, G. Chen, J. X. Sun and Y. S. Zhou, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 4782–4789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shantha and K. B. R. Varma, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1999, 60, 66–75 CrossRef .
E. Alarcon-Llado, L. Chen, M. Hettick, N. Mashouf, Y. J. Lin, A. Javey and J. W. Ager, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1651–1657 RSC .
H. Mai, T. Lu, Q. Sun, R. G. Elliman, F. Kremer, T. Duong, K. Catchpole, Q. Li, Z. Yi, T. J. Frankcombe and Y. Liu, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 898–904 RSC .
D. E. Scaife, Sol. Energy, 1980, 25, 41–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, C. Dong, H. Idriss, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902433 CrossRef CAS .
S. Klejna, T. Mazur, E. Wlaźlak, P. Zawal, H. S. Soo and K. Szaciłowski, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 415, 213316 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, Y. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, C. C. Stoumpos, Q. Ding, J. Wang, M. G. Kanatzidis, X. Zhu and S. Jin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7963–7972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, N. Wang, H. Tian, J. Guo, Y. Wei, H. Chen, Y. Miao, W. Zou, K. Pan, Y. He, H. Cao, Y. Ke, M. Xu, Y. Wang, M. Yang, K. Du, Z. Fu, D. Kong, D. Dai, Y. Jin, G. Li, H. Li, Q. Peng, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nature, 2018, 562, 249–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, X. Wang, S. Li, J. Liu, Y. Guo, G. Niu, L. Yao, Y. Fu, L. Gao, Q. Dong, C. Zhao, M. Leng, F. Ma, W. Liang, L. Wang, S. Jin, J. Han, L. Zhang, J. Etheridge, J. Wang, Y. Yan, E. H. Sargent and J. Tang, Nature, 2018, 563, 541–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang and K. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902579 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15007 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Herz, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 67, 65–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Makuta, M. Liu, M. Endo, H. Nishimura, A. Wakamiya and Y. Tachibana, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 673–676 RSC .
M. Liu, M. Endo, A. Shimazaki, A. Wakamiya and Y. Tachibana, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3722–3732 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, J. Chen, M. P. Hautzinger, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 169–188 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 RSC .
M. Leng, Z. Chen, Y. Yang, Z. Li, K. Zeng, K. Li, G. Niu, Y. He, Q. Zhou and J. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15012–15016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, J.-F. Liao, Z.-G. Huang, J.-H. Wei, X.-D. Wang, W.-G. Li, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5277–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Z. Song and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Umedov, D. B. Khadka, M. Yanagida, A. Grigorieva and Y. Shirai, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 230, 111180 CrossRef CAS .
F. Reyes-Pérez, J. J. Gallardo, T. Aguilar, R. Alcántara, C. Fernández-Lorenzo and J. Navas, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 10226–10235 CrossRef .
D. X. Ju, X. P. Zheng, J. L. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Zhang, B. Q. Cao, H. Xiao, O. F. Mohammed, O. M. Bakr and X. T. Tao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14868–14872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Q. Zhao, X. Wang, X. Yan, J. Xu and Z. Zeng, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 2753–2762 RSC .
X.-D. Wang, Y.-H. Huang, J.-F. Liao, Y. Jiang, L. Zhou, X.-Y. Zhang, H.-Y. Chen and D.-B. Kuang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13434–13441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, W. Xie, H. Ding, Y. Chen, K. Thirumal, L. H. Wong, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Sherburne and M. Asta, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7740–7749 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Khadka, Y. Shirai, M. Yanagida and K. Miyano, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8335–8343 RSC .
Y. Guo, G. Liu, Z. Li, Y. Lou, J. Chen and Y. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 15080–15085 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Chang, T. Doert and M. Ruck, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2016, 642, 736–748 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Bhosale, A. K. Kharade, E. Jokar, A. Fathi, S.-M. Chang and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20434–20442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Liu, R.-R. Liu, Y.-F. Mu, Y.-X. Feng, G.-X. Dong, M. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000691 CrossRef CAS .
B.-M. Bresolin, C. Günnemann, D. W. Bahnemann and M. Sillanpää, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-M. Bresolin, P. Sgarbossa, D. W. Bahnemann and M. Sillanpää, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 251, 117320 CrossRef CAS .
B.-M. Bresolin, N. O. Balayeva, L. I. Granone, R. Dillert, D. W. Bahnemann and M. Sillanpää, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 204, 110214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai and H. Tüysüz, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2587–2592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, C. Poidevin, C. Ochoa-Hernández, A. A. Auer and H. Tüysüz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5788–5796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shi, G. Li, W. Tian, S. Jin, X. Tao, Y. Jiang, E. A. Pidko, R. Li and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Slavney, T. Hu, A. M. Lindenberg and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2138–2141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, X. Zhao, Y. Huang, J. Lai, H. Li, J. Yang, C. Tian, P. He, Q. Huang and X. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 4971–4976 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Liang, H. Huang, X. Liu, Q. Li, L. Chen and D. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7263–7267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, D. Yue, X. Li and Y. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118399 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, I. Hassan, M. Regue, S. Gonzalez-Carrero, E. Rattner, M. A. Isaacs and S. Eslava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12179–12187 RSC .
K. M. Boopathi, P. Karuppuswamy, A. Singh, C. Hanmandlu, L. Lin, S. A. Abbas, C. C. Chang, P. C. Wang, G. Li and C. W. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20843–20850 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, L. Yang, Q. Li, L. Chen and D. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2005495 Search PubMed .
Y. Hai, W. Huang, Z. Li, D. Wu, Q. Huang and X. Tang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 5913–5917 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, Q. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Zheng, Y. Liu, Y. Dai and B. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2955–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. E. Castelli, D. D. Landis, K. S. Thygesen, S. Dahl, I. Chorkendorff, T. F. Jaramillo and K. W. Jacobsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9034–9043 RSC .
R. Abe, M. Higashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11828–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Higashi, K. Domen and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6968–6971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fujito, H. Kunioku, D. Kato, H. Suzuki, M. Higashi, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2082–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kunioku, M. Higashi, O. Tomita, M. Yabuuchi, D. Kato, H. Fujito, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3100–3107 RSC .
H. Kunioku, A. Nakada, M. Higashi, O. Tomita, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1474–1480 RSC .
A. Walsh, D. J. Payne, R. G. Egdell and G. W. Watson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4455–4463 RSC .
D. Kato, K. Hongo, R. Maezono, M. Higashi, H. Kunioku, M. Yabuuchi, H. Suzuki, H. Okajima, C. Zhong, K. Nakano, R. Abe and H. Kageyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18725–18731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kunioku, M. Higashi, C. Tassel, D. Kato, O. Tomita, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, Chem. Lett., 2017, 583–586 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nakada, A. Saeki, M. Higashi, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10909–10917 RSC .
A. Nakada, M. Higashi, T. Kimura, H. Suzuki, D. Kato, H. Okajima, T. Yamamoto, A. Saeki, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3419–3429 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ozaki, H. Suzuki, A. Nakada, M. Higashi, O. Tomita, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, Chem. Lett., 2020, 978–981 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Ye, M. Xu, W. Fu, Y. Y. Cai, X. Wei, K. X. Wang, Y. N. Zhao, X. H. Li and J. S. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3021–3023 RSC .
T. Kanagaraj and S. Thiripuranthagan, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 207, 218–232 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Singh, J. H. Montoya, J. M. Gregoire and K. A. Persson, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Masood, C. Y. Toe, W. Y. Teoh, V. Sethu and R. Amal, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11774–11787 CrossRef CAS .
T. Toyao, Z. Maeno, S. Takakusagi, T. Kamachi, I. Takigawa and K.-I. Shimizu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2260–2297 CrossRef CAS .
M. Krallinger, O. Rabal, A. Lourenco, J. Oyarzabal and A. Valencia, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7673–7761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tshitoyan, J. Dagdelen, L. Weston, A. Dunn, Z. Q. Rong, O. Kononova, K. A. Persson, G. Ceder and A. Jain, Nature, 2019, 571, 95–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Butler, D. W. Davies, H. Cartwright, O. Isayev and A. Walsh, Nature, 2018, 559, 547–555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, L. Wilbraham, B. J. Slater, M. A. Zwijnenburg, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9063–9071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Can and R. Yildirim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 267–283 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mai, T. C. Le, T. Hisatomi, D. Chen, K. Domen, D. A. Winkler and R. A. Caruso, iScience, 2021, 24, 103068 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Herlihy, M. M. Waegele, X. H. Chen, C. D. Pemmaraju, D. Prendergast and T. Cuk, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 556 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Lehuta and K. R. Kittilstved, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 10034–10041 RSC .
H. X. Mai, T. Lu, Q. Li, Z. F. Liu, Y. X. Li, F. Kremer, L. Li, R. L. Withers, H. D. Wen and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12781–12789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Notes on principles of photocatalytic water splitting and pollutant degradation, tables summarizing titanate, ferrite, niobate and other oxide perovskite and halide perovskite photocatalyst properties (CB, VB, bandgap and H2/O2 evolution rates or pollutant investigated). See DOI: 10.1039/d1cs00684cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Haoxin Mai
	Haoxin Mai received his MSc degree in Information Technology and Computer Science from the University of Technology Sydney, and PhD degree in Materials Chemistry from the Research School of Chemistry at the Australian National University in 2019. He has worked at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT) University as a research assistant from 2019. His research interests include perovskite photocatalysis and photoluminescence, ferroelectric thin films, controllable synthesis of inorganic colloid nanocrystals and machine learning.

Dehong Chen
	Dehong Chen is a research fellow in the Applied Chemistry & Environmental Science discipline at RMIT University, Australia. He received his PhD degree in chemistry from Fudan University in 2006. Before joining RMIT University, he conducted research work at the University of Melbourne and the Australian National University. He currently has interests in design and synthesis of diverse functional materials for a range of applications including clean energy utilization, energy storage, environmental remediation and sensors.

Yasuhiro Tachibana
	Yasuhiro Tachibana is a Professor at RMIT University. He received his BEng and MEng from Osaka University in 1992 and 1995, and his PhD in chemistry at Imperial College London in 2000. His research interests include developing photoactive nanomaterials and solar energy conversion devices such as dye or semiconductor quantum dot sensitized solar cells, perovskite solar cells and photocatalysis for water splitting and CO2 reduction by employing time-resolved laser spectroscopies.

Hajime Suzuki
	Hajime Suzuki received his BS (2013), MS (2015), and PhD (2018) degrees from Kyoto University. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow (2018–2019) at Osaka University. He is currently an assistant professor at Kyoto University. His current research focuses on the development of novel photocatalysts and cocatalysts for water splitting.

Ryu Abe
	Ryu Abe received his BS (1996), MS (1998) and PhD (2001) degrees from Tokyo Institute of Technology. He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow (2001–2002) and as a researcher (2002–2005) at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan. In 2005, his academic career as an associate professor began at the Catalysis Research Center, Hokkaido University. He was then promoted to a Professor at Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University, in 2012. His research mainly focuses on the development of new visible-light-responsive photocatalysts and reaction systems for water splitting.

Rachel A. Caruso
	Rachel Caruso is a materials chemist and has expertise in advanced porous materials. She has led teams of scientists at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, The University of Melbourne, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation and RMIT University. Her research interests include materials such as porous oxides, perovskites and carbon materials for energy and environmental applications. She is currently the Director of the Advanced Materials Enabling Capability Platform at RMIT University.

 	Fig. 1  Abundance of the elements on earth given in atom fraction as a function of the atomic number. The rare earth elements are indicated in blue. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2005, U.S. Geological Survey.	 
	(1)
μ = rB/rX	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Crystal structures of examples of A2BB′X6 perovskites with different B-site cation orderings: (a) random, (b) rock-salt, (c) layered and (d) columnar order. The purple spheres represent A-site element, the red spheres represent X-site element, and the green and blue octahedra represent BX6 and B′X6 octahedra respectively in (b), (c) and (d).	 

 	Fig. 3  Crystal structures of layered perovskite compounds (red spheres: X-site element; purple octahedra: BX6; dark green and pink spheres: A-site element): (a) Aurivillius, (b) Ruddlesden–Popper, (c) Dion–Jacobson, (d) {110} type and (e) {111} type.	 

 	Fig. 4  Absolute and relative (respect to standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), pH = 0) energy levels of valence and conduction bands of some perovskite-based photocatalysts and other representative photocatalysts.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the (a) type-II heterojunction, (b) Z-scheme system with shuttle redox mediators, (c) Z-scheme system with solid state electron mediators and (d) direct Z-scheme system. The dotted lines denote the Fermi level of the components.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the energy or electron transfer from different sensitizers to perovskite photocatalysts: (a) dye molecules, (b) plasmonic metal (Ef denotes the Fermi level of the metal particle), (c) quantum dots (QDs) and (d) upconversion particles.	 
ABX3 + H2O → ABX3·H2O	(9)
ABX3·H2O → BX2 + AX + H2O	(10)
CH3NH3X → CH3NH2 + HX	(11)

 	Fig. 7  The SEM images of the (a–f) 6-facet and (g–l) 18-facet SrTiO3 nanocrystals with photo-deposition of noble metals or metal oxides. Reprinted with permission.175 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Reflectance spectrum of STO:Al (black solid line) and wavelength vs. water splitting AQY on Al-doped STO photocatalyst (red spots). (b) STEM and EDS mappings of the Al-doped STO photocatalyst. EDS data were obtained from the area in the red dashed box. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the hydrothermal synthesis of STO@TiO2 hollow multi-shelled structures (HoMSs); (b) The band structure and (c) the TEM image for STO@TiO2 HoMSs. (d) Photocatalytic water splitting performance of single-shelled (1S), double shelled (2S) and triple shelled (3S) STO@TiO2 HoMSs. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of the BiFeO3/TiO2 core/shell nanocomposites; (b) the piezo-phototronic degradation activity for various structures (MPs: micrometre-sized particles, NPs: nanoparticles, NCs: nanocomposites, P: poling); (c) and (d) the piezo/photo-catalysis process of the BiFeO3/TiO2 core/shell structures for the different polarization direction. Reproduced with permission.277 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  FESEM images of (a) bare NaNbO3, (b) NaNbO3/MoS2 and (c) NaNbO3/BiVO4 composite nanostructures; (d) Schematic band alignment between NaNbO3/MoS2 and NaNbO3/BiVO4 nanomaterials (Ef: Fermi level); (e) photocatalytic activity of bare NaNbO3, Degussa (Evonik) P25, NaNbO3/BiVO4 and NaNbO3/MoS2 core–shell heterostructures. Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of Bi2WO6/amorphous BiOCl. Reproduced with permission.366 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic fabrication of the black phosphorus (BP)/monolayer Bi2WO6 (MBWO) heterojunction. Reproduced with permission.367 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of Fe2O3/Bi2MoO6 with surface oxygen vacancies (F/BMO-SOVs); (b) FESEM images of the F/BMO-SOVs nanocomposites, the inset scale bar is 100 nm; (c) total organic carbon (TOC) removal of phenol by BMO, BMO-SOVs, F/BMO-SOVs and F/BMO under visible light illumination. Reproduced with permission.383 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) HRTEM image of SrSnO3; (b) degradation activities of samples synthesised at different temperatures (SSO-calcination temperature); and (c) schematic representation for the synthesis of the SrSnO3 microstructures. Reproduced with permission.409 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustrating the synthesis procedure for the Cs2SnI6/SnS2 heterojunction (PVK denotes halide perovskites). (b) The methane production rate of different samples. (c) Scheme of photocatalytic CO2 reduction on the Cs2SnI6/SnS2 heterojunction. Reproduced with permission.469 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Plausible mechanisms of photocatalytic CO2 reduction via Rb3Bi2I9 and Cs3Bi2I9 catalysts. Reproduced with permission.474 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) SEM images of Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9 (CBSI-x). (b) H2 evolution rate of Cs3Bi2I9 (CBI) and CBSI-0.3 in HI solution (solution 1) and HI solution with Cs2CO3 (solution 2). (c) Stability assessment of CBSI-0.3 in Solution 2. (d) H2 evolution activity (HER) for CBSI-0.3 versus wavelength and diffuse reflectance spectrum (DRS) of CBSI-0.3. Reprinted with permission.490 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic VB structures and reaction scheme on (a) conventional mixed-anion compounds (unstable) and (b) Sillén–Aurivillius oxyhalide perovskites such as Bi4NbO8Cl (stable). The “Red” and”Ox” denotes H2/H2O or reductant/oxidant of redox mediators such as Fe2+/Fe3+ and I−/IO3−.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Crystal structure of Bi4NbO8Cl. (b) Visible-light-driven Z-scheme water splitting using Bi4NbO8Cl-based and SrTiO3-based photocatalysts, in the presence of Fe3+/Fe2+ redox mediator. Reproduced with permission.495 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Density of states (DOS) of Bi4NbO8X (X = Cl, Br) (b) Interactions among Bi-6s, Bi-6p and O-2p orbitals based on the revised lone pair model.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Notes on principles of photocatalytic water splitting and pollutant degradation, tables summarizing titanate, ferrite, niobate and other oxide perovskite and halide perovskite photocatalyst properties (CB, VB, bandgap and H2/O2 evolution rates or pollutant investigated). See DOI: 10.1039/d1cs00684c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
