Significance of thermodynamic interaction parameters in guiding the optimization of polymer:nonfullerene solar cells  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CC04869K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CC04869K
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 12463-12478Significance of thermodynamic interaction parameters in guiding the optimization of polymer:nonfullerene solar cells

        
          
            Mengyuan 
            Gao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ziqi 
            Liang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanhou 
            Geng
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Long 
            Ye
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Molecular Optoelectronic Sciences, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China. E-mail: yelong@tju.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China
Received 
      15th July 2020
    , Accepted 28th August 2020First published on 28th August 2020AbstractPolymer solar cells (PSCs) based on polymer donors and nonfullerene small molecule acceptors are a very attractive technology for solar energy conversion, and their performance is heavily determined by film morphology. It is of considerable interest to reveal instructive morphology–performance relationships of these blends. This feature article discusses the recent advances in analysing the morphology formation of nonfullerene PSCs with an effective polymer thermodynamic quantity, i.e., Flory–Huggins interaction parameter χ. In particular, guidelines of high and low χ systems are summarized. The fundamental understanding of χ and its correlations to film morphology and photovoltaic device parameters is of utmost relevance for providing essential material design criteria, establishing suitable morphology processing guidelines, and thus advancing the practical applications of PSCs based on nonfullerene acceptors.
Mengyuan Gao
Mengyuan Gao earned her Bachelor degree in Polymer Materials & Engineering from Taiyuan University of Technology, China, in July 2019. Presently, she is a graduate student at the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Tianjin University under the supervision of Prof. Long Ye and Prof. Yanhou Geng. Her research work focuses on understanding the mixing behaviours of conjugated polymer blends used in polymer solar cells and other types of electronics by applying polymer physics knowledge.
Ziqi Liang
Ziqi Liang is currently a PhD student at the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Tianjin University under the direction of Prof. Yanhou Geng. She obtained her Bachelor degree in Polymer Materials & Engineering from Shandong University in July 2017. Her current research interests are designing and optimizing organic/polymeric materials for low cost nonfullerene solar cells.
Yanhou Geng
Yanhou Geng is a full professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, China. He received his PhD degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1996. From 1998 to 2003, he worked in the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz (Germany) as an AvH stipendiat and the University of Rochester (USA) as a postdoctoral researcher. From 2003 to 2015, he was a professor at CIAC. His research interests include (1) polymerization methods for conjugated polymers; (2) organic and polymeric semiconductors for solar cells and thin-film transistors.
Long Ye
Long Ye has been a Professor at the School of Materials Science & Engineering of Tianjin University since October 2019. He received his PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Adviser: Prof. Jianhui Hou) in July 2015. From August 2015 to September 2019, he was a postdoctoral researcher and later promoted to research assistant professor in the same group headed by Prof. Harald Ade at the Department of Physics, North Carolina State University. His current interests include morphological and mechanical characterizations of semiconducting polymers and their blends in solar cells and transistors, and polymer physics of conjugated polymers.
1. Introduction
Polymer solar cells (PSCs), as a photovoltaic technology with significant potential in modern buildings, greenhouses, and indoor and space applications,1–5 have become a research hotspot in the fields of chemistry and materials science during recent years.6,7 As the core layer for sunlight to electricity conversion, the active layer of a PSC is generally composed of bulk-heterojunction blends of polymer donors and (polymer or small molecule) acceptors. The continuous improvement of device performance of PSCs is driven by the rapid development of novel donor and acceptor materials. In addition to the molecular structures of photovoltaic materials, film morphology is an important factor that cannot be ignored.8–12 The final morphology of a PSC film is the result of combined influences of mixing thermodynamics and kinetics during the film solidification process.10
Of the continually increasing number (>1000) of nonfullerene small molecule acceptors (NFAs), each could be paired with thousands of donor polymers being extensively developed in the last decade. Yet, power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) over 18% are only achievable for very few pairs of materials with finely-tailored properties through extensive explorations.13,14 Quickly identifying promising donor:acceptor combinations and the best processing protocols is still an exhausting process.15–17 The approach heavily relies on tedious trial-and-error procedures and labour-intensive efforts which are certainly unsustainable. As a good starting point of rational optimization, miscibility is a very important concept widely used for describing the morphology of polymer:fullerene systems, for instance, polythiophene:fullerene systems by various groups,18–23 and low band gap donor–acceptor copolymer:fullerene blends mostly by the Ade group24–28 and Chen et al.29 Although the miscibility characterizations of polymer:fullerene blends have been well summarized by several perspectives,30–32 the recent progress on mixing thermodynamics of PSC blends based on NFAs has not been overviewed. With the development of new NFAs, relating mixing thermodynamics to morphology and device performance has received increasing attention in recent years. Thus, a thorough survey of the thermodynamic studies of PSCs based on NFAs will be particularly useful to the researchers in this field.
In this feature article, we mainly focus on recent efforts in applying Flory–Huggins interaction parameter χ to understand the photovoltaic performance and morphology stability of PSCs, concentrating on polymer:small molecule blend systems (see Fig. 1). The aim of this article is not to provide a comprehensive review, but a concise overview of the research on interaction parameters of nonfullerene organic photovoltaic blends actively developed in the past five years. The article is divided into five sections. We will start with an introductory overview of interaction parameter χ as described by the Flory–Huggins theory of polymer blends and the common experimental methods used for determining χ (Section 2), followed by the relation between χ and morphology derived from the scattering principle and lever rule (Section 3). Subsequently, we will describe how χ can help understand the photovoltaic performance and morphology stability of nonfullerene PSCs by using a variety of representative examples to date. In Sections 4 and 5, applications of χ in binary and ternary blend systems based on conjugated polymers and NFAs will be respectively discussed. The interaction parameter between the photoactive material and processing solvent and its implications in device processing are discussed in Section 6. Finally, we conclude by highlighting the remaining challenges and future opportunities of using χ for conjugated polymer blends.
 Fig. 1  Chemical structures of polymer donors and nonfullerene small molecule acceptors discussed in this feature article. 
2. Mixing thermodynamics of polymer:small molecule blends
In this section, we will briefly overview the fundamentals of mixing thermodynamics of PSCs from a polymer physics viewpoint and the common experimental methods used for determining χ. We start by overviewing the theoretical background that is relevant to the interaction parameters of polymer blend systems. The phase behaviours of polymers and polymer (or small molecule) blends are described by several theories.33,34 Among these, Flory–Huggins solution theory is a very classic and still the most frequently used model.33,35 However, the Flory–Huggins theory is only applicable to amorphous mixtures and does not properly consider some potential effects (e.g., local packing, the size differences between blend components, and volume changes during mixing). Despite the possible limitations, this theory is still quite compelling to the PSC researchers and has provided essential (semi-)qualitative insights into the phase behaviours of various conjugated polymer blends and the corresponding polymer solutions.32,36–46 According to Flory–Huggins theory, when mixing two solute components labelled “1” and “2” together in a solvent labelled “3”, the total change in the Gibbs free energy (Gmix) for this ternary system41 per lattice site is described by the following eqn (1). (1)where ϕi represents the volume fraction of each component. The system is assumed to be incompressible by the Flory–Huggins model, so that ϕ1 + ϕ2 + ϕ3 = 1. N1 and N2 represent effective molecular sizes of components 1 and 2 given in the number of lattice sites, which are related to their degrees of polymerization. k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature in Kelvin. χij is the dimensionless binary interaction parameter representing the (enthalpic) interaction between components i and j, also known as Flory–Huggins interaction parameter. This parameter has been the most widely used quantity, characterizing all sorts of polymer–solvent and polymer–polymer interactions. χij can be positive, zero, or negative. Lower χij indicates a high extent of mixing. During solvent evaporation, the onset of phase separation into the two-phase regime is determined by χ12. Eqn (1) offers a starting point for many equations of interest. For a binary polymer:small molecule blend in the absence of solvent, the total Gibbs free energy of mixing can be reduced to eqn (2). (2)

Fig. 2a shows the most commonly observed temperature (T)–composition (ϕ) diagram for a polymer blend. Spinodal and binodal curves are displayed to separate the three regions (unstable region, metastable region, and compatible region). If one or both of the blend components can crystallize, more complex phase diagrams will emerge.47,48 Hereafter, we concentrate on a simple yet vitally important case in the PSC field, i.e., polymer:small molecule blend.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic phase diagram for a polymer blend system illustrating an upper critical solution temperature (UCST) on the temperature-composition plane. The solid line is called the binodal, and the dashed line is the spinodal curve. The binodal curve and spinodal curve meet at a critical point, which also represents the highest temperature of immiscibility. The process of phase separation in the metastable region is the nucleation and growth mechanism (NG), while in the unstable region it is the spinodal decomposition mechanism (SD). Arrows A and B indicate the quenching condition. The quench along A is a critical quench (here the system enters the unstable region directly without passing through the metastable region), while that along B is an off-critical quench. (b) Plot of the binodal curves of a polymer:small molecule blend as a function of polymer molecular weight. Here N represents the degree of polymerization of the polymer, which ranges from 1 to 100. The dashed arrow illustrates the change of critical point (χc), which is at the apex of the binodal curve. 
For each molecular weight, the χc is at the lowest point of the binodal curve (as illustrated in Fig. 2b). The critical interaction parameter χc of polymer:small molecule blends can be estimated from eqn (3). (3)
It is clear that χc varies from 0.5 to 2.0, which is determined by the degree of polymerization of the polymer donor. χc will approach 2.0 if component 1 is a very low molecular weight molecule. In polymer:small molecule blends, increasing the molecular weight of the polymer will result in a more asymmetric binodal with a shift of the critical point towards a higher volume fraction of the small molecule. χc is close to 0.5 when the polymer is a very high molecular weight polymer. In the classical sense, χ exhibits a linear reciprocal dependence on T49 and of course varies for each material combination. Generally, the experimentally observed temperature dependence of χ is described by  where A and B are temperature independent constants. A reflects an additional entropic contribution to the combinatorial entropy. If B is positive, increasing T leads to lower χ and higher degree of mixing in a blend; such blends are known as upper critical solution temperature (UCST) systems. On the other hand, negative B value reflects a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) behaviour. In rare cases, an effective χ(T) describing experimental phase diagrams needs introducing an additional term,50i.e., C/T2 or Cln(T), where C is a constant that is independent of T.
Obviously, the determination of Flory–Huggins interaction parameter χ is the basis and pre-requisite for thermodynamic studies. Experimentally, the χ parameters of polymer:small molecule blends can be determined by several methods.32 At present, the most commonly used methods to estimate χ are differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and contact angle measurements. χ might be determined according to the theory of melting point depression.51 Essentially, the miscibility of the blend system causes the amorphous components to disrupt the arrangement of the crystalline components, which leads to a decrease of melting point. Therefore, the χ parameter of the semi-crystalline polymer:small molecule blend system at the melting point can be quantitatively analyzed by using eqn (4).43,51,52 (4)where T0m and Tm represent the melting temperature of the pure polymer and the blends, respectively. ΔHm is the melting enthalpy of pure polymer, vm and vs identify the monomer molar volume of the polymer and the small molecule, ϕs is the volume fraction of the small molecule, and R is the ideal gas constant. As shown in eqn (4), the χ parameter can be obtained by fitting the quadratic function of the melting point depression to the volume fraction of small molecules. We recently employed this approach to compare the miscibility of several low-cost polythiophene:nonfullerene blends.53 Taking the PDCBT-Cl and ITIC-Th1 blend54 as an example, the DSC curves of the pure polymer film and blends with different weight ratios were acquired. As shown in Fig. 3a, the melting temperature of the polymer decreased gradually with increasing amount of ITIC-Th1. Fitting the melting point of the pure polymer and blends to eqn (4) yields χ = 0.68 for the PDCBT-Cl:ITIC-Th1 blend system (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  (a) Melting point depression of a polymer:NFA blend (PDCBT-Cl:ITIC-Th1). (b) Fitting the quadratic function of melting point depression and acceptor's volume fraction ϕs.53 Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Plot of the relative χ parameters of over 10 pairs of polymer:NFA blends obtained from surface tension measurements.54,57–60 (d) Typical Flory–Huggins theory derived χ–ϕ phase diagram of binary amorphous mixtures of a polymer and a small molecule, which exhibits UCST phase behaviour. Arrows mark the compositions of two phases (1 and 2) in a quenched morphology. Dashed lines indicate the binodal compositions. (e) Plot of integrated scattering intensity (ISI) as a function of (thermal/solvent vapour) annealing time. The star shows the ISI corresponding to the optimum performance of a high χ system. (f) Classification of high χ and low χ regimes (separated by the ideal χ region) in the χ–ϕ phase diagram. The schematic morphology of high and low χ systems are shown as the inset images.32 Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
Another easily accessible method is contact angle measurement.42,55,56 It can derive the χ parameters of the weakly crystalline or amorphous blend systems, in which melting peaks are absent in the DSC thermograms. The χ parameter could be calculated from the surface energy (γ) by an empirical equation (eqn (5)). (5)where γ is converted by contact angle data and K is a positive constant. Using the contact angle measurement to analyse the miscibility of blend systems has been favoured by many PSC researchers and has been widely used in the miscibility analysis of PSC blends. In a previous study,57 Hou et al. demonstrated the impact of the intramolecular electron push–pull effect of the NFAs on the miscibility of the donor and acceptor by using the measured contact angles of the neat films of PM6, IT-4F and IT-M. The calculation results show that the χ parameter of PM6:IT-4F is higher than that of PM6:IT-M due to the fact that the IT-4F film has a larger surface tension than the IT-M film. Fig. 3c provided a non-exhaustive survey of the relative χ values for many PSC systems using the contact angle method.54,57–60
Temperature-dependent interaction parameter χ(T) can be determined by measuring the device-relevant phase diagrams for the polymer:small molecule blend with time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS), which tracks the special segments of either the polymer or small molecule acceptor using bilayer inter-diffusion approach.61,62χ parameters of the blend system can also be measured by cloud point,63 (X-ray or neutron) scattering,49,64 reflectivity methods65 and swelling methods.66 In addition to the experimental methods, χ parameters can be quickly calculated through the Hansen solubility parameters (HSPs),67 as given in eqn (6). Based upon the group additive approach, HSPs can also be obtained simply based on their molecular structures and molar force data from handbooks.68 (6)where α is the correction term and usually 0.5 in the polymer:small molecule system, Vs is the geometric mean of the molar volume of a polymer with a small molecule, the subscript p identified with the polymer and s with the small molecule, and {δD,δP,δH} is the dispersive interactions, polar interactions, and hydrogen bonding interactions, respectively. Eqn (6) might fail in some circumstances.32,69,70 As a complement to the group additive approach, experimental determination of HSPs may be used.71,72
3. Bridging interaction parameter χ and film morphology in PSCs
Before discussing the relation between device function and interaction parameter χ, this section is meant to discuss the role of the χ parameter on the morphology of the PSC films. The characterization of film morphology can be performed by the real-space microscopy methods such as transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) as well as reciprocal-space scattering methods such as resonant soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS).73 Among these, R-SoXS is a favourable technique for quantitative analysis of the characteristic morphology parameters (domain spacing and relative domain purity) of the blend film.74–76 The long period (L) or centre-to-centre domain spacing is the characteristic length scale of the composition of blend films, and it can be calculated by using the equation: L = 2π/q, where q is the peak location of the scattering maximum.
Domain purity77 is a vitally important parameter that characterizes the molecular miscibility of the components of the blend films, which can be extracted from the R-SoXS scattering profiles after Lorentz correction, namely I(q)q2vs. q plots. The square root of integrated scattering intensity (ISI) over the entire q range of the measurement is used to assess the relative domain purity (σ).75 Based on the contrast mechanism of small angle X-ray scattering, the ISI of a two-phase system as displayed in Fig. 3d is expressed as ISI ∝ (ϕ2 − ϕ1)2φ1φ2(7)where φ1 and φ2 are the volume fractions of the two phases, and ϕ1 and ϕ2 are the concentrations of small molecules in the polymer-rich phase 1 and small molecule-rich phase 2. ϕ0 is the initial volume fraction of small molecules in the blend. Ye and Ade et al.61 derived the mathematical relations between χ and σ based on the lever rule (ϕ0 = ϕ1φ1 + ϕ2φ2) and eqn (7). The readers are directed to the literature61 for full details of the mathematical derivation. The expression of σ is given by eqn (8). (8)
On this basis, if the thermodynamic equilibrium state is reached, eqn (9) can be derived as follows: (9)where ϕ1e and ϕ2e are the binodal concentrations of small molecules in the two phases. It was clear that both ϕ1e and ϕ2e depend on χ. In general, the composition of the polymer in the acceptor-rich phase is almost zero, and thus the value of ϕ2e is estimated to be 100 vol%. σ is monotonically related to the acceptor content in mixed phase for a given blend composition ϕ0. Since χ can be experimentally determined and ϕ0 is known, ϕ1 and ϕ2 at any non-equilibrium states can be inferred from a set of annealing sequence experiments.53,78Fig. 3e presents an example of increasing ISI with annealing time as the mixed domain compositions are evolving from within the two-phase region towards the binodal limit. Usually, optimized device performance was achieved with short annealing (∼10 minutes), before the binodal limit was reached.79
To experimentally verify the above link between χ and phase purity, Ye and colleagues61 directly measured the device-relevant phase diagrams for a polymer:fullerene blend by TOF-SIMS, which allows the determination of the temperature-dependent χ for the system. It was found that the obtained (χ, ISI) data sets of the model system match with the model prediction of eqn (9). Further verification was completed with over 10 pairs of high and low performance material systems. Consequently, these results allow establishing the first model61 to quantitatively connect the thermodynamic χ to the phase purity of binary PSC devices.
Based on the literature survey of a wide range of PSC blends,32 it was proposed that three regimes (low χ, ideal χ, and high χ) can be classified by the relation between miscibility and percolation threshold in the context of the χ–ϕ phase diagram (Fig. 3f). In principle, the blend components in the low χ (hyper-miscibility) system tend to be miscible, resulting in less pure domains, which increase the charge recombination and decrease the charge collection efficiency.80 However, high χ (hypo-miscibility) systems have the tendency of spontaneous phase separation, implying that a higher phase purity is probably achieved in this case. It generally needs to be quenched to the percolation threshold, where the charge transport is more favourable. Only when the two components are moderately mixed, desirable morphology can be realized. For ideal χ cases, the mixed phase of the blend system possesses a composition near the percolation threshold and stable morphology in the thermodynamic equilibrium state. Since there is only one system exhibiting such an ideal χ,61 nearly all kinds of polymer:NFA blends can be treated as either high χ or low χ systems. We will discuss the χ-performance/stability relationships in low χ and high χ systems in Section 4.
4. Role of interaction parameter χ in binary blend systems
Section 4 will introduce how to use the interaction parameters to guide the performance optimization of PSC devices based on polymer:NFA binary blends. While this section cannot cover all of the types of PSC blends known in the literature, we thus use the two most widely used classes of photovoltaic polymers (polythiophenes and benzodithiophene-based copolymers) to highlight the χ-performance relations.
4.1 Guidelines for low χ systems
According to Section 3, the relationships between miscibility and the morphology characteristic parameters of PSC films were clarified. Recent experimental studies observed a (mostly) linear correlation between device fill factor (FF) and σ.81,82 Based on this linear correlation and eqn (8) and (9), Ye and Ade et al. established the relationship between miscibility and device performance in a quantitative manner.61 By investigating a model PSC system consisting of PCDTBT:PCBM and based on the lever rule and mathematical derivations, a quantitative model between the material-specific interaction parameter χ and device FF was then established. Subsequently, a quantitative relationship was established on a variety of polymer:fullerene and polymer:small molecule systems (Fig. 4a). In this study, the interaction parameter χ has been observed as a critical parameter that impacts bimolecular recombination, and thus the FF of PSC devices. The device FF increases with increasing χ parameter, that is, the high χ system can more easily achieve high device performance. According to this relationship, researchers can bypass the trial-and-error strategies to guide the selection of donor/acceptor materials, and achieve the performance improvement of devices through reasonable molecular structure modification and morphology optimization methods, especially in low χ systems.
 Fig. 4  (a) Plot of χ with device fill factor for a wide range of polymer:fullerene and polymer:NFA blends.61 Each data point are well explained in ref. 61. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Illustration of the χ–ϕ phase diagram of the PB3T-C66:IT-4F and PB3TCN-C66:IT-4F blends.83 The solid curves are binodal (coexistence) curves; the horizontal dashed lines are the relative χ parameter calculated by HSP, and the vertical dashed lines are the maximum IT-4F component in the mixed phases. (c) J–V curves of PB3T-C66:IT-4F and PB3TCN-C66:IT-4F.83 Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Two-dimensional GIWAXS pattern for the PDCBT-Cl:Y6 blend film. (e) Plots of relative composition of PDCBT-Cl:acceptor blends with optimized annealing (2 min) and longer annealing (1 h). (f) Plot of PCE for the PDCBT-Cl:Y6 blend as a function of aging time.53 Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
For the hyper-miscibility system, reducing the miscibility of the two components is conducive to the improvement of phase purity, achieving a higher device efficiency. For instance, Duan et al.83 introduced a cyano group into the polymer PB3T-C66 to alter low χ of PB3T-C66:IT-4F, and we compared the miscibility of the two polymers, PB3T-C66 and PB3TCN-C66, with IT-4F by the HSP method (as shown in Fig. 4b). The results demonstrated that the miscibility of the low χ system is significantly reduced by introducing a cyano group into PB3T-C66, resulting in a higher χ for the blend system. Accordingly, the volume fraction of amorphous mixed phases was reduced, combined with the increased domain purity from 0.62 to 1. The optimized phase separation morphology is beneficial to exciton dissociation and inhibits charge recombination along with the improvement of the charge transport. As a consequence, the optimized charge creation and transport facilitate the improvement of Jsc and FF, achieving a significant increase in PCE from 2.3% to 11.2% (see Fig. 4c). In addition, in order to reduce the miscibility of the P3HT:BTP-4Cl system, Hou et al.84 designed and synthesized a new acceptor named ZY-4Cl (the chemical structures are shown in Fig. 1). The P3HT:ZY-4Cl system has a higher χ parameter, driving the appropriate phase separation of the system, which is consistent with the AFM morphology results. In this regard, they produced the record efficiency in P3HT-based PSCs. Another illustrative example is a comparative study of two PBDB-T:NFA systems,85 namely PBDB-T:IT-M and PBDB-T:IT-DM, which are processed at various processing conditions (as cast, add solvent additive, use both solvent additive and thermal annealing). R-SoXS experiments show that the performance metrics of both device characteristics (Jsc and FF) increase with the relative average purity. Also, the PBDB-T:IT-M blend films with a higher χ parameter exhibit a larger average purity under various processing conditions, which eventually leads to the increased FF and Jsc.
We recently discovered that the star acceptor Y6 delivers an abysmal performance with a PCE of 0.5% when blended with PDCBT-Cl, although this binary blend shows a rather broad photoresponse range.53 Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) data shows that the blend is poorly ordered (Fig. 4d). The DSC and contact angle results display that the PDCBT-Cl:Y6 system is difficult to phase separate due to its high miscibility, resulting in serious charge recombination and poor device efficiency of only 0.5%. Y6 and PDCBT-Cl remained in a homogeneous state due to the hyper-miscibility (χ = 0.19) of the two components, which induced impure domains and poor molecular packing in the blend film. Fig. 4e shows that for the PDCBT-Cl:Y6 blend system, the domain purity is almost the same after solvent vapour annealing for 1 hour. In addition, the devices based on the two photoactive materials exhibit excellent stability, with no significant decrease in device efficiency after long-term aging (see Fig. 4f). This finding is also in line with the in operando study on three PTB7-Th:NFA blends by Yip et al.87 They observed that the lowest χ blend demonstrates the best stability.
4.2 Guidelines for high χ systems
Having discussed the low χ systems, we now turn our attention to high χ systems, i.e., those with hypo-miscibility. It has been previously demonstrated that the acceptor concentration in the polymer-rich mixed domains has to be at or above the electron percolation threshold in order to avoid geminate recombination and facilitate charge extraction.32,78,79,88 The ability to reach such a concentration depends on miscibility and casting kinetics. In other words, to realize high performance, the morphology often needs to be frozen to a non-equilibrium state, where the acceptor concentration in the polymer-rich mixed phase is suggested to approach the electron percolation threshold to obtain an optimized device performance.88
A well-studied polymer:NFA system exhibiting high χ is PM6:IT-4F.57,89 In 2019, Ye et al. selected this high χ system as the model system to examine the effect of kinetic quenching on the morphology and performance.78 As shown in Fig. 5a, four batches of PM6 (denoted as PM6-x, x = 1–4) with molecular weight varying from 27.6 kg mol−1 to 51.2 kg mol−1 were employed. They utilized TOF-SIMS and hard/soft X-ray scattering to determine the equilibrium composition, quench depth, molecular packing/aggregation, phase separation domain spacing and phase purity of the PM6-x:IT-4F systems. The results showed that the four systems have different PCEs though they display the same χ parameter. Among them, the highest molecular weight devices obtained the highest performance with an efficiency of over 13%, indicating that the phase evolution is not dramatically influenced by thermodynamics but by film-solidification kinetics. Furthermore, the volume fraction of IT-4F in the mixed amorphous phase (7%) was far below the percolation threshold (ϕp) of the system (25%), which implies that the mixed phase has excessive purity and needs to be quenched to the ϕp for optimized device performance. To further corroborate this viewpoint, the phase purity (σ) of the optimized PM6-4:IT-4F film was analysed as a function of solvent annealing time through R-SoXS, as provided in Fig. 5b. It can be seen that with the lengthening of the solvent annealing time, the phase purity of the blend film increases gradually, that is, the acceptor composition of the blends evolves from the quenched state at ϕp toward the thermodynamic equilibrium state. These results highlighted that the morphology of the optimized film for high χ systems is indeed kinetically quenched to near the percolation threshold.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the χ–ϕ diagram based on high χ system PM6:IT-4F blends. The polymer Mn values and device PCEs of PM6-x are listed in the diagram. (b) Plot of normalized phase purity (σ) of the highest Mn blend as a function of solvent annealing time.78 Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the χ–ϕ diagram of PBDx:IDIC blends with the variation of the polymer side-chain structure. (d) Plot of normalized phase purity (σ) of the IDIC distribution in the mixed phase of the PBDx:IDIC blends.86 Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the χ–ϕ diagram based on PDCBT-Cl:NFA blends. Triangles represent the states in optimized devices while dots represent the states in long-term annealed devices. The relative location of the various triangles or dots represent the χaa of different systems. The best device performance for each blend is depicted in the inset table. (f) Plot of normalized PCEs for four PDCBT-Cl:NFA blends as a function of solvent vapour annealing time.53 Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Side chain engineering86 of PBDx (x = 1–4, molecular structures are shown in Fig. 1) also corroborated the above argument. By varying the alkyl chains attached to the donor and acceptor units, Ye and co-workers used the combinations of PBDx and the non-fullerene acceptor IDIC to establish the side chain structure-device performance relations. The length of the alkyl side chain affects the solubility of the polymer in the solution, resulting in different morphological characteristics during the film-formation process. As illustrated in the χ–ϕ phase diagram (Fig. 5c), all four systems have similar χ parameters yet quite different PCEs, which is related to the different degree of morphology formation kinetics quenching of the films. Because the PBD1 with the shortest alkyl side chain exhibited the strongest aggregation feature compared with the blends of other polymers PBD2-4, PBD1:IDIC film was kinetically quenched with an acceptor composition close to the ϕp, leading to the appropriate phase purity σ of the mixed phase (as displayed in Fig. 5d) and optimized device performance (PCE over 12%).
The need for optimal kinetic quenching is further validated in the record-efficiency polythiophene:NFA system, PDCBT-Cl:ITIC-Th1.53 As shown in Fig. 5e, the blend system achieved over 12% device efficiency due to the appropriate miscibility between donor and acceptor (χ = 0.68 by DSC measurement) and the careful control of the mixed phase composition through post-treatment. As presented in Fig. 5f, after a short period (2 minutes) of solvent annealing, the PCE of the film reached a maximum, and gradually decreased as the solvent annealing time continued to increase. This phenomenon implies that after solvent annealing for 2 min, the blend film of PDCBT-Cl:ITIC-Th1 is locked at the composition near the ϕp, where the condition is conducive to promoting efficient charge transport and obtaining the optimal performance. Compared with PDCBT-Cl:ITIC-Th1, the PDCBT-Cl:IDIC and PDCBT-Cl:ITIC systems have even higher χ, where the acceptor concentration of mixed domains is difficult to be properly quenched to the ϕp and therefore over-purified domains are formed. The oversized phase separation and over-purified domains in the blend films are unfavourable for exciton diffusion and charge transport, resulting in the relatively poor values of Jsc and FF in the OPVs.
To summarize, the chemical structures of donor and acceptor materials have a profound influence on the interaction parameter χ of the blend systems, as shown in Fig. 6. Note that we normalize the χ parameters of the systems to that of the best-performance system in each group to 1. There exist some rules in molecular design according to multiple case studies. For polythiophene donors, we53 reported that the χaa = 1.73, 0.68, and 0.34 for PDCBT-Cl blended with ITIC, ITIC-Th1, and IT4F, respectively. It can be seen that on the introduction of F atoms into NFA, the systems exhibit enhanced miscibility with PDCBT-Cl. While for star donor–acceptor type polymer donors (e.g., PM6), Hou et al.57 demonstrated that F atoms, which are more electron-withdrawing than methyl, were introduced into the end group of the acceptor, resulting in a lower miscibility than IT-M when blended with PM6.
 Fig. 6  Correlation of chemical structure with the relative interaction parameters of the blends as discussed above. Note that we normalize the χ parameter of the systems to the highest efficiency system to 1 in each group and the highest-efficiency system in each group was marked with a star. 
In high χ systems, the composition of the blend film tends to evolve toward the thermodynamic equilibrium state (binodal composition) during storage, which leads to an acceptor composition of the mixed domain that is much lower than the percolation threshold. This will cause the device performance to degrade rapidly. In a system containing crystalline components, when the thermodynamic equilibrium state is reached, the crystalline components tend to crystallize, leading to further purification of the mixing domain and away from the percolation threshold.62 However, enhancing the morphology stability of PSC devices is important to guarantee the long-term operation.90 N. Stingelin and co-workers37 emphasized that a delicate balance of phase compositions is required for optimal device performance. They highlighted that the vitrification process is of paramount importance, which can dominate the microstructure formation of crystalline blends cast from solution. For example, Ade and co-workers62 observed strong burn-in degradation in the system of P3HT:EH-IDTBR after annealing at 120 °C for 10 min, which is due to the phase composition far away from the equilibrium state and the crystallization of both P3HT and EH-IDTBR. In contrast, PTB7-Th:EH-IDTBR91 did not show any small molecule crystalline features and displays superior stability under longer annealing. This is because the glass transition temperature of PTB7-Th is significantly higher than that of P3HT, which leads to a more vitrified system and suppresses the crystallization of small molecules.
It is obvious that the high χ systems cannot achieve high device performance without kinetic quenching of the acceptor component of the mixed domain to the percolation threshold, but it is often accompanied by poor device stability due to the evolution of non-equilibrium morphology. However, the vitrification of polymers and small molecules plays a major role in determining the stability in PSC devices and cannot be over-looked. The high degree of vitrification can inhibit burn-in degradation and attain high device stability. By taking the amorphous miscibility of thermodynamics and the kinetic vitrification into consideration, the optimized device performance and higher stability can be obtained simultaneously.
Except for affecting the lateral phase separation, the thermodynamic χ parameter also has a significant effect on the vertical phase separation in the active layer,40,92,93 and thus affects the selection of proper device configuration. Contact angle measurement and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) are usually used to characterize the vertical phase separation distribution of the blends. Herein, the study by Li et al.59 was used as an illustration. They employed χ to analyse the vertical phase separation in the case of the PDTB-EF-T:IT-4F blend system. The side-chain of the PDTB-EF-T polymer was varied (molecular structures are drawn in Fig. 1, named P1-3). The vertical phase separation in the active layer shows a strong tendency to occur which can be ascribed to the large difference in surface tensions between P2 (with a linear decyl) and IT-4F, corresponding to a higher χ parameter. As can be seen from the XPS, energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and TEM results in Fig. 7a and b, P2 accumulated near the top electrodes and the IT-4F-rich layer was near the bottom substrates, which experimentally proved the vertical phase separation of the blend system. Due to the high χ, the P2:IT-4F blend film has a higher phase purity and favourable vertical phase separation morphology, leading to a FF of up to 76% (see Fig. 7c) and a high PCE of 14.2% in the inverted device.
 Fig. 7  (a) Statistics and Gaussian fitting of the FF distribution of the conventional and inverted PSC devices based on P2:IT-4F. (b) Plot of C/S ratios and N contents (%) for the neat films and P2:IT-4F blends obtained via XPS. Blend 1 denotes the P2:IT-4F blend cast on PEDOT:PSS and blend 2 represents the P2:IT-4F blend cast on ZnO. (c) Cross-sectional TEM images and EDS profiles for the conventional and inverted devices based on the P2:IT-4F blend.59 Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Characteristic J–V curves of PBDB-T:PCBM, PBDB-T:ITIC and PBDB-T:N2200 processed with and without DIO. (e) Plot of standard deviations of the acceptor composition in the vertical direction across the PBDB-T:acceptor blends with their χ parameters.94 Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
A recent study by Liu and Huang et al.94 also examined the influence of χ parameter on the vertical phase separation of the blends. By measuring the contact angle of neat films, the interaction parameters χ of three different systems are obtained, including χPBDB-T:PCBM = 2.4 × 10−2 K, χPBDB-T:ITIC = 1.8 × 10−2 K and χPBDB-T:N2200 = 2.9 × 10−5 K. The standard deviations (σ) of the acceptor vertical distribution are depicted in Fig. 7d. Due to the high miscibility of PBDB-T and N2200, there is no obvious phase separation in the vertical direction of the blend film, which makes it difficult to effectively transfer the charge to the electrode, resulting in a lower Jsc (Fig. 7e). However, the σ of the vertical distribution of the PBDB-T:PCBM system is very large. This is due to the immiscibility between the two components, resulting in the inability to form efficient charge transport pathways. In the PBDB-T:ITIC system, the moderate χ parameter is conducive to the formation of appropriate vertical phase separation, the Jsc of this system is up to 16.3 mA cm−2. Besides, the addition of 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) can further optimize the distribution of the film in the vertical direction and in turn improve the efficiency of the inverted device.95 Understanding the relationship between interaction parameter χ and phase separation in both the lateral and vertical direction can provide more complete guidance for improving device performance of high χ systems.
5. Role of interaction parameter χ in ternary blend systems
For further improving the device performance, ternary blends have been recognized as a potential cause of the availability to broaden the spectral absorption for the current generation, combined with the simplicity of device architecture.96,97 But there is still a long way to establish general design rules for the fabrication of high-efficiency ternary devices. There are generally three types of highly efficient ternary PSCs: polymer:polymer:NFA,98 polymer:fullerene:NFA,99–102 and polymer:NFA:NFA.103,104 As the morphology control is typically more complicated and difficult than that of binary blends,105 the screening of a suitable third component still requires a trial-and-error method in most cases. Profiting from the development of thermodynamics analysis of the morphology regulation in binary systems, the evaluation of the interaction parameters is also conductive for understanding the complex morphology of ternary blend systems. In this section, we are going to delineate the role of χ in various ternary blends and provide optimization guidelines for device fabrication by using several case studies.
The corresponding guidelines on the selection of an appropriate third component for morphology optimization of high-efficiency devices are preliminarily established through miscibility matching.106,107 A typical example of employing the χ of components to help adjust the phase separation in ternary devices was done by Chen and co-workers.98 In their study, PDCBT served as a third component to the PBDB-T:ITIC binary blend. A negative χ value (−0.08) for the PBDB-T:PDCBT blend manifests hyper-miscibility between two components. Conversely, PDCBT and ITIC are less miscible with a higher χ value compared with the PBDB-T:ITIC blend. Due to the high crystallinity of PDCBT and hyper-miscibility with PBDB-T, the molecular ordering of PBDB-T is enhanced with the presence of PDCBT, which may act as a nucleating agent. The hypo-miscibility of PDCBT and ITIC eventually leads to the increase of phase domain size and an apparent phase-separated morphology is noticed in ternary films. Ascribed to the enhancement of ordering of polymer stacking and the formation of proper phase separation, the PCE value increases from 9.4% to ∼11% in ternary devices.
As we discussed above, for binary blends, the amorphous miscibility needs to be large enough to form an apparent phase separation for the acquisition of high FF and thus high PCE values. Therefore, the morphology is generally deeply quenched inside the binodal to form sufficient percolation pathways for the electrons. For these kinds of systems, the poor stability of performance mainly refers to the morphology instability that is primarily driven by thermodynamics, which even occurred while storing devices under a dark and inert environment at room temperature. Generally, there are two ways to improve the long-term stability of high χ PSCs. One is to “freeze” the mixed phase in the quenched morphology of high χ systems through using the components with low flexibility and enhancing the vitrification effect. This method was also extensively discussed in Section 4. And the other is to introduce the third component which has an appropriate miscibility with the donor polymer at or above the percolation threshold to the initial high χ systems, thereby providing sufficient charge transfer channels to suppress the device degradation.108,109 One of our recent studies demonstrated the possibility of suppressing the degradation process for binary systems which include a semi-crystalline acceptor.110 The blend of PTB7-Th and IEICO-4F is a prototypical system used for semi-transparent and tandem device applications with a remarkable Jsc of over 27 mA cm−2 and an acceptable PCE of ∼11%.111 However, the binary blends exhibit a pronounced performance degradation of about 35% after shelf aging under dark conditions for 90 days (Fig. 8a) demonstrated by Zhu et al.110 The origin of rapid performance degradation can be ascribed to the following reasons. The hypo-miscibility of IEICO-4F and PTB7-Th (measured by TOF-SIMS) provides the driving force for two components to phase separation. In addition, the crystallization of IEICO-4F occurs during the device aging and forms largely isolated IEICO-4F-phases (Fig. 8b). These two factors lead to a lack of percolation pathways for electron transport resulting in evident burn-in degradation. The way to improve stability is mainly focused on suppressing the crystallization of the acceptor and maintains the pathways for electron transport. The third component PC71BM is hyper-miscible with PTB7-Th but only partly miscible with IEICO-4F (Fig. 8c). Therefore, the PC71BM is inclined to stay in donor-rich phases to form the transport paths and a bit of PC71BM permeates into acceptor-rich phases to suppress the crystallization of IEICO-4F simultaneously (as illustrated in Fig. 8d), indeed giving rise to the stability of devices with more than 90% of the initial PCE even after storing for 90 days.
 Fig. 8  (a) J–V curves of PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F and PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F:PC71BM blend systems during aging under dark conditions. (b) Two-dimensional GIWAXS pattern for fresh and aged PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F blend films. (c) Schematic illustration of the χ–ϕ diagram for the PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F and PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends in relation to the electron transport percolation threshold. ϕs is the volume composition of the acceptor and ϕi indicates the initial volume composition of the acceptors as the D/A weight ratio of 1:1.5. Point F and point A represent the freshly prepared and aged film, respectively. (d) Schematic of morphology evolution of the PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F system and PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F:PC71BM system during aging.110 Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
In general, the addition of the third component provides a simple method to effectively improve the pristine photovoltaic performance and suppress the degradation of devices driven by thermodynamics simultaneously. A preliminary selection guideline especially toward the device stability can be referenced for the χ parameters of components. Studies to date indicate that the selection of the third component is strongly material-dependent, and remains far away from establishing a general rule for the selection of the third component. To gain a deeper insight into the relationship between material selection, film morphology, and device performance in ternary blend systems, more systematic and fundamental research is required.
6. Role of material:solvent interaction parameter χ in PSCs
Beyond the material:material interaction discussed in prior sections, material:solvent interaction also plays a vital role in understanding the morphology development of PSC films.67,112,113 It has been demonstrated that altering the material:solvent interactions in the solution prior to film-casting induces different solid-state morphological characteristics, which subsequently leads to different performances in PSCs.9,114,115 In this section, we will use two case studies to showcase the potential of using material:solvent interaction parameter χ in understanding the morphology of PSCs and possibly guiding the device optimization.
The development of environmentally-benign solvents is a critical step to advancing the commercialization of PSCs.118–120 Usually, solvent additives are introduced to finely tune the morphology of PSCs.113,121,122 In the bulk-heterojunction devices of an important system PBDB-T:IT-M,123 the incorporation of different halogen-free solvent additives such as N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP), diphenyl ether (DPE), and 1-phenylnaphthalene (PN) into the host solvent o-xylene (XY) results in notable differences in the device fill factors and power conversion efficiencies,116 as illustrated in Fig. 9a. Fig. 9b displays that PSC devices based on PN exhibited the highest FF of 72% and PCE of 11.6%. Starting from HSP, Ye and Zhao et al. estimated the volume normalized χ values of IT-M:DPE, IT-M:NMP, and IT-M:PN pairs, which are 1.3 × 10−4, 2.1 × 10−4, and 1.0 × 10−4, respectively (as shown in Fig. 9c). It is apparent that PN is a more favourable solvent additive for IT-M compared with DPE and NMP. As PN is more feasible with IT-M and exhibits a high boiling point, IT-M can form much more ordered packing and a higher phase purity in the blend films, as confirmed by GIWAXS and R-SoXS results, respectively. Together, these results well explained the observed performance difference, implying a link between χ and PCE. As a consequence, screening environmentally-friendly solvent systems for PSCs may be aided by the use of material:solvent interaction parameter χ.
 Fig. 9  (a) Chemical structures of processing solvents and solvent additives used for fabricating PSC devices. (b) Typical J–V curves of PBDB-T:IT-M based bulk-heterojunction PSC devices fabricated with different halogen-free solvent systems.116 Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (c) Plot of volume normalized NFA:solvent interaction parameter χ. (d) Representative J–V curves of sequentially deposited PSC devices based on FTAZ/IT-M with different solvent systems. (e) Plot of domain spacing of the sequentially deposited PSCs and polymer:solvent interaction parameter χ.117 Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
To further demonstrate the role of processing solvent, the effect of processing solvent on neat polymer films requires in-depth studies. In a recent study, Ye et al. demonstrated sequentially deposited PSCs based on a polymer donor PBnDT-FTAZ (also known as FTAZ) and a nonfullerene acceptor IT-M with eco-compatible solvents. Four different halogen-free solvents, namely, XY, toluene (TL), 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene (TMB), (R)-(+)-limonene (LM), and 2,6-dimethylanisole (DMA), were used to process FTAZ and the chlorinated solvent chlorobenzene (CB) was included as a comparison. It was shown that the processing solvent of FTAZ has a profound influence on the domain spacing of the sequentially deposited nonfullerene PSCs.117 The improved performance (Fig. 9d) of FTAZ-based devices processed by R-limonene (LM) was closely associated with the highest χ parameter. Compared with other processing solvents, LM with the highest χ parameter of photoactive materials makes the film have more suitable domain spacing and highly ordered molecular arrangement through sequential deposition, in turn improving the device efficiency up to 12.5%. Applying this strategy, the sequentially deposited PSC devices outperform the bulk heterojunction devices.124 Notably, Fig. 9e shows that a monotonic (almost linear) relation between the domain spacing and polymer:solvent interaction parameter χ was observed. Although the origin of this relationship is not very clear and requires further in-depth investigations, the preliminary results demonstrated the great potential of applying material:solvent interaction parameters to optimize the PSC devices.
In the device preparation of PSCs, the selection of processing solvent plays an indispensable role. The boiling point of the solvent is a commonly considered factor and closely related to the film-forming kinetics. Besides, the material:solvent interaction parameters are the key factor affecting device performance from a thermodynamic perspective, which can be predicted by using HSPs. In some cases, a higher interaction parameter χ is conducive to pre-aggregation of the material in solvent. The formation of molecular aggregates in solution prior to deposition of the film, resulting in pure domains with an appropriate molecular packing structure, leads to the higher FF and PCE.125 On the other hand, pre-aggregation is related to nucleation dynamics, which also affects the domain size and phase purity of the film.126–128 However, the specific analysis of this pre-aggregation aspect is beyond the scope of this article.
7. Concluding remarks and outlook
Summarizing, this feature article provides an overview of the most recent advances in the mixing thermodynamics of conjugated polymers and their applications in understanding nonfullerene PSCs, with a focus on those based on polymer donor and nonfullerene small molecule acceptor blends reported in the last five years. Based on various types of high-efficiency polymer:nonfullerene composites, we have demonstrated how to realize high-performance PSCs from the viewpoint of mixing thermodynamics. In particular, the significance of interaction parameter χ in understanding the morphology of nonfullerene acceptors with two types of donor polymers (benzodithiophene-based polymers, polythiophene derivatives) and their device functions (performance and stability) were discussed. It should be noted that blend films cast from solution are often kinetically trapped and likely in a metastable state rather than thermodynamic equilibrium state even after post treatment.98 To provide a comprehensive insight into the morphology manipulation, kinetic effects should be comprehensively considered. Despite the recent advances in these polymer:nonfullerene small molecule blends, many open questions related to thermodynamic interaction parameters still need to be addressed.
(1) Temperature dependence of interaction parameters. Currently, the temperature dependence of the interaction parameter, i.e., χ(T) has been only determined for a few PSC systems.61,62 To guide the selection of processing parameters (e.g., post-treatment temperature), χ(T) should be more widely determined. Constructing a new database of conjugated polymer:molecule blends with experimentally determined χ parameters will offer some valuable lessons about device processing and importantly provide quantitative insights into the relationships between χ and other properties of basic physics processes (exciton diffusion, charge transport, etc.).
(2) Effect of molecular mass polydispersity. Almost all the polymer is polydisperse, which is not taken into consideration by Flory–Huggins theory.129 This is an unexplored problem in the field, as the preparation of a set of materials with polydispersity as the only variable is a grand challenge. To consider this factor, new models also need to be developed to understand the molecular weight polydispersity of PSC systems. It was shown that continuous thermodynamics models130 are capable of describing this aspect. In principle, it would be possible to apply the model for PSCs based on polydisperse polymer blends.
(3) Effect of crystalline–amorphous interactions. The molecular interactions between two blend components are much more complex,131 which cannot be only described with a single parameter, i.e., amorphous–amorphous interaction parameter (χaa). Presently, amorphous–amorphous interaction parameter χaa was characterized and studied for many PSC systems, while in the semi-crystalline blend system, crystalline–amorphous and amorphous–crystalline interaction parameters, i.e., χac and χca were only characterized in a few studies61 based on a self-consistent model by Kyu and co-workers,47 and the relation between these interaction parameters and device performance remains poorly understood. To account for both amorphous-amorphous and crystalline–amorphous interactions in polymer blends containing crystalline components, χac and χca should be quantitatively and comprehensively analysed and correlated with film morphology and device function.
(4) Extension to many other polymer:small blends. Although the systems used in this article mainly comprised a polymer donor and a nonfullerene small molecule acceptor, the relations of polymer donor:small molecule acceptor as parameterized with the theory of Flory and Huggins can be likely extended to other kinds of blends used in electronics such as small molecule donor/polymer acceptor blends132 and conjugated polymer/volatilizable solid additives for solar cells, and polymer:small molecule blends for transistors as well as conjugated polymer/dopant blends for versatile applications in thermoelectrics, transistors, and solar cells. The most recent results by Han et al. have demonstrated that determining interaction parameters is instructive to understand these blends.133–135
(5) Characterization of χ for complex polymer systems. Beyond polymer:small molecule blend systems, polymer donor:polymer acceptor blends136–139 and double-cable polymers (single component system)140–142 are under active development and have demonstrated great potential in long-term stability. An impressive efficiency of 14.4% has been achieved in an all-polymer PSC device reported by Huang et al.143 and a promising PCE of 8.4% has been realized in single component PSCs based on a double cable polymer developed by the Li group.56 Currently, the χ parameters of these polymer systems are still inadequately characterized, mostly by the contact angle method. New measures based on other methods might be useful to deduce the structure–performance relationships of these complex polymer blends.
(6) Computational investigation of interaction parameters. While our focus here has been on the experimental determination of χ, computer-aided simulations are ideal solutions to determine interaction parameters. Currently, efforts on simulating χ are much less compared with experimental investigations.144 Since very rare cases have presented both simulated and experimentally determined χ, the computational results have to be compared and refined with experiments. To speed up the advances, more computational efforts are needed.145,146 For instance, a recent study by Zhang and co-workers147 has introduced a new thermodynamic integration scheme to simulate χ parameters, which might be applicable to PSC systems.
Addressing the above challenges may vastly reduce the parameter space of the trial-and-error material synthesis and device optimization approaches by clearly eliminating a large number of material pairs and processing parameters. The establishment of more comprehensive χ-morphology-function relations would eventually enable predicting optimum processing parameters and material combinations for the manufacture of high-performance nonfullerene PSCs. Lastly, we hope to extend the above relations and methodologies of PSCs to understand polymer electronics such as light-emitting diodes, thin-film transistors, thermoelectrics, and photodetectors, where polymer blends are also widely used as the active layers.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52073207) and the Open Fund of State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices (South China University of Technology, 2020-skllmd-11) are appreciated for supporting the preparation of this paper. Some published case studies discussed in this work were supported by the U.S. Office of Naval Research (No. N000141712204), Peiyang Scholar Program of Tianjin University, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51703158 and 21774093). We gratefully acknowledge all the researchers who contributed to the advances and collaborators as appeared in the references. Especially, L. Ye would like to thank Prof. H. Ade (NCSU) for his fruitful discussion. Helpful discussions with Prof. N. Stingelin (Georgia Tech) and Dr J. Michels (MPIP) are highly appreciated.
Notes and references
Y. Cui, Y. Wang, J. Bergqvist, H. Yao, Y. Xu, B. Gao, C. Yang, S. Zhang, O. Inganäs, F. Gao and J. Hou, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 768–775 Search PubMed .
C. Sun, R. Xia, H. Shi, H. Yao, X. Liu, J. Hou, F. Huang, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Joule, 2018, 2, 1816–1826 Search PubMed .
C. J. M. Emmott, J. A. Röhr, M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Kirchartz, A. Urbina, N. J. Ekins-Daukes and J. Nelson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1317–1328 Search PubMed .
N. C. Davy, M. Sezen-Edmonds, J. Gao, X. Lin, A. Liu, N. Yao, A. Kahn and Y.-L. Loo, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17104 Search PubMed .
L. K. Reb, M. Böhmer, B. Predeschly, S. Grott, C. L. Weindl, G. I. Ivandekic, R. Guo, C. Dreißigacker, R. Gernhäuser, A. Meyer and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Joule, 2020, 4, 1880–1892 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, K. Amin, Z. An, Z. Cai, H. Chen, H. Chen, Y. Dong, X. Feng, W. Fu, J. Gu, Y. Han, D. Hu, R. Hu, D. Huang, F. Huang, F. Huang, Y. Huang, J. Jin, X. Jin, Q. Li, T. Li, Z. Li, Z. Li, J. Liu, J. Liu, S. Liu, H. Peng, A. Qin, X. Qing, Y. Shen, J. Shi, X. Sun, B. Tong, B. Wang, H. Wang, L. Wang, S. Wang, Z. Wei, T. Xie, C. Xu, H. Xu, Z.-K. Xu, B. Yang, Y. Yu, X. Zeng, X. Zhan, G. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Q. Zhang, X.-Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, W. Zhao, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1803–1915 Search PubMed .
F. Huang, Z. Bo, Y. Geng, X. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Ma, J. Hou, W. Hu, J. Pei, H. Dong, S. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Shuai, Y. Li and Y. Cao, Acta Polym. Sin., 2019, 50, 988–1046 Search PubMed .
K. Gao, W. Deng, L. Xiao, Q. Hu, Y. Kan, X. Chen, C. Wang, F. Huang, J. Peng, H. Wu, X. Peng, Y. Cao, T. Russell and F. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 639–648 Search PubMed .
C. P. Song, Y. Qu, J. G. Liu and Y. C. Han, Acta Polym. Sin., 2018, 2, 145–163 Search PubMed .
H. Lee, C. Park, D. H. Sin, J. H. Park and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800453 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Zhang, C. Duan, M. Li, Z. Hu, J. Wang, F. Liu, N. Li, C. J. Brabec, R. A. J. Janssen, G. C. Bazan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8934–8943 Search PubMed .
Z. Hamid, A. Wadsworth, E. Rezasoltani, S. Holliday, M. Azzouzi, M. Neophytou, A. A. Y. Guilbert, Y. Dong, M. S. Little, S. Mukherjee, A. A. Herzing, H. Bristow, R. J. Kline, D. M. DeLongchamp, A. A. Bakulin, J. R. Durrant, J. Nelson and I. McCulloch, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903248 Search PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, S. Yang, X. Zhang and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275 Search PubMed .
L. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ke, Z. Xiao, L. Ding, R. Xia, H. L. Yip, Y. Cao and Y. Chen, Science, 2018, 361, 1094–1098 Search PubMed .
A. Levitsky, G. M. Matrone, A. Khirbat, I. Bargigia, X. Chu, O. Nahor, T. Segal-Peretz, A. J. Moulé, L. J. Richter, C. Silva, N. Stingelin and G. L. Frey, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000960 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Tan, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 720–731 Search PubMed .
B. Cao, L. A. Adutwum, A. O. Oliynyk, E. J. Luber, B. C. Olsen, A. Mar and J. M. Buriak, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7434–7444 Search PubMed .
B. Watts, W. J. Belcher, L. Thomsen, H. Ade and P. C. Dastoor, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8392–8397 Search PubMed .
B. A. Collins, E. Gann, L. Guignard, X. He, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3160–3166 Search PubMed .
N. D. Treat, M. A. Brady, G. Smith, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 82–89 Search PubMed .
D. Chen, F. Liu, C. Wang, A. Nakahara and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2071–2078 Search PubMed .
N. D. Treat, A. Varotto, C. J. Takacs, N. Batara, M. Al-Hashimi, M. J. Heeney, A. J. Heeger, F. Wudl, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15869–15879 Search PubMed .
K. Vakhshouri, D. Kozub, C. Wang, A. Salleo and E. Gomez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 026601 Search PubMed .
B. A. Collins, Z. Li, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 9747–9751 Search PubMed .
W. Ma, J. R. Tumbleston, M. Wang, E. Gann, F. Huang and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 864–872 Search PubMed .
J. R. Tumbleston, A. C. Stuart, E. Gann, W. You and H. Ade, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3463–3470 Search PubMed .
B. A. Collins, Z. Li, J. R. Tumbleston, E. Gann, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 65–74 Search PubMed .
W. Ma, J. R. Tumbleston, L. Ye, C. Wang, J. Hou and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4234–4241 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, J. Peet, S. Hu, J. Azoulay, G. Bazan and M. Dadmun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 140–150 Search PubMed .
B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3135–3145 Search PubMed .
J. Song, M. Zhang, M. Yuan, Y. Qian, Y. Sun and F. Liu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700229 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, B. A. Collins, X. Jiao, J. Zhao, H. Yan and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1870124 Search PubMed .
P. Knychała, K. Timachova, M. Banaszak and N. P. Balsara, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 3051–3065 Search PubMed .
F. Bates, Science, 1991, 251, 898 Search PubMed .

          P. J. Flory, Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Cornell University Press,  1953 Search PubMed .
N. D. Treat, P. Westacott and N. Stingelin, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 459–490 Search PubMed .
P. Westacott, N. D. Treat, J. Martin, J. H. Bannock, J. C. de Mello, M. Chabinyc, A. B. Sieval, J. J. Michels and N. Stingelin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2689–2700 Search PubMed .
C. Schaefer, J. J. Michels and P. van der Schoot, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 5914–5919 Search PubMed .
C. Schaefer, J. J. Michels and P. van der Schoot, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 6858–6870 Search PubMed .
J. J. Michels and E. Moons, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 8693–8701 Search PubMed .
M. Kim, J. Lee, S. B. Jo, D. H. Sin, H. Ko, H. Lee, S. G. Lee and K. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15522–15535 Search PubMed .
S. Kouijzer, J. J. Michels, M. van den Berg, V. S. Gevaerts, M. Turbiez, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12057–12067 Search PubMed .
F. Liu, D. Chen, C. Wang, K. Luo, W. Gu, A. L. Briseno, J. W. P. Hsu and T. P. Russell, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19876–19887 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 4317–4328 Search PubMed .
J. D. Perea, S. Langner, M. Salvador, B. Sanchez-Lengeling, N. Li, C. Zhang, G. Jarvas, J. Kontos, A. Dallos, A. Aspuru-Guzik and C. J. Brabec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 18153–18161 Search PubMed .
D. M. Stoltzfus, A. J. Clulow, H. Jin, P. L. Burn and I. R. Gentle, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 4404–4415 Search PubMed .
R. Matkar and T. Kyu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12728–12732 Search PubMed .
R. Matkar and T. Kyu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16059–16065 Search PubMed .
T. P. Russell, R. P. Hjelm and P. A. Seeger, Macromolecules, 1990, 23, 890–893 Search PubMed .
Z. Peng, X. Jiao, L. Ye, S. Li, J. Rech, W. You, J. Hou and H. Ade, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3943–3951 Search PubMed .
T. Nishi and T. T. Wang, Macromolecules, 1975, 8, 909–915 Search PubMed .
D. R. Kozub, K. Vakhshouri, L. M. Orme, C. Wang, A. Hexemer and E. D. Gomez, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5722–5726 Search PubMed .
Z. Liang, M. Li, Q. Wang, Y. Qin, S. J. Stuard, Z. Peng, Y. Deng, H. Ade, L. Ye and Y. Geng, Joule, 2020, 4, 1278–1295 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, M. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Qin, J. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Hou, R. A. J. Janssen and Y. Geng, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 4464–4474 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. Hu, Z. Wu, Y. Lin, L. Zhang, L. Liu, Y. Ma, Y. Cao and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 4659–4672 Search PubMed .
X. Jiang, J. Yang, S. Karuthedath, J. Li, W. Lai, C. Li, C. Xiao, L. Ye, Z. Ma, Z. Tang, F. Laquai and W. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020 DOI:10.1002/anie.202009272 .
W. Li, L. Ye, S. Li, H. Yao, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707170 Search PubMed .
Q. Guo, J. Lin, H. Liu, X. Dong, X. Guo, L. Ye, Z. Ma, Z. Tang, H. Ade, M. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104861 Search PubMed .
S. Li, L. Ye, W. Zhao, H. Yan, B. Yang, D. Liu, W. Li, H. Ade and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7159–7167 Search PubMed .
D. Yuan, F. Pan, L. Zhang, H. Jiang, M. Chen, W. Tang, G. Qin, Y. Cao and J. Chen, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 2000062 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, H. Hu, M. Ghasemi, T. Wang, B. A. Collins, J.-H. Kim, K. Jiang, J. H. Carpenter, H. Li, Z. Li, T. McAfee, J. Zhao, X. Chen, J. L. Y. Lai, T. Ma, J.-L. Bredas, H. Yan and H. Ade, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 253–260 Search PubMed .
M. Ghasemi, H. Hu, Z. Peng, J. J. Rech, I. Angunawela, J. H. Carpenter, S. J. Stuard, A. Wadsworth, I. McCulloch, W. You and H. Ade, Joule, 2019, 3, 1328–1348 Search PubMed .
Y. C. Bae, S. M. Lambert, D. S. Soane and J. M. Prausnitz, Macromolecules, 1991, 24, 4403–4407 Search PubMed .
B. Kuei and E. D. Gomez, Soft Matter, 2016, 13, 49–67 Search PubMed .
E. L. Hynes, J. T. Cabral, A. J. Parnell, P. Gutfreund, R. J. L. Welbourn, A. D. F. Dunbar, D. Môn and A. M. Higgins, Commun. Phys., 2019, 2, 112 Search PubMed .
J. A. Emerson, D. T. W. Toolan, J. R. Howse, E. M. Furst and T. H. Epps, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 6533–6540 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Z. Y. Chen, W. Ma, Z. Y. Xie, J. G. Liu, X. H. Yu and Y. C. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32200–32208 Search PubMed .
D. Leman, M. Kelly, S. Ness, S. Engmann, A. Herzing, C. Snyder, H. Ro, R. Kline, D. DeLongchamp and L. Richter, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 383–392 Search PubMed .
M. Ghasemi, L. Ye, Q. Zhang, L. Yan, J. Kim, O. Awartani, W. You, A. Gadisa and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604603 Search PubMed .
R. Zhang, J. G. Liu and Y. C. Han, Polym. Bull., 2019, 2, 112–125 Search PubMed .
D. T. Duong, B. Walker, J. Lin, C. Kim, J. Love, B. Purushothaman, J. E. Anthony and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 1405–1413 Search PubMed .
F. Machui, S. Abbott, D. Waller, M. Koppe and C. J. Brabec, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 2159–2165 Search PubMed .
J. Rivnay, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. E. Miller, A. Salleo and M. F. Toney, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5488–5519 Search PubMed .
X. Jiao, L. Ye and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700084 Search PubMed .

          L. Ye, S. Stuard and H. Ade, in Conjugated Polymers: Properties, Processing, and Applications, ed. J. R. Reynolds, B. C. Thompson and T. A. Skotheim, CRC Press,  2019 DOI:10.1201/9780429190520-13, ch. 13 .
F. Liu, M. A. Brady and C. Wang, Eur. Polym. J., 2016, 81, 555–568 Search PubMed .
B. P. Lyons, N. Clarke and C. Groves, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7657–7663 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, S. Li, X. Liu, S. Zhang, M. Ghasemi, Y. Xiong, J. Hou and H. Ade, Joule, 2019, 3, 443–458 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 Search PubMed .
S. Roland, M. Schubert, B. A. Collins, J. Kurpiers, Z. Chen, A. Facchetti, H. Ade and D. Neher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2815–2822 Search PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, C. M. Proctor, G. C. Bazan, T. Q. Nguyen and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500877 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, X. Jiao, S. Zhang, H. Yao, Y. Qin, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601138 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. G. Yu, J. D. Zhou, Z. F. Wang, H. R. Tang, S. K. Xie, Z. Q. Xie, L. Y. Hu, H. L. Yip, L. Ye, H. Ade, Z. T. Liu, Z. C. He, C. H. Duan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904247 Search PubMed .
C. Yang, S. Zhang, J. Ren, M. Gao, P. Bi, L. Ye and J. Hou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2864–2869 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Li, S. Mukherjee, J. Carpenter, O. Awartani, X. Jiao, J. Hou and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602000 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, W. Li, X. Guo, M. Zhang and H. Ade, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6568–6577 Search PubMed .
J. Xiao, M. Ren, G. Zhang, J. Wang, D. Zhang, L. Liu, N. Li, C. Brabec, H. Yip and Y. Cao, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1900077 Search PubMed .
J. A. Bartelt, Z. M. Beiley, E. T. Hoke, W. R. Mateker, J. D. Douglas, B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston, K. R. Graham, A. Amassian, H. Ade, J. M. J. Fréchet, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 364–374 Search PubMed .
Q. Fan, W. Su, Y. Wang, B. Guo, Y. Jiang, X. Guo, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, M. Zhang and Y. Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 531–537 Search PubMed .
J. Fang, Q. Liu, J. Zhang, L. Ye, J. Wu, Z. Wei, X. Guo, M. Zhang and Y. Li, Solar RRL, 2020 DOI:10.1002/solr.202000275 .
D. Baran, N. Gasparini, A. Wadsworth, C. H. Tan, N. Wehbe, X. Song, Z. Hamid, W. Zhang, M. Neophytou, T. Kirchartz, C. J. Brabec, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2059 Search PubMed .
Y. Yan, X. Liu and T. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601674 Search PubMed .
S. He, Z. Shen, J. Yu, H. Guan, G. Lu, T. Xiao, S. Yang, Y. Zou and L. Bu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000577 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, L.-M. Wang, S. Liu, X. Zhan, T. Zhu, Z. Cao, H. Lai, J. Zhao, Y. Cai, W. Xie and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45979–45990 Search PubMed .
L.-M. Wang, Q. Li, S. Liu, Z. Cao, Y.-P. Cai, X. Jiao, H. Lai, W. Xie, X. Zhan and T. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 24165–24173 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Xu, J. Song, Y. Jin, Q. Yue, Y. Qian, F. Liu, F. Zhang and X. Zhu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 952–959 Search PubMed .
D. Baran, R. Ashraf, D. Hanifi, M. Abdelsamie, N. Gasparini, J. Rohr, S. Holliday, A. Wadsworth, S. Lockett, M. Neophytou, C. Emmott, J. Nelson, C. Brabec, A. Amassian, A. Salleo, T. Kirchartz, J. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 363–369 Search PubMed .
N. Yi, Q. Ai, W. Zhou, L. Huang, L. Zhang, Z. Xing, X. Li, J. Zeng and Y. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 10211–10224 Search PubMed .
W. Zhong, J. Cui, B. Fan, L. Ying, Y. Wang, X. Wang, G. Zhang, X.-F. Jiang, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8177–8186 Search PubMed .
R. Yu, H. Yao, Y. Cui, L. Hong, C. He and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902302 Search PubMed .
K. Jiang, Q. Wei, J. Y. L. Lai, Z. Peng, H. K. Kim, J. Yuan, L. Ye, H. Ade, Y. Zou and H. Yan, Joule, 2019, 3, 3020–3033 Search PubMed .
H. Lu, J. Zhang, J. Chen, Q. Liu, X. Gong, S. Feng, X. Xu, W. Ma and Z. Bo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9559–9566 Search PubMed .
K. Jiang, G. Zhang, G. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Li, T. Ma, H. Hu, W. Ma, H. Ade and H. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701370 Search PubMed .
X. Ma, J. Wang, J. Gao, Z. Hu, C. Xu, X. Zhang and F. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001404 Search PubMed .
H. B. Naveed and W. Ma, Joule, 2018, 2, 621–641 Search PubMed .
M. Ghasemi, L. Ye, Q. Zhang, L. Yan, J.-H. Kim, O. Awartani, W. You, A. Gadisa and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604603 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, N. Yi, W. Zhou, Z. Yu, F. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900565 Search PubMed .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 Search PubMed .
L. Derue, O. Dautel, A. Tournebize, M. Drees, H. Pan, S. Berthumeyrie, B. Pavageau, E. Cloutet, S. Chambon, L. Hirsch, A. Rivaton, P. Hudhomme, A. Facchetti and G. Wantz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5831–5838 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, A. Gadisa, Z. Peng, M. Ghasemi, L. Ye, Z. Xu, S. Zhao and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900376 Search PubMed .
X. Song, N. Gasparini, L. Ye, H. Yao, J. Hou, H. Ade and D. Baran, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 669–676 Search PubMed .
E. Pavlopoulou, C. S. Kim, S. S. Lee, Z. H. Chen, A. Facchetti, M. F. Toney and Y. L. Loo, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5020–5027 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, S. S. Li, M. Ghasemi, N. Balar, J. Turner, A. Gadisa, J. H. Hou, B. T. O'Connor and H. Ade, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702016 Search PubMed .
F. Liu, W. Zhao, J. R. Tumbleston, C. Wang, Y. Gu, D. Wang, A. L. Briseno, H. Ade and T. P. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301377 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Yang, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade, W. Ma and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15027 Search PubMed .
W. Zhao, L. Ye, S. Li, X. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. Ghasemi, C. He, H. Ade and J. Hou, Sci. China Mater., 2017, 60, 697–706 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, Z. Chen, Q. Zhang, Z. Fei, R. Henry, M. Heeney, B. O'Connor, W. You and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808153 Search PubMed .
S. Zhang, L. Ye, H. Zhang and J. Hou, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 533–543 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, H. Yao, A. Gadisa, H. Zhang, S. Li, M. Ghasemi, N. Balar, A. Hunt, B. T. O’Connor, J. Hou and H. Ade, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7451–7458 Search PubMed .
Y. P. Qin, L. Ye, S. Q. Zhang, J. Zhu, B. Yang, H. Ade and J. H. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4324–4330 Search PubMed .
C. McDowell, M. Abdelsamie, M. F. Toney and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707114 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, X. Jiao, W. Zhao, S. Zhang, H. Yao, S. Li, H. Ade and J. Hou, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6178–6185 Search PubMed .
S. Li, L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Zhang, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9423–9429 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, Q. Zhang, S. Li, C. Wang, Z. Jiang, J. Hou, W. You and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705485 Search PubMed .
B. Xie, K. Zhang, Z. Hu, H. Fang, B. Lin, Q. Yin, B. He, S. Dong, L. Ying, W. Ma, F. Huang, H. Yan and Y. Cao, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 1900385 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Z. Chen, W. Ma, Z. Xie and Y. Han, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12560–12571 Search PubMed .
J. J. van Franeker, M. Turbiez, W. Li, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6229 Search PubMed .
K. Zhou, J. Liu, M. Li, X. Yu, R. Xing and Y. Han, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2015, 53, 288–296 Search PubMed .
Q. Chen, S. Xie, R. Foudazi, T. Lodge and J. Siepmann, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 3774–3787 Search PubMed .
Y. Hu, X. Ying, D. T. Wu and J. M. Prausnitz, Fluid Phase Equilib., 1995, 104, 229–252 Search PubMed .
S. S. Lee and Y.-L. Loo, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2010, 1, 59–78 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Miao, Z. Ding, B. Kan, B. Lin, X. Wan, W. Ma, Y. Chen, X. Long, C. Dou, J. Zhang, J. Liu and L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3271 Search PubMed .
R. Yu, H. Yao, L. Hong, M. Gao, L. Ye and J. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 44–49 Search PubMed .
Y. Tang, B. Lin, H. Zhao, T. Li, W. Ma and H. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13021–13028 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Tang, B. Lin, H. Zhao, T. Li, T. Min, H. Yan and W. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 25115–25124 Search PubMed .
H. Yin, C. Yan, H. Hu, J. K. W. Ho, X. Zhan, G. Li and S. K. So, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 140, 100542 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, X. Jiao, M. Zhou, S. Zhang, H. Yao, W. Zhao, A. Xia, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6046–6054 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, F. S. Melkonyan, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4129–4142 Search PubMed .
C. Lee, S. Lee, G. U. Kim, W. Lee and B. J. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 8028–8086 Search PubMed .
J. Roncali and I. Grosu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801026 Search PubMed .
Y. He, T. Heumüller, W. Lai, G. Feng, A. Classen, X. Du, C. Liu, W. Li, N. Li and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900409 Search PubMed .
G. Feng, J. Li, Y. He, W. Zheng, J. Wang, C. Li, Z. Tang, A. Osvet, N. Li, C. J. Brabec, Y. Yi, H. Yan and W. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 1765–1781 Search PubMed .
T. Jia, J. Zhang, W. Zhong, Y. Liang, K. Zhang, S. Dong, L. Ying, F. Liu, X. Wang, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104718 Search PubMed .
K. Do, C. Risko, J. E. Anthony, A. Amassian and J.-L. Brédas, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7643–7651 Search PubMed .
V. Coropceanu, X.-K. Chen, T. Wang, Z. Zheng and J.-L. Brédas, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 689–707 Search PubMed .
T. Wang, G. Kupgan and J.-L. Brédas, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 535–554 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, E. D. Gomez and S. T. Milner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 017801 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Mengyuan Gao
	Mengyuan Gao earned her Bachelor degree in Polymer Materials & Engineering from Taiyuan University of Technology, China, in July 2019. Presently, she is a graduate student at the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Tianjin University under the supervision of Prof. Long Ye and Prof. Yanhou Geng. Her research work focuses on understanding the mixing behaviours of conjugated polymer blends used in polymer solar cells and other types of electronics by applying polymer physics knowledge.

Ziqi Liang
	Ziqi Liang is currently a PhD student at the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Tianjin University under the direction of Prof. Yanhou Geng. She obtained her Bachelor degree in Polymer Materials & Engineering from Shandong University in July 2017. Her current research interests are designing and optimizing organic/polymeric materials for low cost nonfullerene solar cells.

Yanhou Geng
	Yanhou Geng is a full professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, China. He received his PhD degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1996. From 1998 to 2003, he worked in the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz (Germany) as an AvH stipendiat and the University of Rochester (USA) as a postdoctoral researcher. From 2003 to 2015, he was a professor at CIAC. His research interests include (1) polymerization methods for conjugated polymers; (2) organic and polymeric semiconductors for solar cells and thin-film transistors.

Long Ye
	Long Ye has been a Professor at the School of Materials Science & Engineering of Tianjin University since October 2019. He received his PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Adviser: Prof. Jianhui Hou) in July 2015. From August 2015 to September 2019, he was a postdoctoral researcher and later promoted to research assistant professor in the same group headed by Prof. Harald Ade at the Department of Physics, North Carolina State University. His current interests include morphological and mechanical characterizations of semiconducting polymers and their blends in solar cells and transistors, and polymer physics of conjugated polymers.

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structures of polymer donors and nonfullerene small molecule acceptors discussed in this feature article.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic phase diagram for a polymer blend system illustrating an upper critical solution temperature (UCST) on the temperature-composition plane. The solid line is called the binodal, and the dashed line is the spinodal curve. The binodal curve and spinodal curve meet at a critical point, which also represents the highest temperature of immiscibility. The process of phase separation in the metastable region is the nucleation and growth mechanism (NG), while in the unstable region it is the spinodal decomposition mechanism (SD). Arrows A and B indicate the quenching condition. The quench along A is a critical quench (here the system enters the unstable region directly without passing through the metastable region), while that along B is an off-critical quench. (b) Plot of the binodal curves of a polymer:small molecule blend as a function of polymer molecular weight. Here N represents the degree of polymerization of the polymer, which ranges from 1 to 100. The dashed arrow illustrates the change of critical point (χc), which is at the apex of the binodal curve.	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Melting point depression of a polymer:NFA blend (PDCBT-Cl:ITIC-Th1). (b) Fitting the quadratic function of melting point depression and acceptor's volume fraction ϕs.53 Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Plot of the relative χ parameters of over 10 pairs of polymer:NFA blends obtained from surface tension measurements.54,57–60 (d) Typical Flory–Huggins theory derived χ–ϕ phase diagram of binary amorphous mixtures of a polymer and a small molecule, which exhibits UCST phase behaviour. Arrows mark the compositions of two phases (1 and 2) in a quenched morphology. Dashed lines indicate the binodal compositions. (e) Plot of integrated scattering intensity (ISI) as a function of (thermal/solvent vapour) annealing time. The star shows the ISI corresponding to the optimum performance of a high χ system. (f) Classification of high χ and low χ regimes (separated by the ideal χ region) in the χ–ϕ phase diagram. The schematic morphology of high and low χ systems are shown as the inset images.32 Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 
	(5)
	(6)
ISI ∝ (ϕ2 − ϕ1)2φ1φ2	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Plot of χ with device fill factor for a wide range of polymer:fullerene and polymer:NFA blends.61 Each data point are well explained in ref. 61. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Illustration of the χ–ϕ phase diagram of the PB3T-C66:IT-4F and PB3TCN-C66:IT-4F blends.83 The solid curves are binodal (coexistence) curves; the horizontal dashed lines are the relative χ parameter calculated by HSP, and the vertical dashed lines are the maximum IT-4F component in the mixed phases. (c) J–V curves of PB3T-C66:IT-4F and PB3TCN-C66:IT-4F.83 Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Two-dimensional GIWAXS pattern for the PDCBT-Cl:Y6 blend film. (e) Plots of relative composition of PDCBT-Cl:acceptor blends with optimized annealing (2 min) and longer annealing (1 h). (f) Plot of PCE for the PDCBT-Cl:Y6 blend as a function of aging time.53 Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the χ–ϕ diagram based on high χ system PM6:IT-4F blends. The polymer Mn values and device PCEs of PM6-x are listed in the diagram. (b) Plot of normalized phase purity (σ) of the highest Mn blend as a function of solvent annealing time.78 Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the χ–ϕ diagram of PBDx:IDIC blends with the variation of the polymer side-chain structure. (d) Plot of normalized phase purity (σ) of the IDIC distribution in the mixed phase of the PBDx:IDIC blends.86 Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the χ–ϕ diagram based on PDCBT-Cl:NFA blends. Triangles represent the states in optimized devices while dots represent the states in long-term annealed devices. The relative location of the various triangles or dots represent the χaa of different systems. The best device performance for each blend is depicted in the inset table. (f) Plot of normalized PCEs for four PDCBT-Cl:NFA blends as a function of solvent vapour annealing time.53 Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Correlation of chemical structure with the relative interaction parameters of the blends as discussed above. Note that we normalize the χ parameter of the systems to the highest efficiency system to 1 in each group and the highest-efficiency system in each group was marked with a star.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Statistics and Gaussian fitting of the FF distribution of the conventional and inverted PSC devices based on P2:IT-4F. (b) Plot of C/S ratios and N contents (%) for the neat films and P2:IT-4F blends obtained via XPS. Blend 1 denotes the P2:IT-4F blend cast on PEDOT:PSS and blend 2 represents the P2:IT-4F blend cast on ZnO. (c) Cross-sectional TEM images and EDS profiles for the conventional and inverted devices based on the P2:IT-4F blend.59 Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Characteristic J–V curves of PBDB-T:PCBM, PBDB-T:ITIC and PBDB-T:N2200 processed with and without DIO. (e) Plot of standard deviations of the acceptor composition in the vertical direction across the PBDB-T:acceptor blends with their χ parameters.94 Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) J–V curves of PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F and PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F:PC71BM blend systems during aging under dark conditions. (b) Two-dimensional GIWAXS pattern for fresh and aged PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F blend films. (c) Schematic illustration of the χ–ϕ diagram for the PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F and PTB7-Th:PC71BM blends in relation to the electron transport percolation threshold. ϕs is the volume composition of the acceptor and ϕi indicates the initial volume composition of the acceptors as the D/A weight ratio of 1:1.5. Point F and point A represent the freshly prepared and aged film, respectively. (d) Schematic of morphology evolution of the PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F system and PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F:PC71BM system during aging.110 Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Chemical structures of processing solvents and solvent additives used for fabricating PSC devices. (b) Typical J–V curves of PBDB-T:IT-M based bulk-heterojunction PSC devices fabricated with different halogen-free solvent systems.116 Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (c) Plot of volume normalized NFA:solvent interaction parameter χ. (d) Representative J–V curves of sequentially deposited PSC devices based on FTAZ/IT-M with different solvent systems. (e) Plot of domain spacing of the sequentially deposited PSCs and polymer:solvent interaction parameter χ.117 Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
