Nanostructured metal chalcogenides: synthesis, modification, and applications in energy conversion and storage devices   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35310E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35310E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2986-3017Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanostructured metal chalcogenides: synthesis, modification, and applications in energy conversion and storage devices†

        
          
            Min-Rui 
            Gao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yun-Fei 
            Xu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Jiang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Shu-Hong 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *
      Division of Nanomaterials and Chemistry, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Department of Chemistry, The National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, P. R. China. E-mail: shyu@ustc.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 551 63603040
Received 
      2nd August 2012
    First published on 8th January 2013AbstractAdvanced energy conversion and storage (ECS) devices (including fuel cells, photoelectrochemical water splitting cells, solar cells, Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors) are expected to play a major role in the development of sustainable technologies that alleviate the energy and environmental challenges we are currently facing. The successful utilization of ECS devices depends critically on synthesizing new nanomaterials with merits of low cost, high efficiency, and outstanding properties. Recent progress has demonstrated that nanostructured metal chalcogenides (MCs) are very promising candidates for efficient ECS systems based on their unique physical and chemical properties, such as conductivity, mechanical and thermal stability and cyclability. In this review, we aim to provide a summary on the liquid-phase synthesis, modifications, and energy-related applications of nanostructured metal chalcogenide (MC) materials. The liquid-phase syntheses of various MC nanomaterials are primarily categorized with the preparation method (mainly 15 kinds of methods). To obtain optimized, enhanced or even new properties, the nanostructured MC materials can be modified by other functional nanomaterials such as carbon-based materials, noble metals, metal oxides, or MCs themselves. Thus, this review will then be focused on the recent strategies used to realize the modifications of MC nanomaterials. After that, the ECS applications of the MC/modified-MC nanomaterials have been systematically summarized based on a great number of successful cases. Moreover, remarks on the challenges and perspectives for future MC research are proposed (403 references).
Min-Rui Gao
Min-Rui Gao received his BSc degree in Chemistry from Hefei University in 2006. He received his PhD in nanochemistry under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in the Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China. His current research interests include the design and synthesis of nanostructured metal chalcogenides and their applications in advanced energy conversion and storage devices. In September 2012, Dr Gao started his postdoctoral fellowship with Prof. Yushan Yan in the Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, University of Delaware.
Yun-Fei Xu
Yun-Fei Xu received his BSc degree in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2012. He joined Prof. Shu-Hong Yu's laboratory in his junior year (2010), researching the synthesis of hybrid nanomaterials for electrocatalytic applications. He is currently a Research Assistant in the same laboratory. His research interests include developing the functional nanomaterials for sustainable energy and environmental applications.
Jun Jiang
Jun Jiang received her BSc degree at Hefei University of Technology in Chemistry in 2006. She received her PhD in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in the Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China. Her research interests focus on the synthesis of bio-inspired nanomaterials and their applications.
Shu-Hong Yu
Shu-Hong Yu received his BSc degree at Hefei University of Technology and his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) under the supervision of Prof. Yi-Tai Qian. From 2001 to 2002, he was as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany. He was appointed as a full professor in 2002 and awarded the Cheung Kong Professorship in 2006 by the Ministry of Education in the Department of Chemistry, USTC. His research interests include bio-inspired synthesis and self-assembly of new nanostructured materials and nanocomposites, functional nanostructures and their applications.
1. Introduction
The energy issue is the most important topic of the twenty-first century. An excessive reliance on the combustion of non-renewable fossil fuels brings not only ecological problems but also harsh ongoing impacts on the global economy and society.1–3 There is a pressing requirement for cost-effective, efficient, and environmentally benign energy conversion and storage (ECS) devices that can power energy demanding areas, ranging from portable electronics (e.g., cell phones, camcorders, laptops) to transportation (e.g., electric vehicles, hybrid electric vehicles) and even stationary.4 Typical ECS devices include fuel cells,4–11 solar cells,12–15 photoelectrochemical water splitting cells,16–18 batteries (especially Li-ion batteries),2,19–27 and supercapacitors.28–34 The performance of these energy devices relies strongly on the properties of their nanostructured materials. New development in the field of nanomaterial chemistry is believed to hold the key to further breakthroughs in ECS systems.
Nanostructured metal chalcogenides (MCs) are attracting significant attention in a variety of energy devices including fuel cells, solar cells, light-emitting diodes, sensors, Li-ion batteries, supercapacitors, thermoelectric devices and memory devices.35–38 As very promising non-precious metal catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), transition MCs are expected to serve as effective substitutes for the Pt-based electrocatalysts in fuel cell systems.8,35,39–41 Many MCs have become popular choices for solar absorber materials and device architectures.12–14,42,43 Recently, layered metal dichalcogenides have been actively investigated as electrode materials in Li-ion batteries and electrochemical supercapacitors.44–46 The wide applications of MCs are profited from the progress in the synthesis of new nanostructured materials of different sizes and new morphologies. When the size of the MCs is reduced to the nanometer scale, new physical and chemical properties emerge owing to the well-known quantum size effect.47 In addition, nanostructured MCs can provide a much higher specific surface area as compared with their bulk counterparts, which is beneficial to energy devices because the reaction/interaction between the devices and the interacting media can be significantly enhanced.36,48 Quite a few excellent review articles on the synthesis of nanostructured MCs (mainly focus on Cd-, Pb-based chalcogenides) with controlled sizes and shapes have been published.49–54
Apart from synthesizing MCs at the nanometer scale, new, optimized and enhanced properties can also be achieved by the modification of the host material (e.g., with noble metals, metal oxides, carbon materials and so on). Single-component nanomaterials may not be able to meet the strict requirements of future ECS devices and their intrinsic physical properties, such as conductivity, mechanical and thermal stability and recyclability, need additional improvement.48 Rationally introducing one or several different materials to contact with single-phased nanomaterials brings tremendous hope in helping to ease the above challenges.48,55,56 The resulting modified MCs have been shown to exhibit synergetic properties to realize the full potential of the materials in terms of performance.35,48 For example, the Dai group has been developing the synthesis of nanostructured MCs on graphene sheets to achieve advanced catalyst materials based on synergistic coupling effects between the MC nanomaterials and supported graphene.57,58 Similar synergistic chemical coupling effects were also observed on novel lamellar mesostructured CoSe2/DETA (DETA = diethylenetriamine) nanobelts,59 which can be explored as excellent oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalyst and methanol-tolerant ORR catalyst after modifying them with Mn3O4 and Pt nanoparticles, respectively, although the catalytic performance of pure CoSe2/DETA is common.60,61
Although many excellent review articles on the synthesis, properties and applications of MC nanomaterials have been published, they are mainly focused on Cd- and Pb-based chalcogenides.13,14,49–54,62,63 A comprehensive review article that summarizes the exciting work on other nanostructured MCs is rarely found, which, however, is highly needed to further promote MC-related research and development efforts to solve the energy issues we are now facing. In this review article, we deliberately avoid discussing Cd- and Pb-based chalcogenides, for which readers can refer to the above listed literatures. Our emphasis will be on other metal-based (including V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ge, Mo, Ag, In, Sn, Sb, W, Bi and so on) chalcogenides which have been receiving increasing interest. We first summarize the recently emerging liquid-phase synthetic strategies towards various MCs with different nanostructures. Then, the modifications of nanostructured MCs and their correspondingly optimized properties are discussed. Following that, we will describe the promising applications of MCs and modified MCs in the field of energy conversion and storage (Fig. 1). Finally, a brief discussion on the major challenges and opportunities facing MC nanomaterials will be proposed. Because of the explosion of publications in this exciting and emerging field, we do not claim that this review includes all of the published work (especially the most recently published work). We apologize to the authors of many outstanding research papers, that owing to the large activity in this field, we have unintentionally left out.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of nanostructured MC/modified-MC materials and their potential applications in various ECS devices. 
2. Liquid-phase synthesis of MC nanostructures
Innovative MC nanomaterials synthesized on a large scale with controlled morphology, size, composition, and structure lie at the heart of their practical applications. To achieve this, conventional solid-state or gaseous-state strategies are often unsatisfactory. Comparatively, liquid-based methods have been witnessed to be very powerful for obtaining desired MC functional nanomaterials. In a liquid-based synthetic system, the employed solutions and/or surfactants can be rationally selected based on the target MCs, and the nucleation and growth process of the products can be easily controlled by adjusting the thermodynamic and kinetic parameters of the reaction. Additionally, liquid-based synthetic routes do not involve the use of drastic conditions (e.g., high temperatures, high pressures) and yield products in large amounts. At present, many liquid-based methods have been established to synthesize high-quality MCs. In this section, we will selectively summarize the main and general liquid-based methods for the controlled synthesis of MC nanomaterials.
2.1 Liquid exfoliation method
Besides graphene (the most well-known two-dimensional (2D) nanocarbon), many so-called “inorganic graphene” materials which consist of a single layer of atoms other than carbon are also important because of their useful electronic and mechanical properties. Among the graphene-like materials, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and other transition metal chalcogenides such as Bi2Te3 and Bi2Se3 are attracting rapidly increasing attention for energy conversion and storage applications.36,45,64–66 Originating from the competition between the cationic d levels and anionic sp levels, most transition metal atoms (M) will react with chalcogen atoms (X) to form a X–M–X configuration with stoichiometry MX2.67 Although the bonding within the hexagonal M layer and two X layers is covalent, adjacent sheets stack via weak van der Waals interactions to form a 3D crystal. It is assumed that about 40 MX2 compounds are layered structures, particularly found in the early transition metals of Groups 4–7 (except for manganese).68 TMDs can cover a wide spectrum of electrical properties, changing from insulators like HfS2, through semiconductors like MoS2 and WS2, to metals like NbS2 and VSe2 accordingly to the coordination and oxidation state of metal atoms.67,69 Some TMDs were also found to exhibit superconductivity and charge-density wave effects.67 This versatility enables the TMD materials to be applied in many fields of electronics.
To use the extraordinary capability of these layered materials, bulk TMD crystals must be exfoliated into mono- or few-layer nanosheets to meet their full potential. Like the preparation of graphene, single-layer TMD nanosheets can be harvested by using adhesive tapes for mechanical cleavage due to the weak van der Waals interaction forces between neighboring layers.70 Although this method can fabricate samples with high quality, it is neither high-throughput nor high-yielding, which is disadvantageous for their real utilization. To obtain large quantities of mono- or few-layer TMD nanosheets, a solution processing strategy is required. Inspired by the first reports of the liquid-phase exfoliation of sheets of clay materials in the early 1960s,71 many studies have been focused on exfoliating sheets of MCs in solution.46,65,72–74 The Cheon group reported an interesting sulfidation-induced shape transformation process for the fabrication of 2D WS2 sheets from 1D W18O49 nanorods (Fig. 2a).45 The obtained single sheets of 2D WS2 can further assemble together by van der Waals interactions to form multistacked nanosheets. However, the lateral dimension of the WS2 sheets is confined below 100 nm, which was restricted by the size of the rods. Due to their layered structures, TMD bulk materials can be intercalated by various kinds of intercalates such as organic molecules, transition metal halides and lithium ions.72 The resulting intercalated compounds can be exfoliated to mono- and few-layer 2D TMD nanosheets by simple ultrasonication.64,75–78 For example, Rao and co-workers reported the insertion of MoS2 and WS2 with lithium by using n-butyllithium in hexane as the intercalation agent, and the consequent exfoliation in water with ultrasonication to yield monolayer materials.64 However, this method is time-consuming and the degree of lithium insertion is uncontrollable. Recently, Zhang et al. developed a controllable electrochemical lithiation method to produce high-yield, single-layer TMD nanosheets.79 By incorporating the layered TMD bulk materials, such as MoS2, WS2, TiS2, TaS2 and ZrS2, as the cathode in an electrochemical cell, the lithium intercalation in these materials can be monitored and finely controlled during the discharge process. The obtained intercalated compounds were then ultrasonicated and exfoliated in water or ethanol to achieve high-grade TMD monolayers in large amounts.79 Other layered transitional metal chalcogenide materials such as Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 can also be exfoliated by lithium intercalation in solution.80–82 It should also be noted that lithium intercalation chemistry often brings structural deformations in TMDs to alter electronic properties83 and even leads to the decomposition of TMDs and the formation of metal nanoparticles and Li2S.84
 Fig. 2  (a) 2D WS2 nanosheet crystal formation through the rolling-out shape-transformation processes of 1D W18O49 nanorod precursor. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 45. (b, c) TEM and HRTEM images of MoS2 nanosheets, respectively. Inset in (c) are the corresponding fast Fourier transforms (above) and butterworth-filtered images (below). (d, e) TEM and HRTEM images of WS2 nanosheets, respectively. Inset in (e) are the corresponding fast Fourier transforms (above) and butterworth-filtered images (below). Reproduced with permission of AAAS from ref. 85. 
Excitingly, Coleman and co-workers have developed an effective and reliable liquid exfoliation technique to produce nanosheets, including monolayers.85 After dispersion and ultrasonication of each inorganic starting material in about 30 common solvents with varying tensions, the authors demonstrated that the best solvents have a surface tension close to 40 mJ m−2 by using optical absorption spectroscopy to measure the quantity of the dispersed materials. Based on theory analysis, Coleman et al. proposed that successful solvents are those that minimize the energy of exfoliation. For example, N-methyl-pyrrolidone (NMP) and isopropanol (IPA) are very promising solvents for exfoliating various layered compounds. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images in Fig. 2b and d show that very thin sheets of MoS2 and WS2, with lateral sizes from 50 to 1000 nm, can be obtained after exfoliation. Aberration-corrected TEM gives more detailed analysis of these objects (Fig. 2c and e). These images and associated Fourier transforms illustrate that no substantial deviation from the hexagonal symmetry of these materials was observed, unlike the MoS2 and WS2 nanosheets exfoliated by lithium intercalation.86,87 The insets in Fig. 2c and e present the sections of images of Fig. 2c and e after low-pass Butterworth filtering, which reveal MoS2 and WS2 hexagon widths of 3.8 Å and 4 Å, confirming that no distortions were introduced by exfoliation. This method is practical, simple, scalable, and can be extended to a series of layered compounds such as MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, MoTe2, TaSe2, NbSe2, NiTe2 and Bi2Te3.85,88
2.2 Hot-injection method
The hot-injection method is very effective in synthesizing high-quality nanocrystals with good crystallinity and narrow size distributions. By thermal decomposition of organometallic compounds in hot coordinating solvents, monodisperse nanocrystals of semiconductors, metals, and metal oxides can be produced.52,53,89 Mechanistic insights have suggested that separation of the nucleation and growth steps is critical for the formation of monodisperse nanocrystals.53 The rapid injection of highly reactive precursors into hot organic solvent can trigger a short burst of nucleation, and subsequent growth by aging at a lower temperature can achieve this goal. The hot-injection method was first used by Bawendi et al. to prepare monodisperse CdSe nanocrystals.90 Since then, many other high-quality semiconductor nanocrystals have also been successfully synthesized by this method, including II–VI, III–V, and IV–VI semiconductor nanocrystals.52,91 Here, we only highlight the developments on the preparation of MCs by the hot-injection method. Various MC nanocrystals have been successfully synthesized by this method (Fig. 3), such as GeTe,92–94 ZnS,95,96 Bi2S3,97,98 Bi2Te3,99,100 Ag2E (E = S, Se, Te),101,102 β-FeSex,103 FeS2,104 In2S3,105–107 SnSe,108,109 Cu2S,110 GaSe,111 Sb2S3112 and so on. The morphology of MC nanostructures prepared by the hot-injection method is very diversified, ranging from nanoparticles, nanospheres to nanorods and nanoplates (Fig. 3). The size and morphology of a specific MC can be effectively controlled by judicious adjustment of a few experimental parameters, such as the type and ratios of the starting reagents, reaction temperature, reaction time, and aging period. For example, Alivisatos and co-workers have demonstrated the synthesis of GeTe nanocrystals over a wide range of sizes.92 The rapid injection of 1-dodecanethiol/trioctylphosphine-tellurium (1-DDT/TOP-Te) into squalane/TOP/bis[bis(trimethylsilyl)amino]Ge(II) [(TMS2N)2Ge] induces a short burst of nucleation, and the subsequent growth by aging at a mild lower temperature gives 8 nm GeTe nanocrystals (Fig. 3a). When adjusting the reaction temperature from 230 to 250 °C, GeTe nanocrystals with an average diameter of 17 nm were prepared using the same precursors in the presence of oleylamine. GeTe nanocrystals with a size of about 100 nm were prepared when using a GeCl2–dioxane complex and TOP-Te in the presence of 1-dodecanethiol at 180 °C. All these nanocrystals have narrow size distributions and exist in the rhombohedral structure characteristic of the low-temperature polar phase.92,113 The Ozin group reported the synthesis of Bi2S3 nanodots and nanorods by changing the concentration of the precursors.97 Injection of a high excess of sulfur into a BiCl3/oleylamine solution can lead to uniform Bi2S3 nanorods (Fig. 3c). Conversely, Bi2S3 nanodots were obtained. The high concentration of sulfur may be beneficial to magnify the intrinsic anisotropic feature of the crystal structure, which results in the orientational growth of the nanocrystals.114,115 This hot-injection synthesis can be easily scaled up to the multigram scale,97 which is very important for the practical application of these stable, monodisperse and shape-tunable Bi2S3 nanocrystals.
 Fig. 3  TEM images showing MC nanocrystals with various structures and morphologies synthesized by the hot-injection method. (a) GeTe nanocrystals; (b) ZnS nanorods; (c) Bi2S3 nanorods; (d) Ag2Se nanocrystals; (e) β-FeSex nanoflakes; (f) In2S3 nanoplates; (g) SnSe nanocrystals; (h) Cu2S nanocrystals; (i) GaSe nanoparticles. (a, b, d, g, h, and j) Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 92, 95, 101, 108, 110 and 111, respectively. (c, f) Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 97 and 105, respectively. (e) Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 103. 
2.3 Single-source precursor method
As a very popular non-injection strategy, a so-called single-source precursor method has been proved to be highly effective for generating MC nanocrystalline materials if appropriate precursors can be chosen. The selected precursor must contain both the desired metal and corresponding chalcogen elements, which can decompose under a certain temperature to give MC compounds directly. By adjusting the ratios of the starting reagents (including precursors, ligands, and solvent) as well as the reaction temperature and reaction time, the size and morphology of the MC nanomaterials can be precisely controlled. Up to now, many size- and shape-controlled MCs such as nanoparticles of SnSe,116,117 SnTe,118 Pd4Se and Pd7Se4,119 EuS,120 Ag2S,121,122 α-MnS,123 iron sulfide,124 and CoX (X = S, Se);125 nanoplates of SnS2,126 Fe7S8,127,128 Fe3S4,129 Sb2Te3;130,131 nanosheets of MoS2 and WS2,132 nanorods of NiS,133 Bi2S3;134–136 nanoprisms of NiS,133 nanowires of GeS2 and GeSe2,137 Sb2Se3138 have been successfully synthesized. O'Brien and Vanitha124 obtained monodisperse iron sulfide nanoparticles by employing a cubane-type cluster (Fig. 4), [NnBu4]2[Fe4S4(SPh)4], bis(tetra-n-butylammonium) tetrakis[benezenethiolato-μ3-sulfido-iron], as a single source precursor, which was decomposed at temperatures between 180 and 250 °C in different solvents, such as octylamine, dodecylamine, hexadecylamine and oleylamine (Fig. 4). An interesting phase change from pyrrhotite type Fe7S8 to Fe3S4 with a greigite structure was found when adjusting the decomposition temperature from 180 °C to a higher temperature in alkylamines.124 The obtained particle sizes are in the range of 2.5–5.6 nm, depending also on the decomposition temperature. In another representative case, Korgel et al. reported the synthesis of rhombohedral NiS (millerite) nanorods and triangular nanoprisms by the thermal degradation of nickel thiolate precursors in the presence of octanoate.133 The obtained 1D NiS nanostructures have relatively narrow size and shape distributions, which were controlled by octanoate, a capping ligand used in the synthesis. These NiS nanostructures could serve as model systems to investigate the size- and shape-dependent magnetic and structural phase behavior.133
 Fig. 4  TEM images of Fe7S8 and Fe3S4 nanocrystals synthesized using a cubane-type cluster, bis(tetra-n-butylammonium) tetrakis[benezenethiolato-μ3-sulfido-iron], as a single source precursor. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 124. 
Although the hot-injection and single-source precursor methods are very effective routes for the synthesis of high-quality MC nanomaterials, some disadvantages still exist. For example, the hot-injection method often involves complicated procedures and air-free manipulation, while the precursors used for the single-source precursor method are sometimes hard to be synthesized and are also limited in type. Nowadays, some one-step colloidal synthetic methods for the fabrication of MC nanomaterials using common precursors have received great interest. For example, the Schaak group reported the synthesis of wurtzite-type MnSe by directly heating MnCl2·4H2O, Se powder, oleic acid, and tetraethylene glycol (TREG) at 235 °C for 1 h under the protection of Ar.139 The same group further fabricated SnSe nanosheets,140 and SnS nanoflowers141 using similar methods. This one-step colloidal method is also attractive for producing other MCs with controlled sizes and morphologies, such as Ag2S nanowires,142 Sb2S3 nanotubes,143 In2S3 and Fe3Se4 nanosheets,144,145 EuSe, Cu2−xSe, ZnS and SnS nanoparticles,146–149 and so on. The above achievement indicates that the non-injection and one-step heating method may be one of the effective routes for the controlled preparation of high-quality MC nanocrystals, compensating for the shortcomings of the hot-injection and single-source precursor methods.
2.4 Hydrothermal method
For several decades (since the 1960s), the hydrothermal method has been widely used for the synthesis of a variety of functional nanomaterials with specific sizes and shapes.35,52,150–153 The hydrothermal process uses water as the reaction medium in sealed steel pressure vessels with Teflon liners (Fig. 5), which are then heated to a designed temperature to promote the reaction. The temperature adopted is often higher than 100 °C in order to reach the pressure of vapor saturation, so that autogeneous pressure will be developed in a closed system. The in situ generated pressure within the reactor not only strongly depends on the reaction temperature, but also relies on other experimental factors, such as the amount of liquid added and any dissolved salts. In a recent review, Honma and Devaraju listed the main advantages of hydrothermal and solvothermal processes, such as fast reaction kinetics, short processing times, phase purity, high crystallinity, low cost and so on.151 Very recently, the Yu group enlarged the volume of the common autoclave (Fig. 5) and successfully scaled up the production of carbonaceous nanofibers by using a 12 L autoclave without changing the reaction concentrations and reaction time.154 Even in such a large reaction system, the diameter of the synthesized carbonaceous nanofibers can also be precisely controlled. The result suggests the great potential to achieve the large-scale synthesis of other functional nanomaterials by this method under appropriate reaction parameters, which is hard to be realized by the above discussed hot-injection and single-source precursor methods and is very important for the practical applications of these materials.
 Fig. 5  Photograph of Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclaves with different volumes. The photograph was taken with permission of the Yu Lab at the University of Science and Technology of China. 
In a hydrothermal reaction system, water is used as the main reaction medium, so many inorganic salts containing the source of the metal ions can be well dissolved. In addition, water is also beneficial to introduce small coordinating molecules (e.g., ethylenediamine, hydrazine hydrate, ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid and polyvinylpyrrolidone) to adjust the growth of the final nanocrystals. Up to now, the hydrothermal method has achieved great success in the preparation of MCs with various nanostructures, such as ZnSe hollow microspheres,155 MoS2 hollow cubic cages,156,157 β-In2S3 nanoflowers,158 CuS microtubules,159 SnS2 nanocrystals,160,161 NiSe nanowires,162 CoTe and NiTe nanowires,163 Sb2S3, Sb2Se3 and Sb2Te3 nanobelts,164–166Ag2Te nanotubes,167 Ag2Se nanoparticles,168 and so on. In a hydrothermal process, the presence of a small quantity of organic ligands often plays a key role to determine the sizes, shapes and structures of the MCs. A typical example was provided by Zhao and co-workers.169 Using CuCl and thiourea as the precursors, Zhao et al. described the one-step synthesis and assembly of copper sulfide nanoparticles by an organic amine-assisted hydrothermal method at a mild temperature (90–110 °C).169 The assembled nanostructures including nanowires, nanotubes and nanovesicles can be obtained when triethylenediamine (TEDA), tramethylethylenediamine (TEMA), and di-n-butylamine (DBA) were used as the linking agents. The interaction between CuCl and organic amines was believed to be a key factor in the structural and morphological control of the copper sulfide nanocrystals. In a hydrothermal synthesis, we should also pay intimate attention to other factors, such as the pH value and monomer concentration. An appropriate pH value can affect the hydrolyzation rate of inorganic salts and anion sources (e.g., thiourea and thioacetamide),170–172 while increasing the monomer concentration favours that nanocrystals with an intrinsic anisotropic feature grow along the long axis.114 By carefully adjusting the pH value, monomer concentration, as well as the reaction temperature and reaction time, bismuth chalcogenides with various nanostructures such as nanostring-cluster hierarchical Bi2Te3 (Fig. 6a),170 Bi2S3 nanoribbons (Fig. 6b),173 Bi2S3 networks (Fig. 6c),171 and Bi2Te3 nanoplates (Fig. 6d)174 have been successfully synthesized using the hydrothermal methods.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of bismuth chalcogenides with various nanostructures synthesized by the hydrothermal method. (a) Bi2Te3 hierarchical structures; (b) Bi2S3 nanoribbons; (c) Bi2S3 networks; (d) Bi2Te3 nanoplates. The insets in (a), (c), and (d) are the corresponding magnified TEM images, respectively. (a) Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 170. (b) Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 173. (c, d) Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 171 and 174, respectively. 
To realize the controlled synthesis of MCs with special intrinsic properties (e.g., MCs with ferromagnetism), a modified hydrothermal route should be developed. Fig. 7 shows that the microrods of the ferrosulfide minerals greigite (Fe3S4) and marcasite (FeS2) can be selectively prepared by an in situ magnetic-field-assisted hydrothermal route.175 Two circular magnets were placed at the top and bottom of the stainless steel autoclave, which can provide a magnetic intensity of about 450 G (1 G = 10−4 Wb m−2) during the synthesis (Fig. 7). The presence of a weak magnetic field can affect the growth and directional aggregation of ferrosulfide nanocrystallites, resulting in the formation of pearl-chain-like microrods. In contrast, only irregular microspheres were obtained in the absence of a magnetic field. Additionally, the shape and fine structure of the building blocks also depend on the sulfur precursor in the presence of a magnetic field (Fig. 7).175 The results demonstrated that a magnetic field can be a useful tool for combining with other experimental parameters, such as suitable precursors, for the phase-selective synthesis and self-assembly of inorganic building blocks as well as architectural control in a hydrothermal system.
 Fig. 7  TEM images of ferrosulfide microrods with various microstructures synthesized by an in situ magnetic-field-assisted hydrothermal method. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 175. 
2.5 Solvothermal method
Based on the fact that the solvent properties, such as polarity, viscosity, and softness, have strong effects on the solubility and transport behavior of the precursors in liquid-based synthesis, which will control the reactivity, shapes, sizes, and phases of the final samples, different organic solvents can often be used as reaction media instead of water. This new strategy is known as the “solvothermal method”.
Compared with the hydrothermal method, more solvents with special physicochemical properties can be chosen and the reaction temperature can be elevated to much higher values. By the solvothermal method, lots of MC nanocrystals with an elegant control of the size and shape distributions and also the crystallinity have been synthesized, including wire-like Fe1−xS(en)0.5,176 FeS2,177 Cu2Te,178 Ag2Te179 and Bi2S3;180 rod-like of α-MnSe181 and MnS;182 belt-like ZnSe183 and Bi2S3;184 flower-like FeSe2,185 γ-In2Se3186 and CoS1.097;187 dendrite-like Cu2−xSe188 and Cu2S;189 plate-like Sb2Te3190,191 and CuS;192 sphere-like In2S3193 and Bi2S3;194 FeS2 nanowebs,195 CoTe nanotubes,196 and so on. During these solvothermal syntheses, the reaction temperature was usually set in the range of 100–250 °C and the chalcogen sources could be S, Se, Te, Na2SeO3, Na2TeO3, CS2, thiourea, etc. Furthermore, selecting an appropriate solvent, often served as a “shape controller”, and was particularly important to the final MC nanocrystals. Yu and co-workers reported the synthesis of mesostructured wurtzite ZnS-nanowire/amine nanocomposites with remarkable quantum size effects using different organic amines (including n-butylamine, ethylamine, and tetraethylenepentamine) as solvents (Fig. 8a).197 The amine ligands prefer to attach to the zinc atoms of the (002) face, resulting in the ZnS nanocrystals growing along the c-axis. By using pyridine and xylene as the solvents, the groups of Qian198 and Cho199 prepared ultrathin β-In2S3 nanobelts (Fig. 8b) and graphene-like MoS2 nanoplates (Fig. 8c), respectively. Another astonishing case is the successful synthesis of caved cuboctahedral CuS crystals by a solvothermal reaction in ethylene glycol (EG) solution (Fig. 8d).200 Each caved cuboctahedron has four identical-hexagonal flakes and contains 14 concave cavities. These amazingly complex CuS objects are as beautiful as the cages drawn by M. C. Escher in his 1948 engraving Stars.201 The usage of EG as a solvent is one of the key points for the formation of these geometric “stars”.
 Fig. 8  SEM or TEM images of MCs synthesized by the solvothermal method in various solvents. (a) ZnS nanowire arrays prepared in n-butylamine. (b) β-In2S3 nanobelts prepared in pyridine. (c) MoS2 nanoplates prepared in xylene. Inset is the magnified TEM image. (d) Caved cuboctahedral CuS crystals prepared in EG. (a) Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 197. (b–d) Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 178, 199 and 200, respectively. 
2.6 Mixed solvent method
Accompanied with the development of the hydrothermal/solvothermal method, a promisingly derivative strategy known as “a mixed solvent method” has been rapidly developed. The mixed solvent is often composed of two or more components, thus its properties can be tuned by changing the components and volume ratios, achieving some appropriate synthetic conditions to the desired nanostructures.35,202 Recent advances have shown that the use of a mixed solvent in some cases can be rather effective in producing MC nanomaterials with unique morphologies or new nanoarchitectures.35,202–209 Monodisperse NiS2 dodecahedrons with a diameter of ∼6 μm were synthesized in a mixed solvent of ethylenediamine and glycol (3:1, v/v) using NiCl2·6H2O and sulfur as precursors at 200 °C (Fig. 9a).210 Yu et al. reported the successful preparation of Fe7Se8 polyhedra with two {001} and twelve {012} facets by thermal treatment of FeSO4·7H2O in a mixed solvent of diethylenetriamine (DETA) and water with Na2SeO3 at 140 °C as shown in Fig. 9b.205 The formation of the unusual Fe7Se8 polyhedrons with exposed high-index facets can only be realized at the volume ratio of VDETA/Vwater = 1:2, suggesting the “magic power” of mixed solvents for shaping nanocrystals with new morphologies and structures.
 Fig. 9  SEM or TEM images of MCs synthesized by the mixed solvent method. (a) NiS2 dodecahedrons. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 210. (b) Fe7Se8 polyhedrons. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 205. (c) [Fe18S25](TETAH)14 nanoribbons. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 212. (d) (ZnSe)(DETA)0.5 nanobelts. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 211. 
The mixed solvent method is also found to be rather effective in the synthesis of MCs with unique 1D nanostructures, especially with the presence of small organic amines.211–214 In many cases, these small organic amine molecules can not only play the role of effective structure-directing agents, in assisting the anisotropic crystal growth,215 but can also insert in the MC structure to form MC–amine inorganic–organic hybrid composites. For instance, our group prepared the [Fe18S25](TETAH)14 (TETAH = protonated triethylenetetramine) hybrid nanoribbons by a mixed solvent strategy using FeSO4·7H2O and C2H5NS as precursors (Fig. 9c).212 The suitable volume ratio of triethylenetetramine (TETA) and water is essential for the formation of elegant and uniform [Fe18S25](TETAH)14 nanoribbons. The TETAH molecules can be completely removed by thermal treatment of [Fe18S25](TETAH)14 nanoribbons at 800 °C under an Ar atmosphere, forming pure Fe7Se8 nanowires. Similarly, uniform (ZnSe)(DETA)0.5 hybrid nanobelts have been synthesized using a ternary solution made of DETA, hydrazine hydrate, and water (Fig. 9d).211
Recently, for the first time, a kind of CoSe2–amine hybrid nanobelts [amine = DETA, TETA, or tetraethylenepentamine (TEPA)] with interesting mesostructures has been synthesized in a binary solution of organic amines and water under mild solvothermal conditions (Fig. 10).59Fig. 10a and b show that these uniform and ultrathin nanobelts are single-crystalline and possess a width of 100–500 nm and lengths up to several tens of micrometers. Well-defined multilayered nanostructures can be clearly observed along the thickness direction of the almost transparent nanobelts (Fig. 10c). Again, a suitable volume ratio of amine and water (2:1, v/v) plays the crucial role for the generation of CoSe2–amine nanobelts. As illustrated in Fig. 10d, some amine molecules are first protonated by reaction with water to form positively charged ammonium ions, which are then incorporated into the neighboring CoSe2 layers by coordination with Se. Owing to the linear configuration of the selected amines, they can serve as template molecules that not only lead to the new mesostructured nanobelts but also induce the anisotropic growth of CoSe2–amine nanobelts. Removal of the amines at 450 °C in a N2 atmosphere for 4 h will result in the formation of pure inorganic phase CoSe2 nanobelts.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the morphology of lamellar mesostructured CoSe2–DETA nanobelts. Inset in (b) shows the corresponding SAED pattern. (c) Typical HRTEM image viewed along the lateral thickness direction. (d) Scheme of the formation mechanism for the mesostructured CoSe2–DETA nanobelts. Red, white, blue, gray, pink, and yellow balls correspond to O, H, N, C, Co, Se atoms, respectively. Hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity in the structure. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 59. 
Although great progress has been made in the synthesis of MC nanomaterials by hydrothermal/solvothermal methods as well as the mixed solvent method, some disadvantages still exist. For example, it is hard to study the nucleation and growth process for their closed/“black box” systems. In addition, the controllable synthesis of monodisperse MC nanocrystals with small sizes and narrow distributions is often difficult to be realized.
An improved hydrothermal/solvothermal method has been developed by Li et al. to prepare a broad range of nanostructured crystals.216 Using a liquid–solid-solution (LSS) system consisting of an ethanol–linoleic acid liquid phase, metal linoleate (solid), and a water–ethanol solution under hydrothermal conditions (Fig. 11a), monodisperse MC nanocrystals such as 5.7 nm PbS, 7.3 nm Ag2S, and 8.2 nm ZnSe were successfully synthesized (Fig. 11b). The as-synthesized MC nanocrystals can be easily dispersed in nonpolar solvents (e.g., cyclohexane or chloroform) to form homogeneous colloidal solutions (insets in Fig. 11b). This LSS strategy relies on a general phase transfer and separation mechanism happening at the interfaces of the liquid, solid, and solution phase. Therefore, this greatly modified hydrothermal method is also generalized to prepare a variety of nanocrystals such as noble metal, magnetic/dielectric, semiconducting, rare-earth fluorescent, biomedical, and conducting polymer nanoparticles.
 Fig. 11  (a) Scheme of LSS phase transfer synthetic strategy. (b) TEM images of as-synthesized MC nanocrystals: PbS, Ag2S, and ZnSe. Insets show cyclohexane solutions of corresponding MC nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission of Nature publishing group from ref. 216. 
2.7 Microwave method
Microwave chemistry has been well expanded for the liquid phase preparation of various inorganic nanomaterials due to its specific advantages such as high reaction rate (can reduce reaction time often by orders of magnitude), low processing costs, high yields and side reaction depression.217 The efficient heating of matter is processed with energy by electromagnetic radiation in the frequency range of 0.3 to 2.45 GHz. The microwave dielectric heating mechanism contains two main processes, namely dipolar polarization and ionic conduction,217 which is different from the direct absorption of high energy electromagnetic radiation needed to induce chemical reaction. Due to the microwave-enhanced chemistry being based on the efficient heating of materials, the selected microwave frequency of 2.45 GHz with an energy of only about 1 J mol−1 is the optimized frequency to convert the microwave energy into thermal energy, which, however, is too low to cleave chemical bonds.
Microwave stimulation has been applied to prepare various MC nanomaterials.218–225 The groups of Alonso-Vante218 and Amini219 reported that carbon-supported Co3S4, CoSe2, and CoSe nanoparticles with small sizes and narrow distributions can be prepared within 3–5 min by microwave stimulation, while at least several hours were needed for the conventional heating method at a refluxing temperature of about 142 °C.218 Ramanath et al. reported a rapid and scalable (gram-a-minute) microwave-stimulated solvothermal synthesis of sulfurized Sb2Se3 nanowires and nanotubes.224 By adjusting the microwave dose ( = microwave power × time), the diameter and length of these 1D nanostructures can be controlled. The authors also found increasing nanotube content with the microwave dose, that is 7–10% for 60 s, 15–17% for 90 s, and 62–65% for 120 s syntheses, respectively (Fig. 12). A similar morphology control process was described by EI-Shall and co-workers in their microwave synthesis of semiconductor nanorods and nanowires.220 Again, by simply varying the microwave radiation times from 30–60 s to 1–2 min to >3 min, the stepwise formation of the ZnS and ZnSe nanowires from small spherical nuclei to short aligned rods to long assemblies of nanowires was observed.
 Fig. 12  Size distribution graphs with SEM insets (scale bars = 1 μm) of the Sb2Se3 nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 224. 
2.8 Sonochemical method
Ultrasound has been extensively used in the chemical synthesis of various crystalline nanostructures with small sizes and high surface areas. In a liquid–solid heterogeneous system, ultrasound can increase the reactivity of metal powders by as much as 105-fold.226 The chemical effects of ultrasound do not come from a direct interaction with precursors but from the acoustic cavitation. When a liquid is exposed to strong ultrasound stimulation, the bubbles will experience the process of formation, growth, and implosive collapse. The bubble collapse brings intense local heating (∼5000 K), high pressures (over 1800 atm), and enormous cooling rates (∼1010 K s−1), which enable many chemical reactions to occur.227 The major advantages of sonochemical method contain rapid reaction rate, controllable reaction parameters, and the ability to generate highly pure nanocrystals with uniform shapes and narrow size distributions.
Sonochemical method has been used to prepare various MC nanocrystals by different groups.226–231 Qian et al. prepared nanocrystalline Cu7Te4 and Cu4Te3 in ethylenediamine by high-intensity ultrasonic irradiation at room temperature.228 The ultrasonic-induced solvothermal synthesis is also practical to make high-quality Ag2Te and Ag7Te4 nanocrystals.226 Liu et al. applied the sonochemical method in synthesizing elegant Bi2Se3 nanobelts with widths of 20–80 nm and lengths of several micrometers in a mixed solution of hydrazine hydrate and water by co-reduction of H2SeO3 and BiCl3 under ultrasonic irradiation.229 Chen and co-workers reported the synthesis of Bi2S3 nanorods can be realized by sonochemical method from an aqueous solution of Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and Na2S2O3 in the presence of complexing agents,227 and they found that the ultrasonic irradiation and the complexing agent both have significant influence on the diameters and lengths of the final nanorods.
2.9 Electrodeposition method
The electrodeposition method is attractive to produce a metallic coating on a surface by the cathodic reduction reaction in aqueous or organic solvents. The substrate material, such as anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) and indium-tin oxide (ITO), is used as a cathode and is immersed into a solution containing a salt of the metal to be deposited. The dissolved metallic ions are attracted to the cathode and then reduced to the metallic form.153 The distinctive advantages of the electrodeposition method are that it contains the capacity to enable the conformal deposition of structures and it can easily control the thickness of deposited films. Using the elecrodeposition method, many interesting MC nanostructures or films have been prepared.232–238 For example, single-crystal CuTe nanoribbons with thicknesses of about 50 nm, widths of 300–600 nm, and lengths of several micrometers can be uniformly deposited on the ITO-coated glass substrate in an aqueous solution of 20 mM TeO2, 0.2 mM CuSO4 and 0.536 M NH3·H2O of pH 13.232 Polycrystalline BiTe arrays of nanowires and nanotubes were prepared by Devireddy and co-workers using commercially available polycarbonate (PC) as the template.233 The electrodeposition is carried out in an electrolyte of 0.01 M bismuth oxide and 0.01 M tellurium oxide in 2 M HNO3 at pH 0.25 with a potentiostatic electrodeposition method. By setting the DC potential at −400 mV and −65 mV (vs. SCE), p-type (Bi-rich) and n-type (Te-rich) BiTe can be deposited into the pores of the PC, respectively. It has been found that the pore diameters of the PC substrate have little effect on the crystallite sizes of both BiTe nanowires and nanotubes at the higher overpotential (−400 mV vs. SCE). The effect, however, is very large at the lower overpotential (−65 mV vs. SCE).
2.10 Electrospinning method
Electrospinning is a versatile technique to produce nanofibers with controllable diameter, morphology and surface topology from a variety of organic and inorganic materials. Electrospinning mainly makes use of the electrostatic repulsions between surface charges to reduce the diameter of a viscoelastic jet or a glassy filament. A number of functions can be incorporated into the nanofibers by electrospinning to expand their potential applications with the only prerequisite that the second phase can be soluble or well dispersed in the initial solution. This simple, cheap, and scalable method has been successfully applied to produce MC nanofibers239,240 beyond the well-synthesized polymers, carbon, ceramics and metals. Choa et al. developed a method that combined an electrospinning and galvanic displacement reaction to produce ultra-long BixTe1−x hollow nanofibers.239 Firstly, the Ni acetate/PVP nanowires that were obtained by an electrospinning process were calcined to form highly aligned Ni nanofibers. The obtained Ni nanofibers were then immersed into an acidic nitric solution containing TeO2 and Bi(NO3)·5H2O. About 1 h later, hollow BixTe1−x nanofibers were formed by galvanic displacement reactions. Zussman and co-workers prepared poly methyl methacrylate (PMMA)–WS2 composite fiber meshes by electrospinning the suspension made from PMMA and WS2 nanotubes,240 and they found that the dispersion of individual WS2 nanotubes in the PMMA nanofiber is well along the fiber axis. The obtained composite nanofibers produced by electrospinning exhibit a larger enhancement of stiffness and toughness than that of pure PMMA fiber meshes.
2.11 Photochemical method
Photochemical synthesis depends on the use of powerful lasers to induce the decomposition of a certain precursor and then the initiation of the nucleation and growth of the nanocrystals. Various light sources such as LED, UV and γ-ray are often selected in terms of the energy needed for synthesis. The photochemical method has been well adopted to fabricate different MC nanomaterials, including ZnS,241 NiS,242 PdS,242 BiSe,243 Bi2Se3,244 Ag2Se,245 WS2246 and so on. O'Brien et al. reported that EuS nanocrystals with a diameter of 9 nm can be fabricated by the photolysis of Na[Eu(S2CEt2)4]·3.5H2O using white LED light at room temperature.247 In comparison with other synthetic methods, this photochemical strategy is environment-friendly and has the advantages of low cost, safety, and low temperature. However, it should be noted that this method is often time-consuming and faces a problem of low yields.247
2.12 Cation exchange method
The chemical transformation of nanocrystalline solids has emerged as a very promising strategy for inorganic nanostructure synthesis. Among various chemical transformations, the cation exchange reaction is especially interesting, as it can alter the composition of the existing ionic nanocrystal by replacing the cations within the crystal lattice with a different metal ion. The cation exchange reaction is particularly effective for the transformation of MC nanocrystals,248–252 whose crystal structures are determined by the frameworks of the chalcogen anions, and the metal cations are relatively mobile in the structure, leading to an easier replacement of the cations.
In 2004, a milestone was achieved when Alivisatos and co-workers reported that cation exchange reactions can occur completely and reversibly between CdSe and Ag2Se under ambient conditions (Fig. 13).248 The efficiency of the cation exchange reaction was found to rely on the thermodynamic driving force and the kinetics of a transformation (activation barrier). The solubility product of the ionic solids in the reaction medium was supposed to determine the thermodynamic direction of transformation.248 When the ionic solid product has a lower solubility than a reactant one in the reaction medium, a forward reaction will occur and the kinetics of the transformation can be controlled by tuning the reaction temperature to overcome the activation barrier. The cation exchange reactions can also be used to prepare nanocrystal heterostructures through the partial transformation of ionic nanocrystals. Typical examples include the CdS–Cu2S binary nanorods reported by Alivisatos et al.253 and the CdS–PtS, CdSe–PtSe, CdTe–PtTe, CdS–PdS, and CdSe–PdSe nanocrystals reported by Son et al.254
 Fig. 13  (a) Scheme of the forward cation exchange reaction and reverse cation exchange reaction between CdSe and Ag2Se. (b) Initial CdSe (diameter 4.2 nm), (c) Ag2Se transformed from the forward cation exchange reaction, and (d) recovered CdSe nanocrystals from the reverse cation exchange reaction. Reproduced with permission of AAAS from ref. 248. 
Cation exchange reactions can be employed to prepare MC gels and aerogels.255,256 Aerogel materials with a highly porous network could be very effective in various applications (e.g., catalysis and solar cells). In addition, to conventional oxide aerogels, well-established MC aerogel materials have recently come into focus for their interestingly properties. Due to MC gels being made from connected nanoscale building blocks, a kinetically rapid mechanism of cation exchange could occur in the gel system. Brock et al. verified that by a cation exchange reaction, Ag2Se wet gel monoliths can be fabricated from an initial CdSe wet gel, which can easily convert to an aerogel by a drying treatment.255 Interestingly, by control of the amount of exchanging ions added, heterogeneous CdSe (core)–Ag2Se aerogels can be achieved via partial cation exchange reactions, which is useful for applications requiring hierarchical aerogel architectures.
2.13 Kirkendall-effect-induced method
The Kirkendall effect is a classical phenomenon in metallurgy, which involves a non-equilibrium mutual diffusion process by the interface of a diffusion couple, causing the net flow and coalescence of lattice vacancies, and final formation of voids near the original interface and within the fast-diffusion side.257 The Kirkendall-effect-induced method is widely used for preparing targeted hollow nanostructures of various MC nanomaterials.258–262 A pioneering work from Yin et al. described that hollow Co3S4, Co9S8, or CoSe nanocrystals can be fabricated by reacting presynthesized Co nanocrystals with either sulfur or selenium in solution through a Kirkendall-like mechanism.258 Each obtained MC nanocrystal has a single void. In comparison to the original Co nanocrystals, the diameter of the final voids is much smaller, indicating that the void formation is controlled by both the inward transport of sulfur (or selenium) anions and the outward diffusion of Co cations. Yin et al. further found that void formation within the cobalt sulfide system is greatly affected by the reaction temperature.259 Performing the reaction at high temperature (>120 °C) can lead to the rapid formation of a single void inside each shell, whereas at room temperature multiple voids are generated due to the strongly temperature-dependent diffusivities for vacancies (Fig. 14). Comparison of the volume distributions of the initial and final nanostructures shows extra volume in the shells at high temperature, suggesting significant porosity and/or a defective structure. Yet, at lower temperatures, indirect and direct signs of fracture occurring upon shell formation are observed, as well as the slow phase transformations from Co to Co9S8 and then to Co3S4. It is deduced that behind inward growth of the shell, bulk deformations of the shell or transport of sulfur through cracks in the shell might also take effect.259 Except for hollow nanoparticles, the Kirkendall-Effect-induced method is also very effective for creating other MC hollow nanostructures such as hollow Co3S4, CoSe2, and CoTe chains,260 hollow Bi2Te3 nanotubes261 and so on.
 Fig. 14  TEM images showing the evolution of hollow cobalt sulfide nanocrystals with time at low (LT) and high (HT) temperatures: (a) at room temperature; (b) at 120 °C. (c) Scheme of the temperature dependence of hollow particle evolution at LT and HT. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 259. 
2.14 Template-directed method
Template-directed synthesis has become a very popular method for the fabrication of functional materials with various nanostructures. Generally, templates employed in the synthesis can be classified into two categories: (1) hard templates, which are either used as physical scaffolds for the next deposition of desired material coatings or employed not only as shape-defining templates, but also as chemical reagents that react with other chemicals to create desired nanostructures; and (2) soft templates, which contain ligands, surfactants, polymers, and organogelators. Making use of the pre-existing nanostructures as hard templates, many MC nanomaterials with different morphologies and dimensions have been harvested, such as mesoporous WS2 and MoS2 prepared from mesoporous silica,263 MoS2 nanofibers and nanotubules prepared from porous aluminum oxide template,264 ZnS and ZnSe nanoparticles prepared from ZnO nanoparticles,265 TaS2 nanotubes prepared from Ta2O5 nanotubes,266 Cu2S nanoribbons prepared from Bi2S3 nanoribbons,267 Ni/Ni3S2 peapods and NiS hollow chains prepared from Ni chains,268 and so on. Recently, Se and Te nanowires have been widely used as chemical templates to prepare 1D MC nanostructures and made a big advance (Fig. 15). There are two merits of Se and Te for their usage: (1) 1D nanostructures of Se and Te can be easily achieved because of their anisotropic structure along the c-axis; and (2) the obtained Se or Te nanowires often bear remarkable reactivity as chemical templates. Xia et al. first reported that the single-crystalline Ag2Se nanowires (Fig. 15a) could be obtained by reacting trigonal Se (t-Se) nanowires with AgNO3 solution at room temperature.269,270 The t-Se nanowires were further used as a template to synthesize RuSe2+δ nanotubes by reacting with Ru(acac)3 at 80 °C (Fig. 15b).271 Similarly, Te nanowires or nanorods have been employed as chemical templates to prepare Ag2Te nanowires272 and CoTe nanorods273 by Qian's group. Recently, Yu and co-workers developed an efficient approach for controlled synthesis of high quality ultralong Te nanowires with great reactivity, which were proved to be ideal chemical templates for forming 1D MCs with a high aspect ratio.274 For instance, a family of metal telluride nanowires can be synthesized by using as-prepared Te nanowires as templates. Uniform Bi2Te3 nanowires with a length of tens of micrometers and a diameter of 15–17 nm in triethylene glycol solution are depicted in Fig. 15c.275 In addition, ultrathin Bi2Te3 nanowires with a diameter of 5–8 nm can be prepared by injecting an ethylene glycol solution of Bi(NO3)3·5H2O into as-prepared Te nanowire solution at 160 °C (Fig. 15d).276 Besides hard templates, soft templates such as organic amines, ionic liquids have also been widely exploited to produce various MC nanomaterials.59,277–280 We do not discuss this point in detail due to the limited space.
 Fig. 15  TEM or SEM images of different MCs synthesized using Te nanowires or Se nanowires as templates. (a) Ag2Se nanowires. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 269. (b) RuSe2+δ nanotubes. The scale bars in the inset correspond to 50 nm. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 271. (c) Ultralong Bi2Te3 nanowires with lengths of tens of several micrometers. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 275. (d) Ultrathin Bi2Te3 nanowires with diameters of 5–8 nm. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 276. 
2.15 Growth of MC nanostructure arrays on substrates
The oriented growth of nanostructures on the conductor substrate can serve as an ideal material for energy storage devices, as a catalyst support, or as an efficient edge emitter for electron emission because of the large surface and the presence of sharp edges. The growth of nanostructured MC arrays on the substrate has attracted extensive attention for their importance in interpreting quantum size effects and particular applications. Now, many well-aligned MC nanostructures have been successfully grown on various substrates by different methods. For example, SnS nanowires on tin metal foils,281 CuS nanoneedles on carbon nanotubes (CNTs),282 ZnS nanobelts on a zinc substrate,283 Bi2S3 nanowire on W foils,284 Cu2−xSe nanosheets, nanoribbons, and heterostructures on Cu substrates285 and so on. Chen's group described a general solution method for the oriented growth of Ni3S2 nanowire arrays at a large scale.286 By immersing a Ni grid sample into an alkali solution containing NaOH, ethylenediamine, and hydrazine under ambient air for 20 h, the Ni3S2 nanowire-on-Ni grid product was obtained (Fig. 16b). The coordination of the chalcogen-EDA solution and hydrazine in the alkali solution was found to have great advantages for the preparation of MCs (Fig. 16a). This simple and reliable method has been further extended to the growth of single-crystalline Cu2S nanowire arrays on a Cu substrate by the same group.287
 Fig. 16  (a) Scheme of the growth mechanism for the Ni3S2 nanowire arrays. (b) Typical SEM images of the Ni3S2 nanowire arrays growth on a Ni substrate. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 286. 
3. Modification of MC nanomaterials
In botany, the graft hybridization of a target plant onto an acceptor plant can significantly improve its initial quality. In material science, a similar hybrid improvement effect also widely exists. To meet the high requirement of modern ECS devices, innovative electrode/catalyst materials with new and enhanced performances are urgently needed. The ability to chemically modify an electrode/catalyst nanomaterial with other functional nanomaterials offers an intriguing route to engineer target materials with multifunctionalities or improved properties. Recently, there have been tremendous developments on the modification of MC nanomaterials with various functional materials (e.g., carbon materials, noble metals, metal oxides, and other MCs), realizing the full potential of these MC materials based on their greatly enhanced performance. In this section, we will overview the principles and methods used for modifying MC nanomaterials. As to the ECS applications of the modified MCs, we will discuss them together with the applications of pure MCs in the next section.
3.1 Modification of MC nanomaterials with carbon materials
Carbon materials, especially activated carbon, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and graphene, have been intensively studied as substrates to host various active nanomaterials for ECS applications because of their high conductivities and large surface areas. The loading of MC nanomaterials on the carbon materials has been well demonstrated.57,58,288–298 Gedanken et al. reported that 1D carbon coated WS2 (WS2/C) composites can be prepared by thermolysis of W(CO)6 with elemental S in a closed Swagelok reactor at 750 °C under an inert atmosphere.289 The WS2-C particles look like annelid-type worms, possessing a smooth surface with an average diameter of 25 nm and lengths of 180 nm. Likewise, WSe2/C nanofibers with diameters of 50–100 nm and lengths of several micrometers were also successfully fabricated by a 1 h chemical reaction between W(CO)6 and Se at 750 °C in the dry autoclave.290 Yan et al. developed a facile approach to prepare FeS/C nanosheets in oleylamine solution with 1-dodecanethiol as both the sulfur source and the surfactant.299 In this synthesis, the Fe(acac)3 and sulfur atoms react to form thin layers of FeS while the hydrocarbon tails of 1-dodecanethiol separate the thin FeS layers, which turn to carbon after annealing in Ar. This synthetic method can be extended to grow FeS/C nanospheres and nanoplates by simply tuning the synthetic parameters.
CNTs are intensively used to host MC nanomaterials due to their large surface area, good thermal and chemical stability, as well as high electrical conductivity. Walton et al. reported their study on the fabrication of WS2/CNT composites by pyrolyzing WO3-coated multiwalled CNTs in an H2S/N2 atmosphere at 900 °C.291 The disordered WO3 coatings were interestingly found to convert into layered WS2 nanotubular sheaths on the CNT surface, parallel to the CNT's basal carbon rings. Park et al. described that β-Cu2S nanocrystals can be grown in situ on CNTs in an oleylamine solution by reacting Cu(acac)2 with elemental S at 190 °C.292 The same group later fabricated 3D hierarchical self-supported multiwalled CNTs/SnS2 nanosheets heterostructured electrodes through two subsequent vapour-phase transport methods.293 These single-crystalline SnS2 nanosheets were homogeneously anchored from the heterogeneous nucleation sites on the surface of the 1D multiwalled CNTs. The new hybrid nanomaterials, combining 1D and 2D nanostructures, showed outstanding rate capabilities even at very high current densities.
Graphene nanosheet (GN, 2010 Nobel Prize for Physics), a single or few layers of 2D sp2-bonded carbon sheets, has gained intensive research interest because of its unique intrinsic properties, such as high electrical and thermal conductivities, mechanical flexibility, charge transport mobility, large specific surface area, and good chemical stability. The emergence of GNs offers a wide range of possibilities to modify MC nanomaterials, forming graphene–MC composites for ECS applications. Chen and co-workers have loaded several MC nanomaterials onto GNs.295–297 For example, layered MoS2–graphene composites can be synthesized by a L-cysteine-assisted solution-phase method and subsequent annealing in a H2/N2 atmosphere at 800 °C for 2 h.295 This L-cysteine-assisted method was further used to fabricate a few-layer SnS2–graphene hybrid.296 Again, L-cysteine is used as a complexing sulfide source, and reducing agent during the synthesis. Dai's group has been developing the synthesis of nanostructured MCs on graphene sheets to achieve advanced catalyst materials based on synergistic coupling effects between the MC nanomaterials and supported graphene.57,58 By a one-step solvothermal reaction of (NH4)MoS4 and hydrazine in an N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solution of mildly oxidized graphene oxide (GO) at 200 °C (Fig. 17a), Dai et al. successfully obtained MoS2–RGO hybrid nanomaterials.57 Here, the (NH4)MoS4 precursor was reduced to MoS2 on GO and the mildly oxidized GO transformed to reduced GO (RGO) by hydrazine reduction. Fig. 17b shows that the RGO sheets were uniformly decorated with MoS2 nanoparticles. The HRTEM image reveals hexagonal atomic lattices in the MoS2 basal planes and abundant open edges of the nanoparticles (inset in Fig. 17b). In contrast, the exact same synthetic strategy produced MoS2 coalesced into 3D-like particles of various sizes in the absence of GO sheets (Fig. 17c and inset). Such an amazing morphological difference highlights the important role of GO sheets as a useful support for mediating the nucleation and subsequent growth of MoS2. The same group treated Co(OAc)2 with thioacetamide (TAA) in a GO/water suspension at 80 °C for 12 h to make nanoparticles of the cobalt sulfide precursor coated onto GO surface, which was then annealed at 500 °C in 1 atm of Ar for 1 h to give the Co1−xS–RGO hybrid materials.58 Interestingly, if the cobalt sulfide precursor/GO composite was hydrothermally treated at 180 °C instead of the annealing step, a CoS2–RGO hybrid material with a larger particle size was obtained, indicating that the gas-phase annealing step is important in controlling the size, phase, and shape of the cobalt sulfide nanoparticles grown on graphene.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic solvothermal synthesis with GO sheets to afford the MoS2–RGO hybrid. (b) SEM and (inset) HRTEM images of the MoS2–RGO hybrid nanomaterials. (c) SEM and (inset) TEM images of the free MoS2 particles synthesized without any GO sheets added. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 57. 
3.2 Modification of MC nanomaterials with noble metals
Noble metals have gained wide recognition because of their unique applications in various fields. For example, platinum (Pt) nanocrystals possess outstanding catalytic and electrical properties and superior resistance characteristics to corrosion; gold (Au) nanoparticles possess unique physical, chemical, and biocompatible properties, which have been widely applied in catalysis, sensing, imaging, and medicine; silver (Ag) nanostructures have found use in the catalysis of many oxidation and oxidative coupling reactions, which also show widespread use as substrates for SERS, optical labelling, and near-field optical probing.300 Rationally introducing noble metals to combine with single-phased MC nanomaterials is highly expected to bring MCs enhanced or novel useful properties. Now, many noble–metal-modified MC nanostructures have been prepared by different methods,61,301–308 which can be roughly classified as heterostructures and core–shell structures. Yu et al.61 have demonstrated a simple EG reduction method for in situ loading of Pt nanoparticles on pre-synthesized CoSe2/DETA nanobelts59 under mild chemical conditions without any molecular linkers. By using the copious amount of surface amino groups as the nucleation sites, Pt nanoparticles with a size of about 8 nm can be homogeneously dispersed on CoSe2/DETA nanobelts (Fig. 18). Moreover, the shape and facets of the loaded Pt nanoparticles could be adjusted by controlling the reaction time. Compared with the pure CoSe2/DETA nanobelts, the constructed nanohybrid Pt–CoSe2 exhibited a large ORR enhancement in acidic media. Wang et al. prepared cucumber-like Au–AgAuS nanostructures (Fig. 18) by hydrothermal treatment of Au nanorods, metal thiobenzoates and AgNO3 in the presence of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB).304 In this experiment, nickel thiobenzoate acted as the source of the sulfur. The Au nanorods were used not only as a sacrifice template to direct the formation of the sea cucumber-like nanostructures, but also as a Au precursor to create Au–AgAuS nanostructures.
Yang and Ying paid great attention to the synthesis of heterogeneous semiconductor-noble–metal nanocomposites.305–307 They developed a general protocol for transferring the transition-metal ions from water to an organic medium using an ethanol-mediated route, which could be extended to preparation of a variety of heterogeneous semiconductor/noble-metal hybrids.305 Very recently, this group presented a simple aqueous method for creating nanocomposites consisting Ag2S and different noble metals.307 By using the one-pot method of 7 nm Ag2S nanocrystals, sodium citrate, and various noble-metal precursors at 105 °C (for Au) and 110 °C (for other noble metals), a set of noble–metal/Ag2S heterostructures were obtained, such as Au–Ag2S (Fig. 18c), Pt–Ag2S (Fig. 18d), and Os–Ag2S (Fig. 18e). In the presence of Ag2S seeds, the metals nucleated preferentially on the existing Ag2S seeds rather than homogeneously. Interestingly, Au was found to deposit only at a single site on each Ag2S seed, while the nucleation and growth of Pt and Os occurred at multiple sites on each Ag2S seed (Fig. 17c–e). That is because monoclinic Ag2S has many facets with different lattice spacings, which may provide favourable sites to match the lattice planes of various noble metals for their epitaxial growth on the substrate.307 The species-dependent features of noble metal deposition on Ag2S nanocrystals could be further employed to prepare complex Ag2S–Au–Pt, Ag2S–Au–Os, Ag2S–Pt–Os, and Ag2S–Au–Pt–Os heterostructures.307
 Fig. 18  (a) TEM image of Pt–CoSe2 nanobelts. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 61. (b) TEM image of Au/AgAuS nanohybrids. Inset shows digital photo of two sea cucumbers. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 304. (c–e) TEM images of Au/Ag2S, Pt/Ag2S, and Os–Ag2S heterostructures, respectively. Insets are schemes of corresponding heterostructures. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 307. (f–h) SEM images of Au/ZnS, Au/Ni1−xS, and Au/Cu2−xS core–shell structures, respectively. Insets in (f) and (h) show corresponding TEM images. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 308. 
Wang and co-workers fabricated a series of water-dispersible Au-transition metal sulfide core–shell nanostructures by hydrothermal treatment of pre-synthesized Au nanocrystals, metal thiobenzoates, and Ag+/Cu+ ions in aqueous CTAB solution.308 The synthesis employed CTAB-encapsulated Au nanocrystals as the starting reactants and metal thiobenzoates as the metal sulfide precursors. The presence of a small amount of Ag+ or Cu+ ions will form Ag2S or CuS, which can act as a wetting layer to help the deposition of other metal sulfides on the Au nanocrystals. With this strategy, various core–shell nanostructures of Au/ZnS (Fig. 18f), Au/Ni1−xS (Fig. 18g), and Au/Cu2−xS (Fig. 18h) could be successfully produced. The simple one-pot method is believed to be extended to the preparation of core–shell nanostructures of Au nanocrystals with metal selenide and telluride semiconductors.
3.3 Modification of MC nanomaterials with metal oxides
Generally, metal oxides are essential active components of many electrochemical charge-storage devices because of their mixed electronic and ionic conductivity. For instance, metal oxides can often offer higher energy densities for supercapacitors than carbon materials and a better electrochemical stability than polymer materials.32 Based on this understanding, metal oxides have been extensively introduced to hybrid with MCs by many research groups to deepen and broaden the energy applications of MC nanomaterials.60,309–320 Tremel et al. have reported their concentrated studies on the fabrication of various metal–oxide–MC nanocomposites, which include TiO2/WS2 nanotubes,313,317 ZnO/WS2 nanotubes,314 MnO, Fe3O4, or ZnO coated IF-MoS2 nanoparticles315 and so on. A recent report by Tremel et al. described the reversible functionalization of highly inert WS2 nanotubes with MnO nanoparticles by employing the Pearson's HSAB (hard/soft acid–base) principle.316 The modification of WS2 is based on the chalcophilic affinity of Mn2+, as described by the Pearson HSAB concept. The surface-bound MnO nanoparticles can be detached from the WS2 nanotubes after further functionalization by dopamine, a much more potent ligand for surface 3d metals than the sulfur atoms of WS2. The remaining WS2 nanotubes can be modified again with fresh metal oxide nanoparticles.
Yu's group selected pre-synthesized ultrathin lamellar mesostructured CoSe2/DETA nanobelts59 as substrate materials, which were modified rationally by several metal oxide nanoparticles (e.g., Mn3O4 and Fe3O4, Fig. 19) and then enhanced electrocatalytic performances were observed.60,318 The new CoSe2/DETA nanobelts have several merits, such as large specific surface area (BET = 77 m2 g−1) and a coating of copious amino groups, that facilitate their functionalization. For instance, by thermal decomposition of Mn(acac)3 in the TREG solution of CoSe2/DETA nanobelts at 278 °C with nitrogen protection, highly crystalline Mn3O4 nanoparticles with an average size of ∼15.7 nm were fairly well decorated on the backbone of CoSe2 nanobelts (Fig. 19a and b).60 Intriguingly, CoSe2/DETA nanobelts were found to greatly influence the growth behavior of Mn3O4. Under the same thermal reduction conditions, Mn precursors prefer to evolve into nanoparticulate Mn3O4 in the presence of CoSe2/DETA nanobelts, while Mn3O4 nanorods are formed without CoSe2/DETA nanobelts in the reaction system. All the Mn3O4 nanoparticles were selected to anchor on the CoSe2/DETA surface due to there being copious amino groups on the CoSe2/DETA surface, which can serve as nucleation sites to couple Mn precursors and lead to the confined Mn3O4 deposition on CoSe2. By a similar polyol reduction method, the same group has successfully loaded magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles on the surface of CoSe2/DETA nanobelts (Fig. 19c and d).318 The loading amount and particle size of the Fe3O4 nanoparticles, as well as the magnetic properties of the constructed Fe3O4–CoSe2 nanocomposites can be easily controlled by adjusting the Fe precursor concentration. After modification, the resulting Mn3O4–CoSe2 and Fe3O4–CoSe2 nanocomposites all exhibit much better electrocatalytic properties than the original CoSe2/DETA nanobelts, which will be discussed in Section 4.
 Fig. 19  Metal oxides/CoSe2 nanocomposites synthesized by the polyol reduction strategy. (a, b) TEM and HRTEM images of Mn3O4–CoSe2 nanocomposites prepared at 278 °C for 1 h, respectively. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 60. (c, d) TEM and HRTEM images of Fe3O4–CoSe2 nanocomposites prepared at 278 °C for 30 min, respectively. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 318. 
3.4 Modification of MC nanomaterials with MCs
Research on modifying MCs with MCs has a long history. Several comprehensive reviews have charted the growth mechanism, synthesis, properties, and potential applications of the MC–MC hybrid nanostructures.55,56 In comparison to combining with metals or metal oxides, the MC pairs often have similar structural properties, and the interface between them is almost epitaxial because of the small mismatch of the lattice distances between the components.55 The created MC–MC nanostructures usually exhibit multifunctionalities, enhanced intrinsic properties, and revolutionary new properties, which is connected with an increase of the contact surface area between the two MCs. In this section, we intend to highlight the latest development on the synthesis of MC–MC nano-objects with heterostructures by several typical examples.
Heterostructured MC–MC hybrid nanomaterials can be realized by a seeded-growth technique.321–327 In this technique, seeds can provide crystallographic facets for the epitaxial growth of another material, eventually resulting in heterostructured nanocrystals.56 For instance, Teranishi et al. reported that anisotropically acorn-shaped PdSx/Co9S8 could be spontaneously formed by the reaction of Co(acac)2 and Pd(acac)2 in di-n-octyl ether in the presence of 1-octadecanethiol.321 The first nucleation of PdSx, followed by the anisotropic growth of Co9S8, led to such interesting heterostructures. Based on this PdSx seeded-growth mechanism, ternary PdSx–Co9S8–PdSx heterostructured nanoparticles could also been successfully achieved (Fig. 20).322 Using pre-synthesized PdSx nanoparticles (5.6 ± 1.0 nm) as seeds, Co9S8 phases were anisotropically grown on their surfaces to give peanut-shaped nanocrystals made up of crystalline Co8S9 phases with amorphous PdSx phases at either end (Fig. 20a and b). A time-dependent growth investigation implied that the acorn-shaped PdSx/Co9S8 nanocrystals were formed first, which were then fused by facing each other with their less-passivated Co9S8 phases to yield peanut-like PdSx–Co9S8–PdSx nanocrystals (Fig. 20c).
 Fig. 20  (a) TEM image of Pd–Co–Pd sulfide peanut-shape nanoparticles (Inset: STEM-HAADF image). (b) HRTEM image of a single peanut-shape nanoparticle observed in the [110] direction. (c) Scheme of the synthesis of Pd–Co–Pd sulfide peanut-shape nanoparticles and Co–Pd acorn-shape nanoparticles using the PdSx seed-mediated growth method. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 321. 
Production of MC–MC heterostructures can also be realized by another synthetic technique, i.e., catalyst-assisted growth.328,329 Gao and co-workers prepared rod-like Cu2S/In2S3 heterostructures by employing multistep injections of In(acac)3 into a hot Cu(acac)2-dodecanethiol reaction system.328 It was found that the Cu1.94S nanoparticles which formed in the earliest stage of the synthesis acted as a catalyst for the subsequent anisotropic growth of the heterostructured nanorods. These high-melting-point Cu1.94S nanocrystals with large cationic mobilities were further used as a catalyst to prepare drop-like Cu2S/In2S3 nanocrystals and pencil-like In2S3 nanorods by manipulating the reaction kinetics carefully.328
4. Applications of MC/modified-MC nanomaterials in energy conversion and storage
The conversion and storage of clean and sustainable energy are major challenges that we are facing today under the background of the energy crisis. As the performance of ECS devices depend significantly upon the advancement of their materials, many new energy materials have been developed to meet these challenges. Based on their unique physical and chemical properties, nanostructured MC/modified MC materials promise many advanced applications in the development of ECS technologies. Moreover, MC nanomaterials possess several advantages such as low cost, earth abundance, and ease of acquirement, which are clearly of great importance for their practical applications. Very recently, Chen et al. highlighted the ECS applications of “metal sulfide nanostructure arrays” in their review.36 In this section, we attempt to give a more systematic overview on the current ECS applications of MCs as well as modified MCs with various nanostructures, ranging from fuel cells, electrochemical water splitting to lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors and solar cells.
4.1 MC/modified-MC nanomaterials for fuel cells
As devices for directly converting chemical energy into electrical energy, fuel cells that oxidize fuel at the anode and reduce oxygen from the air at the cathode to produce electricity for automotive propulsion have achieved great progress in many technical aspects related to their large-scale practical applications.8 Current research efforts have been dedicated to the development of fuel cells featuring high efficiency, low cost, and environmental compatibility, which greatly depend on the properties of the corresponding catalyst materials (the most key components for a fuel cell).8 Nowadays, the best and most frequently used catalysts for fuel cells are still the carbon nanomaterial-supported noble metal (particularly Pt) nanocomposites, which, however, suffer from drawbacks such as high costs, sluggish ORR kinetics, time-dependent drift and CO deactivation.8,41 Promisingly, the progress of material science reveals that transition MC (TMC) nanomaterials can be one of the very effective alternatives to the Pt/C electrocatalysts when their comparable catalytic performance towards ORR and much lower costs are considered.8,35,39–41
Baresel et al.330 first studied the ORR on various TMCs and pointed out that Co–S and Co–NiS systems possess certain catalytic activity in an acidic medium. Later, Behret et al.331 prepared various M(a)ZM(b)3−ZX4 thiospinels (M(a) = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu or Zn; M(b) = Ti, V, Cr, Fe, Co or Ni and X = S, Se or Te) and investigated the ORR activity on these thiospinel complexes in 2 M H2SO4vs. a hydrogen electrode systematically. The results exhibited that the activity of these thiospinel complexes was directly related to the type of metal utilized, with an order of Co > Ni > Fe. Additionally, a performance decrease was also found when S was partially replaced by O, Se or Te. After these pioneering works, research on TMCs was suspended for several decades – possibly due to the activity of these inexpensive materials being really hard to improve at that time.
In 1986, Alonso-Vante and co-workers,332 for the first time, reported that Chevrel-phase Ru–Mo chalcogenides (e.g., Mo4Ru2Se8) showed high ORR catalytic activity in acidic media, that even approached the performance of Pt. The great electrocatalytic activity was attributed to a reservoir of electrons in the pseudoternary compound. Afterwards, a series of ternary and pseudoternary Chevrel-phase analogs were further investigated.333–336 Although Ru metal has a low cost relative to Pt (only 4%),39 which still hinders the potential application of these Chevrel-phase Ru–Mo chalcogenides as cathode catalysts due to its high cost and scarce availability. Recently, Sidik and Anderson337 announced the results of their theoretical calculations to interpret the creditable activity of Co sulfide species after studying three different Co9S8 surface structures. It was found that the partially OH-covered (202) surface is active towards the ORR, with an onset potential of 0.74 V vs. RHE. This finding is also suitable for Co9Se8, although its ORR activity is often inferior to that of sulfur-based chalcogenides.338 These inspired theoretical investigations suggest the promising potential of Co-based chalcogenides as ORR electrocatalysts.218,339–341 Using Vulcan XC-72 carbon as a support material, Alonso-Vante et al.218 prepared carbon supported Co3S4 and CoSe2 (Co3S4/C and CoSe2/C, respectively) by three different reflux methods. After heat annealment at 250 °C in pure nitrogen, these Co-based chalcogenides were used for ORR tests in 0.5 M H2SO4. Co3S4/C materials synthesized by the surfactant-free method showed promising catalytic activity with onset potentials between 0.66 and 0.68 V vs. RHE, which were much higher than that of the third Co3S4/C prepared in the presence of a surfactant (onset potential of ∼0.3 V vs. RHE). It was believed that the surfactants used in the synthesis blocked the ORR active sites of Co3S4 and led to the poor activity. The authors later pointed out in a review paper that these newly-prepared or post-annealed Co3S4 nanoparticles were unstable under long term exposure to air, where phase transformation from Co3S4 to CoSO4 was observed by XRD characterization.39 The CoSe2/C nanocomposites synthesized by similar methods could reach an onset potential of 0.72 V vs. RHE in 0.5 M H2SO4,218 which can be further optimized to about 0.81 V vs. RHE by slight modification of these materials.340,341 However, the authors suggested the maximum operating potential of CoSe2/C must be lower than 0.87 V vs. RHE to avoid deactivation toward ORR.340
Almost simultaneously, Campbell and co-workers paid their attention to TMC thin films and systematically studied their ORR performances under acidic conditions. By a magnetic sputtering method, they successfully prepared a series of TMC thin films as model catalysts for the ORR.342–344 An advantage of these thin films is that their surface areas can be facilely defined so that activities can reasonably be related to the measured current densities, and to enable direct comparison with the Pt/C standard.343,344 In 2006, Campbell et al.342 fabricated three thin films of CoSe with different Co/Se ratios and studied their ORR activities in 0.1 M H2SO4, which were compared with the self-synthesized XC-72R carbon supported CoSe composite (CoSe/C). The results showed that CoSe/C exhibited an onset potential of 0.78 V vs. RHE, a little higher than the best CoSe thin film (0.74 V vs. RHE). Based on the cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests on these materials, the authors found some surface Co was leached out and gave a chalcogen-rich active surface, which surrounded the ORR active sites. Later, Campbell et al.343 extended their studies from Co-based chalcogenides to Fe-based chalcogenides and prepared FeS2 as well as (Fe, Co)S2 thin films. In comparison with the naturally occurring mineral FeS2 (pyrite),345 the FeS2 thin films displayed a much high ORR activity in acidic electrolytes, which is possibly due to the different surface sulfur contents. Interestingly, the (Fe, Co)S2 thin film showed a little higher onset potential [0.8 V for (Fe, Co)S2 and 0.78 V for FeS2, all vs. RHE] and improved catalytic current densities than that of the FeS2 thin film. This work indicated the possibility of introducing a transition metal species for enhanced ORR performance although the intrinsic mechanism of the improvement is unknown. The deduction was further proved by the latest work from the same group.344 Through a similar magnetic sputtering procedure, Campbell et al. synthesized a nickel containing (Co, Ni)S2 thin film and compared its activity with that of CoS2 and NiS2 thin films. As expected, the (Co, Ni)S2 thin film electrode showed the best performance with regard to both onset potential and current density in 0.1 M HClO4. Remarkably, the onset potential of 0.89 V vs. RHE was very close to that of the Pt electrode which had an onset potential of 1.02 V vs. RHE. In this work, several reasons have been proposed to interpret the observed ORR enhancement of the (Co, Ni)S2 thin film, which are briefly summed up as follows: 1) the synergistic effect due to adding NiS2 to CoS2, 2) electronic structure may be changed after alloying NiS2 with CoS2, and 3) the S-rich surface of the ternary films are more conductive.
Several other groups have been developing new TMC nanomaterials for use as ORR catalysts and a great advance has been achieved. Zhang et al.346 prepared W–Co–Se chalcogenide materials by a chemical precipitation method, using xylene as the solvent under reflux conditions. The new material showed an onset potential of 0.755 V vs. RHE under acidic conditions, which could be attributed to the electronic structure of W–Co modified by Se. In addition, this material showed an electrochemical stability between 0.05 and 0.8 V vs. RHE, which was also achieved by the Se contribution that enhanced the stability of W and Co at a high electrode potential in an acidic medium. Wu et al.347 prepared carbon-supported Co1.67Te2 composites via a solid-state reaction in an autoclave at elevated temperatures and studied their ORR performance in alkaline media (0.1 M KOH, pH 13). The best performing Co1.67Te2 were obtained at a temperature of 900 °C, showing an onset potential of −0.18 V vs. Ag/AgCl and the lowest peroxide yield (ca. 5%) (Fig. 21a and b). This cobalt telluride can reduce oxygen to OH− with high selectivity by a four-electron pathway. It is believed that the polymeric network with multiple Te–Te bonds of Co1.67Te2 is beneficial for oxygen adsorption and subsequent dissociation.
 Fig. 21  Steady-state ORR polarization plots (a) and H2O2 yield plots (b) measured with different carbon-supported CoTe catalysts in 0.1 M KOH solution saturated with oxygen at a rotating speed of 1200 rpm and room temperature. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 347. 
The modification of TMC nanocrystals with selected foreign materials can significantly improve their ORR performances for practical fuel cells applications. Some early work in this area has just appeared.58,61,294,318 Dai et al. reported the synthesis of a new Co1−xS–RGO hybrid material as an advanced ORR electrocatalyst.58 In 0.5 M H2SO4, the constructed hybrid catalyst exhibited an ORR onset potential of ∼0.8 V vs. RHE. In addition, the ORR current density that could be achieved was as high as 1.1 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V vs. RHE (catalyst loading, 100 μg cm−2; rotation rate, 1600 rpm). The presented performance is much better than any other cobalt sulfides reported in the literature. The RGO sheets underlying the Co1−xS not only provides an electrically conducting support to control the size of the anchored Co1−xS nanoparticles, but also results in the enhanced ORR activity through strong electrochemical coupling. A similar ORR improvement was also observed on the ZnSe/N-doped graphene nanocomposites.294 Recently, our group successfully loaded Fe3O4 nanoparticles with different particle sizes on the surfaces of pre-synthesized CoSe2/DETA mesostructured nanobelts, harvesting Fe3O4/CoSe2 nanohybrid catalysts.318 Compared with the original CoSe2/DETA catalyst, the onset potential and current density of the constructed catalyst showed 0.05 V and 1.01 mA cm−2 increases at 0.3 V vs. RHE, 1600 rpm, respectively. The number of electrons transferred (n) also increases from 2.1 to 3.6 after combining with Fe3O4 nanoparticles. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) revealed that the binding energy of Co 2p3/2 shifts from 778.5 to 777.8 eV after modifying with the Fe3O4 nanoparticles. The reduction of binding energy is possibly the result of the electron transfer from Fe3O4 to CoSe2, thus leading to O2 vacancies on the interfacial oxide, which become active sites for O2 absorption and activation.318 In addition, Wu et al. fabricated Co9S8–N–C nanocomposites via an inert atmosphere protected high-temperature synthesis route.348 Compared with other cobalt sulfides reported in the literature, the new Co9S8-N-C catalyst exhibits a notably improved ORR activity in alkaline media, which is relative to the commercial Pt/C catalyst. The unusual catalytic performance arises from the combination of ORR properties derived from both the Co–S species and nitrogen-doped carbon structure.
More recently, our group developed a methanol-tolerant Pt/CoSe2 nanobelt cathode catalyst with high ORR activity for direct-methanol fuel cells (DMFCs).61 Although TMCs can exhibit a certain methanol tolerance,35 their ORR activities are often too low for their usage. After modifying with Pt nanoparticles (average size of ∼8.3 nm, Fig. 18a), the obtained nanohybrid Pt/CoSe2 nanobelt catalysts showed much better ORR catalytic activity than the original CoSe2/DETA nanobelts (Fig. 22a and b) and cobalt chalcogenides discussed above. Specifically, the onset potential of Pt/CoSe2 showed a 0.3 V positive shift after modification, which is almost the same as that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 22b). An additional improvement in the ORR activity of Pt/CoSe2 may be achieved if a size-controlled and/or surfactant-free synthetic strategy can be developed. More importantly, the constructed material showed much better methanol tolerance than the commercial Pt/C catalyst. For the Pt/C catalyst, the ORR activity is significantly reduced in the presence of methanol, even at a very low concentration of 0.05 M (Fig. 22c). By sharp contrast, the ORR onset potential and current density for Pt/CoSe2 remain almost unchanged in the presence of different concentrations of methanol, even up to 5 M (Fig. 22d). Such an excellent stability of Pt/CoSe2 at high methanol concentrations is attributed to the CoSe2/DETA nanobelts used. This new nanohybrid material with relatively high ORR activity and outstanding methanol-tolerance is highly desirable for cathode catalysts in DMFCs.
 Fig. 22  (a) Polarization curves for ORR on pristine CoSe2/DETA nanobelts in N2- and O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at different rotation rates, respectively. (b) Polarization curves for ORR on pristine CoSe2/DETA nanobelts, 22.1 wt% Pt/CoSe2 nanobelts, and 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solutions. (c, d) Polarization curves for ORR on 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst (c) and 22.1 wt% Pt/CoSe2 nanobelts (d) in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte containing 0, 0.5, 1, and 5 M methanol. Sweep rate: 50 mV s−1; rotation rate: 2500 rpm. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 61. 
4.2 MC/modified-MC nanomaterials for electrochemical water splitting
Hydrogen is considered to be the promising and appealing fuel of the future world. Compared with the widely employed steam reformed hydrogen (i.e., the reaction of methane and water to form hydrogen and carbon dioxide), electrocatalytically produced hydrogen from water splitting can be more renewable, scalable and environment-friendly. One key step in water splitting is the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER, 2H+ + 2e− → H2), which needs an excellent catalyst to reduce the overpotential and consequently increase the efficiency of this important electrochemical process. To date, electrochemical water splitting still highly relies on the use of Pt metal as the HER catalyst, which, however, is among the rarest elements in the Earth's crust. It remains challenging to develop highly effective HER catalysts which rely on materials that are more abundant at low costs. Recent advances in material science have revealed that MCs, especially nanostructured MoS2,349–353 are promisingly inexpensive alternatives to Pt for the electrochemical generation of hydrogen from water.
In 2005, Nørskov et al.349 proposed that an optimal HER catalyst should provide catalytic surfaces that exhibit a Gibbs free energy of adsorbed hydrogen close to zero (i.e., ΔGoH ≅ 0) based on their density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Free-energy diagrams calculated with DFT reveal that hydrogen adsorption on Pt surfaces associated with the smallest free-energy change among Au, Ni and Mo (Fig. 23a). Similar calculations were also applied to analyze the active sites in hydrogenases and nitrogenases, two kinds of enzymes which catalyze HER effectively. As shown in Fig. 23a, the enzymes have hydrogen adsorption properties very similar to those of Pt, which both fulfil the criterion of ΔGoH ≅ 0. Using ΔGoH as a good descriptor, the authors tried to search for promising HER catalysts from a broad range of material systems. One compound they found to computationally obey the criterion is MoS2 (Fig. 23a), whose reasonable hydrogen evolution rate was further observed experimentally. Two years later, Chorkendorff et al.351 reported the identification of the active edge sites of MoS2 HER nanocatalysts by using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). The surface active sites of solid-state catalysts are often difficult to identify for the complicacy and variety, which, however, are very critical to the design and development of improved HER catalysts. In an ultra-high vacuum (UHV), the authors deposited Mo on a clean Au(111) surface in a background of H2S to prepare MoS2 samples, which were then annealed at 400 or 500 °C for STM imaging and HER measurement. Inset in Fig. 23b gives a STM image of the atomically resolved MoS2 particle annealed at 550 °C, from which a flat polygon morphology with conducting edge states can be seen. Polarization curves for the as-prepared MoS2 samples and a blank sample, as well as the corresponding Tafel plots are shown in Fig. 23b and c, respectively. All of the MoS2 samples possess Tafel slopes between 55 and 60 mV per decade irrespective of annealing temperature and coverage. Furthermore, the exchange current density, which is the most inherent measure of activity for the HER, was determined in the range of 1.3 × 10−7 to 3.1 × 10−7 A cmgeometric−2 for all MoS2 samples. The relationship between the exchange current density and MoS2 edge length was plotted in Fig. 23d, where the data points fall on a straight line with a slope of 1.67 × 10−20 A nmMoS2-edge−1. This result means that the HER rates are directly proportional to the number of edge sites for all samples, and therefore the edge sites are indeed the active sites of the MoS2 nanoparticles. In this work, Chorkendorff et al. also indicated that only a quarter of the edge sites are used for hydrogen generation.357 Tuning the electronic structure of the edge to increase the bond strength of the adsorbed hydrogen is a big challenge, although it can improve the utilization efficiency of MoS2 edge sites for hydrogen adsorption greatly. Very recently, Long et al.354 reported a well-defined MoIV-disulfide molecule that mimics the structure of the proposed triangular active edge site fragment of MoS2 to catalytically produce hydrogen from acidic organic media and from acidic water. This study describes an alternative route to harvest a high density of catalytically active metal sites by tailoring the discrete molecular units.
 Fig. 23  (a) Calculated free energy diagram for hydrogen evolution at a potential U = 0 relative to the standard hydrogen electrode at pH = 0. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 349. (b) Polarization curves for HER on five different MoS2 samples as well as a blank sample. Inset in (b) gives the STM image of atomically resolved MoS2 particles on Au(111), from a sample annealed to 550 °C, showing the predominance of the sulfide Mo-edge (60 Å by 60 Å, 1.0 nA, 300 mV). (c) Tafel plots derived from (b). (d) Exchange current density versus MoS2 edge length (open circles are samples annealed to 400 °C, filled circles are samples annealed to 550 °C). Reproduced with permission of AAAS from ref. 351. 
Besides nanoparticulate MoS2, amorphous MoSx (x = 2 and 3) has also been found to be a promising non-precious catalyst for HER.355–357 Hu et al.355 reported the successful fabrication of amorphous MoSx films via simple electropolymerization of [MoS4]2− at room temperature and ambient pressure. Although the precatalysts could be MoS3 or MoS2, the real active form of the catalyst is amorphous MoS2. The obtained amorphous film works in water and is compatible with a wide range of pHs (0–13). Importantly, this catalyst can achieve a geometric current density of 15 mA cm−2 at a low overpotential of 200 mV, which is among the most active inexpensive HER catalysts. The obtained amorphous MoS2 film shows a Tafel slope of 40 mV per decade, which is lower than that of MoS2 nanoparticles351 (55 to 60 mV per decade) or MoS2 crystals352 (120 mV per decade), indicating a rate-determining ion + atom step. Due to the amorphous nature, MoS2 films may possess more unsaturated active sites on the edges than that of MoS2 single crystals and MoS2 nanoparticles, which thus lead to their better HER performances. However, the yields of MoSx films synthesized by electropolymerization procedures are very low, which hampers their large-scale applications. A latest report from Hu and co-workers356 described that amorphous MoS3 particles could be obtained upon acidification of a solution of MoO3 and Na2S under mild conditions. The as-synthesized amorphous MoS3 particles were then loaded onto FTO, glassy carbon, and carbon paste electrodes to form modified electrodes for HER tests, which all displayed excellent HER activities. After annealing, the amorphous MoS3 particles were transformed to polycrystalline and single-crystalline MoS3 and MoS2 particles, which together with commercial MoS2 micro-crystals, exhibited inferior HER activity compared with the amorphous MoS3 particles.
Excitingly, quite a few investigations have proved that the HER performance of molybdenum sulfides could be significantly improved by introducing another selected functional material to form MoS2-based hybrids or composites.57,228,319,325,358,359 Using mildly oxidized GO as a support, Dai et al.57 realized the in situ growth of MoS2 on RGO by a simple solvothermal reaction. The constructed MoS2–RGO hybrid catalyst (Fig. 17b) has nanoscopic few-layer MoS2 structures with many exposed edges stacked onto graphene, which showed outstanding HER catalytic activity with a small overpotential of about 0.1 V in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. Furthermore, a Tafel slope of approximately 41 mV per decade was measured for the MoS2–RGO catalyst, suggesting electrochemical desorption as the rate-limiting step in the catalyzed HER. It should be noted that the measured Tafel slope is a very small value for a MoS2 catalyst, which can only be exceeded by amorphous MoS2 films (40 mV per decade) developed by Hu and co-workers.355 It has been proposed that the copious catalytic edge sites on the MoS2 nanoparticles, as well as the excellent electrical coupling to the underlying graphene network, led to the advanced HER catalyst. Another interesting example is that Jaramillo et al.319 reported a low-temperature sulfidization method for the growth of a MoS2 layer around MoO3 nanowires. The resulting MoO3/MoS2 nanowire catalyst could utilize the best properties of each component material, that is, the MoO3 serves as a highly conductive core, while the conformal MoS2 shell serves as both a HER catalyst and a protective layer. This new HER catalyst was found to exhibit very high current densities (>10 mA cm−2) at a low overpotential and remain stable under corrosive acidic conditions (pH < 1), which is highly active and durable compared with other non-noble materials.
Other MCs, such as WS2,357 NiSe,206 and Ni–S alloys,360 have also emerged as new electrocatalysts for HER in water. In a recent study, our group reported a sea urchin-like NiSe nanostructure that shows high activity for the HER in 0.5 M H2SO4,206 which, unexpectedly, is comparable to the best performance of the well-studied MoS2 catalysts. In nature, the H2 production is catalyzed by the active sites of hydrogenases using nickel and iron ions.361 Inspired by this, considerable research efforts for new HER catalysts have been focused on nickel- and iron-based materials.206 Recent advances show that the Ni element in some Ni-based compounds [e.g., Ni(OH)2] can help to cleave the O–H bond of absorbed water,362 thus facilitating the conversion of H2O to H2. The new sea urchin-like NiSe catalyst showed higher HER current densities than the previous MoS2 catalysts at the same potential with similar loadings.353 The experimentally observed Tafel slope of ∼64 mV per decade for the obtained Ni-based catalyst indicates that electrochemical desorption is the rate-determining step for the HER processes. A big disadvantage of such a NiSe catalyst is its poor stability, whose improvement should be a focus of further investigations. As forecasted by Norskov and Christensen,350 there may be other MCs that are better HER catalysts than MoS2, what we have to do is to design and create them on the basis of as-known and unknown theories as well as repetitious experiments.
In the process of water splitting, another key step is the oxygen evolution reaction (OER, 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−). Compared with HER, the OER is much more challenging in that it involves the removal of a total of four electrons and four protons from two water molecules to form one O2 molecule. The multiple bond rearrangements as well as sluggish OER kinetics severely test the OER catalysts, which should be not only fast, stable, but also capable of water oxidation at a potential minimally above the thermodynamic value (i.e., 1.299–0.059 × pH at 25 °C).363 Currently, the best and commonly used catalysts for the OER are ruthenium (Ru) and iridium (Ir) oxides, although unfortunately they contain rare and expensive metals. Thus, searching for cost-effective alternatives which provide the availability for large-scale application and also high efficiency are critical to viable water electrolytic systems.
Many cobalt (Co)-based materials are now emerging as interesting low-cost and effective catalysts for the OER, mainly containing Co-based molecular catalysts and cobalt oxide materials.363 The report on using cobalt chalcogenides as OER catalysts is rare. For cobalt oxides, it has been well documented that CoIV cations play a key role in enabling the OER.364,365 The role of the CoIV species for the electrochemical oxidation of water in base was recently proposed by Bell et al.364 In short, the presence of CoIV cations was believed to improve the electrophilicity of the adsorbed O and thus helps to facilitate the formation of O–OH via nucleophilic attack, which was also believed to promote the deprotonation of the OOH species, via an electron-withdrawing inductive effect, to generate O2.364 Bearing this in mind, our group reported on a kind of cobalt selenide nanostructures (i.e., CoIVSe2/DETA nanobelts) that, when modified with Mn3O4 nanoparticles, exhibited an unprecedented activity and stability for the OER in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte.60 From Fig. 24a, we can see that pure CoSe2/DETA nanobelts show certain electrocatalytic activity for water oxidation, while the constructed Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid catalyst displays a greater current and earlier onset of the catalytic current as compared with the pure CoSe2/DETA nanobelts as well as the commercial Pt/C reference. The current density of 10 mA cm−2 can be achieved at a small overpotential of ∼0.45 V for the Mn3O4/CoSe2 catalyst, which is comparable to the performance of the best reported Co3O4/graphene catalyst at a similar loading (0.2 mg cm−2).366 The Tafel slope of the Mn3O4/CoSe2 catalyst was found to be ∼49 mV per decade (Fig. 24b), which is smaller than that of pure CoSe2 nanobelts and the previously reported Co-based OER catalysts, such as Co3O4/graphene, at a similar loading.366 More importantly, the new Mn3O4/CoSe2 catalyst exhibited outstanding stability for the OER. Fig. 24c shows that, after 1200 potential cycles, the constructed Mn3O4/CoSe2 almost afforded the same J–V curves as the initial catalyst, the only difference being negligible drops of the anodic current.
 Fig. 24  (a) Polarization curves for the OER on the bare GC electrode and modified GC electrodes comprising the Mn3O4 nanorods, 20 wt% Pt/C, pure CoSe2/DETA nanobelts, and Mn3O4–CoSe2 hybrid, respectively. (b) Tafel plots derived from (a). (c) The OER polarization curves for the Mn3O4–CoSe2 hybrid before and after different cycles of the accelerated stability test. (d) Co 2p XPS spectra for the pure CoSe2/DETA nanobelts and as-constructed Mn3O4–CoSe2 hybrid. Inset in (d) demonstrates the electron donation from Mn3O4 to CoSe2. Pink and yellow correspond to Co and Se atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 60. 
It should be noticed that pure Mn3O4 materials only slightly affect the OER activity, the excellent OER activity of Mn3O4–CoSe2 catalyst should originate from the surface CoIV of the ultrathin CoSe2 nanobelts. The understanding of how Mn3O4 works as a synergist to improve the OER activity of CoSe2/DETA nanobelts is very interesting. Fig. 24d compares the Co 2p XPS data of pure CoSe2/DETA and the Mn3O4–CoSe2 catalyst, which reveals that the electron binding energy of Co 2p has a ∼0.84 eV decrease after anchoring to Mn3O4, indicating the electron transfer from Mn3O4 to CoSe2. Based on this observation, the authors proposed that Mn3O4 (Lewis acid) will be more acidic, which facilitates the activation of H2O (Lewis base) molecules through Lewis acid–base interactions, thus leading to the improved OER activity of the hybrid catalyst.
4.3 MC/modified-MC nanomaterials for lithium ion batteries
The history of rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) is not very long. In 1972, Armand first suggested rechargeable LIBs based on the intercalation concept,367 and the first commercial LIBs were realized by researchers at Sony Energytech in the late 1980s.24 Currently, LIBs have become one of the most promising energy storage systems for various applications, ranging from portable electronic devices to future electric vehicles, hybrid electric vehicles, and emerging smart grids.21 The commercial LIBs often utilize graphite as an anode and Li-ion host materials (e.g., LiCoO2) as the cathodes. However, limits exist in these electrode materials. For example, at the anode, graphite has only a theoretical capacity of 372 mA h g−1 to form LiC6, and a very slow Li-ion diffusion rate of 10−8 cm2 s−1, which inevitably leads to a small energy density and low powder density of the battery, respectively.21,24,25 Many new electrode materials, such as graphene, metals, metal oxides, metal phosphides, LiMn2O4 and LiFePO4,21,24,25 have been designed and developed to respond to these challenges. Owing to their high lithium storage capacity and long cycling life, TMCs have been considered as very potential electrode materials for application in LIBs.25,368
A number of TMC nanostructures have been studied as cathode materials, including CuS,235 Cu2S,287 Na/Cu2S,369 CuxS/Cu,370 NiS,371 NiS2,372 Ni3S2,286,373–375 TiS2,376 VS2377 and so on. Chen et al.286 reported that Ni2S3 nanowire arrays exhibited superb rate capability even at a rate of 10C and the capacity delivered was as high as 2.5 times that of the commercially used LiCoO2 (<145 mA h g−1) cathode material. The outstanding electrochemical performance was suggested to be ascribed to the nanowire arrays having increased reaction sites, improved cycle life in the face of mechanical strain and efficient charge transport. In later work reported by the same group, the authors used a Cu2S nanowire array as a working cathode of a LIB.287 The reversible capacity of the Cu2S nanowire array was determined to be about 230 mA h g−1, which is as high as 1.6 times that of LiCoO2 and can maintain more than 50% after 100 cycles at a high rate of 2C.
By contrast, many other TMCs such as SnS,141 SnSe,116 In2S3,107,144 Sb2Se3,165 ZnS,378 Al2S3379 and layered TMDs (i.e., MS2, M = Mo, W, Sn, Co, Zr)44,45,126,161,293,380–385 have been intensively explored as anode materials for LIBs. Among these TMC nanomaterials, layered MS2 nanostructures are the most attractive because they can serve as excellent intercalation hosts for lithium. A typical layered TMD represents an analogous structure of graphene, which is composed of three stacked atom layers (S–M–S) held together by weak van der Waals forces. During lithium intercalation, a complete charge transfer occurs, which involves not only the reduction of M4+ to M3+ but also the diffusion of Li ions into the van der Waals gaps.25 Based on TMD anodes, high capacity and good cycling stability were observed. Cho et al.44 fabricated new MoS2 nanoplates, which exhibited a reversible capacity of 912 mA h g−1 at a rate of 1C and a super reversible capacity of 554 mA h g−1 even after 20 cycles at 50 C (= 53.1 A g−1), which they suggested was to be attributed to the disordered graphene-like nanostructures that accommodated more Li+ and led to the cycling stability. Cheon and co-workers126 found that layered SnS2 nanoplates significantly improved the host capabilities as an anode for LIBs. The experimentally measured discharge capacity of 1311 mA h g−1 for the first cycle was close to the sum of theoretical irreversible capacity (587 mA h g−1) and maximum theoretical reversible capacity (645 mA h g−1). The cycle life test revealed that these SnS2 nanoplates show an average discharge capacity that is as high as 583 mA h g−1 for 30 cycles, which is 90% of the maximum theoretical reversible values, and 1.6 times higher than that of commercial carbon anode (372 mA h g−1). The enhanced electrochemical properties were ascribed to the well-defined layered structure, finite lateral size and enhanced open-edges of the unique SnS2 nanoplates.
More-successful electrode materials for LIBs based on TMCs can be achieved by combining them with other popular LIB materials, which was proved by several typical examples including In2S3/graphene,107 FeS/C,299 MoS2/graphene,295,297 MoS2/CNTs,386 MoS2/amorphous carbon,387 SnS2/graphene,298 SnS2/SiO2,388 CoS2/C,389 and so on. For example, Zhi et al.298 successfully prepared porous SnS2/graphene nanohybrid materials via a two-step approach, which provided significantly improved transport kinetics for both Li ions and electrons in SnS2. Yan et al.299 prepared FeS/C nanosheets by a surfactant-assisted solution-based method, which depict a specific capacity of 233 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles (discharge rate: 10C) and a much better cycling life than that of FeS nanocrystals. Very recently, Chen and co-workers297 developed a facile in situ solution-phase reduced method for preparing MoS2/graphene nanosheets (MoS2/GNS) as an advanced anode material for LIBs. From Fig. 25b, it can observed that the first charge and discharge capacities are 2200 and 1300 mA h g−1 for the MoS2/GNS electrode, which are much higher than the capacity of the bare MoS2 electrode (Fig. 25a). Fig. 25c reveals that the MoS2/GNS composites can retain the reversible capacity of 1290 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles, about 2.2 times higher than that of the free MoS2 electrode (605 mA h g−1), indicating the extraordinary cycling behavior of the constructed composites. Fig. 25d shows that the MoS2/GNS composites also possess a good rate capability, which can remain at 1040 mA h g−1 even when the current density is as high as 1000 mA g−1. It was suggested that the synergetic effect between the conducting GNS and MoS2 should be responsible for the outstanding LIB performance by improving the efficiency of charge transportation from the MoS2 layers to the graphene layers.
 Fig. 25  (a, b) Calvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the bare MoS2 electrode and MoS2/GNS electrode at a current density of 100 mA g−1 for the 1st and 2nd cycles, respectively. (c) Cycling performance of the MoS2 and MoS2/GNS electrodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (d) Cycling performance of the MoS2/GNS electrode at various current densities. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 297. 
4.4 MC/modified-MC nanomaterials for supercapacitors
Electrochemical capacitors or supercapacitors have attracted intensive research interest in recent years, mainly due to their high power density, rapid charging and discharging, long lifespans (>100000 cycles), wide thermal operating range, and great safety. Based on the underlying energy storage mechanism, supercapacitors can be divided into two kinds: electrical double-layer supercapacitors (EDLS) and pseudocapacitors. EDLS generally store the electrical energy by electrostatic accumulation of charges at the electrode/electrolyte interface, while pseudocapacitors store electrical energy by the fast and reversible surface redox reactions (i.e., faradaic reactions).32 The advancement of supercapacitor technologies can benefit from the development of nanostructured electrode materials. Recent progress in material science has shown that carbon-based materials, conducting polymers and metal oxides are very effective electrode materials for supercapacitors.32 Notwithstanding that, tremendous research efforts on supercapacitors are still highly focused on discovering new electrode materials with enhanced energy-power capability and diminished cost to realize their extensive usage in our life time.
Due to their interesting intrinsic properties as well as good performance, some MC nanomaterials are receiving increasing attention as electrode materials for supercapacitors.46,187,282,390–393 Lou et al.392 reported the synthesis of hierarchical NiS hollow spheres by an efficient template-engaged conversion method. In virtue of the unique structural features and high BET, these NiS hollow spheres show high specific capacitances of 583–927 F g−1 at various current densities of 4.08–10.2 A g−1. In addition, over 70% of the initial capacitances can be retained even after deep cycling of 1000–3000 cycles. Later, the same group393 prepared CoS2 ellipsoids with anisotropic tube-like cavities by simultaneous thermal decomposition and sulfidation of preformed CoCO3 ellipsoidal microparticles. A high specific capacitance as high as 1040 F g−1 was achieved at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, which is owed to the novel anisotropic cavities that facilitate the infiltration of the electrolyte and also provide a more active surface. Bulk VS2 flakes can be exfoliated into ultrathin VS2 nanosheets with less than five S–V–S atomic layers by an ammonia-assisted strategy.46 The as-exfoliated VS2 nanosheets can be directly assembled into highly c oriented VS2 thin films for constructing the electrodes of in-plane supercapacitors.
In spite of the above efforts, there is still a need to explore and develop the performance of MC materials by effective routes (e.g., forming MC-based composites) in order to achieve high-quality electrode materials for supercapacitor applications.
4.5 MC/modified-MC nanomaterials for solar cells
The conversion of sunlight into electric power by solar cells has long been highly noticed by researchers across many disciplines because they may supplement or even replace fossil fuels to meet the growing energy demand cleanly and sustainably. Except for traditional silicon-based solar cells, several newly emerging solar cells, such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), polymer–inorganic nanocrystal hybrid solar cells, and organic solar cells, have attracted tremendous attention. For example, DSSCs may be the most promising light-to-energy conversion devices due to their low cost, easy fabrication, environmental friendliness, and high efficiency.394
Many MC nanocrystals are proved to be favorable options for solar absorber materials and device architectures.104,108,110,395–401 The use of expensive and rare Pt as a counter electrode seriously impedes the large-scale manufacturing of DSSCs. Promisingly, some MC nanomaterials such as FeS,395 FeS2,395 CoS,396 and NiS,397 were reported as efficient counter electrode materials with remarkable stability. A low-temperature hydrothermal method for the in situ growth of metal selenides (Co0.85Se and Ni0.85Se) on transparent conductive glass (F-doped SnO2, FTO) has been developed by Wang and co-workers.398Fig. 26a–c show that graphene-like Co0.85Se nanosheets with high crystallization were deposited on FTO. As to Ni0.85Se, spherical nanoparticles were formed instead of nanosheets.398 The as-obtained Co0.85Se/Ni0.85Se coated FTOs were directly used as counter electrodes to assemble DSSCs without any post-treatments. Excitingly, the graphene-like Co0.85Se achieved a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.40% versus 8.64% for Pt under the same conditions (Fig. 26d), which is the highest PCE for the I−/I3− redox couple based DSSCs with Pt-free cathodes under AM1.5G simulated solar light (100 mW cm−2). Using quantum dots (QDs) as a sensitizer can bring distinct advantages for DSSCs, including a tunable absorption spectrum, rapid charge separation, and a low Shockley-Queisser limit. In a recent report, Yu et al.399 prepared SnSe2 QD-sensitized TiO2 photoanodes using (NH4)3(N2H5)4Sn2Se6 as the precursors. The assembled QDSSC showed a PCE of 0.12%, which is dramatically larger than that of 0.004% for the bare TiO2 solar cell under the same conditions (AM 1.5G, 1 sun). It is suggested that the in situ deposition of SnSe2 QDs on the surface of TiO2 can enhance the electron transformation from SnSe2 to TiO2 and thus leads to high performance solar cells.
 Fig. 26  (a–c) SEM, TEM and HRTEM images of as-synthesized Co0.85Se, respectively. (d) Photocurrent density–voltage characteristics of DSSCs with different CEs, measured at AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 398. 
Polymer–inorganic nanocrystal hybrid solar cells, as the name suggests, are photovoltaic devices that are made from organic polymers and inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals, which have the advantages of both materials and hold the great potential of low-cost manufacture. In a typical hybrid device, the polymers are the electron donors and hole-transport medium while the inorganic nanocrystals often serve as the electron acceptors and electron-transport medium.14 Since the first CdSe–poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) hybrid solar cell was designed and fabricated by Alivisatos et al. in 2002,402 many other MC nanocrystals have also been proposed as promising candidates for such devices, including SnSe/P3HT,108,109 In2S3/P3HT,401 FeS2/P3HT,403etc. For instance, Li et al.109 developed an efficient solution phase synthetic method to achieve colloidal SnSe nanowires with tunable lengths. The hybrid solar cells based on a blend of the long SnSe nanowires and P3HT showed a PCE of 0.01%, which was enhanced by 174% in comparison with the neat P3HT device (PCE = 0.0038%) under the same conditions (AM 1.5G sun). The obviously improved PCE implies that the SnSe nanowires play an important role in the photogeneration of charges and the subsequent transfer from P3HT to SnSe.
5. Summary and perspective
It is predicted that the world will need nearly 30 TW (1012) of new power by 2050.12 The huge energy requirement and fossil-fuel induced environmental pollution create an enormous strain for scientists to develop clean and sustainable technologies to provide abundant energy in an economically viable way. ECS devices such as fuel cells, photoelectrochemical water splitting cells, solar cells, Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors, etc. have the capability to power the energy demanding areas that range from portable electronics to transportation and even stationary.4 Nevertheless, the real application of ECS devices will depend critically on synthesizing new functional materials with the merits of low cost, high efficiency, and outstanding properties.
When used as catalysts or electrode materials for ECS systems, nanostructured materials are found to be more effective than their bulk counterparts due to the following several advantages: (1) higher specific surface areas and more active sites, (2) longer cycle life, (3) higher electric conductivity, and (4) shorter path lengths for the transport of electrons.36 Recent advances have proved that nanostructured MCs are great potential materials for ECS utilization because of their unique physical and chemical properties and because of the above listed “nanoscale effects”. Moreover, the performance in terms of activity, stability, capacity, and efficiency of the MC materials can be further refined by modifying with other functional nanomaterials. The newly emerging nanostructured MC materials as well as MC-based nanocomposites are now offering significant opportunities for the development of cost-effective, efficient, and environmentally benign ECS devices.
This review focuses on the progress made over the past decade related to the liquid-phase synthesis and modification of nanostructured MC materials and their corresponding applications for ECS devices. Fifteen kinds of typical and mostly used methods for various MCs with different nanostructures are systematically summarized. The key reaction parameters that influence the nucleation and growth as well as the size, shape, composition, and structure are carefully discussed. Four types of MC-based nanocomposites/nanohybrids including MC–carbon, MC–noble metals, MC–metal oxides, and MC–MC are also highlighted in terms of synthetic strategies and improved properties. These MC/modified MC nanomaterials appear promising to meet the performance requirements for intensively explored ECS devices that range from energy conversion (fuel cells, photoelectrochemical water splitting cells, and solar cells) to energy storage (Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors). Developing smart material-design strategies and novel synthetic technologies may generate superior MC nanomaterials for more advanced ECS applications. Of note, it is not intended that this review covers the Cd- and Pb-based chalcogenides, which have been well summarized by a number of excellent review articles, interested readers can refer to the related literature.
Although the last decade has witnessed great progress in the synthesis of nanostructured MC/modified-MC materials and their applications for ECS devices, challenges still exist. For fuel cells, the ORR activity of the MC-based catalysts is still lower than commercial Pt/C catalysts and much lower than the Department of Energy (DOE) 2015 target of 300 A cm−3.40 Additionally, the ORR stability should be largely improved for practical fuel cell applications. Although some MC nanomaterials such as MoS2 are very promising noble-metal-free HER catalysts for electrochemical H2 production, the best performance of these materials is still inferior to the Pt or Pt-based catalysts. More-successful MC-based catalysts are also desperately desired to replace the expensive RuO2 and IrO2 catalysts used for the OER. Regarding Li-ion batteries, tremendous research efforts are still needed to design and explore new MC-based electrode materials with a higher lithium storage capacity, columbic efficiency and longer cycling life to overcome the current challenges. The use of MC-based nanomaterials in supercapacitors is in its infancy, which also confronts the puzzle of limited energy density. Moreover, the PCE of the current MC-based solar cell devices is still low and needs to be greatly enhanced to reach the goals of scalable applications and a promising market foreground. To ease these challenges, more attention should be focused on the design and development of new and highly-effective MC nanomaterials, which often directly determine the performance of these devices. In the future, research directions on MC nanomaterials for ECS applications would be proposed as following:
We should not only inherit the existing synthetic methods but also develop new and advanced synthetic strategies to generate high-quality MC nanomaterials. We need to make vigorous efforts to understand the relationship between the reaction parameters and the final structure and properties of the MC nanocrystals as well as their underlying nucleation and growth mechanism in solution, which could guide us to the design of desired MC nanomaterials rather than just the preparation of them.
We should pay close attention to the specific surface area, size, and phase purity of the MC nanomaterials. Higher specific areas can offer more active sites. Based on this understanding, porous MCs, MC thin films, single-layer or few-layer MCs, and amorphous MCs have received particular interest. Controlling MC nanocrystals with an appropriate crystal size is also important. Bigger crystal sizes will lead to smaller specific surface areas and thus lower activity, while smaller sizes often suffer from faster collapse in the crystalline structure and thus lower stability. Furthermore, we also need to ensure the phase purity of the as-synthesized MCs in that any impurities may bring unexpected performance degradation.
We should think highly of the material engineering of MCs to give combined composite/hybrid materials. The modification techniques could help us access a huge number of new MC-based nanocomposites/nanohybrids, which not only integrate the properties of the individual MCs, but also bring new collective and synchronic functions. Moreover, enhanced performances of MC nanomaterials at the nanoscale can be observed due to the synergetic chemical coupling effects. Although recent progress has shown successful cases such as MC–carbon, MC–noble metals, MC–metal oxides, and MC–MC, a wide range of other MC-based material combinations is highly pursued for broadening and enhancing the applications of MC-based nanomaterials.
We should attach importance to the fundamental understanding of the principles of energy conversion and storage. For example, an in-depth understanding of the ORR mechanisms and their relationship with the structure and composition of the catalyst active sites is beneficial to tailor new catalyst structures and ORR activity levels.40 In addition, new insights are needed into the electro(photo)chemical water splitting mechanism, especially regarding the identification of any thermodynamic and kinetic bottlenecks. Furthermore, more theoretical investigations into the electronic properties, crystal and surface structure as well as synergetic effects of MC/modified-MC nanomaterials should be made based on first-principle calculations, which in combination with smart experimental strategies will greatly shorten the development process of highly efficient MC-based nanomaterials for ECS applications.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the funding support from the National Basic Research Program of China (Grant 2010CB934700), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 91022032, 21061160492, J1030412), the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant KJZD-EW-M01-1), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2012BAD32B05-4), the International Science & Technology Cooperation Program of China (Grant 2010DFA41170), and the Principal Investigator Award by the National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory at University of Science and Technology of China.
Notes and references
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4269 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. AricÒ, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. V. Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
Y. J. Wang, D. P. Wilkinson and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 7625–7651 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Adzic, J. Zhang, K. Sasaki, M. B. Vukmirovic, M. Shao, J. X. Wang, A. U. Nilekar, M. Marvikakis, J. A. Valerio and F. Uribe, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 249–262 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Sahoo, Y. Z. Pan, L. Li and S. H. Chan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4203–4210 CrossRef CAS .
C. Koenigsmann and S. S. Wong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1161–1176 RSC .
A. A. Gewirth and M. S. Thorum, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 3557–3566 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
C. Laberty-Robert, K. Vallé, F. Pereira and C. Sanchen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 961–1005 RSC .
S. J. Guo and E. K. Wang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 240–264 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Habas, H. A. S. Platt, F. A. M. van Hest and D. S. Ginley, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6571–6594 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664–6688 Search PubMed .
G. Q. Zhang, S. Finefrock, D. X. Liang, G. G. Yadav, H. R. Yang, H. Y. Fang and Y. Wu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2430–2443 RSC .
A. Kubacka, M. Fernández-García and G. Colón, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1555–1614 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. Mckone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4301 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1497–1514 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. X. Wang, L. Q. Chen and X. J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4593–4607 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Ji, Z. Lin, M. Alcoutlabi and X. W. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2682–2699 RSC .
Z. G. Yang, J. L. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. C. Lu, D. W. Choi and J. P. Lemmon, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Liu and X. W. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4097–4111 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, W. Naoi, S. Aoyagi, J. I. Miyamoto and T. Kamino, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012 DOI:10.1021/ar200308h .
M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1294–1301 RSC .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
G. P. Wang, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
A. Ghosh and Y. H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 480–499 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, J. J. Liang and Y. S. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 1805–1834 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, J. Jiang and S. H. Yu, Small, 2012, 8, 13–27 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lai, M. Y. Lu and L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19–30 RSC .
M. Yuan and D. B. Mitzi, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6065–6236 RSC .
P. D. Antunez, J. J. Buckley and R. L. Brutchey, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2399–2411 RSC .
Y. J. Feng and N. Alonso-Vante, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 1792–1806 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, D. Higgins, A. P. Yu, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3167–3192 RSC .
A. Morozan, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1238–1254 RSC .
C. X. Guo, G. H. Guai and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 448–452 Search PubMed .
P. D. Antunez, J. J. Buckley and R. L. Brutchey, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2399–2411 RSC .
H. Hwang, H. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4826–4830 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Seo, Y. W. Jun, S. W. Park, H. Nah, T. Moon, B. Park, J. G. Kim, Y. J. Kim and J. Cheon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8828–8831 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, X. Sun, C. Z. Wu, L. L. Peng, C. W. Lin, S. L. Hu, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17832–17838 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. EI-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, J. Duay and S. B. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1384–1404 RSC .
K. B. Tang, Y. T. Qian, J. H. Zeng and X. G. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 448–450 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar and T. Nann, Small, 2006, 2, 316–329 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Zhao, L. F. Hu and X. S. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1551–1566 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5492–5513 RSC .
J. Park, J. Joo, S. G. Kwon, Y. J. Jiang and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4630–4660 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, Nano Res., 2010, 2, 425–447 .
R. Costi, A. E. Saunders and U. Banin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2–22 .
L. Carbone and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 449–493 CrossRef .
Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, G. S. Hong and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li and H. J. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10969–10972 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, W. T. Yao, H.-B. Yao and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7486–7487 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, Y. F. Xu, J. Jiang, Y. R. Zheng and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2930–2933 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, Q. Gao, J. Jiang, C. H. Cui, W. T. Yao and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4905–4908 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Oh, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8433–8445 RSC .
H. Y. Fu and S. W. Tsang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2187–2201 RSC .
H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, A. Gomathi, A. K. Manna, D. J. Late, R. Datta, S. K. Pati and C. N. R. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4059–4062 .
J. Feng, L. L. Peng, C. Z. Wu, X. Su, S. L. Hu, C. W. Lin, J. Dai, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1969–1974 Search PubMed .
S. K. Mishra, S. Satpathy and O. Jepsen, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1997, 9, 461–470 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Bouroushian, Electrochemistry of Metal Chalcogenides, Monographs in Electrochemistry, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Chemistry of intercalation compounds, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1978, 12, 41–99 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Marseglia, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1983, 3, 177–216 Search PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Walker, Nature, 1960, 187, 312–313 Search PubMed .
M. B. Dines, J. Chem. Educ., 1974, 51, 221–223 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sasaki, M. Watanabe, H. Hashizume, H. Yamada and H. Nakazawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 8329–8335 CrossRef CAS .
D. Golberg, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 200–201 Search PubMed .
P. Joensen, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Miremadi and S. R. Morrison, J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 63, 4970–4974 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang and R. F. Frindt, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1996, 57, 1113–1116 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–6116 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Zeng, Z. Y. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. Y. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11093–11097 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Chizhevskaya, T. E. Svechnikova, S. Y. Skipidarov, N. A. Tsvetkova and N. N. Nemtsov, Inorg. Mater., 1992, 28, 231–234 .
Z. F. Ding, S. K. Bux, D. J. King, F. L. Chang, T. A. Chen, S. C. Huang and R. B. Kaner, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2588–2592 RSC .
Z. Ding, L. Viculis, J. Nakawatase and R. B. Kaner, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 797–800 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Sandoval, D. Yang, R. F. Frindt and J. C. Irwin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 3955–3962 CrossRef .
X. Rocquefelte, F. Boucher, P. Gressier and G. Ouvrard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 2397–2400 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Gordon, D. Yang, E. D. Crozier, D. T. Jiang and R. F. Frindt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 125407 Search PubMed .
G. L. Frey, K. J. Reynolds, R. H. Friend, H. Cohen and Y. Feldman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5998–6007 Search PubMed .
G. Cunningham, M. Lotya, C. S. Cucinotta, S. Sanvito, S. D. Bergin, R. Menzel, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3468–3480 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Donegá, P. Liljeroth and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Small, 2005, 1, 1152–1162 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .

          M. R. Gao, J. Jiang, Q. Gao and S. H. Yu, Chalcogenide semiconductor based core/shell nanostructures: synthesis, properties and application, Encyclopedia of Semiconductor Nanotechnology, American Scientific Publishers, USA,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. J. Polking, H. M. Zheng, R. Ramesh and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2044–2047 CrossRef CAS .
I. U. Arachchige, R. Soriano, C. D. Malliakas, S. A. Lvanov and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2737–2743 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Buck, I. T. Sines and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3236–3240 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yu, J. Joo, H. M. Park, S. Baik, Y. W. Kim, S. C. Kim and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5662–5670 CrossRef .
L. S. Li, N. Pradhan, Y. J. Wang and X. G. Peng, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2261–2264 CrossRef .
R. Malakooti, L. Cademartiri, Y. Akcakir, S. Petrov, A. Migliori and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2189–2194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2701–2706 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Lu, Y. Ding, Y. X. Chen, Z. L. Wang and J. Y. Fang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10112–10116 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Son, M. K. Choi, M. K. Han, K. Park, J. Y. Kim, S. J. Lim, M. Oh, Y. Kuk, C. Park, S. J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 640–647 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sahu, L. J. Qi, M. S. Kang, D. Deng and D. J. Norris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6509–6512 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Liu, D. K. Ko, S. J. Oh, T. R. Gordon, V. Doan-Nguyen, T. Paik, Y. J. Kang, X. C. Ye, L. H. Jin, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4657–4659 Search PubMed .
L. Q. Chen, H. Q. Zhan, X. F. Yang, Z. Y. Sun, J. Zhang, D. Xu, C. L. Liang, M. M. Wu and J. Y. Fang, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 4386–4391 RSC .
Y. Bi, Y. B. Yuan, C. L. Exstrom, S. A. Darveau and J. S. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4953–4957 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Park, K. Jang and S. U. Son, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4608–4612 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, J. H. Lee, D. W. Shin, S. M. Park, J. S. Moon, J. G. Nam and J. B. Yoo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2292–2294 RSC .
J. Choi, J. Jin, J. Lee, J. H. Park, H. J. Kim, D. H. Oh, J. R. Ahn and S. U. Son, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11107–11112 RSC .
M. A. Franzman, C. W. Schlenker, M. E. Thompson and R. L. Brutchey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4060–4061 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Y. Guo, M. R. Li, W. H. Zhang, X. Y. Liu and C. Li, Angew, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12050–12053 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, C. Wadia, W. Ma, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2551–2555 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chikan and D. F. Kelley, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Malakooti, L. Cademartiri, A. Migliori and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 66–69 RSC .
M. J. Polking, J. J. Urban, D. J. Milliron, H. M. Zheng, E. Chan, M. A. Caldwell, S. Raoux, C. F. Kisielowski, J. W. Ager III, R. Ramesh and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1147–1152 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1389–1395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3343–3353 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Ning, G. J. Xiao, T. Jiang, L. Wang, Q. Q. Dai, B. Zou, B. B. Liu, Y. J. Wei, G. Chen and G. T. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 4161–4166 RSC .
W. J. Baumgardner, J. J. Choi, Y. F. Lim and T. Hanrath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9519–9521 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, W. Heiss, E. V. Shevchenko, J. S. Lee, H. Schwinghammer, A. P. Alivisatos and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11354–11355 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Singh, G. Kumar Rao, A. Kumar and A. K. Singh, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 1142–1145 RSC .
M. D. Regulacio, K. Bussmann, B. Lewis and S. L. Stoll, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11173–11179 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Du, B. Xu, T. Fu, M. Cai, F. Li, Y. Zhang and Q. B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1470–1471 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Lim, Z. H. Zhang, H. Y. Low and W. S. Chin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5685–5689 CrossRef CAS .
A. Puglisi, S. Mondini, S. Cenedese, A. M. Ferretti, N. Santo and A. Ponti, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2804–2813 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Vanitha and P. O'Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17256–17257 CrossRef CAS .
W. Maneeprakorn, M. A. Malik and P. O'Brien, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2329–2335 RSC .
J. W. Seo, J. T. Jang, S. W. Park, C. Kim, B. Park and J. Cheon, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4269–4273 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Zhang, Y. P. Du, H. R. Xu and Q. B. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 3658–3663 RSC .
W. Han and M. Y. Gao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1023–1030 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paolella, C. George, M. Povia, Y. Zhang, R. Krahne, M. Gich, A. Genovese, A. Falqui, M. Longobardi, P. Guardia, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3762–3768 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schulz, S. Heimann, J. Friedrich, M. Engenhorst, G. Schierning and W. Assenmacher, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2228–2234 Search PubMed .
S. S. Garje, D. J. Eisler, J. S. Ritch, M. Afzaal, P. O'Brien and T. Chivers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3120–3121 CrossRef CAS .
C. Altavilla, M. Sarno and P. Ciambelli, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3879–3885 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghezelbash, M. B. Sigman Jr. and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 537–542 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, M. H. So, C. M. Che and H. Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4540–4545 RSC .
L. Tian, H. Y. Tan and J. J. Vttal, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 734–738 CrossRef .
W. J. Lou, M. Chen, X. B. Wang and W. M. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 872–878 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nath, A. Choudhury and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2698–2699 RSC .
H. W. Chang, B. Sarkar and C. W. Liu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2691–2695 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. Sines, R. Misra, P. Schiffer and R. E. Schaak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4638–4640 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Vaughn II, S. In and R. E. Schaak, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8852–8860 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Vaughn II, O. D. Hentz, S. Chen, D. H. Wang and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5608–5610 RSC .
D. S. Wang, C. H. Hao, W. Zheng, Q. Peng, T. H. Wang, Z. M. Liao, D. P. Yu and Y. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2628–2632 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Park, J. Choi, H. J. Kim, J. B. Lee and S. U. Son, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3861–3863 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Ye, C. Wang, G. H. Du, X. B. Chen, Y. J. Zhong and J. Z. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17063–17065 RSC .
H. W. Zhang, G. Long, D. Li, R. Sabirianov and H. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3769–3774 Search PubMed .
C. X. Wang, D. Zhang, L. Xu, Y. N. Jiang, F. X. Dong, B. Yang, K. Yu and Q. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7587–7591 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Shen, H. Z. Wang, H. Yuan, L. Ma and L. S. Li, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 555–560 RSC .
Y. W. Zhao, Y. Zhang, H. Zhu, G. C. Hadjipanayis and J. Q. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6874–6875 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, N. Al-Salim, C. W. Bumby and R. D. Tilley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15990–15991 CrossRef CAS .

          S. H. Yu and Y. T. Qian, Soft synthesis of ceramic nanorods, nanowires, and nanotubes, in Self-Organized Nanoscale Materials, Springer, New York,  2005 Search PubMed .
M. K. Devaraju and I. Honma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 284–297 Search PubMed .
A. H. Lu, E. L. Salabas and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Liang, Q. F. Guan, L. F. Chen, Z. Zhu, W. J. Zhang and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5101–5105 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, Y. J. Dong and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2003, 42, 3027–3030 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Ye, C. Z. Wu, W. Guo and Y. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4738–4740 RSC .
L. N. Ye, W. Guo, Y. Yang, Y. F. Du and Y. Xie, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6331–6337 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Chen, Z. D. Zhang and W. Z. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4117–4123 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yao, X. Zhu, C. Z. Wu, X. J. Zhang and Y. Xie, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 1256–1261 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhang, J. Li, M. Zhang and D. D. Dionysiou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 9324–9331 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Zai, X. F. Qian, K. X. Wang, C. Yu, L. Q. Tao, Y. L. Xiao and J. S. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1364–1375 RSC .
Z. B. Zhuang, Q. Peng, J. Zhuang, X. Wang and Y. D. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 211–217 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, Y. J. Dong and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 2174–2175 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, R. H. Wang, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 23312–23315 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ma, Y. P. Wang, Y. J. Wang, Q. Chen, J. B. Lian and W. J. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13588–13592 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Shi, J. B. Yu, H. S. Wang and H. J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16490–16491 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Qin, Y. P. Fang, P. F. Tao, J. Y. Zhang and C. Y. Su, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 7403–7409 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, B. Zhang, H. Q. Shi, Y. J. Tang, K. Jiao and X. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2573–2580 RSC .
Q. Y. Lu, F. Gao and D. Y. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 725–728 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Mi, N. Lock, T. Sun, M. Christensen, M. Søndergaard, P. Hald, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and B. B. Iversen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2523–2530 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Xie, J. S. Jie, C. Y. Wu and S. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3378–3383 RSC .
Z. H. Ge, B. P. Zhang, P. P. Shang and J. F. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9194–9200 RSC .
Z. P. Liu, S. Peng, Q. Xie, Z. K. Hu, Y. Yang, S. Y. Zhang and Y. T. Qian, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 936–940 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Fu, S. Y. Song, X. G. Zhang, F. Cao, L. Zhou, X. Y. Li and H. J. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 2159–2165 RSC .
Z. B. He, S. H. Yu, X. Y. Zhou, X. G. Li and J. F. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1105–1111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nath, A. Choudhury, A. Kundu and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2098–2101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kar and S. Chaudhuri, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 398, 22–26 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Lin, W. F. Lee, M. Y. Lu, S. Y. Chen, M. H. Hung, T. C. Chan, H. W. Tsai, Y. L. Chueh and L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7098–7103 RSC .
F. Xiao, G. Chen, Q. Wang, L. Wang, J. Pei and N. Zhou, J. Solid State Chem., 2010, 183, 2382–2388 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, H. Park, C. H. Hsu and J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9634–9639 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Lei, K. B. Tan and H. G. Zheng, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 1625–1628 Search PubMed .
J. Lu, P. F. Qi, Y. Y. Peng, Z. Y. Meng, Z. P. Yang, W. C. Yu and Y. T. Qian, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 2169–2172 CAS .
L. H. Zhang, H. Q. Yang, L. Li, R. G. Zhang, R. N. Liu, J. H. Ma, X. L. Xie and F. Gao, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11950–11957 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Zhu, Y. Y. Huang, S. X. Wang, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12145–12148 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. Yuan, W. L. Luan and S. T. Tu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 772–776 RSC .
X. Y. Tan, J. Zhou and Q. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2792–2798 RSC .
Q. H. Wang, L. F. Jiao, H. M. Du, J. Q. Yang, Q. N. Huan, W. X. Peng, Y. C. Si, Y. J. Wang and H. T. Yuan, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 6960–6963 RSC .
D. P. Li, Z. Zheng, Y. Lei, S. X. Ge, Y. D. Zhang, Y. G. Zhang, K. W. Wong, F. L. Yang and W. M. Lau, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 1856–1861 RSC .
Z. C. Wu, C. Pan, Z. Y. Yao, Q. R. Zhao and Y. Xie, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 1717–1719 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Wang, B. Poudel, J. Yang, D. Z. Wang and Z. F. Ren, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13792–13793 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Jin, G. Chen, J. Pei, H. M. Xu and Z. S. Lv, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1450–1456 RSC .
W. M. Du, X. F. Qian, X. D. Ma, Q. Gong, H. L. Cao and J. Yin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chai, P. Zeng, X. H. Zhang, J. Mao, L. Zan and T. Y. Peng, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2372–2377 RSC .
H. Y. Zhou, S. L. Xiong, L. Z. Wei, B. J. Xi, Y. C. Zhu and Y. T. Qian, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3862–3867 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, Y. Xie, L. N. Ye, Y. Chen and Q. X. Guo, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 583–587 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang and Y. J. Zhu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 1238–1243 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Yao, S. H. Yu and Q. S. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 623–631 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Du, J. Zhu, S. X. Li and X. F. Qian, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2130–2136 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hwang, H. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4826–4830 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Wu, S. H. Yu and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3599–3601 CrossRef CAS .

          M. C. Escher, Stars wood engraving,  1948, http://www.mcescher.com/Gallery/back-bmp/LW359.jpg Search PubMed .
W. T. Yao and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3357–3366 CrossRef .
W. T. Yao, S. H. Yu, J. Jiang and L. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2066–2072 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhou, H. B. Yao, Y. Wang, H. L. Liu, M. R. Gao, P. K. Shen and S. H. Yu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 12000–12007 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, Z. Y. Lin, J. Jiang, H. B. Yao, Y. M. Lu, Q. Gao, W. T. Yao and S. H. Yu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 5068–5075 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, Z. Y. Lin, T. T. Zhuang, J. Jiang, Y. F. Xu, Y. R. Zheng and S. H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13662–13668 RSC .
S. Rengaraj, S. Venkataraj, C. W. Tai, Y. H. Kim, E. Repo and M. Sillanpää, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5534–5541 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Jin, G. Chen, J. Pei, J. X. Sun and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3893–3899 RSC .
F. Cao, R. X. Liu, L. Zhou, S. Y. Song, Y. Q. Lei, W. D. Shi, F. Y. Zhao and H. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1078–1085 RSC .
S. L. Yang, H. B. Yao, M. R. Gao and S. H. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 1383–1390 RSC .
W. T. Yao, S. H. Yu, X. Y. Huang, J. Jiang, L. Q. Zhao, L. Pan and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2799–2802 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Zang, H. B. Yao, Y. X. Zhou, W. T. Yao and S. H. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4749–4755 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Yao, S. H. Yu, L. Pan, J. Li, Q. S. Wu, L. Zhang and J. Jiang, Small, 2005, 1, 320–325 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Liu, D. Xu, J. B. Liang, J. M. Shen, S. Y. Zhang and Y. T. Qian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10699–10704 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7522–7534 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bilecka and M. Niederberger, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1358–1374 RSC .
Y. J. Feng, T. He and N. Alonso-Vante, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 26–28 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nekooi, M. Akbari and M. K. Amini, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 6392–6398 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Panda, G. Glaspell and M. S. EI-Shall, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2790–2791 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. P. Qiano and X. M. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2747–2748 RSC .
G. H. Dong, Y. J. Zhu and L. D. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1976–1981 RSC .
J. Liu and D. F. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 223–228 RSC .
R. J. Mehta, C. Karthik, W. Jiang, B. Singh, Y. F. Shi, R. W. Siegel, T. Borca-Tasciuc and G. Ramanath, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4417–4422 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Mehta, Y. L. Zhang, C. Karthik, B. Singh, R. W. Siegel, T. Borca-Tasciuc and G. Ramanath, Nat. Chem., 2012, 11, 233–240 Search PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. X. Huang and Y. T. Qian, J. Solid State Chem., 2001, 158, 260–263 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. J. Zhu, J. M. Zhu and H. Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3848–3854 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Xie, J. X. Huang, Y. Liu and Y. T. Qian, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2614–2616 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. M. Cui, F. Han, X. Li, J. Y. Wang and R. I. Boughton, Cryst. Growth Des., 2005, 5, 1711–1714 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salinas-Estevané and E. M. Sánchez, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 3917–3924 CrossRef CAS .
R. Harpeness, O. Palchik, A. Gedanken, V. Palchik, S. Amiel, M. A. Slifkin and A. M. Weiss, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2094–2102 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. She, X. H. Zhang, W. S. Shi, Y. Cai, N. Wang, P. Liu and D. M. Chen, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pinisetty, D. Davis, E. J. Podlaha-Murphy, M. C. Murphy, A. B. Karki, D. P. Young and R. V. Devireddy, Acta Mater., 2011, 59, 2455–2461 Search PubMed .
N. Han, S. I. Kim, J. D. Yang, K. Lee, H. Sohn, H. M. So, C. W. Ahn and K. H. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1871–1875 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chen, C. Davoisne, J. M. Tarascon and C. Guéry, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5295–5299 RSC .
R. Z. Chen, D. S. Xu, G. L. Guo and Y. Q. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1437–1441 RSC .
S. Murugesan, P. Kearns and K. J. Stevenson, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 5513–5517 Search PubMed .
S. H. Li, M. S. Toprak, H. M. A. Soliman, J. Zhou, M. Muhammed, D. Platzek and E. Müller, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3627–3633 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Lee, H. Song, Y. I. Lee, H. S. Jung, M. L. Zhang, Y. H. Choa and N. V. Myung, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9107–9109 RSC .
C. S. Reddy, A. Zak and E. Zussman, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16086–16093 RSC .
X. C. Jiang, Y. Xie, J. Lu, L. Y. Zhu, W. He and Y. T. Qain, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1213–1218 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Cheon, D. S. Talaga and J. I. Zink, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1208–1212 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Webber and R. L. Brutchey, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 723–725 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, W. B. Zhao, J. M. Hong, J. J. Zhu and H. Y. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 319–321 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. B. Ng, H. Tan and W. Y. Fan, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9712–9717 CrossRef .
J. J. Hu, J. S. Zabinski, J. H. Sanders, J. E. Bultman and A. A. Voevodin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8914–8916 Search PubMed .
Y. Hasegawa, M. Afzaal, P. O'Brien, Y. J. Wada and S. Yanagida, Chem. Commun., 2005, 242–243 RSC .
D. H. Son, S. M. Hughes, Y. D. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 306, 1009–1012 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Moon, S. Ko, Y. N. Xia and U. Jeong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2307–2319 CrossRef CAS .
U. Jeong, Y. N. Xia and Y. D. Yin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 416, 246–250 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Y. F. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Xu, C. B. Liu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3211–3215 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Wang, B. Hu, C. C. Liu and S. H. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 325, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sadtler, D. O. Demchenko, H. M. Zheng, S. M. Hughes, M. G. Merkle, U. Dahmen, L. W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5285–5293 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Wark, C. H. Hsia and D. H. Son, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9550–9555 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Yao, I. U. Arachchige and S. L. Brock, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2800–2801 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shafaei-Fallah, J. Q. He, A. Rothenberger and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1200–1202 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Fan, U. Gösele and M. Zacharias, Small, 2007, 3, 1660–1671 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Yin, R. M. Rioux, C. K. Erdonmez, S. Hughes, G. A. Somorjar and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 304, 711–714 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Yin, C. K. Erdonmez, A. Cabot, S. Hughes and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1389–1399 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Gao, B. Zhang, X. X. Zhang and B. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1220–1223 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Zhang, Q. X. Yu, Z. Yao and X. G. Li, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2317–2319 RSC .
G. Q. Zhang, W. Wang, Q. X. Yu and X. G. Li, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 969–974 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Shi, Y. Wan, R. L. Liu, B. Tu and D. Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9522–9531 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Zelenski and P. K. Dorhout, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 734–742 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dawood and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 424–425 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, C. L. Stender, E. Ringe, L. D. Marks and T. W. Odom, Small, 2010, 6, 1096–1099 Search PubMed .
Z. Q. Li, H. Yang, Y. Ding, Y. J. Xiong and Y. Xie, Dalton Trans., 2006, 149–151 RSC .
W. Zhou, W. M. Chen, J. W. Nai, P. G. Yin, C. P. Chen and L. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3678–3683 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gates, Y. Y. Wu, Y. D. Yin, P. D. Yang and Y. N. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11500–11501 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gates, B. Mayers, Y. Y. Wu, Y. G. Sun, B. Cattle, P. D. Yang and Y. N. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. C. Camargo, Z. M. Peng, X. M. Lu, H. Yang and Y. N. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1024–1030 RSC .
L. Mu, J. X. Wan, D. K. Ma, R. Zhang, W. C. Yu and Y. T. Qian, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 52–53 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan, Y. G. Zhang, M. F. Zhang, X. Y. Wang and Y. T. Qian, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2838–2841 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Liang, S. Liu and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3925–3937 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. W. Liang, W. T. Yao and S. H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15057–15062 RSC .
G. Q. Zhang, B. Kirk, L. A. Jauregui, H. R. Yang, X. F. Xu, Y. P. Chen and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 56–60 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yu and M. Yoshimura, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 296–300 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Therese, F. Rocker, A. Reiber, J. X. Li, M. Stepputat, G. Glasser, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 262–265 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Vanchura, P. He, V. Antochshuk, M. Jaroniec, A. Ferryman, D. Barbash, J. E. Fulghum and S. D. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12090–12091 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, S. H. Yu, W. T. Yao, H. Ge and G. Z. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6094–6100 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Panda, A. Datta, A. Dev, S. Gorai and S. Chaudhuri, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 2177–2181 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhu, B. Y. Xia, L. Zhou and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7851–7855 RSC .
F. Lu, W. P. Cai, Y. G. Zhang, Y. Li, F. Q. Sun, S. H. Heo and S. O. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13385–13392 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Bao, C. M. Li, X. Q. Cui, Y. Gan, Q. L. Song and J. Guo, Small, 2008, 4, 1125–1129 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Chen, R. J. Zou, N. Wang, H. H. Chen, Z. Y. Zhang, Y. G. Sun, L. Yu, Q. W. Tian, Z. G. Chen and J. Q. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3053–3059 RSC .
C. H. Lai, K. W. Huang, J. H. Cheng, C. Y. Lee, W. F. Lee, C. T. Hunag, B. J. Hwang and L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7277–7283 RSC .
C. H. Lai, K. W. Huang, J. H. Cheng, C. Y. Lee, B. J. Hwang and L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6638–6645 RSC .
P. Y. Ge, M. D. Scanlon, P. Peljo, X. J. Bian, H. Vubrel, A. O'Neill, J. N. Coleman, M. Cantoni, X. L. Hu, K. Kontturi, B. H. Liu and H. H. Girault, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6484–6486 RSC .
V. G. Pol, S. V. Pol, N. Perkas and A. Gedanken, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 134–140 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Pol, V. G. Pol, J. M. Calderon-Moreno and A. Gedanken, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5356–5360 Search PubMed .
R. L. D. Whitby, W. K. Hsu, P. K. Fearon, N. C. Billingham, I. Maurin, H. W. Kroto, D. R. M. Walton, C. B. Boothroyd, S. Firth, R. J. H. Clark and D. Collison, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2209–2217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Myung, D. M. Jang, Y. J. Cho, H. S. Kim, J. Park, J. U. Kim, Y. Choi and C. J. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1251–1259 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Kang, G. H. Lee, K. S. Park, S. O. Kim, S. Lee, D. W. Kim and J. G. Park, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9330–9337 RSC .
P. Chen, T. Y. Xiao, H. H. Li, J. J. Yang, Z. Wang, H. B. Yao and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 712–719 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang and W. X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4720–4728 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang, Z. Wang, G. C. Huang, H. Li, W. X. Chen and J. Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang and W. X. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4252–4254 RSC .
B. Luo, Y. Fang, B. Wang, J. S. Zhou, H. H. Song and L. J. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5226–5230 RSC .
C. Xu, Y. Zeng, X. H. Rui, N. Xiao, J. X. Zhu, W. Y. Zhang, J. Chen, W. L. Liu, H. T. Tan, H. H. Hng and Q. Y. Yan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4713–4721 Search PubMed .
Y. N. Xia, Y. J. Xiong, B. K. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vinokurov, J. E. Macdonald and U. Banin, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1822–1827 Search PubMed .
D. K. Ko, Y. J. Kang and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2841–2844 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhang, M. L. Snedaker, C. S. Birkel, S. Mubeen, X. L. Ji, Y. F. Shi, D. Y. Liu, X. N. Liu, M. Moskovits and G. D. Stucky, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1075–1080 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Bao, Z. H. Sun, M. D. Xiao, L. W. Tian and J. F. Wang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1650–1652 RSC .
J. Yang, E. H. Sargent, S. O. Kelley and J. Y. Ying, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 683–689 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3187–3189 RSC .
J. Yang and J. Y. Ying, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4637–4643 CAS .
Z. H. Sun, Z. Yang, J. H. Zhou, M. H. Yeung, W. H. Ni, H. K. Wu and J. F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2881–2885 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhang, Z. N. Du, K. W. Li, M. Zhang and D. D. Dionysiou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1528–1537 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Sun, A. Kumbhar, K. Sun, Q. S. Liu and J. Y. Fang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1920–1922 RSC .
K. S. Coleman, J. Sloan, N. A. Hanson, G. Brown, G. P. Clancy, M. Terrones, H. Terrones and M. L. H. Green, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11580–11581 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lian, Y. Xu, M. Lin and Y. Chan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8754–8757 Search PubMed .
M. N. Tahir, N. Zink, M. Eberhardt, H. A. Therese, S. Faiss, A. Janshoff, U. Kolb, P. Theato and W. Tremel, Small, 2007, 3, 829–834 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Tahir, A. Yella, H. A. Therese, E. Mugnaioli, M. Panthöfer, H. U. Khan, W. Knoll, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5382–5387 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Sahoo, M. N. Tahir, A. Yella, T. D. Schladt, S. Pfeiffer, B. Nakhjavan, E. Mugnaioli, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3534–3539 Search PubMed .
J. K. Sahoo, M. N. Tahir, A. Yella, T. D. Schladt, E. Mugnaoli, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7578–7582 Search PubMed .
M. N. Tahir, F. Natalio, H. A. Therese, A. Yella, N. Metz, M. R. Shah, E. Mugnaioli, R. Berger, P. Theato, H. C. Schröder, W. E. G. Müller and W. Tremel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 285–291 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, S. Liu, J. Jiang, C. H. Cui, W. T. Yao and S. H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9355–9361 RSC .
Z. B. Chen, D. Cummins, B. N. Reinecke, E. Clark, M. K. Sunkara and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4168–4175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schrier, D. O. Demchenko and L. W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2377–2382 CrossRef CAS .
T. Teranishi, Y. Inoue, M. Nayaka, Y. Oumi and T. Sano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9914–9915 CrossRef CAS .
T. Teranishi, M. Saruyama, M. Nakaya and M. Kanehara, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1713–1715 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saruyama, M. Kanehara and T. Teranishi, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2724–2726 RSC .
T. Teranishi, M. Saruyama and M. Kanehara, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 225–228 RSC .
M. L. Tang, D. C. Grauer, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, V. K. Yachandra, L. Amirav, J. R. Long, J. Yano and A. P. Alivisatos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10203–10207 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mirkovic, D. Rossouw, G. A. Botton and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 181–187 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Chang and C. Y. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9089–9091 RSC .
W. Han, L. X. Yi, N. Zhao, A. W. Tang, M. Y. Gao and Z. Y. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13152–13161 CrossRef CAS .
N. Petchsang, L. Shapoval, F. Vietmeyer, Y. H. Yu, J. H. Hodak, I. M. Tang, T. H. Kosel and M. Kuno, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3145–3151 RSC .
D. Von Baresel, W. Sarholz, P. Schaarner and J. Schmitz, Ber. Bunsen-Ges., 1974, 78, 608–611 CAS .
H. Behret, H. Binder and G. Sandstede, Electrochim. Acta, 1975, 20, 111–117 CrossRef CAS .
N. Alonso-Vante and H. Tributsh, Nature, 1986, 323, 431–432 CAS .
N. Alonso-Vante, W. Jaegermann, H. Tributsh, W. Honle and K. Yvon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 3251–3257 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fischer, N. Alonso-Vante, S. Fiechter and H. Tributsch, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1995, 25, 1004–1008 CAS .
N. Alonso-Vante, H. Tributsh and O. Solorza-Feria, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 567–576 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lewera, J. Inukai, W. P. Zhou, D. Cao, H. T. Duong, N. Alonso-Vante and A. Wieckowski, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5759–5765 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Sidik and A. B. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 936–941 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vayner, R. A. Sidik, A. B. Anderson and B. N. Popov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10508–10513 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Feng, T. He and N. Alonso-Vante, ECS Trans., 2008, 11, 67–73 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Feng, T. He and N. Alonso-Vante, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 77–83 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Feng, T. He and N. Alonso-Vante, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5252–5256 CrossRef CAS .
D. Susac, A. Sode, L. Zhu, P. C. Wong, M. Teo, D. Bizzotto, K. A. R. Mitchell, R. R. Parsons and S. A. Campbell, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10762–10770 CrossRef CAS .
D. Susac, L. Zhu, M. Teo, A. Sode, K. C. Wong, P. C. Wong, R. R. Parsons, D. Bizzotto, K. A. R. Mitchell and S. A. Campbell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18715–18723 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, D. Susac, M. Teo, K. C. Wong, P. C. Wong, R. R. Parsons, D. Bizzotto, K. A. R. Mitchell and S. A. Campbell, J. Catal., 2008, 258, 235–242 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ahlberg and A. E. Broo, Int. J. Miner. Process., 1996, 46, 73–89 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1704–1708 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, G. F. Cui, D. Y. Li, P. K. Shen and N. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6581–6589 RSC .
G. Wu, H. T. Chung, M. Nelson, K. Artyushkova, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, ECS Trans., 2011, 41, 1709–1717 Search PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Norskov and C. H. Christensen, Science, 2006, 312, 1322–1323 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bonde, P. G. Moses, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Norskov and I. Chorkendorff, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 219–231 RSC .
T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, J. D. Zhang, B. L. Ooi, L. Andersson, J. Ulstrup and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17492–17498 CrossRef CAS .
H. I. Karunadasa, E. Montalvo, Y. J. Sun, M. Majda, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, Science, 2012, 335, 698–702 CrossRef CAS .
D. Merki, S. Fierro, H. Vrubel and X. L. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1262–1267 RSC .
H. Vrubel, D. Merki and X. L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6136–6144 RSC .
D. Merki and X. L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3878–3888 RSC .
M. Lacroix, C. Dumonteil, M. Breysse and S. Kasztelan, J. Catal., 1999, 185, 219–222 Search PubMed .
X. Zong, H. J. Yan, G. P. Wu, G. J. Ma, F. Y. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176–7177 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, K. Liu, J. S. Chen and X. J. Wei, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 1207–1212 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 62–72 RSC .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K. C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS .
V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238–7266 CrossRef .
B. S. Yeo and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5587–5593 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Chou, P. N. Ross, A. T. Bell and T. D. Tilley, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Armand, in Materials for advanced batteries, ed. D. W. Murphy, J. Broodhead and B. C. H. Steele, Plenum Press, New York,  1980 Search PubMed .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacín, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, D. Y. Kim, G. B. Cho, T. H. Nam, K. W. Kim, H. S. Ryu, J. H. Ahn and H. J. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cai, J. Chen, J. X. Zhu, C. Xu, W. Y. Zhang, C. M. Zhang, W. H. Shi, H. T. Tan, D. Yang, H. H. Hug, T. M. Lim and Q. Y. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12468–12474 Search PubMed .
K. G. Aso, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2987–2990 RSC .
T. Takeuchi, H. Sakaebe, H. Kageyama, T. Sakai and K. Tatsumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A697–A684 Search PubMed .
X. J. Zhu, Z. Y. Wen, Z. H. Gu and S. H. Huang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A504–A507 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsumura, K. Nakano, R. Kanno, A. Jirano, N. Imanishi and Y. Takeda, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 632–636 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Wang, S. L. Chou, S. Y. Chew, J. Z. Sun, M. Forsth, D. R. MacFarlane and H. K. Liu, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 2379–2382 CrossRef CAS .
M. Minakshi, A. Pandey, M. Blackford and M. Ionescu, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 6193–6197 Search PubMed .
A. V. Murugan, M. Quintin, M. H. Delville, G. Campet and K. Vijayamohanan, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 902–909 RSC .
J. Z. Wang, G. X. Wang, L. Yang, S. H. Ng and H. K. Liu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2006, 10, 250–254 CrossRef CAS .
H. Senoh, T. Takeuchi, H. Kageyama, H. Sakaebe, M. Yao, K. Nakanishi, T. Ohta, T. Sakai and K. Yasuda, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 8327–8330 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and J. H. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1675–1682 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhong, G. Z. Yang, H. W. Song, Q. Y. Liao, H. Cui, P. K. Shen and C. X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9319–9326 Search PubMed .
C. Q. Feng, L. F. Huang, Z. P. Guo and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 119–122 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Wang, S. Bewlay, J. Yao, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A321–A323 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Yan, H. Z. Hunag, J. Zhang, Z. J. Liu and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 264–269 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jang, S. Jeong, J. Seo, M. Kim, E. Sim, Y. Oh, S. Nam, B. Park and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7636–7639 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ding, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13142–13145 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang, W. X. Chen, L. Ma, H. Li, H. Li, F. H. Huang, Z. D. Xum Q. B. Zhang and J. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6251–6257 RSC .
P. Wu, N. Du, H. Zhang, J. Liu, L. T. Chang, L. Wang, D. R. Yang and J. Z. Jinag, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4002–4006 RSC .
W. Luo, Y. Xie, C. Z. Wu and F. Zheng, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 075602 CrossRef .
F. Tao, Y. Q. Zhao, G. Q. Zhang and H. L. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1282–1287 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Stevic and M. Rajcic-Vujasinovic, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 1511–1517 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhu, Z. Y. Wang, S. J. Ding, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 397–400 RSC .
L. Zhang, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6912–6914 RSC .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. Nazeeruddin, E. W. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Z. Zheng, H. M. Jiam Y. W. Tang and L. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13037–13042 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Wang, A. M. Anghel, B. Marsan, N. L. C. Ha, N. Pootrakulchote, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15967–15977 Search PubMed .
H. C. Sun, D. Qin, S. Q. Hunag, X. Z. Guo, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo and Q. B. Meng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2630–2637 RSC .
F. Gong, H. Wang, X. Xu, G. Zhou and Z. S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10953–10958 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Yu, J. Zhu, Y. H. Zhang, J. Weng, L. H. Hu and S. Y. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3324–3326 RSC .
S. H. Im, C. S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, N. Maiti, H. J. Kim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Il Seok, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4789–4793 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Jia, W. W. He, X. W. Chen, Y. Lei and Z. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12824–12828 RSC .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Lin, D. Y. Wang, H. C. Yen, H. L. Chen, C. C. Chen, C. M. Chen, C. Y. Tang and C. W. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 405207 CrossRef .

Footnote† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Min-Rui Gao
	Min-Rui Gao received his BSc degree in Chemistry from Hefei University in 2006. He received his PhD in nanochemistry under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in the Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China. His current research interests include the design and synthesis of nanostructured metal chalcogenides and their applications in advanced energy conversion and storage devices. In September 2012, Dr Gao started his postdoctoral fellowship with Prof. Yushan Yan in the Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, University of Delaware.

Yun-Fei Xu
	Yun-Fei Xu received his BSc degree in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2012. He joined Prof. Shu-Hong Yu's laboratory in his junior year (2010), researching the synthesis of hybrid nanomaterials for electrocatalytic applications. He is currently a Research Assistant in the same laboratory. His research interests include developing the functional nanomaterials for sustainable energy and environmental applications.

Jun Jiang
	Jun Jiang received her BSc degree at Hefei University of Technology in Chemistry in 2006. She received her PhD in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in the Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China. Her research interests focus on the synthesis of bio-inspired nanomaterials and their applications.

Shu-Hong Yu
	Shu-Hong Yu received his BSc degree at Hefei University of Technology and his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) under the supervision of Prof. Yi-Tai Qian. From 2001 to 2002, he was as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany. He was appointed as a full professor in 2002 and awarded the Cheung Kong Professorship in 2006 by the Ministry of Education in the Department of Chemistry, USTC. His research interests include bio-inspired synthesis and self-assembly of new nanostructured materials and nanocomposites, functional nanostructures and their applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of nanostructured MC/modified-MC materials and their potential applications in various ECS devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) 2D WS2 nanosheet crystal formation through the rolling-out shape-transformation processes of 1D W18O49 nanorod precursor. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 45. (b, c) TEM and HRTEM images of MoS2 nanosheets, respectively. Inset in (c) are the corresponding fast Fourier transforms (above) and butterworth-filtered images (below). (d, e) TEM and HRTEM images of WS2 nanosheets, respectively. Inset in (e) are the corresponding fast Fourier transforms (above) and butterworth-filtered images (below). Reproduced with permission of AAAS from ref. 85.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images showing MC nanocrystals with various structures and morphologies synthesized by the hot-injection method. (a) GeTe nanocrystals; (b) ZnS nanorods; (c) Bi2S3 nanorods; (d) Ag2Se nanocrystals; (e) β-FeSex nanoflakes; (f) In2S3 nanoplates; (g) SnSe nanocrystals; (h) Cu2S nanocrystals; (i) GaSe nanoparticles. (a, b, d, g, h, and j) Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 92, 95, 101, 108, 110 and 111, respectively. (c, f) Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 97 and 105, respectively. (e) Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 103.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images of Fe7S8 and Fe3S4 nanocrystals synthesized using a cubane-type cluster, bis(tetra-n-butylammonium) tetrakis[benezenethiolato-μ3-sulfido-iron], as a single source precursor. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 124.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photograph of Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclaves with different volumes. The photograph was taken with permission of the Yu Lab at the University of Science and Technology of China.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of bismuth chalcogenides with various nanostructures synthesized by the hydrothermal method. (a) Bi2Te3 hierarchical structures; (b) Bi2S3 nanoribbons; (c) Bi2S3 networks; (d) Bi2Te3 nanoplates. The insets in (a), (c), and (d) are the corresponding magnified TEM images, respectively. (a) Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 170. (b) Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 173. (c, d) Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 171 and 174, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM images of ferrosulfide microrods with various microstructures synthesized by an in situ magnetic-field-assisted hydrothermal method. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 175.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM or TEM images of MCs synthesized by the solvothermal method in various solvents. (a) ZnS nanowire arrays prepared in n-butylamine. (b) β-In2S3 nanobelts prepared in pyridine. (c) MoS2 nanoplates prepared in xylene. Inset is the magnified TEM image. (d) Caved cuboctahedral CuS crystals prepared in EG. (a) Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 197. (b–d) Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 178, 199 and 200, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM or TEM images of MCs synthesized by the mixed solvent method. (a) NiS2 dodecahedrons. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 210. (b) Fe7Se8 polyhedrons. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 205. (c) [Fe18S25](TETAH)14 nanoribbons. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 212. (d) (ZnSe)(DETA)0.5 nanobelts. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 211.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the morphology of lamellar mesostructured CoSe2–DETA nanobelts. Inset in (b) shows the corresponding SAED pattern. (c) Typical HRTEM image viewed along the lateral thickness direction. (d) Scheme of the formation mechanism for the mesostructured CoSe2–DETA nanobelts. Red, white, blue, gray, pink, and yellow balls correspond to O, H, N, C, Co, Se atoms, respectively. Hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity in the structure. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Scheme of LSS phase transfer synthetic strategy. (b) TEM images of as-synthesized MC nanocrystals: PbS, Ag2S, and ZnSe. Insets show cyclohexane solutions of corresponding MC nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission of Nature publishing group from ref. 216.	 

 	Fig. 12  Size distribution graphs with SEM insets (scale bars = 1 μm) of the Sb2Se3 nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 224.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Scheme of the forward cation exchange reaction and reverse cation exchange reaction between CdSe and Ag2Se. (b) Initial CdSe (diameter 4.2 nm), (c) Ag2Se transformed from the forward cation exchange reaction, and (d) recovered CdSe nanocrystals from the reverse cation exchange reaction. Reproduced with permission of AAAS from ref. 248.	 

 	Fig. 14  TEM images showing the evolution of hollow cobalt sulfide nanocrystals with time at low (LT) and high (HT) temperatures: (a) at room temperature; (b) at 120 °C. (c) Scheme of the temperature dependence of hollow particle evolution at LT and HT. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 259.	 

 	Fig. 15  TEM or SEM images of different MCs synthesized using Te nanowires or Se nanowires as templates. (a) Ag2Se nanowires. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 269. (b) RuSe2+δ nanotubes. The scale bars in the inset correspond to 50 nm. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 271. (c) Ultralong Bi2Te3 nanowires with lengths of tens of several micrometers. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 275. (d) Ultrathin Bi2Te3 nanowires with diameters of 5–8 nm. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 276.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Scheme of the growth mechanism for the Ni3S2 nanowire arrays. (b) Typical SEM images of the Ni3S2 nanowire arrays growth on a Ni substrate. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 286.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic solvothermal synthesis with GO sheets to afford the MoS2–RGO hybrid. (b) SEM and (inset) HRTEM images of the MoS2–RGO hybrid nanomaterials. (c) SEM and (inset) TEM images of the free MoS2 particles synthesized without any GO sheets added. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 57.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) TEM image of Pt–CoSe2 nanobelts. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 61. (b) TEM image of Au/AgAuS nanohybrids. Inset shows digital photo of two sea cucumbers. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 304. (c–e) TEM images of Au/Ag2S, Pt/Ag2S, and Os–Ag2S heterostructures, respectively. Insets are schemes of corresponding heterostructures. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 307. (f–h) SEM images of Au/ZnS, Au/Ni1−xS, and Au/Cu2−xS core–shell structures, respectively. Insets in (f) and (h) show corresponding TEM images. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 308.	 

 	Fig. 19  Metal oxides/CoSe2 nanocomposites synthesized by the polyol reduction strategy. (a, b) TEM and HRTEM images of Mn3O4–CoSe2 nanocomposites prepared at 278 °C for 1 h, respectively. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 60. (c, d) TEM and HRTEM images of Fe3O4–CoSe2 nanocomposites prepared at 278 °C for 30 min, respectively. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 318.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) TEM image of Pd–Co–Pd sulfide peanut-shape nanoparticles (Inset: STEM-HAADF image). (b) HRTEM image of a single peanut-shape nanoparticle observed in the [110] direction. (c) Scheme of the synthesis of Pd–Co–Pd sulfide peanut-shape nanoparticles and Co–Pd acorn-shape nanoparticles using the PdSx seed-mediated growth method. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 321.	 

 	Fig. 21  Steady-state ORR polarization plots (a) and H2O2 yield plots (b) measured with different carbon-supported CoTe catalysts in 0.1 M KOH solution saturated with oxygen at a rotating speed of 1200 rpm and room temperature. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 347.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Polarization curves for ORR on pristine CoSe2/DETA nanobelts in N2- and O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at different rotation rates, respectively. (b) Polarization curves for ORR on pristine CoSe2/DETA nanobelts, 22.1 wt% Pt/CoSe2 nanobelts, and 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solutions. (c, d) Polarization curves for ORR on 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst (c) and 22.1 wt% Pt/CoSe2 nanobelts (d) in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte containing 0, 0.5, 1, and 5 M methanol. Sweep rate: 50 mV s−1; rotation rate: 2500 rpm. Reproduced with permission of Wiley from ref. 61.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Calculated free energy diagram for hydrogen evolution at a potential U = 0 relative to the standard hydrogen electrode at pH = 0. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 349. (b) Polarization curves for HER on five different MoS2 samples as well as a blank sample. Inset in (b) gives the STM image of atomically resolved MoS2 particles on Au(111), from a sample annealed to 550 °C, showing the predominance of the sulfide Mo-edge (60 Å by 60 Å, 1.0 nA, 300 mV). (c) Tafel plots derived from (b). (d) Exchange current density versus MoS2 edge length (open circles are samples annealed to 400 °C, filled circles are samples annealed to 550 °C). Reproduced with permission of AAAS from ref. 351.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Polarization curves for the OER on the bare GC electrode and modified GC electrodes comprising the Mn3O4 nanorods, 20 wt% Pt/C, pure CoSe2/DETA nanobelts, and Mn3O4–CoSe2 hybrid, respectively. (b) Tafel plots derived from (a). (c) The OER polarization curves for the Mn3O4–CoSe2 hybrid before and after different cycles of the accelerated stability test. (d) Co 2p XPS spectra for the pure CoSe2/DETA nanobelts and as-constructed Mn3O4–CoSe2 hybrid. Inset in (d) demonstrates the electron donation from Mn3O4 to CoSe2. Pink and yellow correspond to Co and Se atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 60.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a, b) Calvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the bare MoS2 electrode and MoS2/GNS electrode at a current density of 100 mA g−1 for the 1st and 2nd cycles, respectively. (c) Cycling performance of the MoS2 and MoS2/GNS electrodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (d) Cycling performance of the MoS2/GNS electrode at various current densities. Reproduced with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry from ref. 297.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a–c) SEM, TEM and HRTEM images of as-synthesized Co0.85Se, respectively. (d) Photocurrent density–voltage characteristics of DSSCs with different CEs, measured at AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission of American Chemical Society from ref. 398.	 
Footnote
† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
