Perovskites with d-block metals for solar energy applications  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9DT01485C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9DT01485C
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 9516-9537Perovskites with d-block metals for solar energy applications

        
          
            Lazaros 
            Theofylaktos
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kyro Odysseas 
            Kosmatos
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Eleni 
            Giannakaki
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Helen 
            Kourti
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dimitris 
            Deligiannis
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Maria 
            Konstantakou
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Thomas 
            Stergiopoulos
          
          
        
      *
      Laboratory of Physical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece. E-mail: stergt@chem.auth.gr;   Tel: +302310997752
Received 
      8th April 2019
    , Accepted 5th June 2019First published on 5th June 2019AbstractPb2+ halide organic–inorganic perovskites are excellent semiconductors for use in solar energy applications, but at the expense of robustness and environmental compatibility. Tin (Sn), which sits just above lead in the periodic table, forms pure (or mixed with lead) perovskites when at the 2+ or 4+ oxidation state. It can act as a promising alternative; however, there are still some serious concerns regarding its suitability. This presents a major challenge; viable metal cations have to be identified. A good number of elements, originating from a large range of d-block metal ions, with adequate oxidation states, moderate toxicity, and relative abundance, seem ideal for this purpose. In this review, we present the most characteristic perovskites (conventional perovskites, layered, or double perovskites) that can be formed with the help of these metals. We focus on d-block metal ions with stable oxidation states, such as Ag+ or Ti4+, which have exhibited satisfactory photovoltaic properties until now. Further, we highlight the results involving compounds other than halide perovskites, such as oxides, chalcogenides, and nitrides (as well as oxyhalides, oxysulfides, and oxynitrides); a few of them are ferroelectric (based on Ti4+, Zr4+, Fe3+, and Cr3+) and can yield a photovoltage that exceeds the bandgap of the material. Finally, we present the critical challenges that currently limit the efficiency of these systems and propose prospects for future directions.Lazaros TheofylaktosLazaros Theofylaktos is currently a Master's student at the Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. He acquired his BSc in Physics from the Department of Physics, University of Ioannina. His research focuses on the synthesis, stability, and characterization of functional perovskite materials, mainly for use in photovoltaic applications. For the past 4 years, he has been tutoring students (ages 12–18 years) on math, physics, and chemistry.Kyro Odysseas KosmatosKyro Odysseas Kosmatos is currently studying for his BSc at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. He is conducting his graduate thesis under the tutoring of Dr Thomas Stergiopoulos, focusing on perovskite solar cells. During the last three years, he has been an active member of the chemistry-focused volunteer group ReAcTiON.Eleni GiannakakiEleni Giannakaki is currently a MSc student in the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. She received her BSc in chemistry from the University of Ioannina in 2017. Her current research mainly involves hybrid perovskite materials with mixed, short, and long, organic cations.Helen KourtiHelen Kourti was born in Thessaloniki, Greece. Since her high school years, chemistry has been her biggest interest. She started her studies in the Department of Chemistry at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki in 2013. One year ago, she finished her Bachelor's thesis on perovskite solar cells as a part of the research team of Dr Stergiopoulos.Dimitris DeligiannisDimitris Deligiannis acquired his BSc and MSc in Materials Science and Engineering from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering (DMSE), University of Ioannina and the Department of Chemical Engineering from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki in 2016 and 2018, respectively. His research focuses on the development of functional nanomaterials and prospective energy materials for optoelectronic applications, particularly regarding highly efficient and low-cost photovoltaics (organic PVs and perovskites).Maria KonstantakouMaria Konstantakou is a postdoctoral research assistant in the group of Prof. Stergiopoulos at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. She received her PhD on gas storage in porous media from the National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos (Athens, Greece). Then, she worked as a research associate in several projects such as nanoporous carbon materials for hydrogen storage and solution-processed mesoporous semiconductors for dye-sensitized solar cells. Her current research interests include lead- and tin-based perovskite films and optoelectronic devices.Thomas StergiopoulosThomas Stergiopoulos is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. He obtained his PhD in dye-sensitized solar cells at the National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos (Athens, Greece) and then worked as a research associate in several European projects regarding renewable energy and clean environment applications. In 2014, he moved for two years at the University of Oxford to work with Prof. H. Snaith on perovskite solar cells under a Marie Curie IEF fellowship grant. In 2018, he received the ERC Consolidator Grant to develop a novel class of optoelectronic materials based on perovskite-like chalcogenide semiconductors.
Introduction
Recently, lead halide perovskites of the type ABX3 (where A = methylammonium, formamidinium, or cesium; B = Pb; and X = halide) have demonstrated optoelectronic properties comparable with those of the best single-crystal semiconductors.1 Their unique properties have led to revolutionary efficiencies of over 23% in solar cells2 and promoted the development of other applications, such as light-emitting devices.3 Despite its promising potential, lead halide perovskite technology draws major skepticism from supporters of established optoelectronic technologies due to long-term stability and environmental compatibility issues.4
A provisional solution to these issues has come from two metals, which belong to Group 14 of the periodic table, namely, tin and germanium. In the case of Ge2+, a viable solar cell with 7% efficiency was possible only when germanium was combined with Sn2+ at 50% molar ratio in the perovskite structure.5 On the other hand, various types of tin perovskites (with or without lead) of variable structural dimensionalities and oxidation states have shown promising efficiencies (∼10% for pure tin6 and ∼20% for tin–lead perovskite solar cells).7 However, this efficiency could not be combined with acceptable stability in the long term;8 furthermore, even if tin is considered as an environmentally friendly alternative to lead, there are serious concerns regarding its suitability.9
Therefore, the current methodologies involving Group 14 elements have failed to provide a viable alternative for toxic lead perovskites. A viable solution could arise from the large number of d-block metals that are found directly in the centre of the periodic table (namely, Sc, Y, La, Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta, Cr, Mo, W, Mn, Tc, Re, Fe, Ru, Os, Co, Rh, Ir, Ni, Pd, Pt, Cu, Ag, Au, Zn, Cd, and Hg). These d-block metals have two main disadvantages: first, they get readily oxidized; second, they have more than one oxidation number since they lose a multiple number of their d-orbital electrons. However, they do have several positive properties, too. Most of them are relatively abundant (such as Ti, Fe, and Mn) and nontoxic (e.g., Co, Ni, and Pt).10 In addition, they can be met in the 2+ oxidation state (but can also have various oxidation states making them ideal for double perovskites), can easily mix together because of their similar atomic size and, more importantly, have already been used to effectively turn sunlight into electricity. The most characteristic examples are absorbers containing cadmium (CdTe),11 copper (CIGS),12 zinc (metalloporphyrins),13 ruthenium and osmium (dye solar cells),14 and silver (AgBiS2).15 Quite recently, noticeable efficiencies were attained with perovskites containing Ag+ or Ti4+.16,17 These latest results were the main motivation for us to write this review.
Therefore, we present all the types of perovskites that have been used as absorbers in solar cells. In most cases, the d-block metal sits at the B site, where only a few of them can be met at the A site, too (Fig. 1). In some works where a solar cell is not fabricated, we provide some data on the reported optoelectronic applications, such as LEDs and water splitting. This review comprises four main parts, distinguishing the d-block-metal-containing perovskites into halides, oxides, chalcogenides, and nitrides depending on the element at the X site. Certainly, we mainly focus our discussion on halides of different dimensionalities (cubic or cubic-like and layered) and structures (single or double), where most of the significant results are achieved with regard to photovoltaic (PV) properties. We also comment on works where the d-block metal ions have been incorporated as dopants in conventional lead perovskites. At the end of the review, we summarize the results until now, providing a status of the current situation and giving an outlook for future research in this field.
 Fig. 1  Compositional flexibilities of single (ABX3, A2BX4, and others) and double perovskites (A2B′B′′X6) using elements from Groups 1–17 of the periodic table. All the d-metals can occupy the B site (while some of them can also be found at the A site). By varying the elements at the X site, halide, oxide, chalcogenide, and nitride perovskites can be formed. 
ABX3 halide perovskites
The ABX3 halide perovskite structure can be formed by placing d-block elements at the A and B sites, if we take into account the large availability of d-block metal cations at the +1 and +2 oxidation states. However, besides preserving charge neutrality, additional premises should be met. The ABX3 perovskite is a cubic array of corner-sharing [BX6]2− octahedra, with the A-site cation located within the cuboctahedral cavities. For a stable cubic perovskite to be formed at room temperature and pressure, Goldschmidt developed a formula (known as the tolerance factor) to predict whether the A-site cation can fit within the cavities of the [BX6]2− framework.18 In addition, the octahedral factor, which accounts for the ability of a metal cation to octahedrally coordinate, was also taken into consideration.19 Very recently, looking at both tolerance and octahedral factors and introducing a revised set of ionic radii for cations that are anion-dependent, Travis et al. suggested that d-block metal ions can form ABX3 perovskites only when X = F.20
In any case, we encountered a few perovskites—better described as perovskite-like materials—with interesting optoelectronic properties that we wish to report here. For instance, Ni2+-based compounds (e.g., CsNiCl3 and CsNiBr3) were predicted to possess low electronic bandgaps and dispersive bands.21 In another theoretical work, Gabriel et al. suggested that MAZnI3 (where MA stands for the CH3NH3+ cation) is a perovskite with a bandgap (Eg) value of 1.2 eV and absorption coefficients ranging from 104 to 105 cm−1.22 However, we were not able to find any fabricated (and properly characterized) ABX3 perovskite optoelectronics based on nickel or zinc in the literature.
On the other hand, we have encountered similar materials based on palladium, cadmium, manganese, and copper. For instance, MAPdI3 has shown absorption cutoff at 1.24 eV and a photoelectric response in the near-infrared region. Very interestingly, the XRD patterns of the compound were very close to those of tetragonal MAPbI3.23 The stability of this compound needs further investigation since—as we will see in the subsequent paragraphs—a Pd2+-based compound was not able to form when one mole of PdBr2 reacted with two moles of CsBr.24
In turn, Ye et al. synthesized a (3-pyrrolinium)(CdCl3) perovskite-like compound and found that it is an above-room-temperature ferroelectric. They even observed an anomalous PV effect with a measured voltage as high as 32 V out of a 1 mm-thick bulky crystal, properly contacted with the electrodes.25 Similarly, Zhang et al. could grow brown/orange-colored crystals of (pyrrolidinium)MnBr3, which also exhibited ferroelectric properties. This compound exhibited intense red luminescence under UV excitation with photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) of 28.5% and an emission lifetime of 127 μs.26 Finally, another ferroelectric material based on Cu2+, which is a metal cation with more potential as an absorber in solar cells, was synthesized. C6H4NH2CuBr2I thin films were fabricated via spin coating a clear dark solution, comprising 1:1 molar ratio of C6H4NH2I and CuBr2 in dimethylformamide (DMF), onto mesoporous titania substrates. The films exhibited a suitable Eg value of ∼1.64 eV and high absorption coefficient (∼6 × 104 cm−1 at 450 nm). By scanning the potential from +10 V to −0.2 V applied at the FTO/TiO2 electrode of a hole transport material (HTM)-free solar cell, promising power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2% could be achieved (FTO refers to fluorine-doped tin oxide conductive glass). These films exhibited an extraordinary hydrophobic behavior by remaining black even after direct contact with water.27
As mentioned earlier, numerous d-block metal ions at the +2 oxidation state (Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni, Cd, and Hg) can form ABF3 perovskites.20 Even though we located certain interesting materials with promising bandgaps in the Materials Project (such as tetragonal KCrF3 with Eg value of 1.85 eV),28 we have not found any works on photoinduced applications of these materials.29 The liquid- and solid-state syntheses of these types of materials30 and their oxide equivalents (i.e., oxyfluorides)31 can be obtained from the literature; however, there are only a few reported experimental works, most probably due to the potential release of hazardous HF or F2 gas.32
Substitution and chemical doping of conventional perovskites
Evidently, only a few ABX3 perovskites with interesting optoelectronic properties can be formed with d-block metals. Therefore, totally replacing toxic lead by a d-block metal in a high-performing APbX3 perovskite does not seem like a worthwhile idea. However, a few attempts have been made to substitute a significant amount of lead in the perovskite structure, leading to lead-less perovskite solar cells. The “substituted” perovskite, in the form of APb1−yMyX3 (y is the percentage of added metal, M), should consist of a homogeneous, segregation-free phase, resulting from solid solutions formed between APbX3 and AMX3. The molar ratio M:Pb is generally above 1% and, in theory, can reach up to 100% (at least for certain fluorides as mentioned earlier). Although this is somewhat controversial, since d-block metal cations cannot fit into the crystal lattice of an iodide or iodide/bromide perovskite, there are certain results that are worth reporting.
Most of the more interesting works originate from Group 12 elements that lie close to Group 14. For instance, 5–15% Cd2+ was found to transform tetragonal MAPbI3 into a cubic perovskite with a slightly decreased Eg value.33 In another work, 5% Zn2+ substitution of lead in MAPbI3 significantly enlarged the grain size, assisting in forming pinhole-free films with long charge carrier lifetimes. With these films, n–i–p devices have shown a PCE value of over 18% under forward bias (with moderate hysteresis), which was significantly increased in comparison with the initial ∼15% efficiency.34 Similarly, Frolova et al. found that up to 30% toxic Hg2+ can be effectively incorporated in MAPbI3 perovskite, without any significant changes in the crystal structure and optical properties of the material. Notably, solar cells, based on the new perovskite formed by the substitution of 10% of lead by mercury, exhibited better performance when compared with the reference solar cells.35
Other metal ions have also been tested. Notably, 5% Cu2+ was incorporated in MAPbI3 or MA(Pb:Sn)I2.9Br0.1, yielding PCE values of 17% and 21%, respectively.36,37 In the former, the grain size and conductivity were enhanced; with the latter, the larger grain size was also accompanied by effective trap passivation. Similarly, 10% Co2+ altered MAPbI3 from tetragonal to cubic, leading to larger grain sizes as well as higher electron mobilities; these could be attributed to the contribution of the 3d orbitals of cobalt. With these, the PCE values increased from 17.5% to 21.4% with a concomitant decrease in hysteresis.38 Along the same direction, Yuan et al. fabricated a 10% Co2+ incorporated in GASnI3 cubic perovskites (where GA denotes guanidinium) with Eg = 1.46 eV in addition to exhibiting improved air stability.39
In most of the above cases where solar cells could be properly constructed, the efficiency usually increased upon every kind of substitution. We would like to notify the readers that this could not be a universal conclusion. For instance, in the work involving mercury, all the other d-block metal ions (Cu+, Ag+, Cd2+, Zn2+, Co2+, Fe2+, Ni2+, and Ti4+) were found to decrease the initial efficiency.35 We could argue that the enhancement (or not) of the PCE could also depend on the quality of the starting perovskite film. For a low-quality perovskite film, the scope of improvement is higher. Other parameters could also be relevant, such as the nature of perovskite (MA or CsPbI3 perovskite) or chemistry of the precursor solution. In addition, it is paradoxical that the substitution of lead yielded films with an increased grain size despite a decrease in the cell volume even though all the incorporated metal ions were smaller than Pb2+. Further, we have encountered cases in which enhanced light harvesting and, therefore, elevated short-circuit current were observed upon substitution. For such a comparison, a similar thickness for the perovskite film, with or without the addition of a foreign metal, was used. This might be incorrect since the grain does not increase only in one direction. In the SEM images (Fig. 2), it is evident that the inclusion of 10 mM CdCl2 in MAPbI3 perovskites increased the grain sizes fivefold and, simultaneously, the film thickness also increased by ∼25%.40 Another controversial issue is that in certain cases, a chloride or bromide source (such as CuBr2) is used. This complicates data interpretation as halides act as passivation agents.41
 Fig. 2  Top and cross-sectional SEM images of the surface of MAPbI3 films prepared without (a and b) and with (c and d) 10 mM CdCl2 addition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Efforts have also been made with other d-block metals but without any applications in solar cells. For instance, the formation of stable tetragonal perovskites (even though mixed with impurity phases) was confirmed by the substitution of lead with palladium.42 In turn, 3d orbitals of Cr induced new electronic states in the bandgap of Cr2+-incorporated MAPbI3, without significantly affecting its crystal lattice.43 Localized d states were also responsible for the half-metallic behavior of MA(Pb:Fe)I3 perovskites.44 The same phenomenon (creation of impurity bands by localized 3d states) could also be the reason behind the marginal photocurrent gained by a solar cell constructed based on 10% Mn2+ incorporated in MAPbI3 perovskites.45 On the contrary, the incorporation of 20% Mn2+ in Cs2NaBiCl6 double perovskites resulted in a new orange-red phosphor with quantum efficiency of ∼15%.46
Iron was also incorporated in CsPbI3 perovskites at the 3+ oxidation state. The as-prepared ultralong microwires with 0.5% to 2.3% Fe3+ were responsible for high-quality two-photon photoluminescence (PL) emissions.47 Ru3+ was also adopted to replace Bi3+ in 1D Cs3Bi2I9 perovskites. Upon partial substitution, a narrower bandgap and an upward shift in the band structures could be observed.48
Similar efforts for lead substitution have been conducted in perovskite nanocrystals (NCs). For instance, up to 10% Cd2+ or Zn2+ ions were effectively incorporated into CsPbBr3 NCs by post-synthetic cation exchange reactions, without influencing the high PLQE (∼60%) and narrow spectral linewidth (∼80 meV).49 Similarly, 2.2% Ni2+ enhanced the violet luminescence (∼405–435 nm) of CsPbCl2Br NCs, yielding PLQE of 93% (from only 5% of undoped NCs) resulting from the lower defect density.50 A considerable amount of work has also been undertaken in Mn2+ doping in high-bandgap perovskite hosts where the excitation energy is transferred to the Mn d-state, resulting in short-range tunable d–d emissions.51 For instance, a room-temperature PLQE value of 62% was observed at ∼600 nm from 3% Mn2+ incorporated in CsPbCl3 NCs.52 Interestingly, Mir et al. suggested that Mn2+ can stabilize the black phase of CsPbI3 NCs.53 Since there is only a marginal amount of work on perovskite-NCs-based solar cells, we do not wish to delve deeper into this discussion.54 We refer the readers to an excellent perspective published by Swarnkar and coworkers.55
We end this subsection by reviewing the most interesting results on perovskite doping with d-block metals. With doping, we refer to either lead substitution or simply the addition of extra metals in the lead-based precursor solution. In both these cases, a very small amount of dopant (from 0.001% to 0.5%) is introduced. Isovalent and heterovalent doping modalities were adopted; for heterovalent doping, only metal ions with lower oxidation states have yielded good results until now since they can easily provide free holes to the lattice. This is in perfect agreement with the prediction of Yanfa Yan's group that MAPbI3 can be doped more easily as p-type rather than n-type by using extrinsic dopants.56
Isovalent doping was attempted by incorporating 0.005% Mn2+ in CsPbI1.01Br1.99 perovskites. This led to a reduction in the bandgap and reconstruction of the band structure, enabling reduced energy loss during hole transfer. The films were also better crystallized, showing improved light harvesting and charge transport characteristics. With this, the PCE of solar cells was enhanced from 6.1% to 7.0%. Notably, the devices based on doped perovskites exhibited very good stability in the ambient atmosphere.57
In another work, 0.027% of toxic Cd2+ was added in a precursor solution comprising Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8PbI2.55Br0.45 perovskites (where FA denotes formamidinium). The incorporation of cadmium was found to relax the lattice strain and suppress the formation energy of I vacancies. With this, a tenfold increase in PL intensity was observed. The as-fabricated devices showed similar PCE values (∼20.5%) with those attained by the reference solar cells. However, the Cd-doped perovskite-based devices exhibited an enhanced ambient-air operational stability by an order of magnitude higher than that of nondoped perovskite solar cells (PSCs).58
Then, Klug et al. investigated how a large variety of d-block metal ions can affect the PV performance of MAPbI3 solar cells. Surprisingly, the initial PCE value was increased by replacing up to 6% Pb with most of the considered extrinsic metal species (Co, Cu, Mn, Ni, and Zn). The notable exception was Fe, which introduced trap states that severely diminished the PV performance and PL even at relatively low levels of Pb replacement.59 This result was in close agreement with those obtained in other works.44 Co2+ has proven to be the most promising metal ion. Interestingly, in this work, the authors have found that the grain size of the perovskite was gradually reduced with increasing Co2+ fraction (while the films remained virtually pinhole-free), which is in perfect agreement with the introduction of small cations in the crystal, thereby reducing the lattice volume. By optimizing the cobalt amount at 0.016% (in relation to Pb2+), a worthwhile efficiency of 17.2% could be achieved; this could be attributed to the improvement in the open-circuit voltage (Voc) while maintaining the fill factor (FF) and producing only a slightly reduced short-circuit current (Jsc) in comparison with the reference MAPbI3 devices. This performance improvement arises from the ability of Co2+ to tune the Fermi level and valence band edge of the perovskite in a manner that is independent of the bandgap and shift the material into a more favorable energetic alignment with the hole extraction layer (Fig. 3a).
 Fig. 3  (a) Isovalent doping: energy levels of the MA(Pb:Co)I3 materials relative to the vacuum level by increasing Co2+ amount. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Aliovalent doping: valence and conduction band edges position vs. the Fermi level (black dot line), induced by the incorporation of Ag+ in MAPbI3, in comparison with other (Na+ and Cu+) dopants. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Besides 2+ metal cations, heterovalent doping with cations of the lower oxidation state than lead seems to be an interesting idea. If these dopants do not provide a negative effect, i.e., creating deep traps in the perovskite, they can act as acceptors and provide holes in the system. The sole elements that can perform this function are from Group 11. In this case, 20% Cu+ was suggested to increase the efficiency of a MAPbI3 perovskite/ITO heterojunction solar cell from 6.5% to 15.2% (ITO refers to indium tin oxide conductive glass).60 A severely reduced molar ratio of Cu+ (0.1%) was introduced into the FAPbI3 perovskite, stabilizing its black phase and enhancing the long-term stability of the devices upon storage in a nitrogen atmosphere. However, the incorporation of Cu+ led to a PCE decrease from 16.5% to 15.2%. This reduction might originate from the poor defect chemistry due to the presence of a large number of accessible oxidation states.61 However, it is noteworthy that when half of the Cu+ amount was incorporated in the MAPbI3 perovskite, the efficiency of the solar cells increased from ∼16% to over 18%.62
Since we were not able to find any work on Au+-doped halide perovskites, we focus our discussion on the last element in Group 11, i.e., silver. Ag+ seems to be an ideal solution since its stable oxidation state is 1+. The incorporation of 0.5% Ag+ in MAPbI3 led to a reduction in electron concentration, moving the Fermi level toward the middle of the bandgap, suggesting a change from n-type to intrinsic-like behavior (Fig. 3b). With this, the devices showed an enhancement of the initial PCE (16%) up to 18.4%.63 A cleaner bandgap, reflected by a lower energetic disorder, was further confirmed by Abdi-Jalebi et al. when ten times lower silver was incorporated in MAPbI3. These authors also verified a severe PCE enhancement from ∼16% to over 19%.62 Certainly, this “dedoping” effect is not universal. For instance, when Ag+ was introduced in CsPbBr3 NCs, a heavily p-type material was obtained.64 Other interesting phenomena have also been observed in NCs, such as defect passivation65 or plasmon-induced hot electron transfer.66
A2BX4 layered perovskites
In contradiction with three-dimensional ABX3 perovskites, d-metal cations can form layered perovskites. Because of the smaller ionic radii of transition metals, the 3D structure is sterically hindered; further, the atoms rearrange in a layered configuration, which is isostructural to compounds of the Ruddlesden–Popper phase, such as K2NiF4.67 This structure can be derived by cutting the standard 3D perovskite along specific orientations and piling up alternating organic and inorganic slabs. The resulting general formula can be written as An+1MnX3n+1, where n is the number of layers within an inorganic slab.68 Unfortunately, we have not been able to find many works on solar cells or other related light-induced applications based on these interesting materials.
Pd could serve as the metal (M) forming the 2D hybrid perovskites having low toxicity. For instance, the layered (CH3NH3)2PdBr4 perovskite, crystallized at the orthorhombic structure, was found to behave as a p-type semiconductor, with a carrier concentration of 3.4 × 1012 cm−3 and mobility of 23.4 cm2 V−1 s−1. This material also exhibited a promising optical gap of 1.91 eV. Impressively, the perovskite was stable under high humidity (60% relative humidity) for 4 days.69 The material was synthesized by others, too; however, they did not detect any PL, implying that probably the perovskite's performance is limited by the presence of numerous defects.70
Even if palladium forms promising materials, only copper layered compounds, which are much cheaper, were successfully synthesized and utilized in solar cells. Cu2+ is particularly interesting due to the stability of its oxidation state in an aerobic environment and its ability to form compounds with a large absorption coefficient in the visible region. For instance, orthorhombic, layered MA2CuCl2Br2 with Eg = 2.12 eV was synthesized through conventional low-temperature crystallization in solution (ethanol). Then, the powders were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and uniformly infiltrated in 5 μm-thick mesoporous titania substrates. Using 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) as HTM solar cell devices yielded a PCE value of 0.017% with Jsc = 0.2 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.26 V, and FF = 0.32.71
Even better results were achieved using the same material in similar device architecture, but the thickness of the mesoporous titania was severely reduced down to 200–300 nm. With this, the cells yielded a PCE value of ∼1%. We note that the powders were synthesized through a solid-state reaction by simple grinding the precursors in a mortar and were further dissolved in DMF, rather than DMSO. Even more importantly, layered MA2CuCl4 yielded an even higher PCE value of 2.4%. This material with Eg = 2.36 eV exhibited EQE onset at 800 nm and could yield a record Jsc value of over 8 mA cm−2.72
Other groups took advantage of the Jahn–Teller distortion of Cu2+, which introduces elastic bonds in the inorganic planes, resulting in an easier interaction even with larger ammonium cations. For instance, single crystals of a new layered (C6H5CH2NH3)2CuBr4 perovskite were grown in HBr solution. The crystals were dissolved in ethanol, forming a dark violet ink (note that this is a similar case with 3D lead halide perovskite NCs in solution).73 The material exhibited a low Eg value of 1.81 eV and high absorption coefficient of ∼1 × 105 cm−1 at 539 nm, along with moderate carrier lifetime exceeding 2 ns. Devices using mesoporous titania and poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) yielded a PCE value of 0.2%. More importantly, the material proved to be very stable in the presence of moisture, heat, and UV light.74
Similarly, flat violet plates of (F-C8H8NH3)2CuBr4 and (CH3CH2CH2CH2NH3)2CuBr4 were also grown in HBr solution. Crystals in ethanol were deposited on mesoporous TiO2 and full devices were completed by spiro-MeOTAD and Ag top contact. These devices yielded PCE values of 0.5–0.6% for both the layered perovskites.75
Halide double perovskites
The necessity to go for lead-free materials for optoelectronics gave birth to the family of double perovskites. The concept involved the replacement of the metal cation Pb2+ and maintain the three-dimensional ABX3 perovskite structure (X = halide and A = cation at the +1 oxidation state). The idea was to use nontoxic elements that lie close to the Group 14 elements and have already exhibited worthwhile PV performance; the obvious choices were Bi3+ and Sb3+. However, it was very challenging to accommodate the difference in charges.
Consequently, an expanded lattice, in the form of A2B′B′′X6, with a unit cell that is twice that of perovskites, was suggested.76 The B and B′ sites provide a combined charge of 4+; this charge can be equally or unequally divided. Halide double perovskites can accommodate metals with the oxidation states of 2+/2+ and 1+/3+ in the B′/B′′ sites. Here, we focus on the 1+/3+ compounds, where B′′ is Bi3+ or Sb3+. However, some other promising materials in this category have been reported with B′′ = Tl, such as Cs2AgTlBr6 with Eg = 0.95 eV.77
Interestingly, in the case of the 1+/3+ system, there is a chance that B′ = B′′. An example is the mixed valence Au(I + III) system. Using first-principles calculations, Debbichi et al. predicted the coexistence of two separate frameworks: [AuI2]− and [AuI4]− in the dual molecule of Cs2Au2I6. This led to a direct bandgap of 1.2–1.3 eV with high absorption coefficients. The authors then estimated that the maximum theoretical efficiency that this material could achieve exceeds 20%.78
In any case, the most compelling compounds for light-induced applications came when B′′ was either Bi3+ or Sb3+. Following the cation-transmutation strategy, many optoelectronically active materials that incorporate d-block metals (where B′ is Ag+, Cu+, and Au+) have been experimentally synthesized until now.79 It should be noted that noble metals (Cu, Ag, and Au) are the best known electrical conductors, owing to their filled d10 shell and free-electron-like behavior of the s1 shell. In addition, in an octahedral environment, the ionic radii of Cu+ (0.91 Å), Ag+ (1.29 Å), and Au+ (1.51 Å) are relatively similar to those of Sb3+ (0.76 Å) and Bi3+ (1.03 Å).80
Tetravalent cations could also be incorporated to form a 4+/0 perovskite, where the B′ site is vacant. Compounds in which B′′ is a d-block metal cation (such as Ti4+, Pt4+, Pd4+, and Au4+) have been reported. These perovskites are called vacancy-ordered “double” perovskites since they are isostructural to A2B(I)B(III)X6 but with a “virtual” cation (since the B′ site is vacant).81 In the following, we continue the discussion by separating these two significant categories: double perovskites and vacancy-ordered double perovskites.
A2B′B′′X6 double perovskites
A good range of A2B′B′′X6 double perovskites based on bismuth or antimony have been reported until now with A = Cs+ or CH3NH3+ and B′ = Ag+. There is also a special case where a part or all of Bi3+ is replaced by In3+, forming a Cs2AgBi(1−x)InxCl6 perovskite (with 0 < x < 1); this perovskite will be discussed at the end of this subsection. A vast majority of these compounds are chloride and bromide perovskites. Theoretical research has been intensively conducted to predict the optoelectronic properties and thermodynamic stability of these perovskites.82,83 For some materials, the compounds have also been synthesized and characterized. For instance, stable perovskites, namely, Cs2AgBiCl6,84 Cs2AgBiBr6,85 MA2AgBiBr6, and Cs2AgSbCl6, have been comprehensively studied, but they have never been used to fabricate solar cells.86,87 All the compounds crystallize in the cubic Fmm symmetry and exhibit an indirect gap. This gap varies from ∼2.0–2.3 eV for bromides and up to 2.2–2.8 eV for chlorides.
Iodide analogues are far scarcer due to synthesis challenges. In any case, MA2AgBiI6 and MA2AgSbI6 have been successfully synthesized, presenting close to ideal optical bandgaps—lower than 2 eV—accompanied by excellent stability in air.88,89 An even lower Eg value (1.75 eV) could be attained by preparing 10 nm Cs2AgBiI6 NCs via ion exchange from the bromide compound. Unfortunately, no visible PL was observed at room temperature.90
Another approach to lower the optical bandgap of double perovskites was realized by Karmakar et al., who doped Cs2SbAgCl6 perovskites with Cu2+. The dilute incorporation of 3d9 orbitals near the valence band maximum, which consists of the Sb-5s/Ag-4d orbitals, allowed the narrowing of the bandgap from 2.65 eV down to 1.02 eV. This material demonstrated long-term structural and photophysical stabilities under thermal and moisture exposures.91
Even though ideal bandgaps have been attained by these perovskites, only Cs2AgBiBr6 (Fig. 4a) has been used until now to fabricate solar cells. Before moving to devices, several research groups have determined the optoelectronic properties of this compound. Slavney et al. were the first to determine a long PL decay time of 660 ns.92 An even longer lifetime of 1.4 μs via transient absorption spectroscopy (being two orders of magnitude slower than PL decay) was recently reported. The same authors also estimated the steady-state excess carrier density under 1 sun to be 2.2 × 1016 cm−3, which is an order of magnitude larger than that for MAPbI3, suggesting that charge transport and extraction can be highly efficient in Cs2AgBiBr6.93 The above results were further justified by Bartesaghi et al., who identified the presence of mobile charges with microsecond lifetimes. In addition, the authors could determine a shallow trap-state density of around 1016 cm−3 in the bulk of the Cs2AgBiBr6 crystal and mobility product of 1 cm2 V−1 s−1.94 These relatively high mobility values suggest a band-like charge transport characteristic limited only by phonon scattering, implying that the charge transport mechanism is similar to that observed in state-of-the-art lead-based perovskites.95
 Fig. 4  (a) Crystal structure of Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite and (b) schematic of sequential vapor deposition processing of Cs2AgBiBr6 films. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) Cs2AgBiBr6 powder, Cs2AgBiBr6 solution in DMSO, solution-processed Cs2AgBiBr6 yellow films, and a characteristic top SEM image of their surface. (d) Perovskite solar cell structure: FTO/TiO2/Cs2AgBiBr6/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag and typical J–V curves of the fabricated devices with optimized solution- and vacuum-processed Cs2AgBiBr6 thin films. A record PCE value of 2.5% could be attained. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Cs2AgBiBr6 seems optimal for the moment, but it also has inherent limitations. For instance, Schade et al. found that charge carrier lifetimes are affected by a structural cubic-to-tetragonal transition, while significant trapping of charge carriers can take place in grain boundaries in polycrystalline thin films.96 On the other hand, several groups have identified the presence of deep traps, created by Cs interstitials, Br vacancies,97 Bi vacancies, and AgBi antisites.98 With these facts in mind, Savory et al. determined a spectroscopic limited maximum efficiency of only 7.9% due to the large indirect bandgap caused by the fundamental mismatch of Ag d and Bi s orbitals at the band edges.99 Indeed, PV efficiencies of not more than 2.5% could be attained until now. In the following, we focus on the most important recent results on solar cells with acceptable efficiencies.
Through typical solution-processed spin coating, Ning et al. deposited 205 nm-thick films of Cs2AgBiBr6 on compact TiO2/ITO substrates. The precursor solution consisted of 2–5 mm octahedral single crystals of the perovskite (previously developed in an autoclave at 120 °C) dissolved in DMSO. After deposition, the films were annealed at 250 °C for better crystallization. Planar solar cell devices were completed by depositing spiro-MeOTAD and metal contact on the top. The authors were then able to estimate the indirect bandgap of the material (∼2.0 eV) and its absorption coefficient (105 cm−1 at 439 nm) through absorption–emission measurements. Then, by means of transient PL measurements, the PL lifetime was determined to be 35 ± 1 ns, which was accompanied by photoexcitation mobility of 0.37 ± 0.15 cm2 V−1 s−1, leading to relatively long diffusion lengths for the electrons and holes (≈110 ± 20 nm). Using these diffusion lengths and absorption coefficients, a theoretical Jsc value of around 5.2 mA cm−2 was estimated. In practice, the as-fabricated devices could produce a Jsc value of only 1.7 mA cm−2. This current was associated with a Voc value of 1.06 V, leading to a PCE value of 1.2%. This efficiency was stabilized within the maximum power point (MPP) at the same value for over 600 s of illumination. Almost no hysteresis behavior in the J–V curves was observed, implying less trapping or ion migration in Cs2AgBiBr6 when compared with those in lead-based hybrid perovskites. The authors suggested that a further improvement could take place by removing the interfacial barrier that was created by the surface defects; this could be achieved by replacing TiO2 with more suitable electron transport materials and by increasing the film thickness while maintaining film quality.100
The idea to convert and deposit an already fabricated Cs2AgBiBr6 solid was replicated by others. This time, Wu et al. realized the same reaction but without using an autoclave, resulting in a red-orange powder (rather than single crystals), which was then dissolved in DMSO. The spin-coated film was quickly moved to a low-pressure chamber pumped to 20 Pa, where the transparent film gradually turned to light yellow. Then, it was annealed at 200 °C to evaporate the residual solvent, achieving a uniform film with good crystallinity. Following the suggestion of Ning et al., the authors replaced TiO2 by SnO2 and spiro-MeOTAD by the P3HT hole-conducting polymer. The films exhibited dense and smooth morphology without any visible pinholes, exhibiting an appreciable PL lifetime of 30 ns. The planar heterojunction solar cells yielded a maximum PCE value of 1.44% with Voc = 1.04 V, Jsc = 1.78 mA cm−2, and a high FF value of 0.78 (measured in the forward scan). Hysteresis was still observed; however, the solar cell exhibited a stabilized PCE value of 1.30% at bias of 0.80 V. The devices have not shown degradation when stored under ambient conditions (temperature: 20–30 °C; relative humidity: 40–60%) without any encapsulation.101
A very similar approach with Cs2AgBiBr6 powder dissolved in DMSO was adopted, but antisolvent (2-propanol) crystallization was employed during spin coating. With this, Gao et al. could fabricate smooth films (root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of less than 10 nm) with grain sizes of 300–400 nm on Cu-NiOx/ITO substrates.102 The indirect bandgap of these films was estimated to be ∼1.9 eV, while the calculated carrier trap-state density (∼9.1 × 1016 cm−3) is comparable to that of Pb-based perovskite polycrystalline films.103 Completing the device structure by using C60, bathocuproine (BCP), and silver contact, a PCE value of 2.2% could be attained with Voc = 1.01 V, Jsc = 3.2 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.69. No discernible hysteresis effect was observed with a stable PCE value for at least 300 s. The devices exhibited excellent long-term stability of over 10 days when stored in 50% relative humidity.102
The same deposition procedure was pursued by Grancini's group; however, this time, Cs2AgBiBr6 was infiltrated into the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold through antisolvent (chlorobenzene) crystallization. The as-prepared films had a compact structure with a 200 nm-thick homogeneous Cs2AgBiBr6 capping layer on the top of TiO2 and an average grain size of around 80 nm. PL spectroscopy measurements revealed Eg = 2.1 eV and fundamental charge recombination lifetime of 282 ns. When embodied in solar cells, with poly(triarylamine) (PTAA) as the HTM, a maximum PCE value of ∼1.3% could be attained without any hysteresis.104
Liu's group also proved that efficient Cs2AgBiBr6 perovskite films of high quality could be fabricated through a sequential vapor deposition method. Briefly, AgBr was first deposited onto compact TiO2. BiBr3 and CsBr were then sequentially deposited on the top of the film layer by layer. A double perovskite was formed throughout the diffusion reaction driven by the subsequent thermal annealing process (Fig. 4b). The authors found that the molar ratio of the three evaporated components was critical to fabricate stoichiometric double perovskite films, suggesting that an excess of BiBr3 facilitated the growth of perovskite crystals and eliminated the impurity phases in the final films. A high temperature of ∼220 °C was also found to be necessary to obtain films with high crystallinity. The obtained films were uniform and smooth, exhibiting an indirect bandgap of 2.02 eV and PL lifetime of 117 ns. Planar n–i–p devices with P3HT on the top yielded an average stabilized PCE value of 1%, with the best-performing device yielding a PCE value of ∼1.4% and record Voc value of 1.12 V. The devices preserved 90% of their initial PCE after 240 h of storage under ambient conditions.105
Yang Yang's group actually compared the two methods: vacuum deposition and solution processing. With a slight increase in the crystallization temperature (280 °C), solution-processed films of ∼2 eV Cs2AgBiBr6 on compact TiO2/FTO substrates could be fabricated. A typical approach of dissolving Cs2AgBiBr6 powder in DMSO was adopted,101 but without any antisolvent treatment. These films did not suffer from a severe loss of Br−, which is the case of vacuum-deposited ones, thereby reaching PL lifetimes of 56.3 ± 4.0 ns and mobilities of 0.74 cm2 V−1 s−1. Typical devices of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag structure yielded a record, nearly hysteresis-free PCE value of 2.5%, with Jsc = 3.82 mA cm−2 and Voc = 1.01 V (Fig. 4d). These devices were able to retain over 90% of their initial PCE values without encapsulation for 15 days.16
Even though the results were promising for a 2 eV material, researchers attempted to further reduce the bandgap of Cs2AgBiBr6. Du et al. suggested that Eg as low as 1.86 eV could be attained via the incorporation of 37.5% Sb3+ in Cs2AgBiBr6. On the other hand, they also found that this double perovskite could accommodate up to 75% In3+, but with higher Eg.106 With this in mind, Volonakis et al. suggested that the substitution of Bi3+ by In3+ could switch the bandgap from indirect to direct. In fact, Cs2AgInCl6 exhibited a direct bandgap of 3.3 eV at the Γ point and absorption coefficients greater than 104 cm−1 at higher energies.107 These results were further corroborated by other groups.108 Even more importantly, Zunger's group identified other similar perovskites, namely, Cs2AgInBr6, Rb2CuInCl6, and Rb2AgInBr6, having direct bandgaps of 1.36, 1.46, and 1.50 eV, respectively, and theoretical spectroscopic limited maximal efficiency comparable to those of chalcopyrites and MAPbI3.109
In this direction, Tang's group synthesized single crystals of Cs2AgInCl6 and then fabricated sensitive and fast UV photodetectors.110 With this material, the same group could fabricate electroluminescent devices with efficient and stable emissions of warm white light. Consequently, the authors had to substitute 40% Ag+ with Na+ that has a distinctively different electronic configuration than that of Ag. With this, they were able to break the parity-forbidden transition by manipulating the symmetry of the self-trapped exciton wavefunction and reduce the electronic dimensionality of the perovskite. This led to impressive PLQE of 86% (while PLQE was extremely low for Na-free perovskites) along with peak current efficiency of 0.11 cd A−1 for at least 1000 h of continuous operations.111
With the hope of lower electron dimensionality, double perovskites with lower structural dimensionality have also been suggested. For instance, (BA)4AgBiBr8 and (BA)2CsAgBiBr7 (BA = CH3(CH2)3NH3+) exhibit metal–halide sheets of mono and bilayer thicknesses, respectively, where the ordered double perovskite lattice is partitioned by organic cations. Electronic structure calculations reveal that the indirect bandgap of Cs2AgBiBr6 becomes direct when the infinitely thick inorganic lattice is reduced to monolayer thickness.112 In another approach, Ruddlesden–Popper-type Cs4In3/2Sb3/2Cl10/Cs2Cu1/2Bi1/2Cl4 heterostructures with type-II band alignment were prepared. These heterostructures exhibited a direct bandgap of 1.65 eV, accompanied with low carrier recombination rates and carrier mobilities that are three/four orders of magnitude larger than those of MAPbI3 (up to 102–103 cm2 V−1 s−1).113
A2B′′X6 vacancy-ordered double perovskites
The birth of this field in the solar cell technology dates back to 2014 when Kanatzidis’ group reported the p-type properties of doped Cs2SnI6.114 This material, which is a native n-type semiconductor, exhibits a direct bandgap of around 1.3–1.5 V, which accounts for the difference between the lowest unoccupied state derived from the Sn 5s/I 5p orbitals and the highest occupied state derived exclusively from the iodine p states. The conduction band is highly dispersive due to the close-packed framework of iodides, which is very similar to that of cubic CsSnI3 that exhibits orbital overlap between the neighboring octahedra. This leads to electron effective masses of as low as 0.25m0 along with impressive electron mobility of 310 cm2 V−1 s−1, despite the presence of ordered vacancies.115 On top of that, the lack of trap states results in the classification of Cs2SnI6 as a defect-tolerant semiconductor.116
However, even though Cs2SnI6 exhibited very interesting optoelectronic properties relevant for applications in photovoltaics, a very low efficiency, not exceeding 1%, could be attained with a double perovskite acting as the sole absorber in the device.117 In addition, the demonstrated air stability of the compound is insufficient for commercial applications. Last, but not the least, serious concerns still persist with regard to the suitability of tin as an environmentally friendly alternative to lead.9 For this, a range of nontoxic metals were suggested as alternatives. The most obvious choices came from elements of Group 4 (Ti, Zr, and Hf), which form cations with stable +4 oxidation states. However, some elements from Group 10 (Pd and Pt) could exhibit similar properties even though both +2 and +4 oxidation states are equally probable (recall that this is also the case for tin). Here, we should highlight the fact that several transition metals (such as Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Mo, and W) were already modeled by Ju et al., who suggested that the bandgaps of some of these perovskites may be too wide, while others may become metallic.118
We start with tetravalent d-block metals from Group 10. Compounds of the type A2PtI6, where A = NH4+, CH3NH3+, and CH(NH2)2+, have been synthesized. These compounds crystallize in the cubic Fmm (for the ammonium compound) or a distorted K2PtI6 (for the other two compounds) vacancy-ordered double perovskite structures. They exhibit an indirect bandgap of ∼2 eV arising from transitions between the I 5p orbitals at the Γ point to the Pt 5d eg states (with little or no contribution from the iodine p states) at the X site. Here, we recall that Cs2SnI6 possesses a direct bandgap. This implies that the direct vs. indirect nature of the bandgap in vacancy-ordered double perovskites is dictated by the interaction of the B site with the halide ligands of the octahedra.119 Pt-Based vacancy-ordered double perovskites exhibit fairly dispersive conduction band states, with electron effective masses ranging from 0.38 to 0.43m0 for (NH4)2PtI6 perovskites.120 These compounds have never been tested in solar cells according to our knowledge.
Snaith's group was the first to investigate palladium—another metal cation of Group 10. First, Prof. Giustino performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations in order to define the bandgap of Cs2PdBr6 as well as to estimate the electron and hole effective masses. They obtained an indirect bandgap of 1.56 eV between the Γ and X points, but with the lowest direct bandgap (at the X point) that was only marginally larger than the indirect bandgap (1.59 eV). This perovskite is expected to behave as an n-type semiconductor because of the low electron effective masses. Subsequently, Sakai et al. synthesized this compound. In fact, this happened accidentally. The initial procedure was based on a Pd(II) precursor material, but finally octahedral Cs2PdX6 crystals were precipitated out of the solution. This was due to the oxidation of Pd2+ to Pd4+ through HBr treatment, which proved to be an efficient catalytic agent for this oxidation reaction. The as-fabricated single crystals exhibited absorption onset at 1.58 eV and PL emission maximum at 1.60 eV, which is in full accordance with theory. Similarly, 800 nm-thick films, prepared by spin coating a solution of Cs2PdBr6 in DMF on ITO conductive glass, exhibit an optical bandgap of ∼1.60 eV. A long lifetime of 79 ns was also determined from the PL measurements. These films, with Ag on the top, have been adopted as model devices to verify any photoresponse of the perovskite. Fortunately, these devices behave as photodiodes, with an increase in conductivity under illumination, even though a clear rectification of the J–V curve was not seen. This implies that Cs2PdBr6 may be suitable for use in a wide range of optoelectronic applications such as photon sensors, light-emitting diodes, and PV devices. The authors also suggest that the material is water-stable.24
The above results were further justified by Zhou et al., who achieved material growth in the NC form (size: 1–2 nm). The Cs2PdBr6 NCs exhibited an optical bandgap of 1.69 eV. Transient PL measurements showed a short PL decay lifetime of 0.9 ns, while fs transient absorbance revealed an even shorter component of 34.8 ps, which was attributed to the intrinsic decay that originated from the radiative recombinations of the electron–hole pairs. Despite the fact that radiative recombinations between the electrons and holes seem restrained in this system (probably due to ultrafast charge trapping through the defects), the photocurrent of a three-electrode photoelectrochemical cell with Cs2PdBr6 NCs deposited on FTO glass responded quickly when the light was turned on/off. The NCs exhibited high stability against light illumination (1 sun for more than 1000 h), moisture (70% for 2 months), and high-temperature (120 °C for 600 h) conditions. The authors moved the approach to the next level by successfully synthesizing the I analogue (e.g., Cs2PdI6) through a simple ion-exchange procedure that was completed within 5 min. The prepared cubic Cs2PdI6 exhibited the same crystal structure as that of Cs2PdBr6 with space group Fmm and a lower bandgap of ∼1.4 eV.121
The most important work in this field has been carried out by the groups of Zhou and Padture. In particular, Ju et al. calculated the bandgaps for Ti(IV) compounds by altering their A-site atoms (A = Cs+, Rb+, K+, and In+) and found that all of them possessed the desired optical properties. However, they concluded that Cs2TiX6-based compounds were the most suitable (Fig. 5a). For instance, the Cs2TiBr6 compound possesses Eg = 1.78 eV, which makes it ideal for tandem PV applications. In turn, Cs2TiI6 with Eg = 1.38 eV represents an optimal candidate for single-junction solar cells. Although the calculated effective masses (0.79 and 1.58m0 for light and heavy holes at the Γ point, respectively, as well as 1.58m0 for electrons) are larger than those of lead–halide-based perovskites, double perovskites have reasonable carrier mobilities for PV applications. Finally, the authors confirmed the stability and processability of these materials.118
 Fig. 5  (a) Crystal structure of A2TiX6 perovskites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the vapor-based synthesis of Cs2TiBr6 films. (c) UV–vis spectra (inset: photograph of the films). (d) Time-resolved PL decay of Cs2TiBr6 films, with and without P3HT hole quencher. (e) Solar cell architecture and J–V curves at both forward (hollow circles) and reverse (solid circles) scans of the best devices, with or without the presence of a C60 interfacial layer. A record PCE value of 3.2% could be attained. Reprinted from ref. 17 with permission from Elsevier. 
Then, the same authors proceeded to fabricate Cs2TiBr6 on TiO2/FTO substrates via a two-step vapor deposition method (Fig. 5b). With an additional annealing step at 200 °C for 24 h, highly uniform, pinhole-free, and phase-pure Cs2TiBr6 films (thickness: 200 nm) were attained. The RMS roughness of the films was 24.5 nm and the average grain size was as high as 270 nm. The as-deposited films exhibited Eg = 1.82 eV (Fig. 5c), which was in considerable concordance with theory, with appreciable PL lifetimes (23.7 ns) and concomitant balanced electron–hole diffusion lengths (exceeding 100 nm) (Fig. 5d). Then, these Cs2TiBr6 films were incorporated into planar-heterojunction PSCs with a combination of P3HT on the top acting as the HTM. The cells exhibited stable efficiencies of ∼2.2% with Voc = 0.89 V and Jsc = 4.03 mA cm−2.17 The efficiency is very similar with that attained by the record PSCs based on 2 eV Cs2AgBiBr6 absorbers.16 This value was further enhanced up to 3.2% (Voc = ∼1 V; Jsc = 5.6 mA cm−2) when a C60 layer was inserted between the perovskite and TiO2 (Fig. 5e). Unencapsulated devices retained 94% of their initial PCE value for 350 h under environmental stress (70 °C; 30% relative humidity; ambient light). Similarly, these devices could retain 85% of their PCE value under continuous one-sun illumination.17
Oxide perovskites
Around 90% of the metallic elements in the periodic table are stable in an oxide perovskite. However, they do not act as ideal absorbers in a solar cell since they have a relatively wide bandgap due to the large difference in the electronegativity values between oxygen and the metal atom.122 On the other hand, some of these oxides are ferroelectric, implying that they exhibit unique properties that are not found in conventional photovoltaics.123 In particular, under illumination, they exhibit a short-circuit photocurrent parallel to the direction of the ferroelectric polarization axis, as well as photovoltage that is usually much larger than their bandgap (in the range of 3–4 eV). This is called the bulk photovoltaic effect (BPE).124
Titanates
PbTiO3 is probably the most well-known ferroelectric oxide with highly spontaneous polarization and low Curie temperature. When the crystallization temperature is below the Curie temperature, the tetragonal ferroelectric phase is formed, the crystal structure is noncentrosymmetric, and the displacement of Ti4+ ions with respect to the oxygen cage results in a large degree of ferroelectricity. These ferroelectrics exhibit spontaneous electric polarization, where the application of an electric field (poling) reorients the domains within the individual grains.125
As stated earlier, the main issue with this material is its wide bandgap (around 3.5 eV). For this, Rappe's group suggested 10 metal oxide perovskites that could form homogeneous alloys with lead titanate, decreasing the bandgap while maintaining large spontaneous polarization.126 Fairly notably, they also predicted that solid solutions of PbNiO3–PbTiO3 could yield an optical bandgap comparable to that of bulk Si.127 A portion of these predictions was already confirmed by Zhao et al., who found that 20% Ni4+ in PbTiO3 reduced the bandgap and enhanced the photocurrent under positive poling by one order of magnitude larger than that of undoped PbTiO3 films.128
Another promising ferroelectric perovskite is BaTiO3. In fact, BPE has been observed back in 1975 when the photovoltage of melt-grown BaTiO3 single crystals exceeded their Eg value (3.2–3.5 eV).129 These results were recently confirmed, but in a more advanced manner. Devices, made of a single-tip electrode contact, could extract hot photoelectrons through BPE in BaTiO3, leading to a PCE value (3.9%) that exceeded the Shockley–Queisser limit for a material with such a bandgap.130 The delivery of a stable photocurrent without the need of any selective contact was further justified by others through the construction of planar-structured ferroelectric BaTiO3 devices.131
Ferroelectric oxides as interfacial layers in conventional PSCs
Even though the above results are very promising, we have not found any paper on really efficient solar cells using titanates as the absorber. On the contrary, there are a few recent works on the use of such ferroelectric oxides as interfacial layers in highly efficient lead halide PSCs. The rationale behind this is that a built-in electric field in a PV device may be advantageous for the mechanism of charge separation and charge transfer throughout the structure.132 In addition, these materials can work as ideal window layers since they possess a wide bandgap (3.2–3.5 eV) that is very close to those of typical transport layers (such as TiO2 and SnO2).
To prove the above hypothesis, Wang et al. fabricated typical planar devices with FTO/PbTiO3/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au architecture. The authors found that the photocurrent could be tuned by the positive ferroelectric polarization. With this, the stabilized PCE was increased from around 5.6% up to 9.6%, as the optimal energy level of the oxide layer could transfer the electrons and block the holes at the oxide–CH3NH3PbI3 interface.133
In a similar approach, Pérez-Tomas et al. deposited 10 nm PbZrTiO3 as the electron extraction material in triple cation halide perovskite solar cells. The application of a bias voltage up to 2 V under UV light proved to be the critical step for the induction of charge transport in the ferroelectric oxide. The J–V curves of the unencapsulated cells exhibited hysteretic behavior and a maximum PCE value under reverse scan of 11.2% after poling (0.6% without any poling) (Fig. 6a); even more notably, the devices exhibited negligible degradation for hours under UV light and humid air.134
 Fig. 6  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite solar cell device employing a PbZrTiO3 ferroelectric layer and histograms of PCEs of the device before and after poling. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Device geometry of Bi2FeCrO6 multilayer structure and J–V characteristics of the 3-junction devices under AM1.5G illumination. A record PCE value of 8.1% could be attained. Reprinted from ref. 152 with permission from Springer Nature. (c) Crystal structures of the suggested oxide double perovskites. The evolution of double perovskite A2M(III)M(V)O6 can be considered as a chemical mutation of cation B to cations M(III) and M(V). Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
In another approach, Yang et al. incorporated in situ an ultrathin PbTiO3 layer between mesoporous TiO2 and MAPbI3 perovskite. Before the deposition of a halide perovskite on the top, a bias voltage of 20 V was applied to the electrode from a Pt-coated Si cantilever of the atomic force microscope to induce net polarization in PbTiO3. Devices that did not use any HTM achieved a record PCE value of 16.4%, accompanied by marginal hysteresis, through an enhanced built-in potential and suppressed nonradiative recombinations.135
Interesting results have also been attained by the use of BaTiO3 as an interfacial layer in conventional PSCs. For instance, a layer of porous BaTiO3 out of nanoparticles was deposited on the top of a standard mesoporous TiO2 layer. In this way, charge recombination was suppressed and efficiency was improved from 9.9% to 12.4%.136 Here, we have to clarify that any layer that is deposited beneath the halide perovskite acts as the substrate for perovskite crystallization. Therefore, factors other than ferroelectricity, such as larger crystals or absence of pinholes, can also play a role.
In another work, a BaTiO3 dilute solution was infiltrated into the mesopores of titania. With this, the as-fabricated layer impeded charge recombinations, serving as an electron-blocking layer between spiro-OMeTAD and the lead halide perovskite. Simultaneously, BaTiO3 facilitated electron extraction due to better energy alignment at the interface. Subsequently, these devices yielded hysteresis-free efficiencies of 17.9%.137
Nickelates
Interesting results have been obtained with nickel-based oxide perovskites for solar cell applications. For instance, 0.2% efficiency was obtained when using ferroelectric NdNiO3 by constructing Au/NdNiO3/Nb-SrTiO3 heterojunctions.138
Niobates
Along the same direction, Grinberg et al. combined nickelates and niobates to fabricate novel materials with promising potential in optoelectronic applications. In particular, they suggested a family of single-phase solid solutions between KNbO3 and BaNi1/2Nb1/2O3, adopting conventional solid-state chemistry. These oxides exhibited both ferroelectricity and a wide variation of direct bandgaps in the range of 1.1–3.8 eV. In particular, the composition with 90% KNbO3 is polar at room temperature and has a direct bandgap of 1.39 eV. Bandgap reduction was experimentally confirmed to arise from the emergence of filled Ni 3d gap states in the valence band.139
Ferrites
On the other hand, more exotic perovskite-like compounds of the type RFeO3 (R = Tm and Lu) with a hexagonal crystal structure have yielded even narrower bandgaps (down to 1.18 eV) and PV efficiency dependent on the magnitude of ferroelectric polarization. Even though the attained Voc value of an ITO/RFeO3/Pt device did not exceed 0.57 V, the authors proved that it was dominated by the ferroelectric PV effect rather than the internal field effect, arising from the net built-in potential.140
Ferrites with Bi3+ at the A site have proven to be the most efficient ferroelectrics until now. BiFeO3 is a direct semiconductor with a bandgap between 2.0 and 2.8 eV.141 Choi et al. were the first to report this PV effect. In particular, they constructed symmetric Au/BiFeO3/Au diodes by growing single-ferroelectric-domain BiFeO3 crystals with a small optical gap edge of ∼2.2 eV. A diode effect was observed, associated with the direction of bulk electric polarization in BiFeO3. The forward direction of the diode was determined by the direction of the electric polarization, and the directionality of the diode could be reproducibly switched by large external electric fields. By illuminating the diode by visible light, a substantial zero-bias PV current was induced.142
Then, Kumari et al. p-doped a material with Ti, Cd, and Ni in order to reduce the leakage current from the as-fabricated devices; this material used n-type single-layer graphene as an effective heterojunction. With titanium, 3% efficiency could be achieved, accompanied by Voc = 0.77 V; fairly notably, the perovskites were deposited on FTO conductive glass out of the solution.143 Similarly, Na0.5Bi0.5FeO3 nanoparticle ink was deposited on compact TiO2/FTO substrates; in conjunction with a typical organic semiconductor (spiro-OMeTAD), it was able to yield Voc = 0.68 V when polarized at +3 V vs. FTO.144
A unique concept was recently introduced by You et al., who reported a large PV enhancement by A-site substitutions in ABO3 ferroelectric materials. In particular, 20% lanthanum doping in BiFeO3 led to Voc enhancement from 0.2 V up to more than 0.5 V. Here, the idea was fairly different when compared to that used in the production of BPE by using a ferroelectric material. The authors suggested that the A-site chemical substitutions produce local disturbances to the ferroelectric ground state, triggering an overall tendency for polarization rotation in the system. This rotational instability modifies the local crystal field and band structure, which drives the direct-to-indirect transition of the bandgap. The indirect nature of the band-edge transition strongly suppresses the radiative recombination of the thermalized photoexcited carriers, thereby improving the PV effect, despite suffering from the loss of ferroelectric order.145
Manganates
BiMnO3 is one of the most fundamental multiferroic materials with a monoclinic crystal structure at room temperature, Eg as low as 1.2 eV, and ferroelectric spontaneous polarization of up to 16 μC cm−2 in the thin-film form. Rosei's group reported a PCE value of ∼0.1% (accompanied with Voc = 0.56 V) in Bi–Mn–O thin films grown onto (111)-oriented Nb-doped SrTiO3 single-crystal substrates by applying 1 ms voltage pulses of −10 or +10 V between the top and bottom electrodes.146 The same group was then able to increase the Jsc value by 15 times, from ∼0.2 to 3.5 mA cm−2 (retaining high FF, i.e., 0.72), leading to an impressive PCE value of 1.4% by depositing bilayer thin films of BiMnO3 with BiFeO3.147 An appreciable photovoltage (0.64 V) was also reported by forming solid solutions of BiMnO3 with K0.5Na0.5NbO3.148
Chromates
ACrO3 was also found to be promising when forming solid solutions with ferrites. First, Cai et al. demonstrated, through first-principles DFT calculations, that ferroelectric semiconductors of the type ScFe1−xCrxO3 (1/6 ≤ x ≤ 5/6) could yield Eg = ∼1.8 eV, with the potential to yield PCE of 9% in a Schottky-based solar cell structure.149 In an experimental work, an actual PCE value of ∼0.01% could be attained by the ferroelectric polarization of BiFe1−xCrxO3 thin films, epitaxially deposited by pulsed laser deposition onto (100)-oriented CaRuO3-coated LaAlO3 substrates.150
Oxide double perovskites
Similar perovskites possessing a double structure led to even more significant PCE values. For instance, 200 nm of highly oriented single-crystal Bi2FeCrO6 films were epitaxially grown on silicon substrates using a MgO buffer layer. A photovoltage of 0.5 V and PCE value of 2.7% could be achieved due to polarization that is predominantly oriented along the in-plane direction.151
The same group was able to severely reduce the electronic bandgap of the material down to 1.4 eV by tailoring the Fe/Cr cation ordering and ordered domain size without altering its ferroelectric properties. Due to the reduced bandgap and built-in electric field originating from spontaneous polarization, record efficiency of 3.3% could be attained. Even more importantly, by controlling the Fe/Cr cationic order and their distribution in the films, the authors were able to tune the bandgap in the range of 2.1–1.4 eV. With this, they were able to stack three layers with different bandgaps, fabricating tandem perovskite-on-perovskite solar cells. This led to an unprecedented PCE value of 8.1% (Fig. 6b).152
Since then, theory has been used to predict double perovskites with similar or even superior properties. As an example, single-phase CaMnTi2O6 was found to exhibit room-temperature-stable ferroelectricity due to the polar displacement of planar-coordinated Mn cations, together with B-site Ti displacements. The material exhibits a semiconducting bandgap similar to that in BiFeO3, which can be tunable by altering the planar Mn–O bonds.153
A very important work was recently published by the group of Yanfa Yan. Sun et al. suggested a novel class of double oxide perovskites of the type A2M(III)M(V)O6 (A = Ca, Sr, and Ba) by mutating the transition metal element Ti(IV) ions to lone-pair s elements (M(III) = Bi3+ or Sb3+) and Group VB elements (M(V) = V5+, Nb5+, and Ta5+). By means of first-principles studies, they found that Ba2+-based compounds did not exhibit major changes in the structural framework of the perovskite (Fig. 6c). They also retain the key feature of the electronic structure of organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites, namely, the strong sp antibonding coupling at the valence band maximum derived from the strong sp coupling between the M(III) lone-pair s and O 2p states. These features imply low hole effective mass (0.30m0 for Ba2SbNbO6), defect tolerance, and direct bandgaps ranging from 0.3 to 3.8 eV, different from the class of halide double perovskites (e.g., the widely studied Cs2AgBiBr6) that exhibit indirect bandgaps. For instance, double perovskites of the type Ba2SbV1−xTaxO6 could yield an optimal bandgap of 1.0–1.6 eV and strong optical absorptions for ultrathin solar cell applications. Even more importantly, these perovskites were found to be much more stable than the halide ones, as reflected by their large decomposition energies.154 A comprehensive review in this field was very recently published by the group; we suggest the researchers, who are interested in this topic, to read this review.155
Oxyhalide perovskites
Only a few oxyhalide perovskites have been synthesized until now. They have a layered Bi4MO8Cl (M = Nb and Ta) structure, which is actually a Sillen–Aurivillius perovskite phase comprising single-layer MO4 perovskite blocks that are separated by (Bi2O2)2Cl blocks. The bandgaps of these materials lie well above 2 eV, suggesting that they might not be good materials for use in PV applications. However, they have been applied until now in water-splitting applications.156
Chalcogenide perovskites
Most ABO3 compounds exhibit networks of corner-sharing BO6 octahedra and are commonly called perovskites. In contrast, ABS3 compounds are observed with networks of solely corner-, edge-, or face-shared BS6 octahedral motifs. Such structural diversity and multiple stable phases might be the reason that very few of these compounds have been reported until now.157
ABS3 perovskites
First, Jishi et al. performed DFT calculations on ZnBO3 compounds (B = Sn4+, Ge4+, and Ti4+), focusing on the substitution of oxygen with sulfur. The starting bandgap was around 3 eV for the oxide compound (ZnSnO3), going down to 2.30 eV for the ZnSnS3P21 monoclinic phase, as well as 1.28 eV for the same compound possessing the R3c phase.158
Then, the d-block metal Zr was incorporated at the B-site atom. Interestingly, ZrS2 has already been demonstrated to have suitable properties for PV systems.159 The effect of substituting the oxygen atom at the X site with chalcogens was first investigated by Bennet et al. using first-principles DFT calculations. BaZrO3 and BaZrS3 were adopted as the model compounds. The authors found that the DFT bandgap decreased from 3.9 eV for BaZrO3 to 1.7 eV for BaZrS3. Even though the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) of the two compounds are similar (comprising mainly anion p states), the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) is a set of states that includes some S 3d characteristics, indicative of the covalent nature of the Zr–S bonds in BaZrS3. This effectively lowers the energy of the LUMO. Such mixing of the d states does not occur in BaZrO3, as O does not contain d orbitals that are sufficiently close in energy to facilitate mixing.160
This theory was confirmed a few years later. Perera et al. successfully grew BaZrO3 crystals. The color of these crystals was white, suggesting no optical absorption in the visible range, consistent with Eg = 5 eV. Powder analysis indicated grain crystals of 100–200 nm in size. After sulfurization, the sample became black and the particles were much larger (few microns in size). The Eg value of the crystals was estimated to be about 1.73 eV, which was in excellent agreement with the theoretical prediction by Rappe's group. The broad PL peak centered near the bandgap energy (at about 1.7 eV) confirmed the presence of traps in the compound (e.g., sulfur vacancies owing to sulfur volatility). Good carrier mobility was also estimated, attributable to the large band dispersion due to Zr. The material exhibited excellent air and moisture stabilities. In the same work, the authors could fabricate several other compounds, such as CaZrS3 and SrZrS3 along with a compound with Ti at the B site (SrTiS3). CaZrS3 was found to have a distorted perovskite structure with Eg = 1.90 eV, while both SrTiS3 and SrZrS3 possessed a needle-like phase.161
Even though the above materials were crystallized in specific structures, we should highlight that they can be found in several phases (distorted perovskite, needle-like NH4CdCl3 phase, and hexagonal) depending on the synthesis conditions. Sun et al. showed that most of these materials are predominantly crystallized in the orthorhombic distorted perovskite (or GdFeO3) structure within the Pnma space group (Fig. 7a). However, in certain cases (e.g., BaTiS3), a hexagonal phase with a BaNiO3 structure and P63/mmc space group is observed. In such a hexagonal phase, the coordination of the cations is similar to that of the perovskite structure, namely, the A cation is 12-coordinated and the B cation is 6-coordinated. Finally, compounds such as SrTiS3 and SrZrS3 can possess needle-like phases. Although needle-like NH4CdCl3 also possesses the symmetry of the Pnma space group, its structure is significantly different from that of the perovskite structure.162 SrZrS3 has been synthesized in both distorted perovskite and needle-like phases. Further, it has been shown that both phases were stable at ambient conditions for an extended period of time.163 Interestingly, some materials (with Ti at the B site) possess very low Eg (below 1 eV) in their distorted perovskite structures. On the other hand, needle-like phases (CaZrS3, SrZrS3, BaZS3, CaHfS3, SrHfS3, and BaHfS3) have ideal Eg (1.1–1.6 eV); however, this bandgap is indirect and, therefore, these materials show weak absorption. In any case, the predicted bandgaps of BaZrS3, CaZrSe3, and CaHfSe3 with the distorted perovskite structure are within the optimal range for fabricating single-junction solar cells. The predicted optical absorption properties of these materials are superior when compared with other highly efficient solar cell materials. Even more importantly, no signs of instability were observed, as confirmed by ab initio molecular dynamics simulations.162
 Fig. 7  (a) BaZrS3 distorted perovskite Pnma crystal structure. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from the American Physical Society. (b) Optical images of pellets of α-SrZrS3, β-SrZrS3, and BaZrS3, and (c) the corresponding PL spectra, showing bandgap values of 1.53, 2.13, and 1.81 eV, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (d) Perspective view of the natural superlattice nanostructure in Ba3Zr2S7. The blue and yellow spheres represent Ba and S atoms, respectively. The ZrS6 octahedra are highlighted in green. (e) PL from a Ba3Zr2S7 crystal in comparison with some of the best single-crystal semiconductors (InP and GaAs). Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In the same direction, Niu et al. synthesized SrZrS3 and BaZrS3 powders and found that the SrZrS3 compound had two room-temperature-stable phases (Fig. 7b). With XRD analysis, they defined the Pnma space group for all the three compositions. Intense room-temperature PL signals indicated Eg = 1.53 eV for needle-like SrZrS3. On the other hand, distorted perovskites exhibited a sharp absorption onset and direct bandgap values of 1.81 eV for BaZrS3 and 2.13 eV for SrZrS3 (Fig. 7c).164 These reported bandgaps are in excellent agreement with the theoretical calculations.162 Again, it was suggested that it is preferable to adopt higher-symmetry phases for solar cell applications since they exhibit ultrahigh absorption coefficients of absorption, approaching 2 × 105 cm−1, within only a few tenths of an electron volt above the gap in the calculated absorption spectra.164
All the works agreed with the fact that BaZrS3 remained the ideal compound; however, the obtained bandgap (1.7–1.8 eV) seems more optimal for a top cell in a tandem device rather than for a single-junction device. For this, Gross et al. suggested that bandgap engineering of BaZrS3 by adding appropriate metals in alloys should be explored for PV applications.165 This strategy has been demonstrated recently by Meng et al., who have systematically tuned the bandgap of BaZrS3 from 1.76 eV down to 1.47 eV by doping with 10% Ti.166
In another approach, Sun et al. could reduce the bandgap of BaZrS3 by substituting inorganic Ba+ with the hydrazinium (Hz) cation. The substituted HzZrS3 compound was found to be stable with a direct bandgap of 1.68 eV at the Γ point. This material exhibited theoretical efficiency of about 29% as an absorber in a single-junction solar cell according to the Shockley–Queisser limit.162
Ruddlesden–Popper-type chalcogenide perovskites
Until now, we have seen that AZrS3 compounds (A = Ba, Ca, and Sr) exhibit various phases. In fact, they can also be found in various stoichiometries other than the typical ABX3 three-dimensional perovskite structure.
For instance, S. Niu et al. investigated the Ruddlesden–Popper-type layered perovskite, i.e., Ba3Zr2S7. This material has a natural superlattice-like structure of alternating double-layer perovskite blocks and single-layer rock salt structure (Fig. 7d). Ba3Zr2S7 demonstrated a bright PL peak at 1.28 eV with large external luminescence efficiency of up to 0.15%. The authors performed time-resolved PL spectroscopy on these crystals and obtained an effective recombination time of ∼65 ns. The bandgap of this material is close to the optimal value (1.33 eV) if all the recombinations in the semiconductor are radiative (Fig. 7e).167
Along the same direction, H. Wang et al. used first-principles calculations to design a new family of Ruddlesden–Popper-type perovskite sulfides (A3B2S7) for use in ferroelectric PV applications. In particular, Ca3Zr2S7 was predicted to have stable ferroelectric polarization that can efficiently separate the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, as well as yield acceptable Eg = ∼2.2 eV.168
Finally, in a rather unique approach, an ABS3 perovskite was synthesized for the first time using two metals (A and B), both coming from Group 3 of the periodic table and having a 3+ oxidation state. LaYS3 was found to be a direct semiconductor with Eg = 2 eV and absorption coefficients as high as 104–105 cm−1. Unfortunately, no solar cells were assembled even when relatively smooth films could be deposited by means of sputtering.169
Chalcogenide double perovskites
Chalcogenides can also be found in a double perovskite structure. Sun et al. suggested a novel class of double perovskites, namely, Ba2M(III)M(V)S6 with M(III) = Bi3+ or Sb3+ and M(V) = V5+, Nb5+, and Ta5+. Nine perovskites were predicted to exhibit ideal optoelectronic properties; however, the thermodynamic stability calculations show negative decomposition energies. In any case, the authors believe that a compound with decomposition energy close to zero (Ba2BiNbS6 with Eg = 1.69 eV) could be a viable absorber for solar cell applications.170 Similar theoretical results predicted that double perovskites based on Nb5+, combined with Ga3+ or Al3+ at the M(III) site, could exhibit an indirect gap with additional direct bandgaps near the optimal value for an absorber in a single-junction solar cell, while exhibiting acceptable thermodynamic and kinetic stabilities.171
Since the use of chalcogenides in optoelectronics is completely unexplored, we do not wish to delve deeper into this discussion. A perspective article was recently published on this very subject. In this work, both the computational and experimental progresses made in designing chalcogenide perovskites with worthwhile optoelectronic properties has been summarized by the authors. Therefore, we encourage the readers to search for more details in that review.172
Oxychalcogenide perovskites
Park et al. employed DFT and quasi-particle perturbation theory to investigate the potential of oxychalcogenides as visible-light absorbers.173 They focused on NaNbO3 and NaTaO3 perovskites with indirect bandgaps (3.3 and 3.8 eV, respectively), which have already been studied as photocatalysts,174 and replaced the apical O atom with a chalcogen ion (S or Se) while maintaining the octahedral coordination. With this, the more delocalized valence shell of the chalcogen ion could alter the band structures by reducing the bandgap (down to 1.8 eV for NaNbO2S) and turning it from indirect to direct. This change was accompanied by a higher degree of band energy dispersion, leading to reduced effective masses for charge carriers and, therefore, enhanced mobilities. Theoretical calculations implied that NaNbO2S perovskites could prove to be excellent absorbers for use in solar cells, with efficiencies of 26%, due to their desirable optoelectronic properties. Fairly notably, by replacing S with the more scarce element Se, a perovskite with an even lower bandgap (∼1.5 eV) and efficiency approaching the Shockley–Queisser limit (31.8%) could be predicted.
A compound with a similar oxysulfide structure has already been synthesized. This material, namely, Sm2Ti2S2O5, has the same structure as that of the Ruddlesden–Popper-type layered perovskite oxide represented by (AX)(A0.5BX3)n. It exhibits Eg = 1.9–2.1 eV, and it proved to be a stable photocatalyst for water oxidation/reduction.175
Finally, a series of oxysulfide perovskites BaZr(S1−xOx)3 were also synthesized by Perera et al. by forming solid solutions of BaZrS3 and BaZrO3. The bandgap could be systematically tuned by the formation of stable oxysulfides with different O2:S2 ratios. The obtained Eg values fell within our area of interest, i.e., 1.7–1.9 eV for S atomic ratio of 30–60%.161
Nitride perovskites
Very few ABX3 (X = N) nitride perovskites are known to possess d-block metals at the B site.176 When B = Re, two materials have been predicted to have a perovskite structure, but with metallic behaviors. On the flip side, one material, i.e., LaWN3, was found to crystallize in the perovskite structure that subsequently exhibited semiconducting properties with both direct (∼2.2 eV) and indirect (∼2 eV) bandgaps.177
Oxynitride perovskites
The predicted material has been synthesized in the past, but it has been found to contain 20% oxygen (LaWO0.6N2.4), eventually forming an oxynitride.178 A very similar perovskite, i.e., MgWON2, has been found to possess a promising indirect bandgap of 1.9 eV.179 Other oxynitrides with similar perovskite structures have been computationally identified with tungsten, molybdenum, tantalum, and titanium at the B site (NaWO2N, NaMoO2N, KMoO2N, BaTaO2N, and LaTiO2N), yielding direct or indirect bandgaps of 1.7–1.9 eV.180 Interestingly, LaTiO2N has already been synthesized.181 In addition, more complex structures with mixed cations at the A and B sites have been theoretically proposed: the most prominent are SrGa1/3W2/3O2N and BaIn1/3W2/3O2N with a direct bandgap of ∼1.7 eV.180 Among these materials, Mg1/3Ta2/3O2N, with a slightly wider bandgap of 2.1 eV, has been actively studied experimentally for photocatalytic water splitting.182
Summary and outlook
We end this review by summarizing our findings and giving our viewpoint for the future work that can be done in this field (Table 1). Evidently, a good range of d-block metal cations can be introduced at the A or B site of various perovskites, yielding novel compounds with satisfactory optoelectronic applications.
Table 1 Summary of different types of perovskites containing d-block metal cations. For each type of perovskite, the representative compounds—which have been used for solar energy applications—are given, along with their advantages/disadvantages, as well as possible solutions and outlook for the future




Types of perovskites
Characteristic compounds
Current status
Future


Pros
Cons





Halides (ABX3, A2BX4, A2B′B′′X6 and A2B′′X6)
Doped MAPbl3 with Cd2+, Mn2+,Co2+, Ag+
Fermi level/band edges tuning
Toxicity (Cd)
More stable cations (Zn2+) and n-doping (Co3+, Ti4, Nb5+)


Various oxidation states


MA2CuCl4
PCE = 2.4%
Cu2+/Cu+ coexist
Stable cations (Ni2+)


Cs2AgBiBr6
PCE = 2.5%
Wide Eg
Reduce Eg



E
g ∼2 eV (indirect)
Try Sc3+, Y3+, La3+


Na+-Doped Cs2AgInCl6
PLQE = 86%
Scarce indium
Make solar cells replace In


Cs2TiBr6

E
g = 1.8 eV (indirect)
Wide Eg
Stabilize low Eg Cs2Til6


PCE = 3.2%
Use as top cell




Try Zr4+, Hf4+, Re4+, Os4+



Oxides (ABO3 and A2BO6)
Pb(Ti,Zr)O3 and BaTiO3
Ferroelectrie interfacial layers
Hysteresis
Control perovskite/layer interface


BiFeO3 and Bi2FeCrO6
Ferroelectric
Not verified PCEs for real applications
Solution-processing


PCE=3.3%
Tune Eg



Chalcogenides (ABS3 and A3B2S7)
BaZrS3 and Ba3Zr2S7

E
g = 1.3–1.8 eV
No solar cells
Double perovskites (V5+, Nb5+ and Ta5+)



Nitrides (ABN3)
LaWN3

E
g = 2.2 eV (direct)
Water splitting
Oxynitrides




These metal cations do not appear as viable alternatives of APbX3 halide perovskites due to their small ionic size. In any case, some of them (e.g., Zn2+ or Ag+) could effectively dope lead halide perovskites. Despite the good results, in terms of the stability of the doping effect, metal cations with a large number of accessible oxidation states (such as Co2+ and Mn2+) are not optimal. A similar issue can be encountered in Cu2+, which seems ideal to form moisture-stable layered perovskites; multiple oxidation states could lead to defects. The simplest form of a Ruddlesden–Popper-type Cu2+ perovskite, i.e., MA2CuCl4, has already yielded an appreciably efficient solar cell (2.4%); however, this promising result has not been confirmed by others yet.
Double perovskites with long-term stability under ambient conditions could also be formed with Ag+ combined with a 3+ metal (bismuth or indium), leading to hysteresis-free solar cells (with Cs2AgBiBr6) with 2.5% efficiency or warm-white-light-emitting diodes with PLQE of 86% (with Na+-doped Cs2AgInCl6). Similarly, by replacing (Ag+ + Bi3+) with Ti4+, forming vacancy-ordered double perovskites of the type Cs2TiBr6, similar efficiencies could be obtained. By optimizing electron extraction, a record PCE value of 3.2% can be achieved.
Notably, non-halide perovskite compounds can be fabricated, too. In fact, taking into account the 2− charge of oxygen and sulfur in oxide and chalcogenide perovskites, a large variety of 4+ and 3+ d-block metal ions can be possibly placed at the B site. Ferroelectric titanates (PbTiO3 and BaTiO3) proved to be the most promising materials, at least when used as window layers in PSCs, taking advantage of their wide bandgap (larger than 3 eV). Interestingly, ferroelectrics could also produce a tremendous photovoltage through the anomalous PV effect. For instance, Bi2FeCrO6 double perovskite could provide appreciable efficiencies (∼3.5%) acting as the sole absorber in a solar cell by reducing its bandgap down to 2.1–1.4 eV through the control of the Fe/Cr cationic order. In turn, various chalcogenides (sulfides) have been predicted with Group 4 elements (Ti4+, Zr4+, and Hf4+). However, even if some of them have already been synthesized and yielded close to ideal bandgaps (e.g., ∼1.3 eV for Ba3Zr2S7), no operational solar cells have been fabricated until now. In the case of nitrides, since the total valence of nine between the A and B metals in the perovskite is required for the charge balance with three trivalent nitrogen ions, only a few metals with high valence states (mainly W6+ and Mo6+) have yielded desirable bandgaps. Interestingly, controlling the anion ordering in these perovskites forms new compounds (oxyhalides, oxysulfides, and oxynitrides) with controllable bandgaps and enhanced stabilities.
We argue that conventional or layered Pb2+ halide perovskites can continue to conquer the field in the subsequent years. However, the effective doping of these materials with isovalent (e.g., Zn2+) or aliovalent d-block metal cations (e.g., Ag+, Co3+, Ti4+, and Nb5+) could lead to the formation of effective p–n perovskite-on-perovskite homojunctions.183 On the other hand, perovskites that are more stable than Cu2+ or Pd2+ layered perovskites can be synthesized with the use of metal cations (e.g., Ni2+). These layered compounds, when deposited on the top of conventional lead halide perovskites, could form effective 2D/3D heterostructures, reducing charge recombinations and enhancing stability.184
Further, we firmly believe that we are at the cusp of a new era of novel perovskites with a double structure that do not contain any metal cation from Group 14; lead does not form stable 4+ oxidation states, while tin and germanium have not been effective until now, most probably due to the coexistence of both 2+ and 4+ oxidation states. On the contrary, there is a good collection of d-block metals with stable oxidation states, marginal toxicity, and relative abundance, such as Ti4+, Zr4+, Hf4+, Re4+, and Os4+, which can form vacancy-ordered pure metal (or mixed metal) double perovskites. In the case of conventional 1+/3+ double perovskites, it seems that Ag+ is the sole solution; this could be combined with Group 3 d-block metals such as Sc3+, Y3+, and La3+. We hypothesize that most of the future works involving double perovskites will be devoted toward reducing their bandgaps by stabilizing the iodide (rather than bromide) perovskites (in the form of polycrystalline films or NCs), as well as slowing down carrier recombinations and improving film quality through the incorporation of organic components.
There might be focus on non-halide, more stable, and environmentally compatible perovskites (e.g., oxides and chalcogenides). This field is currently at its infancy regarding the PV properties of these compounds. For the moment, the main issue is their relatively wide bandgap. For this, they can either be used as a top cell in multijunction solar cells or reduce their bandgap by forming stable (without phase segregation) solid solutions with halides.185 In the double form, a large library of d-block metals with high but stable oxidation states can be tested, such as V5+, Nb5+, and Ta5+. Theoretical works can definitely pave the way toward the design of appropriate materials. Machine learning could accelerate this process,186 even though it is very challenging to identify the compounds that can or cannot be synthesized if they can be kinetically (rather than thermodynamically) assessed. Therefore, in any case, we can argue that researchers should attempt to synthesize the hypothesized metastable perovskites.187
Lastly, there are a few interesting d-block metal cations with very promising properties, but they come at the expense of questionable stability or moderate abundance or even high cost and toxicity. When necessary, these could be incorporated as dopants in very low amounts (Cd2+ and Hg2+) or on the top of conventional perovskites to passivate traps (e.g., CuCl2). Alternatively, Co3+/2+, Ru4+/3+, and Ir4+/3+ redox couples could be added in the perovskite precursor solution to regulate I0 defects, improving both efficiency and stability of a conventional lead halide perovskite.188
In any case, the incorporation of d-block metal cations into various perovskite structures considerably increases the compositional diversity of perovskites, further widening their optoelectronic applications. If successful, this concept could permit the transition for emerging optoelectronic materials from toxic to green perovskites. Here, even though we focused on solar energy applications, this review can provide ideas to scientists for the exploration of materials based on d-block metal cations in other areas of interest beyond photovoltaics, such as displays and lighting, X-ray detectors, and phototransistors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the “RESEARCH PROJECTS FOR EXCELLENCE IKY/SIEMENS” and the “IKY FELLOWSHIPS OF EXCELLENCE FOR POSTGRADUATE STUDIES IN GREECE-SIEMENS PROGRAMME” Programmes.
Notes and references
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019 DOI:10.1038/s41566-019-0398-2 .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. Il Seok, M. D. McGehee, E. H. Sargent and H. Han, Science, 2018, 361, 1214 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, M.-G. Ju, H. F. Garces, A. D. Carl, L. K. Ono, Z. Hawash, Y. Zhang, T. Shen, Y. Qi, R. L. Grimm, D. Pacifici, X. C. Zeng, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 16 CrossRef .
E. Jokar, C.-H. Chien, C.-M. Tsai, A. Fathi and E. Wei-Guang Diau, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804835 CrossRef .
J. Tong, Z. Song, D. H. Kim, X. Chen, C. Chen, A. F. Palmstrom, P. F. Ndione, M. O. Reese, S. P. Dunfield, O. G. Reid, J. Liu, F. Zhang, S. P. Harvey, Z. Li, S. T. Christensen, G. Teeter, D. Zhao, M. M. Al-Jassim, M. F. A. M. van Hest, M. C. Beard, S. E. Shaheen, J. J. Berry, Y. Yan and K. Zhu, Science, 2019, 364, 475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Konstantakou and T. Stergiopoulos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11518 RSC .
A. Babayigit, A. Ethirajan, M. Muller and B. Conings, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bozic-Weber, E. C. Constable and C. E. Housecroft, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 3089 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Major, R. E. Treherne, L. J. Phillips and K. Durose, Nature, 2014, 511, 334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chirilă, P. Reinhard, F. Pianezzi, P. Bloesch, A. R. Uhl, C. Fella, L. Kranz, D. Keller, C. Gretener, H. Hagendorfer, D. Jaeger, R. Erni, S. Nishiwaki, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1107 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Karthikeyan and J. Y. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 10973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Vougioukalakis, A. I. Philippopoulos, T. Stergiopoulos and P. Falaras, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2602 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bernechea, N. Cates Miller, G. Xercavins, D. So, A. Stavrinadis and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 521 CrossRef CAS .
F. Igbari, R. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, X.-J. Ma, Q. Wang, K.-L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L.-S. Liao and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, M.-G. Ju, A. D. Carl, Y. Zong, R. L. Grimm, J. Gu, X. C. Zeng, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, Joule, 2018, 2, 1 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64, 702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Travis, E. N. K. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. O. Scanlon and R. G. Palgrave, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4548 RSC .
M. R. Filip and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 166 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Gabriel, S. Xie, K. Choudhary, M. Sexton, S. R. Phillpot, J. Xue and R. G. Hennig, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2018, 155, 69 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, X. Cui, C. Yuan, J. Cui, S. Shi, G. He, Y. Wang, J. Wei, X. Pu, W. Li, D. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Ren, H. Ma, X. Shao, X. Wei, J. Zhao, X. Zhang and J. Yin, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 13960 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sakai, A. A. Haghighirad, M. R. Filip, P. K. Nayak, S. Nayak, A. Ramadan, Z. Wang, F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Ye, Y. Zhang, D.-W. Fu and R.-G. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W.-Q. Liao, D.-W. Fu, H.-Y. Ye, C.-M. Liu, Z.-N. Chen and R.-G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Zhong, Y. Hu, B. Li, Y. Sheng, Y. Zhang, C. Weng, M. Feng, H. Han and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://materialsproject.org/materials/mp-560547/
        .
S. Margadonna and G. Karotsis, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2013 RSC .
T. Yi, W. Chen, L. Cheng, R. D. Bayliss, F. Lin, M. R. Plews, D. Nordlund, M. M. Doeff, K. A. Persson and J. Cabana, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1561 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Choy, J.-Y. Kim, S.-J. Kim, J.-S. Sohn and O.-H. Han, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 906 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nagarajan, S. Ahmad and P. Singh, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 10105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Navas, A. Sánchez-Coronilla, J. J. Gallardo, N. C. Hernández, J. C. Piñero, R. Alcántara, C. Fernández-Lorenzo, D. M. De los Santos, T. Aguilar and J. Martín-Calleja, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6216 RSC .
W. Zhao, D. Yang, Z. Yang and S. Liu, Mater. Today Energy, 2015, 5, 205 CrossRef .
L. A. Frolova, D. V. Anokhin, K. L. Gerasimov, N. N. Dremova and P. A. Troshin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahandar, J. H. Heo, C. E. Song, K.-J. Kong, W. S. Shin, J.-C. Lee, S. H. Im and S.-J. Moon, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 330 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Z.-K. Wang, M.-P. Zhuo, Y. Hu, K.-H. Hu, Q.-Q. Ye, S. M. Jain, Y.-G. Yang, X.-Y. Gao and L.-S. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800258 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, L. Zheng, X. Zhang, Y. Cao, T. Meng, D. Wu, L. Liu, W. Hu and X. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703178 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, B. Li and C. Hao, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2017, 57, 95 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Watthage, Z. Song, N. Shrestha, A. B. Phillips, G. K. Liyanage, P. J. Roland, R. J. Ellingson and M. J. Heben, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Navas, A. Sánchez-Coronilla, J. J. Gallardo, J. C. Piñero, D. De los Santos, E. I. Martín, N. C. Hernández, R. Alcántara, C. Fernández-Lorenzo and J. Martín-Calleja, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 141 CrossRef CAS .
G. García, P. Palacios, E. Menéndez-Proupin, A. L. Montero-Alejo, J. C. Conesa and P. Wahnón, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2511 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, J. Chang, Z. Lin, C. Zhang, D. Chen, J. Zhang and Y. Hao, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 54586 RSC .
P. Singh, P. J. S. Rana, P. Dhingra and P. Kar, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3101 RSC .
J. D. Majher, M. B. Gray, T. A. Strom and P. M. Woodward, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1738 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zou, G. Yang, T. Yang, D. Zhao, Z. Gan, W. Chen, H. Zhong, X. Wen, B. Jia and B. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, G. Yan, Y. Lian, Q. Mu, H. Jin, Z. Zhang, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 25802 RSC .
W. van der Stam, J. J. Geuchies, T. Altantzis, K. H. van den Bos, J. D. W. Meeldijk, S. Van Aert, S. Bals, D. Vanmaekelbergh and C. de Mello Donega, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Yong, S.-Q. Guo, J.-P. Ma, J.-Y. Zhang, Z.-Y. Li, Y.-M. Chen, B.-B. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Shu, J.-L. Gu, L.-R. Zheng, O. M. Bakr and H.-T. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Guria, S. K. Dutta, S. D. Adhikari and N. Pradhan, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1014 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, S. Ji, M. C. De Siena, L. Fei, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Li, J. Zhao and D. R. Gamelin, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8003 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Mir, A. Swarnkara and A. Nag, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 4278 RSC .

  (a) Q. A. Akkerman, M. Gandini, F. Di Stasio, P. Rastogi, F. Palazon, G. Bertoni, J. M. Ball, M. Prato, A. Petrozza and L. Manna, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16194 CrossRef ; 
  (b) E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, J. A. Christians, S. P. Harvey, P. N. Ciesielski, L. M. Wheeler, P. Schulz, L. Y. Lin, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 4204 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Swarnkar, V. K. Ravi and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1089 CrossRef .
T. Shi, W.-J. Yin and Y. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25350 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Z. Liu, L. Qiu, Z. Hawash, L. Meng, Z. Wu, Y. Jiang, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800504 CrossRef .
M. I. Saidaminov, J. Kim, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Tan, G. Long, F. Tan, A. Johnston, Y. Zhao, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 648 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Klug, A. Osherov, A. r. A. Haghighirad, S. D. Stranks, P. R. Brown, S. Bai, J. T.-W. Wang, X. Dang, V. Bulovic, H. J. Snaith and A. M. Belcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 236 RSC .
K. Lu, Y. Lei, R. Qi, J. Liu, X. Yang, Z. Jia, R. Liu, Y. Xiang and Z. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25211 RSC .
Z. Song, Y. Jiang, J. Liu, Q. Pan, W. Zuo, X. Zhang, C. Liao and J. Mei, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 12198 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. Pazoki, B. Philippe, M. I. Dar, M. Alsari, A. Sadhanala, G. Divitini, R. Imani, S. Lilliu, J. Kullgren, H. Rensmo, M. Grätzel and R. H. Friend, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, L. Chen, F. Ye, T. Zhao, F. Tang, A. Rajagopal, Z. Jiang, S. Jiang, A. K.-Y. Jen, Y. Xie, J. Cai and L. Chen, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, Y. Ma, G. Zhou, X. Xu, M. Qin, Y. Li, Y.-J. Hsu, H. Hu, G. Li, N. Zhao, J. Xu and X. i. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 534 CrossRef .
M. Lu, X. Zhang, X. Bai, H. Wu, X. Shen, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, H. Song, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, H. Li, C. Zhang, S. Tan, Z. Chen, L. Chen, Z. Lu, X. Wang and M. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1163 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cheng and J. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 2646 RSC .
D. B. Mitzi, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2001, 1, 12 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, T. J. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Tang, N. Zhang, D. Shi and H. Gong, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 4991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Wong, F. Liu, C. S. Kam, T. L. Leung, H. W. Tam, A. B. Djurišić, J. Popović, H. Li, K. Shih, K.-H. Low, W. K. Chan, W. Chen, Z. He, A. Ng and C. Surya, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9946 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cortecchia, H. A. Dewi, J. Yin, A. Bruno, S. Chen, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar, C. Soci and N. Mathews, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Elseman, A. E. Shalan, S. Sajid, M. M. Rashad, A. M. Hassan and M. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, G. Rainò, M. V. Kovalenko and L. Manna, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, B. Li, J. Chang, B. Ding, S. Zheng, Y. Wu, J. Yang, G. Yang, X. Zhong and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2709 CrossRef CAS .
X.-P. Cuia, K.-J. Jiangb, J.-H. Huang, Q.-Q. Zhanga, M.-J. Su, L.-M. Yang, Y.-L. Song and X.-Q. Zhou, Synth. Met., 2015, 209, 247 CrossRef .
X.-G. Zhao, D. Yang, J.-C. Ren, Y. Sun, Z. Xiao and L. Zhang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1662 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Slavney, L. Leppert, A. S. Valdes, D. Bartesaghi, T. J. Savenije, J. B. Neaton and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Debbichi, S. Lee, H. Cho, A. M. Rappe, K.-H. Hong, M. S. Jang and H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707001 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-G. Zhao, J.-H. Yang, Y. Fu, D. Yang, Q. Xu, L. Yu, S.-H. Wei and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751 CrossRef .
A. H. Slavney, R. W. Smaha, I. C. Smith, A. Jaffe, D. Umeyama and H. I. Karunadasa, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Meng, X. Wang, Z. Xiao, J. Wang, D. B. Mitz and Y. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Filip, X. Liu, A. Miglio, G. Hautier and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 158 CrossRef CAS .
G. Volonakis, M. R. Filip, A. A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, B. Wenger, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. McClure, M. R. Ball, W. Windl and P. M. Woodward, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1348 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wei, Z. Deng, S. Sun, F. Zhang, D. M. Evans, G. Kieslich, S. Tominaka, M. A. Carpenter, J. Zhang, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1089 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Rong, M. S. Molokeev, X. Zhang and Z. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2346 RSC .
Y.-J. Li, T. Wu, L. Sun, R.-X. Yang, L. Jiang, P.-F. Cheng, Q.-Q. Hao, T.-J. Wang, R.-F. Luc and W.-Q. Deng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 35175 RSC .
P. Cheng, T. Wu, Y. Li, L. Jiang, W. Deng and K. Han, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 9598 RSC .
S. E. Creutz, E. N. Crites, M. C. De Siena and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Karmakar, M. S. Dodd, S. Agnihotri, E. Ravera and V. K. Michaelis, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8280 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Slavney, T. Hu, A. M. Lindenberg and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Z. Hoye, L. Eyre, F. Wei, F. Brivio, A. Sadhanala, S. Sun, W. Li, K. H. L. Zhang, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, P. D. Bristowe, R. H. Friend, A. K. Cheetham and F. Deschler, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800464 CrossRef .
D. Bartesaghi, A. H. Slavney, M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, B. A. Connor, F. C. Grozema, H. I. Karunadasa and T. J. Savenije, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 4809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Hutter, M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, D. Bartesaghi, F. C. Grozema and T. J. Savenije, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 11655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Schade, A. D. Wright, R. D. Johnson, M. Dollmann, B. Wenger, P. K. Nayak, D. Prabhakaran, L. M. Herz, R. Nicholas, H. J. Snaith and P. G. Radaelli, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 299 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiu, Y. Shao, L. Chen, Y. Feng, J. Dai, X. Zhang, Y. Lin, Y. Zhu, Z. Wu, Y. Zheng, H. Pan, C. Liu, X. Shi, X. Cheng and Z. He, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 186 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, W. Meng, J. Wang and Y. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Savory, A. Walsh and D. O. Scanlon, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ning, F. Wang, B. Wu, J. Lu, Z. Yan, X. Liu, Y. Tao, J.-M. Liu, W. Huang, M. Fahlman, L. Hultman, T. Chien Sum and F. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706246 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wu, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Luo, X. Guo, Z. Huang, H. Ting, W. Sun, X. Zhong, S. Wei, S. Wang, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700759 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, C. Ran, J. Xi, B. Jiao, W. Zhang, M. Wu, X. Hou and Z. Wu, ChemPhysChem, 2018, 19, 1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Brenes, D. Guo, A. Osherov, N. K. Noel, C. Eames, E. M. Hutter, S. K. Pathak, F. Niroui, R. H. Friend, M. S. Islam, H. J. Snaith, V. Bulovic, T. J. Savenije and S. D. Stranks, Joule, 2017, 1, 155 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pantaler, K. T. Cho, V. I. E. Queloz, I. G. Benito, C. Fettkenhauer, I. Anusca, M. K. Nazeeruddin, D. C. Lupascu and G. Grancini, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1781 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, P. Zeng, S. Bai, J. Gu, F. Li, Z. Yang and M. Liu, Sol. RRL, 2018, 1800217 CrossRef .
K. Du, W. Meng, X. Wang, Y. Yan and D. B. Mitzi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Volonakis, A. A. Haghighirad, R. L. Milot, W. H. Sio, M. R. Filip, B. Wenger, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Tran, J. R. Panella, J. R. Chamorro, J. R. Morey and T. M. McQueen, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 688 RSC .
X.-G. Zhao, D. Yang, Y. Sun, T. Li, L. Zhang, L. Yu and A. Zunger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, S. Li, H. Wu, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Liu, J. Li, K. Li, F. Yi, G. Niu and J. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 398 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, X. Wang, S. Li, J. Liu, Y. Guo, G. Niu, L. Yao, Y. Fu, L. Gao, Q. Dong, C. Zhao, M. Leng, F. Ma, W. Liang, L. Wang, S. Jin, J. Han, L. Zhang, J. Etheridge, J. Wang, Y. Yan, E. H. Sargent and J. Tang, Nature, 2019, 563, 541 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Connor, L. Leppert, M. D. Smith, J. B. Neaton and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, J.-J. Shi, M. Zhang, Y.-L. Cen, W.-H. Guo and Y.-H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11575 RSC .
B. Lee, C. C. Stoumpos, N. Zhou, F. Hao, C. Malliakas, C.-Y. Yeh, T. J. Marks, M. G. Kanatzidis and R. P. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Chung, J.-H. Song, J. Im, J. Androulakis, C. D. Malliakas, H. Li, A. J. Freeman, J. T. Kenney and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Maughan, A. M. Ganose, M. M. Bordelon, E. M. Miller, D. O. Scanlon and J. R. Neilson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qiu, B. Cao, S. Yuan, X. C. Z. Qiu, Y. Jiang, Q. Ye, H. Wang, H. Zeng, J. Liu and M. G. Kanatzidis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 227 CrossRef CAS .
M.-G. Ju, M. Chen, Y. Zhou, H. F. Garces, J. Dai, L. Ma, N. P. Pasture and X. C. Zeng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Maughan, A. M. Ganose, D. O. Scanlon and J. R. Neilson, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1184 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Evans, D. H. Fabini, J. L. Andrews, M. Koerner, M. B. Preefer, G. Wu, F. Wudl, A. K. Cheetham and R. Seshadri, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 10375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, J.-F. Liao, Z.-G. Huang, X.-D. Wang, Y.-F. Xu, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2613 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walsh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lopez-Varo, L. Bertoluzzi, J. Bisquert, M. Alexe, M. Coll, J. Huang, J. A. Jimenez-Tejada, T. Kirchartz, R. Nechachei, F. Rosei and Y. Yuan, Phys. Rep., 2016, 653, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. Robertson, W. L. Warren and B. Tuttle, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 3975 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Martin and A. M. Rappe, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 2, 16087 CrossRef .
J. W. Bennett, I. Grinberg and A. M. Rappe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Gou, J. W. Bennett, H. Takenaka and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 83, 205115 CrossRef .
C. W. Zhao, B. C. Luo, S. J. Guo and C. L. Chen, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 7861 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. H. Koch, R. Munser, W. Ruppel and P. Wurfel, Solid State Commun., 1975, 17, 847 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Spanier, V. M. Fridkin, A. M. Rappe, A. R. Akbashev, A. Polemi, Y. Qi, Z. Gu, S. M. Young, C. J. Hawley, D. Imbrenda, G. Xiao, A. L. Bennett-Jackson and C. L. Johnson, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 611 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ma and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 417 CrossRef CAS .
N. Plugaru, G. A. Nemnes, L. Filip, I. Pintilie, L. Pintilie, K. T. Butler and A. Manolescu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9096 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Z. Wang, H.-J. Feng, C.-X. Qian, J. He, J. Feng, Y.-H. Cao, K. Yang, Z.-Y. Deng, Z. Yang, X. Yao, J. Zhou, S. Liu and X. C. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806427 CrossRef .
A. Perez-Tomas, H. Xie, Z. Wang, H.-S. Kim, I. Shirley, S.-H. l. Turren-Cruz, A. Morales-Melgares, B. Saliba, D. Tanenbaum, M. Saliba, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel, A. Hagfeldt and M. Lira-Cantu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 382 RSC .
Y. Yang, Z. Liu, W. K. Ng, L. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Meng, Y. Bai, S. Xiao, T. Zhang, C. Hu, K. S. Wong and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806506 CrossRef .
Y. Okamoto and Y. Suzuki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 13995 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, Z. Zhang, W. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Gao and Y. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chang, L. Wang, L. You, Y. Zhou, L. Fang, S. Wang and J. Wang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2016, 49, 44LT02 CrossRef .
I. Grinberg, D. V. West, M. Torres, G. Gou, D. M. Stein, L. Wu, G. Chen, E. M. Gallo, A. R. Akbashev, P. K. Davies, J. E. Spanier and A. M. Rappe, Nature, 2013, 503, 509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Han, D. Kim, S. Chae, J. Park, S. Y. Nam, M. Choi, K. Yong, H. J. Kim, J. Son and H. M. Jang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13261 RSC .
F. Gao, X. Y. Chen, K. B. Yin, S. Dong, Z. F. Ren, F. Yuan, T. Yu, Z. G. Zou and J.-M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2889 CrossRef CAS .
T. Choi, S. Lee, Y. J. Choi, V. Kiryukhin and S.-W. Cheong, Science, 2009, 324, 63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kumari, T. Chakrabartib, A. Janaa, D. Bhattachartjeea, B. Guptaa and S. K. Sarkara, Opt. Mater., 2018, 84, 681 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Z. Wan, J. Qi and M. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 750, 959 CrossRef CAS .
L. You, F. Zheng, L. Fang, Y. Zhou, L. Z. Tan, Z. Zhang, G. Ma, D. Schmidt, A. Rusydi, L. Wang, L. Chang, A. M. Rappe and J. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 3438 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Chakrabartty, R. Nechache, C. Harnagea and F. Rosei, Opt. Express, 2013, 22, A80 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chakrabartty, R. Nechache, C. Harnagea, S. Li and F. Rosei, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 215402 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, F. Guo, J. Chen and S. Zhao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 253901 CrossRef .
T.-Y. Cai, S.-C. Liu, S. Ju, C.-Y. Liu and G.-Y. Guo, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2017, 8, 034034 CrossRef .
J. Chakrabartty, R. Nechache, S. Li, M. Nicklaus, A. Ruediger and F. Rosei, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 97, 1837 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nechache, W. Huang, S. Lia and F. Rosei, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3237 RSC .
R. Nechache, C. Harnagea, S. Li, L. Cardenas, W. Huang, J. Chakrabartty and F. Rosei, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 61 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gou, N. Charles, J. Shi and J. M. Rondinelli, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 11854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, J. Wang, W.-J. Yin and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705901 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, B. Weng, J. Ge, Q. Sun, Z. Li and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 442 RSC .

  (a) H. Kageyama and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2082 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Tao, Y. Zhao, L. Mu, S. Wang, R. Li and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 170139 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) Z. Wei, J. Liu, W. Fang, Z. Qin, Z. Jiang and W. Shangguan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 3774 RSC .
J. A. Brehm, J. W. Bennett, M. R. Schoeberg, I. Grinberg and A. M. Rappe, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 224703 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Jishi and M. A. Lucas, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2016, 6193502 Search PubMed .
L. Li, H. Wang, X. Fang, T. Zhai, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2586 RSC .
J. W. Bennett, I. Grinberg and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 235115 CrossRef .
S. Perera, H. Hui, C. Zhao, H. Xue, F. Sun, C. Deng, N. Gross, C. Milleville, X. Xu, D. F. Watson, B. Weinstein, Y.-Y. Sun, S. Zhang and H. Zeng, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 129 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Sun, M. L. Agiorgousis, P. Zhang and S. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-S. Lee, K. M. Kleinke and H. Kleinke, Solid State Sci., 2005, 7, 1049 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niu, H. Huyan, Y. Liu, M. Yeung, K. Ye, L. Blankemeier, T. Orvis, D. Sarkar, D. J. Singh, R. Kapadia and J. Ravichandran, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 160473 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Gross, Y.-Y. Sun, S. Perera, H. Hui, X. Wei, S. Zhang, H. Zeng and B. A. Weinstein, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2017, 8, 044014 CrossRef .
W. Meng, B. Saparov, F. Hong, J. Wang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 821 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niu, D. Sarkar, K. Williams, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, E. Bianco, H. Huyan, S. B. Cronin, M. E. McConney, R. Haiges, R. Jaramillo, D. J. Singh, W. A. Tisdale, R. Kapadia and J. Ravichandran, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4882 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, G. Gou and J. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 507 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kuhar, A. Crovetto, M. Pandey, K. S. Thygesen, B. Seger, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff and K. W. Jacobsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2579 RSC .
Q. Sun, H. Chen and W.-J. Yin, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 244 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Agiorgousis, Y.-Y. Sun, D.-H. Choe, D. West and S. Zhang, Adv. Theory Simul., 2019, 1800173 CrossRef .
A. Swarnkar, W. J. Mir, R. Chakraborty, M. Jagadeeswararao, T. Sheikh and A. Nag, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 565 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, F. H. Alharbi, S. Sanvito, N. Tabet and F. El-Mellouhi, ChemPhysChem, 2018, 19, 703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fresno, P. Jana, P. Renones, J. M. Coronado, D. P. Serrano and V. A. de la Pena O'Shea, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2017, 16, 17 RSC .
A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zakutayev, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6742 RSC .
R. Sarmiento-Pérez, T. F. T. Cerqueira, S. Körbel, S. Botti and M. A. L. Marques, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5957 CrossRef .
P. Bacher, P. Antoine, R. Marchand, P. L'Haridon, Y. Laurent and G. Roult, J. Solid State Chem., 1988, 77, 67 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sawada and T. Nakajima, APL Mater., 2018, 6, 101103 CrossRef .

  (a) Y. Wu, P. Lazic, G. Hautier, K. Persson and G. Ceder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 157 RSC ; 
  (b) T. Takata, C. Pan and K. Domen, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2015, 16, 033506 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Clarke, B. P. Guinot, C. W. Michie, M. J. C. Calmont and M. J. Rosseinsky, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 288 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1 CrossRef .
P. Cui, D. Wei, J. Ji, H. Huang, E. Jia, S. Dou, T. Wang, W. Wang and M. Li, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 150 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Hörantner, T. Leijtens, M. E. Ziffer, G. E. Eperon, M. G. Christoforo, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2506 CrossRef .
S. Lu, Q. Zhou, Y. Ouyang, Y. Guo, Q. Li and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3405 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Aykol, S. S. Dwaraknath, W. Sun and K. A. Persson, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 0148 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Hu, B. Huang, M. Sun, B. Dong, G. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Li, Z. Xu, N. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, Science, 2019, 363, 265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Lazaros Theofylaktos	Lazaros Theofylaktos is currently a Master's student at the Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. He acquired his BSc in Physics from the Department of Physics, University of Ioannina. His research focuses on the synthesis, stability, and characterization of functional perovskite materials, mainly for use in photovoltaic applications. For the past 4 years, he has been tutoring students (ages 12–18 years) on math, physics, and chemistry.
Kyro Odysseas Kosmatos	Kyro Odysseas Kosmatos is currently studying for his BSc at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. He is conducting his graduate thesis under the tutoring of Dr Thomas Stergiopoulos, focusing on perovskite solar cells. During the last three years, he has been an active member of the chemistry-focused volunteer group ReAcTiON.
Eleni Giannakaki	Eleni Giannakaki is currently a MSc student in the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. She received her BSc in chemistry from the University of Ioannina in 2017. Her current research mainly involves hybrid perovskite materials with mixed, short, and long, organic cations.
Helen Kourti	Helen Kourti was born in Thessaloniki, Greece. Since her high school years, chemistry has been her biggest interest. She started her studies in the Department of Chemistry at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki in 2013. One year ago, she finished her Bachelor's thesis on perovskite solar cells as a part of the research team of Dr Stergiopoulos.
Dimitris Deligiannis	Dimitris Deligiannis acquired his BSc and MSc in Materials Science and Engineering from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering (DMSE), University of Ioannina and the Department of Chemical Engineering from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki in 2016 and 2018, respectively. His research focuses on the development of functional nanomaterials and prospective energy materials for optoelectronic applications, particularly regarding highly efficient and low-cost photovoltaics (organic PVs and perovskites).
Maria Konstantakou	Maria Konstantakou is a postdoctoral research assistant in the group of Prof. Stergiopoulos at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. She received her PhD on gas storage in porous media from the National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos (Athens, Greece). Then, she worked as a research associate in several projects such as nanoporous carbon materials for hydrogen storage and solution-processed mesoporous semiconductors for dye-sensitized solar cells. Her current research interests include lead- and tin-based perovskite films and optoelectronic devices.
Thomas Stergiopoulos	Thomas Stergiopoulos is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. He obtained his PhD in dye-sensitized solar cells at the National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos (Athens, Greece) and then worked as a research associate in several European projects regarding renewable energy and clean environment applications. In 2014, he moved for two years at the University of Oxford to work with Prof. H. Snaith on perovskite solar cells under a Marie Curie IEF fellowship grant. In 2018, he received the ERC Consolidator Grant to develop a novel class of optoelectronic materials based on perovskite-like chalcogenide semiconductors.

 	Fig. 1  Compositional flexibilities of single (ABX3, A2BX4, and others) and double perovskites (A2B′B′′X6) using elements from Groups 1–17 of the periodic table. All the d-metals can occupy the B site (while some of them can also be found at the A site). By varying the elements at the X site, halide, oxide, chalcogenide, and nitride perovskites can be formed.	 

 	Fig. 2  Top and cross-sectional SEM images of the surface of MAPbI3 films prepared without (a and b) and with (c and d) 10 mM CdCl2 addition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Isovalent doping: energy levels of the MA(Pb:Co)I3 materials relative to the vacuum level by increasing Co2+ amount. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Aliovalent doping: valence and conduction band edges position vs. the Fermi level (black dot line), induced by the incorporation of Ag+ in MAPbI3, in comparison with other (Na+ and Cu+) dopants. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Crystal structure of Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite and (b) schematic of sequential vapor deposition processing of Cs2AgBiBr6 films. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) Cs2AgBiBr6 powder, Cs2AgBiBr6 solution in DMSO, solution-processed Cs2AgBiBr6 yellow films, and a characteristic top SEM image of their surface. (d) Perovskite solar cell structure: FTO/TiO2/Cs2AgBiBr6/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag and typical J–V curves of the fabricated devices with optimized solution- and vacuum-processed Cs2AgBiBr6 thin films. A record PCE value of 2.5% could be attained. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Crystal structure of A2TiX6 perovskites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the vapor-based synthesis of Cs2TiBr6 films. (c) UV–vis spectra (inset: photograph of the films). (d) Time-resolved PL decay of Cs2TiBr6 films, with and without P3HT hole quencher. (e) Solar cell architecture and J–V curves at both forward (hollow circles) and reverse (solid circles) scans of the best devices, with or without the presence of a C60 interfacial layer. A record PCE value of 3.2% could be attained. Reprinted from ref. 17 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite solar cell device employing a PbZrTiO3 ferroelectric layer and histograms of PCEs of the device before and after poling. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Device geometry of Bi2FeCrO6 multilayer structure and J–V characteristics of the 3-junction devices under AM1.5G illumination. A record PCE value of 8.1% could be attained. Reprinted from ref. 152 with permission from Springer Nature. (c) Crystal structures of the suggested oxide double perovskites. The evolution of double perovskite A2M(III)M(V)O6 can be considered as a chemical mutation of cation B to cations M(III) and M(V). Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) BaZrS3 distorted perovskite Pnma crystal structure. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from the American Physical Society. (b) Optical images of pellets of α-SrZrS3, β-SrZrS3, and BaZrS3, and (c) the corresponding PL spectra, showing bandgap values of 1.53, 2.13, and 1.81 eV, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (d) Perspective view of the natural superlattice nanostructure in Ba3Zr2S7. The blue and yellow spheres represent Ba and S atoms, respectively. The ZrS6 octahedra are highlighted in green. (e) PL from a Ba3Zr2S7 crystal in comparison with some of the best single-crystal semiconductors (InP and GaAs). Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 



Halides (ABX3, A2BX4, A2B′B′′X6 and A2B′′X6)	Doped MAPbl3 with Cd2+, Mn2+,Co2+, Ag+	Fermi level/band edges tuning	Toxicity (Cd)	More stable cations (Zn2+) and n-doping (Co3+, Ti4, Nb5+)
Various oxidation states
MA2CuCl4	PCE = 2.4%	Cu2+/Cu+ coexist	Stable cations (Ni2+)
Cs2AgBiBr6	PCE = 2.5%	Wide Eg	Reduce Eg

E
g ∼2 eV (indirect)	Try Sc3+, Y3+, La3+
Na+-Doped Cs2AgInCl6	PLQE = 86%	Scarce indium	Make solar cells replace In
Cs2TiBr6	
E
g = 1.8 eV (indirect)	Wide Eg	Stabilize low Eg Cs2Til6
PCE = 3.2%	Use as top cell

	Try Zr4+, Hf4+, Re4+, Os4+

Oxides (ABO3 and A2BO6)	Pb(Ti,Zr)O3 and BaTiO3	Ferroelectrie interfacial layers	Hysteresis	Control perovskite/layer interface
BiFeO3 and Bi2FeCrO6	Ferroelectric	Not verified PCEs for real applications	Solution-processing
PCE=3.3%	Tune Eg

Chalcogenides (ABS3 and A3B2S7)	BaZrS3 and Ba3Zr2S7	
E
g = 1.3–1.8 eV	No solar cells	Double perovskites (V5+, Nb5+ and Ta5+)

Nitrides (ABN3)	LaWN3	
E
g = 2.2 eV (direct)	Water splitting	Oxynitrides

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
