Recent advances in electrochemical 2e oxygen reduction reaction for on-site hydrogen peroxide production and beyond  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CC05156J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CC05156J
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 12109-12121Recent advances in electrochemical 2e oxygen reduction reaction for on-site hydrogen peroxide production and beyond

        
          
            Kun 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianhao 
            Huang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Haixin 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Wang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Shuqin 
            Song
          
        
      *a
aThe Key Lab of Low-carbon Chemistry & Energy Conservation of Guangdong Province, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: stsssq@mail.sysu.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai 519082, P. R. China
Received 
      29th July 2020
    , Accepted 1st September 2020First published on 2nd September 2020AbstractThe electroproduction of H2O2 through 2e oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) as an alternative strategy for the conventional anthraquinone process is highly energy-efficient and environment-friendly. Different kinds of electrocatalysts with high selectivity, activity, and stability have been recently reported, and are an essential part of the whole electroproduction process of H2O2. In this review, we expound the ORR mechanism and introduce some methods to screen out potential electrocatalysts through theoretical calculations and experimental verifications. In addition, recent advances in reactor design for large-scale on-site production of H2O2 and integrated systems for electricity-H2O2 co-generation are mentioned. With ideal electrocatalysts and rational reactor design, different concentrations of H2O2 can be obtained depending on the practical applications. Utilizing the solar or chemical energy, it can promote energy efficiency and sustainability of the process. Finally, we make a brief conclusion about recent developments in electrocatalysts, device design, as well as integrated systems, and give an outlook for future research challenges, which are meaningful for advancing the electrochemical on-site production of H2O2via 2e ORR to the marketplace.
Introduction
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is an environment-friendly strong oxidant that has found use in extensive applications such as in sewage treatment, industrial bleaching, chemical synthesis, and medical disinfection. Currently, the anthraquinone process is still a widely used method to produce H2O2 on an industrial scale.1 In this process, the hydrogenation of anthraquinone derivatives on Pd-based catalysts generates dihydroxyanthraquinone. Consequently, the obtained dihydroxyanthraquinone undergoes rapid oxidation by O2 to give H2O2 and regenerates anthraquinone derivatives. H2O2 can be accumulated to the required concentration via solvent extraction technology and regenerated anthraquinone derivatives remain in the organic phase to be recycled.2 On the other hand, there exist many shortcomings in the above anthraquinone process: (1) it is very energy-intensive; (2) several associated side reactions can produce some harmful organic by-products, which are harmful to the environment; (3) the instability of H2O2 at high concentration poses a safety issue in its transportation and storage.3 Consequently, it is urgently desirable to develop an energy-efficient, eco-friendly, and on-site production technique of H2O2 as an alternative.
Fortunately, electrochemical oxygen electrode reactions, especially oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) through 2e process for on-site production of H2O2 as a green and safe route, have been continually employed in the already reported literatures that mainly focus on the development of highly-efficient 2e ORR electrocatalysts,4–15 design of reactors to generate the maximum possible H2O2 output,16–19 and an integrated system construction for electricity-H2O2 co-generation.20–27 ORR is a multi-electron-transfer reaction, including 2e and 4e pathways for H2O228–33 and H2O34–40 products, respectively, and simultaneously involves complicated redox reactions of starting materials, intermediates, and products, as discussed later. Great challenges and opportunities co-exist in the research of electrochemical 2e ORR for the on-site production of H2O2, especially in the field of developing promising electrocatalysts to suppress side reactions and self-decomposition of H2O2. Consequently, deeply understanding ORR kinetics and revealing its electrocatalytic mechanism enable to provide new opportunities for the rational design of electrodes with high activities and selectivities.
In this review, recent advances and trends in the electrochemical on-site production of H2O2 are discussed. We especially make an overview of diverse 2e ORR electrocatalysts, including noble metal and non-noble metal materials, and unveil the basic principle and rational design approaches of the electrocatalysts with high selectivity and activity. Furthermore, we summarize some key factors for reactor design of on-site H2O2 production as well as the construction of solar energy/electricity-H2O2 co-generation integrated system.
Mechanism of ORR
As is well-known, ORR consists of 2e and 4e pathways, as shown in eqn (1a) and (1b). O2 molecules adsorbed on the electrode surface can obtain electrons under an applied negative potential, and then can be reduced to H2O2 or H2O through the 2e or 4e pathway, respectively (Fig. 1). For some new energy conversion devices, such as fuel cells and Zn–air batteries, a direct 4e ORR pathway is highly preferred in order to obtain high efficiency, while the selective 2e pathway is desirably adopted in electrochemical ORR for on-site H2O2 production. O2 + 2H+ + 2e− ↔ H2O2 E0 = 0.67 V versus SHE(1a) O2 + 4H+ + 4e− ↔ 2H2O E0 = 1.229 V versus SHE(1b)Here, SHE represents Standard Hydrogen Electrode.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the ORR mechanism. 
In order to regulate the reaction pathways of ORR electrocatalysts, it is important to elucidate the ORR mechanism. As investigated, the associative mechanism is a well-recognized process for both 2e and 4e pathways (eqn (2a)–(3e)). Irrespective of whether the pathway is 2e or 4e, the adsorption of O2 molecules is the first step and also the rate-determining step.
Associative mechanism (2e pathway):41 O2 + * → O2*(2a) O2* + H2O + e− → OOH* + OH−(2b) OOH* + e− → OOH− + *(2c)
Associative mechanism (4e pathway): O2 + * → O2*(3a) O2* + H2O + e− → OOH* + OH−(3b) OOH* + e− → OH− + O*(3c) O* + H2O + e− → OH* + OH−(3d) OH* + e− → OH− + *(3e)* denotes one catalytic active site on a certain catalytic surface.
However, with regard to the 4e pathway for ORR, there exists another possible mechanism, i.e., dissociative mechanism (eqn (4a)–(4c)). O2 molecule is initially adsorbed on the active sites, followed by O–O bond breaking and formation of two O* species without the generation of OOH*. Finally, O* gains protons and electrons to form H2O/OH−.
Dissociative mechanism (4e pathway): O2 + 2* → 2O*(4a) 2O* + 2H2O + 2e− → 2OH* + 2OH−(4b) 2OH* + 2e− → 2OH− + 2*(4c)
It is noteworthy that whether ORR occurs through a 2e or a 4e pathway depends on the dissociation barrier of the initial adsorbed O2 on the electrode surface, which is also one of the essential foundations for the design and synthesis of ideal electrocatalysts.
Adsorption modes and binding energy of O2 molecule
According to the above-mentioned ORR mechanism, O2 adsorption on the electrode surface is the first step and also the rate-determining step for electrocatalyzing ORR. Thus, it is necessary to know the different O2 adsorption modes on the electrode.
Yeager et al.42 put forward three typical modes for O2 adsorption, i.e., Pauling model, Griffiths model, and Bridge model, as shown in Fig. 2a. Pauling model is also known as “end-on” adsorption, in which only one atom of O2 molecule interacts with the surface-active site and prefers to retain the O–O bonding, thus generating H2O2 through the 2e ORR pathway. In Griffiths model, the O2 molecule transversely interacts with one active site, which can significantly weaken the O–O bonding, furthering favouring a 4e ORR pathway. Bridge model is also called “side-on” adsorption, in which both atoms of O2 molecule interact with two active sites at the same time. Thus, the O–O bonding is easily broken and then the O* species are reduced to H2O via the 4e pathway. In short, the adsorption modes of O2 molecule on the electrocatalysts’ surface play a decisive role in determining the ORR pathway.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the three typical O2 molecule adsorption modes on the catalytic surface; (b) ORR activity for a series of pure metals plotted against the O* binding energy. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, the binding energy of O2 molecules with electrode materials has a significant effect on the ORR activity (Fig. 2b). In 2004, Nørskov et al.43,44 provided the ORR activity as a function of the calculated O* binding energy (ΔEO) via density functional theory (DFT) calculations. As shown in Fig. 2b, for the pure metals on the left of the volcano plot, their electrocatalytic ORR activity improves with the increase in ΔEO. This could be attributed to the ORR activity in this area with strong O2 bonding, which is determined by the removal rate of O, OH, and some oxygen-containing intermediates from the electrode surface. On the contrary, the pure metals on the right side of the volcano plot exhibit fading ORR activity with the increase in ΔEO. This is because the enhancement of the O binding energy weakens the O2 molecule adsorption on the electrode surface, leading to reduced activity. Obviously, the binding strength of the catalyst to the adsorbed reactants, intermediates, and products should neither be too strong nor too weak. The closer to the volcano top, the more moderate the binding energy of the oxygen-containing species and the better the ORR activity.
Except for the ORR activity, the catalysts’ selectivity, especially for the 2e ORR pathway for on-site H2O2 production, is also closely related to the corresponding ΔEO. The experimentally measured electron transferred number on almost all carbon materials is smaller than four. In contrast, on most metal surfaces, ORR proceeds via a dissociative pathway due to the strong adsorption of O2. For instance, the binding energy of O2 on the Pt(111) surface is about −0.6 eV, with a very low O2 dissociation barrier of less than 0.3 eV, thus showing a 4e pathway.45,46 However, Ag(111) possesses a weak O2 adsorption ability, leading to a high O2 dissociation barrier. Consequently, the reaction pathway on the Ag surface generally obeys the associative mechanism associated with a high 2e ORR selectivity.47
In short, the ORR activity and selectivity of the as-prepared materials are greatly dependent on the adsorption modes and binding energy of O2 molecules on the electrode surface. “End-on” adsorption and moderate binding energy are advantageous to the 2e ORR pathway for on-site H2O2 production. Thus, modifying the structure and composition of the materials to regulate their adsorption modes and binding energy of O2 molecules in order to realize highly-efficient 2e reaction pathway is a general research idea for the development of 2e ORR electrocatalysts.
Side reactions in on-site H2O2 production via 2e ORR
As mentioned before (eqn (1a) and (1b)), the 4e ORR is a competitive reaction that possesses a more positive standard electrode potential than that of the 2e ORR, indicating its thermodynamic favourability. Besides, the further reduction of H2O2 to H2O, the spontaneous disproportionation, and the hemolysis reaction of the on-site produced H2O2 (eqn (5a)–(5c)) can further lower the yield.48 H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− ↔ 2H2 OE0 = 1.76 V versus SHE(5a) H2O2 ↔ H2O + 1/2O2(5b) H2O2 → 2HO˙(5c)
Meanwhile, other side reactions associated with the oxygenic species may occur in the ORR process,49,50 such as the formation of superoxide anions, 3e ORR, and the further reaction of H2O2 to hydroxyl radicals (eqn (6a)–(6c)). O2 + e− → O2˙− E0 = 0.330 V versus SHE(6a) O2 + 3H+ + 3e− → H2O + HO˙ E0 = 0.803 V versus SHE(6b) H2O2 + e− → OH− + HO˙ E0 = 0.104 V versus SHE(6c)
It is worth mentioning that the above-mentioned oxygenic radicals can be favorable for H2O2 generation via the eqn (7a)–(7d). O2˙− + H+ → HO2(7a) O2˙− + HO2˙ → HO2− + O2(7b) HO2˙ + e− → HO2− E0 = − 0.744 V versus SHE(7c) HO2− + H+ → H2O2(7d)
Consequently, for on-site H2O2 production via 2e ORR, the development of highly-efficient 2e ORR electrocatalysts and the rational design of the electrode and device to allow the generated H2O2 to rapidly diffuse so as to avoid its further oxidation or reduction should be simultaneously considered.
Testing techniques for ORR selectivity and H2O2 accumulation
So far, the rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) technique is a facile and widely-used method to judge the ORR selectivity of the as-prepared electrocatalysts on a laboratory scale. The general experimental setup and detection principle based on RRDE are exhibited in Fig. 3a and b, respectively. The produced H2O2 through the 2e ORR on the glassy carbon disk electrode under a certain applied potential can be thrown to the surrounding Pt ring electrode by forced convection caused by the rotation of the electrode, and then H2O2 can be oxidized to H2O at a constant applied positive potential. The electron selectivity of ORR for the investigated catalyst can be calculated from eqn (8). The H2O2 yield is further determined by eqn (8) and (9): (8) (9)where ID is the disk current density, IR is the ring current density, and N is the H2O2 collection efficiency of the ring electrode, which is determined from the ring (IR) and disk (ID) currents (in units of mA), eqn (10), as shown in Fig. 3c.51,52 (10)
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup for ORR characterization and (b) the testing principle of RRDE; (c) ring (Fe2+ → Fe3+ + e−) and disk (Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+) currents at 60 °C for the determination of the collection efficiency on the Pt/Vulcan thin-film RRDE in 0.1 M NaOH supporting electrolyte with 10 mM K3Fe(CN)6. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2001, Elsevier B. V. 
The Koutecky–Levivh (K–L) plot is another common method to investigate the electron transferred number of ORR, further revealing the ORR mechanism. K–L plots present ω−1/2 as a function of i−1 (ω represents the rotation speed of the electrode and i is the current measured in the experiment), and the electron transferred number can be calculated via the following K–L equations: i−1 = iK−1 + iL−1(11) iL = 0.620nFAD02/3ω1/2v−1/6CO2 = Bω1/2(12)iL (A) is the limiting current under diffusion control, ik (A) is the kinetic current of the reaction with active substances on the electrode surface, n (mol−1) is the number of transferred electrons when each O2 molecule is reduced, F is the Faraday constant (96500 C mol−1), A (cm2) is the geometric area of the electrode, D0 (cm2 s−1) is the diffusion coefficient of O2 in the electrolyte, ω (rad s−1) is the electrode rotation speed in rpm, ν (cm2 s−1) is the kinematic viscosity of the electrolyte, CO2 (mol cm−3) is the O2-staturated concentration in the electrolyte, and B (mA (rpm1/2)−1) is the reciprocal of the slope.
Furthermore, the developed powder catalysts for 2e ORR can be fabricated into a large-area integrated electrode for H2O2 accumulation. Utilizing the chromogenic reaction of the produced H2O2 with potassium titanium oxalate in acidic media, the H2O2 yield can be indirectly calculated by measuring the intensity of the adsorption peak of the reaction products through a UV-Vis spectrophotometer.53 The detailed process of this detection technology is as follows: a certain volume of the sample to be measured is added into the pre-prepared potassium titanium oxalate solution, and then the color of the solution changes to yellow because of the above chromogenic reaction. In addition, Ce(SO4)2 or KMnO4 or iodometric titration methods are usually used to test the H2O2 yield directly. In these methods, color indicators are generally necessary. By tracking the color change of the color indicators, the H2O2 content is accurately calculated. The current efficiency for H2O2 accumulation can be calculated based on eqn (13): Current Efficiency = 2CVF/Q(13)where C is the H2O2 concentration (mol L−1), V is the volume of the electrolyte (L), F is Faraday's constant (96485 C mol−1), and Q is the amount of charge passed through the cell (C).
Electrocatalysts for H2O2 production via the 2e ORR process
The performance of the electrocatalysts, as a key factor, has a great effect on the on-site H2O2 production yield from the 2e ORR process. Many researchers have devoted great efforts for developing high activity and selectivity electrocatalysts, which mainly include noble metal and non-noble metal electrocatalysts. To improve the H2O2 yield as much as possible, high 2e selectivity and current density are simultaneously needed. However, there is a negative correlation between the current density and the selectivity towards on-site H2O2 production. This drives us to exploit the electrocatalysts that possess high 2e ORR selectivity while working at high over-potential. We summarize the performance for the electrosynthesis of H2O2via the 2e ORR process of the already-reported representative electrocatalysts ranging from noble metals to non-noble metals (Table 1).
Table 1 Summary of reported electrocatalysts for H2O2 electrosynthesis via the 2e ORR process




Materials
Selectivity (%)

n

Electrolyte solution

E versus RHE (V)

J (mA cm−2)
Ref.




*The equation 1/j = 1/jd + 1/jk is used to correct the current for mass losses, where j is the total current, jd is the mass-transport-limited current to H2O2 (obtained from the ring), and jk is the kinetic current to H2O2.




Noble metal electrocatalysts


Au25 nanoclusters
86
2.28
0.1 M KOH
0.36
–

9



Au0.92Pd0.08 nanoalloys
95
2.25
0.1 M HClO4
0.30
–

5



Au–Pt–Ni nanorods
95
2.11
0.1 M KOH
0.50

J
measured = 1.4

10



Pt–Hg
∼96
∼2.08
0.1 M HClO4
0.20–0.40
*JkineticforH2O2a = 3.0

6



Pd–Hg/C nanoparticles
∼95
∼2.1
0.1 M HClO4
0.35–0.55
—

7



Carbon-coated Pt
41
3.18
1.0 M HClO4
0.10
—

13







Non-noble metal electrocatalysts


Hierarchically porous carbon (HPC-H24)
95
2.10
0.05 M H2SO4 + 0.05 M Na2SO4
0.20
—

57



Mesoporous carbon
>70
—
0.1 M KOH
0.30–0.60
—

58



Oxidative graphitic ordered mesoporous carbon (o-GOMC)
>90
—
0.1 M KOH
0.20–0.75
—

59



Mesoporous nitrogen-doped carbon
93
2.14
0.5 M H2SO4
0.10
—

81



N and S co-doped mesoporous carbon (N,S-MC-1)
76
2.50
0.5 M H2SO4
0.06

J
limiting = 2.7

74



Nitrogen-rich few-layered graphene (N-FLG-8)
>95
<2.10
0.1 M KOH
0.30–0.70
—

102



Co–N–C
80
2.40
0.5 M H2SO4
0.10

J
measured = 2.97

104



Atomic Co–Nx–C sites and oxygen functional group (Co–POC–O)
85.6
2.29
0.1 M KOH
0.78

J
measured = 1.0

106



MnO and Mn–Nx coupled with N-doped carbons
74
2.5
0.1 M HClO4
0.20
—

108



Single-atom Co–N4 (Co1–NG(O))
∼82
—
0.1 M KOH
0.65

J
kineticforH2O2 = 2.8

105





Also, we review the development of the electrocatalysts for the electrosynthesis of H2O2 (Fig. 4), highlight the mechanistic origins of their high activities and selectivities, and provide our own viewpoints on the rational design of efficient 2e ORR electrocatalysts as below from two aspects of noble metal based-electrocatalysts and non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 4  Major developments of the electrocatalysts for the electrosynthesis of H2O2via 2e ORR. 
Noble metal-based electrocatalysts
The surface properties of the electrocatalysts play a decisive role in O2 adsorption and binding energy, further affecting their ORR activity and selectivity. Several works have been reported about the modification of surface engineering. In 1983,4 it was found that Au(111) and (100) catalyzed ORR to preferentially generate H2O2, while 4e ORR occurred on the Au(110) surface. Also, moderate Pb adsorption on the Au(111) and (100) surfaces can change the ORR from 2e to 4e pathway, arising from the variation in the O2 adsorption modes from end-on to bimetal bridge, thus leading to enhanced ORR activity and 4e selectivity. The above work provided the concept for the targeted regulation of ORR activity and selectivity via surface engineering. Lu et al.9 studied the effect of the Au25 cluster charge states on the electrochemical production of H2O2 in alkaline media. It was found that the negatively charged clusters (Au25−) exhibited the best ORR activity and 2e selectivity towards H2O2 production among the three kinds of Au clusters (Au250, Au25−, Au25+). This is due to efficient electron transfer from the anionic Au25− cluster surface into the LUMO (π* of O2) (Fig. 5a), indicating the significant effect of the charge state of the electrocatalyst surface on its catalytic properties.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of selective electrochemical production of H2O2 on Au25− nanoclusters. Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (b) the variation in the structure and adsorption of O2 on the Au–Pd alloys with the increase in the Pd content, yellow: Au, blue: Pd, red: O. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society; (c) high resolution HAADF-STEM images of the interface of the Au–Pt–Ni nanorods. Reproduced with permission.10 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Though the 2e ORR pathway dominates on Au, it is poor at adsorbing O2, which can lead to the low coverage of O2 and thus limit the activity. Accordingly, some methods to improve the ORR activity of Au-based electrocatalysts meanwhile guarantee high 2e selectivity have been reported. In 2011,5 Jirkovsky et al. found that isolated alloying atoms of Pd, Pt, or Rh placed within the Au surface could enhance the H2O2 production with respect to pure Au via DFT modelling, further screening for the best alloy candidates of Au1−xPdx. Subsequently, the dependence of Pd content in the Au1−xPdx nanoparticles has been experimentally investigated with respect to the ORR, which is in agreement with the DFT modelling results. As shown in Fig. 5b, the structural mode of guest Pd atoms and host Au atoms can change with the increase in the Pd content. When the Pd content is small, isolated Pd atoms can be embedded in the Au(111) matrix. In this case, the role of Pd can improve O2 adsorption on the electrode surface and will not change its adsorption mode, thus exhibiting enhanced 2e ORR pathway. With the Pd content increasing, finally, a thin Pd monolayer can be present on top of the Au(111) surface, which is favorable for the bridge adsorption of O2, thus demonstrating 4e selectivity. Inspired by this work, the epitaxial growth of Au–Pt–Ni trimetal nanorods for high selectivity H2O2 production have emerged.10 As shown in Fig. 5c, Ni introduction can enhance the adsorption of O2; meanwhile, the inertness of Au promises the inhibition of the O–O bond breaking. Note that when Pt is deposited at the interface between the Au core and the Ni shell, the electronic properties and lattice strain of the Ni shell can be simultaneously tuned by the epitaxial growth of the core–shell structures due to work function difference and lattice mismatch, which is responsible for the further enhanced activity and 2e selectivity towards H2O2 production.
With the development of computer science, computational screening for efficient 2e ORR electrocatalysts and further experimental verification, as a novel research strategy, have gradually attracted more attention. In 2013,6 utilizing the isolated active site concept, Rossmeisl et al. gave a theoretically calculated ORR volcano plot for the 2e and 4e ORR pathways as a function of ΔGHO* and ΔGHOO*, respectively. In fact, the 2e ORR pathway is governed by only one intermediate, which is OOH* (* denotes an active site). By minimizing the kinetic barriers for HOO* formation, accelerating its desorption and maximizing the barriers for HOO* reduction or dissociation to O* and OH* are the ultimate goals for the rational design of 2e ORR electrocatalysts. From Fig. 6a, PtHg4 located at the volcano top for 2e ORR, represents an optimal ΔGHOO* and thermodynamic overpotential for 2e ORR, and is also the only identified catalyst that fulfils the criteria for both 2e selectivity and activity of ORR. Fig. 6b exhibits the kinetic current for H2O2 production of all the reported promising 2e ORR electrocatalysts as a function of the applied potential, demonstrating that Pt–Hg/C nanoparticles are the best alloying electrocatalysts for 2e ORR. Following this work, the same group members further modified different metal surfaces with Hg as a method to tune the ORR activity and selectivity of various electrodes towards H2O2 production.7,52 As shown in Fig. 6c and d, theoretical calculations and experimental verifications have screened and identified two novel 2e ORR electrocatalysts, namely, Ag–Hg and Pd–Hg, with unique electrocatalytic properties, both of which exhibit performances that far exceed the state-of-the-art electrocatalysts of 2e ORR.
 Fig. 6  (a) Theoretically calculated volcano plot for the 2e (blue) and 4e (red) ORR, with the limiting potential plotted as a function of ΔGHO* (lower horizontal axis) and ΔGHOO* (upper horizontal axis); (b) the performance of different electrocatalysts for H2O2 production; the kinetic current has been derived by correcting the partial current density for H2O2 production for mass transport limitations. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group; (c) potential required to reach 1 mA cm−2 of kinetic current density for H2O2 on polycrystalline catalysts as a function of the calculated HOO* binding energy. The solid lines represent the theoretical Sabatier volcano. The dotted line represents the thermodynamic potential for oxygen reduction to H2O2; (d) schematic representation of oxygen reduction to H2O2 on a model Pd2Hg5(001) surface, green: Pd, blue: Hg, red: O, yellow: H. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, nanocluster-based electrocatalysts, as a special scale between single-atom-based and nanoparticle-based electrocatalysts, have been demonstrated to possess unique electrochemical properties, thus providing a promising strategy to tune the activity and selectivity of ORR towards H2O2 production. Chen et al. developed novel partially-oxidized Pdδ+ (Pd3δ+ and Pd4δ+) on mildly oxidized carbon nanotubes via a facile solution impregnation method, which showed a high H2O2 selectivity of 95–98% in a wide potential range of 0.3–0.7 V. Further DFT calculations indicated that the interaction between the partially-oxidized Pd clusters and the oxygen-containing functional groups on the oxidized carbon nanotubes were responsible for their high selectivity and activity for 2e ORR.8
Non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts
Unlike noble metal-based electrocatalysts, non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts, especially carbon-based nanomaterials, are cheap, earth-abundant, and favorable for sustainable development, which are well-recognized as promising alternatives to noble metal-based electrocatalysts for the on-site electrochemical production of H2O2via 2e ORR. As is known to all, intrinsic defects,54 such as holes, edges, positive topological disclinations, and sp3–C sites are commonly present in pristine carbon materials, including graphite, graphene, carbon nanotubes, and porous carbons. It is investigated that the intrinsic carbon defects without any dopant can tailor the electronic structure of carbon materials and significantly modulate their ORR activity. Thus, they are considered to be the ORR active sites.55,56 Liu et al.57 introduced high content of defects and sp3–C into hierarchical porous carbon (HPC) by the carbonization of metal organic frameworks (MOFs) under H2 atmosphere. The obtained excellent H2O2 selectivity and yield could be attributed to its high content of sp3–C and defects, which is favorable for the adsorption and reduction of O2 during the electrocatalytic process. By the way, the porous structure of the electrocatalysts has a significant effect on the mass transport of O2 reactant and the H2O2 product. Chen et al.58 elaborated the effect of pore size of the as-prepared electrocatalysts on the electrochemical synthesis of H2O2. It was found that the mesoporous structure enhanced the mass transport of the H2O2 product, reducing its residence time on the electrocatalyst surface and avoiding its further reduction to H2O, thus increasing its yield.
Besides the intrinsic defects of carbon materials, the oxygenated graphitic edge sites59 and oxygen-containing functional groups60–65 in carbon nanocatalysts also play an essential role in enhancing their 2e ORR activity and selectivity. According to the theoretical calculations,60 Lu et al. screened out the C–O–C functional groups on the basal plane and at the edge of the graphene as well as the –COOH functional groups at the armchair edge, which could significantly affect the ORR activity and selectivity of the carbon materials. In order to indicate the above hypothesis, CNTs-KOH rich in COOH functional groups and CNTs-PEO rich in –C–O–C functional groups were synthesized via different oxidation treatment methods. The electrochemical results revealed that both CNTs-KOH and CNTs-PEO showed significantly improved ORR activity and selectivity (∼83% and ∼87% for CNTs-KOH and CNTs-PEO, respectively). Except for powdered carbon materials, the intrinsic defects and oxygen-containing functional groups can also be directly introduced into the carbon-based current collectors, such as carbon paper, carbon cloth, and graphite felt in order to construct an integrated electrode for on-site H2O2 production. Electro-Fenton, as an advanced oxidation process, has been widely reported in wastewater treatment. The electrochemical on-site produced H2O2 reacts with Fe3+ to generate hydroxyl radicals as a strong oxidant to degrade the pollutants, thus avoiding the risks from the storage and shipment of concentrated H2O2. Obviously, improving the 2e ORR performance of the electrode materials for the efficient on-site production of H2O2 is the key step in the electro-Fenton technology. Wang et al.66 prepared an activated hydrophilic graphite felt (GF) modified with oxygen-containing functional groups via KOH heat treatment. The optimized GF was applied as the electron-Fenton cathode for organic pollutant degradation. Due to the large surface area and increased oxygen-containing functional groups of the activated GF, the apparent rate constant for dimethyl phthalate (DMP) degradation at the activated GF was significantly enhanced by a factor of 900% with respect to that at the raw GF. Subsequently, the same group members67 activated the graphite felt with gaseous acetic acid steam at high temperature to generate a specific pore structure, sp3–C bonding, and oxygen-containing functional groups (C–OH and OC–O), which could act as active sites for O2 adsorption and reduction during the electrocatalytic process. The H2O2 yield increased from 342.96 mg L−1 of the raw GF to 472.90 mg L−1 of the activated GF in 60 min.
Recently, heteroatom-doped carbon materials have drawn great attention and have been widely reported as a class of promising non-noble metal ORR electrocatalysts,68–73 especially N-doped metal-free carbon-based materials.74–80 Compared with C atoms, N atoms with a higher electronegativity can activate π electrons and induce charge redistribution, further regulating the electronic properties and adsorption abilities of carbon materials to O2 and its intermediates. However, the actual mechanism of N doping is still controversial and further investigation is needed. Three main key factors, namely, the pore structure, and the types and amount of N atoms (Fig. 7), have been reported to significantly affect the ORR pathway and activity of N-doped carbon materials. Nabae et al. demonstrated that the mesoporous structure in N-doped carbon materials could accelerate the mass transport of H2O2 as ORR intermediates to prevent its further reduction to H2O, thus exhibiting 2e ORR selectivity,81 while most already reported N-doped carbon materials exhibited 4e ORR selectivity.82–94 In addition to the pore structure of the electrocatalysts, Fellinger et al. firstly reported that an increased N content may favour the 2e ORR process from a macroscopic perspective.95 However, excess N-content can lead to the disruption of the π-system in carbon, further reducing the conductivity and 2e ORR activity of the as-synthesized N-doped carbon materials.96,97 In addition, figuring out the exact active sites among different N configurations for N-doped carbon materials is quite pivotal for the controllable synthesis of efficient 2e ORR electrocatalysts.98 Although pyridinic N sites are well-recognized active sites for 4e ORR due to the fact that they can weaken the O–O bond by imparting a relatively high positive charge density on the adjacent carbon atoms,99 Daniel Iglesias et al.100 pointed out that the proven protonation of the pyridinic N sites in acidic media101 compromised the ability to weaken the O–O bond, leading to the preferential formation of H2O2. With increasing pH value of the electrolyte, the selectivity of the catalyst towards H2O2 decreased. Recently, an N-rich few-layered graphene (N-FLG) with a tunable N configuration was reported.102 It was found that a positive correlation existed between the content of pyrrolic N and the corresponding H2O2 selectivity. Along with the development of the characterization technology, the N K edges of the as-prepared N-FLG in the X-ray adsorption near edge structure (XANES) spectra were characterized. There was a negative shift in the peak belonging to pyrrolic N after the ORR process, while the peak corresponding to pyridinic N and graphitic N remained nearly unchanged, which was attributable to the distortion of heterocycles due to the absorption of intermediates OOH* on the carbon atoms around the pyrrolic N. It was also suggested that a much larger number of pyrrolic N configurations in N-FLG-8 may alter its electronic structure, optimize the adsorption of OOH* intermediates, and thus lead to superior 2e ORR selectivity. It is noteworthy that without absolutely eliminating all the other affecting factors involved such as a slight distinction of the N species, we still cannot draw an absolutely reliable conclusion about the actual reactive sites; thus, further research is needed.
 Fig. 7  Key factors for determining the ORR activity and selectivity of the N-doped carbon materials. 
N-doped carbon materials featuring atomically dispersed transition-metal cations (M–N–C) are emerging heterogeneous single-atom catalysts (SACs), which comprise single metal atoms stabilized on a support. Some transition metal macrocycle complexes with natural well-defined M–Nx reactive sites are used to selectively produce H2O2. However, the general principle that governs the selectivity of M–N–C catalysts towards H2O2 still remains unknown. Jia et al.103 revealed that the binding energies of *OOH, *O, and *OH are generally related with the number of valence electrons increasing in the M (Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu) atoms (Fig. 8a). For Fe–N–C and Mn–N–C catalysts, the strong binding of the intermediates results in high ORR activity but low H2O2 selectivity; thus, it needs to weaken the oxophilicity and mitigate the further reduction of H2O2. However, Co–N–C with moderate binding energy of intermediates is a promising catalyst for H2O2 production but needs to enhance the overall activity.104 By theoretical calculations, Jung et al.105 revealed the possibility of tuning the performance of the Co–N–C catalyst at the atomic level. By attaching electron-rich species (such as O*) near the Co–N4 moiety, the ΔGOOH* of Co–N–C (Fig. 8b) can be further optimized for efficiently catalyzing 2e ORR because of the change in the charge state of the Co atoms. Subsequently, according to the results of the theoretical calculation, the Co–N4 moieties surrounded by the C–O–C epoxides (Co–NG(O)) were prepared. In this case, Co became electron-poor and increased the binding energy of OOH*. The calculated kinetic current density of Co–NG(O) for H2O2 production was 2.8 ± 0.2 mA cm−2 (at 0.65 V), demonstrating its superior H2O2 production activity that far surpassed that of state-of-the-art electrocatalysts (Fig. 8c). Furthermore, other research has drawn a similar conclusion that the introduced oxygen-containing functional groups play an important role in high-performance electrochemical H2O2 production.106,107 Oxygen-containing functional groups such as C–O and CO with both electronic and steric effects can weaken the oxophilicity at the active metal–Nx moieties and pre-occupy the nearest carbon sites, leading to the end-on adsorption of O2 molecules; in this way, the further reduction of H2O2 is inhibited (Fig. 8d). Thus, this may provide an extra way to tune the M–N–C catalysts for H2O2 production.
 Fig. 8  (a) Binding energy of *OOH, *O, and *OH as well as the d-band center (open circle) of M atom in transition-metal single-atom catalysts. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2020, Elsevier B. V.; (b) calculated catalytic activity volcanoes for the production of H2O (blue) and H2O2 (red) via the ORR (bottom panel). Black data points represent the M–N4/graphenes (M = Co, Ni, Fe, Pt, Ag, and Ru) that are used to construct the activity volcanoes. Blue and red data points represent Co–N4/graphene with 4H*/2H* and O*/2O* adsorbed near the cobalt atom, respectively; (c) summary of H2O2 production activity. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group; (d) schematic of the synergistic strategy of atomic Co–Nx–C sites and oxygen functional groups for H2O2 electrosynthesis on noble metal-free electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Reactor design for large-scale electrochemical production of H2O2
Considering the fact that the reactor design has a significant effect on the H2O2 yield, although various 2e ORR electrocatalysts for H2O2 production have been widely reported, there is still a long way to the large-scale production of H2O2via the electrochemical method. In order to improve the H2O2 yield, two factors should be simultaneously considered: (1) the in situ produced H2O2 needs to be timely collected, which can prevent its further decomposition under applied potential; (2) a stable gas–liquid–solid three phase interface is required for efficiently electrocatalyzing 2e ORR. Gas–liquid separated flow-cell (Fig. 9a), as a basic reactor, is particularly desirable when scaling up the electrochemical cells from the laboratory to the industrial scale. Due to the gas–liquid separation, the mass transport of O2 in the gas phase is obviously faster than that in the solution. Accordingly, O2 with high concentration can rapidly flow through the working electrode to the catalyst-electrolyte interface and immediately be reduced, improving the solubility limit of O2 in the electrolyte and the consequent concentration polarization, thus enhancing the ORR current densities. Thus, a well-designed working electrode, which not only possesses outstanding 2e ORR electrocatalysts for O2 adsorption but also provides a rapid transport pathway for O2, is urgently needed. On the other hand, the flow cell can collect the H2O2 product in a reservoir or circulate the produced H2O2 to give a high concentration of the desired product, thus weakening its further decomposition under applied potential.
 Fig. 9  (a) Gas–liquid separated flow-cell configurations for the electrosynthesis of H2O2; (b) schematic diagram of the H2O2 generation device in the electrolyzer mode. Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) electrosynthesis of H2O2 using pure H2 and O2 streams separately introduced into the anode and cathode, respectively. SE represents the solid electrolyte. Electrochemically generated cations (H+) and anions (HO2−), driven by the electric field, cross in the porous SE layer and recombine to form H2O2. DI water flowing through the porous SE layer then dissolves the H2O2 with no impurities. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2019, Science Publishing Group. 
Taking the two above-mentioned factors into consideration, Jaramillo and co-workers16 reported a membrane-free gas–liquid separated electrolyzer, whose schematic device is shown in Fig. 9b. For the working electrode, the electrocatalysts were drop-casted onto the carbon paper, with the backside of the gas diffusion layer (GDL) coated with a hydrophobic polymer, which allows the diffusion of O2 gas but prevents water diffusion to a desired level. As observed, the side with the electrocatalysts for the working electrode and the hydrophobic layer of the counter electrode co-facing compartment 2 block the diffusion of the produced H2O2; thus, a high concentration of H2O2 can be obtained. Therefore, this device can not only prevent the decomposition of the in situ generated H2O2 but also lower the overall ohmic loss due to lack of a membrane. In the operating process of this device, CMK-3 and NiFeOx were used as the cathode for H2O2 production and the anode for oxygen evolution reaction, respectively. As investigated, the accumulated H2O2 concentration during the long-term experiment for 2 h was 2795 mg L−1, which was approximately 0.3 wt% (a value commonly used in many commercial applications), with a high faradaic efficiency of ∼90%. Following the design concept of this reactor, recently, some works about using this kind of flow cell to assess the developed electrocatalysts have been reported.17,18
Although the gas–liquid separated flow-cell can theoretically be used as a reactor for H2O2 electrosynthesis at an industrial scale, the on-site produced H2O2 is still dissolved in the electrolyte; thus, its further extraction and purification from the electrolyte is necessary for practical applications. In order to address this issue, Wang et al.19 reported a porous solid electrolyte design to realize the direct electrosynthesis of pure H2O2 solution and electricity co-generation based on the H2–O2 fuel cell concept, as depicted in Fig. 9c. The cation exchange membrane (CEM) and anion exchange membrane (AEM) were used for the anode and cathode, respectively, which avoided flooding by direct contact with liquid water. In the center, a thin and porous solid electrolyte layer modified with functional groups facilitated the ionic recombination of H+ and HO2− ions crossing from the anode and cathode with a small ohmic loss. A flowing DI water stream confined to this middle layer could then dissolve the pure H2O2 product with no introduction of ionic impurities. By controlling the flow rate of the DI water stream and the production rate of HO2−, different concentrations of H2O2 solution, even up to 20% by weight, could be directly obtained for related applications, such as drinking water purification and pollutant degradation.
Electricity and H2O2 co-generation integrated system
The electrochemical production of H2O2 based on the electrolytic cell, where ORR occurs at the cathode under an external voltage bias, requires only O2 and electricity from a source without waste production. However, such devices would also require continuous energy input, which may limit their extensive applications, especially for those places where there is a shortage of electrical energy. Therefore, instead of energy-consumption, the co-generation of H2O2 production and electrical energy in the fuel/metal–air cell or solar energy would be significantly meaningful. Obviously, such integrated systems have great flexibility for H2O2 synthesis, which can be operated at room temperature and atmospheric pressure directly in the places of need and at the right point in time but can also provide an energy output. Besides, the huge fluctuation in the solar energy depends on the length of the daytime, which is a serious problem in practical applications. With the co-generation integrated systems, the produced H2O2 can also be used as a fuel to produce electricity at night time and solves the above-described problems.
By summarizing the previous studies, it can be found that there are two mainstream directions for electricity and H2O2 co-generation integrated system. One is the chemical battery system with the direct production of H2O2, and the other is the light-driven photoelectrochemical system with simultaneous production of H2O2 and electricity.
The integrated fuel-cell system is different from the conventional H2–O2 fuel cell or metal–air battery, in which H2O2 instead of H2O is generated in the cathode through 2e ORR. According to thermodynamics, it can spontaneously produce electricity along with the generation of valuable chemicals such as H2O2. Yamanaka20,21 firstly reported a new integrated system for the synthesis of H2O2 utilizing a H2/O2 fuel-cell reactor at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. The following three systems come out through gradual improvement, as shown in Fig. 10a. On one hand, the electrolyte compartment in system-2 is divided into two compartments by a CEM to prevent H2O2 diffusion from the cathode to the anode compartment and suppress its consumption. On the other hand, the micro-syringe pump in system-3 is used to prevent the decrease in the analyte volume caused by the electrochemical transportation of Na+ and coordinated water from the anode to the cathode compartment. The optimized system-3 can selectively produce the H2O2 solution (concentration: 2 M) with a high current efficiency of 93% at atmospheric pressure and 298 K. Wang et al.22 also demonstrated the self-powered production of H2O2 based on a Zn–air battery with the oxygenated carbon electrocatalyst. By tuning the ratio of the oxygen-containing groups, the efficient co-generation of electricity and H2O2 has been demonstrated a power density of 360 W mgeo−2 at an operating voltage of 0.8 V and a high H2O2 production rate of 5.93 mol mgeo−2 h−1. Furthermore, using a polymer p-type semiconductor (polyterthiophene, pTTh) as the cathode, it puts forward a concept of photo-assisted ORR, which can be used to construct a photo-enhanced electricity and H2O2 co-generation integrated system based on a Zn–air battery23 (Fig. 10b) or H2/O2 fuel cell24 (Fig. 10c). The potential of the oxygen reduction peak in the light positively shifts with respect to that in the dark and the ORR performance is significantly improved with a pTTh electrode, which enables to simultaneously utilize solar energy and electrochemical energy.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representations of the three systems of fuel-cell reactors used for the formation of solutions of H2O2/NaOH. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH; (b) the schematic diagram of photo-enhanced Zn–air batteries with simultaneous highly efficient in situ H2O2 generation and wastewater treatment. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) the working principle of the tandem cell. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (d) pattern diagram of the photoelectrode system for producing only H2O2 using a two-electron oxidation system of H2O on a WO3/BiVO4 photoanode under solar light irradiation. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
The light-driven photoelectrochemical system generally consists of a light-driven two-electron water oxidation reaction (WOR) and two-electron ORR, as shown in eqn (14a)–(14d), which is non-spontaneous according to the thermodynamics and requires suitable illumination conditions. Thus, it is essential to design an efficient photoelectrode and system structure for high yield and selectivity of H2O2. Light + 2H2O + O2 = Electricity + 2H2O2(14a) Anode: 2H2O ↔ H2O2 + 2(H+ + e−), EOox = −1.763 V(14b) Cathode: O2 + 2(H+ + e−) ↔ H2O2, EOred = 0.695 V(14c) Overall reaction: 2H2O(l) + O2 = 2H2O2, ΔEcell = −1.068 V(14d)
Fuku25 prepared a composite electrode (WO3/BiVO4 + Au), supported by both porous WO3/BiVO4 and Au on an F-doped SnO2 conductive glass (FTO) substrate, as shown in Fig. 10d. The single photoelectrode substrate (photocatalyst sheet) could simultaneously generate H2O2 by the oxidation of H2O and the reduction of O2 without the separation of the anode and the cathode solutions and reach 130 μM H2O2 after simulated solar light irradiation for 60 min. Similarly, Shi26 also prepared photoelectrochemical systems with a BiVO4 photoanode and a C-cathode, and produced H2O2 at a rate of 0.48 μmol min−1 cm−2, which yielded a maximum output power density of 0.194 mW cm−2 that could lighten up a light-emitting diode. It is noteworthy that the above-mentioned devices only utilize solar energy at the anode side, which means that the total system structure can be further improved. Interestingly, Fan27 utilized solar energy on both the anodic and cathodic sides for highly efficient H2O2 production. Owing to the difference between the Fermi levels of the n-type BiVO4 and the p-type pTTh, the photo-electrocatalytic (PEC) system spontaneously produced an interior bias between the two photoelectrodes equal to the open-circuit voltage (Voc). The NiFeOx/BiVO4-pTTh/CP dual-photoelectrodes in a PEC cell were able to self-drive simultaneous 2e WOR on the photoanode and 2e ORR on the photocathode only with light illumination. As expected, the PEC cell achieved a record-high H2O2 concentration of 110 mmol L−1 for 5 cycles without any noticeable decay.
In short, it is eco-friendly and energy-efficient to develop an electricity and H2O2 co-generation integrated system, especially the light-driven photoelectrochemical system. It provides a promising way to utilize infinite solar energy for the production of valuable chemicals, which deserves further exploration.
Conclusions and future outlook
Electrochemistry offers an economical and environment-friendly route to obtain H2O2 from O2, which could effectively address the issues associated with the indirect anthraquinone process and the direct synthetic process. Through selective 2e ORR, H2O2 can be produced at the cathode surface and can be accumulated in useful concentrations over the continuous electrolysis. With ideal electrochemical catalysts and rational reactor design, we can achieve any concentration of H2O2 depending on the applications.109–111 On the other hand, the electrochemical generation of H2O2 from water oxidation is also a very good alternative way.112
In this review, we summarized recent advances on electrochemical production and application of H2O2 from key components to entire systems, including the electrocatalyst and device design for large-scale on-site H2O2 production as well as the electricity-H2O2 co-generation integrated systems. It is obvious that an efficient catalyst for the electrochemical production of H2O2 through 2e ORR is still a pivotal aim, which especially meets both the requirements of high activity and selectivity. By theoretical calculations and experimental verifications, researchers have screened out Hg-based alloys and N-doped carbon materials as potential efficient electrocatalysts for H2O2 production from 2e ORR. Taking both environmental issues and long-term stability into consideration, the non-toxic inexpensive carbon-based materials will be a practical candidate, especially the heteroatom-doped carbon materials with single-atom active sites. From the perspective of thermodynamics, the standard electrode potential of 2e ORR in acidic media (0.70 V vs. RHE) is more positive than that in basic media (0.06 V vs. RHE), meaning that 2e ORR in acidic media is more favored. In addition, the further reduction of on-site H2O2 to H2O in basic media is more likely to occur than in acidic media. However, considering the fact that the oxygen saturation concentration in acidic media is far less than that in basic media, it is more difficult to drive ORR in acidic media.
With the ultimate objective of large-scale electrochemical production of H2O2, researchers have focused on H2O2 electrosynthesis from benchtop experiments to synthesis at industrial scales. The rational design of reactors, especially the gas–liquid separated flow-cell, possesses a simple reactor structure, which is easily to scale up. With the help of a gas diffusion layer in the electrode to control the direction of the material flow, it is convenient to collect the H2O2 product to a reservoir and obtain different concentrations of H2O2 by regulating the velocity of deionized water. Besides, the integrated systems that simultaneously generate electricity and H2O2 as well as photo-assisted H2O2 synthesis provide attractive ways for H2O2 production from the point of view of utilization of diverse energy sources.
In conclusion, the electrochemical synthesis of H2O2 is both an opportunity and a challenge. Despite the significant achievements that have been made in the past years in this field, researchers still need to make a hard effort in this fascinating field. Not only the improvements in the efficiency and selectivity of catalysts but also the problems about the rational design of reactors and integrated systems have to be dealt with in future work.
(1) Noble metal-based electrocatalysts are one of the most efficient electrocatalysts for the generation of H2O2via 2e ORR, especially Pt-based electrocatalysts. Due to their scarcity and insufficient durability, there exists a big hurdle towards large-scale on-site H2O2 production. In order to decrease the Pt loading of Pt-based electrocatalysts without deteriorating their activity, transition metal doping is a promising way and is being widely adopted.
(2) Due to their low-cost and earth-abundant properties, carbon-based metal-free electrocatalysts are promising alternatives for the generation of H2O2via 2e ORR from the perspective of practical applications. Unfortunately, the electrocatalytic ORR activities of most reported carbon-based metal-free electrocatalysts are worse than that of noble metal-based electrocatalysts, especially in acidic media. Consequently, modification technologies for these carbon-based electrocatalysts are necessary, such as heteroatom doping, edge-defect induction, and surface functionalization. Besides, the electrocatalytic mechanism and active sites of carbon-based 2e ORR electrocatalysts need further investigation, which is essential for the rational design of high-performance metal-free 2e ORR electrocatalysts.
(3) To meet the requirement of practical commercial application of H2O2, a large-scale H2O2 production device is demanded, which can produce various H2O2 solution concentrations for actual use. A gas–liquid separated flow-cell reactor with a flowing DI water stream confined to one side of the electrode that can dissolve the pure H2O2 product without introducing ionic impurities, can collect the on-site generated H2O2 in time, and avoid its further reduction or self-decomposition is required. Thus, a well-designed working electrode as well as a stream circulation system are key factors for obtaining an efficient flow cell reactor.
(4) Without the input of extra energy, the integrated systems associated with H2O2 and electrical energy co-generation would be significantly meaningful, especially at places where there is a shortage of electrical energy. However, electrolytes with different pH are required in different fuel cells, such as alkaline fuel cells, proton exchange membrane fuel cells, and solid electrolyte fuel cells. Thus, there exists a pressing need of electrocatalysts with high activity in a wide pH range. Moreover, further studies are urgently needed to explore the real electrocatalytic mechanism of 2e ORR and the further reduction of H2O2 in different pH electrolytes.
Conflicts of interest
The work described in the article has not been published previously or under consideration for publication elsewhere. The submission of this article for publication has been approved by all authors and explicitly by the responsible authorities where the work was carried out, without any conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the financial support of National Natural Science Foundation of China (21978331, 21975292, 21905311), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Program No. 2016YFB0101200), the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2020A1515010343), the Guangzhou Science and Technology Project (201707010079), Tip-top Scientific and Technical Innovative Youth Talents of Guangdong Special Support Program (No. 2016TQ03N322), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Grant (No. 2019M653142), and the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities (No. 19lgpy136).
Notes and references
J. M. Campos-Martin, G. Blanco-Brieva and J. L. G. Fierro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6962 Search PubMed .
Y. Cheng, L. Wang, S. Lü, Y. Wang and Z. Mi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 7414 Search PubMed .
J. K. Edwards and G. J. Hutchings, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9192 Search PubMed .
M. Alvarez-Rizatti and K. Jüttner, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1982, 144, 351 Search PubMed .
J. S. Jirkovský, I. Panas, E. Ahlberg, M. Halasa, S. Romani and D. J. Schiffrin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19432 Search PubMed .
S. Siahrostami, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, M. Karamad, D. Deiana, P. Malacrida, B. Wickman, M. Escudero-Escribano, E. A. Paoli, R. Frydendal, T. W. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff, I. E. L. Stephens and J. Rossmeisl, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1137 Search PubMed .
A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, D. Deiana, M. Karamad, S. Siahrostami, P. Malacrida, T. W. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and I. E. L. Stephens, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1603 Search PubMed .
Q. Chang, P. Zhang, A. H. B. Mostaghimi, X. Zhao, S. R. Denny, J. H. Lee, H. Gao, Y. Zhang, H. L. Xin, S. Siahrostami, J. G. Chen and Z. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2178 Search PubMed .
Y. Lu, Y. Jiang, X. Gao and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8464 Search PubMed .
Z. Zheng, Y. H. Ng, D.-W. Wang and R. Amal, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9949 Search PubMed .
J. S. Jirkovský, M. Halasa and D. J. Schiffrin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 8042 Search PubMed .
B. B. Blizanac, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2264 Search PubMed .
C. H. Choi, H. C. Kwon, S. Yook, H. Shin, H. Kim and M. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 30063 Search PubMed .
Q. Shi, W. Zhu, H. Zhong, C. Zhu, H. Tian, J. Li, M. Xu, D. Su, X. Li, D. Liu, B. Z. Xu, S. P. Beckman, D. Du and Y. Lin, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7722 Search PubMed .
A. P. Reyes-Cruzaley, R. M. Félix-Navarro, B. Trujillo-Navarrete, C. Silva-Carrillo, J. R. Zapata-Fernández, J. M. Romo-Herrera, O. E. Contreras and E. A. Reynoso-Soto, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 575 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Chen, S. Siahrostami, P. Chakthranont, C. Hahn, D. Nordlund, S. Dimosthenis, J. K. Nørskov, Z. Bao and T. F. Jaramillo, React. Chem. Eng., 2017, 2, 239 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Gao, S. Xi, W. Cai, J. Zhang, P. Cui and B. Liu, Carbon Energy, 2020, 2, 1 Search PubMed .
Y.-L. Wang, S.-S. Li, X.-H. Yang, G.-Y. Xu, Z.-C. Zhu, P. Chen and S.-Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21329 Search PubMed .
C. Xia, Y. Xia, P. Zhu, L. Fan and H. Wang, Science, 2019, 366, 226 Search PubMed .
I. Yamanaka, T. Onizawa, S. Takenaka and K. Otsuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3653 Search PubMed .
I. Yamanaka, T. Onisawa, T. Hashimoto and T. Murayama, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 494 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. Hu, Y. Liu, Z. Zheng and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31855 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, Z. Mo, S. Tang, M. Li, H. Yang, B. Long, Y. Wang, S. Song and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14129 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, S. Wang, W. Fan, W. Ma, Z. Liang, J. Shi, S. Liao and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14748 Search PubMed .
K. Fuku, Y. Miyase, Y. Miseki, T. Funaki, T. Gunji and K. Sayama, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 1111 Search PubMed .
X. Shi, Y. Zhang, S. Siahrostami and X. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801158 Search PubMed .
W. Fan, B. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Ma, D. Li, Z. Wang, M. Dupuis, J. Shi, S. Liao and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 238 Search PubMed .
Y. Yi, L. Wang, G. Li and H. Guo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1593 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, Y.-T. Kim and S. H. Joo, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2020, 21, 109 Search PubMed .
S. C. Perry, D. Pangotra, L. Vieira, L.-I. Csepei, V. Sieber, L. Wang, C. P. Leon and F. C. Walsh, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 442 Search PubMed .
A. Sehrish, R. Manzoor, K. Dong, Y. Jiang and Y. Lu, Chem. Rep., 2019, 1, 81 Search PubMed .
M. Melchionna, P. Fornasiero and M. Prato, Adv. Mater., 2018, 31, 1802920 Search PubMed .
Y. Jiang, P. Ni, C. Chen, Y. Lu, P. Yang, B. Kong, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801909 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Ye, Q. Chen and C. Liang, Carbon, 2020, 156, 31 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, F. Xiang, H. Guo, L. Wang and X. Niu, Carbon, 2020, 156, 514 Search PubMed .
M. Qiao, Y. Wang, Q. Wang, G. Hu, X. Mamat, S. Zhang and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2688 Search PubMed .
X. F. Lu, B. Y. Xia, S.-Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4634 Search PubMed .
X. Tian, X. F. Lu, B. Y. Xia and X. W. Lou, Joule, 2020, 4, 45 Search PubMed .
C. Wan, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903815 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, Z. Li, C. Wang, W. Tao, M. Huang, M. Zuo, Y. Yang, K. Yang, L. Zhang, S. Chen, P. Xu and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4905 Search PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060 Search PubMed .
J. Clavilier, D. Armand, S. G. Sun and M. Petit, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1986, 205, 267 Search PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886 Search PubMed .
V. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, P. N. Ross, N. M. Markovic, J. Rossmeisl, J. Greeley and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 118, 2963 Search PubMed .
M. L. Bocquet, J. Cerdà and P. Sautet, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 15437 Search PubMed .
L. Ou, F. Yang, Y. Liu and S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20657 Search PubMed .
M. Alducin, H. F. Busnengo and R. D. Muiño, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 224702 Search PubMed .
H. S. Wroblowa, Y.-C. Pan and G. Razumney, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1976, 69, 195 Search PubMed .
J.-M. Noël, A. Latus, C. Lagrost, E. Volanschi and P. Hapiot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2835 Search PubMed .
M.-H. Shao, P. Liu and R. R. Adžic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7408 Search PubMed .
U. A. Paulus, T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger and R. J. Behm, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 495, 134 Search PubMed .
S. Yang, A. Verdaguer-casadevall, L. Arnarson, L. Silvioli, V. Čolic, R. Frydendal, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and I. E. L. Setphens, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4064 Search PubMed .
Y. Sheng, S. Song, X. Wang, L. Song, C. Wang, H. Sun and X. Niu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8651 Search PubMed .
Y. Jiang, L. Yang, T. Sun, J. Zhao, Z. Lyu, O. Zhuo, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma and Z. Hu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6707 Search PubMed .
A. Ueda, D. Kato, N. Sekioka, T. Kamata, R. Kurita, H. Uetsuka, Y. Hattori, S. Hirono, S. Umemura and O. Niwa, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1943 Search PubMed .
G. Zhong, H. Wang, H. Yu and F. Peng, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 40, 5 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Quan, X. Fan, H. Wang and S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 201502396 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, Z. Chen, S. Siahrostami, T. R. Kim, D. Nordlund, D. Sokaras, S. H. Nowak, J. W. F. To, D. Higgins, R. Sinclair, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and Z. Bao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1311 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Sa, J. H. Kim and S. H. Joo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1100 Search PubMed .
Z. Lu, G. Chen, S. Siahrostami, Z. Chen, K. Liu, J. Xie, L. Liao, T. Wu, D. Lin, Y. Liu, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 156 Search PubMed .
H. W. Kim, M. B. Ross, N. Kornienko, L. Zhang, J. Guo, P. Yang and B. D. McCloskey, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 282 Search PubMed .
K.-H. Wu, D. Wang, X. Lu, X. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. Liu, B.-J. Su, J.-M. Chen, D.-S. Su, W. Qi and S. Guo, Chem, 2020, 6, 1443 Search PubMed .
G.-F. Han, F. Li, W. Zou, M. Karamad, J.-P. Jeon, S.-W. Kim, S.-J. Kim, Y. Bu, Z. Fu, Y. Lu, S. Siahrostami and J.-B. Baek, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2209 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Mi, K. Wang and S. Song, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 523 Search PubMed .
C.-Y. Chen, C. Tang, H.-F. Wang, C.-M. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Huang and Q. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1194 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, K. Wang, S. Song, P. Tsiakaras and H. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 360 Search PubMed .
Z. Pan, K. Wang, P. Tsiakaras and S. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 392 Search PubMed .
K. Zhao, Y. Su, X. Quan, Y. Liu, S. Chen and H. Yu, J. Catal., 2018, 357, 118 Search PubMed .
K. Jiang, S. Back, A. J. Akey, C. Xia, Y. Hu, W. Liang, D. Schaak, E. Stavitski, J. K. Nørskov, S. Siahrostami and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3997 Search PubMed .
M. Wang, N. Zhang, Y. Feng, Z. Hu, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020 DOI:10.1002/anie.202006422 .
N. Wang, S. Ma, J. Duan, X. Zhai, F. Guan, X. Wang and B. Hou, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 340, 135880 Search PubMed .
M. B. Zakaria, C. Li, M. Pramanik, Y. Tsujimoto, M. Hu, V. Malgras, S. Tominaka and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9266 Search PubMed .
L. Liang, M. Zhou, X. Lu, P. Su and J. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 134569 Search PubMed .
V. Perazzolo, C. Durante, R. Pilot, A. Paduano, J. Zheng, G. A. Rizzi, A. Martucci, G. Granozzi and A. Gennaro, Carbon, 2015, 95, 949 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, Z. Chen, S. Siahrostami, D. Higgins, D. Nordlund, D. Sokaras, T. R. Kim, Y. Liu, X. Yan, E. Nilsson, R. Sinclair, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7851 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. Li, Z. P. Jovanov, D. Bernsmeier, H. Wang, B. Paul, X. Wang, S. Kühl and P. Strasser, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3388 Search PubMed .
L. Han, Y. Sun, S. Li, C. Cheng, C. E. Halbig, P. Feicht, J. L. Hübner, P. Strasser and S. Eigler, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1283 Search PubMed .
Y. Wu, A. Muthukrishnan, S. Nagata and Y. Nabae, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4590 Search PubMed .
D. Zhang, T. Liu, K. Yin, C. Liu and Y. Wei, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123184 Search PubMed .
N. Jia, T. Yang, S. Shi, X. Chen, Z. An, Y. Chen, S. Yin and P. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 2883 Search PubMed .
J. Park, Y. Nabae, T. Hayakawa and M. Kakimoto, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3749 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Tong, Z. Pan and S. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29356 Search PubMed .
Y. Hua, T. Jiang, K. Wang, M. Wu, S. Song, Y. Wang and P. Tsiakaras, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 202 Search PubMed .
T. Jiang, Y. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Liang, D. Wu, P. Tsiakaras and S. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 189, 1 Search PubMed .
M. Wu, K. Wang, M. Yi, Y. Tong, Y. Wang and S. Song, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6082 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Liu, K. Wang, S. Song and P. Tsiakaras, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 57 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, H. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Tong, S. Song, P. Tsiakaras and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118468 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, S. Zhang, L. Dai and L. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18932 Search PubMed .
D. Yu, Q. Zhang and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15127 Search PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444 Search PubMed .
H.-W. Liang, X. Zhuang, S. Brüller, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4973 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Yang, S. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Ma, Q. Wu, Y. Jiang, W. Qian and Z. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1201 Search PubMed .
Y.-H. Wang, M. L. Pegis, J. M. Mayer and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16458 Search PubMed .
T.-P. Fellinger, F. Hasché, P. Strasser and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4072 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, G. Zeng, J. Chen, L. Bi, L. Dai and Z. Wen, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 393 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, I. Sinev, W. Ju, A. Bergmann, S. Dresp, S. Kühl, C. Spöri, H. Schmies, H. Wang, D. Bernsmeier, B. Paul, R. Schmack, R. Kraehnert, B. R. Cuenya and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2844 Search PubMed .
Y. Wu, A. Muthukrishnan, S. Nagata and Y. Nabae, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4590 Search PubMed .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361 Search PubMed .
D. Lglesias, A. Giuliani, M. Melchionna, S. Marchesan, A. Criado, L. Nasi, M. Bevilacqua, C. Tavagnacco, F. Vizza, M. Prato and P. Fornasiero, Chem, 2018, 4, 106 Search PubMed .
M. Rauf, Y.-D. Zhao, Y.-C. Wang, Y.-P. Zheng, C. Chen, X.-D. Yang, Z.-Y. Zhou and S.-G. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 73, 71 Search PubMed .
L. Li, C. Tang, Y. Zheng, B. Xia, X. Zhou, H. Xu and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000789 Search PubMed .
Y. Jia and X. Yao, Chem, 2020, 6, 548 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, L. Silvioli, N. R. Sahraie, W. Ju, J. Li, A. Zitolo, S. Li, A. Bagger, L. Arnarson, X. Wang, T. Moeller, D. Bernsmeier, J. Rossmeisl, F. Jaouen and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12372 Search PubMed .
E. Jung, H. Shin, B.-H. Lee, V. Efremov, S. Lee, H. S. Lee, J. Kim, W. H. Antink, S. Park, K.-S. Lee, S.-P. Cho, J. S. Yoo, Y.-E. Sung and T. Hyeon, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 436 Search PubMed .
B.-Q. Li, C.-X. Zhao, J.-N. Liu and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808173 Search PubMed .
M. Suk, M. W. Chung, M. H. Han, H.-S. Oh and C. H. Choi, Catal. Today, 2019 DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2019.05.034 .
A. Byeon, J. Cho, J. M. Kim, K. H. Chae, H.-Y. Park, S. W. Hong, H. C. Ham, S. W. Lee, K. R. Yoon and J. Y. Kim, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 832 Search PubMed .
R. Gao, L. Pan, Z. Li, C. Shi, Y. Yao, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910539 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Zhang, M.-J. Cheng and Q. Lu, Small, 2020, 16, 1902845 Search PubMed .
M. Gao, W.-K. Wang, Y.-M. Zheng, Q.-B. Zhao and H.-Q. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 402, 126171 Search PubMed .
V. Viswanathan, H. A. Hansen and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4224 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− ↔ H2O2 E0 = 0.67 V versus SHE	(1a)
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− ↔ 2H2O E0 = 1.229 V versus SHE	(1b)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the ORR mechanism.	 
O2 + * → O2*	(2a)
O2* + H2O + e− → OOH* + OH−	(2b)
OOH* + e− → OOH− + *	(2c)
O2 + * → O2*	(3a)
O2* + H2O + e− → OOH* + OH−	(3b)
OOH* + e− → OH− + O*	(3c)
O* + H2O + e− → OH* + OH−	(3d)
OH* + e− → OH− + *	(3e)
O2 + 2* → 2O*	(4a)
2O* + 2H2O + 2e− → 2OH* + 2OH−	(4b)
2OH* + 2e− → 2OH− + 2*	(4c)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the three typical O2 molecule adsorption modes on the catalytic surface; (b) ORR activity for a series of pure metals plotted against the O* binding energy. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society.	 
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− ↔ 2H2 OE0 = 1.76 V versus SHE	(5a)
H2O2 ↔ H2O + 1/2O2	(5b)
H2O2 → 2HO˙	(5c)
O2 + e− → O2˙− E0 = 0.330 V versus SHE	(6a)
O2 + 3H+ + 3e− → H2O + HO˙ E0 = 0.803 V versus SHE	(6b)
H2O2 + e− → OH− + HO˙ E0 = 0.104 V versus SHE	(6c)
O2˙− + H+ → HO2	(7a)
O2˙− + HO2˙ → HO2− + O2	(7b)
HO2˙ + e− → HO2− E0 = − 0.744 V versus SHE	(7c)
HO2− + H+ → H2O2	(7d)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup for ORR characterization and (b) the testing principle of RRDE; (c) ring (Fe2+ → Fe3+ + e−) and disk (Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+) currents at 60 °C for the determination of the collection efficiency on the Pt/Vulcan thin-film RRDE in 0.1 M NaOH supporting electrolyte with 10 mM K3Fe(CN)6. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2001, Elsevier B. V.	 
i−1 = iK−1 + iL−1	(11)
iL = 0.620nFAD02/3ω1/2v−1/6CO2 = Bω1/2	(12)
Current Efficiency = 2CVF/Q	(13)


Noble metal electrocatalysts
Au25 nanoclusters	86	2.28	0.1 M KOH	0.36	–	
9

Au0.92Pd0.08 nanoalloys	95	2.25	0.1 M HClO4	0.30	–	
5

Au–Pt–Ni nanorods	95	2.11	0.1 M KOH	0.50	
J
measured = 1.4	
10

Pt–Hg	∼96	∼2.08	0.1 M HClO4	0.20–0.40	*JkineticforH2O2a = 3.0	
6

Pd–Hg/C nanoparticles	∼95	∼2.1	0.1 M HClO4	0.35–0.55	—	
7

Carbon-coated Pt	41	3.18	1.0 M HClO4	0.10	—	
13



Non-noble metal electrocatalysts
Hierarchically porous carbon (HPC-H24)	95	2.10	0.05 M H2SO4 + 0.05 M Na2SO4	0.20	—	
57

Mesoporous carbon	>70	—	0.1 M KOH	0.30–0.60	—	
58

Oxidative graphitic ordered mesoporous carbon (o-GOMC)	>90	—	0.1 M KOH	0.20–0.75	—	
59

Mesoporous nitrogen-doped carbon	93	2.14	0.5 M H2SO4	0.10	—	
81

N and S co-doped mesoporous carbon (N,S-MC-1)	76	2.50	0.5 M H2SO4	0.06	
J
limiting = 2.7	
74

Nitrogen-rich few-layered graphene (N-FLG-8)	>95	<2.10	0.1 M KOH	0.30–0.70	—	
102

Co–N–C	80	2.40	0.5 M H2SO4	0.10	
J
measured = 2.97	
104

Atomic Co–Nx–C sites and oxygen functional group (Co–POC–O)	85.6	2.29	0.1 M KOH	0.78	
J
measured = 1.0	
106

MnO and Mn–Nx coupled with N-doped carbons	74	2.5	0.1 M HClO4	0.20	—	
108

Single-atom Co–N4 (Co1–NG(O))	∼82	—	0.1 M KOH	0.65	
J
kineticforH2O2 = 2.8	
105


 	Fig. 4  Major developments of the electrocatalysts for the electrosynthesis of H2O2via 2e ORR.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of selective electrochemical production of H2O2 on Au25− nanoclusters. Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (b) the variation in the structure and adsorption of O2 on the Au–Pd alloys with the increase in the Pd content, yellow: Au, blue: Pd, red: O. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society; (c) high resolution HAADF-STEM images of the interface of the Au–Pt–Ni nanorods. Reproduced with permission.10 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Theoretically calculated volcano plot for the 2e (blue) and 4e (red) ORR, with the limiting potential plotted as a function of ΔGHO* (lower horizontal axis) and ΔGHOO* (upper horizontal axis); (b) the performance of different electrocatalysts for H2O2 production; the kinetic current has been derived by correcting the partial current density for H2O2 production for mass transport limitations. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group; (c) potential required to reach 1 mA cm−2 of kinetic current density for H2O2 on polycrystalline catalysts as a function of the calculated HOO* binding energy. The solid lines represent the theoretical Sabatier volcano. The dotted line represents the thermodynamic potential for oxygen reduction to H2O2; (d) schematic representation of oxygen reduction to H2O2 on a model Pd2Hg5(001) surface, green: Pd, blue: Hg, red: O, yellow: H. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Key factors for determining the ORR activity and selectivity of the N-doped carbon materials.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Binding energy of *OOH, *O, and *OH as well as the d-band center (open circle) of M atom in transition-metal single-atom catalysts. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2020, Elsevier B. V.; (b) calculated catalytic activity volcanoes for the production of H2O (blue) and H2O2 (red) via the ORR (bottom panel). Black data points represent the M–N4/graphenes (M = Co, Ni, Fe, Pt, Ag, and Ru) that are used to construct the activity volcanoes. Blue and red data points represent Co–N4/graphene with 4H*/2H* and O*/2O* adsorbed near the cobalt atom, respectively; (c) summary of H2O2 production activity. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group; (d) schematic of the synergistic strategy of atomic Co–Nx–C sites and oxygen functional groups for H2O2 electrosynthesis on noble metal-free electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Gas–liquid separated flow-cell configurations for the electrosynthesis of H2O2; (b) schematic diagram of the H2O2 generation device in the electrolyzer mode. Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) electrosynthesis of H2O2 using pure H2 and O2 streams separately introduced into the anode and cathode, respectively. SE represents the solid electrolyte. Electrochemically generated cations (H+) and anions (HO2−), driven by the electric field, cross in the porous SE layer and recombine to form H2O2. DI water flowing through the porous SE layer then dissolves the H2O2 with no impurities. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2019, Science Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representations of the three systems of fuel-cell reactors used for the formation of solutions of H2O2/NaOH. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH; (b) the schematic diagram of photo-enhanced Zn–air batteries with simultaneous highly efficient in situ H2O2 generation and wastewater treatment. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) the working principle of the tandem cell. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (d) pattern diagram of the photoelectrode system for producing only H2O2 using a two-electron oxidation system of H2O on a WO3/BiVO4 photoanode under solar light irradiation. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 
Light + 2H2O + O2 = Electricity + 2H2O2	(14a)
Anode: 2H2O ↔ H2O2 + 2(H+ + e−), EOox = −1.763 V	(14b)
Cathode: O2 + 2(H+ + e−) ↔ H2O2, EOred = 0.695 V	(14c)
Overall reaction: 2H2O(l) + O2 = 2H2O2, ΔEcell = −1.068 V	(14d)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
