Towards commercialization: the operational stability of perovskite solar cells  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00573H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00573H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8235-8286Towards commercialization: the operational stability of perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Nengxu 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiuxiu 
            Niu†
b, 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Chen
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Huanping 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *a
aBeijing Key Laboratory for Theory and Technology of Advanced Battery Materials, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, BIC-ESAT, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: happy_zhou@pku.edu.cn
bExperimental Centre for Advanced Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China
Received 
      26th July 2020
    First published on 10th September 2020AbstractRecently, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted much attention owing to their high power conversion efficiency (25.2%) and low fabrication cost. However, the short lifetime under operation is the major obstacle for their commercialization. With efforts from the entire PSC research community, significant advances have been witnessed to improve the device operational stability, and a timely summary on the progress is urgently needed. In this review, we first clarify the definition of operational stability and its significance in the context of practical use. By analyzing the mechanisms in established approaches for operational stability improvement, we summarize several effective strategies to extend device lifetime in a layer-by-layer sequence across the entire PSC. These mechanisms are discussed in the contexts of chemical reactions, photo-physical management, technological modification, etc., which may inspire future R&D for stable PSCs. Finally, emerging operational stability standards with respect to testing and reporting device operational stability are summarized and discussed, which may help reliable device stability data circulate in the research community. The main target of this review is gaining insight into the operational stability of PSCs, as well as providing useful guidance to further improve their operational lifetime by rational materials processing and device fabrication, which would finally promote the commercialization of perovskite solar cells.
Nengxu Li
Nengxu Li received his BS degree in 2017 from the School of Materials Science & Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, majoring in materials chemistry. Now he is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Huanping Zhou at the College of Engineering, Peking University. His current research interest is developing high-efficiency and stable perovskite solar cells.
Xiuxiu Niu
Xiuxiu Niu received her BS degree in 2017 from the School of Materials Science & Technology, China University of Geosciences Beijing, majoring in materials chemistry. Now she is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Qi Chen at the School of Materials Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology. Her current research interest is developing high-efficiency and stable large scale perovskite solar cells.
Qi Chen
Prof. Qi Chen obtained both his BS and MS degrees from Tsinghua University, and received his PhD degree from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). From 2013–2016, he worked as a postdoc fellow at California Nanosystem Institute (CNSI), UCLA. Now he is a professor in Beijing Inistitute of Technology. His research focuses on hybrid materials design, processing and applications in opto-electronics and for energy harvesting and storage.
Huanping Zhou
Huanping Zhou received her PhD in inorganic chemistry from Peking University in 2010. After that, she joined the University of California, Los Angeles, as a postdoctoral researcher from 2010 to 2015. In July 2015, she joined Peking University as an assistant professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering. She is a materials chemist with expertise in the fields of nanoscience, thin film optoelectronics, organic/inorganic interface engineering, and the development and fabrication of related devices, such as photovoltaic cells, LEDs, etc. Currently, her group focuses on thin film optoelectronics, e.g., perovskite materials and solar cells.
1. Introduction
As an outstanding candidate among the emerging photovoltaics (PV), metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted extensive attention from both academia and industry. The superb optoelectronic properties of perovskite absorbers such as strong light absorption,1 high charge carrier mobility,2 and low-cost fabrication3 have promoted PSCs to become one of the most promising PV technologies toward commercialization. In the lab, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has increased from 3.8% to a certified 25.2% over the past decade.1,4–14 It has already surpassed that of other commercialized thin film solar cells based on CdTe, (Cu,In)GaSe2, and amorphous Si, and is very close to the state-of-the-art PCE of 26.6% obtained by crystalline-silicon solar cells (SSCs, currently occupy over 90% of the PV market).15 The progress in terms of PCE is probably the most aggressive in the history of PV development, which has largely stemmed from the ideal optoelectronic properties of the perovskite absorber itself, as well as applicably leveraging accumulative knowledge achieved from decades of research and development in PV technology. Besides the efficiency, the manufacturing cost of PSCs is also attractive, which is estimated to be merely half of that of crystalline SSCs (0.3 $ W−1 for SSCs).16,17 Moreover, by stacking a perovskite absorber on top of currently commercially ready solar cells, it can further reduce their levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) by increasing their unit power output, which thus suggests a feasible commercialization route to push perovskite solar cells out of the lab.17 However, considering the golden triangle (efficiency, cost and lifetime) to evaluate the technical feasibility of photovoltaic techniques,15 the lifetime of perovskite solar cells is far behind the requirements for a regular PV product, which is the Achilles’ heel that hinders their commercialization severely. Early in 2009, it was demonstrated that the lifetime of the first reported PSCs was only several seconds.1 Up to now, the lifetime of PSCs has been reported to have achieved about 1 year under standard ageing conditions,18 which is far behind the 25 year lifetime guarantee for most commercially available PV modules. To date, research efforts have gradually shifted from efficiency to device stability to improve the lifetime of PSCs under actual operational conditions.
To the best of our knowledge, it is difficult to fully unveil the origin of the short lifetime of PSCs, though there are some intrinsic instability issues reported for perovskite semiconductors, based on which the photovoltaic devices are built. Perovskite materials used in light harvesting share the same chemical formula of ABX3, where A-site contains monovalent cations such as methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+), and Cs+; B-site contains divalent metal ions such as Pb2+ and Sn2+; and X-site contains halogens such as I−, Br−, and Cl−. And theoretically, these constituents can be readily incorporated in the crystal lattice with arbitrary stoichiometry. In contrast to crystalline silicon composed of atoms from the relatively chemically stable IVA group connected through strong covalent bonds (bond energy is about 222 kJ mol−1), metal halide perovskites contain IA and VIIA group elements and organic constituents, most of which are chemically active, soft and deformable. Most importantly, these components are classified based on relatively weak ionic bonds (e.g., Pb–I bonds with bonding energy about 142 kJ mol−1), and/or secondary bonds, and van der Waals interactions.19–21 In these ionic crystals, halide perovskites are prone to react when exposed to ageing stressors such as light, heat, moisture, oxygen, and electric fields, most of which cannot be avoided during device operation. It inevitably causes decomposition of materials, component loss, lattice collapse, phase transition, etc., which consequently leads to device failure.22 Notoriously, ionic constituents can easily migrate under external stimuli due to the low activation energy for ionic migration (0.58 eV for I−, 0.84 eV for MA+, and 2.31 eV for Pb2+),23–25 causing undesired ion redistribution or even phase separation especially in mixed perovskites.26–29 In addition, many point defects (often in pairs) in the perovskites are also developed along with ion migration, such as vacancies, interstitials, anti-site defects, etc.30,31 Although most of these defects are in shallow energy levels,32–35 they can assist and thus aggravate ion migration,25 which deteriorates the long-term stability of PSCs under various operational conditions.
In the entire device stacks, potential failure due to materials instability occurs not only in the perovskite absorbers, but also in charge transport layers (CTL), electrodes, and the relevant interfaces. Popular materials include electron transport materials, like TiO2, SnO2, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), and C60, and hole transport materials, like 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethyl phenyl)amine] (PTAA), poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), NiOx, CuSCN, etc. Given that long-term stability is essential for commercialized deployment of PSCs, there have already been some excellent reviews focusing on the degradation mechanisms of PSCs under various stressors (such as under humidity, heating, oxidation, illumination, etc.)22,36–39 and discussions on effective strategies to improve the corresponding stability of perovskite photovoltaics.22,40–42 Early research reports include only shelf lifetime of devices, which were stored in different environments to investigate the non-operational stability. With a further understanding of materials degradation mechanisms, extensive research efforts have attempted to improve the operational stability of PSCs, which determines the device lifetime in practical use. It is encouraging that the reported longest lifetime of PSCs is about 1 year under operation conditions right now.18 Considering those commercial requirements that are far beyond the current status of device lifetime, a comprehensive review of recent progress is urgently needed to understand the operational stability of PSCs and relevant strategies, which could serve as useful guidance for future research to improve the device lifetime. An earlier review has intensively discussed the chemical and intrinsic stability of halide perovskites though,22 it lacks a systematic summary focusing on the operational stability of perovskite devices in the context of the whole layered configuration.
In this review, the definition of operational stability is clarified first with an emphasis on its measure and significance. We then summarize and discuss the effective approaches used for operational stability improvement of PSCs, including the modification of perovskite absorbers, such as defect passivation, morphology modification, phase stabilization, component engineering, and surface passivation. Materials screening is discussed, e.g., for chemically stable charge transport layers and electrodes. And encapsulation techniques, as the most effective method to improve moisture stability, are also covered in brief. Most importantly, the in-depth mechanism is reviewed when discussing these approaches, which may inspire future development of more effective strategies during device fabrication. Finally, the standardized parameter of operational stability is provided to develop consensus on stability measurement protocols, which is constructive to obtain useful information from standard testing results by different groups to facilitate the progress of the entire community.
2. Stability requirements for the commercialization of PSCs
2.1 The definition and significance of operational stability in PSCs
Solar cells harvest solar energy to generate charge carriers, often in forms of free electrons and holes, which are then collected and transported into external circuits to make electric energy.43 Thus a commercially available PSC should be at least stable during device operation, namely, when it is under illumination with working-load/bias under certain environmental conditions where it is implemented. The operational stability governs the device behavior/lifetime when it is practically used, which emphasizes a spectrum of operational stressors in addition to environmental stressors that accelerate device ageing, including heat, humidity, mechanical load, etc. Different from those environmental stressors which can be effectively prevented by introducing external protection like encapsulation,44 operational stressors coherently associate with working devices. It is thus important to improve the intrinsic robustness of PSCs against these operational stressors to achieve sufficient operational stability that meets the commercial requirements. Operational stability is mainly evaluated by the lifetime of PSCs operated under continuous 1-sun illumination (or close to) with an electric load, especially the maximum power point (MPP) tracking, which reflects the intrinsic stability of PSC devices. It is an essential parameter to anticipate the possibility of commercialization of PSCs.
It is challenging to obtain satisfactory lifetime during PSC operation when compared to that of silicon solar cells. As mentioned above, halide perovskite materials used in PSCs are a class of organic–inorganic hybrid materials, which exhibit a soft ionic lattice,45 and contain unstable components with additionally weak interactions (hydrogen bonds, van der Waals interactions).19–21 As an ionic conductor, easy ion migration occurs,23–25 leading to substantial changes in perovskite films under illumination, including halide segregation (Hoke effect),26,27,29,46–48 cation segregation,49,50 and photochemical reactions such as photodecomposition (Fig. 1a).51,52 This results in a variety of defects in the course of tens of minutes to hours under illumination (Fig. 1b).13,53–55 Although there is no exact theory to explain the origin of photoinduced changes in perovskites, some reports argue that halide vacancy concentration and ionic conductivity increase under illumination,52,56,57 which are mainly responsible for phase segregation and decomposition. In addition, carrier transporting dynamics in perovskites has proven to be highly influenced by facet orientation,58 residual strain,59etc. The relevant structure defects are thus prone to affect carrier transport, which leaves excessive light-induced carriers within perovskite films to aggravate ion migration and accelerate perovskite degradation (Fig. 1c).60 Therefore the carrier behavior in perovskites under illumination is also an important factor to influence the operational stability of PSCs.
 Fig. 1  (a) Diagram of the photodecomposition mechanism: upon illumination, the chemical potential of iodine is effectively increased over the equilibrium value in the dark (where μI,dark = μI,out). Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. (b) Schematic image of the composition changes in the perovskite film under illumination: Pb0 and I2 are formed. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Proposed mechanism for charge induced instability of perovskites. Charges neutralize the vacancy generated by leaving the ions and then reduce ion migration dragging force which is the coulombic attraction induced by the vacancies and moving ions. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. 
Besides perovskites, CTLs such as organic semiconductors and photocatalytic inorganic semiconductors can also be affected by light. For organic semiconductors, free radicals can be formed under illumination, which can result in cross-linking to form new separated phases and increase the disorder of semiconductor films.61,62 Taking fullerene based materials as examples, photodimerization under photoexcitation creates disorder and then largely inhibits charge transport in the devices.63 Similarly, for TiO2, a typical photocatalytic inorganic CTL, photoinduced desorption of oxygen on TiO2 surfaces (leaving oxygen vacancies) can result in rapid trap-induced recombination across the TiO2 interface.64 All of these phenomena point out the serious photoinstability of the CTLs and the resulting PSCs.
Considering that the device works at a certain electric circuit, the electric field is another inevitable factor to influence the operational stability of PSCs. A previous study has shown that the additional electric field will accelerate the ion migration of perovskites due to the “poling effect”,56 and migrating ions have a direct influence on the built-in electric field of p–n junctions, thus affecting photo-carrier transportation. Based on these discussions, we can find that improving the operational stability of PSCs is still challenging and needs more attempts, which is also an essential way to promote the development of commercialization for perovskite PV technology.
2.2 IEC stability standards in PSCs
In addition to operational stressors, PSCs are also susceptible to external environmental stressors such as heat, humidity, mechanical load, etc., which hinder their commercialization. Actually, there are a series of established testing standards to evaluate the stability of solar cells, and the most relevant one for industry standards has been issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), namely, the IEC 61215 standard. IEC 61215 contains a series of detailed and consecutive stress tests which can provide accelerated ageing conditions to estimate the potential lifetime of a solar cell under real operation.65,66 It reflects the most basic requirements for practical use of solar cells, and those established PV technologies such as crystalline-Si and GaAs have successfully passed this test. For PSCs, some relevant companies such as Saule Technologies and Frontier Energy Solutions are trying to meet the IEC 61646 standard as early as possible, which is now incorporated into the IEC 61215.67 Note that the manufacturers and customers will not accept PSCs if they cannot pass IEC 61215, so passing the IEC 61215 is a necessary minimum requirement for the commercialization of PSCs. In 2018, Holzhey et al. reviewed the current IEC 61215 tests (Fig. 2) in detail,65 in which PSCs should be stable upon subjecting to numerous conditions such as 1-sun illumination (1000 ± 100 W m−2), thermal cycling (−40 to 85 °C), damp heat (85 °C and 85% relative humidity (RH)), humidity freeze (−40 to 85 °C, 85% RH), UV-light (15 kW h m−2 of UV irradiation between 280 and 400 nm), outdoor conditions (maximum power point (MPP) tracking at least 60 kW h m−2 of irradiation), hot-spot (50 ± 10 °C under 1000 W m−2 irradiance with the maximum power dissipation), hail impact (ice balls with a weight of 7.53 g and a speed of 82.8 km h−1) and mechanical load (at least 2400 Pa), etc. Besides these tests, high bias voltage which is not mentioned in IEC 61215 should not be ignored, because an external electric field can induce ion migration and further device degradation,68–71 especially for PSCs which are even susceptible to a small electric field.50 IEC TS 62804-1 standard, which is applied to monitor the stability of silicon solar cells under high bias voltages at high temperature and humidity,72–74 may be an appropriate reference to extend the requirements for PSC commercialization.
 Fig. 2  Full flowchart of the official module testing for the IEC 61215 standard and important stability tests for PSCs are marked in green. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. 
With continuous efforts, the improvement on the stability of PSCs has allowed them to pass some individual tests within the IEC 61215 standard, such as damp heat, thermal cycling, UV-light, outdoor conditions, and hail impact testing. For example, Bush et al. used FACs perovskites as the top absorber in perovskite/silicon tandem devices.75 Combined with atomic layer deposition (ALD) or chemical vapor deposition (CVD) fabricated SnO2/ZTO (zinc tin oxide) films, as well as effective encapsulation with the elastomeric polymer ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA) and a glass cover sheet which were employed to prevent oxidation and moisture ingress. The resulting tandem devices had no efficiency drop after a damp heat test (85 °C and 85% RH) for 1000 h (Fig. 3a). Note that FACs perovskites may be a suitable candidate to pass the damp heat test, which is also proved by another report.76
 Fig. 3  (a) Efficiency (black), JMPP (red), and VMPP (blue) of a single-junction perovskite device packaged with EVA, glass, and a butyl rubber edge seal during damp heat testing. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Evolution of normalized PCE under damp heat (DH) and thermal cycling (TC) test for method 3 encapsulated PSCs. The error bars denote ± one standard deviation. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Results of the aging test on the three series of PSCs: uncoated, front-coated (i.e., luminescent fluorinated coating on the front side), and front/back-coated (i.e., front side coated with the luminescent fluorophore and back contact coated with the moisture-resistant fluoropolymeric layer). During the first 3 months, PSCs were kept under an Ar atmosphere and in the next 3 months under air at 50% RH, in both cases under continuous UV irradiation. PCE was measured once a week. (d) Results of the aging test on front/back coated devices left for three months on the terrace of the Politecnico di Torino building in Turin (Italy), thus experiencing real outdoor operating conditions. PCE was measured once a week. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Science, copyright 2016. (e) Perovskite solar modules after the hail impact (above) and the water dripping test (below). Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Nature, copyright 2019. 
Besides, one other heat related test is a thermal cycle test (200 thermal cycles from −40 to 85 °C), which is passed by the employment of a low temperature, glass–glass encapsulation technique with high performance polyisobutylene (PIB) as the moisture barrier.77 Compared to EVA or UV-cured epoxy, PIB was found to be able to insert into PSC materials without performance loss, suppressing the escape of volatile decomposition products from perovskite solar cells to a maximum extent under thermal treatment. The resulting devices had almost no PCE decay after 200 thermal cycles (−40 to 85 °C, Fig. 3b). Further, the authors argued that the escape of volatile decomposition products was the biggest obstacle for thermal stability of PSCs, which should be eliminated by effective encapsulation. In brief, the heat related IEC tests should be passed by using a thermally stable perovskite system and effective encapsulation for PSCs.
Regarding the UV irradiation and outdoor condition tests, Bella et al. reported the use of multifunctional photopolymers as a promising solution to address PSC instability.78 First, a luminescent downshifting (LDS) fluoropolymeric layer was cast on the front side (light incidence) of the PSC device upon UV-light exposure. This coating layer prevented potential destruction of PSCs by UV radiation in the solar spectrum by converting it into visible light. Then a strongly moisture resistant fluoropolymeric layer was grown on the rear side of PSCs, to serve as a hydrophobic barrier toward environmental moisture within the solar cells. The resulting PSCs maintained 98% of their initial PCE after the ageing tests including UV irradiation (5 mA cm−2) in Ar and then UV irradiation (5 mA cm−2) in air (50% RH) for 6 months (Fig. 3c). They also kept 95% of their initial efficiency after outdoor operation (exposed on the terrace of the Politecnico di Torino building in Turin, Italy) for 3 months (Fig. 3d). The application of a luminescent downshifting material to improve the irradiation stability of PSCs is also confirmed by other reports.79–82
Recently, Jiang et al. simulated a hail scenario in which perovskite solar modules with different encapsulation methods were collided by metal balls.83 They eventually found that encapsulating PSCs by using thermocrosslinking epoxy resin (ER) films at the top sides is the most effective approach to protect perovskite solar modules from the simulated hail impact (Fig. 3e), because the ER films exhibited a self-healing property when the temperature is over 42 °C (close to real operating temperature) and increased mechanical strength. The resulting PSC modules had only some star-shaped cracks at the attacked position, and showed the least decomposition (from perovskite to PbI2) after the following water dripping tests on the damaged perovskite solar modules (Fig. 3e). Therefore, the protected layer which possesses both self-healing properties and mechanical strength could be suitable for improving the mechanical stability (such as passing hail impact and mechanical load tests) of PSCs.
On the basis of the above discussion, it seems that encapsulation is crucial in improving the stability of PSCs that meets some of the IEC requirements. It serves as barriers to not only prevent PSCs from moisture invasion, but also block the leakage of volatile components from decomposition. Moreover, encapsulation materials can be functionalized by introducing luminescent downshifting or self-healing additives, which can protect PSCs from damaging under more outside stressors. A brief summary of the PSCs that passed single IEC tests aided by encapsulation is shown in Table 1. The development of more advanced multifunctional encapsulation materials, as well as innovative packaging technology, is further required to fabricate more stable PSCs under various environmental stressors.
Table 1 The summary of some single tests of the IEC 61215 standard for PSCs




Test
Perovskite component
Encapsulation
Test condition
Lifetime
Ref.





a This test is not the IEC 61215 standard, but it is similar to the approval standard for rigid photovoltaic modules (FM 44787).83





Damp heat
FA1−xCsxPbI3−yBry
Yes
85 °C and 85% RH
1000 h with no decay

75



Thermal cycle
FAPbI3
Yes
−40 to 85 °C dwell 15 min at −40 and 85 °C
200 thermal cycles with no decay

77



UV irradiation
FA1−xMAxPbI3−yBry
Yes
UV irradiation (5 mA cm−2) in Ar then UV irradiation (5 mA cm−2) in air (50% RH)
6 months with 98% PCE retention

78



Outdoor condition
FA1−xMAxPbI3−yBry
Yes
On the terrace of the Politecnico di Torino building in Turin (Italy)
3 months with 95% PCE retention

78



Hail impact
FA0.93Cs0.07PbI3
Yes
Dropping a metal ball on top of the perovskite solar modulesa
Perovskite solar modules stayed as one piece with star-shaped cracks at the attacked position

83





Generally, no matter what kind of PV material, the key requirement of commercialization is the stable operation under both operation and environment stressors. Already there have been many studies to improve the stability of PSCs under IEC testing standards mostly under storage conditions. However, how to enhance the operation lifetime of PSC devices by solving scientific problems with technological approaches is still crucial at this period, which has gradually attracted the attention. The following text reviews the effective strategies to improve the operational stability of PSCs, which serves as useful guidance to future research to fabricate PSCs to meet commercial demands.
3. The strategies on perovskite absorbers
Generally, the instability in perovskite absorbers during PSC operation mainly stems from the materials’ intrinsic compositions (e.g. unstable atomic bonding), and is self-accelerated by defects in lattice structures, which induces further degradation in crystal phases.
(1) Chemical instability. The A-, B- and X-site constituents in halide perovskites are low-valence ions with a large radius (such as MA+, Pb2+, I−, etc.), which exhibit low ionic potential to achieve relatively low lattice energy in the crystal consequently.84 This allows low formation energy in the corresponding crystals (which can be easily formed at low temperature), though this soft crystal lattices are prone to deform, and are vulnerable to various ageing stressors, such as moisture, oxygen, heat, and even illumination. For example, ultraviolet radiation can directly destroy Pb–I bonding upon its absorption.22,54,85 In addition, most perovskite films contain organic ammonium ions at the A-site (such as MA+, FA+, etc.), which have high chemical reactivity enhanced by polar surroundings of C–N or N–H bonding. Therefore, halide perovskites are easily decomposed at elevated temperatures39,86 and are prone to react with surrounding molecules such as H2O and O2. Particularly when exposed to light, the formation of oxygen radicals will accelerate the deprotonation reaction of ammonium ions.87 In the context of chemical composition, we emphasize that the low ionic potential and consequent high chemical reactivity, originated from the interaction between relevant constituents, are mainly responsible for the chemical instability of perovskites.
(2) Defects existence. Due to the low formation energy, there are various types of defects existing in polycrystalline perovskite films. They usually serve as non-radiative recombination centers for free carriers, leading to unfavorable performance decay of corresponding devices.88 In addition, the polycrystalline perovskite films having grain boundaries and pinholes accommodate extra defects to accelerate ion migration.89 Migrated ions will further induce more defects in perovskites and cause component losses in a self-accelerated manner, where photo-excited carriers are highly influenced.23,25 Defect involvement and ion migration have deleterious effects on the operational stability of PSCs, mainly affecting the carrier behavior within perovskites under illumination.
(3) Structure and phase instability. Photo-active perovskites generally adopt the cubic phase of the crystal structure, where [BX6] octahedra occupy the corners in the cube to form the framework accommodating the A site component at the center of cube. Due to the Jahn–Teller effect,90 the octahedra are often distorted in the real lattice that can be further modulated by residual strain induced by mechanical, thermal, or light stressors.59,91 Moreover, A-site ions, if size incompatible, bring in unstable cubic structures with an unfavorable tolerance factor, which causes phase transition from the α to δ phase (photo-inactive).92,93 In addition, the lattice mismatch within cation or anion hybrid perovskites will also induce phase separation under illumination.29,48 Beyond atomic interaction and lattice occupancy, phase variations play an additional role in affecting the operational lifetime of PSCs.
In order to solve these intrinsic instability issues of perovskites, some effective methods have been reported by introducing functionalized additives, adjusting perovskite components, and forming a passivation layer on the perovskite surface. The following text will discuss them in detail.
3.1 Additive modification
It is well known that perovskite films are commonly fabricated by solution processing, in which the materials’ component and structure change from the precursor to the resulting polycrystalline perovskite will bring a variety of defects. Early studies showed that numerous possible point defects would be formed in the perovskite structure, and these defects are all charged including electron acceptors such as Ii, MAPb, VMA, VPb, IMA, and IPb and electron donors such as MAi, PbMA, VI, Pbi, MAI, and PbI.94,95 Note that vacancy defects with shallow levels (i.e. VI, VMA, VPb) are the dominant defect species in perovskites due to the low formation energy.23,96 In addition, grain boundaries (GBs) and surfaces in perovskites play a critical role in accumulating charged defects, which can readily capture photogenerated free carriers and serve as nonradiative recombination sites.89,97 Although these defects are deleterious to PV performance and the long-term stability of PSCs (especially under real operation), the ionic nature of perovskites enables additional ions such as Lewis acids, Lewis bases (Fig. 4), etc.98,99 to effectively passivate the charged defects without altering the basic bonding nature of the perovskite lattice. Besides, some additives are also beneficial for the formation of high quality perovskite films (such as large grains with less GBs) by affecting the perovskite crystallization and film formation, as well as stabilizing the photoactive phase of some compositions. The following text will list some examples to manifest the positive effect of additives on improving the operational stability of PSCs.
 Fig. 4  Imperfections in perovskite films and their passivation by ionic bonding, coordinate bonding, and conversion to wide bandgap materials, and suppression of ion migration at extended defects. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. 

3.1.1 Defect passivation. 
In earlier works, using additives to passivate the perovskite defects during fabrication (such as incident I2) is an effective approach to improve the optoelectronic performance of PSCs. For example, our group demonstrated that the addition of MA/EtOH into the perovskite precursor could suppress the I2 impurities by the disproportionation of I2 and MA. Meanwhile, MA could act as a Lewis base to coordinate with Pb2+ to restrict I− rich iodoplumbate complexes, the resulting PSCs achieved a champion PCE of 20.02%.100 Following this work, we further reported that the alkalinity of additives would largely influence the disproportionation reaction of I2 and crystallization kinetics. Although “strong” alkalis will promote the disproportionation reaction more effectively, the “weak” alkalis will help to preserve the photoactive phase during crystal growth. Thus, a weak alkaline formamidine acetate (FAAc) which also consists of the FA+ cation, could serve as a “residual” free agent to suppress the deep-level defects in perovskites. Based on this foundation, the PCE of FAAc modified PSCs is further improved up to 21.01%.101 All of these findings demonstrate that introducing appropriate chemical additives into perovskites is an effective approach to reduce corresponding defects, which is also widely applied to improve the operational stability of PSCs.
With regard to operational stability, some studies have pointed out that I− in perovskites can be easily oxidized to I0, which not only serve as carrier recombination centers, but also initiate chemical chain reactions to accelerate the degradation of perovskite layers.85 In addition, Pb2+ is prone to be reduced into metallic Pb0 upon heating or illumination, which has been observed in Pb-containing halide perovskite films.54,102 Pb0 is a primary deep defect state that severely degrades the optoelectronic performance of perovskite devices.103,104 Most importantly, all of these defects (I0 and Pb0) also have adverse effects on the long-term operational stability of PSCs. In 2019, our group proposed the “redox shuttle” to oxidize Pb0 and reduce I0 independently, by using the ion pair Eu3+–Eu2+ following the chemical reactions: 2Eu3+ + Pb0 → 2Eu2+ + Pb2+; Eu2+ + I0 → Eu3+ + I− (Fig. 5a).13 Interestingly, the Eu3+–Eu2+ pair was not consumed during device operation, probably because of its nonvolatility and the suitable redox potential in this cyclic transition. Finally, the Pb0 was oxidized into Pb2+ by Eu3+, and the I0 was reduced to I− by Eu2+, leading to 91% maintenance of the original PCE in PSCs (unencapsulated) after 500 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 5b); meanwhile, the Eu3+–Eu2+ pair based PSCs also exhibited higher thermal stability. Using redox reaction pairs to repair I0 and Pb0 defects was proven to be effective, and the passivation strategy by chemical reactions should be further developed to obtain more stable PSCs under real operation.
 Fig. 5  (a) Diagram of the proposed mechanism of cyclic elimination of Pb0 and I0 defects and regeneration of Eu3+–Eu2+ metal ion pair. (b) The MPP tracking of a 0.15% Eu3+-incorporated device, measured at 0.97 V and 1-sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. (c) A schematic illustration of enhancing the hydrogen bond between the halogen and MA/FA ions, and strengthening the ionic bond between the halogen and metal ions through increasing the electronegativity of halogen. (d) Devices under MPP tracking and continuous light irradiation with a white LED lamp, 100 mW cm−2, in a nitrogen atmosphere. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from Nature, copyright 2019. 
In addition, the charged defects in perovskites (such as VI, PbI, VMA, etc.) should be passivated (or neutralized) by additives which can donate or accept electrons. Actually, there always exist more than one kind of charged defect in perovskites, for example, the positively and negatively charged defects are coexistent after the fabrication of perovskite films, which need multifunctional additives to conduct dual-passivation of defects. In 2019, our group reported that by adding a small amount of fluoride into perovskites, the halide anion and organic cation vacancies were effectively passivated or eliminated.14 By taking advantage of the extremely high electronegativity of fluoride (Fig. 5c), the strong ionic bond between F and Pb was formed at the perovskite surface, thus passivating iodine vacancy defects. The stronger F–Pb bond (compared to I–Pb bond) also immobilized halogen ions and lead ions, inhibiting the unwanted ion migration in perovskites. In addition, there are strong hydrogen bonds (N–H⋯F) formed between F and organic cations, thus the formation energy of organic cation vacancies was enhanced according to DFT calculations. Combining the overall chemical bonding enhancement by fluoride incorporation, the resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) kept 90% of the initial PCE after 1000 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere, while fluoride-free devices only kept 40% of the original PCE after 600 h under the same conditions (Fig. 5d). This result highlights the significance of chemical bond modulation on dual-defect passivation and then improving the operational stability of PSCs.
Besides dual-passivation, the charged defects can be effectively passivated by using the Lewis acid or base, respectively. A Lewis acid as the electron acceptor has the capability to passivate electron-rich defects. Mainly, there are two types of Lewis acid: metal ions and fullerene derivatives. Metal ions with a positive charge can effectively passivate negatively charged defects by formation of ionic bonds. Abdi-Jalebi et al. reported that after introducing some K+ into a perovskite, potassium selectively depleted bromide from the perovskite crystal structure; these halides (KBr) were immobilized at the GBs and surface of perovskite films (Fig. 6a), thereby suppressing any additional non-radiative decay arising from interstitial halides and inhibiting halide migration.105 The resulting unencapsulated PSCs retained over 80% of their original PCE after 300 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (ultraviolet-filtered simulated sunlight) in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 6b). Unfortunately, the operational stability of K-free PSCs was not monitored, which need further investigation. Another type of Lewis acid fullerene derivative such as PCBM and C60 have high electron affinity, which can serve as ETLs, interfacial modification materials, and defect passivators within the perovskite layers.106–108 Xu et al. used density functional theory (DFT) to prove that when introducing PCBM near the PbI3− antisite defects (Fig. 6c), the wave function of the ground state (Fig. 6d) was hybridized between PCBM and the perovskite surface; meanwhile, the bonding of PCBM with PbI3− was thermodynamically favored, thus suppressing the formation of deep traps (Fig. 6e).109 The resulting PSCs exhibited low hysteresis and enhanced photovoltage, while the operational stability was not monitored. Later, Zhang et al. used α-bis-PCBM to assist perovskite growth and film formation,110 by taking advantage of effective negative defect passivation, as well as inhibiting the voids or pinholes generated in the active layer. The corresponding PSCs kept 96% of the initial PCE after 600 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature, while the control sample lost all PCE after 250 h under the same conditions. All of these reports highlight the effect of passivation of Lewis acids on electron-rich defects, which can be further developed for more operationally stable PSCs.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of a perovskite film showing halide-vacancy management in cases of excess halide, in which the surplus halide is immobilized through complexing with potassium into benign compounds at the grain boundaries and surfaces. (b) MPP stability of a device with 10% KI incorporation aged at 0.8 V under continuous ultraviolet-filtered simulated sunlight in a nitrogen atmosphere for over 350 hours. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. (c) A schematic of in situ passivation of halide-induced deep trap: PCBM adsorbs on a Pb–I antistite defective grain boundary during perovskite self-assembly. (d) The wave function overlap shows the hybridization between PCBM and defective surface, enabling electron/hole transfer for absorbance and passivation. (e) DFT calculation of density of states (DOS) shows that the deep trap state (black) induced by the Pb–I antistite defect is reduced and becomes much shallower (red) upon the adsorption of PCBM on defective halide. Ec, minimum of the conduction band; Ev, maximum of the valence band. Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Nature, copyright 2015. 
Another type of additive, Lewis bases, usually serve as electron donors, which can coordinate with positive ions such as Pb2+. Thus, the formation of acid–base complexes can passivate the electron-poor defects. There are mainly three types of Lewis base: N-based donor, O-based donor, and S-based donor. N-Based donors have a nitrogen-bearing lone pair of electrons, such as pyridine,111 4-tert-butylpyridine,112D-4-tert-butylphenylalanine,113 1H,1H-perfluorooctylamine,114etc. In 2019, Wu et al. reported that 1,3-diaminopropane (DAP) with –NH2 tails could passivate crystallographic defects at the perovskite surface by forming coordination bonds with undercoordinated Pb2+ (Fig. 7a); in addition, it could occupy A-site vacancies at the surface exposing the linking hydrophobic carbon chain and forming a moisture-repelling barrier on perovskite grains.115 The resulting PSCs (encapsulated) retained 90% of the initial PCE after 500 h under 1-sun illumination, while the PCE of the DAP-free device decreased to only 35% of its original PCE after 200 hours under the same conditions. The improved illumination stability (Fig. 7c) and higher humidity resistance (Fig. 7b) of DAP based PSCs are beneficial for their real operation. Besides, O-based donors describe a structure which has an oxygen-bearing lone pair of electrons, such as N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone,116 trimesic acid,117 ethyl cellulose,118 caffeine,119etc. And S-based donors have a sulfur-bearing lone pair of electrons such as thiophene,120 thiourea,121 2-pyridylthiourea,122etc. All of these molecules are proved to be effective in passivating positively charged defects by binding with undercoordinated Pb2+ ions, and the corresponding PSCs exhibit improved PCE with high humidity or thermal stability. Unfortunately, the influence of these O or S based Lewis bases on the operational stability of PSCs is rarely investigated, which is further required to guide the selection of more effective additives.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of defect passivation and water repellence induced by DAP incorporation. (b) Moisture stability of nonencapsulated PSCs based on MAPbI3-DAP and MAPbI3 films under ambient air (50 ± 5 RH% at room temperature). (c) Operational stability of encapsulated PSCs based on MAPbI3-DAP and MAPbI3 films under continuous 1-sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. 
In summary, the strategies used for defect reduction by additives are mainly focused on introducing effective chemical interactions. The examples include (i) designing redox reactions to eliminate I0/Pb0 defects by redox pairs; (ii) immobilizing ions to reduce vacancy defects by chemical bond enhancement; (iii) forming acid–base complexes to passivate charged defects by effective coordination, etc. These chemical methods are all beneficial for long-term stability of PSCs under operational conditions, and more strategies at the molecular or even atomic level are required to further improve the operational stability of PSC devices.


3.1.2 Morphology modification. 
Using additives to modify the perovskite film morphology (such as enlarging grain size, adjusting crystal orientation, reducing film pinholes, etc.) is another effective approach to improve the optoelectronic performance and operational stability of PSCs. For grain size enlargement, our group has shown that the acetonitrile-added precursor system could facilitate perovskite grain growth due to the quick removal of solvents.123 In addition, the most well-known “film quality modificator” is MACl, which is widely used to enlarge grain size in various perovskite systems.124–128 Tavakoli et al. used MACl as a “crystallization aid” in their precursor solution to enlarge the grain size of the triple A-cation perovskites up to 2 μm (Fig. 8a).127 Considering that the chlorine atoms would leave the perovskite lattice upon annealing, causing ionic vacancies on the perovskite surface, they used iodine solution (I2 dissolved in IPA) as post-passivator to reduce the surface defects. The resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) retained 96% of their original PCE after 500 h MPP tracking at 20 °C under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 8b), and attained high operational stability at an elevated temperature of 65 °C. Besides, an ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4) was incorporated into perovskites by Bai et al.,129 whereas the existence of BMIM+ greatly suppressed the emergence of crystalline PbI2 and enlarged the grain size of perovskites. Fortunately, the large BMIM+ ions would not alter the pristine morphology of perovskite films, because BMIM+ could be excluded from the perovskite crystals and hence accumulated at the surface and GBs of the perovskite film. Based on these positive effects on perovskite films upon BMIMBF4 incorporation, the resulting PSCs (encapsulated) retained 85% of the original PCE after 1885 h under 1-sun illumination under open-circuit conditions with a temperature of about 70–75 °C and RH about 40–60% (Fig. 8c). This result indicates that using ionic liquids is an effective approach to improve the film quality of perovskites, which has been widely applied in other reports.130–132
 Fig. 8  (a) Top-view SEM images of triple A-cation perovskite films without (left) and with (right) MACl additive in the starting solution. (b) Stability test of the PSC after passivation based on spiro-OMeTAD HTL at room temperature over 500 h under continuous full sun illumination and maximum power-point tracking. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (c) Long-term stability performance of the most stable device with BMIMBF4 in the perovskite film, under full-spectrum sunlight and heat stress at 70–75 °C. The concentration of the BMIMBF4 in the perovskite film is 0.3 mol% with respect to the lead atoms. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Nature, copyright 2019. 
For crystal orientation adjustment, our group reported that by cation cascade doping at the A-site, the facet orientation within the perovskites could be well manipulated.58 The following work found that by adjusting the FA/MA ratio, the thermodynamically favored crystal orientation could be finely controlled.133 In addition, introducing some large cations such as n-butylammonium (BA) into perovskites to form some two-dimensional (2D) perovskites is also an effective approach. In 2017, Wang et al. reported that by adding BA cations into mixed-cation lead mixed-halide 3D perovskites,134 the “plate-like” 2D-phase crystallites stood up between the 3D perovskite grains, therefore, the orientation of the 3D perovskite grains exhibited a high preference for the [100] direction to align out-of-plane (Fig. 9a). A deep study found that the BA cations were expelled from the crystallizing 3D perovskite domains as crystallization proceeded, which appeared to act as a flux, accelerating crystal growth and evolving to a much higher degree of crystallinity of 3D perovskites. Better crystal orientation has proven to be beneficial for high performance of PSCs,58 and in this work, the BA-modified PSCs (encapsulated) kept 80% of their original PCE (except the burn-in region) after 1680 h under full-spectrum illumination (76 mW cm−2) and open-circuit conditions with RH about 45%, while BA-free PSCs kept 80% of their initial PCE only for 970 h under the same conditions (Fig. 9b). All of these results indicate that adjusting the crystal orientation is another effective approach to improve the operational stability of PSCs.
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration depicting the orientation of the 3D perovskite phase in the 9% BA-containing (x = 0.09) film, compared with a low-textured reference (x = 0) film. (b) Comparison of stability of high-performance non-encapsulated (left) and encapsulated (right) solar cell devices using FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (navy blue lines; labelled pristine) and BA0.09(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.91Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (red lines; labelled BA/FA/Cs) perovskite active layers. The devices are aged under xenon-lamp simulated full-spectrum AM 1.5, 76 mW cm−2 equivalent irradiance in air (humidity ∼45 RH%) without any ultraviolet filter, held at open-circuit during ageing, and tested at different time intervals under a separate AM 1.5 100 mW cm−2 solar simulator. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Nature, copyright 2017. 
For film pinhole reduction, Liu et al. firstly used methimazole (MMI) to construct a surface “patch” by in situ converting residual PbI2 at GBs. The resultant MMI–PbI2 complex can effectively reduce the pinholes of perovskite films, thus suppressing ion migration and inhibiting diffusion of the metal electrodes.135 The resulting PSCs maintained 80% of their initial efficiency under continuous 1-sun illumination for 672 h. Besides, as it is difficult to synthesize uniform and pinhole-free Pb–Sn based perovskite films owing to the rapid crystallization,136 the additives used to improve the film quality based on Pb–Sn alloys are widely investigated. Tong et al. added a small amount of guanidinium thiocyanate (GuaSCN) into (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4,137 where the densities of small grains and pinholes (which existed in GuaSCN-free film) were substantially reduced, meanwhile, GBs became more compact (Fig. 10a). The effect of SCN− ions, by increasing the grain size and improving the film morphology, is also well proved in other perovskite systems138–140. In addition, a 2D structure formed at GBs with the addition of GuaSCN, which could improve the perovskite electronic properties by (i) passivating GBs and surfaces through its wider band gap; (ii) blocking diffusion of Sn out of grains and further suppressing the formation of excessive Sn vacancies; and (iii) reducing oxygen diffusion into perovskite grains to suppress further oxidation of Sn2+. The resulting low band gap (∼1.25 eV) PSCs (encapsulated) kept 90% of their original PCE after 115 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (Fig. 10b), while GuaSCN-free PSCs retained 80% of their initial PCE only after 8.5 h under the same ageing conditions (Fig. 10c). This result indicates that the film quality improvement for Pb–Sn perovskites is crucial to obtain more stable PSCs under operation.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM images of perovskite films prepared without (left) and with (right) 7% GuaSCN additive. (b) MPP tracking of the semitransparent wide band gap top PSC, the filtered bottom low band gap PSC, and the 4-T tandem device under simulated AM 1.5G one-sun illumination. (c) MPP tracking comparison of the filtered control and GuaSCN-modified low-band gap PSCs. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. 


3.1.3 Phase stabilization. 
Recently, FAPbI3 and CsPbI3−xBrx based PSCs are gradually popular due to their excellent performance both in PCE and stability (which will be discussed later). However, because of their too large (such as FA) or too small (such as Cs) cations, their phase instability (from α-phase to δ-phase) is always the biggest hindrance for further development.93,141 Fortunately, some additives are proven to be effective in stabilizing the black phase of FAPbI3 and CsPbI3−xBrx, which then improve the operational stability of corresponding PSCs. In 2019, Xiang et al. reported that by introducing some europium (Eu) into all-inorganic CsPbI2Br,142 the grain size of perovskite was reduced (Fig. 11a), thus the surface-to-volume ratio increased and then led to the increase of surface energy. Therefore, more energy was required to conquer the barrier of the transformation from the α-phase to the δ-phase.143 A deep study revealed that Eu was incorporated into the parent CsPbI2Br perovskite lattice at the atomic level, which could increase the tolerance factor and induce less distortion of the perovskite lattice.144 Based on these reasons, Eu doping led to an exceptionally high thermodynamic phase stability of the CsPbI2Br perovskite, the corresponding PSCs (unencapsulated) retained 93% of its initial efficiency after 370 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (white light LED) in a N2 gas flow, while the Eu-free PSCs retained only about 20% of its initial value after 370 h under the same conditions (Fig. 11b). Hence, tuning the tolerance factor and increasing the surface energy are the effective approaches to stabilize the black phase of all-inorganic perovskites, and the stable phase is the basis of high operational stability in PSCs.
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM images of CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br perovskite thin films. (b) Normalized PCE of unencapsulated CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br devices monitored under continuous white light exposure as a function of time. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Elsevier Inc., copyright 2019. 
Similarly, there are also some additives to improve the phase stability of FAPbI3 perovskite films. Alanazi et al. reported that 5-ammonium valeric acid iodide (AVAI) could act as a structure-directing cross-linking agent between adjacent grains in the perovskite structure.145 A deep study revealed that the structure-directing role of AVAI was through forming hydrogen bonds with the perovskite lattice by its NH3+ group, while its COOH end was involved in dynamic hydrogen bonding with other AVA moieties (Fig. 12a). As a result, AVAI stabilized the FAPbI3 phase by preventing the detrimental α-to-δ phase transition, as well as obtaining highly crystalline films with large, micrometer-sized grains and enhanced charge-carrier lifetime. The corresponding PSCs (unencapsulated) retained 90% of its initial PCE after 300 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature, while FAPbI3 based PSCs only kept 10% of the original PCE after 100 h (Fig. 12b). Using a cross-linking agent between perovskite grains is an effective approach to enhance the interaction of perovskite lattices, which provides a new method to stabilize the black phase of FAPbI3. In addition, Min et al. used methylenediammonium dichloride (MDACl2) to stabilize the black phase of FAPbI3,12 and demonstrated that MDA could stabilize α-FAPbI3 through the partial replacement of FA sites. Because MDA has more H groups with an ionic radius similar to that of FA, more hydrogen bonds (I⋯H–N) between Pb–I octahedron and MDA were formed, thus enhancing cohesion of perovskite lattices. In addition, a small amount of Cl− substitution could reduce the lattice strain of FAPbI3 and suppress defect formation,146 thus the black phase of FAPbI3 was stabilized by enhancing the interaction of component ions. The resulting PSCs (encapsulated) maintained 90% of their initial PCE after 600 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (without a UV filter) under ambient conditions (Fig. 12e), as well as achieved higher humidity (Fig. 12c) and thermal (Fig. 12d) stability. From these results we can conclude that besides the tolerance factor adjustment by incorporating small cations, the chemical bond enhancement between A-site cations and X-site anions is also an effective approach to stabilize the black phase of FAPbI3. FAPbI3 based PSCs have great potential to exhibit higher PCE owing to the more ideal band gap than MAPbI3 and CsPbI3; meanwhile, FAPbI3 also exhibits considerable thermal stability, thus using chemical approaches to stabilize their black phase is helpful to obtain both highly efficient and operationally stable PSCs under real environment conditions, which further promote the commercialized development of PSCs.
 Fig. 12  (a) Structural model of the AVAI-modified α-FAPbI3 proposed based on the solid-state NMR data. (b) Normalized PCE of unencapsulated AVAI-modified α-FAPbI3 and undoped α-FAPbI3 devices monitored under MPP tracking and 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. Comparison of (c) humidity (85% RH, 25 °C) and (d) thermal (150 °C at ∼25% RH) stability performances of unencapsulated control ((FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15) and target (MDACl2 doped FAPbI3) devices. (e) Maximum power point tracking measured with the encapsulated target (MDACl2 doped FAPbI3) device under full solar illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 under ambient conditions) without a UV filter. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. 
Based on the above discussion, we can find that the poor morphology of perovskites will bring in a great deal of defects, serving as non-radiative recombination sites of free carriers, and further leading to substantial optoelectronic performance decay of PSCs. Moreover, the existence of ion migration within perovskites will lead to lattice deformation and transit into a photo-inactive phase. All of these factors are unfavorable for long-term operation of PSCs. Using functionalized additives can partially solve these problems, through (i) forming extra chemical bonding or designing appropriate chemical reactions within perovskites to passivate defects; (ii) adjusting the kinetics of perovskite nucleation and growth to modify the corresponding morphology; (iii) enhancing the cohesion of perovskite lattices and improving the energy barrier of phase transition to stabilize the photo-active phase of perovskites (summarized in Table 2). These chemical approaches have proven to be effective and further improvements based on physical or atomic view are required to obtain more stable PSCs under real operation.
Table 2 The summary of operational lifetimes of PSCs based on additives




Device structure
Additives
Encapsulation
Test conditions
Lifetime
Ref.




FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/Cs0.06FA0.79MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
K+
No
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (ultraviolet-filtered simulated sunlight) in a nitrogen atmosphere
300 h with 80% PCE retention

105



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/(FAI)0.81(PbI2)0.85(MABr)0.15(PbBr2)0.15/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
α-Bis-PCBM
No
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere
600 h with 96% PCE retention

110



ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu
1,3-Diaminopropane
Yes
Realistic operating conditions under 1-sun illumination
500 h with 90% PCE retention

115



ITO/SnO2/Cs0.05FA0.54MA0.41Pb(I0.98Br0.02)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Fluoride
No
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere
1000 h with 90% PCE retention

14



ITO/SnO2/(FA,MA,Cs)Pb(I,Br)3(Cl)/spiro-OMeTAD (modified)/Au
Eu3+–Eu2+ pair
No
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere
500 h with 91% PCE retention

13



FTO/TiO2/SnO2/(FA,MA,Cs)Pb(I,Br)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
MACl
No
MPP tracking at 20 °C under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere
500 h with 96% PCE retention

127



FTO/NiO/(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3/PCBM/BCP/Cr/Cr2O3/Au
BMIMBF4
Yes
1-sun illumination under open-circuit conditions at temperatures about 70–75 °C, RH about 40–60%
1885 h with 85% PCE retention

129



FTO/SnO2/C60/BA0.09(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.91Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
BA+
Yes
Full-spectrum illumination (76 mW cm−2) under open-circuit conditions with RH about 45%
1680 h with 80% PCE retention

134



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/C60/BCP/Ag
GuaSCN
Yes
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination
115 h with 90% PCE retention

137



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Eu2+
No
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere
370 h with 93% PCE retention

142



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/FAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
AVAI
No
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere
300 h with 90% PCE retention

145



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/FAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
MDACl2
Yes
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (without a UV filter) under ambient conditions
600 h with 90% PCE retention

12






3.2 Component engineering
An obvious feature of perovskites is their adjustable component in A, B, and X sites. Each site can contain single or mixed ions once the size of ions satisfies the Goldschmidt tolerance factor calculation.147,148 Moreover, large monovalent cations such as n-butylamine (BA) or phenyl ethyl-ammonium (PEA) in the A-site can be used to obtain two-dimensional (2D) or quasi-2D perovskites, which are also widely investigated in the perovskite community.149–157 Due to the existence of various components and corresponding different optoelectronic properties of perovskites, there exists large potential to improve the operational stability of PSCs by component engineering. Although it is difficult to decide which component is the most suitable for operation owing to the deficiency of systematic comparison, the following summary based on different kinds of perovskite components will be useful for the selection of more operationally stable perovskites.

3.2.1 A-Site engineering. 
Since MAPbI3 is the first developed absorber in perovskite PV technology, the main goal of early component engineering on A-sites (from MA to FA or FAMA) is to improve the optoelectronic performance (especially PCE) of PSCs. The more suitable bandgap of FAPbI3 (1.48 eV, as compared to 1.55 eV of MAPbI3) allows greater potential in delivering higher PCEs.158–160 However, the photoactive black phase (α-phase) of FAPbI3 is thermodynamically unstable at room temperature, which easily changes into the photo inactive yellow phase (δ-phase) particularly in a humid atmosphere.159 This phase instability of FAPbI3 hinders the development of highly efficient and stable FAPbI3-based PSCs. Therefore, a FAMA system with a more stable black phase160–162 becomes an excellent alternative in high performance133 and operationally stable PSCs. Unfortunately, systematic research on the operational stability comparison between MA-only perovskites and FAMA alloys (under the same ageing conditions) is still lacking.
Based on the widely used FAMA system MA0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, the effect of cesium (Cs) incorporation was systematically investigated by Saliba et al. in 2016.163 Cs has a smaller ionic radius (1.81 Å) than MA (2.70 Å) or FA (2.79 Å),164 which serves as the effective “phase stabilizer” of the black phase of FA-based perovskites.147,160,165 The results showed that a small amount of Cs (5%) was sufficient to suppress yellow phase perovskites (Fig. 13a). In addition, the perovskite grains for the CsFAMA system were larger than the grains of the FAMA system (Fig. 13b), meaning higher film quality with reduced defects in CsFAMA perovskites. The possible hypothesis is that Cs induced some perovskite seeds (nucleation sites) to assist film formation, which was supported by XRD data by showing a pronounced perovskite peak in the non-annealed CsFAMA film (Fig. 13c, note that the component of perovskite seeds still needs further investigation). Based on phase stabilization and grain modification, 5% Cs-containing unencapsulated PSCs showed a remarkable enhancement of operational stability, which retained 90% of their original PCE after 250 h MPP tracking in a nitrogen atmosphere held at room temperature under constant 1-sun illumination (provided by an array of white LEDs), while FAMA based PSCs lost over 50% of PCE in the initial 100 h (Fig. 13d). Note that the positive effect of Cs incorporation is not only applicable for the FAMA system, but also for FAPbI3 perovskites.147,165–167 Lee et al. incorporated partial Cs ions (10%) into FAPbI3, which led to the contraction of the cubo-octahedral volume due to the small size of Cs ions and thereby enhanced FA–I interactions.166 This is mainly responsible for the enhanced phase stability of FA-based perovskites. In addition, the FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 film showed larger crystals than FAPbI3, similar to CsFAMA perovskites mentioned above. All of these effects improved illumination and moisture stability of FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3; the resulting encapsulated PSCs kept nearly 70% of their initial PCE after 120 h under continuous white light (sulfur lamp, ≈100 mW cm−2) illumination with RH < 50% and temperature below 65 °C, while the PCE of FAPbI3 based devices dropped to zero before 70 h under the same conditions. Although this work did not monitor the operational stability of PSCs, the existing results still suggested the great potential of Cs-containing PSCs for real operation, especially with an additional humidity stressor. In 2018, Jiang et al. proved that Cs0.07FA0.93PbI3 based PSCs (unencapsulated) maintained 56% of their original PCE after 17 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (solar simulator) with RH ≈ 60%, while FAPbI3 only kept nearly 20% of the initial PCE after 4 h under the same conditions.167 Besides the positive effect of Cs as mentioned above, this work also found that the energy level of perovskites upon Cs incorporation was aligned well with TiO2 and spiro-MeOTAD, thus facilitating carrier transport. Based on these findings, we can conclude that Cs ions have a positive effect on stabilizing the black phase, modifying grains, and adjusting the energy levels of perovskites, which further promote PSCs to obtain better operational stability.
 Fig. 13  (a) XRD spectra of perovskites upon addition of Cs investigating the series Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(1−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, abbreviated as CsxM where M stands for a “mixed perovskite”. CsxM with x = 0, 5, 10, 15%. (b) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy images of Cs0M and Cs5M. (c) Absorption spectra of as-fabricated films (at room temperature) without the subsequent annealing step; the Cs0M film is red (red line, image of red film). Upon addition of cesium, the Cs10M film turns black (black line, image of black film). The inset XRD data show that Cs10M has the characteristic perovskite pattern whereas Cs0M does not. (d) Aging for 250 h of high performance Cs5M and Cs0M devices in a nitrogen atmosphere held at room temperature under constant illumination and maximum power point tracking. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
As another inorganic cation, rubidium (Rb) has a smaller ionic size than Cs, which is not able to form the black perovskite phase RbPbI3 due to the too small size.168 However, the effect of Rb incorporation in FACs and the CsFAMA system was also investigated by Saliba et al.169 Similar to Cs, Rb could stabilize the black phase of FA-based perovskites by eliminating the excess Pb and the yellow-phase impurities, as well as enforcing a homogeneous crystallization upon annealing starting with photoactive perovskite nuclei. Moreover, 5% Rb addition (RbCsFAMA) induced larger grain size of perovskites compared to CsFAMA. Based on the “cation cascade”, RbCsFAMA based PSCs (unencapsulated) with PTAA (which has higher thermal stability than spiro-OMeTAD170) as the HTL, retained 95% of their initial PCE after 500 hour MPP tracking at 85 °C under continuous 1-sun illumination (provided by a white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 14a). Unfortunately, the stability of the CsFAMA system under the same conditions was not monitored, thus it is not convincing enough to highlight the positive effect of Rb on improving the operational stability of PSCs. A similar work was also reported by Turren-Cruz et al., in which 5% Rb addition in Cs0.1FA0.9PbI3 perovskites could improve the absolute PCE and reproducibility of PSCs.171 Based on component Rb0.05Cs0.1FA0.85PbI3, as well as polymeric buffer layers poly methyl methacrylate (PMMA) at the perovskite/HTL interface and PCBM/PMMA (5:1) at the ETL/perovskite interface (the effect of polymeric buffer layers will be discussed later), the resulting unencapsulated PSC devices kept 98% of their original PCE after 1000 h MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (provided by a white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 14b). However, although it has been shown that the incorporation of Rb and Cs in FA based PSCs can exhibit high PCE and good operational stability, the research about the effect of Rb-only on operational stability is still lacking. Most importantly, the deep mechanism of performance enhancement upon Rb addition, and whether Rb occupies the A-site in perovskites are still under debate.172
 Fig. 14  (a) Thermal stability test of a perovskite solar cell. The device was aged for 500 hours at 85 °C under continuous full illumination and MPP tracking in a nitrogen atmosphere (red curve, circles). This aging routine exceeds industry norms. During the light soaking at 85 °C, the device retained 95% (dashed line) of its initial performance. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from Science, copyright 2016. (b) Stability for the Cs10Rb5FAPbI3 device without polymer layers (green curve) and with polymer-modification (blue curve) aged at room temperature after 1000 hours of continuous MPP tracking in a nitrogen atmosphere. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from Science, copyright 2018. 


3.2.2 B-Site engineering. 
Since Pb is a widely used B-site ion in perovskites, complete or partial replacement of Pb with Sn can narrow the band gap of perovskites (i.e. 1.3 eV for MASnI3 and CsSnI3, 1.41 eV for FASnI3),173–175 which is more ideal for absorption of the solar spectrum. In addition, the Sn-based perovskite is the most suitable candidate for rear cells in perovskite–perovskite tandem photovoltaics due to the adjustable band gap varying from 1.16 eV (MASn0.6Pb0.4I3)176 to 1.41 eV (FASnI3).175,177 Besides the ideal band gap for PCE improvement, the operational stability of Sn-containing PSCs was also investigated. Eperon et al. compared the stability of different Sn-content based PSCs (unencapsulated) at MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in ambient air with RH of 50 ± 5%.178 While FASnI3 lost the whole PCE in a few minutes, mainly due to the notoriously air sensitive tin-based films (Sn2+ is easily oxidized into Sn4+),173,179 and low surface coverage (the uncontrollable crystallization in the film formation),173 FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 and FA0.75Cs0.25Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 based PSCs kept over 90% of their initial PCE after 50 min. This operational stability was even better than that of the FAPbI3 based device (maintained only 80% of the original PCE after 50 min, which might be associated with the phase transition from black to yellow reported by other works147). This further indicates that the oxidation of Sn2+ was partially inhibited by Pb–Sn alloys. Although the deep mechanism about this phenomenon is under investigation, this result may suggest the possible chemical reaction between Pb and Sn (Pb + Sn4+ = Pb2+ + Sn2+) and thus the potential of Pb–Sn based PSCs for real operation. Note that the oxidation of Sn2+ is probably still the biggest obstacle for the development of Pb–Sn PSCs, thus Gu et al. first revealed that the addition of Sn powder into Sn2+-based precursor solution could effectively eliminate the Sn4+ content, by the comproportionation reaction Sn + Sn4+ = 2Sn2+.180 Further, Lin et al. added a small amount of metallic tin powders into precursor solution to prevent the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ (Fig. 15a).181 Through this simple and effective tin-reduced precursor (TRP) solution strategy, high quality Pb–Sn perovskite films with reduced Sn vacancies were obtained (Fig. 15b). The resulting unencapsulated tandem solar cells retained 90% of their initial performance after 463 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (provided by a xenon lamp solar simulator) in a glovebox at about 32 °C (Fig. 15c). Although now the operational stability of Pb–Sn based PSCs is still lower than that of the state-of-the-art Pb based devices, mainly due to the extremely sensitive oxidation of Sn2+ and poor perovskite film quality, the unique small band gap of Pb–Sn alloys makes them valuable for developing operationally stable perovskite–perovskite tandem photovoltaics.
 Fig. 15  (a) Photographs showing the ease of oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ in ambient air and the facile reduction of Sn4+ to Sn2+ by metallic Sn powders. (b) Illustration of the formation of Sn vacancies in mixed Pb–Sn perovskites due to the presence of Sn4+ in the precursor solution and the suppression of Sn vacancy formation in TRP perovskites because of the absence of Sn4+. (c) MPP tracking of an unencapsulated small-area tandem solar cell for 463 h in a glovebox under full simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) without an ultraviolet filter. The device retained 90% of its initial efficiency after operation for 463 h (T90 = 463 h). Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from Nature, copyright 2019. 


3.2.3 X-Site engineering. 
In early works, the incorporation of Br could tune the bandgap of MA based perovskites between 1.5 eV and 2.3 eV.182 Meanwhile, the optoelectronic properties and moisture stability of the corresponding PSCs were improved by adding a small amount of Br into MAPbI3, which might be associated with its compact and stable structure.182 In this structure, the substitution of large I with small Br led to the reduction of the lattice constant, which meant stronger interactions between halogen and lead, as well as stronger hydrogen bonds between Br and organic cations. Later, addition of a small amount of Br ions (i.e. I0.85Br0.15) has been widely used in high performance and stable PSCs,183 further confirming the positive effect of Br incorporation. However, some works also reported that phase segregation occurred in the hybrid halide system (I1−xBrx) upon illumination,26–28 which is negative on real operation of PSCs. Therefore, a systematic discussion about the operational stability of PSCs based on various Br contents is required to design more stable PSCs.
Besides Br, the effect of Cl is also widely investigated. Due to the too large band gap of Cl-based perovskites (i.e. 3.04 eV for MAPbCl3, 3.02 eV for FAPbCl3, 2.99 eV for CsPbCl3),184 which is unfavorable for light harvesting when used as a single cell, the Cl-containing molecules, such as MACl with a small amount, often serve as additives to improve the film quality of perovskites (for example, increase grain size185–187 or stabilize black phase of FA-based perovskites126,188,189). This will promote the formation of the Cl-containing intermediate phase and then the release of gaseous MACl (or other organic chlorides) to assist crystallization and recrystallization of the perovskites.126,185,187,190 Interestingly, the Cl-based perovskites with a large band gap is suitable to be a top-cell in perovskite-silicon tandem photovoltaics, and recent work demonstrated that by directly alloying MAPbCl3 perovskite into the lattice of FACs perovskites, the Cl ions would be successfully incorporated into the perovskite lattice; meanwhile, the photoinduced phase segregation in perovskites was largely suppressed.191 Based on this observation, the resulting PSCs maintained 96% of their initial PCE after 1000 h MPP tracking under 0.77-sun illumination in a N2 atmosphere (the temperature was about 60 °C). Besides these effect, Saidaminov et al. argued that the incorporation of Cl also suppressed the density of vacancy defects by lattice strain relaxation.146 Strain originated from the size mismatch between the A-site cation and the lead halide cage, resulting in cage distortions and tilting of BX6 octahedra (Fig. 16b). This strain could be released by the formation of X-site vacancies (Fig. 16c).192 However, these vacancy defects are the major source of degradation in PSCs. By incorporating small ions such as Cl, the lattice strain was also released without vacancy formation (Fig. 16a), thus Cl addition effectively suppressed the formation of vacancy defects. The resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) exhibited a slow PCE degradation rate (lost 0.25% per min) at MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination with a RH of about 50%, while Cl-free PSCs lost 1.5% PCE per min, meaning faster degradation. Note that Cl is very effective in obtaining high quality and stable perovskite films, which needs further research to confirm its positive effect on the operational stability of PSCs.
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustrating the local strain (b), which is reduced either by the formation of point defects (c) or by the incorporation of small ions (a). The distortion angle (θ = 180° – angle (B–X–B′)) decreases via strain relaxation. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. 
In summary, the main effect of component engineering is (i) improving the structure and phase stability of perovskites by adjusting the tolerance factor and residue strain; (ii) achieving higher quality perovskite films by controlling the perovskite nucleation and growth and precursor purification. All these advantages contributed to high PCE in corresponding PSCs, and positively affected the operational stability of PSC devices. Identifying a suitable perovskite component is the basis of further stability improvement, as summarized in Table 3. Nowadays FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 are more popular due to their high efficiency12,126 and high thermal stability respectively,193 and the corresponding single phase characteristics without interference by phase segregation upon illumination would add to their promise of high operational stability. The following sections will discuss other effective approaches for improving the operational stability of PSCs based on these components.
Table 3 The summary of operational lifetimes of PSCs based on component engineering




Device structure
Fabrication method
Encapsulation
Test conditions
Lifetime
Ref.




FTO/compact TiO2/Li-doped mesoporous TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
One-step solution
No
MPP tracking in N2 held at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (an array of white LEDs)
250 h with 90% PCE retention

163



FTO/compact TiO2/FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
One-step solution
Yes
White light (sulfur lamp, ≈100 mW cm−2) illumination with RH < 50%, temperature below 65 °C
120 h with 70% PCE retention

166



FTO/compact TiO2/Cs0.07FA0.93PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Hybrid CVD and cation exchange (HCVD-CE)
No
MPP tracking with RH ≈ 60% under 1-sun illumination (solar simulator)
17 h with 56% PCE retention

167



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/RbCsFAMAPbI3/PTAA/Au
One-step solution
No
MPP tracking at 85 °C under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere
500 h with 95% PCE retention

169



FTO/SnO2/PCBM:PMMA(5:1)/Rb0.05Cs0.1FA0.85PbI3/PMMA/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
One-step solution
No
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere
1000 h with 98% PCE retention

171



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/BCP/Au
One-step solution
No
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination in ambient air with RH of 50 ± 5%
50 min with 90% PCE retention

178



ITO/PTAA/FA0.8Cs0.2Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/C60/ALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.7MA0.3Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/BCP/Cu
One-step solution
No
MPP tracking at 32 °C under 1-sun illumination (xenon lamp solar simulator) in a glovebox
463 h with 90% PCE retention

181






3.3 Surface passivation
In solution processing of perovskite films, the crystal formation and growth are always accompanied by a transformation from liquid to solid. And due to the self-assembly properties,194,195 perovskite film formation generally starts from the substrate. Then the periodic lattice arrangement is stopped at the perovskite film surface. This will bring in many dangling bonds on the surface, which served as defect sites (especially vacancy defects).35,196,197 In addition, perovskite degradation is generally initialized from the defect sites at the surface, which are more reactive toward water and oxygen,197–199 and other environmental factors. Further, the heterojunction between charge transport layers and the perovskite surface will lead to energy level mismatch and non-ohmic contact, hence increasing the energy loss during transport of free carriers. All of these factors indicate that the surface of perovskites has a large number of defects and can be the initiator of perovskite degradation, so developing effective surface passivation methods is another important step to improve the operational stability of PSCs. The following text will focus on different kinds of surface passivators such as organic layers, inorganic layers and low-dimensional materials, which have proven to be useful in modifying perovskite surfaces and improving the operational stability of corresponding PSC devices.

3.3.1 Organic layers. 
As mentioned above, the most common defect sites in perovskites are the charged point defects, which can be passivated by Lewis acids or bases. This strategy can also be applied to surface passivation, by using some molecules which have charged functional groups to eliminate surface defects. In 2019, Wang et al. reported that by using theophylline, caffeine, and theobromine as surface passivators, PbI antisite defects were effectively passivated.200 A deep study revealed that theophylline had the best passivation effects among these molecules through the strong Lewis base–acid interaction between the CO group and the antisite PbI, while the neighboring N–H on the imidazole ring also interacted with I of the Pb–I octahedron through a hydrogen bond; this would strengthen the absorption of theophylline onto the PbI defect. Upon adding a methyl group to the N on the imidazole ring of theophylline (resulting in caffeine), the hydrogen bond between N–H and I would be eliminated, thus the interaction between CO groups and PbI defects will be weakened. Further, when the N–H group was located neighboring to the CO group on the same six-membered ring (resulting in theobromine), producing a shorter distance between the CO and the N–H, the spatially effective interaction between the N–H and I was disabled as CO has been bound to antisite PbI, thus the main interaction (between CO group and PbI defects) became weaker because of the steric effects (Fig. 17a). Based on these findings, the theophylline treated PSCs (encapsulated) exhibited the highest PCE of 23.48%, as well as high operational stability: maintained >95% of their original PCE after 500 h under 1-sun illumination and open-circuit conditions in humid air with RH about 30–40%, temperature about 40 °C, while no-treated PSCs kept only 20% of original PCE after 500 h under same ageing conditions (Fig. 17b). These results indicate that not only forming interaction between additionally functional groups and defects, but also strengthening this interaction to obtain strong and stable bonding are the more effective approach to passivate surface defects and then improve the operational stability of PSCs.
 Fig. 17  (a) Theoretical models of perovskites with molecular surface passivation of PbI antisite with theophylline, caffeine, and theobromine. (b) Evolution of the PCEs measured from the encapsulated perovskite solar cells with or without theophylline treatment exposed to continuous light (90 ± 10 mW cm−2) under open-circuit conditions. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. (c) The device structure of perovskite planar heterojunction solar cells. (d) Schematic illustration of quaternary ammonium halides (QAHs) assembled on the defect sites. The red and blue symbols represent the N atom and O atom of the choline chloride molecule, respectively. (e) Maximum power point tracking for 26 h of an unencapsulated device under continuous 1 sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Nature, copyright 2017. 
Beyond passivating one type of electronic defects on the perovskite surface, it is required to find other passivators to simultaneously take effect on the positively and negatively charged defects that coexisted to accelerate the degradation of perovskite films. In 2017, Zheng et al. used quaternary ammonium halides,201 especially choline chloride to passivate PbI antisite (negatively charged) and Pb cluster (namely VI, positively charged) defects (Fig. 17c): Pb clusters on the top of the perovskite surface is bonded with Cl− (Fig. 17d), and the enhanced interaction between Pb and the surface passivators resulted in an increase of the wavefunction overlap between Pb clusters and the surface slab. In addition, PbI antisite defects were almost eliminated by adding choline ions, which could induce the migration of I− to the top position of its neighbouring Pb2+ and bonded with strong electrostatic interactions. The resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) maintained 86% of the initial PCE after 26 h MPP tracking under 1 sun illumination (Fig. 17e), as well as attained higher humidity stability. Note that the passivation effect of choline chloride was better than that of Lewis acid PCBM according to the DFT calculation, which further highlighted the importance of dual-passivation.
Since perovskite surface is also easily affected by environmental factors such as water, introducing some hydrophobic molecules (to repel water molecules from the perovskite layer) or hygroscopic molecules (to absorb water before invading the perovskite layer) and simultaneously passivating the surface defects is a better strategy to improve the stability of PSCs under real operation. For hydrophobic molecules, our earlier works have shown that an amino-group (NH2-POSS) could successfully reduce the charge trap density of the perovskite surface, as well as improve the humidity stability of PSCs by its hydrophobic group.202,203 In 2020, Zhu et al. substituted the hydrogen (H) of benzylammonium iodide with hydrophobic 4-tert-butyl, forming a new molecule 4-tert-butyl-benzylammonium iodide (tBBAI).204 Following research found that by adding tBBAI onto the perovskite surface (Fig. 18a), the contact angle of water droplets on the surface of perovskite films became larger and the calculated surface free energy decreased; this meant a better moisture resistance for tBBAI-passivated perovskites. In addition, the tert-butyl group of tBBAI prevented the unwanted aggregation by steric repulsion, thus accelerating the charge extraction from the perovskite into the HTL. Due to the similar chemical structure between tBBAI and phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI), which has proven to be very effective in passivating perovskite surface defects,11,205,206 the tBBAI molecules which had dual-function both in hydrophobicity and defect passivation were successfully applied to improve the stability of corresponding solar devices: the unencapsulated PSC passivated by a tBBAI interlayer retained 95% of its initial efficiency after 500 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere, while the untreated PSCs only kept 70% of their original PCE after 500 h under the same conditions (Fig. 18b). The humidity stability was also remarkably improved by tBBAI incorporation. In addition, Tavakoli et al. introduced adamantane (AD) and 1-adamantylamine (ADA) on the surface of perovskites (Fig. 18c),207 finding that the ADA molecule had stronger bonding with the perovskite surface than AD due to the presence of the amine group which could anchor to an A-cation vacancy. Besides, the contact angle of water on top of the perovskite was enhanced by AD and ADA passivation, implying the lower wettability. Based on these advantages, the ADA-treated PSCs (unencapsulated) retained 96% of their initial PCE after 300 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere at a temperature of about 30 °C, while untreated PSCs kept only 72% of the original PCE after 300 h under the same conditions (Fig. 18d). Meanwhile, the humidity stability of PSCs was also improved by ADA or AD passivation. All of these results provide a general strategy to simply improve the operational stability of PSCs under humid conditions, that is, incorporating amphiphilic molecules onto the perovskite surface, which not only have electron donor or accepter groups on one side to passivate surface defects, but also have hydrophobic groups on the other side to prevent water intrusion. Some polymers such as PMMA also have a similar function and have proven to be effective in improving the efficiency and operational stability of PSCs.171,208
 Fig. 18  (a) Structures of a tBBAI-passivated PSC. (b) MPP ageing results in an inert atmosphere (N2) and under 1 sun continuous illumination of a PSC without passivation and PSCs passivated with PEAI and tBBAI. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (c) Chemical structure of adamantane (AD) and 1-adamantylamine (ADA) used for passivation of perovskite films. (d) Stability test of PSCs with and without passivation under continuous full-sun illumination and maximum power point tracking in a nitrogen atmosphere at T = 30 °C. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (e) A schematic illustration of a polymer thin film (PEO) assembled on the perovskite structure. (f) Operational stability test for the evolution of PCE of FA0.87Cs0.13Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3 devices without and with PEO, continuously measured under xenon-lamp simulated full-spectrum AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 equivalent irradiance in air (humidity ∼ 50 RH%) without any ultraviolet filter, held at the maximum power point during ageing, and tested at 0.03 s time intervals. Reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. 
Another class of molecules are the hygroscopic polymers. In 2018, Kim et al. designed the incorporation of a polymer thin film (polyethylene oxide (PEO)) as an interlayer between the perovskite and the charge extracting layers (Fig. 18e),209 finding that a coordinate bond between PEO and the perovskite surface was formed, by sharing the lone electron pair on the C–O of PEO with the empty 6p orbital of Pb2+ in the perovskite,210–212 and then passivating the positively charged iodine vacancy defects. In addition, the PEO layer strongly slowed down the perovskite hydration process by absorbing water before invading the perovskites, thus the humidity stability of corresponding perovskite films and PSCs were largely improved. Based on these modifications, the PEO-based PSCs (unencapsulated) showed negligible degradation over 14 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in air (50% RH), while untreated PSCs only kept 75% of their original PCE after 14 h under the same conditions (Fig. 18f). Using hygroscopic layers to absorb water, as well as passivating surface defects of perovskites, is another effective approach to improve the operational stability of PSCs under humidity conditions, which need further development.
Besides defect passivation, some surface treatments also have a positive effect on the phase stability of perovskites. In 2019, Wang et al. developed a crack-filling interface engineering method using choline iodine (CHI),213 which not only passivated the surface trap states of perovskites as earlier work reported,201 but also penetrated into the bulk of the CsPbI3 thin films to form CHI shells (Fig. 19a), thus improving the film quality and preventing the phase transition of perovskite grains (from photoactive β phase to photo-inactive δ phase). In addition, the CHI treatment led to an improved energy-level alignment at both the β-CsPbI3/ETL and the β-CsPbI3/HTL interface, promoting carrier transport. All of these improvements promoted the resulting β-CsPbI3 based PSCs (unencapsulated) to exhibit a high PCE over 18% (Fig. 19b), and retained 92% of their initial PCE after 500 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a N2 glovebox (Fig. 19c).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of crack-filling interface engineering. (b) J–V characteristics of PSCs based on CsPbI3 and CHI–CsPbI3 with 0.1 cm2 effective cell area under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination of 100 mW cm−2 in reverse scan. (c) Photostability of the unencapsulated CHI–CsPbI3 PSC devices under continuous white light LED (light-emitting diode) illumination (100 mW cm−2) at their MPP in a N2 glovebox. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. 
In summary, the advantages using organic layers as the perovskite surface passivator are (i) passivating surface defects by directly interacting with the uncoordinated atoms; (ii) possessing amphiphilic groups to achieve multi-functionality; (iii) the formation of a surface layer that will effectively block the invasion of environmental molecules (such as H2O), as well as prevent the ion migration across the whole devices. Such functional organic layers should be further discovered and developed to obtain more stable PSCs under real operation.


3.3.2 Inorganic layers. 
Despite the initial success in improving the efficiency and operational stability of PSCs by using organic passivators, limitations also exist due to the secondary bonding (mainly coordination bond) between these passivation molecules and the perovskite surface, which is generally too weak to protect the absorber from attack by various ageing conditions, especially while operating under moisture and oxygen. In silicon PV technology, surface defects are usually passivated by silicon oxide,214 silicon nitride,215 or aluminum oxide,216 which can form strong covalent bonds to silicon; meanwhile, oxides and nitrides are also chemically stable, which can protect the underlying silicon from degradation without introducing new unstable factors. Thus using inorganic layers which are more mechanically and chemically stable, as well as can form stronger bonding with perovskite surfaces, may be a good method to further improve the operational stability of PSCs.
In 2019, Yang et al. demonstrated a general passivation strategy by forming a thin, compact inorganic lead sulfate (PbSO4) layer on the perovskite surface through an in situ reaction with selected inorganic anions.217 The formation approach was dipping perovskite films in SO42−-containing solutions and following the chemical reaction: APbX3 + SO42− → A+ + 3X− + PbSO4. Because PbSO4 was electrically insulating, the reaction time and precursor concentration were carefully optimized. Finally, a thin PbSO4 layer with thickness less than 5 nm formed on the surface of perovskites (Fig. 20a). The formation of PbSO4 effectively passivated the uncoordinated Pb2+ defects without influencing the bulk perovskite structures, and the strong ionic bond between SO42− and Pb2+ effectively protected perovskite films, even under humid conditions. The resulting PSCs (encapsulated) kept 96.8% of their initial PCE after 1200 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (provided by a plasma lamp) in air (∼60 ± 10% RH, ∼65 °C), while untreated PSCs kept only 46.9% of their original PCE after 474 h under the same conditions (Fig. 20b). This result highlights the excellent effect of inorganic layers on passivating perovskite surface defects and serving as a stable “umbrella” of perovskite films.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of protection of perovskites through in situ formation of a lead sulfate top layer on the perovskite surface. (b) Stability test of encapsulated solar cell devices based on control (blue) and sulfate-treated (red) CsFAMA perovskite active layers. Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. (c) Schematic drawing of the conversion process from the pristine perovskite layer, the layer treated with Pb(SCN)2, and the Pb surface-rich perovskite layer. (d) Operational stability of the control cell and the cell with GO or Cl–GO. Reproduced from ref. 221 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. 
Another type of inorganic layer is graphene oxides. Earlier works have proven that owing to the exceptional electrical, optical, and physical properties as well as the low-cost solution-phase production techniques, graphene has risen as a promising candidate for optoelectronic applications.218,219 And by incorporating nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide (N-RGO) into perovskite films, the corresponding grain size increased due to the slower crystallization process.220 However, whether graphene oxide (GO) layers have a positive effect on improving the operational stability of PSCs has not been investigated, due to the weak interaction between GO and perovskites. Recently, Wang et al. used a dilute Pb(SCN)2 solution as the Pb source which was spin-coated onto the perovskite film to obtain a Pb-rich surface of perovskites;221 then two strong chemical bonds of Pb–O and Pb–Cl were formed by deposition of chlorinated graphene oxide (Cl–GO) onto the perovskite surface (Fig. 20c). A deep study revealed that O in Cl–GO had stronger electron-withdrawing properties so the Pb–O bond within perovskite/Cl–GO is stronger than that of perovskite/GO. Most importantly, after forming strong interactions between Cl–GO and the perovskite surface, the count of the I− signal from the HTL layer was substantially reduced for the aged device which was encapsulated and then aged at MPP under light-soaking (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) for 200 hours at 60 °C. Thus the introduction of Cl–GO effectively reduced the ion migration (especially I− ions) from perovskite into the HTL, keeping the basic p-type properties of HTL after operation. Based on these improvements, the resulting PSCs (encapsulated) retained 90% of their initial PCE after 1000 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 60 °C, while untreated PSCs kept only 35% of their original PCE after 1000 h under the same conditions (Fig. 20d). All of these results indicate that GO is an effective barrier to prevent ion migration, thus reducing component loss of perovskites and keeping properties of HTLs during real operation of PSC devices.
In summary, besides defect passivation, inorganic layers have three unique advantages compared to that of organic layers: (i) a strong ionic bond can be formed between inorganic molecules and perovskites, while a relatively weak bond (mainly coordination bond) is formed between organic groups and perovskites. Stronger bonding will lead to more stable passivation effects. (ii) The mechanical and chemical stability of inorganic molecules are better than those of organic molecules, which will serve as an effective “umbrella” of perovskite films toward those environmental factors such as oxygen and water. (iii) Inorganic layers have proven to be an effective barrier to prevent ion migration from perovskites to charge transport layers, thus reducing the interplay between various layers. All of these advantages promote the passivation effect of inorganic layers on perovskites, which should be further developed to obtain more stable PSCs under real operational conditions.


3.3.3 Low-dimensional materials. 
Generally, the low-dimensional (LD) materials in 3D perovskites belong to organic layers; however, these materials have unique properties such as they are photoactive and always have a wide bandgap compared to 3D perovskites, which can reduce interfacial recombination of free carriers.18 In addition, they share similar inorganic component and framework with 3D perovskites so that more interface defects can be eliminated by the in situ reaction with LD components. The hydrophobic carbon chain or carbon ring in LD components also can protect 3D perovskites from degradation by water. All of these advantages are beneficial for improving the operational stability of PSCs, especially under environmental conditions. The most common LD materials are the 2D perovskites, which are also widely applied in improving the efficiency and light/humid/thermal stability of PSCs.222–224 The 2D/3D homojunction is also applied to improve the operational stability of PSCs. In 2017, Grancini et al. designed an ultra-stable 2D/3D (HOOC(CH2)4NH3)2PbI4/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite junction.18 The 2D/3D structure formed an exceptional gradually-organized multi-dimensional interface, and the resulting PSCs kept 100% of their initial PCE after 10000 h of ageing under 1-sun illumination and short circuit conditions in ambient air at a cycling temperature from 35 to 90 °C. In addition, Zhang et al. reported that by using the diethylenetriamine (DETA) which had three amine groups as the post-device ligand (PDL),225 the DETA molecule could interact with MAPbI3 perovskite by substitution of the surface MA+ ion, thus forming stable low-dimensional perovskite complexes by the reaction: MAPbI3(s) + DETA(g) → DETA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1(s) + MA(g) (Fig. 21a). The as-formed DETA based 2D perovskites on the 3D perovskite surface effectively prevented the diffusion of water molecules into the active perovskite region. Also, metallic Pb defects (which can serve as non-radiative recombination sites) were greatly reduced by DETA treatment, due to the effective reaction between metallic Pb, Pb–I octahedron and DETA. Based on these improvements, the resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) retained 70% of their initial PCE after 500 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in air with humidity about 50 ± 5% RH and temperature about 25 ± 1 °C, while the untreated PSCs completely degraded within 100 h under the same conditions (Fig. 21b). These results provide a new approach to improve the operational stability of PSCs under humid conditions, that is, treating as-prepared PSC devices with ligand vapor, repairing interface defects of 3D perovskites by forming some hydrophobic 2D layers. The post-treatment of whole devices is innovative and should be further developed to obtain highly efficient and stable PSCs.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the PDL treatment process and the relevant device configuration, the molecular structure of DETA, and a possible model for DETA interaction with the MAPbI3 cage. (b) Maximum power point (MPP) tracking for 500 h of the unencapsulated devices under continuous 1 sun illumination. The humidity and temperature are 50 ± 5% and 25 ± 1 °C, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 225 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. 
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of a 3D/2D PSC. (b) The MPP was measured under full solar illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) without a UV-filter. The PSC shows an initial PCE of 22.6% and maintained 85% of its efficiency after 500 h. The device is encapsulated and measured under ambient conditions. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. (c) Structures of pure 3D perovskite (left) and pure 2D perovskite (right), respectively. (d) MPP tracking under ambient atmosphere of a 3D PSC and a 3D/2D PSC, with relative humidity shown in the inset. Reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. 
In 2019, Yoo et al. used n-butylammonium bromide (C4Br), n-hexylammonium bromide (C6Br), and n-octylammonium bromide (C8Br) as the 2D layer precursor (Fig. 22a),226 respectively, and found that the passivation effect on the 3D perovskite surface and GB defects among them were similar. The optoelectronic performance of the corresponding PSCs upon C4Br/C6Br/C8Br treatment had no significant difference, which were all higher than those of untreated devices. This result indicated that the length of the carbon chain did not affect the passivation effect of the 3D perovskite surface. A longer carbon chain (C8Br) will lead to a better hydrophobic effect, so the corresponding PSC (encapsulated) maintained 85% of its initial efficiency over 500 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination under ambient conditions (Fig. 22b). In addition, Liu et al. reported that by immersing the 3D perovskite into a solution of pentafluorophenylethylammonium (FEA) iodide (FEAI) in isopropanol (IPA),227 a pure 2D perovskite film with the composition of FEA2PbI4 was formed on the surface of 3D perovskites by the reaction: FAPbI3(δ) + 2FEAI = (FEA)2PbI4 + FAI (Fig. 22c), thus the non-perovskite phase (δ) of FAPbI3 was successfully reduced by the incorporation of FEAI. In addition, the 2D material (FEA2PbI4) in the 3D/2D bilayer was still textured in the out-of-plane direction, promoting the free carrier transportation and reducing interfacial recombination. Based on these advantages, the resulting 3D/2D bilayer PSC (unencapsulated) retained 90% of its initial efficiency after 1000 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination under ambient conditions with a prevalent humidity of 40%, while the PCE of the pure 3D PSC dropped to 43% after 1000 h under the same conditions (Fig. 22d). All of these results indicate that hydrophobic 2D layers are effective in improving the operational stability of PSCs under humid conditions, and the detailed adjustment such as the orientation of 2D perovskites will further enhance the optoelectronic performance and long-term stability of PSC devices.
Besides 2D materials, Xu et al. treated the FAPbI3 perovskite surface with pyrrolidinium hydroiodide (PyI) salts, resulting in a 1D perovskite structure (PyPbI3), which was stacked on the original 3D perovskite.228 A deep study revealed that the temperature-dependent phase transition activation barrier was enhanced after forming the 1D/3D structure, thus the phase stability of FAPbI3 perovskites was largely improved. The resulting unencapsulated 1D/3D devices maintained 70% of their initial efficiency after 27 days in air (RH is about 65%), while the PCE of control 3D devices decayed to nil after 12 days. This result provides useful guidance to fabricate more operationally stable PSCs under air conditions.
In summary, surface passivation is also an effective approach to eliminate defects in perovskite by using various molecules (summarized in Table 4). Compared to additives used in perovskite films, surface passivators exhibit some unique advantages: (i) they have negligible influence on the bulk properties of perovskites due to the post-treatment, and thus can allow more types of molecules without considering their potential “bad effect” on the formation of perovskite films; (ii) they can be organic molecules with the hydrophobic groups, or directly the hydrophobic inorganic molecules, further improving the stability of PSCs under humid conditions; (iii) they can serve as an effective ion barrier, through additional bonding with perovskite surface ions, or constructing steric hindrance, thus the mobile ions (such as I−) will be blocked inside perovskites. The limitation of ion migration will greatly contribute to the higher operational stability of PSCs. Therefore, surface passivation is a promising strategy to obtain more stable PSCs under real operational conditions.
Table 4 The summary of operational lifetimes of PSCs based on surface passivation




Device structure
Surface passivators
Encapsulation
Test conditions
Lifetime
Ref.




ITO/SnO2/(FAPbI3)x(MAPbBr3)1−x/PTAA/Au
Theophylline
Yes
1-sun illumination under open-circuit conditions at temperature about 40 °C, RH about 30–40%
500 h with 95% PCE retention

200



ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu
Choline chloride
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination
26 h with 86% PCE retention

201



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
4-tert-Butyl-benzylammonium iodide
No
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere
500 h with 95% PCE retention

204



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsFAMAPb(IBr)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1-Adamantylamine
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere at temperature 30 °C
300 h with 96% PCE retention

207



FTO/SnO2/PCBM:PMMA(5:1)/Rb0.05Cs0.1FA0.85PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
PMMA
No
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere
1000 h with 98% PCE retention

171



FTO/compact TiO2/C60/FA0.87Cs0.13Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Polyethylene oxide
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in air (50% RH)
14 h with 100% PCE retention

209



ITO/PTAA/Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45/C60/BCP/Cu
Lead sulfate
Yes
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 65 °C, RH about 60 ± 10%
1200 h with 96.8% PCE retention

217



ITO/SnO2/FAxMA1−xPb1+yI3/PTAA/Au
Chlorinated graphene oxide
Yes
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 60 °C
1000 h with 90% PCE retention

221



ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM:C60/ZrAcac/Ag
Diethylenetriamine
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 25 ± 1 °C, RH about 50 ± 10%
500 h with 70% PCE retention

225



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.92(MAPbBr3)0.08/spiro-OMeTAD/Au

n-Octylammonium bromide
Yes
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination under ambient conditions
500 h with 85% PCE retention

226



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsFAMAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Pentafluorophenylethylammonium iodide
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination under ambient conditions (40% RH)
1000 h with 90% PCE retention

227






4. The strategies on other functional layers
4.1 Electron transport layer modification
Electron transport layers (ETLs), as the electron extraction and hole blocking materials, are very important in high performance PSCs. To the best of our knowledge, most PSCs with decent efficiency rely on high-quality ETLs, highlighting their necessity in device architecture. With the development of the perovskite PV technology, two major categories of ETL materials have been reported to be promising candidates, namely, inorganic compounds (mainly metal oxides such as TiO2,229 SnO2,230 ZnO,231 BaSnO3,232etc.) and fullerene derivatives (including PCBM,233 C60,234etc.). Generally, metal oxides show desired electrical conductivity combining optical transparency along the spectrum compatible to the absorber. However, they often need high-temperature processing (above 400 °C) to ensure the basic crystal structure, which is the prerequisite to achieve the above-mentioned optoelectronic properties. Such a temperature is not compatible with the current device architecture, which inevitably damages other functional layers and the absorber. In addition, TiO2 is a typical photocatalytic material, which is not stable in PSCs. It is found that photoinduced desorption of oxygen on TiO2 surfaces can result in a rapid trap-induced recombination at the TiO2 interface.64 Therefore, the poor crystallinity due to the lack of high-temperature fabrication and potential photo-instability are the two major instability factors in metal oxide based ETLs. Fullerene derivatives, on the other hand, are not that stable under illumination. It is reported that light illumination will induce the generation of free radicals (such as C–C*), which are chemically active to cause photodimerization of fullerenes.63 It thus leads to electronic disorders to trap the carriers, which ultimately deteriorates the device performance. In short, light induced degradation of ETLs is the major challenge with respect to the device operational stability. The following text will focus on different kinds of ETLs to summarize the effective modification approaches toward operationally stable PSCs.

4.1.1 Metal oxide based ETLs. 
The first used ETL in PSCs is TiO2, and most of the top-performing PSCs rely on high-temperature sintered (450–550 °C) mesoporous TiO2 films. However, the high-temperature processing will make manufacture more complex, as well as hamper the development of flexible modules and perovskite-based tandem devices. In addition, the photocatalytic nature of TiO2 makes it easily form oxygen vacancies under light, thus resulting in a rapid trap-induced recombination across the TiO2 interface.64 These characteristics make mesoporous TiO2 ETL unfavorable for PSCs’ commercialization. To solve this problem, a low temperature (150 °C) fabricated planar TiO2 film with good electronic properties was reported by Zhou et al.6 Through Y-doping, the conductivity of the ETL was highly improved, and an ultrathin layer of PEIE was successfully inserted into the ETL/ITO interface, to adjust the work function of the ITO electrode, thus facilitating the electron transport from TiO2 to ITO. The resulting PSCs exhibited a high PCE of 19.3%. Afterwards, the low-temperature based planar TiO2 films were widely applied to improve the operational stability of PSCs. In 2017, Tan et al. reported a low temperature processing (<150 °C) to fabricate a chlorine-capped TiO2 (TiO2–Cl) colloidal nanocrystal film as the ETL.9 It is revealed that the interfacial Cl atoms on the TiO2 films suppressed deep trap states at the perovskite interface and thus considerably reduced interface recombination at the TiO2/perovskite contact (Fig. 23a and b). Based on these benefits, the TiO2–Cl based PSCs (unencapsulated) obtained a certified PCE of 20.1%, and retained 90% of their initial performance after 500 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 23c). In addition, Chen et al. successfully applied TiO2 onto perovskite films to fabricate large-area p–i–n PSCs.235 In order to prevent heat-induced degradation of the perovskite layers and the adjacent interfaces, they kept the annealing temperature of TiO2 films below 70 °C. However, such a temperature would lead to the formation of amorphous TiO2, thus exhibiting low conductivity in the range of 10−8 to 10−6 S cm−1.236 To solve this problem, a heavy n-doping by Nb5+ was applied into an amorphous TiO2 film (Ti(Nb)Ox), by partial substitution of Ti4+ with Nb5+, and the conductivity of TiO2 was largely improved similar to a previous report.237 In addition, the dramatic increase in the electrical conductivity enabled thicker ETL layers to be used for electron extraction, while improving the hole blocking effect by reducing the density of pinholes and cracks over large areas. The resulting large-sized (>1 cm2) PSCs (encapsulated, Fig. 23d) obtained a high PCE of 16.2%, and maintained 90% of their initial PCE after 1000 h ageing under 1-sun illumination under short-circuit conditions at 45–50 °C (Fig. 23e). These results indicate that the planar TiO2 or doped TiO2 film based PSCs fabricated by low temperature processing can also exhibit high efficiency and long-term operational stability, which is promising to meet the commercial demand.
 Fig. 23  (a) Trap-like localized antisite defects form near the valence band edge for the PbI2-terminated TiO2/perovskite interface. (b) Shallow and delocalized Pb–Cl antisite defects are seen for the PbCl2-terminated interface. (c) Continuous MPP tracking for 500 hours of a high-performance unsealed CsMAFA cell with TiO2–Cl in a nitrogen atmosphere under constant simulated solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a 420 nm cutoff UV filter. Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from Science, copyright 2017. (d) Diagram of the cell configuration highlighting the doped charge carrier extraction layers. The right panels show the composition of Ti(Nb)Ox and the crystal structure of Li+-doped NixMg1−xO, denoted as NiMg(Li)O. (e) Stability of sealed cells kept in the dark or under simulated solar light (AM 1.5; 100 mW cm−2; using a 420 nm UV light cut-off filter; surface temperature of the cell, 45–50 °C; bias potential, 0 V). Reproduced from ref. 235 with permission from Science, copyright 2015. (f) Long-term stability of the planar heterojunction perovskite solar cell fabricated using as-deposited (defective, orange line) and post-annealed (commonly fabricated, blue line) TiO2 thin films as the ETL. The curves were measured at a bias of 0.8 V under AM 1.5G in a N2 atmosphere. Reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from Nature, copyright 2016. 
To reduce the negative effects of photocatalytic nature of TiO2, Li et al. used a defective TiO2 thin film as the ETL, which also can improve the operational stability of the corresponding PSCs.238 TiO2 layers were deposited by electron beam evaporation with a substrate temperature of 350 °C in an oxygen-deficient environment, and then deep-level native defects related to oxygen vacancies and/or under-coordinated Ti sites were formed within the TiO2 materials. These defects could serve as hole traps and contributed to a high photoconductive gain of TiO2, by reducing the recombination of minority carriers (holes) and majority carriers (electrons). In addition, such defects could reduce the photocatalytic activity of TiO2, further improving their photostability. Based on these advantages, the resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) kept 90% of their initial PCE after 100 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere, while the commonly fabricated TiO2 based PSCs lost >30% of their original PCE after 100 h under the same conditions (Fig. 23f). These results suggest that employing defective TiO2 with hole traps as the ETL is an innovative and effective way to enhance the operational stability of the PSCs, which can be further developed.
As mentioned above, due to the photo-instability of TiO2, which may influence the long-term operational stability of corresponding PSCs, another metal oxide SnO2 and modified SnO2 is gradually adopted in fabricating highly efficient and stable PSCs.239 In 2016, Anaraki et al. developed a simple, low temperature, solution processing method to obtain high quality SnO2 films.240 The spin-coated (SC) SnO2 film was post-treated by chemical bath deposition (SC-CBD), to improve the uniformity and then to enhance the hole-blocking capability of the SnO2 layer (Fig. 24a), which delivered a PCE close to 21% in the resulting PSC. Most importantly, the SC-CBD based PSCs (unencapsulated) kept 83.3% of their initial PCE after 60 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 20 °C (Fig. 24b), which indicated that the pinhole-free and uniform SnO2 film was important for obtaining high-performance and operationally stable PSCs. In addition, Yang et al. introduced ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) into the SnO2 film (namely E-SnO2),241 finding that the charge accumulation at the perovskite/ETL interface was effectively eliminated, since the electron mobility of the E-SnO2 film increased by about three times compared to that of SnO2. Besides, the SnO2 surface became more hydrophilic upon EDTA treatment, which decreased the Gibbs free energy for heterogeneous nucleation, thus resulting in the high quality of the perovskite film. Based on these advantages, the resulting planar-type PSCs (unencapsulated) obtained a high PCE of 21.6%, and maintained 86% of their initial PCE after 120 h ageing under 1-sun illumination, while the devices using SnO2 retained only 38% relative to their original efficiency (Fig. 24c). Similar to the fact that EDTA is an excellent improver for ETLs in organic solar cells,242 this work has shown that the EDTA is indeed chelated with SnO2. Thus this type of chelators can be further developed to obtain more efficient and stable PSCs.
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of different steps in all-solution processing methods of SnO2 thin film deposition: spin coating (SC, left) and chemical bath deposition (CBD, right). (b) Long-term ageing of SC-CBD fabricated SnO2 film based PSCs under MPPT and constant 1 sun equivalent, with N2 flow at 20 °C. Reproduced from ref. 240 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (c) Long-term stability measurements of devices without any encapsulation under illumination of 100 mW cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 241 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. (d) Schematic illustration of the formation map for the superoxide precursor colloidal solution. (e) Photostability tests under constant AM 1.5G illumination with a xenon lamp, including UV radiation for two unencapsulated devices of FTO/LBSO/MAPbI3/PTAA/Au and FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA/Au. (f) Long-term photostability test under constant AM 1.5G illumination with a metal-halide lamp, including UV radiation for two encapsulated devices of FTO/LBSO/MAPbI3/NiO/FTO and FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/NiO/FTO. Reproduced from ref. 246 with permission from Science, copyright 2017. 
Besides SnO2, another type of Sn-based oxide is BaSnO3 (BSO), an n-type semiconducting perovskite with a wide band gap of 3.2 eV.232 In particular, La-doped BSO (LBSO) exhibits a high electrical mobility at room temperature (320 cm2 V−1 s−1 at a La-doping concentration of 8 × 1019 cm−3)243 and has negligible UV photocatalytic ability because of its small dipole moment, originating from its cubic perovskite structure without octahedral tilting,244 these advantages facilitate LBSO to be an effective and stable ETL in PSC devices. However, the fabrication of such a material generally needs a high crystallization temperature of >1000 °C,245 which cannot be applied onto flexible or even glass substrates. In 2017, Shin et al. demonstrated a crystalline superoxide-molecular cluster (CSMC) colloidal solution containing well-dispersed CSMC LBSO nanoparticles in 2-methoxyethanol (2ME) (Fig. 24d),246 which could form a compact and uniform LBSO layer by spin-coating the solution onto the FTO substrate and then annealing below 300 °C through an intermediate peroxo-complex. A deep study revealed that the formation of a superoxide molecular cluster with a perovskite frame required lower phase-transition energy, and presented a faster pathway to the thermodynamically stable cubic perovskite LBSO phase. Based on low-temperature fabricated LBSO ETLs, the resulting PSCs (encapsulated) exhibited a high PCE of 21.2%, and retained 93.3% of their initial PCE after 1000 h 1-sun illumination at 25 °C, while the TiO2 based PSCs completely degraded within 500 h under the same conditions (Fig. 24e and f). This result provides useful guidance to obtain more efficient and operationally stable PSCs based on perovskite-type oxides as ETLs, which should be further developed.
In summary, most of the metal oxide based ETLs require high temperatures to obtain high crystallinity, so decreasing the fabrication temperature while keeping their optoelectronic properties is still challenging. As mentioned above, there have been some effective methods such as doping of ions, modifying fabrication processes to acquire efficient metal oxide ETLs at low temperatures, which can be further developed to expand their application window in perovskite PV technology. In addition, considering the photo-instability of TiO2, developing other types of metal oxides such as SnO2 is a more promising way to fabricate PSCs with high operational stability.


4.1.2 Fullerene based ETLs. 
Fullerenes (such as PCBM and C60) as a typical n-type material are widely used in a variety of solar cells. In 2015, Wojciechowski et al. used C60 as the ETL in a regular n–i–p architecture PSCs,234 finding that the electron extraction efficiency from the perovskite to C60 was improved compared to that of TiO2, which was attributed to the better band alignment and the electronic coupling between the perovskite and C60. In addition, the self-assembly property of C60 could enhance the chemical contact between the bottom electrode and ETL, and thus the electron transportation across these layers. Based on these advantages, the resulting C60 based PSCs (encapsulated) preserved over 50% of their initial PCE after 500 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (no UV filter) at 60 °C, while the TiO2-based PSCs kept about 30% of original PCE after 500 h under the same conditions (Fig. 25a). This result indicates that C60 can help to overcome the issue of UV instability existing in TiO2. To further improve the efficiency and stability of C60 based PSCs, Wang et al. employed an effective n-doping of C60 by using 4-(1,3-dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)-N,N-diphenylaniline (N-DPBI),247 finding that the aromatic phenyl rings of N-DPBI could stabilize the radical species through resonance, ensuring a stable doped formulation over time. A deep study revealed that a reaction between the N-DPBI dopant and the host C60 would lead to the formation of C60 radical anions, which are responsible for the n-doping effect.248,249 In addition, the incorporation of N-DPBI into C60 increased the wettability of the C60 film, which could be due to the increased surface energy of C60 films in the presence of triphenyl rings in N-DPBI dopant molecules.250 As such, the resulting PSCs (encapsulated) retained over 75% of their initial PCE after 2000 h of ageing under 1-sun illumination at the open-circuit state in air, while the undoped C60 based PSCs kept 56% of the original PCE after 2000 h under the same conditions (Fig. 25b and c). All of these results point out the great potential of fullerenes in obtaining highly efficient and operationally stable PSCs. Additionally, due to the solubility in weak polar solvent (such as chlorobenzene) and the compatibility with the low-temperature process, these materials can be applied in both n–i–p and p–i–n devices, which are more commonly adopted in various kinds of PSCs compared to metal oxides.
 Fig. 25  (a) Evolution of normalized photovoltaic parameters extracted from JV curves measured every 65 min (from the top: fill factor, open circuit-voltage, short-circuit current), and efficiency at the maximum power point (bottom panel) of the cells with C60 and TiO2 compact layer kept under a load for a period of 500 h at 60 °C. Reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. Comparison of stability of MAPbIxCl3−x (with neat C60) and FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4) perovskite devices with neat (control) and 1 wt% N-DPBI doped C60 electron-transporting layers. The devices (b) nonencapsulated and (c) encapsulated with a hot-melt polymer foil and a glass coverslip were aged under full spectrum simulated AM 1.5, 76 mW cm−2 average irradiance at Voc in air without a UV filter. Reproduced from ref. 247 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. 
In summary, most of the ETLs (including metal oxides and fullerenes) are modified through n-type doping to obtain higher electron conductivity, better band alignment, and fewer defects. Combined with the modification of their morphology, especially reducing pinholes to obtain uniform and compact ETL films, the operational stability of corresponding PSCs was largely improved. The existing modification approaches are summarized in Table 5, and further development can be focused on either finding new and effective ETL materials or combining two ETL materials to form a bilayer.251
Table 5 The summary of operational lifetimes of PSCs based on ETL modification




Device structure
Modification method
Encapsulation
Test conditions
Lifetime
Ref.




FTO/chlorine-capped TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using chlorine-capped TiO2
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere
500 h with 90% PCE retention

9



FTO/NiMgLiO/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ti(Nb)Ox/Ag
Using Nb5+-doped TiO2
Yes
1-sun illumination under short-circuit conditions at 45–50 °C
1000 h with 90% PCE retention

235



FTO/defective TiO2/MAPbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using defective TiO2
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere
100 h with 90% PCE retention

238



FTO/SnO2/FAMACsPb(IBr)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using chemical bath deposition modified SnO2
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 20 °C
60 h with 83.3% PCE retention

240



FTO/SnO2/FA1−xCsxPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using EDTA modified SnO2
No
Under 1-sun illumination
120 h with 86% PCE retention

241



FTO/La-doped BaSnO3/MAPbI3/NiO/FTO
Using La-doped BaSnO3 as ETL
Yes
Under 1-sun illumination at 25 °C
1000 h with 93.3% PCE retention

246



FTO/C60/MAPb(ICl)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using C60 as ETL
Yes
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 60 °C
500 h with 50% PCE retention

234



FTO/N-DPBI doped C60/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using N-DPBI doped C60 as ETL
Yes
1-sun illumination under open-circuit conditions in air
2000 h with 75% PCE retention

247






4.2 Hole transport layers modification
Hole transport layers (HTLs), as the hole extraction and electron blocking materials, can largely determine the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.252–254 The commonly used HTLs are also divided into organic HTLs such as spiro-OMeTAD, PTAA, P3HT, EH44, etc. and inorganic HTLs such as NiOx, CuSCN, CuI, etc. Their common drawback is poor morphology (not compact, which can induce shunting paths during carrier transport) and low conductivity, resulting in unfavorable carrier transportation and ion migration at the perovskite/HTL/electrode interface. For organic HTLs, a series of metal-salts such as Li-TFSI are doped into HTL films to improve the conductivity. However, due to the incompatibility between metal-salts and organic molecules, the introduction of metal-salts will bring in extra pinholes in the as-formed organic HTLs.79 In addition, the hygroscopicity and chemical activity of the metal-salts will induce unfavorable reaction with polar molecules such as H2O and O2,255 and the mobile metal ions would migrate across the whole PSC device upon operation, further accelerating the degradation of organic HTL films. Most importantly, the low thermal resistance of organic molecules (tend to crystallize or even decompose at high-temperature) highly limit their application in the actual operation. For inorganic HTLs, the low crystallinity resulting from low-temperature processing is still the major reason responsible for their low conductivity. Besides, most of the strong polar solvents (such as H2O) used to dissolve these inorganic materials can degrade the perovskite layer; thus, it is hard to apply this kind of inorganic HTLs in the n–i–p structured PSCs through a simple solution processing. Therefore, the following text will focus on the HTL adjustments, such as spiro-OMeTAD modification, using new HTLs, and HTL-free strategies, to improve the operational stability of corresponding PSCs.

4.2.1 Spiro-OMeTAD modification. 
Among various HTLs, spiro-OMeTAD is the most adaptable one in the state-of-the-art n–i–p PSCs,11,12,14 thanks to its suitable highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level and excellent hole-extraction and transportation abilities.256 However, PSC devices employing spiro-OMeTAD were associated with severe degradation against thermal stress because of the low glass-transition temperature (Tg) (121 °C), which was further decreased with the involvement of the additives, e.g. Li-TFSI.257,258 Additionally, the presence of pinholes in spiro-OMeTAD layers can serve as ion migration channels, which deteriorates the optoelectronic properties and long-term stability of the resulting PSCs.79,254,259,260
To reduce the pinholes of as-formed spiro-OMeTAD layers, Niu et al. reported that the introduction of poly(4-vinylpyridine) (P4VP) in spiro-OMeTAD during film fabrication could suppress the void formation during long-term exposure to humid air.79 In addition, Ono et al. reported a convenient methodology to fabricate pinhole free spiro-OMeTAD based HTLs by changing the solvent from the commonly used chlorobenzene to chloroform.261 The results showed that pinholes existed in the spiro-OMeTAD films prepared by using chlorobenzene (Fig. 26a), also resulting in voids and a large amount of iodine-containing compounds on the Au top electrode (Fig. 26b). In contrast, using chloroform to fabricate spiro-OMeTAD films could eliminate the pinholes probably due to the increased polarity of chloroform which could increase the compatibility of Li-TFSI and spiro-OMeTAD in the solution (Fig. 26a and b), and thus the iodine migration through HTLs was effectively inhibited. The resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) kept 50% of their initial PCE after 100 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in ambient air with 42% RH, while the chlorobenzene based PSCs lost the whole PCE after 14 h under the same conditions (Fig. 26c). This work highlights the importance of pinhole-free HTLs on the operational stability of PSCs, largely because pinholes can serve as channels for ion migration under illumination or an electric field, or the invasion of H2O and O2 under real operational conditions.
 Fig. 26  (a) Tapping mode AFM topography images of spiro-MeOTAD films prepared by using chlorobenzene (left) and chloroform (right). (b) SEM images of Au electrodes on the spiro-MeOTAD films prepared by using chlorobenzene (left) and chloroform (right). (c) Stability profile of the PSCs with spiro-OMeTAD dissolved in chlorobenzene (ClB cells) and chloroform (ClF cells) operated under air with a controlled relative humidity of ∼42%. When the cells were not under I–V measurements, a constant voltage was supplied to the cells matching the voltage at the maximum power point. Reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (d) Cross-sectional SEM images of aged control (Li-TFSI doped) and optimized (spiro-OMeTAD(TFSI)2 doped) devices; the emerged voids across the perovskite/HTL interface are highlighted with red circles. (e) Evolution of PCE in a long-term stability test of control and optimized devices; the devices were unencapsulated and aged under continuous 1-sun illumination at 40% RH and 50 °C for 300 h. Reproduced from ref. 262 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (f) Chemical structures of DM and evolution of normalized power conversion efficiency obtained a from DM-based device with encapsulation under maximum power point tracking and continuous light irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2, white LED) at 25 °C. Reproduced from ref. 263 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. 
To obtain better conductivity, the spiro-OMeTAD materials always use the additive of lithium-bis (trifluoromethane) sulfonimide (Li-TFSI); however, Li-TFSI is hygroscopic, which can adsorb ambient water, thus resulting in extra pinholes in the doped spiro-OMeTAD film. To solve this problem, Tan et al. employed spiro-OMeTAD(TFSI)2 as effective p-dopant molecules to replace Li-TFSI.262Via the reaction spiro-OMeTAD2+ + spiro-OMeTAD → 2 spiro-OMeTAD+, pure spiro-OMeTAD+ without any impurities (such as Li+) was formed, which directly provided high conductivity in HTL films with low series resistance, fast hole extraction, and lower interfacial charge recombination. Moreover, the spiro-OMeTAD(TFSI)2 doped HTLs showed better morphology without forming aggregates or voids when tested under an ambient atmosphere (Fig. 26d), Based on these benefits, the resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) retained 65% of their initial PCE after 300 h under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 50 °C and RH about 40%, while the Li-TFSI based PSCs kept only 40% of the original PCE after 300 h under the same conditions (Fig. 26e). This result provides useful guidance to oxidize spiro-OMeTAD by using Li-free additives, further inhibiting the formation of pinholes and improving the operational stability of PSCs under environmental conditions.
To increase the Tg of spiro-OMeTAD materials so that the corresponding PSCs can operate at higher temperatures, Jeon et al. introduced a fluorene unit as a new peripheral group to instead p-anisole of spiro-OMeTAD (which is abbreviated as DM, Fig. 26f).263 The fluorene-terminated DM molecules exhibited a higher Tg of 161 °C, as compared to spiro-OMeTAD of 121 °C. By carefully optimizing the amounts of additives (Li-TFSI and TBP), the DM-based PSCs eventually showed a high PCE of 22.91%, which was similar to that of spiro-OMeTAD based ones (23.05%). Most importantly, the Tg of additive-doped DM powder was about 90 °C, much higher than that of additive-doped spiro-OMeTAD (50 °C).257 The enhanced Tg of HTLs increased the application window of PSCs under operational conditions, where the DM based PSCs (encapsulated) maintained 92.6% of their initial PCE after 310 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 25 °C (Fig. 26f). These results indicate that the appropriate molecular tailoring of spiro-OMeTAD is useful to obtain more stable HTLs, which should be further developed.


4.2.2 New HTLs. 
Since spiro-OMeTAD is not likely to be commercialized, some new HTLs are explored to obtain more operationally stable PSCs without losing too much efficiency. There are two kinds of new HTLs: organic and inorganic materials. In 2018, Christians et al. prepared a Li+-free hydrophobic HTL based on EH44 (9-(2-ethylhexyl)-N,N,N,N-tetrakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-9H-carbazole-2,7-diamine),49 which contained π-conjugated methoxyphenyl groups to enable similar electronic and charge-transport properties to those of spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. 27a). Further, the core of EH44 is a carbazole group which allows additional functionalization of hydrophobic alkyl at the N position.264 By using silver bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Ag-TFSI) to oxidize EH44, it yielded EH44+TFSI− to improve the conductivity. And the resulting PSCs exhibited a PCE of 18.5%, which was similar to that of spiro-OMeTAD based ones (19.6%). Most importantly, due to the improved hydrophobicity of EH44, the corresponding PSCs (unencapsulated) retained 77% of their initial PCE after 160 h under ISOS-L-1 (International Summit on Organic Photovoltaic Stability) testing conditions (devices were held at a static load resistance of 510 Ω under 1-sun illumination under ambient conditions),265 while the spiro-OMeTAD based PSCs only kept 30% of their original PCE after 160 h under the same ageing conditions (Fig. 27b).
 Fig. 27  (a) Chemical structure of neat EH44 (top) and spiro-OMeTAD (bottom). (b) PSCs with the HTL layer of either spiro-OMeTAD (black) or EH44 (yellow) were subjected to continuous operation (resistive load of 510 Ω) under ambient conditions. The ambient relative humidity (RH, black, left axis) and room temperature (red, right axis) were monitored during the course of the experiments (top) and the average efficiency obtained as a function of time from seven devices for each HTL is shown with error bars that represent the standard deviation of the devices (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. (c) Results of operational stability tests on the encapsulated control and DHA devices by tracking at their maximum power points under 1-Sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Nature, copyright 2019. 
In addition, Jung et al. proposed a PSC architecture for highly efficient perovskite solar cells using P3HT as the HTL without any dopants in contact with the modified perovskite layer.10 Earlier works showed that a strong electronic coupling between the P3HT molecules and the perovskites resulted in a relatively low carrier lifetime,266 and physically poor contact hampered efficient hole transfer from the perovskite to P3HT.267 To solve these problems, this work introduced a double-layered halide architecture (DHA) in which an ultrathin wide-bandgap halide (WBH) was stacked onto a narrow-bandgap-halide (NBH) light-absorbing layer, prior to deposition of the HTL. And the WBH layer was formed by the in situ reaction of n-hexyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (HTAB) on the perovskite surface. A deep study revealed that when P3HT was deposited onto the surface of the DHA, interdigitation of its alkyl chains and the analogous alkyl chains of HTAB (C6H13−) could promote the self-assembly of P3HT and enhance their van der Waals interactions. In addition, the self-assembled P3HT nano-fibrils with strong π–π interactions led to a considerably higher mobility without any dopants than amorphous P3HT. Thus, the resulting PSCs exhibited better optoelectronic properties (certified PCE of 22.7%) and operational stability: maintained 95% of their initial PCE after 1370 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at room temperature when encapsulated, while the reference showed severe degradation within 100 h under the same conditions (Fig. 27c). This result highlights the HTL morphology and the interaction between HTL and perovskites, which can impact the operational stability of PSCs. Besides, Abate et al. reported that methoxy triphenylamines with a silolothiophene functional group (Si-OMeTPAs) exhibited better thermal stability than spiro-OMeTAD,268 thus the resulting PSCs could keep 90% of their initial PCE after 200 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 45 °C. Other relatively thermally stable materials such as PTAA,269 MPA-BTTI,270 and DBC-OMeDPA271 are also proven to be effective in improving the operational stability of PSCs.
The other class of new HTLs are the inorganic materials. Due to the lower fabrication cost and higher thermal stability compared to organic HTLs, inorganic molecules such as NiO,235,272,273 CuI,274 and CuSCN275 are the promising candidates to obtain more stable PSCs under various conditions. However, a critical issue associated with solution process is that most of the solvents used to dissolve these inorganic materials can degrade the perovskite layer.276 Thus these inorganic HTLs are often deposited prior to the perovskite fabrication in inverted (p–i–n) devices.124,277 However in 2017, Arora et al. deposited a thin and uniform CuSCN layer on top of the perovskites.278 They drop-casted a defined volume of CuSCN solution of diethyl sulfide in 2–3 s to retain the quality of the perovskite underneath. It further demonstrated that the CuSCN domains had homogeneous coverage and preferential orientation with the long unit cell axis paralleled to the substrate (Fig. 28a). By employing the reduced graphene oxide (rGO) as a spacer layer between CuSCN and Au electrode, the undesired barrier which was formed by the electric field induced reaction between gold and the thiocyanate anions was effectively eliminated. Based on these modifications, the resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) exhibited a high PCE over 20%, and retained >95% of their initial efficiency after 1000 hours MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 60 °C (Fig. 28b).
 Fig. 28  (a) The preferential out-of-plane orientation of CuSCN (the in-plane orientation is rotated by 90°). Color code: red, copper atoms; yellow, sulfur atoms; gray, carbon atoms; blue, nitrogen atoms. (b) Operational stability of an unencapsulated CuSCN-based device with and without a thin layer of rGO (as a spacer layer between CuSCN and gold layers), examined at a maximum power point under continuous full-sun illumination at 60 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere. Reproduced from ref. 278 with permission from Science, copyright 2017. 
Besides, NiOx is also a widely used HTL material in PSCs,279 which exhibited remarkable stability.75,246,280 All of these results provide great potentiality in applying inorganic HTLs to obtain stable PSCs in real operation conditions. The next challenge is to improve the PCE of corresponding PSC devices with sufficient long lifetime. Possible attempts may focus on the composites that combine both the inorganic and organic materials,281etc.


4.2.3 HTL-free. 
In the history of PSC development, the HTL-free configuration is a special category, which exhibits good stability. In addition, HTL-free devices can reduce the fabrication cost and the complexity of processing substantially, which is promising to be applied for large scale fabrication.282 Up to now, the highest PCE of HTL-free PSC is 20.2%, which was achieved by doping F4TCNQ into MAPbI3 films.283 In 2019, Zhou et al. reported fluorinated tetraarylbenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dipyrrol-1,5-yl alkanediylsulfonate salt (BDPSO) as the additive in perovskite films.284 It contains two ionic side chains, which could interact with uncoordinated lead atoms in perovskite and the ITO surface. Therefore it effectively passivated the defects at the GBs and the ITO/perovskite interfaces to suppress charge recombination (Fig. 29a and b). In addition, the HOMO level of BDPSO matched well with perovskites to facilitate hole transportation, and the resulting HTL-free PSCs (encapsulated) exhibited a PCE of 16.9%, and retained >80% of their initial efficiency after 1300 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 35 °C (Fig. 29c). From these results we can conclude that instead of HTL, p-type doping in perovskites is necessary for highly efficient and operationally stable devices when HTL is omitted. Yet, it is challenging to further reduce carrier recombination at the perovskite/electrode interface without the HTLs (electron barriers). Besides this, another type of HTL-free PSC adopts carbon electrodes,18 which will be discussed later.
 Fig. 29  (a) Device architecture of HTL-free p–i–n PSC prepared using BDPSO doping. (b) Effects of BDPSO dopants to passivate defects and facilitate charge transfer between perovskite grains and at the interface. (c) Operational stability test of the encapsulated 16 mm2 device under light soaking at MPP (1-sun; with a 420 nm UV light cutoff filter; 35 °C; bias potential, 0 V). Reproduced from ref. 284 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
In short, most of the high efficiency PSCs use organic HTLs such as spiro-OMeTAD, PTAA, etc. These molecules exhibit well aligned energy levels with perovskites so that the energy loss during carrier transport is largely reduced. Unfortunately, most organic HTLs are thermally unstable, and even worse, ionic additives are always incorporated into them for higher conductivity to bring in more unstable factors. Inorganic HTLs and HTL-free strategies are proven to be effective in improving the stability of PSCs, but their poor device efficiency is the major hindrance for their commercialization. The existing HTL modification approaches to improve the operational stability of PSCs are summarized as Table 6. Future research may focus on obtaining hybrid HTLs that combines organic and inorganic materials together, or developing more stable (especially dopant-free) organic HTLs and more efficient inorganic HTLs if used individually.
Table 6 The summary of operational lifetimes of PSCs based on HTL modification




Device structure
Modification method
Encapsulation
Test conditions
Lifetime
Ref.




FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using chloroform solvent
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination with RH about 42%
100 h with 50% PCE retention

261



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/Rb0.05Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.07PbBr0.4I2.57/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using spiro-OMeTAD(TFSI)2 additive
No
1-sun illumination at temperature about 50 °C and RH about 40%
300 h with 65% PCE retention

262



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05/DM/Au
Using DM as HTL
Yes
MPP tracking at 25 °C under 1-sun illumination
310 h with 92.6% PCE retention

263



FTO/TiO2/(FA0.76MA0.21Cs0.03)0.67Pb(I0.89Br0.11)2.56/EH44/Au
Using EH44 as HTL and Ag-TFSI as additives
No
ISOS-L-1 testing standard (devices were held at a static load resistance of 510 Ω under 1-sun illumination under ambient conditions)
160 h with 77% PCE retention

49



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05/P3HT/Au
Using P3HT as HTL
Yes
MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination
1370 h with 95% PCE retention

10



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsFAMAPbI3−xBrx/CuSCN/Au
Using CuSCN as HTL
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 60 °C
1000 h with 95% PCE retention

278



ITO/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag
HTL free
Yes
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 35 °C
1300 h with 80% PCE retention

284






4.3 Interface modification between HTL and electrode
There are two interfaces with relevance to HTLs: HTL/perovskite and HTL/electrodes. The interface between the perovskite and HTL has attracted much attention in the past few years, and some effective approaches to improve the operational stability of the corresponding PSCs have been summarized in the “Surface passivation of perovskites” section. However, the interface between the HTL and electrodes also influences the long-term stability of PSCs, due to the possible ion diffusion from the electrode to HTL (even to perovskite), and undesired reactions of electrodes and halides (halides originate from the perovskite and migrate through the HTL). The formation of metal halides (such as AgI) at HTL/electrodes will largely increase the series resistance of PSCs.285 In addition, the not fully covered electrode will increase the interaction between the HTL and environmental molecules, which brings in extra instability issues. To solve these problems, an interface layer between the HTL and electrode is investigated to improve the operational stability of PSCs. In 2017, Hou et al. developed a ionic dopant-free HTL poly[5,5′-bis(2-butyloctyl)-(2,2′-bithiophene)-4,4′-dicarboxylate-alt-5,5′-2,2′-bithiophene] (PDCBT),286 and an interface layer between PDCBT and the Au electrode, namely, tantalum-doped tungsten oxide (Ta-WOx), which allows a substantial reduction in the transport barrier between the electrode and π-conjugated HTLs (Fig. 30a and b). It revealed that Ta-WOx introduced a larger hole density of the PDCBT via transfer of electrons from the polymer to the metal oxides, thus the hole extraction from the perovskite to PDCBT became more efficient. In addition, compared to WOx, Ta-WOx showed enhanced conductivity to form selective but low-resistance contacts. Further, Ta-WOx suppressed diffusion of Au into and across the HTL, which otherwise would cause interface shunts and lead to an increase in leakage current.287 The resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) maintained almost 95% of their initial PCE after 1000 h ageing under 1-sun illumination in a N2 atmosphere, while the spiro-OMeTAD and MoOx-based devices exhibited short lifetimes (<200 hours) under the same conditions (Fig. 30c). This result highlights the importance of small interface barriers and quasi-ohmic contacts between charge transport layers and electrodes, which provides useful guidance to fabricate more stable PSCs.
 Fig. 30  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a complete perovskite device based on ITO/C60-SAM/perovskite/PDCBT/Ta-WOx/Au. Scale bar, 500 nm. (b) Corresponding SEM image of a focused ion beam polished cross section. Scale bar, 500 nm. (c) Unencapsulated device photostability tests under continuous 1-sun illumination in a home-built chamber filled with N2. PCE variation of the HTL stacks: spiro-MeOTAD/MoOx/Au (yellow), PDCBT/MoOx/Au (green), and PDCBT/Ta-WOx/Au (gray). Reproduced from ref. 286 with permission from Science, copyright 2017. (d) Results of maximum power point tracking aging of the corresponding devices. The aging was done under 1 sun illumination at 75 °C and N2 flow. The values are normalized to the initial ones. Reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Besides, Domanski et al. reported that by introducing a chromium (Cr) interlayer between the HTL and Au electrode, high-temperature induced irreversible performance losses were avoided.287 It is found that considerable amounts of Au could diffuse across the HTL into the perovskite layer at high temperatures (over 70 °C), which led to shunting paths to reduce the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) of PSCs.288 Moreover, Au atoms could create deep trap states within the perovskite, which enhanced the non-radiative recombination sites.289 Fortunately, by using Cr as the interlayer between Au and the HTL, the Au diffusion was effectively hindered. The resulting PSCs (unencapsulated) exhibited better operational stability at high temperatures: maintained 83% of their initial PCE after 12 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 75 °C, while the Cr-free PSCs only kept 50% of their original PCE after 12 h under the same conditions (Fig. 30d). From these results we can conclude that the effective hindrance of ion migration from the electrode to HTL and perovskite is helpful to obtain more stable PSCs under operational conditions.
4.4 Carbon electrodes
Au is commonly used in PSCs due to its superior conductivity and relatively good chemical robustness. However, Au can diffuse into the HTL and perovskite under operational conditions, which is destructive for long-term stability of PSCs. Another common electrode Ag is even more chemically unstable, which is prone to react with iodine migrated from absorbers to alter the electronic properties of the Ag/HTL interface.285,290 A similar phenomenon has also been shown for Al,291 which indicates that these metal electrodes have some unfavorable factors for PSC stability. To find alternatives, another type of electrode carbon is gradually investigated. Mei et al. fabricated a solar cell using a double layer of mesoporous TiO2 and ZrO2 covered with a porous carbon film (Fig. 31a).292 The perovskite was infiltrated into the porous TiO2/ZrO2 scaffold by drop-casting a solution through the printed carbon layer. Based on this HTL-free structure, the resulting carbon electrode based PSCs (unencapsulated) kept nearly 100% of their initial PCE after 1008 h ageing under 1-sun illumination in ambient air (Fig. 31b), meaning that the perovskite was well protected by the carbon layer as the back contact. Most importantly, the Fermi level of carbon is at −5.0 eV, which is close to the valence band edge of the perovskite (at about −5.4 eV) to collect holes. In addition, Grancini et al. used a similar PSC device structure to fabricate large area 10 × 10 cm2 solar modules (encapsulated),18 and found that they also kept 100% of their initial PCE after 10000 h ageing under 1-sun illumination and short circuit conditions in ambient air at a cycling temperature from 35 to 90 °C (Fig. 31c). Although these works do not monitor the MPP tracking stability of resultant PSCs, the excellent illumination stability in ambient air at elevated temperatures shows great potential to further develop this electrode for stable PSCs. Note that the carbon based PSC is also an ideal candidate to pass damp heat testing,76 which is more stable than metals. However, the efficiency of carbon based PSCs (especially HTL-free) is not sufficiently high, thus further development should focus on the device PCE, such as creating an intimate contact or introducing an electron blocking layer to reduce carrier recombination, etc.
 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic drawing showing the cross section of the triple-layer perovskite-based fully printable mesoscopic solar cell. The mesoporous layers of TiO2 and ZrO2 have a thickness of ∼1 and 2 μm, respectively, and are deposited on a FTO-covered glass sheet shown in blue and gray. They are infiltrated with perovskite by drop-casting from solution. (b) Stability test of a triple layer (5-AVA)x(MA)(1−x)PbI3 perovskite sensitized mesoscopic solar cell in full AM 1.5 simulated sunlight in ambient air over 1008 hours with an unsealed device. Reproduced from ref. 292 with permission from Science, copyright 2014. (c) Typical module stability test under 1 sun AM 1.5G conditions at a stabilized temperature of 55 °C and under short circuit conditions. Stability measurements done according to the standard aging conditions. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Nature, copyright 2017. 
In summary, the main goal of modifying the interface between the HTL and electrode and using a carbon electrode is inhibiting the metal ion migration from the electrode to HTL, even to the perovskite. The relevant modifications are summarized in Table 7, which can be further developed to obtain commercially required PSCs under operational conditions.
Table 7 The summary of operational lifetimes of PSCs based on HTL/electrode interface modification and using a carbon electrode




Device structure
Modification method
Encapsulation
Test conditions
Lifetime
Ref.




ITO/C60-SAM/FA0.83MA0.17Pb1.1Br0.50I2.80/PDCBT/Ta-WOx/Au
Using Ta-WOx as the interface between HTL and Au
No
Under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere
1000 h with 95% PCE retention

286



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsFAMAPbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Cr/Au
Using Cr as the interface between HTL and Au
No
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 75 °C
12 h with 83% PCE retention

287



FTO/TiO2/ZrO2/(5-AVA)x(MA)1−xPbI3/C
Using carbon electrode
No
Under 1-sun illumination in ambient air
1008 h with 100% PCE retention

292



FTO/TiO2/ZrO2/(AVA)2PbI4/MAPbI3/C
Using carbon electrode
Yes
Under 1-sun illumination and short circuit conditions in ambient air at a cycling temperature from 35 to 90 °C
10000 h with 100% PCE retention

18





5. Device encapsulation
Encapsulation is the most effective approach, which is widely used to improve the environmental stability of various electronic devices and solar cells. In PSCs, encapsulation provides barriers not only to prevent the invasion of moisture and oxygen, but more importantly, to suppress the escape of volatile products from perovskite decomposition. In this scenario, encapsulation plays multi-fold roles to strengthen the perovskite devices. Considering the hybrid nature of perovskite materials that are not chemically inert, encapsulation techniques are developed not only in line with the established technology applied in other areas, but also with considerable modifications to fit the requirements for PSCs. Several representative attempts have been well documented with the major focus on encapsulants which may affect the perovskite layer significantly: (1) encapsulation by double glass substrates using the ultraviolet resin to form a water barrier;83 (2) employing EVA as encapsulants to prevent the oxidation of perovskites and moisture ingression;75 (3) glass–glass encapsulation technique with PIB as encapsulants which are processed at low temperature;77 and (4) using thermally crosslinkable ER films as encapsulants in double glass encapsulation against the hail impact based on self-healing properties of ER films.83 These encapsulating approaches accumulatively contribute to improve the robustness of PSCs against moisture, thermal stress, and hail impact stability (details can be found in Section 2.2). With the aid of effective encapsulation, the longest MPP tracking lifetime of PSCs to date has been reported by Islam et al., where the PSCs kept nearly 100% of their initial PCE after 4000 h under 1-sun illumination.293 However, whether the encapsulation process itself influences the long-term stability of PSCs under operational conditions is not clear yet. In addition, how to select and modify the encapsulant by considering both the device architecture and encapsulation structure to reduce the potential damage of illumination (especially ultraviolet) is also crucial to further improve the operational stability of PSCs.
In 2020, Ma et al. demonstrated a solvent-free and low-temperature encapsulation strategy for the PSC, by using paraffin as an encapsulation material.44 Compared to commonly used UV-curable adhesive (UVCA), whose outgassed vapor could damage the perovskite during UV-curing,294,295 this encapsulation method shows improved compatibility with the fragile perovskite absorber. Besides, the nonpolar paraffin could effectively remove the residual oxygen and moisture during the encapsulation process, preventing the perovskite from phase segregation, and suppressing the volatilization of the perovskite to impede its decomposition. The resulting PSCs (encapsulated) retained over 80% of their initial PCE after 1000 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in an ambient environment with RH around 30–50%, while the paraffin-free, UVCA encapsulated PSCs almost lost the whole PCE within 10 h due to the existence of oxygen and moisture in the headspace above the devices. The thermal and moisture stability of PSCs were also improved by introducing paraffin (Fig. 32a–e). Most importantly, this solvent-free encapsulation method based on paraffin could be operated in an ambient environment, which was readily to be adopted by mass production, thus providing new insight for further development of encapsulation technology for commercialization of perovskite optoelectronics.
 Fig. 32  The UV-vis absorption spectra of (a) UVCA without paraffin and (b) UVCA with paraffin encapsulation, and inset photos show devices after encapsulation from both sides. (c) Thermal stability and (d) moisture stability track of encapsulated devices. (e) Continuous MPP track in an ambient environment with different encapsulation conditions. Inset: The MPP track of UVCA without paraffin encapsulation in a short time range. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (f) Illustration of adding Pb-absorbing materials—DMDP film and EDTMP–PEO film—on the front (glass) and back (metal electrode) sides of PSCs, respectively (left), and molecular structures of DMDP and EDTMP (right). (g) Operational stability for PSCs prepared with and without the Pb-absorbing layers. All devices are covered with an EVA layer. Reproduced from ref. 296 with permission from Nature, copyright 2020. 
Besides the encapsulation process itself, “functionalized encapsulation” by introducing some functional layers on the front or back side of PSCs is also applied to obtain more stable and environmentally friendly solar devices. For example, Bella et al. used a luminescent downshifting (LDS) fluoropolymeric layer on the glass side of PSCs to reduce the negative effect of UV light, as well as a strongly moisture resistant fluoropolymeric layer on the contact side of PSCs to improve their humidity stability (details have been discussed in Section 2.2).78 Combining these two layers, the encapsulated PSCs kept 95% of their initial efficiency under outdoor operating conditions (exposed on the terrace of the Politecnico di Torino building in Turin, Italy) for 3 months. In addition, considering the possible Pb leakage after glass fracture upon hail impact or mechanical load, Li et al. deposited a transparent lead-absorbing molecular film P,P′-di(2-ethylhexyl)methanediphosphonic acid (DMDP) on the glass side of PSCs,296 which contains phosphonic acid groups to strongly bind lead. Besides, to avoid the potential Pb leakage during water ingress into the perovskite layer and the subsequent irreversible outflow of Pb into underground water and/or soils, a polymer film N,N,N′,N′-ethylenediaminetetrakis (methylenephosphonic acid), namely, EDTMP, was deposited on the back (metal) electrode side of PSCs, to ensure that water doesn’t wash off the chelating agents or the formed Pb-chelating complex (Fig. 32f). Based on these functional layers, the resultant PSCs preserved 80% of their initial PCE after 500 h MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in air at about 50 °C (Fig. 32g), and most importantly, the applied Pb-absorbing layers could effectively reduce the lead leakage of PSCs, which largely promoted their practical application in the future.
In summary, device encapsulation is essential for real operation of PSCs in the future, while the advanced encapsulation technology, such as a solvent free process and extra functional layer based encapsulation will facilitate the fabrication of more stable and environmentally friendly PSCs under various operational conditions. The relevant modifications are summarized in Table 8, which can be further developed to promote the commercialization process of PSCs.
Table 8 The summary of operational lifetimes of PSCs based on effective encapsulation




Device structure
Modification method
Encapsulation
Test conditions
Lifetime
Ref.




ITO/SnO2/RbCsMAFAPb(I1−xBrx)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using paraffin as encapsulation material
Yes
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in ambient air with RH about 30–50%
1000 h with 80% PCE retention

44



ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/AZO/ITO
Using sputter deposited NiOx as HTL
Yes
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (no UV-light filtering) at 30 °C
4000 h with 100% PCE retention

293



FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/FA1−xMAxPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using luminescent downshifting materials
Yes
On the terrace of the Politecnico di Torino building in Turin (Italy)
2160 h with 95% PCE retention

78



FTO/TiO2/(CsPbI3)0.05(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Using Pb-absorbing layers
Yes
MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in air at about 50 °C
500 h with 80% PCE retention

296





6. Standardized monitor for operational stability of PSCs
On the basis of the above discussion, it is observed that the operational lifetime of PSCs is affected by many external factors such as the ambient air,297–299 temperature300–302 and the intensity and the type of the illumination source.303,304 Given the various test procedures and conditions, quite a large amount of results with regard to device stability are not available for direct comparison.305 Therefore, it is urgent to establish a unified stability test standard to obtain useful data that can be circulated over the community for meaningful interpretation and analysis. Organic photovoltaics (OPV) provide a great example to learn, which establish standardized ageing experiments at the International Summit on Organic PV Stability (ISOS). Research efforts on PSCs can also refer to ISOS to establish their own standard on stability tests. Perovskite solar cells share major similarities to OPV in materials properties of absorbers and device architectures, which may help to facilitate the creation of testing standards. Specifically, ISOS has different categories of test protocols: dark, outdoor, simulated light and stress testing and thermal cycling, which fit well to evaluate PSCs stability. These protocols all include three levels: basic (level 1), Intermediate (level 2) and Advanced (level 3). The temperature, humidity, light and electrical load are defined as different parameters (Table 9).265 Level 1 is the easiest to conduct with “hand held’’ measurements using the simplest equipment and few conditions (such as storage with no light source, or ageing under an inexpensive light source and open-circuit conditions, etc.). Levels 2 and 3 include more stringent test conditions such as MPP, and can provide higher levels of reliability on the results. Among all, the operational stability (such as MPP) is a very important factor in estimating the lifetime of solar cells, which should be monitored in future works to improve the reliability of stability results. By following the ISOS tests customized for PSCs, their operational stability can be well evaluated hopefully.
Table 9 Overview of different types of ISOS test protocols. Reproduced from ref. 265 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011




Three levels


Basic (level 1) “hand held” measurements using the simplest equipment and few conditions


Intermediate (level 2) fixed conditions and protocols suited for most labs


Advanced (level 3) standardized tests applied in certified labs. Extended range of parameters to monitor, etc.


Test type
Dark
Outdoor





a The ambient conditions are defined as 23 °C/50% RH in general, and 27 °C/65% RH accepted in tropical countries according to ISO 291(2008): Plastics—standard atmospheres for conditioning and testing.
b Open circuit refers to a simply disconnected device or device connected to a sourcemeter set to 0 current.





Test ID
ISOS-D-1
ISOS-D-2
ISOS-D-3
ISOS-O-1
ISOS-O-2
ISOS-O-3


Light source
(Shelf)
(High temp. storage)
(Damp heat)
(Outdoor)
(Outdoor)
(Outdoor)


Temp.a
None
None
None
Sunlight
Sunlight
Sunlight


Relative humidity (R.H.)a
Ambient
65/85 °C
65/85 °C
Ambient
Ambient
Ambient


Environmenta
Ambient
Ambient (low)
85%
Ambient
Ambient
Ambient


Characterization light source
Ambient
Oven
Env. Chamber
Outdoor
Outdoor
Outdoor


Loadb
Solar simulator or sunlight
Solar simulator
Solar simulator
Solar simulator
Sunlight
Solar simulator and sunlight




Open circuit
Open circuit
Open circuit
MPP or Open circuit
MPP or Open circuit
MPP






Test type
Laboratory weathering testing
Thermal cycling




Test ID
ISOS-L-1 (Laboratory weathering)
ISOS-L-2 (Laboratory weathering)
ISOS-L-3
ISOS-T-1
ISOS-T-2
ISOS-T-3


Light source
Simulator
Simulator
(Laboratory weathering)
(Thermal cycling)
(Thermal cycling)
(Thermal cycling)


Temp.a
Ambient
65/85 °C
Simulator
None
None
None


Relative humidity (R.H.)a
Ambient
Ambient
65/85 °C
Between room temp. and 65/85 °C
Between room temp. and 65/85 °C
−40 to +85 °C


Environment/setup
Light only
Light & Temp.
Near 50%
Ambient
Ambient
Near 55%


Characterization light source
Solar simulator
Solar simulator
Light, temp. and R.H.
Hot plate/oven
Oven/env. chamb.
Env. chamb.


Loadb
MPP or open circuit
MPP or open circuit
Solar simulator
Solar simulator or sunlight
Solar simulator
Solar simulator








MPP
Open circuit
Open circuit
Open circuit






Test type
Solar-thermal-humidity cycling




Test ID
ISOS-LT-1 (solar-thermal cycling)
ISOS-LT-2 (solar-thermal-humidity cycling)
ISOS-LT-3 (solar-thermal-humidity-freeze cycling)


Light source
Simulator
Simulator
Simulator


Temp.
Linear or step ramping between room temp. and 65 °C
Linear ramping between 5 and 65 °C
Linear ramping between −25 and 65 °C


Relative humidity (R.H.)
Monitored, uncontrolled
Monitored, controlled at 50% beyond 40 °C
Monitored, controlled at 50% beyond 40 °C


Environment/setup
Weathering chamber
Env. chamb. with sun simulation
Env. chamb. with sun simulation and freezing


Characterization light source
Solar simulator
Solar simulator
Solar simulator


Loadb
MPP or open circuit
MPP or open circuit
MPP or open circuit




Then how to establish an appropriate testing standard for operational stability of PSCs? In 2018, Domansk et al. systematically investigated the impact of operation conditions on the degradation behavior of perovskite solar cells, by comparing different electric loads including open-circuit, short-circuit and MPP conditions (Fig. 33a–c).306 Eventually, they found that ageing at the MPP state was the most appropriate way for evaluating the stability of PSCs due to its closest simulation of the actual operating conditions, while ageing at open or short circuit appeared to provide a conservative estimation. It is then proposed that ageing the PSCs with MPP tracking under a 1-sun solar simulator (possible to relax to white LEDs) illumination at both room and elevated temperatures in an inert environment is the most reliable way to monitor operational stability. Simultaneously, they carefully monitored the actual degradation trend of PSCs in the process of MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere at 20 °C. As shown in Fig. 33d, the degradation curve usually included two parts: exponential decline and linear decline. The first part (exponential decline) was a reversible process, whereas the performance of the devices could be recovered upon leaving them in the dark for an extended amount of time.307,308 Considering the aging behavior of PSCs containing a certain reversible degradation stage, they customized corresponding aging procedures by combining MPP tracking, dark treatment and periodic J–V scans, as shown in Fig. 33e. Considering that degradation may be different during J–V sweeps and under the MPP conditions, they performed “15 min MPP tracking – 100 mV s−1J–V scans – 15 min MPP tracking” cyclic tests in this work, so that devices can spend 98% of the total aging time under the MPP condition.
 Fig. 33  The devices were held at the MPP, open circuit or short circuit during the ageing period and their J–V curves were measured periodically. Evolution of (a) PCE, (b) Voc, (c) FF measured in the backward J–V scan (from Voc to Jsc); the values are normalized to the initial ones. The lines represent averaged behavior of devices, while the shaded area represents standard deviation. After 250 h of ageing under illumination, the devices were allowed to recover in the dark for 24 h before being re-measured. (d) The device shows an initial exponential loss region, followed by a slower linear region. A slope can be fitted to the linear region (broken line) to estimate device lifetime, T80. The device can recover part of its initial performance after being kept in the dark—in this case for 16 hours. The device was aged under a white LED lamp. (e) A schematic of the ageing procedure combining MPP tracking and periodic J–V scans. Reproduced from ref. 306 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. 
Besides, in the 11th International Summit on Organic and Hybrid Photovoltaics Stability held in Suzhou, China, many researchers discussed the suitability of applying ISOS stress protocols for the PSCs, and proposed additional stress tests such as electrical bias and light–dark cycling. They also identified that the key technical and procedural information about the PSCs stability testing should be included in future publications to obtain more transparent and repeatable results. Recently, Khenkin et al. collated and published relevant contents of the meeting,309 and corresponding MPP test procedures are also listed (Table 10). This indicates that to provide credible MPP results, we should conduct and report the following experimental procedures in detail truthfully: initial solar cell characterization; encapsulation; ageing conditions; ageing time; measurements during ageing; number of samples; and outdoor stability. With the higher transparency of the test procedures, useful information with respect to the operational stability can be extracted from the experimental results and meaningful comparisons, which will ultimately promote the commercialization process of PSCs.
Table 10 Suggested checklist for reporting data from stability tests. Reproduced from ref. 309 with permission from Nature, copyright 2020




Key aspects
Characteristics
Details to be reported




Initial solar cell characterization
Current–voltage (J–V) curves
Light source (light source type, intensity, spectrum, filters applied, calibration), scan speed, direction, dwelling time, the number of power line cycles (NPLC), preconditioning, and so on


MPP tracking or photocurrent at MPP
Hardware, tracking algorithm, delay time, tracking duration


EQE/IPCE spectra
Indicating the lock-in frequency and light bias if used, and if monochromatic light is smaller than active area, or larger and an optical mask applied. Calculated Jsc and its comparison to Jsc obtained from the J–V data






Encapsulation
Wiring
Materials, processing conditions, addition of a protective sealant


Front- and back-side encapsulation layer(s)
Materials (reference or composition, thickness), processing conditions (environment, temperature, duration)


Edge sealant
Materials (reference, thickness, width), processing conditions (environment, curing and so on)


Geometry
Rim (minimum distance between encapsulation edge and active area edge), device active area; picture or a scheme of the device






Ageing conditions
Light
Light source type, intensity, spectrum, filters applied, calibration


Temperature
In shadow and/or under illumination, temperature sensor type


Atmosphere
Air/glovebox/sealed pouch/environmental chamber, and so on; RH (controlled or monitored)


Electrical bias condition
Open circuit/maximum power point/short circuit/constant load


Cycling procedure (if applicable)
Dwell and period times


Comply with known protocols (IEC, ISOS and so on)?








Ageing time


Stress duration and corresponding performance loss, resting times (for example, without stress).






Measurements during ageing
Periodically recorded J–V curves
Recording frequency, scan parameters (similar to ‘Initial solar cell characterization’)


Recovery before measurements
Recovery time and conditions prior to the measurements.


MPP tracking
Tracking parameters (similar to ‘Initial solar cell characterization’)


Other periodic measurements (if applied)








Number of samples


Number of solar cells of each type tested under each ageing condition, statistical analysis (if applicable).


Number of samples still operating above a specified efficiency level at the end of the ageing test.






Outdoor stability
Location and time of exposure
Place or coordinates; dates and total amount of hours of exposure.


Weather conditions throughout the exposure period
Temperature, humidity, sunlight irradiance (preferably in tabulated format), wind speed, and so on.




In summary, the commercialization of new PV technologies must meet the requirements of high efficiency, low cost and excellent long-term operational stability. Efficiency-wise, standard procedures to measure PSCs have been generated step by step and gradually accepted in the PV community. However, the IEC test standards for conventional PV products (such as silicon) cannot be directly applied to PSCs due to the unique material properties and device behavior.22,306,310–314 A customized stability testing standard for PSC devices is thus urgently required. As mentioned above, operational stability, especially MPP tracking is the most important test to evaluate the commercial feasibility of PSCs. It is essential to conduct and report the MPP tracking at a laboratory level in a standard manner to promote the development of perovskite PV technology. Relevant standards should be further established and popularized in near future.
7. Conclusion and outlook
In summary, the recent fast development of perovskite solar cells is mostly due to the excellent and tunable optoelectronic properties of the materials which has been greatly leveraged by decades of research effects accumulated in the entire PV community. Moving from lab research to commercialization for PSCs, recent results have encouragingly convinced that the efficiency or cost is no longer the major concern, while their short lifetime during environmental ageing, especially under operational conditions, has become the new challenge. The whole bunch of IEC testing standards providing comprehensive and general guidance to evaluate all PV device stability should serve as a solid foundation to monitor the stability of PSCs under various environmental conditions with some specific modification. To date, some PSCs have already passed single IEC tests with strengthened perovskite films and device architectures by effective stabilization approaches and encapsulations as well. Due to the ionic and soft nature of perovskites however, it is challenging to obtain long-term stability of devices during their operation when illumination and electric fields are inevitably applied to trigger ion migration and phase segregation. How to obtain operationally stable PSCs is the most important issue to promote the commercialization process of perovskite PV technologies. By summarizing and analyzing the existing strategies to improve the operational stability of PSCs, we come to the conclusion in a layer-by-layer sequence as follows:
(1) Absorbers: the instability issues of perovskite films are mainly caused by various point defects (including charged and metallic defects), poor morphology (such as pinholes and small grains), and phase transitions (especially for FAPbI3 and CsPbI3). Under operational conditions, defects will accelerate ion migration within perovskite films with poor morphology, which leads to lattice deformation and transits into a photo-inactive phase. Moreover, existing defects introduce non-radiative recombination of free carriers, leading to substantial optoelectronic performance decay of PSCs. Fortunately, effective methods have been reported by introducing functionalized additives, adjusting perovskite components, and forming a passivation layer on the perovskite surface. Recently, some effective approaches have been demonstrated such as using hybrid components and adding MACl during perovskite fabrication, to achieve high efficiency and operationally stable PSCs.
(2) HTLs: the main hindrance is the low thermal resistance of additives in organic HTLs and low crystallinity of inorganic materials when processing at low temperatures. During device operation, morphological defects (e.g. pinholes) and electronic imperfections are developed to serve as shunting paths and recombination centers that deteriorate device performance. Employment of effective and stable additives to improve the film quality and conductivity of HTLs, and/or applying HTL-free device layout have proven to be useful in improving the operational stability of corresponding PSCs.
(3) ETLs: the high-temperature requirement and photo-instability of TiO2 are the major instability factors while operating PSCs. Effective doping, or replacing with tin-based oxides or fullerene based ETLs, shows great potential to obtain more stable PSCs under operation.
(4) Electrodes: diffusion and corrosion are the two major degradation paths. The metals migrate into the charge transport layer (especially HTL) and even perovskite layers during device operation, which causes shunting paths to reduce Voc and FF significantly. And an Ag electrode corrodes rapidly by reaction with I− migrated from perovskite to form AgI easily, which accelerates the device degradation. Carbon electrodes show satisfactory robustness under various environmental conditions, wherein practical use has been successfully demonstrated. In combination with their low cost, this suggests promising future for carbon electrodes during commercialization as long as device efficiency can be further improved.
(5) Interfaces in relevance: the basic requirement to construct a robust interface is chemically inert, delamination-free, and intimate contact. Rational materials selection and effective interface engineering has provided quite a few successful examples. Regrading the various interfacial layers, Lee et al. have systematically summarized the critical functions of these materials to overcome the possible degradation at the interfaces of the PSC devices,315,316 and currently, research efforts may further focus on how to slow down ion migration through these interfaces, wherein the effective “ion barriers” can be inserted into interfaces to systematically enhance the operational stability of PSCs.
It should be noted that we analyze the operational stability issue in a layer-by-layer sequence for simplicity, mainly because of the stacking architecture of corresponding devices. However, it may lead to the final solution to improve operational stability only by solving isolated issues in each layer individually. Taking ion migration for example, it occurs across the entire device and deteriorates device performance via different mechanisms in different functional layers over different time scales. Only when contemplating the device stability issue from a system perspective by focusing on the interaction between each component and the consequent impact on the entire device can we possibly find solutions to overcome those local instabilities and balance potential side effects induced by any strengthening approaches. Here, we briefly review a few research directions from different perspectives, which may serve as a powerful toolbox for future research to improve the device operational stability.
(1) Phase stability in perovskite alloys. Hybrid halide perovskites exhibit an almost unlimited compositional space to utilize. Among all A-site candidates, MA is thermally and chemically unstable. Therefore, developing MA-free perovskites is an effective approach to improve the operational stability of PSCs under various environmental conditions. Currently, FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 are the most promising alternatives, but their phase instability (easily occurring phase transition from α to δ) is the major hindrance. Their mixture, namely, FA1−xCsxPbI3, can stabilize the black phase at operation temperatures due to its appropriate Goldschmidt tolerance factor. Unfortunately, recent research found that upon operation, FA1−xCsxPbI3 exhibits substantial phase segregation to form single constituent phases.317 Therefore, future research may focus on two aspects accordingly. One is to stabilize the α-phase of FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 at room temperature. Possible approaches may include controlling the kinetics of their nucleation and growth, and enhancing the cohesive energy of their cubic lattice by suitable crystal termination. The other is to inhibit the phase segregation of FA1−xCsxPbI3. It is worth trying to improve the ion (Cs) migration barrier through functional additives, or to reduce the thermodynamically driving force for phase segregation by strain engineering in the film.
(2) Chemical modulation of defects. Defect passivation is regarded as the most effective approach to achieve highly efficient and stable solar cells, which attracts intensive attention among the PV community. For further development of passivation, we suggest to conceiving it from a chemistry viewpoint. Taking the I0 and Pb0 defect pair for example, the passivation method should involve the electron transfer process (from I0/Pb0 to I−/Pb2+), thus a recyclable redox-reaction can be designed in the perovskites, to simultaneously reduce the content of I0 and Pb0.13 In the scenario of charged point-defects, considering the potential coordination ability of perovskite components, introducing multiple bonding to enhance the chemical interaction of ions, thus immobilizing them is also proven to be effective in reducing the point-defects.14 Given the varieties of chemical bonding in perovskite crystals, chemical modulations via alternative interactions are not fully exploited yet, like secondary bonding, and van der Waals interactions. Further passivation strategies can refer to these chemical approaches, to develop more operationally stable PSCs.
(3) Crystal orientations and facet exposure. Since crystal orientation has been proven to closely correlate with the carrier dynamics of perovskites,58 adjusting the crystal stacking mode of certain crystallographic planes in perovskites to form the preferred facet orientation is an effective method to facilitate photocarrier transport under operation, thus reducing the accumulation of carriers within perovskites and then improving the operational stability of PSCs. In addition, recent work found that the (110) orientation of the surface led to a more hydrophobic MAPbI3 perovskite film and consequently enhanced moisture stability.318 Therefore, controlling the crystal orientation in the polycrystalline film, wherein the most stable facets are exposed, is also a promising way to extend the operating lifetime of PSCs under environmental conditions.
(4) Strain Engineering. Recently, several studies found that the local lattice mismatches within hybrid perovskite systems59 and thermal expansion difference between perovskite films and substrates during the annealing process would bring in residual strains in perovskite thin films.319 A subsequent study revealed that the residual strain was mainly concentrated at the surface of the perovskite film.320 The existence of residual strains (mainly tensile strain) would not only affect the photovoltaic performance of PSCs,59 but also further accelerate the degradation of perovskite films during device operation by strain-enhanced ion migration.319,321 Therefore, releasing this tensile strain by (i) forming low-dimensional structures on the perovskite surface result in a lattice reconstruction and consequently low elastic modulus;228,320 (ii) applying HTLs with external compressive strain to compensate for the tensile strain in perovskites;321 (iii) using flexible substrates with a comparable thermal expansion coefficient319 may be a possible avenue to enhance the operational stability of PSCs.
(5) Self-healing. Perovskites have proven to obtain self-healing behavior,322 which can be explained by ease of ion migration so that the displaced ions can move back to their lattice positions which are still thermodynamically lower energy sites.323,324 Thus ion migration inside perovskites may have minor influence on operating lifetimes of PSCs (note that this speculation still needs more experimental proof). By inserting “ion barriers” between perovskites and charge transport layers, inhibiting ion migration from perovskites to other layers while keeping the base carrier transporting properties, the operational stability may be further improved.
(6) Microscopic characterizations. To date, a complete understanding of operational stability of PSCs has been lacking. The underlying mechanisms should be further investigated by using various microscopic characterizations on those aged devices after operation. Recently, some reports have already focused on this topic: using in situ X-ray diffraction to monitor the dynamic variations (component mixing and de-mixing) of perovskites during operation;317 and applying photoemission electron microscopy to image the trap distribution of perovskites in a nanoscale.325 Recently, our group also combined synchrotron-based nanoprobe X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and X-ray beam induced current (XBIC) measurements to detect the phase segregation in formamidinium-cesium lead iodide perovskites under operation conditions.326 If we can answer the question “why they are unstable”, then we can know “how to improve them”.
In addition, considering the availability and reproducibility of these stability results, the standardized test process for operational stability of PSCs should be discussed and established. Besides, the detailed experimental procedures are required to be included in future publications to obtain more reliable and comparable results. In a word, more and more researchers are focusing on improving the operational stability of PSCs and striving to establish a reasonable testing and reporting standard. Just as the rapid improvement in efficiency of PSCs, their operational stability is believed to be improved quickly by efficient and effective efforts, which ultimately lead to the commercialization of PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51722201, 51672008, 51972004, 91733301), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2017YFA0206701), and the Natural Science Foundation of Beijing, China (Grant No. 4182026).
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. García de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–515 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
H. Min, M. Kim, S.-U. Lee, H. Kim, G. Kim, K. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Science, 2019, 366, 749 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Hu, B. Huang, M. Sun, B. Dong, G. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Li, Z. Xu, N. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, Science, 2019, 363, 265 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, S. Tao, Y. Chen, X. Niu, C. K. Onwudinanti, C. Hu, Z. Qiu, Z. Xu, G. Zheng, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Liu, Y. Lun, J. Hong, X. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Xie, Y. Gao, Y. Bai, S. Yang, G. Brocks, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
L. Meng, J. You and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5265 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, C. L. McElvany, A. B. Phillips, I. Celik, P. W. Krantz, S. C. Watthage, G. K. Liyanage, D. Apul and M. J. Heben, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1297–1305 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1559–1572 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS .
C. Motta, F. El-Mellouhi, S. Kais, N. Tabet, F. Alharbi and S. Sanvito, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7026 CrossRef CAS .
F. El-Mellouhi, A. Marzouk, E. T. Bentria, S. N. Rashkeev, S. Kais and F. H. Alharbi, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2648–2655 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Egger and L. Kronik, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2728–2733 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3418–3451 CrossRef CAS .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Yun, J. Seidel, J. Kim, A. M. Soufiani, S. Huang, J. Lau, N. J. Jeon, S. I. Seok, M. A. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600330 CrossRef .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 RSC .
F. Brivio, C. Caetano and A. Walsh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1083–1087 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Slotcavage, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1199–1205 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yoon, S. Draguta, J. S. Manser, O. Sharia, W. F. Schneider, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Bischak, C. L. Hetherington, H. Wu, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, D. T. Limmer and N. S. Ginsberg, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1028–1033 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16149 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Son, S.-G. Kim, J.-Y. Seo, S.-H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meggiolaro, S. G. Motti, E. Mosconi, A. J. Barker, J. Ball, C. Andrea Riccardo Perini, F. Deschler, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 702–713 RSC .
K. X. Steirer, P. Schulz, G. Teeter, V. Stevanovic, M. Yang, K. Zhu and J. J. Berry, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang and L.-W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 489–493 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Brandt, V. Stevanović, D. S. Ginley and T. Buonassisi, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 265–275 CrossRef CAS .
B.-w. Park and S. I. Seok, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805337 CrossRef .
T. A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323–356 RSC .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500963 CrossRef .
H.-S. Kim, J.-Y. Seo and N.-G. Park, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2528–2540 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiu, N. Li, Z. Huang, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Small Methods, 2020, 1900877 CrossRef CAS .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 RSC .
M. I. Asghar, J. Zhang, H. Wang and P. D. Lund, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 77, 131–146 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Sum and N. Mathews, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2518–2534 RSC .
S. Ma, Y. Bai, H. Wang, H. Zai, J. Wu, L. Li, S. Xiang, N. Liu, L. Liu, C. Zhu, G. Liu, X. Niu, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902472 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin and H. I. Karunadasa, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1549–1555 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
A. J. Barker, A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, M. Gandini, S. P. Senanayak, P. M. Pearce, E. Mosconi, A. J. Pearson, Y. Wu, A. R. Srimath Kandada, T. Leijtens, F. De Angelis, S. E. Dutton, A. Petrozza and R. H. Friend, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1416–1424 CrossRef CAS .
S. Draguta, O. Sharia, S. J. Yoon, M. C. Brennan, Y. V. Morozov, J. S. Manser, P. V. Kamat, W. F. Schneider and M. Kuno, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 200 CrossRef .
J. A. Christians, P. Schulz, J. S. Tinkham, T. H. Schloemer, S. P. Harvey, B. J. Tremolet de Villers, A. Sellinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
R. W. Gurney and N. F. Mott, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1938, 164, 151–167 CAS .
G. Y. Kim, A. Senocrate, T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 445–449 CrossRef CAS .
U. B. Cappel, S. Svanström, V. Lanzilotto, F. O. L. Johansson, K. Aitola, B. Philippe, E. Giangrisostomi, R. Ovsyannikov, T. Leitner, A. Föhlisch, S. Svensson, N. Mårtensson, G. Boschloo, A. Lindblad and H. Rensmo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34970–34978 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Xu, C. Wang, B. Ecker, J. Yang, J. Huang and Y. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3904–3910 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, M. Brandl, B. May, I. Levchuk, Y. Hou, M. Richter, H. Chen, S. Chen, S. Kahmann, A. Osvet, F. Maier, H.-P. Steinrück, R. Hock, G. J. Matt and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15896–15903 RSC .
Y.-C. Zhao, W.-K. Zhou, X. Zhou, K.-H. Liu, D.-P. Yu and Q. Zhao, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e16243 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mosconi, D. Meggiolaro, H. J. Snaith, S. D. Stranks and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3180–3187 RSC .
G. Zheng, C. Zhu, J. Ma, X. Zhang, G. Tang, R. Li, Y. Chen, L. Li, J. Hu, J. Hong, Q. Chen, X. Gao and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2793 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, X. Niu, Y. Fu, N. Li, C. Hu, Y. Chen, X. He, G. Na, P. Liu, H. Zai, Y. Ge, Y. Lu, X. Ke, Y. Bai, S. Yang, P. Chen, Y. Li, M. Sui, L. Zhang, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 815 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, B. Chen, Y. Fang, J. Zhao, C. Bao, Z. Yu, Y. Deng, P. N. Rudd, Y. Yan, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4981 CrossRef .
W. R. Mateker and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603940 CrossRef .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
E. T. Hoke, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, M. T. Lloyd, I. Kauvar, W. R. Mateker, A. M. Nardes, C. H. Peters, N. Kopidakis and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1351–1357 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef .
P. Holzhey and M. Saliba, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21794–21808 RSC .

          H. Ossenbrink, H. Müllejans, R. Kenny and E. Dunlop, Comprehensive Renewable Energy,  2012, vol. 1, pp. 787–803 Search PubMed .
F. De Angelis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2640–2641 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bae, S. Kim, S.-W. Lee, K. J. Cho, S. Park, S. Lee, Y. Kang, H.-S. Lee and D. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3091–3096 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, E. T. Hoke, G. Grancini, D. J. Slotcavage, G. E. Eperon, J. M. Ball, M. De Bastiani, A. R. Bowring, N. Martino, K. Wojciechowski, M. D. McGehee, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500962 CrossRef .
X. Deng, X. Wen, C. F. J. Lau, T. Young, J. Yun, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9060–9068 RSC .
P. Calado, A. M. Telford, D. Bryant, X. Li, J. Nelson, B. C. O’Regan and P. R. F. Barnes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13831 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hacke, R. Smith, K. Terwilliger, G. Perrin, B. Sekulic and S. Kurtz, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 22, 775–783 Search PubMed .
J. Wohlgemuth and S. Kurtz, IEEE 40th Photovoltaic Spec. Conf., 2014, 3589–3594 Search PubMed .
S. Pingel, O. Frank, M. Winkler, S. Daryan, T. Geipel, H. Hoehne and J. Berghold, IEEE 35th Photovoltaic Spec. Conf., 2010, 002817 Search PubMed .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, Z. Liu, Z. Hu, Z. Hawash, L. Qiu, Y. Jiang, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804284 CrossRef .
L. Shi, T. L. Young, J. Kim, Y. Sheng, L. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Feng, M. J. Keevers, X. Hao, P. J. Verlinden, M. A. Green and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25073–25081 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bella, G. Griffini, J.-P. Correa-Baena, G. Saracco, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt, S. Turri and C. Gerbaldi, Science, 2016, 354, 203 CrossRef CAS .
X. Niu, N. Li, C. Zhu, L. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Ge, Y. Chen, Z. Xu, Y. Lu, M. Sui, Y. Li, A. Tarasov, E. A. Goodilin, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7338–7346 RSC .
H. C. Weerasinghe, Y. Dkhissi, A. D. Scully, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gheno, T. Trigaud, J. Bouclé, P. Audebert, B. Ratier and S. Vedraine, Opt. Mater., 2018, 75, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chander, A. F. Khan, P. S. Chandrasekhar, E. Thouti, S. K. Swami, V. Dutta and V. K. Komarala, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 033904 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, L. Qiu, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono, Z. Hu, Z. Liu, Z. Wu, L. Meng, Q. Wang and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 585–593 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zheng and O. Rubel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11977–11984 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16195 CrossRef .
T. Supasai, N. Rujisamphan, K. Ullrich, A. Chemseddine and T. Dittrich, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 183906 CrossRef .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8208–8212 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long, J. Liu and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3884–3890 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gui, L. Ji, A. Muhammad, W. Li, W. Cai, Y. Li, X. Li, X. Wu and P. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 751–755 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, O. Durand, J. W. Strzalka, B. Chen, R. Verduzco, P. M. Ajayan, S. Tretiak, J. Even, M. A. Alam, M. G. Kanatzidis, W. Nie and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2018, 360, 67 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, J. Zhao, Z. Chen and J. Huang, Joule, 2017, 1, 371–382 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, S.-H. Bae, P. Sun, Y.-T. Hsieh, Y. Yang, Y. S. Rim, H. Zhao, Q. Chen, W. Shi, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2253–2258 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
C. Ran, J. Xu, W. Gao, C. Huang and S. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4581–4610 RSC .
A. Walsh, D. O. Scanlon, S. Chen, X. G. Gong and S.-H. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1791–1794 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, P. N. Rudd, S. Yang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3842–3867 RSC .
F. Zhang and K. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1902579 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Hu, H. Jiao, L. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, Q. Zhang, C. Shen, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606774 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, N. Li, L. Wang, L. Li, Z. Xu, H. Jiao, P. Liu, C. Zhu, H. Zai, M. Sun, W. Zou, S. Zhang, G. Xing, X. Liu, J. Wang, D. Li, B. Huang, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1112 CrossRef .
S. R. Raga, M.-C. Jung, M. V. Lee, M. R. Leyden, Y. Kato and Y. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1597–1603 CrossRef CAS .
B. Philippe, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. K. Jena, A. Banerjee, S. Chakraborty, U. B. Cappel, R. Ahuja, A. Hagfeldt, M. Odelius and H. Rensmo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 26655–26666 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Reed and R. D. Bolskar, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1075–1120 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, J. Zou, W.-C. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14976–14981 RSC .
Y. Wu, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Yue, M. Cai, F. Xie, E. Bi, A. Islam and L. Han, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16148 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, W. Shi, J. Luo, N. Pellet, C. Yi, X. Li, X. Zhao, T. J. S. Dennis, X. Li, S. Wang, Y. Xiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Bi and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606806 CrossRef .
X. Liu, J. Wu, Y. Yang, T. Wu and Q. Guo, J. Power Sources, 2018, 399, 144–150 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Wu, X.-Q. Shi, X.-H. Ding, Y.-K. Ren, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, Y. Ding, P. Xu and S.-Y. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3602–3608 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. Dai, Z. Yu, Y. Shao, Y. Zhou, X. Xiao, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5781–5787 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guo, Q. Ye, X. Yang, J. Zhang, F. Xu, D. Shchukin, B. Wei and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2497–2506 RSC .
W.-Q. Wu, Z. Yang, P. N. Rudd, Y. Shao, X. Dai, H. Wei, J. Zhao, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, X. Xiao, Y. Feng and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav8925 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, Z. Dai, C. Lee, H. M. Lee, T.-H. Han, N. De Marco, O. Lin, C. S. Choi, B. Dunn, J. Koh, D. Di Carlo, J. H. Ko, H. D. Maynard and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6317–6324 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guan, N. Jiao and Y. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 14223–14228 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, S. Xiong, T. Qu, Y. Zhang, X. He, X. Guo, Q. Zhao, S. Braun, J. Chen, J. Xu, Y. Li, X. Liu, C. Duan, J. Tang, M. Fahlman and Q. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13491–13498 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, J. Xue, L. Meng, J.-W. Lee, Z. Zhao, P. Sun, L. Cai, T. Huang, Z. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Duan, J. L. Yang, S. Tan, Y. Yuan, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1464–1477 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Ma, B. Liu, W. Wu, Y. Zhu, R. Ma and C. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800034 CrossRef .
M. Sun, F. Zhang, H. Liu, X. Li, Y. Xiao and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13448–13456 RSC .
L. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, X. Wang and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9862–9868 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Liao, P. Guo, C.-P. Hsu, M. Lin, B. Wang, L. Zeng, W. Huang, C. M. M. Soe, W.-F. Su, M. J. Bedzyk, M. R. Wasielewski, A. Facchetti, R. P. H. Chang, M. G. Kanatzidis and T. J. Marks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601660 CrossRef .
H. Lai, B. Kan, T. Liu, N. Zheng, Z. Xie, T. Zhou, X. Wan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11639–11646 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019, 3, 2179–2192 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, M. Saliba, P. Yadav, P. Holzhey, A. Hagfeldt, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802646 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Y. Fang, A. Z. Stieg, T.-B. Song, H.-H. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Lu, J. You, P. Sun, J. McKay, M. S. Goorsky and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7269 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, P. Da, C. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, F. Fu, M. Kawecki, X. Liu, N. Sakai, J. T.-W. Wang, S. Huettner, S. Buecheler, M. Fahlman, F. Gao and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2019, 571, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. Wang, C. Li and T. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 372, 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Han, X. Li, Z. Liu, S. Liu and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900417 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Z. Fei, P. Gao, Y. Lee, F. F. Tirani, R. Scopelliti, Y. Feng, P. J. Dyson and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702157 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, Z. Liu, N. Li, G. Tang, G. Zheng, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Huang, L. Li, N. Zhou, J. Hong, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900390 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, S. Huang, Y. Lu, P. Liu, Y. Zhao, C. Shi, S. Zhang, J. Wu, H. Zhong, M. Sui, H. Zhou, H. Jin, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800544 CrossRef .
T. Yokoyama, D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, T.-B. Song, Y. Sato, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 776–782 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tong, Z. Song, D. H. Kim, X. Chen, C. Chen, A. F. Palmstrom, P. F. Ndione, M. O. Reese, S. P. Dunfield, O. G. Reid, J. Liu, F. Zhang, S. P. Harvey, Z. Li, S. T. Christensen, G. Teeter, D. Zhao, M. M. Al-Jassim, M. F. A. M. van Hest, M. C. Beard, S. E. Shaheen, J. J. Berry, Y. Yan and K. Zhu, Science, 2019, 364, 475 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. Wang, W. Liao, N. Shrestha, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, L. Guan, R. J. Ellingson, K. Zhu, X. Zhao, R.-G. Xiong and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17018 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, C. Xiao, C. Wang, B. Saparov, H.-S. Duan, D. Zhao, Z. Xiao, P. Schulz, S. P. Harvey, W. Liao, W. Meng, Y. Yu, A. J. Cimaroli, C.-S. Jiang, K. Zhu, M. Al-Jassim, G. Fang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5214–5221 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Harvey, Z. Li, J. A. Christians, K. Zhu, J. M. Luther and J. J. Berry, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28541–28552 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dastidar, C. J. Hawley, A. D. Dillon, A. D. Gutierrez-Perez, J. E. Spanier and A. T. Fafarman, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1278–1282 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiang, Z. Wang, D. J. Kubicki, W. Tress, J. Luo, D. Prochowicz, S. Akin, L. Emsley, J. Zhou, G. Dietler, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Joule, 2019, 3, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ahmad, J. Khan, G. Niu and J. Tang, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700048 CrossRef .
A. Swarnkar, W. J. Mir and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 286–289 CrossRef CAS .
A. Q. Alanazi, D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, E. A. Alharbi, M. E. F. Bouduban, F. Jahanbakhshi, M. Mladenović, J. V. Milić, F. Giordano, D. Ren, A. Y. Alyamani, H. Albrithen, A. Albadri, M. H. Alotaibi, J.-E. Moser, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger, L. Emsley and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17659–17669 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, J. Kim, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Tan, G. Long, F. Tan, A. Johnston, Y. Zhao, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 648–654 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J.-S. Park, S.-H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477–485 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, J. Tang, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703487 CrossRef .
J. Yan, W. Qiu, G. Wu, P. Heremans and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11063–11077 RSC .
B.-E. Cohen, M. Wierzbowska and L. Etgar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604733 CrossRef .
N. Zhou, B. Huang, M. Sun, Y. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Lun, X. Wang, J. Hong, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1901566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Tan, N. Zhou, N. Yang, W. Zhou, Y. Wu, K. Weber, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900083 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, Y. Lu, S. Lan, C. Zhu, J. Xiao, H. Zai, M. Sui, D. Li, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Small, 2019, 15, 1804152 CrossRef .
S. Tan, N. Zhou, Y. Chen, L. Li, G. Liu, P. Liu, C. Zhu, J. Lu, W. Sun, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803024 Search PubMed .
L. Li, N. Zhou, Q. Chen, Q. Shang, Q. Zhang, X. Wang and H. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1124–1132 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhou, Y. Shen, L. Li, S. Tan, N. Liu, G. Zheng, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 459–465 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
T. M. Koh, K. Fu, Y. Fang, S. Chen, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and T. Baikie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16458–16462 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T.-Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Weber, B. Charles and M. T. Weller, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15375–15382 RSC .
A. Binek, F. C. Hanusch, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3608–3616 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yi, J. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Röthlisberger and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656–662 RSC .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, M. R. Leyden, L. Qiu, S. Wang, L. K. Ono, Z. Wu, E. J. Juarez-Perez and Y. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703835 CrossRef .
D. M. Trots and S. V. Myagkota, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 2520–2526 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, N. Park, J. S. Yun, S. Huang, M. A. Green and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 162, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Turren-Cruz, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Science, 2018, 362, 449 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14173–14180 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 RSC .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–489 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Koh, T. Krishnamoorthy, N. Yantara, C. Shi, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, A. C. Grimsdale, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14996–15000 RSC .
S. Lee and D.-W. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22432–22439 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Zhu and W. C. H. Choy, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800146 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T.-W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot, R. May, A. Palmstrom, D. J. Slotcavage, R. A. Belisle, J. B. Patel, E. S. Parrott, R. J. Sutton, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, B. Conings, A. Babayigit, H.-G. Boyen, S. Bent, F. Giustino, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 354, 861 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gu, S. Ye, Z. Zhao, H. Rao, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800136 CrossRef .
R. Lin, K. Xiao, Z. Qin, Q. Han, C. Zhang, M. Wei, M. I. Saidaminov, Y. Gao, J. Xu, M. Xiao, A. Li, J. Zhu, E. H. Sargent and H. Tan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 864–873 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao, I. Schmidt, G. Brocks, J. Jiang, I. Tranca, K. Meerholz and S. Olthof, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2560 CrossRef .
H. Yu, F. Wang, F. Xie, W. Li, J. Chen and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7102–7108 CAS .
F. Xie, C.-C. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Li, M. Cai, X. Liu, X. Yang and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1942–1949 RSC .
C. Fei, L. Guo, B. Li, R. Zhang, H. Fu, J. Tian and G. Cao, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 17–26 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, Z. Xiao, J. Zhang, W. Chai, H. Xu, Z. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7149–7155 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mu, J. Pan, S. Feng, Q. Li and D. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601297 CrossRef .
E. L. Unger, A. R. Bowring, C. J. Tassone, V. L. Pool, A. Gold-Parker, R. Cheacharoen, K. H. Stone, E. T. Hoke, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7158–7165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, Z. J. Yu, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey, E. J. Wolf, W. Weigand, S. Manzoor, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. J. Berry, J. M. Luther, Z. C. Holman and M. D. McGehee, Science, 2020, 367, 1097 CrossRef CAS .
U. Aschauer, R. Pfenninger, S. M. Selbach, T. Grande and N. A. Spaldin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 054111 CrossRef .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502458 CrossRef .
W. Li, J. Fan, J. Li, Y. Mai and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10399–10405 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aharon, M. Layani, B.-E. Cohen, E. Shukrun, S. Magdassi and L. Etgar, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500118 CrossRef .
W. Kong, T. Ding, G. Bi and H. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12626–12632 RSC .
Z. Fan, H. Xiao, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, H.-C. Cheng, S.-J. Lee, G. Wang, Z. Feng, W. A. Goddard, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Joule, 2017, 1, 548–562 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, Y. Bai, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 516–522 RSC .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef .
R. Wang, J. Xue, K.-L. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Luo, D. Fenning, G. Xu, S. Nuryyeva, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, J. L. Yang, J. Zhu, M. Wang, S. Tan, I. Yavuz, K. N. Houk and Y. Yang, Science, 2019, 366, 1509 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Jin, N. Liu, Q. Chen, W.-B. Zhang and H. Zhou, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800069 CrossRef .
N. Liu, Q. Du, G. Yin, P. Liu, L. Li, H. Xie, C. Zhu, Y. Li, H. Zhou, W.-B. Zhang and Q. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6806–6814 RSC .
H. Zhu, Y. Liu, F. T. Eickemeyer, L. Pan, D. Ren, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, B. Carlsen, B. Yang, X. Dong, Z. Wang, H. Liu, S. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar, X. Li and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1907757 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Liang, H. Bian, D. Bai, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4544 CrossRef .
N. Li, Z. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, H. Liu, B. Peng, A. Petrone, X. Li, L. Wang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601307 CrossRef .
M. M. Tavakoli, D. Bi, L. Pan, A. Hagfeldt, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800275 CrossRef .
J. Peng, J. I. Khan, W. Liu, E. Ugur, T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, K. Wang, H. Dang, E. Aydin, X. Yang, Y. Wan, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole, F. Laquai, S. De Wolf and T. P. White, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801208 CrossRef .
M. Kim, S. G. Motti, R. Sorrentino and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2609–2619 RSC .
L. Zuo, H. Guo, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Jariwala, N. De Marco, S. Dong, R. DeBlock, D. S. Ginger, B. Dunn, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700106 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, B. Huang, S. Wu, Z. Xiong, J. Li and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6255–6264 RSC .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Qi, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Science, 2019, 365, 591 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. McIntosh and L. P. Johnson, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 124520 CrossRef .
T. Lauinger, J. Schmidt, A. G. Aberle and R. Hezel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 1232–1234 CrossRef CAS .
T.-T. Li and A. Cuevas, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2009, 3, 160–162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, S. Chen, E. Mosconi, Y. Fang, X. Xiao, C. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. Yu, J. Zhao, Y. Gao, F. De Angelis and J. Huang, Science, 2019, 365, 473 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal′ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, H.-B.-R. Lee, R. W. Johnson, J. T. Tanskanen, N. Liu, M.-G. Kim, C. Pang, C. Ahn, S. F. Bent and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4781 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hadadian, J.-P. Correa-Baena, E. K. Goharshadi, A. Ummadisingu, J.-Y. Seo, J. Luo, S. Gholipour, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8681–8686 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Wu, J. Barbaud, W. Kong, D. Cui, H. Chen, X. Yang and L. Han, Science, 2019, 365, 687 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, C. Leng, Y. Ji, X. Wei, K. Sun, L. Tang, J. Yang, W. Luo, C. Li, Y. Deng, S. Feng, J. Shen, S. Lu, C. Du and H. Shi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18309–18314 RSC .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Z. Chen, S. Yang, X. Zheng, S. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Zhao and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 654–658 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ran, J. Xi, W. Gao, F. Yuan, T. Lei, B. Jiao, X. Hou and Z. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 713–721 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Ren, X. Chen, J. Mao, J. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, J. Milic, W.-J. Yin, M. Grätzel and W. C. H. Choy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2253–2262 RSC .
J. J. Yoo, S. Wieghold, M. C. Sponseller, M. R. Chua, S. N. Bertram, N. T. P. Hartono, J. S. Tresback, E. C. Hansen, J.-P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulović, T. Buonassisi, S. S. Shin and M. G. Bawendi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2192–2199 RSC .
Y. Liu, S. Akin, L. Pan, R. Uchida, N. Arora, J. V. Milić, A. Hinderhofer, F. Schreiber, A. R. Uhl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar and M. Grätzel, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2543 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Xu, N. Liu, F. Xie, T. Song, Y. Ma, P. Zhang, Y. Bai, Y. Li, Q. Chen and G. Xu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3864–3871 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 RSC .
W. Ke, G. Fang, Q. Liu, L. Xiong, P. Qin, H. Tao, J. Wang, H. Lei, B. Li, J. Wan, G. Yang and Y. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
D. O. Scanlon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 161201 CrossRef .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 RSC .
K. Wojciechowski, T. Leijtens, S. Siprova, C. Schlueter, M. T. Hörantner, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-Z. Li, A. K. Y. Jen, T.-L. Lee and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2399–2405 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wojciechowski, M. Saliba, T. Leijtens, A. Abate and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1142–1147 RSC .
Y. Furubayashi, T. Hitosugi, Y. Yamamoto, K. Inaba, G. Kinoda, Y. Hirose, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 252101 CrossRef .
Y. Li, J. K. Cooper, W. Liu, C. M. Sutter-Fella, M. Amani, J. W. Beeman, A. Javey, J. W. Ager, Y. Liu, F. M. Toma and I. D. Sharp, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12446 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, X. Niu, F. Pei, H. Liu, Y. Cao, Y. Liu, H. Xie, Y. Gao, Q. Chen, F. Mo and H. Zhou, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900217 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Anaraki, A. Kermanpur, L. Steier, K. Domanski, T. Matsui, W. Tress, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3128–3134 RSC .
D. Yang, R. Yang, K. Wang, C. Wu, X. Zhu, J. Feng, X. Ren, G. Fang, S. Priya and S. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3239 CrossRef .
X. Li, X. Liu, W. Zhang, H.-Q. Wang and J. Fang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4176–4180 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, U. Kim, H. M. Kim, T. H. Kim, H. S. Mun, B.-G. Jeon, K. T. Hong, W.-J. Lee, C. Ju, K. H. Kim and K. Char, Appl. Phys. Express, 2012, 5, 061102 CrossRef .
W. Wang, S. Liang, K. Ding, J. Bi, J. C. Yu, P. K. Wong and L. Wu, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 1893–1902 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Wadekar, J. Alaria, M. O'Sullivan, N. L. O. Flack, T. D. Manning, L. J. Phillips, K. Durose, O. Lozano, S. Lucas, J. B. Claridge and M. J. Rosseinsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 052104 CrossRef .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, N. Sakai, S. van Reenen, K. Wojciechowski, J. B. Patel, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604186 CrossRef .
B. D. Naab, S. Guo, S. Olthof, E. G. B. Evans, P. Wei, G. L. Millhauser, A. Kahn, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15018–15025 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wei, T. Menke, B. D. Naab, K. Leo, M. Riede and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3999–4002 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Armstrong, P. A. Veneman, E. Ratcliff, D. Placencia and M. Brumbach, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1748–1757 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guo, X. Sun, B. Liu, Z. Yang, J. Wei and D. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18460–18465 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Polander, P. Pahner, M. Schwarze, M. Saalfrank, C. Koerner and K. Leo, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081503 CrossRef .
N. Arora, S. Orlandi, M. I. Dar, S. Aghazada, G. Jacopin, M. Cavazzini, E. Mosconi, P. Gratia, F. De Angelis, G. Pozzi, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, W. Fu, C. Huang, Z. Zhang, S. Li, F. Ding, M. Shi, C.-Z. Li, A. K. Y. Jen and H. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700012 CrossRef .
I. Lee, J. H. Yun, H. J. Son and T.-S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7029–7035 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, B. Xu, D. Bi, H. Tian, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7378–7385 CrossRef CAS .
T. Malinauskas, D. Tomkute-Luksiene, R. Sens, M. Daskeviciene, R. Send, H. Wonneberger, V. Jankauskas, I. Bruder and V. Getautis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11107–11116 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, H.-S. Kim, J.-Y. Seo and N.-G. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7148–7153 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Jung, S. R. Raga, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9863 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Jung and Y. Qi, Org. Electron., 2016, 31, 71–76 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, M. Remeika, A. J. Winchester, A. Gabe and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15451–15456 RSC .
B. Tan, S. R. Raga, A. S. R. Chesman, S. O. Fürer, F. Zheng, D. P. McMeekin, L. Jiang, W. Mao, X. Lin, X. Wen, J. Lu, Y.-B. Cheng and U. Bach, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901519 CrossRef .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. Il Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, T. Giovenzana, S. N. Habisreutinger, J. S. Tinkham, N. K. Noel, B. A. Kamino, G. Sadoughi, A. Sellinger and H. J. Snaith, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5981–5989 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Reese, S. A. Gevorgyan, M. Jørgensen, E. Bundgaard, S. R. Kurtz, D. S. Ginley, D. C. Olson, M. T. Lloyd, P. Morvillo, E. A. Katz, A. Elschner, O. Haillant, T. R. Currier, V. Shrotriya, M. Hermenau, M. Riede, K. R. Kirov, G. Trimmel, T. Rath, O. Inganäs, F. Zhang, M. Andersson, K. Tvingstedt, M. Lira-Cantu, D. Laird, C. McGuiness, S. Gowrisanker, M. Pannone, M. Xiao, J. Hauch, R. Steim, D. M. DeLongchamp, R. Rösch, H. Hoppe, N. Espinosa, A. Urbina, G. Yaman-Uzunoglu, J.-B. Bonekamp, A. J. J. M. van Breemen, C. Girotto, E. Voroshazi and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1253–1267 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bi, L. Yang, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Brauer, Y. H. Lee, M. K. Nazeeruddin and N. Banerji, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3675–3681 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abate, S. Paek, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, P. Gao, T. Matsui, J. Ko, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. H. Dahmen, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2946–2953 RSC .
G. Kakavelakis, I. Paradisanos, B. Paci, A. Generosi, M. Papachatzakis, T. Maksudov, L. Najafi, A. E. Del Rio Castillo, G. Kioseoglou, E. Stratakis, F. Bonaccorso and E. Kymakis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702287 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, W. Chen, L. Wang, B. Tu, T. Chen, B. Liu, K. Yang, C. W. Koh, X. Zhang, H. Sun, G. Chen, X. Feng, H. Y. Woo, A. B. Djurišić, Z. He and X. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902781 CrossRef .
M. Ren, J. Wang, X. Xie, J. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2683–2688 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, A. Zhu, F. Cai, L. Tao, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Q. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6597–6605 RSC .
Z. Qiu, H. Gong, G. Zheng, S. Yuan, H. Zhang, X. Zhu, H. Zhou and B. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7084–7094 RSC .
J. A. Christians, R. C. M. Fung and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 758–764 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yaacobi-Gross, N. D. Treat, P. Pattanasattayavong, H. Faber, A. K. Perumal, N. Stingelin, D. D. C. Bradley, P. N. Stavrinou, M. Heeney and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401529 CrossRef .
S. Ye, W. Sun, Y. Li, W. Yan, H. Peng, Z. Bian, Z. Liu and C. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sajid, A. M. Elseman, H. Huang, J. Ji, S. Dou, H. Jiang, X. Liu, D. Wei, P. Cui and M. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 408–424 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, M. Zhang, X. Xu, F. Cai, H. Yuan, L. Bu, W. Li, A. Zhu, Z. Zhao, M. Wang, Y.-B. Cheng and H. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24121–24127 RSC .
R. Li, P. Wang, B. Chen, X. Cui, Y. Ding, Y. Li, D. Zhang, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou and S. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 503–512 RSC .
W.-Q. Wu, Q. Wang, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, S. Tang, Y. Deng, H. Lu, Y. Liu, T. Li, Z. Yang, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1625 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, Z. Qiang, T. Sakamaki, I. Takei, R. Shang and E. Nakamura, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22603–22611 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500195 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, X. Du, S. Scheiner, D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, N. Li, M. S. Killian, H. Chen, M. Richter, I. Levchuk, N. Schrenker, E. Spiecker, T. Stubhan, N. A. Luechinger, A. Hirsch, P. Schmuki, H.-P. Steinrück, R. H. Fink, M. Halik, H. J. Snaith and C. J. Brabec, Science, 2017, 358, 1192 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guarnera, A. Abate, W. Zhang, J. M. Foster, G. Richardson, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 432–437 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Lang, H. G. Grimmeiss, E. Meijer and M. Jaros, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1980, 22, 3917–3934 CrossRef CAS .
H. Richter, B. Molitor, H. Wei, W. Chen, L. Aristilde and L. T. Angenent, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2392–2399 RSC .
H. Back, G. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kong, T. K. Kim, H. Kang, H. Kim, J. Lee, S. Lee and K. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1258–1263 RSC .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Islam, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, Y. Nabetani and K. Miyano, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 195, 323–329 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, F. Liu, M. K. Wong, H. W. Tam, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, C. Surya, W. K. Chan and A. M. C. Ng, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2597–2603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 RSC .
X. Li, F. Zhang, H. He, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and T. Xu, Nature, 2020, 578, 555–558 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. Wheeler, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1655 RSC .
J. M. Howard, E. M. Tennyson, S. Barik, R. Szostak, E. Waks, M. F. Toney, A. F. Nogueira, B. R. A. Neves and M. S. Leite, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3463–3469 CrossRef CAS .
N.-K. Kim, Y. H. Min, S. Noh, E. Cho, G. Jeong, M. Joo, S.-W. Ahn, J. S. Lee, S. Kim, K. Ihm, H. Ahn, Y. Kang, H.-S. Lee and D. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 4645 CrossRef .
J. A. Schwenzer, L. Rakocevic, R. Gehlhaar, T. Abzieher, S. Gharibzadeh, S. Moghadamzadeh, A. Quintilla, B. S. Richards, U. Lemmer and U. W. Paetzold, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16390–16399 CrossRef CAS .
P. Holzhey, P. Yadav, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, A. Ummadisingu, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Mater. Today, 2019, 29, 10–19 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lang, O. Shargaieva, V. V. Brus, H. C. Neitzert, J. Rappich and N. H. Nickel, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1702905 CrossRef .
S.-W. Lee, S. Kim, S. Bae, K. Cho, T. Chung, L. E. Mundt, S. Lee, S. Park, H. Park, M. C. Schubert, S. W. Glunz, Y. Ko, Y. Jun, Y. Kang, H.-S. Lee and D. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38150 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tiihonen, K. Miettunen, J. Halme, S. Lepikko, A. Poskela and P. D. Lund, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 730–738 RSC .
K. Domanski, E. A. Alharbi, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and W. Tress, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, K. Appavoo, H. Tsai, M. Chhowalla, M. A. Alam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Katan, J. Even, S. Tretiak, J. J. Crochet, G. Gupta and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11574 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S. H. Turren-Cruz, J. P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604 RSC .
M. V. Khenkin, E. A. Katz, A. Abate, G. Bardizza, J. J. Berry, C. Brabec, F. Brunetti, V. Bulović, Q. Burlingame, A. Di Carlo, R. Cheacharoen, Y.-B. Cheng, A. Colsmann, S. Cros, K. Domanski, M. Dusza, C. J. Fell, S. R. Forrest, Y. Galagan, D. Di Girolamo, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt, E. von Hauff, H. Hoppe, J. Kettle, H. Köbler, M. S. Leite, S. Liu, Y.-L. Loo, J. M. Luther, C.-Q. Ma, M. Madsen, M. Manceau, M. Matheron, M. McGehee, R. Meitzner, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. F. Nogueira, Ç. Odabaşı, A. Osherov, N.-G. Park, M. O. Reese, F. De Rossi, M. Saliba, U. S. Schubert, H. J. Snaith, S. D. Stranks, W. Tress, P. A. Troshin, V. Turkovic, S. Veenstra, I. Visoly-Fisher, A. Walsh, T. Watson, H. Xie, R. Yıldırım, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. Zhu and M. Lira-Cantu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 35–49 CrossRef .
A. Abate, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, M. S. Su'ait and F. Bella, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 3083–3100 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Christians, S. N. Habisreutinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2136–2143 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, D. Neher and A. Abate, Joule, 2018, 2, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, Science, 2018, 359, 388 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith and P. Hacke, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 459–465 CrossRef .
K.-G. Lim, S. G. Ji, J. Y. Kim and T.-W. Lee, Small Methods, 2020, 2000065 CrossRef .
H. Kim, K.-G. Lim and T.-W. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 12–30 RSC .
L. T. Schelhas, Z. Li, J. A. Christians, A. Goyal, P. Kairys, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, K. H. Stone, J. M. Luther, K. Zhu, V. Stevanovic and J. J. Berry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1341–1348 RSC .
Y. Ma, P. M. Hangoma, W. I. Park, J.-H. Lim, Y. K. Jung, J. H. Jeong, S. H. Park and K. H. Kim, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 170–177 RSC .
J. Zhao, Y. Deng, H. Wei, X. Zheng, Z. Yu, Y. Shao, J. E. Shield and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao5616 CrossRef .
H. Wang, C. Zhu, L. Liu, S. Ma, P. Liu, J. Wu, C. Shi, Q. Du, Y. Hao, S. Xiang, H. Chen, P. Chen, Y. Bai, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904408 CrossRef CAS .
D.-J. Xue, Y. Hou, S.-C. Liu, M. Wei, B. Chen, Z. Huang, Z. Li, B. Sun, A. H. Proppe, Y. Dong, M. I. Saidaminov, S. O. Kelley, J.-S. Hu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1514 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Z. Xu, S. Xue, P. Kandlakunta, L. Cao and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805547 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao and Y. Yan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17042 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. S. Doherty, A. J. Winchester, S. Macpherson, D. N. Johnstone, V. Pareek, E. M. Tennyson, S. Kosar, F. U. Kosasih, M. Anaya, M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, E. L. Wong, J. Madéo, Y.-H. Chiang, J.-S. Park, Y.-K. Jung, C. E. Petoukhoff, G. Divitini, M. K. L. Man, C. Ducati, A. Walsh, P. A. Midgley, K. M. Dani and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2020, 580, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Y. Luo, Z. Chen, X. Niu, X. Zhang, J. Lu, R. Kumar, J. Jiang, H. Liu, X. Guo, B. Lai, G. Brocks, Q. Chen, S. Tao, D. P. Fenning and H. Zhou, Joule, 2020, 4, 1–16,  DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2020.06.005 .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this review.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Nengxu Li
	Nengxu Li received his BS degree in 2017 from the School of Materials Science & Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, majoring in materials chemistry. Now he is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Huanping Zhou at the College of Engineering, Peking University. His current research interest is developing high-efficiency and stable perovskite solar cells.

Xiuxiu Niu
	Xiuxiu Niu received her BS degree in 2017 from the School of Materials Science & Technology, China University of Geosciences Beijing, majoring in materials chemistry. Now she is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Qi Chen at the School of Materials Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology. Her current research interest is developing high-efficiency and stable large scale perovskite solar cells.

Qi Chen
	Prof. Qi Chen obtained both his BS and MS degrees from Tsinghua University, and received his PhD degree from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). From 2013–2016, he worked as a postdoc fellow at California Nanosystem Institute (CNSI), UCLA. Now he is a professor in Beijing Inistitute of Technology. His research focuses on hybrid materials design, processing and applications in opto-electronics and for energy harvesting and storage.

Huanping Zhou
	Huanping Zhou received her PhD in inorganic chemistry from Peking University in 2010. After that, she joined the University of California, Los Angeles, as a postdoctoral researcher from 2010 to 2015. In July 2015, she joined Peking University as an assistant professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering. She is a materials chemist with expertise in the fields of nanoscience, thin film optoelectronics, organic/inorganic interface engineering, and the development and fabrication of related devices, such as photovoltaic cells, LEDs, etc. Currently, her group focuses on thin film optoelectronics, e.g., perovskite materials and solar cells.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Diagram of the photodecomposition mechanism: upon illumination, the chemical potential of iodine is effectively increased over the equilibrium value in the dark (where μI,dark = μI,out). Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. (b) Schematic image of the composition changes in the perovskite film under illumination: Pb0 and I2 are formed. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Proposed mechanism for charge induced instability of perovskites. Charges neutralize the vacancy generated by leaving the ions and then reduce ion migration dragging force which is the coulombic attraction induced by the vacancies and moving ions. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 2  Full flowchart of the official module testing for the IEC 61215 standard and important stability tests for PSCs are marked in green. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Efficiency (black), JMPP (red), and VMPP (blue) of a single-junction perovskite device packaged with EVA, glass, and a butyl rubber edge seal during damp heat testing. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Evolution of normalized PCE under damp heat (DH) and thermal cycling (TC) test for method 3 encapsulated PSCs. The error bars denote ± one standard deviation. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Results of the aging test on the three series of PSCs: uncoated, front-coated (i.e., luminescent fluorinated coating on the front side), and front/back-coated (i.e., front side coated with the luminescent fluorophore and back contact coated with the moisture-resistant fluoropolymeric layer). During the first 3 months, PSCs were kept under an Ar atmosphere and in the next 3 months under air at 50% RH, in both cases under continuous UV irradiation. PCE was measured once a week. (d) Results of the aging test on front/back coated devices left for three months on the terrace of the Politecnico di Torino building in Turin (Italy), thus experiencing real outdoor operating conditions. PCE was measured once a week. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Science, copyright 2016. (e) Perovskite solar modules after the hail impact (above) and the water dripping test (below). Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Nature, copyright 2019.	 


Damp heat	FA1−xCsxPbI3−yBry	Yes	85 °C and 85% RH	1000 h with no decay	
75

Thermal cycle	FAPbI3	Yes	−40 to 85 °C dwell 15 min at −40 and 85 °C	200 thermal cycles with no decay	
77

UV irradiation	FA1−xMAxPbI3−yBry	Yes	UV irradiation (5 mA cm−2) in Ar then UV irradiation (5 mA cm−2) in air (50% RH)	6 months with 98% PCE retention	
78

Outdoor condition	FA1−xMAxPbI3−yBry	Yes	On the terrace of the Politecnico di Torino building in Turin (Italy)	3 months with 95% PCE retention	
78

Hail impact	FA0.93Cs0.07PbI3	Yes	Dropping a metal ball on top of the perovskite solar modulesa	Perovskite solar modules stayed as one piece with star-shaped cracks at the attacked position	
83


 	Fig. 4  Imperfections in perovskite films and their passivation by ionic bonding, coordinate bonding, and conversion to wide bandgap materials, and suppression of ion migration at extended defects. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Diagram of the proposed mechanism of cyclic elimination of Pb0 and I0 defects and regeneration of Eu3+–Eu2+ metal ion pair. (b) The MPP tracking of a 0.15% Eu3+-incorporated device, measured at 0.97 V and 1-sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. (c) A schematic illustration of enhancing the hydrogen bond between the halogen and MA/FA ions, and strengthening the ionic bond between the halogen and metal ions through increasing the electronegativity of halogen. (d) Devices under MPP tracking and continuous light irradiation with a white LED lamp, 100 mW cm−2, in a nitrogen atmosphere. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of a perovskite film showing halide-vacancy management in cases of excess halide, in which the surplus halide is immobilized through complexing with potassium into benign compounds at the grain boundaries and surfaces. (b) MPP stability of a device with 10% KI incorporation aged at 0.8 V under continuous ultraviolet-filtered simulated sunlight in a nitrogen atmosphere for over 350 hours. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. (c) A schematic of in situ passivation of halide-induced deep trap: PCBM adsorbs on a Pb–I antistite defective grain boundary during perovskite self-assembly. (d) The wave function overlap shows the hybridization between PCBM and defective surface, enabling electron/hole transfer for absorbance and passivation. (e) DFT calculation of density of states (DOS) shows that the deep trap state (black) induced by the Pb–I antistite defect is reduced and becomes much shallower (red) upon the adsorption of PCBM on defective halide. Ec, minimum of the conduction band; Ev, maximum of the valence band. Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Nature, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of defect passivation and water repellence induced by DAP incorporation. (b) Moisture stability of nonencapsulated PSCs based on MAPbI3-DAP and MAPbI3 films under ambient air (50 ± 5 RH% at room temperature). (c) Operational stability of encapsulated PSCs based on MAPbI3-DAP and MAPbI3 films under continuous 1-sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Science, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Top-view SEM images of triple A-cation perovskite films without (left) and with (right) MACl additive in the starting solution. (b) Stability test of the PSC after passivation based on spiro-OMeTAD HTL at room temperature over 500 h under continuous full sun illumination and maximum power-point tracking. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (c) Long-term stability performance of the most stable device with BMIMBF4 in the perovskite film, under full-spectrum sunlight and heat stress at 70–75 °C. The concentration of the BMIMBF4 in the perovskite film is 0.3 mol% with respect to the lead atoms. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration depicting the orientation of the 3D perovskite phase in the 9% BA-containing (x = 0.09) film, compared with a low-textured reference (x = 0) film. (b) Comparison of stability of high-performance non-encapsulated (left) and encapsulated (right) solar cell devices using FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (navy blue lines; labelled pristine) and BA0.09(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.91Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (red lines; labelled BA/FA/Cs) perovskite active layers. The devices are aged under xenon-lamp simulated full-spectrum AM 1.5, 76 mW cm−2 equivalent irradiance in air (humidity ∼45 RH%) without any ultraviolet filter, held at open-circuit during ageing, and tested at different time intervals under a separate AM 1.5 100 mW cm−2 solar simulator. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Nature, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM images of perovskite films prepared without (left) and with (right) 7% GuaSCN additive. (b) MPP tracking of the semitransparent wide band gap top PSC, the filtered bottom low band gap PSC, and the 4-T tandem device under simulated AM 1.5G one-sun illumination. (c) MPP tracking comparison of the filtered control and GuaSCN-modified low-band gap PSCs. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Science, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM images of CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br perovskite thin films. (b) Normalized PCE of unencapsulated CsPbI2Br and CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br devices monitored under continuous white light exposure as a function of time. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Elsevier Inc., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Structural model of the AVAI-modified α-FAPbI3 proposed based on the solid-state NMR data. (b) Normalized PCE of unencapsulated AVAI-modified α-FAPbI3 and undoped α-FAPbI3 devices monitored under MPP tracking and 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. Comparison of (c) humidity (85% RH, 25 °C) and (d) thermal (150 °C at ∼25% RH) stability performances of unencapsulated control ((FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15) and target (MDACl2 doped FAPbI3) devices. (e) Maximum power point tracking measured with the encapsulated target (MDACl2 doped FAPbI3) device under full solar illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 under ambient conditions) without a UV filter. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Science, copyright 2019.	 

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/Cs0.06FA0.79MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	K+	No	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (ultraviolet-filtered simulated sunlight) in a nitrogen atmosphere	300 h with 80% PCE retention	
105

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/(FAI)0.81(PbI2)0.85(MABr)0.15(PbBr2)0.15/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	α-Bis-PCBM	No	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere	600 h with 96% PCE retention	
110

ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu	1,3-Diaminopropane	Yes	Realistic operating conditions under 1-sun illumination	500 h with 90% PCE retention	
115

ITO/SnO2/Cs0.05FA0.54MA0.41Pb(I0.98Br0.02)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Fluoride	No	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere	1000 h with 90% PCE retention	
14

ITO/SnO2/(FA,MA,Cs)Pb(I,Br)3(Cl)/spiro-OMeTAD (modified)/Au	Eu3+–Eu2+ pair	No	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere	500 h with 91% PCE retention	
13

FTO/TiO2/SnO2/(FA,MA,Cs)Pb(I,Br)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	MACl	No	MPP tracking at 20 °C under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere	500 h with 96% PCE retention	
127

FTO/NiO/(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3/PCBM/BCP/Cr/Cr2O3/Au	BMIMBF4	Yes	1-sun illumination under open-circuit conditions at temperatures about 70–75 °C, RH about 40–60%	1885 h with 85% PCE retention	
129

FTO/SnO2/C60/BA0.09(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.91Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	BA+	Yes	Full-spectrum illumination (76 mW cm−2) under open-circuit conditions with RH about 45%	1680 h with 80% PCE retention	
134

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/C60/BCP/Ag	GuaSCN	Yes	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination	115 h with 90% PCE retention	
137

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsPb0.95Eu0.05I2Br/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Eu2+	No	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere	370 h with 93% PCE retention	
142

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/FAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	AVAI	No	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere	300 h with 90% PCE retention	
145

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/FAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	MDACl2	Yes	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (without a UV filter) under ambient conditions	600 h with 90% PCE retention	
12


 	Fig. 13  (a) XRD spectra of perovskites upon addition of Cs investigating the series Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(1−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, abbreviated as CsxM where M stands for a “mixed perovskite”. CsxM with x = 0, 5, 10, 15%. (b) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy images of Cs0M and Cs5M. (c) Absorption spectra of as-fabricated films (at room temperature) without the subsequent annealing step; the Cs0M film is red (red line, image of red film). Upon addition of cesium, the Cs10M film turns black (black line, image of black film). The inset XRD data show that Cs10M has the characteristic perovskite pattern whereas Cs0M does not. (d) Aging for 250 h of high performance Cs5M and Cs0M devices in a nitrogen atmosphere held at room temperature under constant illumination and maximum power point tracking. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Thermal stability test of a perovskite solar cell. The device was aged for 500 hours at 85 °C under continuous full illumination and MPP tracking in a nitrogen atmosphere (red curve, circles). This aging routine exceeds industry norms. During the light soaking at 85 °C, the device retained 95% (dashed line) of its initial performance. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from Science, copyright 2016. (b) Stability for the Cs10Rb5FAPbI3 device without polymer layers (green curve) and with polymer-modification (blue curve) aged at room temperature after 1000 hours of continuous MPP tracking in a nitrogen atmosphere. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from Science, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Photographs showing the ease of oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ in ambient air and the facile reduction of Sn4+ to Sn2+ by metallic Sn powders. (b) Illustration of the formation of Sn vacancies in mixed Pb–Sn perovskites due to the presence of Sn4+ in the precursor solution and the suppression of Sn vacancy formation in TRP perovskites because of the absence of Sn4+. (c) MPP tracking of an unencapsulated small-area tandem solar cell for 463 h in a glovebox under full simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) without an ultraviolet filter. The device retained 90% of its initial efficiency after operation for 463 h (T90 = 463 h). Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustrating the local strain (b), which is reduced either by the formation of point defects (c) or by the incorporation of small ions (a). The distortion angle (θ = 180° – angle (B–X–B′)) decreases via strain relaxation. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018.	 

FTO/compact TiO2/Li-doped mesoporous TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	One-step solution	No	MPP tracking in N2 held at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (an array of white LEDs)	250 h with 90% PCE retention	
163

FTO/compact TiO2/FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	One-step solution	Yes	White light (sulfur lamp, ≈100 mW cm−2) illumination with RH < 50%, temperature below 65 °C	120 h with 70% PCE retention	
166

FTO/compact TiO2/Cs0.07FA0.93PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Hybrid CVD and cation exchange (HCVD-CE)	No	MPP tracking with RH ≈ 60% under 1-sun illumination (solar simulator)	17 h with 56% PCE retention	
167

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/RbCsFAMAPbI3/PTAA/Au	One-step solution	No	MPP tracking at 85 °C under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere	500 h with 95% PCE retention	
169

FTO/SnO2/PCBM:PMMA(5:1)/Rb0.05Cs0.1FA0.85PbI3/PMMA/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	One-step solution	No	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere	1000 h with 98% PCE retention	
171

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/BCP/Au	One-step solution	No	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination in ambient air with RH of 50 ± 5%	50 min with 90% PCE retention	
178

ITO/PTAA/FA0.8Cs0.2Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/C60/ALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.7MA0.3Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/BCP/Cu	One-step solution	No	MPP tracking at 32 °C under 1-sun illumination (xenon lamp solar simulator) in a glovebox	463 h with 90% PCE retention	
181


 	Fig. 17  (a) Theoretical models of perovskites with molecular surface passivation of PbI antisite with theophylline, caffeine, and theobromine. (b) Evolution of the PCEs measured from the encapsulated perovskite solar cells with or without theophylline treatment exposed to continuous light (90 ± 10 mW cm−2) under open-circuit conditions. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. (c) The device structure of perovskite planar heterojunction solar cells. (d) Schematic illustration of quaternary ammonium halides (QAHs) assembled on the defect sites. The red and blue symbols represent the N atom and O atom of the choline chloride molecule, respectively. (e) Maximum power point tracking for 26 h of an unencapsulated device under continuous 1 sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Nature, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Structures of a tBBAI-passivated PSC. (b) MPP ageing results in an inert atmosphere (N2) and under 1 sun continuous illumination of a PSC without passivation and PSCs passivated with PEAI and tBBAI. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (c) Chemical structure of adamantane (AD) and 1-adamantylamine (ADA) used for passivation of perovskite films. (d) Stability test of PSCs with and without passivation under continuous full-sun illumination and maximum power point tracking in a nitrogen atmosphere at T = 30 °C. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (e) A schematic illustration of a polymer thin film (PEO) assembled on the perovskite structure. (f) Operational stability test for the evolution of PCE of FA0.87Cs0.13Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3 devices without and with PEO, continuously measured under xenon-lamp simulated full-spectrum AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 equivalent irradiance in air (humidity ∼ 50 RH%) without any ultraviolet filter, held at the maximum power point during ageing, and tested at 0.03 s time intervals. Reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of crack-filling interface engineering. (b) J–V characteristics of PSCs based on CsPbI3 and CHI–CsPbI3 with 0.1 cm2 effective cell area under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination of 100 mW cm−2 in reverse scan. (c) Photostability of the unencapsulated CHI–CsPbI3 PSC devices under continuous white light LED (light-emitting diode) illumination (100 mW cm−2) at their MPP in a N2 glovebox. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Science, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of protection of perovskites through in situ formation of a lead sulfate top layer on the perovskite surface. (b) Stability test of encapsulated solar cell devices based on control (blue) and sulfate-treated (red) CsFAMA perovskite active layers. Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from Science, copyright 2019. (c) Schematic drawing of the conversion process from the pristine perovskite layer, the layer treated with Pb(SCN)2, and the Pb surface-rich perovskite layer. (d) Operational stability of the control cell and the cell with GO or Cl–GO. Reproduced from ref. 221 with permission from Science, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the PDL treatment process and the relevant device configuration, the molecular structure of DETA, and a possible model for DETA interaction with the MAPbI3 cage. (b) Maximum power point (MPP) tracking for 500 h of the unencapsulated devices under continuous 1 sun illumination. The humidity and temperature are 50 ± 5% and 25 ± 1 °C, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 225 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of a 3D/2D PSC. (b) The MPP was measured under full solar illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) without a UV-filter. The PSC shows an initial PCE of 22.6% and maintained 85% of its efficiency after 500 h. The device is encapsulated and measured under ambient conditions. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. (c) Structures of pure 3D perovskite (left) and pure 2D perovskite (right), respectively. (d) MPP tracking under ambient atmosphere of a 3D PSC and a 3D/2D PSC, with relative humidity shown in the inset. Reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from Science, copyright 2019.	 

ITO/SnO2/(FAPbI3)x(MAPbBr3)1−x/PTAA/Au	Theophylline	Yes	1-sun illumination under open-circuit conditions at temperature about 40 °C, RH about 30–40%	500 h with 95% PCE retention	
200

ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu	Choline chloride	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination	26 h with 86% PCE retention	
201

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	4-tert-Butyl-benzylammonium iodide	No	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere	500 h with 95% PCE retention	
204

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsFAMAPb(IBr)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1-Adamantylamine	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere at temperature 30 °C	300 h with 96% PCE retention	
207

FTO/SnO2/PCBM:PMMA(5:1)/Rb0.05Cs0.1FA0.85PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	PMMA	No	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination (white LED lamp) in a nitrogen atmosphere	1000 h with 98% PCE retention	
171

FTO/compact TiO2/C60/FA0.87Cs0.13Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Polyethylene oxide	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in air (50% RH)	14 h with 100% PCE retention	
209

ITO/PTAA/Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45/C60/BCP/Cu	Lead sulfate	Yes	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 65 °C, RH about 60 ± 10%	1200 h with 96.8% PCE retention	
217

ITO/SnO2/FAxMA1−xPb1+yI3/PTAA/Au	Chlorinated graphene oxide	Yes	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 60 °C	1000 h with 90% PCE retention	
221

ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM:C60/ZrAcac/Ag	Diethylenetriamine	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 25 ± 1 °C, RH about 50 ± 10%	500 h with 70% PCE retention	
225

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.92(MAPbBr3)0.08/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
n-Octylammonium bromide	Yes	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination under ambient conditions	500 h with 85% PCE retention	
226

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsFAMAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Pentafluorophenylethylammonium iodide	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination under ambient conditions (40% RH)	1000 h with 90% PCE retention	
227


 	Fig. 23  (a) Trap-like localized antisite defects form near the valence band edge for the PbI2-terminated TiO2/perovskite interface. (b) Shallow and delocalized Pb–Cl antisite defects are seen for the PbCl2-terminated interface. (c) Continuous MPP tracking for 500 hours of a high-performance unsealed CsMAFA cell with TiO2–Cl in a nitrogen atmosphere under constant simulated solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a 420 nm cutoff UV filter. Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from Science, copyright 2017. (d) Diagram of the cell configuration highlighting the doped charge carrier extraction layers. The right panels show the composition of Ti(Nb)Ox and the crystal structure of Li+-doped NixMg1−xO, denoted as NiMg(Li)O. (e) Stability of sealed cells kept in the dark or under simulated solar light (AM 1.5; 100 mW cm−2; using a 420 nm UV light cut-off filter; surface temperature of the cell, 45–50 °C; bias potential, 0 V). Reproduced from ref. 235 with permission from Science, copyright 2015. (f) Long-term stability of the planar heterojunction perovskite solar cell fabricated using as-deposited (defective, orange line) and post-annealed (commonly fabricated, blue line) TiO2 thin films as the ETL. The curves were measured at a bias of 0.8 V under AM 1.5G in a N2 atmosphere. Reproduced from ref. 238 with permission from Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of different steps in all-solution processing methods of SnO2 thin film deposition: spin coating (SC, left) and chemical bath deposition (CBD, right). (b) Long-term ageing of SC-CBD fabricated SnO2 film based PSCs under MPPT and constant 1 sun equivalent, with N2 flow at 20 °C. Reproduced from ref. 240 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. (c) Long-term stability measurements of devices without any encapsulation under illumination of 100 mW cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 241 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. (d) Schematic illustration of the formation map for the superoxide precursor colloidal solution. (e) Photostability tests under constant AM 1.5G illumination with a xenon lamp, including UV radiation for two unencapsulated devices of FTO/LBSO/MAPbI3/PTAA/Au and FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA/Au. (f) Long-term photostability test under constant AM 1.5G illumination with a metal-halide lamp, including UV radiation for two encapsulated devices of FTO/LBSO/MAPbI3/NiO/FTO and FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/NiO/FTO. Reproduced from ref. 246 with permission from Science, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Evolution of normalized photovoltaic parameters extracted from JV curves measured every 65 min (from the top: fill factor, open circuit-voltage, short-circuit current), and efficiency at the maximum power point (bottom panel) of the cells with C60 and TiO2 compact layer kept under a load for a period of 500 h at 60 °C. Reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. Comparison of stability of MAPbIxCl3−x (with neat C60) and FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4) perovskite devices with neat (control) and 1 wt% N-DPBI doped C60 electron-transporting layers. The devices (b) nonencapsulated and (c) encapsulated with a hot-melt polymer foil and a glass coverslip were aged under full spectrum simulated AM 1.5, 76 mW cm−2 average irradiance at Voc in air without a UV filter. Reproduced from ref. 247 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017.	 

FTO/chlorine-capped TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using chlorine-capped TiO2	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere	500 h with 90% PCE retention	
9

FTO/NiMgLiO/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ti(Nb)Ox/Ag	Using Nb5+-doped TiO2	Yes	1-sun illumination under short-circuit conditions at 45–50 °C	1000 h with 90% PCE retention	
235

FTO/defective TiO2/MAPbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using defective TiO2	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere	100 h with 90% PCE retention	
238

FTO/SnO2/FAMACsPb(IBr)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using chemical bath deposition modified SnO2	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 20 °C	60 h with 83.3% PCE retention	
240

FTO/SnO2/FA1−xCsxPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using EDTA modified SnO2	No	Under 1-sun illumination	120 h with 86% PCE retention	
241

FTO/La-doped BaSnO3/MAPbI3/NiO/FTO	Using La-doped BaSnO3 as ETL	Yes	Under 1-sun illumination at 25 °C	1000 h with 93.3% PCE retention	
246

FTO/C60/MAPb(ICl)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using C60 as ETL	Yes	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 60 °C	500 h with 50% PCE retention	
234

FTO/N-DPBI doped C60/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using N-DPBI doped C60 as ETL	Yes	1-sun illumination under open-circuit conditions in air	2000 h with 75% PCE retention	
247


 	Fig. 26  (a) Tapping mode AFM topography images of spiro-MeOTAD films prepared by using chlorobenzene (left) and chloroform (right). (b) SEM images of Au electrodes on the spiro-MeOTAD films prepared by using chlorobenzene (left) and chloroform (right). (c) Stability profile of the PSCs with spiro-OMeTAD dissolved in chlorobenzene (ClB cells) and chloroform (ClF cells) operated under air with a controlled relative humidity of ∼42%. When the cells were not under I–V measurements, a constant voltage was supplied to the cells matching the voltage at the maximum power point. Reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (d) Cross-sectional SEM images of aged control (Li-TFSI doped) and optimized (spiro-OMeTAD(TFSI)2 doped) devices; the emerged voids across the perovskite/HTL interface are highlighted with red circles. (e) Evolution of PCE in a long-term stability test of control and optimized devices; the devices were unencapsulated and aged under continuous 1-sun illumination at 40% RH and 50 °C for 300 h. Reproduced from ref. 262 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (f) Chemical structures of DM and evolution of normalized power conversion efficiency obtained a from DM-based device with encapsulation under maximum power point tracking and continuous light irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2, white LED) at 25 °C. Reproduced from ref. 263 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Chemical structure of neat EH44 (top) and spiro-OMeTAD (bottom). (b) PSCs with the HTL layer of either spiro-OMeTAD (black) or EH44 (yellow) were subjected to continuous operation (resistive load of 510 Ω) under ambient conditions. The ambient relative humidity (RH, black, left axis) and room temperature (red, right axis) were monitored during the course of the experiments (top) and the average efficiency obtained as a function of time from seven devices for each HTL is shown with error bars that represent the standard deviation of the devices (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018. (c) Results of operational stability tests on the encapsulated control and DHA devices by tracking at their maximum power points under 1-Sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) The preferential out-of-plane orientation of CuSCN (the in-plane orientation is rotated by 90°). Color code: red, copper atoms; yellow, sulfur atoms; gray, carbon atoms; blue, nitrogen atoms. (b) Operational stability of an unencapsulated CuSCN-based device with and without a thin layer of rGO (as a spacer layer between CuSCN and gold layers), examined at a maximum power point under continuous full-sun illumination at 60 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere. Reproduced from ref. 278 with permission from Science, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Device architecture of HTL-free p–i–n PSC prepared using BDPSO doping. (b) Effects of BDPSO dopants to passivate defects and facilitate charge transfer between perovskite grains and at the interface. (c) Operational stability test of the encapsulated 16 mm2 device under light soaking at MPP (1-sun; with a 420 nm UV light cutoff filter; 35 °C; bias potential, 0 V). Reproduced from ref. 284 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using chloroform solvent	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination with RH about 42%	100 h with 50% PCE retention	
261

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/Rb0.05Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.07PbBr0.4I2.57/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using spiro-OMeTAD(TFSI)2 additive	No	1-sun illumination at temperature about 50 °C and RH about 40%	300 h with 65% PCE retention	
262

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05/DM/Au	Using DM as HTL	Yes	MPP tracking at 25 °C under 1-sun illumination	310 h with 92.6% PCE retention	
263

FTO/TiO2/(FA0.76MA0.21Cs0.03)0.67Pb(I0.89Br0.11)2.56/EH44/Au	Using EH44 as HTL and Ag-TFSI as additives	No	ISOS-L-1 testing standard (devices were held at a static load resistance of 510 Ω under 1-sun illumination under ambient conditions)	160 h with 77% PCE retention	
49

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05/P3HT/Au	Using P3HT as HTL	Yes	MPP tracking at room temperature under 1-sun illumination	1370 h with 95% PCE retention	
10

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsFAMAPbI3−xBrx/CuSCN/Au	Using CuSCN as HTL	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 60 °C	1000 h with 95% PCE retention	
278

ITO/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag	HTL free	Yes	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at temperature about 35 °C	1300 h with 80% PCE retention	
284


 	Fig. 30  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a complete perovskite device based on ITO/C60-SAM/perovskite/PDCBT/Ta-WOx/Au. Scale bar, 500 nm. (b) Corresponding SEM image of a focused ion beam polished cross section. Scale bar, 500 nm. (c) Unencapsulated device photostability tests under continuous 1-sun illumination in a home-built chamber filled with N2. PCE variation of the HTL stacks: spiro-MeOTAD/MoOx/Au (yellow), PDCBT/MoOx/Au (green), and PDCBT/Ta-WOx/Au (gray). Reproduced from ref. 286 with permission from Science, copyright 2017. (d) Results of maximum power point tracking aging of the corresponding devices. The aging was done under 1 sun illumination at 75 °C and N2 flow. The values are normalized to the initial ones. Reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic drawing showing the cross section of the triple-layer perovskite-based fully printable mesoscopic solar cell. The mesoporous layers of TiO2 and ZrO2 have a thickness of ∼1 and 2 μm, respectively, and are deposited on a FTO-covered glass sheet shown in blue and gray. They are infiltrated with perovskite by drop-casting from solution. (b) Stability test of a triple layer (5-AVA)x(MA)(1−x)PbI3 perovskite sensitized mesoscopic solar cell in full AM 1.5 simulated sunlight in ambient air over 1008 hours with an unsealed device. Reproduced from ref. 292 with permission from Science, copyright 2014. (c) Typical module stability test under 1 sun AM 1.5G conditions at a stabilized temperature of 55 °C and under short circuit conditions. Stability measurements done according to the standard aging conditions. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Nature, copyright 2017.	 

ITO/C60-SAM/FA0.83MA0.17Pb1.1Br0.50I2.80/PDCBT/Ta-WOx/Au	Using Ta-WOx as the interface between HTL and Au	No	Under 1-sun illumination in a nitrogen atmosphere	1000 h with 95% PCE retention	
286

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/CsFAMAPbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Cr/Au	Using Cr as the interface between HTL and Au	No	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination at 75 °C	12 h with 83% PCE retention	
287

FTO/TiO2/ZrO2/(5-AVA)x(MA)1−xPbI3/C	Using carbon electrode	No	Under 1-sun illumination in ambient air	1008 h with 100% PCE retention	
292

FTO/TiO2/ZrO2/(AVA)2PbI4/MAPbI3/C	Using carbon electrode	Yes	Under 1-sun illumination and short circuit conditions in ambient air at a cycling temperature from 35 to 90 °C	10000 h with 100% PCE retention	
18


 	Fig. 32  The UV-vis absorption spectra of (a) UVCA without paraffin and (b) UVCA with paraffin encapsulation, and inset photos show devices after encapsulation from both sides. (c) Thermal stability and (d) moisture stability track of encapsulated devices. (e) Continuous MPP track in an ambient environment with different encapsulation conditions. Inset: The MPP track of UVCA without paraffin encapsulation in a short time range. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (f) Illustration of adding Pb-absorbing materials—DMDP film and EDTMP–PEO film—on the front (glass) and back (metal electrode) sides of PSCs, respectively (left), and molecular structures of DMDP and EDTMP (right). (g) Operational stability for PSCs prepared with and without the Pb-absorbing layers. All devices are covered with an EVA layer. Reproduced from ref. 296 with permission from Nature, copyright 2020.	 

ITO/SnO2/RbCsMAFAPb(I1−xBrx)3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using paraffin as encapsulation material	Yes	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in ambient air with RH about 30–50%	1000 h with 80% PCE retention	
44

ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/AZO/ITO	Using sputter deposited NiOx as HTL	Yes	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination (no UV-light filtering) at 30 °C	4000 h with 100% PCE retention	
293

FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/FA1−xMAxPbI3−yBry/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using luminescent downshifting materials	Yes	On the terrace of the Politecnico di Torino building in Turin (Italy)	2160 h with 95% PCE retention	
78

FTO/TiO2/(CsPbI3)0.05(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Using Pb-absorbing layers	Yes	MPP tracking under 1-sun illumination in air at about 50 °C	500 h with 80% PCE retention	
296







Test ID	ISOS-D-1	ISOS-D-2	ISOS-D-3	ISOS-O-1	ISOS-O-2	ISOS-O-3
Light source	(Shelf)	(High temp. storage)	(Damp heat)	(Outdoor)	(Outdoor)	(Outdoor)
Temp.a	None	None	None	Sunlight	Sunlight	Sunlight
Relative humidity (R.H.)a	Ambient	65/85 °C	65/85 °C	Ambient	Ambient	Ambient
Environmenta	Ambient	Ambient (low)	85%	Ambient	Ambient	Ambient
Characterization light source	Ambient	Oven	Env. Chamber	Outdoor	Outdoor	Outdoor
Loadb	Solar simulator or sunlight	Solar simulator	Solar simulator	Solar simulator	Sunlight	Solar simulator and sunlight

	Open circuit	Open circuit	Open circuit	MPP or Open circuit	MPP or Open circuit	MPP

Test ID	ISOS-L-1 (Laboratory weathering)	ISOS-L-2 (Laboratory weathering)	ISOS-L-3	ISOS-T-1	ISOS-T-2	ISOS-T-3
Light source	Simulator	Simulator	(Laboratory weathering)	(Thermal cycling)	(Thermal cycling)	(Thermal cycling)
Temp.a	Ambient	65/85 °C	Simulator	None	None	None
Relative humidity (R.H.)a	Ambient	Ambient	65/85 °C	Between room temp. and 65/85 °C	Between room temp. and 65/85 °C	−40 to +85 °C
Environment/setup	Light only	Light & Temp.	Near 50%	Ambient	Ambient	Near 55%
Characterization light source	Solar simulator	Solar simulator	Light, temp. and R.H.	Hot plate/oven	Oven/env. chamb.	Env. chamb.
Loadb	MPP or open circuit	MPP or open circuit	Solar simulator	Solar simulator or sunlight	Solar simulator	Solar simulator

	
	
	MPP	Open circuit	Open circuit	Open circuit

Test ID	ISOS-LT-1 (solar-thermal cycling)	ISOS-LT-2 (solar-thermal-humidity cycling)	ISOS-LT-3 (solar-thermal-humidity-freeze cycling)
Light source	Simulator	Simulator	Simulator
Temp.	Linear or step ramping between room temp. and 65 °C	Linear ramping between 5 and 65 °C	Linear ramping between −25 and 65 °C
Relative humidity (R.H.)	Monitored, uncontrolled	Monitored, controlled at 50% beyond 40 °C	Monitored, controlled at 50% beyond 40 °C
Environment/setup	Weathering chamber	Env. chamb. with sun simulation	Env. chamb. with sun simulation and freezing
Characterization light source	Solar simulator	Solar simulator	Solar simulator
Loadb	MPP or open circuit	MPP or open circuit	MPP or open circuit

 	Fig. 33  The devices were held at the MPP, open circuit or short circuit during the ageing period and their J–V curves were measured periodically. Evolution of (a) PCE, (b) Voc, (c) FF measured in the backward J–V scan (from Voc to Jsc); the values are normalized to the initial ones. The lines represent averaged behavior of devices, while the shaded area represents standard deviation. After 250 h of ageing under illumination, the devices were allowed to recover in the dark for 24 h before being re-measured. (d) The device shows an initial exponential loss region, followed by a slower linear region. A slope can be fitted to the linear region (broken line) to estimate device lifetime, T80. The device can recover part of its initial performance after being kept in the dark—in this case for 16 hours. The device was aged under a white LED lamp. (e) A schematic of the ageing procedure combining MPP tracking and periodic J–V scans. Reproduced from ref. 306 with permission from Nature, copyright 2018.	 

Initial solar cell characterization	Current–voltage (J–V) curves	Light source (light source type, intensity, spectrum, filters applied, calibration), scan speed, direction, dwelling time, the number of power line cycles (NPLC), preconditioning, and so on
MPP tracking or photocurrent at MPP	Hardware, tracking algorithm, delay time, tracking duration
EQE/IPCE spectra	Indicating the lock-in frequency and light bias if used, and if monochromatic light is smaller than active area, or larger and an optical mask applied. Calculated Jsc and its comparison to Jsc obtained from the J–V data


Encapsulation	Wiring	Materials, processing conditions, addition of a protective sealant
Front- and back-side encapsulation layer(s)	Materials (reference or composition, thickness), processing conditions (environment, temperature, duration)
Edge sealant	Materials (reference, thickness, width), processing conditions (environment, curing and so on)
Geometry	Rim (minimum distance between encapsulation edge and active area edge), device active area; picture or a scheme of the device


Ageing conditions	Light	Light source type, intensity, spectrum, filters applied, calibration
Temperature	In shadow and/or under illumination, temperature sensor type
Atmosphere	Air/glovebox/sealed pouch/environmental chamber, and so on; RH (controlled or monitored)
Electrical bias condition	Open circuit/maximum power point/short circuit/constant load
Cycling procedure (if applicable)	Dwell and period times
Comply with known protocols (IEC, ISOS and so on)?	



Ageing time	
	Stress duration and corresponding performance loss, resting times (for example, without stress).


Measurements during ageing	Periodically recorded J–V curves	Recording frequency, scan parameters (similar to ‘Initial solar cell characterization’)
Recovery before measurements	Recovery time and conditions prior to the measurements.
MPP tracking	Tracking parameters (similar to ‘Initial solar cell characterization’)
Other periodic measurements (if applied)	



Number of samples	
	Number of solar cells of each type tested under each ageing condition, statistical analysis (if applicable).
Number of samples still operating above a specified efficiency level at the end of the ageing test.


Outdoor stability	Location and time of exposure	Place or coordinates; dates and total amount of hours of exposure.
Weather conditions throughout the exposure period	Temperature, humidity, sunlight irradiance (preferably in tabulated format), wind speed, and so on.
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this review.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
