Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals : the aqueous approach   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35285K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35285K
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2905-2929Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsColloidal semiconductor nanocrystals: the aqueous approach†

        
          
            Vladimir 
            Lesnyak‡
, 
      
        
          
            Nikolai 
            Gaponik
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Alexander 
            Eychmüller
          
          
        
      *
      Physical Chemistry, TU Dresden, Bergstr. 66b, 01062 Dresden, Germany. E-mail: alexander.eychmueller@chemie.tu-dresden.de;  Fax: +49 (0)35146337164;   Tel: +49 (0)35146335203
Received 
      27th July 2012
    First published on 20th November 2012AbstractThis article summarizes the main achievements and challenges in the field of the aqueous synthesis of semiconductor quantum dots in colloidal solutions. Developments in the last two decades demonstrate the great potential of this approach to synthesize nanocrystalline materials with superior properties such as strong photoluminescence, long time stability and compatibility with biological media, and the variability in assembling and self-assembling into larger structures or on surfaces. Being relatively straightforward, the aqueous approach provides some advantages such as versatility, scalability, environmental friendliness and cost effectiveness, leading in summary to very attractive application perspectives.
Vladimir Lesnyak
Vladimir Lesnyak is presently a Marie Curie fellow at the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Genova, Italy) in the group of Prof. Liberato Manna. He received his PhD degree in chemistry (2005) from the Belarusian State University in Minsk (Belarus) under supervision of Prof. F. N. Kaputsky, developing a synthesis of petroleum resins and methods of their chemical modification. PhD studies were followed by post-doctoral research at the Technical University of Dresden (Germany) in the group of Prof. Alexander Eychmüller from 2006 to 2012. His current research focuses on the synthesis, assembly and applications of colloidal semiconductor and metal nanocrystals.
Nikolai Gaponik
Nikolai Gaponik is a senior staff scientist at the TU Dresden (Germany). He received his PhD in chemistry (2000) from the Belarussian State University in Minsk (Belarus) under supervision of Prof. D. V. Sviridov. He was a visiting scientist at the LMU in Munich in 2000 (with Prof. J. Feldmann and Dr M. Gao), a DAAD-fellow and later a research scientist in the group of Prof. H. Weller at the University of Hamburg in 2000–2005, and an IKERBASQUE-Fellow in the group of Prof. Y. Rakovich at the Center of Materials Physics, San Sebastian, Spain, in 2011.
Alexander Eychmüller
The academic career of Alexander Eychmüller started in Göttingen with studies of Physics (PhD, MPI for Biophysical Chemistry, A. Weller and K. H. Grellmann), continued at UCLA (postdoc with M. A. El-Sayed), Berlin (HMI with A. Henglein), and at the University of Hamburg (with H. Weller). Since 2005 he holds a chair in Physical Chemistry/Electrochemistry at the TU Dresden. He published about 200 papers in peer review journals, most of them on the synthesis and characterization of nanosized objects including work on their photophysical, electrochemical and structural properties.
Introduction
The aqueous colloidal synthesis of semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) or quantum dots (QDs) is an advantageous alternative to the widely used organometallic route.1 In comparison to the latter, the aqueous method (1) employs the most widespread, environmentally friendly and biocompatible solvent, (2) is not restricted to an inert atmosphere, (3) is easily up-scalable, and (4) provides various functionalizations of the NCs by applying an appropriate capping ligand which in turn may be further functionalized by electrostatic or covalent linking.2 The formation of nanoparticles is a dynamic process which is usually explained by an Ostwald ripening (OR) mechanism mainly consisting of the growth of larger particles at the expense of smaller ones present in an ensemble. The history of this method begins 30 years ago starting with an early work of Henglein.3,4 Comprehensive historical overviews of the progress made in the field during this time may be found in recent publications.5–7 The aqueous approach has already yielded stable binary II–VI and IV–VI compounds such as CdS,8–10 CdTe,1,11–14 CdSe,15–17 ZnSe,18,19 HgTe,20 PbS21–25 as well as some alloyed particles such as CdSeTe,26 CdHgTe,27–29 ZnSeS,30 ZnCdSe,19,31–33 ZnHgSe,34 and ZnSeTe.35,36 Most of these materials exhibit strong photoluminescence (PL) (Fig. 1) whose efficiency is substantially determined by a proper choice of the stabilizer.37 The strong tuneable luminescence and the high extinction coefficients of the NCs define their application potential in the fields of light emitting diodes (LEDs),38 colour conversion,39 energy scavenging,40,41 fluorescence sensing,42–44 bioimaging45 and biosensing.46 Without doubt, in the aqueous synthesis short chain thiols are the most used ligands for the stabilization of various semiconductor materials.
 Fig. 1  Representative normalized photoluminescence spectra of a series of various aqueous NCs. Reproduced from ref. 47. 
The mild synthetic conditions used in aqueous syntheses often disable perfect arrangements of the atoms in the crystal lattice of the nanoparticles which is more easily achieved by the syntheses in high boiling organic solvents. In order to improve the crystallinity, size distribution and the corresponding optical properties of the QDs the use of microwave irradiation48,49 or the synthesis in autoclaves50 has been reported to be applied to CdTe and ZnSe NCs. The microwave assisted synthesis has also resulted in alloyed ZnSeS48 and ZnCdTe51 NCs and even core–shell–shell CdTe–CdS–ZnS52 highly emitting particles which, to the best of our knowledge, appeared as a first successful example of such kind of sophisticated structure prepared by the aqueous method. Different core–shell semiconductor nanoparticles are achievable by a common aqueous synthetic protocol, e.g. ZnSe–ZnS,53 ZnCdSe–ZnS,54 CdSe–CdS,55–59 CdTe–CdS,60 CdTe–ZnTe,61 CdSeTe–ZnS,62 CdHgTe–CdS,63 and HgTe–CdS.64 The obtaining of these core–shell and core–shell–shell structures directly in water constitutes a large step forward towards a superior quality of NCs accessible previously solely from the organometallic synthetic route.
Interesting hybrid approaches for the synthesis of core–shell NCs combining aqueous and organic phase techniques have recently been developed. Depending on the accessibility of the corresponding core and shell materials, cores being synthesized in water (organics) have been transferred into organics (water) for subsequent shell formation. Thereby, CdTe and CdHgTe cores transferred from water were coated by ZnS shells via the hot injection technique.65 The opposite direction of the core being transferred (from organics to water) has been applied for the synthesis of InP/ZnS QDs.66 As examples of a shape control, the facile synthesis of CdTe67,68 and CdHgTe69 nanorods with controllable sizes and aspect ratios is mentioned. Nevertheless, it is accepted that the aqueous method usually does not permit a direct efficient shape control of the nanoparticles during their growth due to temperature limitations: temperatures of around 100 °C are not sufficient to overcome the energy barrier of transforming the usually evolving zinc-blende to the wurtzite structure. Thus, the NCs synthesized exhibit in most cases an isotropic zinc blende cubic crystal structure and mainly spherical or quasi-spherical shape, since this shape is thermodynamically the most stable.70
In the following paragraphs we will review in more detail recent results of the aqueous synthesis of various semiconductor materials, arranging them in decreasing order of their band gaps, i.e. beginning with wide band gap compounds emitting in the ultra-violet (UV) region (ZnSe) via the visible (CdTe) to the near-infrared (NIR) and infrared (IR) narrow energy gaps (HgTe, PbS). The synthetic part including a search for less toxic materials and insights into the NC growth mechanism will be appended by processing approaches and application perspectives. We note that the applications of semiconductor NCs synthesized in water mostly relate to CdTe since this material has been best investigated. Nevertheless, our experience shows that the majority of the assembly and application approaches developed for CdTe NCs are also transferrable to other types of thiol-capped nanoparticles.
General synthetic protocol
In general, an aqueous synthetic protocol consists of the reaction between metal ions or their complexes and chalcogen containing precursors in the presence of an appropriate stabilizer with subsequent nucleation and growth of the NCs, typically controlled by heating. As metal precursors water soluble salts are used, commonly perchlorates and chlorides. As a sulphur source Na2S22,25 is widely employed instead of the less convenient H2S.71 Direct injection of sodium sulphide solution is done also for a CdS and ZnS shell formation.52 However, in our opinion, organic compounds which slowly decompose with a controlled release of sulphur ions, such as thioacetamide55,57 and thiourea53,72 are more appropriate for this purpose. Se2− and Te2− are introduced in the reaction in the form of H2Se30 and H2Te1 gases generated by the decomposition of the corresponding aluminium chalcogenide, or in the form of NaHSe15,73 and NaHTe74–78 prepared by the reduction of elemental Se or Te by NaBH4.79 An electrochemical generation of H2Te has also been applied in the synthesis of CdTe13 and HgTe80 NCs. Mixed NaHSexTe1−x81 or simultaneous injection of NaHSe and NaHTe solutions26 was employed for the one-pot synthesis of alloyed CdSeTe NCs. The slow release of selenium ions is realized by the decomposition of N,N-dimethylselenourea in the reaction mixture under microwave57 or laser55 irradiation. We note that H2Te injection for the precursor generation is not limited to only aqueous media and can be applied also in organic solvents (toluene,82 dimethylacetamide and dimethylformamide83) and even ionic liquids84 whereas NaHTe is useful solely in water.
A variety of thiols as capping ligands employed in the aqueous synthesis of semiconductor NCs is summarized in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of typical thiol capping ligands employed in the aqueous synthesis of NCs. 
Therefore the typical synthetic protocol for obtaining aqueous thiol-capped NCs is a one-pot process consisting of 3 main steps:
1. Formation of metal–thiol complexes by dissolving a metal salt in water followed by the addition of an appropriate thiol with subsequent pH adjustment.
2. Injection of a chalcogen source into a thoroughly de-aerated (through purging by an inert gas (Ar, N2)) metal/thiol solution results in the formation of a MeX precursor (frequently referred to as a monomer).
3. Nucleation and growth of the NCs by heating or microwave irradiation, usually upon reflux under open air conditions. Note that the growth of HgTe and PbS particles occurs at room temperature. Fig. 3 presents an example of the aqueous synthesis employing aluminium chalcogenides to produce the hydrogen chalcogenide gas.
 Fig. 3  Schematic presentation of the synthesis of aqueous thiol-capped binary semiconductor NCs (ZnSe, CdSe, CdTe, HgTe) using aluminum chalcogenides (Al2Se3, Al2Te3) as the chalcogen source. Courtesy of A. Dubavik (LMU Munich, Germany). 
Recently Zhou et al. dramatically simplified the aqueous synthesis, having reproducibly prepared highly luminescent CdTe QDs in a conical flask at room temperature, without precursor preparation, pH adjustment, inert gas protection, and heating.85 In this protocol the QDs were synthesized through the stepwise addition of water, CdCl2, thiol, Na2TeO3, NaBH4, and N2H4. The adjustment of the feed ratio of the reagents allowed for an efficient control of the particle sizes. Hydrazine as a strong reducing agent protected the monomers from oxidation and, being a weak electrolyte, permitted the QD growth by altering the electrostatic environment of the growing crystals. At the same time, the employment of a large amount of highly toxic hydrazine (almost three fourth of the total reaction volume) and low concentrations of the monomers are serious drawbacks of this protocol.
ZnX NCs
Zinc chalcogenides attract scientific interest due to the demand for non- or low-toxic nanoparticulate semiconductor materials, decreasing the amount of released heavy metal pollutants such as Cd, Hg, Pb into the environment. The most developed materials via an aqueous approach are ZnSe NCs. ZnS, with a wide bulk band gap of 3.54 eV (2.58 eV for ZnSe and 2.26 eV for ZnTe, all of zinc blende crystal structure),99 is commonly used as a shell material for the creation of core–shell structures. The synthesis of ZnTe NCs, although reported,100 has not yielded high quality light emitting colloids, probably due to the high reactivity of ZnTe towards oxygen and water and its instability under ambient conditions.36,101
ZnSe
Nanostructured ZnSe exhibiting luminescence in the near-UV and blue spectral region is a promising candidate for the fabrication of blue emitting LEDs and laser diodes,102 and as a potentially low-toxic material also for biolabelling. The first successful aqueous colloidal synthesis of strongly emitting ZnSe NCs was reported by Shavel et al.30 A typical procedure comprised the reaction between Zn ions and H2Se gas generated by the decomposition of Al2Se3, carried by N2 or Ar to the reaction mixture. This nucleation step occurs in the presence of thiol-stabilizers (thioglycolic acid (TGA), 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) or 1-thioglycerol (TG) (Fig. 2)) and is followed by the growth of the NCs under reflux. We note that the pH value of the reaction mixture plays a very important role in the aqueous synthesis of semiconductor nanoparticles, ensuring their stability and providing control of their growth. Since the as-prepared ZnSe NC colloids exhibited negligible photoluminescence quantum yields (QY) (≤0.1%), they underwent a photochemical treatment by an illumination with white or UV light in the presence of the Zn salt and the thiol-stabilizer.18,30,73 The latter was decomposed under the irradiation, releasing S ions which subsequently reacted with the Zn ions, forming a ZnS or a mixed ZnSSe shell on the surface of the ZnSe NCs.103 The evolution of the optical properties of the ZnSe NCs during white light illumination and a scheme of the ZnS layer formation are shown in Fig. 4. This photochemical treatment greatly enhances the QY up to 50%.18 In fact, due to the small size of these particles (2–3 nm), their structure is considered more as alloyed than as core–shell, possibly graded. Nevertheless, the escape of charge carriers or their nonradiative recombination in traps is reduced drastically. Application of microwave irradiation for the synthesis of ZnSe NCs leads to a simplification of the procedure, enabling the fast preparation of an emitting colloid in one stage, excluding additional photochemical treatments.48
 Fig. 4  (Left) proposed scheme of ZnS layer formation on the surface of ZnSe NCs upon light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 18 Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier. (Right) absorption and PL spectra of ZnSe NCs obtained for various irradiation times. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society. 

L-Glutathione (GSH) capping allows the preparation of readily luminescing ZnSe NCs without additional post-preparative treatment, probably due to the quite labile Zn–S–C bond which decomposes by heating during particle growth, forming a ZnS shell layer, similar to the formation of the CdS layer during the growth of CdTe NCs as described in ref. 92. The thus-prepared NCs have an average size of 2.7 nm, emission with a maximum at approx. 370 nm and a QY of up to 20%.19,53 An additional reaction stage consisting of the heat treatment of the synthesized QDs in the presence of Zn ions, GSH and thiourea leads to the formation of a more pronounced ZnS shell and a corresponding QY enhancement of up to 65%.53 Nevertheless, in spite of the high QYs achieved in the synthesis of ZnSe and ZnSeS NCs, they demonstrate an ultimate PL peak position at a wavelength slightly above 400 nm, i.e. at the edge of the visible region, not including weak trap-related emission in the region of 400–600 nm. Apparently, the conditions of the aqueous synthesis do not permit size tuning of ZnSe QDs over a wide range, thereby entrapping their luminescence in a very narrow corridor, typically 350–400 nm. In this case, the formation of alloyed structures can provide an additional opportunity for controlling the material properties by changing their composition and consequently their band gaps.104
ZnSe based alloyed NCs
Although the aforementioned synthesis of ZnSe NCs accompanied by a thin ZnS layer surrounding may also be considered as an alloying procedure, the composition of the resulting particles is not fully tuned by the process conditions, i.e. such alloying is an occasional rather than a controllable one. In a more controllable way the incorporation of Cd atoms (ions) into a ZnSe matrix was carried out. Two basic strategies have been developed for the synthesis of alloyed ZnxCd1−xSe NCs: incorporation of Cd ions into already synthesized ZnSe QDs,19,33 or direct synthesis of an alloyed structure by means of the partial replacement of a Zn precursor by a Cd salt in the reaction mixture.31,32,54 Incorporation of Cd into GSH-capped ZnSe NCs enabled variation of the alloy composition up to a molar ratio of Zn/Cd = 1/1.5, shifting the PL to longer wavelengths from 360 nm (for the initial pure ZnSe) to 500 nm (see Fig. 5a).19 A typical evolution of the absorption and fluorescence spectra of the GSH-capped ZnSe QDs after injection of the Cd precursor is illustrated in Fig. 5b. This approach has yielded alloyed ZnCdSe NCs with tuneable composition in the size range of about 3–4 nm and strong fluorescence with a QY of up to 50% (see Fig. 5c).19,33 Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements revealed the gradual transformation of the ZnSe lattice to that of CdSe. The prepared GSH-capped ZnCdSe QDs underwent selective fluorescence quenching in the presence of Pb2+ ions.42 By coupling the GSH-capped QDs with a high throughput detection system, a simple tool for the quick and ultrasensitive Pb2+ detection was demonstrated. This nature-mimicking system is capable of Pb2+ detection even in the presence of an ionic mixture.
 Fig. 5  (a) Absorption (⋯) and PL (—) spectra of ZnSe and Zn1−xCdxSe alloyed QDs. (Spectra of Zn0.75Cd0.25Se, Zn0.62Cd0.38Se, and Zn0.4Cd0.6Se QDs are shown in blue, green, and red, respectively.) (b) Evolution of the absorption (⋯) and PL (—) spectra of Zn1−xCdxSe alloyed QDs with time. (c) QYs and PL maxima of Zn1−xCdxSe alloyed QDs as a function of the Cd molar fraction. (d) Photographs of Zn0.4Cd0.6Se (left) and Zn0.3Cd0.7Se (right) alloyed QDs under visible and UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19 Copyright 2007 WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
The other strategy, i.e. the direct synthesis of alloyed ZnCdSe NCs ensures the decrease of the Cd content, providing the same PL shift.31,32,54 The resulting composition of thus-obtained alloyed crystals depends mainly on the initial ratio of concentrations of the metal precursors and their intrinsic reactivities towards the chalcogen source. It was observed that the composition of TGA-stabilized ZnCdSe NCs determined by elemental analysis is very close to the feed ratio of the Zn and Cd precursors used in the synthesis, which enables efficient composition control.32 The same method of photochemical treatment as described for pure ZnSe was applied to alloyed particles in order to enhance their emission by means of a ZnS enriched layer formation, leading to QYs of 20–30%.31,32 Injection of a Cd precursor to the Zn salt and TGA containing solution during the post-preparative photochemical treatment provides a further shift of the PL to longer wavelengths due to additional incorporation of Cd atoms into the NC surface layer. Obtaining alloyed GSH-capped ZnxHg1−xSe QDs by a one-pot synthesis leads to further narrowing of the band gap and yields colloids emitting in the range of 550–620 nm.34 XRD analysis shows a zinc blende cubic crystal structure for all aqueous ZnSe NCs and their alloys.
An alternative way of changing the band gap energies consists of the preparation of alloyed materials based on a ZnSe matrix by means of a partial replacement of Se atoms (or ions) by e.g. Te atoms (or ions) aiming at the formation of a smaller band gap material. Recently, this approach has been realized in a multistep synthesis of Cd-free water-soluble NCs.35 The application of GSH as a stabilizer for ZnSeTe NCs improved and simplified the synthetic method towards a facile one-step protocol, providing blue emitting QDs in the region of 370–430 nm with QYs of up to 20%.36 In contrast to ZnCdSe alloys, only a very small amount of Te (relative to the initial feed ratio) is incorporated into the resulting NCs. The maximum amount of the injected H2Te was converted to Te nanoparticles. The incorporation of the obtained particles into a polymer matrix allows us to obtain stable NC–polymer composites directly from the as-prepared aqueous colloid by the addition of a prepolymer. Thereby the alloyed NCs in the dispersion are wrapped in a polymer shell, which serves as an additional stabilizer. Fig. 6 demonstrates the bright emission of the initial colloid as well as that of the NC–polymer composite film formed by water evaporation, along with its transparency.
 Fig. 6  Photographs of the ZnSe0.98Te0.02/GSH colloid (a), the NC–polyurethane composite film under daylight (b) and under UV light (365 nm excitation) (c). Absorption and PL spectra of the ZnSe0.98Te0.02/GSH NC–polymer dispersion and the film after water evaporation (λex = 310 nm) (d). Reproduced from ref. 36. 
Thus, the chemical and physical properties of semiconductor NCs can be varied by changing the particle size as well as their composition. Alloying paves the way for designing materials with electronic and optical properties, different from their corresponding constituting compounds.
CdX NCs
Although the first colloidal material synthesized via the aqueous approach and thoroughly investigated was CdS, the most successful example of the cadmium chalcogenides is CdTe owing to its unique optical properties, in particular, its strong and tuneable photoluminescence in the visible region. For an overview of the work on CdS colloidal synthesis we refer the reader to the corresponding chapters in the recently issued excellent books edited by Schmid5 and Rogach.6
CdTe
CdTe NCs have been obtained directly in water firstly by Resch et al. in the presence of hexametaphosphate,100 then Rajh et al. employed a mixed stabilizer system consisting of hexametaphosphate and 3-mercapto-l,2-propanediol.12 Later the optimization by Rogach et al. led to a synthesis of stable NCs with sizes ranging from 1.3 to 2.4 nm solely in the presence of thiols, viz. 2-mercaptoethanol and 1-thioglycerol.11 An important step towards strongly emitting CdTe NCs was taken by Gao et al. through the utilization of thioglycolic acid as the capping agent.105 State-of-the-art preparations yield aqueous CdTe NCs capped by mercaptoacids, mercaptoamines or mercaptoaminoacids, which have diameters of up to 6 nm and a PL covering most of the visible region and extending to the NIR with a QY of up to 70–80%. Thus, they can compete with the best organometallically prepared materials.13 For instance, as-prepared NCs by microwave irradiation demonstrate a QY as high as 82% and a narrow size distribution.49 Here we would like to note that the very high QYs reported in the literature should be considered with care, since the QY value is strongly dependent on the method of determination, standards used, instrumental conditions, to name a few. A reliable and quite detailed procedure for QY determination has been reported recently by Grabolle et al.106
A variety of thiol capping ligands as summarized in Fig. 2 is applicable for the synthesis of CdTe NCs. The thiols determine the chemical functionality and the charge of the NC surface. This opens the possibility to manipulate these NCs, e.g. by the layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly, oriented attachment, electrostatic assembly or by electrophoresis. Specific chemical functionalities (e.g. amino- or carboxylic groups) are attractive for the covalent linking to macrosurfaces (e.g. electrodes or substrates for optical studies), to the surfaces of other NCs as well as to biomolecules. By this, proper thiol-capping may be considered as the key factor in determining the successful fabrication, assembly and application of the aqueous NCs. In addition to the common carboxylic- or amino-surface functionalities a variety of more specific capping thiol molecules was used. For example, 5-mercaptomethyltetrazole (5-HSCH2Tz) is one more recently developed thiol-containing stabilizer enabling reversible 3D assembly (gelation) of CdTe NCs98 and moreover the formation of hybrid CdTe/Au structures.107 This assembly, initiated in the presence of several metal ions, may be promising for optical sensing applications.
The chiral structure of the CdX surface was imparted by the application of enantiomeric thiols, L- and D-cysteinemethylester hydrochloride, bidentate R- and S-α-lipoic acids in the synthesis.75,89 These NCs retain their optical activity even after ligand exchange for an achiral stabilizer (so-called chiral memory effect).

Fig. 7 shows typical PL and absorption spectra of TGA and MPA capped CdTe QDs along with the evolution of PL lifetime of CdTe/MPA NCs during their growth and a transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the CdTe/MPA sample emitting with a maximum at 780 nm. We note that MPA stabilization ensures very fast growth108 of the largest achievable NCs still exhibiting emission peaking at 840 nm,29 which is quite close to the bulk band gap of CdTe (1.56 eV at 300 K).12 Nevertheless, the Bohr radius of 7.3 nm12 still provides efficient quantization within the particle. As in the case of ZnSe and its alloys, aqueous CdTe NCs commonly display the zinc blende cubic crystal structure. It is noted that it is not possible to completely prevent the incorporation of sulfur into the largely grown nanocrystals either by the choice of the solvent or by a variation of the stabilizers.109 Nevertheless, this process leads to the formation of a CdS layer on the CdTe NC surface (or CdTe(S) NCs with a sulfur enriched shell), resulting in an improvement of the material's quality, e.g. higher stability and QY as well as longer PL lifetimes.13,60,110
 Fig. 7  PL (a) and absorption (b) spectra of TGA- and MPA-capped CdTe NCs demonstrate their tuneability over a broad spectral range in the visible and near-infrared (λex. = 450 nm). TEM image of MPA-capped CdTe NCs, 5.5 nm average size, with a PL maximum at 780 nm (c). PL decays of MPA-capped CdTe NCs of increasing sizes (d). Adapted with permission from ref. 13 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. 
Aqueous CdTe NCs display different stabilities in varied water based media, which strongly depends on their size and concentration. Thus, Boldt et al., having tested TGA- and MPA-stabilized CdTe particles in various buffers (in the pH range 5–11) commonly used for the indirect immunofluorescence labelling of cells, showed that a lower concentration of QDs results in the detachment of ligands from the particle surface and therefore a decreased stability.111 The control parameter being monitored during a period of one week was the PL of several CdTe NCs fractions derived via size-selective precipitation of the colloids (described in the section “Postpreparative treatment of CdTe nanocrystals”). As expected, larger semiconductor QDs have shown a greater resistance to photobleaching than smaller ones. However, smaller QDs displayed higher stability under acidic conditions and low buffer concentrations, which was most probably due to their cluster-like, more defined structure. The authors have observed pseudozero-order kinetics of the emission diminution, ascribing it to the oxidation of the particle surface by the dissolved oxygen.
Although, as mentioned above, the aqueous method does not permit the direct synthesis of semiconductor particles with a nonspherical shape, a few examples of the formation of 1D nanostructures during the CdTe NC growth have been reported.67,68,112 The key factors ensuring the CdTe growth in one direction and the subsequent stability of the obtained structures are the low concentration of the precursors, employing of a mixed ligand system and moderate temperatures in order to suppress OR of the NCs. Zhang et al. successfully prepared CdTe nanorods using TGA and TG as mixed stabilizers and incubating the precursor solution with concentrations of Cd2+ = 2.4 mM and a ratio of Cd2+/TGA/TG/HTe− = 1/1.2/1.2/0.5 at 80 °C for several hours (see Fig. 8).68,112 At the same time, in the sole presence of TGA, metastable 1D wurtzite structures have transformed under the present conditions into thermodynamically stable spherical zinc blende NCs. Furthermore, applying a mixture of TGA and 2-mercaptoethylamine allows for a control of the aspect ratio of the CdTe nanorods during their growth.112 The elongation causes a long-wavelength shift of the optical absorption, resulting in the dark colour of the nanorods suspension as seen in Fig. 8c. These nanorods exhibit a weak luminescence owing to the weaker quantum confinement of 1D nanostructures, relative to that of 0D QDs.
 Fig. 8  TEM (a) and high resolution TEM (HRTEM) (b) images of 1D CdTe nanocrystals obtained by 8 h storage of 2.4 mM precursor solutions in the presence of TGA and TG at 80 °C. Inset in (a) is their SAED pattern. Corresponding absorption spectrum and a photograph of the solution (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. 
Therefore, shaped CdTe nanostructures, such as 1D wires,113,114 twisted ribbons,115 2D sheets,94 and 3D gel-like networks,107,116,117 are achievable via postpreparative self-organization of preformed QDs. Thus, the up to date developed assembly approaches yield a wide variety of nanoparticle-based structures starting from small QD clusters90,118,119 through 1D nanowires, 2D layer-by-layer films and highly porous 3D gels to closely packed solids120 (monoliths). Most of these approaches have been recently reviewed in ref. 47.
CdTe nanocrystal growth mechanism
Similarly to the organometallic route, the formation of aqueous NCs consists of a fast nucleation stage, followed by slow OR. Coalescence of the precursors – monomers or even some magic-sized clusters – is the main process accounting for nucleation, whereas OR comes into the foreground after monomer depletion. It is also considered that an oriented attachment (OA) mechanism coexists simultaneously with OR, especially in the early stages of the particle growth, when two crystallographically oriented nanoparticles combine together to form a larger one.121
Due to the lower temperature, different precursor reactivity and reaction media, the NC growth rate is much slower as compared to the organometallic approach and therefore the formation of aqueous NCs has its own peculiarities. The kinetics of the NC growth is determined mainly by the concentration of the precursors, the nature of the stabilizer, the Cd2+/Te2−/thiol ratio, the pH of the solution, and its temperature. Yang et al. explained the growth of CdTe NCs by electrostatic effects occurring on the nanoparticles surface.122 According to this suggestion, the nature of the diffuse layer influences the ability of the monomer (i.e. CdTe precursor) diffusion and hence the growth rate of the NCs (see Fig. 9). Thus, the reaction conditions reducing the thickness of the electric double-layer foster monomer diffusion and a rapid growth of the NCs. At the same time, the diffuse layer also regulates a charge-selective transfer of Cd monomers. The neutral monomers, such as the complex Cd(MPA), migrate through the diffuse layer more easily than the charged ones Cd(MPA)22− or Cd(MPA)34−, thus facilitating the growth of the NCs. Electrostatic effects play an important role not only in the monomer diffusion but also in the interparticle interaction, especially at the initial stage of the reaction, where CdTe NCs grow through the agglomeration of small clusters.123 At this step the decrease in the electrostatic repulsion facilitates aggregation and consequently the growth of the particles.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the electric double-layer of aqueous MPA-capped CdTe NCs. The structure consists of: CdTe core, ligand layer, adsorbed layer and diffuse layer. The adsorbed layer corresponds to the contact adsorbed ions, which is only an instantaneous state for a growing NC. The adsorbed cation is predominantly Na+. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 Copyright 2008, WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Experimental results and calculations employing stability constants of cadmium complexes with TGA performed by Shavel et al. also reveal the domination of the uncharged Cd(TGA) complex in the NC growth, gaining further insight into the factors governing the NC growth.124 A numerical calculation shows a clear correlation between the concentration ratio of Cd2+/thiol in the initial solution and the QY of the resulting CdTe NCs. An improvement of the emission efficiency of the CdTe QDs up to ca. 50–60% was achieved through decreasing of the Cd/TGA ratio to 1:1.3, which is advantageous for increasing the concentration of the Cd2+–thiol complex. Moreover, maintaining the solution pH at 12 allows the reduction of the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) and the Stokes shift. The decomposition of the Cd–thiol complexes rather than the diffusion of the monomers is suggested as a reaction rate-limiting process.125 In this respect, the stability of the Cd(MPA) complex is lower than that of Cd(TGA), which leads to a faster release of the monomers and correspondingly to a faster particle growth. The key role of a ligand shell in the growth process and QYs of aqueous CdTe NCs has also been proven, considering its influence on the activation energy via the formation of a transition-state complex.126
As was proposed by Yin et al., coalescence of small particles plays a major role in the initial growth stages of TGA-capped CdTe NCs, while the later stages are mainly controlled by OR.121 As is seen from the TEM images presented in Fig. 10a–d, after 20 min of the reaction most of the irregularly shaped NCs exhibited the characteristics of growth by the OA mechanism, such as retained lattice defects (twins and stacking faults) and clear coalescence profiles of small building blocks, whereas at 200 min the particles evolved into a relatively perfect lattice and a more regular shape with smooth edges, achieved via OR. Fitting the growth kinetics further confirms this assumption: the evolution of the particle size is better fitted by employing an OA mechanism in the early stage (first 40 min), whereas the OR theory provides a better convergence at the later stage (after 50 min) (see Fig. 10e). Combining these two mechanisms, the authors derived eqn (1) that well fits the experimental results: (1)where d is the mean particle size at the time t, d0 is the primary particle size, KOR is a temperature-dependent OR growth rate constant, n is an exponent relevant to the coarsening mechanism (physically meaningful in the range of 1–5), kOA is the OA rate constant, and N0 is the primary particle concentration.
 Fig. 10  (a–d) HRTEM images of defective CdTe NCs coarsened via OA and their corresponding simulations (below). (e) Evolution of the CdTe NC sizes as a function of their growth time at different growth temperatures. The solid lines are obtained by fitting the experimental results (dots) with an OA and OR mixed growth model. The dotted and dashed lines represent the fitting by an OA kinetic model and the OR theory, respectively. (f) Zeta potentials of TGA-capped CdTe NCs at different primary particle concentrations. (g) Predicted electrostatic particle–particle interaction energy U(r) between CdTe NCs in solutions with different particle concentrations N0 = 0.3, 0.1 and 0.033 mM at T = 338 K. (h) The OA activation energy (Ea,OA) vs. the electrostatic barrier energy (U(r) max). Adapted with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
It was found that in the initial growth stage the increasing particle concentration accelerates the growth rate, providing more opportunities for collisions between the NCs while in the later stage the particle growth becomes slower in the system with higher particle concentration. At the same time, as is seen from Fig. 10f–h, the increase in the particles concentration leads to a rise of the surface charge density, inhibiting OA by the NC repulsion, and consequently results in a smaller OA rate constant and correspondingly a higher activation energy. With the increase of the particle sizes, the OA rate constant largely decreases due to reduced diffusion. In addition, in the course of the growth, the electrostatic particle–particle repulsion increases, and thus the OA rate constant decreases abruptly.
Strong interactions between the adsorbed layer inside the diffuse layer and the Cd monomers enable accelerated NC growth and NCs with high QYs are gained. This assumption elucidates the difference between the growth rates of CdTe capped by MPA and TG. The deprotonated carboxyl groups of MPA strongly interact with Cd, assisting monomer adsorption. On the contrary, although a similar amount of monomers are transported through the diffuse layer formed by the hydroxyl groups of TG, only a few monomers are adsorbed on the NC surface due to the weak interaction of Cd and the –OH groups, retarding the growth. In general, a relatively quick particle growth leads to an insufficient quality reflected in a low crystallinity and a large number of defects and surface states. Oppositely, a comparatively slow growth rate results in a high content of sulfur (as a product of the thiol decomposition) in the particles and a higher probability of NC oxidation.124
Although the NC growth is considered as the stage determining the quality of the material and consequently its optical properties, Zhou et al. have demonstrated that well separated and controlled nucleation greatly contributed to the luminescence efficiency of CdTe QDs.81 Accordingly, the reorganization of precursors via their aging over a period of 9 hours at room temperature resulted in the formation of highly crystalline nuclei which promoted further growth of defect-free particles. In this case nucleation is also determined by the interaction between precursor species, in particular via their electrostatic repulsion, leading to decomposition of amorphous nuclei aggregates formed at the very early nucleation steps, which in turn is governed by the particle surface.
Obviously, the formation and growth of any kind of NCs is a multifactorial process, whose analysis requires a complex approach, taking into account various aspects including the reactivity of the initial precursors, the stability of intermediate complexes, electrostatic interactions between monomers and growing species, their activation energy etc. In addition, a comprehensive description is further complicated by changing the role of certain factors at different stages of particle formation and growth. Moreover, a characterization of the kinetic regimes depends intrinsically on the chemical procedure adopted.127 Although a creation of an universal theory embracing different sides of the aqueous NC synthesis seems to be quite difficult, a large number of experimental investigations conducted up to date pave the way for the generation of an optimized synthetic protocol for at least the main systems. For instace, the basic conditions for the preparation of high quality CdTe NCs capped with TGA, MPA and TG are as follows: a molar ratio of Cd2+/Te2−/stabilizer = 1/0.5/1.3, pH 11.5–12, and H2Te gas injection. At the same time, in order to obtain cysteamine stabilized particles the Cd2+/Te2−/stabilizer ratio and the pH should be adjusted to 1/0.5/2.6 and 6–6.5, respectively.
Postpreparative treatment of CdTe nanocrystals
In certain cases the quality of the resulting NCs is not satisfactory even under optimal conditions. In order to improve the quality of the as-synthesized particles as well as to impart to them new properties and functionalities, postpreparative treatments are applied. Some of these methods are: size selection,1,128 surface modification by means of Cd–thiol complex formation,78,105 photoetching,1,129 ligand exchange,130 and ligand modification.131,132

Size selection of CdTe nanocrystals. 
Since in the beginning of its development the aqueous synthesis usually yielded NCs with quite broad size distributions, the as-prepared colloids were often subjected to a size selective precipitation. This procedure consists of the gradual precipitation of the nanoparticles induced by portional addition of a nonsolvent (e.g. 2-propanol) into a preliminary concentrated NC solution.1,133 This technique, originally designed for narrowing the size distributions and the isolation of fractions showing sufficiently enhanced emission in comparison to the ensemble average, today is mostly used for the preparation of QD colloid series with very accurately tuned optical properties, as shown in Fig. 11. Note that in this example the size distribution is narrowed to only about 10% standard deviation.
 Fig. 11  Absorption (top) and PL (bottom) spectra of size-selected fractions (grey lines) isolated from a crude CdTe NCs colloid (red lines). 
Recently a more facile separation method was introduced by Ho et al. having applied free flow electrophoresis for the fractionation of TGA-capped CdTe NCs.128 Unlike the gel electrophoresis method134 validated mostly as an analytical tool, this technique is more convenient and operational on a preparative scale. Several variables such as buffer composition, buffer and sample infusion rate, potential field, and channel bed temperature play important roles in the successful size separation of nanoparticles. The FWHM of the PL peak is reduced by 50% as compared with the emission spectra of the separated samples with the original one, as is seen in Fig. 12. This technique not only separates the CdTe NC colloids into narrow fractions but also allows the removal of unreacted species. Moreover, it can potentially be used for a controlled self-organization of nanoparticles under the influence of an electrical field.
 Fig. 12  Significant color differences under UV light after free flow electrophoresis separation (a). PL spectra of the original and separated CdTe NC colloids (b). TEM images of separated CdTe NCs from different fractions show size variations (c). Adapted from ref. 128. 


Phototreatment. 
Photochemical etching of colloidal NCs is a powerful tool for enhancing their quality. It has been shown that the PL efficiency of TGA-capped CdTe colloid increases upon irradiation with 400 nm light of a 450 W Xe lamp in oxygen saturated solutions. Presumably, the reason for this improvement of the PL is the etching of tellurium trap states which are responsible for the non-radiative recombination.1,135 In this case, the NCs having the most defect states dissolve primarily during photochemical etching. On the contrary, photochemical treatment of the CdTe–TGA colloid under inert atmosphere retards its photodegradation and results in a CdTe–CdS core–shell structure formation.129 The formation of this structure occurs via an intermediate Cd(TGA) complex shell followed by a slow generation of sulphide ions reacting with cadmium atoms on the CdTe surface, similar to the growth of a ZnS shell on the surface of ZnSe QDs as described above.129 CdS being a larger band-gap material passivates surface trap states and prevents nonradiative recombinations from reaching a QY of 85%. The crude aqueous colloids usually contain certain amounts of unreacted species (e.g. Cd–thiol complexes) which may contribute to illumination induced photoreactions. Under the same conditions MPA does not release sulphide ions, leading to only a very limited influence on the PL intensity.


Ligand exchange and ligand modification. 
In order to impart solubility in organic solvents to aqueous particles, strategies of ligand exchange and ligand modification have been developed. Gaponik et al. employed a partial exchange of TGA with 1-dodecanethiol (DDT), allowing for an almost complete (∼90%) phase transfer of CdTe NCs synthesized in water to nonpolar organic solvents such as toluene, hexane, chloroform, etc.130 The optical properties of the transferred QDs exhibit only a moderate alternation in comparison to the particles in water. It was found that acetone plays an important role in an efficient phase transfer of the particles, reducing the surface tension at the H2O/DDT interface. Utilizing this phase transfer technique a hybrid aqueous-organic synthesis of core–shell CdTe–ZnS QDs has been developed.65 This approach affords a facile growth of a ZnS shell in organic solvents at high temperatures around the CdTe cores originally synthesized in water to yield small-diameter, highly luminescent material. Combining the treatment with DDT and amphiphilic octadecylamine-modified poly(acrylic acid) (PAA-ODA) in a one-pot process, Yuwen et al. have developed an interesting method of encapsulation of core–shell MPA-capped aqueous CdTe–CdS QDs into micelles according to the scheme presented in Fig. 13.136 This polymer coating significantly enhances the photostability and the QY of the QDs, retarding the diffusion of oxygen as well as the detachment of thiol ligands and consequently preventing the oxidation of the particle surface and the release of Cd2+ ions into the environment. By controlling the molar ratio of PAA-ODA to QDs, the number of QDs in the micelles can be tuned from a single QD to multiple particles.
 Fig. 13  Scheme of the one-pot encapsulation of a QD by amphiphilic PAA-ODA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136 Copyright 2011, WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Ligand shell modifications via the interaction between –COO− groups on the surface of TGA-capped CdTe NCs and the –NH2 group of 1-hexadecylamine ensures an efficient phase transfer of the QDs from water to chloroform.131 The adjustment of the pH of the water phase induces decomposition of –COO−Na+NH2– bonds and results in the reversible transport of the particles back into water.
An interesting postpreparative method combining alkanethiols and an alkylammonium surfactant, allowing for a controllable band gap engineering of TGA-capped CdTe NCs, was proposed by Akamatsu et al.74 This method consists of a phase transfer of aqueous QDs to toluene, employing tetra-n-octylammonium bromide (TOAB) with subsequent injection of various alkanethiols, leading to selective dissociation of Te species from the crystal surface and a simultaneous attachment of the alkanethiol at the defect site thus formed. As a result, the PL experienced a significant blue shift whereas the size of the particles remained constant.

Processing and application of CdTe nanocrystals
The utilization of QD colloids as dispersions of individual particles is restricted to applications in fluorescence sensing (e.g. discriminative detection of lead42 and manganese44 ions in solutions) or to bio-imaging.45 Since most of the other applications require assembled nanoparticles rather than individual QDs, diverse processing techniques have been developed until now. Owing to the presence of various functional groups on the surface of aqueous nanoparticles which commonly carry charges, they are processible through covalent linking by means of formation of ester- and amid-bonds as well as via charge–charge interaction.47,137 Therefore we can outline the following types of the QD processing:  

Via these approaches a wide variety of structures are obtained such as nanosized QD–biomolecule hybrids, QD–QD dimers, thin QD films on flat or shaped substrates, and macrosized solids. The immobilization of QDs onto a substrate surface by covalent linking or by LbL deposition leaves them partially exposed to an environment, whereas their encapsulation or embedding into a continuous matrix can provide efficient isolation. The isolation allows retaining of the optical properties of the QDs and preventing the release of toxic metal ions from the nanoparticles into the environment. By processing of the QDs, alterations of their opto-electrical properties due to interactions with a substrate material as well as with neighbouring particles within an array by means of energy/charge transfer should be taken into account, especially in closely packed QD solids.138,139

Template free self-assembly. 
The assembly of colloidal NCs provides new opportunities of transferring functions of nanomaterials to the macroscopic scale. The simplest way of assembling of nanoparticles is their spontaneous reorganisation in solution owing to a controlled removal of the stabilizer which has been thoroughly investigated by the Kotov group. Strong dipole–dipole and charge–dipole interactions are believed to be the driving forces of such self-organization.113 This approach has yielded crystalline CdTe nanowires,113,114 twisted ribbons115 and free-floating sheets94 which are presented in Fig. 14.
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM image of CdTe nanowires. The inset is a corresponding HRTEM image of a nanowire fragment, vectors of the crystal lattice are indicated by arrows. PL spectra of parental CdTe QDs (dashed lines) and the resulting nanowires (solid lines). (b) TEM image of CdTe free-floating films. The inset represents a detailed arrangement of single NCs obtained by HRTEM. PL spectra of the parental CdTe QD colloid and the dispersion of the free-floating sheets. (c) SEM and TEM (inset) images of bundles of twisted CdTe ribbons. Evolution of the PL spectra during the self-organization of NCs into the ribbons. Adapted with permission from ref. 94, 113 and 115 Copyright 2002, 2006, 2010, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
As intermediate structures in the nanowire formation linear pearl necklace aggregates were found which subsequently recrystallized into uniform nanowires having high aspect ratios (up to 500) and diameters equal to the diameters of the NCs.113 Importantly, these nanowires preserved the strong luminescence of their parental CdTe NCs to a large degree (QYs of up to 29%) whereas their PL maxima underwent a remarkable red shift due to a weakening of the quantum confinement and energy/charge transfer (see Fig. 14a). At the same time, nanocrystals assembled into 2D films retained less than 10% of the QY of the initial NCs (see Fig. 14b).94 The authors found that this 2D organization resembles the assembly of surface layer proteins. The sheets formed possess some physical integrity, and some pieces as large as 50 × 30 μm remained after gentle stirring and drying.
Slow oxidation of tellurium ions in CdTe resulted in the assembly of 1–4 μm long flat ribbons composed of several layers of individual NCs (see Fig. 14c).115 Twisting of the ribbons with an equal distribution of left and right handed helices was induced by illumination with visible light. Unusual shapes of multiparticle assemblies, such as ellipsoidal clouds, dog-bone agglomerates, and ribbon bunches, were observed at intermediate stages. Computer simulations revealed that the balance between attraction and electrostatic repulsion determines the resulting geometry and dimensionality of the nanoparticle assemblies. Instead of the typical red shift of the optical features found in the case of wires and sheets, a gradual blue shift of the luminescence and absorption peaks was observed during the formation of the ribbons (see Fig. 14c).
Despite the simplicity of the self-assembly approach, it requires quite a long time for the spontaneous reorganization and recrystallization of NCs. Moreover, the yield of the resulting nanostructures is not quantitative and their total amount is limited by the low concentration of the particles in the parent colloids. Therefore, in order to facilitate the assembly of NCs frequently external stimuli are employed, such as e.g. addition of a “bad” solvent or chelating charged species. Also by simple mixing of oppositely charged particles (e.g. TGA- and cysteamine-capped CdTe) it is possible to obtain colloidal QD-clusters whose constituents are capable of Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET).118 The same effect has been achieved by the addition of Ca2+ ions to negatively charged TGA-capped CdTe NCs.119 In these methods the assembly level can be controlled by the variation of the ratios between positively and negatively charged particles or by the amount of the chelating agent. Although these approaches are more controllable than the destabilization of the surface, without proper templates they produce rather small nano-micro-sized objects.
In this respect, the addition of a nonsolvent to an aqueous CdTe QD colloid leading to flocculation of NCs has been demonstrated as a route to large highly porous 3D structures preserving bright luminescence even after drying (see Fig. 15).117 As is seen from SEM and TEM images, the structure obtained consists of several micrometers long nanowires built up of CdTe@Cd–TGA complexes formed from as-prepared CdTe QD colloids by the addition of ethanol and sodium acetate, and by applying moderate heating. The in situ formed Cd–TGA complexes play the role of a mechanical support for the CdTe NCs and also act as spacers between the inner CdTe NCs, limiting their interactions. In this scenario almost all particles are incorporated in the final product.
 Fig. 15  SEM (a), TEM (b), and HRTEM (c) images of the 3D CdTe@Cd-TGA complex hybrid nanostructures. The inset in (c) is photographs of the corresponding dry nanostructures, obtained by a supercritical drying with liquid CO2, under UV lamp excitation. Adapted with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Another type of 3D structures is NC-based gels where particles in solution form self-supporting highly porous networks either by aging, by chemical (via pH tuning140) or by photochemical treatment,116 as well as by metal ion-induced complexations of the nanocrystals.98,107 These gelation methods are applicable not only to NCs synthesized in water but also to those originally obtained in organic media and subsequently transferred to water by means of ligand exchange by thiols. Thus, oxidative loss of thiolate surface groups has already yielded nanoparticulate gels of ZnS, CdS, CdSe, CdSe/ZnS and PbS investigated in detail by the Brock group.141–144 Being processed via supercritical drying, hydrogels transform into monolithic aerogels exhibiting densities hundreds of times less than those of the corresponding bulk materials.145
Recently, an interesting method of precisely controlled and highly reproducible gel-like assembly of NCs via the complexation of tetrazole capped particles by metal ions has been developed.98,107 In this approach, 5-HSCH2Tz-capped CdTe NCs form the entire network by interaction with transition metal ions (such as Cd2+, Zn2+, Ni2+) according to the scheme presented in Fig. 16. The gelation process embraces all the particles present in solution and is rapid, easily upscalable and does not involve any destabilization reactions. The versatility of the method has been demonstrated by the formation of hybrid CdTe/Au structures with controlled content.107 Owing to the equal capping, both types of particles are uniformly distributed within the network as is seen in Fig. 16. Moreover, this assembly method is fully reversible, i.e. by the addition of stronger electron donors than the tetrazole, e.g. ethylenediaminetetraacetate, the hydrogels formed dissolve, releasing the individual nanocrystals which, to a large extent, maintain their original optical properties.
 Fig. 16  Scheme of the gelation process of 5-HSCH2Tz-capped CdTe and Au NCs (left). TEM image of a fragment of a hybrid CdTe/Au aerogel (CdTe/Au = 1/1.6 wt) (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
All the above cited template-free nanoparticle organization approaches may be attributed to dynamic assemblies.146


Immobilization of QDs – templated assembly. 
Although the template free self-assembly of aqueous semiconductor NCs described above offers a series of architectures with varied shape and composition, it is limited in terms of the size and robustness of the evolving structures. Therefore QDs are often scaffolded by microscopic or macroscopic substrates. In this scenario they still retain their surface features, which is crucial for catalytic and sensing applications. To attach QDs to a substrate charge–charge interaction and covalent linking strategies are mostly harnessed. In both cases a proper functionalization of the substrate surface is necessary prior to coupling. For instance, in order to covalently link carboxyl-functionalized CdTe NCs to a glass substrate147 or attach them via charge–charge interaction to a porous ZnO surface,148 the substrates have been aminated with 3-(aminopropyl)triethoxysilane. Subsequent covalent binding has been realized via water soluble carbodiimide mediated amidation.147 This reaction allows the formation of amide and ester bonds between carboxylic and amino or hydroxylic groups even at room temperature in a standard buffer medium and has already been successfully used for the conjugation of nanoparticles to biomolecules,149 the coupling QDs,90 and their attachment to micro- and macroscopic surfaces.147,150
Another interesting method for immobilizing CdTe QDs on thin, fluid films consisting of poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) polymer chains tethered by one end to an underlying substrate in a polymer brush configuration has been recently published.151 The protocol involves amide linkage between the amino groups on the surface of CdTe NCs and the carboxylic groups of PAA polymer chains. Exploitation of a thin polymer brush (∼4.5 nm) was found to suppress QD aggregation and facilitates complete surface coverage. A novel hybrid material based on monodisperse, thermosensitive poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPAM) microgels has been obtained via covalent immobilization of CdTe NCs as is shown in Fig. 17a.152 In this composite the chemical environment around the NCs was modified by a temperature-induced volume-phase transition in the microgel (see Fig. 17b). This variation of the chemical environment induced in its own turn a steep variation in the nanocrystal PL intensity. The PL was quenched when the temperature was under the low critical solution temperature of the polymer (36 °C), whereas above this value the PL intensity was restored, as is seen from Fig. 17c.
 Fig. 17  (a) Reaction steps carried out to obtain microgels covered with CdTe QDs. (b) PL intensity of the P(NIPAM-AA-CdTe) microgels at 620 nm as a function of temperature. Insets are proposed models for the quenching and antiquenching effects. (c) PL intensity measured during repeated heating (40 °C) and cooling (25 °C) cycles of the microgels. Adapted with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
One more interesting example of hybridization of QDs with an active substrate is the QD/graphene composite which has been recently developed by the group of Dirk Guldi.153 Two strategies for the immobilization of CdTe QDs onto the basal plane of graphene in either exfoliated graphite or nanographene were implemented as is schematically outlined in Fig. 18: a direct (left) and a sequential (right) approach. In the first, a hydrophobic–hydrophobic/π–π stacking interaction between exfoliated graphite and pyrene, to which the QDs were covalently attached, has been harnessed. In the second, the combination of hydrophobic–hydrophobic/π–π stacking and electrostatic interactions resulted in hierarchical structures composed of nanographene, positively charged pyrene (pyrene+), and negatively charged TGA/2-mercaptoethanesulfonat-costabilized CdTe QDs. The sequential approach, where a high degree of exfoliation was achieved prior to the attachment of the QDs, was revealed to be far more superior to the direct approach. Indeed, the degree of exfoliation strongly impacted the electronic communication between graphene and the QDs.
 Fig. 18  Schematic representation of direct (left) and sequential (right) approaches toward combining graphene and QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 


Layer-by-layer deposition. 
The LbL deposition is a well established economical method for the assembly of various charged species.154 Since the basic aspects of the application of LbL deposition to thiol-capped QDs have been recently reviewed by Gaponik47 and Shavel et al.,137 we will not focus on the basics of this method of assembly in this review. Nevertheless, we will show several novel examples of its application. The LbL assembly of QDs is applicable to a wide variety of substrates from polymer microspheres and carbon nanotubes to large scale planar, porous or curved surfaces. Apart from covering microbeads by luminescing nanoparticles,155–158 recently the LbL technique has been extended to the deposition of different types of nanocrystals onto the surface of diatom biosilica, yielding a novel material combining the natural structure characteristics of diatoms with special properties of the nanoparticles.150 Another hybrid material has been developed in the group of Guldi by decoration of single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) with TGA-capped CdTe QDs using poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) and poly((vinylbenzyl)trimethylammonium chloride) as polyelectrolytes.159 The authors have detected charge transfer between the SWNTs and the QDs by means of various spectroscopy techniques. This material is a suitable system for solar energy conversion.
LbL provides an opportunity of engineering of composite sandwich macro-structures containing different types of nanoparticles with fine tuning of the interlayer distance and thus controlling opto-electronic properties of the resulting systems. Thus, combining two differently sized CdTe QD layers well separated by several polyelectrolyte bilayers (PDDA/poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate) (PSS)), FRET from smaller to larger QDs with rates as high as 1.2 ns−1 has been revealed by Lunz et al.138,139 The authors have shown the possibility of controlling the efficiency of the FRET process within the QD layers through variation in the QD concentration and/or careful selection of the inhomogeneous broadening and Stokes shift of the QD ensemble. They also demonstrated that the FRET rate rather than its efficiency more appropriately characterizes the donor–acceptor energy transfer due to the input from intra-donor energy transfer.138 The utilization of the FRET phenomenon in LbL architectures allowed for highly sensitive tuning of their colour chromaticity.160 These structures are applicable as colour conversion layers for the fabrication of LEDs based on a blue emitting chip.161
Sandwiching of gold nanoparticles in between CdTe donor and acceptor monolayers resulted in an enhancement of the FRET rate by a factor of 80 and an increase of the Förster radius by 103% compared to a donor–acceptor structure without gold NCs, thus providing a way to improve the performance of energy transfer exploiting devices.162 Furthermore, it was shown that the donor properties have a large impact on the probability of surface plasmon mediated FRET. Donors with highest QY and the emission spectra being in resonance with the surface plasmon peak of Au NCs showed a clear signature of surface plasmon mediated energy transfer, reflected in the largest acceptor emission.
Assembling CdTe QDs, as is presented in Fig. 19a, Ozel et al. have demonstrated sufficient enhancement of the QD emission in the presence of gold particles separated by a dielectric polyelectrolyte layer.163 At the same time, without a dielectric spacer the QD emission was quenched. For instance, as is shown in Fig. 19b, the PL increased by a factor of 3.6 in the case of N = 2 (two-time unit cell repetition), whereas its life time decreased. Three PDDA/PSS bilayers offer an optimal dielectric spacing for the enhancement of QD emission. In such a multilayered plasmonic resonator assembly of isotropic CdTe QDs, polarized light emission of 80% in the vertical polarization has been observed. This concept of plasmon coupled QD composites paves a new path for biosensors and highly efficient devices in nanophotonics. This example clearly demonstrates that although LbL based architectures are thin films, in many cases they contain several layers and cannot be treated simply as 2D objects.
 Fig. 19  Schematic representations of LbL films containing (a, from top to bottom): only CdTe QDs and PDDA/PSS dielectric spacer, Au NCs and CdTe QDs with no spacer, Au NCs, CdTe QDs, and PDDA/PSS dielectric spacer, which are repeated N times. PL spectrum (b, top) and time resolved PL (b, bottom) of the composite films with N = 2. Adapted with permission from ref. 163 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Employing the specially designed water soluble conjugated polymer (poly(9,9-bis(3′-[(N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium]-propyl)-2,7-fluorene-alt-1,4-phenylene] dibromide) as a positively charged polyelectrolyte and TGA-capped CdTe QDs Lutich et al. fabricated multilayered composites.164 In this structure the QD layers play a twofold role, acting both as very efficient energy acceptors (energy transfer efficiency ∼45%) and as insulating layers, effectively suppressing nonradiative recombination in conjugated polymer layers via the reduction of the exciton diffusion. The dual function of NCs in the LbL composites makes these structures very attractive for applications in optoelectronics.
We emphasize that even nonconjugated polyelectrolytes, such as PDDA, may serve as interparticle layers in the fabrication of a LED as was demonstrated recently.165,166 Thus, LbL assembled CdTe sandwiched between indium tin oxide and aluminium electrodes showed an electroluminescence turn on at 2.5 V and the maximum light output at 3.3 V, with a peak radiated power of 141 nW corresponding to an external quantum efficiency of 0.51%. The luminous efficiencies of the red-emitting LED reached 0.4 cd A−1 and 0.81 Lm W−1.165 To accelerate the LbL process and to avoid the use of a dipping robot, alternating solution spraying has been introduced as an improved technique for forming single layers.166 A typical volume fraction of the NCs in thus obtained CdTe/PDDA films was found to be around 30%.166 An improved stability of a LED for working under harsh operating conditions has been achieved using hydrotalcite as an alternate interparticle layer which acts both to support and to distribute the CdTe nanocrystals, thus comprising a novel all-inorganic based device.167 It exhibited high thermal stability and a maximum efficiency at 0.12 A cm−2 operating continuously up to 90 °C.
Combining two different kinds of QDs (i.e. CdTe and CdSe) in a multilayered type II aligned structure, Gross and co-workers have recently unambiguously demonstrated the directionality of charge separation by means of surface photovoltage spectroscopy.168 Within this LbL assembly the holes accumulated in the CdTe NC layers and the electrons in the CdSe NC layers. Separated charges were observed to diffuse over several layers of the same kind of NCs. By this, an increase in the thickness of the PSS/PDDA spacer strongly decreased the separation efficiency. The structures developed are promising for the use in photovoltaic applications.
A LbL deposited CdTe QD film on the surface of ZnO nanorods has been recently utilized as a light absorbing layer in the fabrication of excitonic solar cells.169 Solar cells were produced by filling the obtained CdTe-coated nanorods grown on fluorine-doped tin oxide substrate with the wide band gap p-type semiconductor CuSCN or by a hole-collecting layer consisting of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and PSS. Increasing the number of CdTe layers resulted in a controllable enlargement of the absorption of the incident light: 50 layers of QDs coated onto the ZnO nanorods absorbed 80% of the incident light at their absorption peak. In this system annealing of the LbL films at 350 °C was essential to reduce the series resistance of the cell. The annealed cells generated an open-circuit voltage of 120 mV and a short-circuit current density of 0.19 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5 illumination.


Embedding into a continuous matrix. 
In order to improve the mechanical properties of the QDs and impart them with additional stability while maintaining their original bright emission, they are often embedded into a robust continuous matrix. In this respect, polymers are appropriate candidates to stabilize and protect the NCs and integrate their functionalities. Two main scenarios for the fabrication of NC–polymer composites are feasible in the case of aqueous nanoparticles. First, they can directly be mixed with water dispersible polymers (like polyvinyl alcohol) in solution or after the above-mentioned ligand exchange or surface modification the QDs become soluble in organic solvents and thus miscible with a larger number of polymer solutions. Second, the QDs may be combined with monomers followed by their polymerization/polycondensation. The latter approach also requires a ligand modification step in order to provide compatibility of the aqueous QDs with the organic monomer molecules.
Thus, a facile preparation of a hybrid GSH-capped CdTe QD–enzyme–polymer composite film has recently been demonstrated by Yuan et al. by simple interaction of the particles and enzymes with PDDA in water via electrostatic attraction with subsequent precipitation of the composite formed, as shown in Fig. 20a.46 This composite proved to be a stable and versatile material for biosensors and test paper development for catechol and glucose as example analytes. Its sensor response was based on the quenching effects of the enzymatic products on the emission of the QDs (see Fig. 20b). The detection limits of catechol and glucose were 1 × 10−5 and 5 × 10−6 M, respectively. In the obtained hybrid materials, the emission of the QDs was stable for at least 3 months, and the structure and activity of the enzyme was also well maintained.
 Fig. 20  Scheme of the QD–enzyme–PDDA hybrid formation and corresponding images taken under room and UV light (a) and sensing mechanisms (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Polycondensation of prepolymer in solution with subsequent evaporation of a solvent has been developed for the encapsulation of CdTe QDs into a polyurethane matrix.170,171 Thus, TG-stabilized CdTe NCs dissolved in DMSO formed composites with polyurethane via the reaction between the –OH groups of TG and the –NCO groups of the prepolymer.170 Water dispersible polyurethane has been exploited for the straightforward fabrication of the composite with cysteine-capped CdTe particles directly in water without any post-preparative treatment.171 In this case nanoparticles act as cross-linking centers, reacting with –NCO terminated prepolymer molecules by the amino groups of cysteine, as is shown in Fig. 21. After water evaporation transparent solid compounds can be obtained, which retain and even enhance the QY of the CdTe QDs and impart their photochemical stability.
 Fig. 21  Scheme of the fabrication of the CdTe NC–polyurethane composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. 
Since the number of water dispersible polymers is limited, in most of the cases the surface exchange step is necessary to obtain QD–polymer composites. In spite of imparting solubility in organic solvents the common hydrocarbon tail-containing ligands do not ensure uniform distribution into the polymer matrix due to phase separation, leading to the formation of large QD domains within the polymer. Therefore, a straightforward method for the modification of the thiol-ligand shell with polymerizable surfactant has been developed.132 Octadecyl-p-vinylbenzyldimethylammonium chloride (OVDAC) allows for the efficient transfer of CdTe NCs directly to styrene or styrene/methyl methacrylate with subsequent radical polymerization of the obtained QDs–monomer mixture induced by azobisizobutyronitrile (AIBN), yielding transparent highly emitting bulk NC–polymer composites containing up to 10 wt% of the nanoparticles (see Fig. 22).132 Alternatively, OVDAC–styrene copolymers prepared in a first step can serve as a phase transfer mediator for aqueous CdTe NCs, avoiding an interaction of the particles with free radicals.172 Analogously, exploiting the copolymer of OVDAC with 9-vinylcarbazole showing blue fluorescence, in combination with green and red emitting CdTe QDs Sun et al. have demonstrated the fabrication of white LEDs.173
 Fig. 22  Preparative procedures for the fabrication of fluorescent CdTe–polystyrene composites. Adapted with permission from ref. 132 Copyright 2003, WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 


Encapsulation of individual QDs and small ensembles. 
Despite the main demand for large scale macroscopic assemblies of integrated QDs there are some fields such as biomedical applications requiring small nano–micro entities containing QDs which are capable of the transport in live cells and organisms being at the same time stable enough in the bio-environment. This task has been tackled by the incorporation of individual nanoparticles or their small ensembles into various micelles and beads based on specially designed polymers or silica. In addition to the example presented in Fig. 13, another innovative approach of the encapsulation of aqueous CdTe NCs into an amphiphilic polymer has recently been developed.174 The authors employed a two step phase transfer of the QDs from water to chloroform by ligand modification with dimethyldioctadecyl-ammonium-bromide (DDAB) and subsequently from chloroform back to water by encapsulation of DDAB-coated particles into amphiphilic poly(ethylene glycol) diglycidyl-grafted poly(maleic anhydride-alt-octadecene), as is illustrated in Fig. 23a.174 The obtained QD–polymer composites exhibited a spherical shape, with an average diameter of about 80 nm according to TEM investigations (see Fig. 23b) and a hydrodynamic diameter of 95 nm measured by dynamic light scattering. The wrapping of the CdTe NCs into composite microspheres greatly enhanced their stability under acidic conditions.
 Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of water-dispersible CdTe NC–polymer composite microspheres via a two step phase transfer (a). TEM images of the microspheres (b). Fluorescence microscope images of the microspheres with orange emission (c). Adapted from ref. 174. 
The application of the above shown polymerizable surfactants as both phase transfer agent (didecyl-p-vinylbenzylmethylammonium chloride) and emulsifier (OVDAC) resulted in a preparation of composite CdTe NC–polystyrene microbeads with an average size of ∼1.5 μm upon mini-emulsion polymerization.175 The use of polymerizable surfactants as the emulsifier plays the most important role in the effective encapsulation of the aqueous colloidal particles into polymeric beads. At the same time, polymerizable surfactants as the phase transfer agents guarantee a homogenous distribution of the QDs within the polystyrene matrix.
Another material for encapsulation of various nanoparticles is silica.176 The fabrication of silica beads incorporating CdTe NCs analogous to those of polystyrene mentioned above has been developed recently by the group of Gao via the water-in-oil reverse microemulsion method using cyclohexane, Triton X-100, n-hexanol and tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), as a medium, a surfactant, a co-surfactant and a silica source, respectively.177–179 The method results in the formation of 45–109 nm SiO2 spheres containing in the core one or several CdTe particles, depending on the process conditions (see Fig. 24). An additional incubation of the as-prepared CdTe colloid in ammonia solution enhances the QY of the QDs and moreover retains an excellent emission with an efficiency of up to 47% for the resulting CdTe@SiO2 core–shell particles.177 A silica shell impedes the diffusion of oxygen from the surrounding environment, preventing the CdTe QDs from photo-oxidation. Moreover, the shell blocks diffusion of Cd2+ ions, reducing the cytotoxicity of such core–shell particles and making them a promising material for bio-labeling. Further surface modification of the silica coated QDs with amino groups provides a route for covalent linking of biomolecules.179
 Fig. 24  Photographs of an aqueous dispersion of CdTe@SiO2 particles under daylight (a) and UV light (b). Silica beads with different distributions of the CdTe crystals: one QD located in the center (c), increasing number of QDs in the center (d, from top to bottom), QDs evenly distributed over the entire beads (e). Adapted with permission from ref. 178 Copyright 2005, WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
CdTe NCs coated with thin hybrid silica shells containing CdS clusters have been shown by Murase's group to assemble into intensely luminescing fibers (QYs of up to 55% were reported).180,181 According to the method developed (see Fig. 25), reflux of a solution of CdTe NCs, cadmium salt, TGA, TEOS and NH3 yielded tubal, solid, or belt-like 1D structures, depending on the concentration of the precursors. During this treatment CdS-like clusters formed in the vicinity of the NCs in the thin SiO2 layer that led to a red shift of the PL maxima of the hybrid structures as compared to the initial QDs.182 Thus, the emission colours have been tuned from yellow to red by changing the reflux time.
 Fig. 25  Formation process of hybrid SiO2-coated CdTe NCs and their subsequent assembly into fibers (left). Microscopy images of fibers under day (top right) and UV light (bottom right). Adapted from ref. 180. 

Amphiphilic CdTe particles
In this short paragraph we focus on amphiphilic particles as a separate category of colloidal nanomaterials which have been emerging during the last decade owing to their versatile synthesis bridging the hot-injection and the aqueous approaches. For example, the application of thiolated poly(ethylene glycol) (mPEG-SH) as a capping ligand enables the direct synthesis of CdTe NCs not only in water but also in a variety of organic solvents (e.g. toluene, dimethylacetamide, dimethylformamide), as recently reported by Dubavik et al.82,83 Therefore, this technique steps towards an organic method, which, on the other hand, approaches the aqueous route by using a similar technique for the injection of the gaseous PH3 precursor in the synthesis of InP183 and Cd6P7 QDs.184 The solubility of the mPEG-SH-stabilizer facilitates the spontaneous direct and complete transfer of CdTe NCs across phase boundaries from toluene through water to chloroform without stirring or agitation or any other means and medium adjustments as is shown in Fig. 26a. The versatility of this approach has been proven also in a Au NC synthesis.185 Moreover, these particles have revealed an ability to penetrate through the lipid bilayer of model membrane systems as well as live cells, demonstrating nonendocytic uptake.83 As is seen from Fig. 26b, amphiphilic mPEG-SH-capped CdTe QDs were found to be distributed over the whole cell interiors with partial confinement in the endosomes whereas reference hydrophilic TGA-capped NCs were solely accumulated in the endosomes due to their aggregation in the presence of chelating metal ions (see Fig. 26c). This finding makes CdTe@mPEG-SH QDs promising agents for tracking whole cells and intracellular processes. Moreover, their high colloidal stability in various biological media and stable emission properties can be exploited for a better delivery of agents for therapeutic applications.
 Fig. 26  (a) Photographs of vials demonstrating the spontaneous tri-phase transfer of CdTe@mPEG-SH QDs from toluene through water into chloroform with time (from top to bottom) under UV light. (b) Bright field (left panels) and confocal microscopy (right panels) images of live cells acquired after 1 h of incubation in the presence of CdTe@TGA (top) and CdTe@mPEG-SH (bottom) QDs. (c) Simplified scheme of the penetration of the corresponding QDs into a cell. The inset in (c) is a sketch of a CdTe NC capped by mPEG-SH. Adapted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Core–shell CdTe based NCs
Microwave irradiation has been revealed as an advantageous technique for core–shell particle synthesis. Thus, using this method the first synthesis of core–shell–shell MPA-capped CdTe–CdS–ZnS NCs directly in water was recently introduced.52 This protocol comprises three steps: CdTe core preparation, coating the core by a CdS shell followed by a second shell (ZnS) formation (see Fig. 27). The intermediate CdS shell is formed in order to reduce lattice strain induced by the large lattice mismatch between the CdTe core and the outer ZnS shell. The NCs undergo purification after each step by reprecipitation which is necessary for the separation of unreacted species. The resulting QDs were reported to be very stable in biological media and non-cytotoxic, which makes them very promising candidates for biolabelling.
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the microwave-assisted synthesis of aqueous CdTe–CdS–ZnS core–shell–shell QDs. Reproduced from ref. 52 Copyright 2008 WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Another material for bioimaging applications, namely type II CdTe–CdSe core–shell QDs with NIR fluorescence was prepared by applying a successive ion-layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) technique.50 According to this recipe, L-cysteine-stabilized CdTe cores were covered with 1 to 6 layers of CdSe by the sequential injection of Cd2+/cysteine and KHSe solutions which, upon reflux, resulted in the preparation of NCs emitting in the red to NIR region of 600–850 nm with the highest QY = 12%. The SILAR technique can also ensure an efficient control of the shell thickness, allowing the tuning of the behaviour of core–shell CdTe–CdS QDs from type I to type II structures by gradual deposition of several shell layers.60 This transition was indicated by the change of the optical properties of the core–shell QDs including a sufficient enhancement of their PL life time compared with that of the initial core particles.60
In addition to microwave irradiation, an ultrasonic treatment has been applied for a CdS shell formation on CdTe NCs.72 In this case acoustic cavitation facilitates the decomposition of thiourea, which releases S2− to react with Cd2+ present in solution with subsequent creation of a gradated shell.
We have to admit, unfortunately, that the formation of core–shell structures is often not unambiguously proven. In our opinion some reports, especially those claiming a one-pot aqueous synthesis of core–shell NCs when the precursors for both the core and shell are added and are supposed to react simultaneously, give rise to logical criticism since in this case the formation of an alloyed structure rather than a classical core–shell is much more probable. One such example is the one-pot synthesis of CdTe–ZnTe NCs,61 a system which is particularly doubtful, taking into account the inherent instability of ZnTe36,101 in aqueous media.
Alloyed CdTe based NCs
All the above-mentioned approaches ensure the synthesis of NCs emitting mainly in the visible region. In order to extend the emission of CdTe to longer wavelengths one uses alloying of the NCs with materials having narrower band gaps which have quite similar lattice parameters as CdTe. Thus approaches for alloying via partial replacement of both the cation and the anion have been developed.

CdHgTe. 
An appropriate candidate for alloying with CdTe is HgTe which has a very similar lattice constant (cf. 6.477 and 6.462 Å for bulk zinc blende CdTe and HgTe, respectively99). The aqueous synthesis of NIR emitting alloyed CdHgTe and core–shell CdHgTe–CdS along with pure HgTe NCs has been first reported by Harrison, Rogach and others.27,186,187 This approach based on the incorporation of Hg2+ ions into already prepared CdTe NCs, stabilized by 2-mercaptoethanol or TG, involves several steps: the synthesis of the initial NCs followed by the subsequent formation of a HgTe shell. In order to shift the PL to wavelengths longer than 1000 nm, this layer-by-layer procedure has to include the creation of 2–3 HgTe layers separated by CdTe layers upon addition of different amounts of Hg2+ ions to the CdTe colloidal solutions corresponding to 20%, 40%, 80% and 120% of the cadmium content of the aliquots, as is schematically shown in Fig. 28.27
 Fig. 28  Scheme of the synthetic route for obtaining CdxHg1−xTe NCs. Reproduced from ref. 186 Copyright 2000, with permission from Elsevier. 
The thus-prepared alloyed QDs have been applied for the fabrication of field-effect thin-film transistors via their spin-coating onto oxidized Si substrates with subsequent sintering at 150 °C, followed by the deposition of a top-gate dielectric alumina layer.188 This device exhibited a field-effect mobility of 0.21 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an Ion/Ioff ratio of 1.5 × 102.
A similar approach was applied for the preparation of CdHgTe nanorods using CdTe nanorods as a template.69 The authors have assumed that the redistribution of mercury and cadmium ions in the growing QDs most probably leads to the formation of CdxHg1−xTe alloys rather than to discretely layered NCs. The shell formation is more obvious in the hybrid approach when CdTe or CdHgTe particles were transferred from water to organics with subsequent coating by ZnS shell employing an organometallic route yielding small-diameter, highly NIR-luminescent NCs.65 Water absorbs strongly in the NIR and IR spectral region starting from approx. 1150 nm (its transmission measured in a 1 cm cuvette at this wavelength is ca. 35%, see Fig. 29a), sufficient to obscure the luminescence of the samples.29 Therefore, solvents with lower absorption have to be used for the acquisition of PL spectra (e.g. D2O or some organics) or measurements have to be performed from dried NCs deposited on a transparent wafer.
 Fig. 29  Transmission spectra of H2O and D2O (a), evolution of the PL (b) and absorption spectra (c) of Cd0.95Hg0.05Te NCs as a function of the reflux time, measured in D2O. High-resolution TEM image of Cd0.95Hg0.05Te/TGA NCs (d). Cd/Hg ratio and corresponding composition of the TGA-capped Cd1−xHgxTe particles obtained from the initial feed ratio Cd2+/Hg2+ = 95/5 as a function of the reflux time (e). Adapted from ref. 29. 
The Hg incorporation is limited in terms of the achievable spectral position of the PL maximum, i.e. the tuneability of the PL band. The ultimate value reachable with this synthesis is 1100 nm for the PL maximum and 40% for the QY of the corresponding NCs. The newly developed facile one-pot synthesis provides a wide range of alloyed TGA stabilized CdxHg1−xTe NC batches possessing a strong PL within the spectral range of 640 to 1600 nm (see Fig. 29b–d).29 The recipe is very similar to the synthesis of pure CdTe and includes a partial replacement of the Cd salt by the Hg precursor. In contrast to the incorporation technique, the nucleation and the growth of alloyed NCs using the addition of only a small amount of the mercury precursor leads to a significant shrinkage of the band gap and correspondingly to a shift of the PL to longer wavelengths. The authors have suggested that the synthesis of the CdxHg1−xTe particles follows approximately the same NC growth kinetics as the synthesis of undoped TGA-capped CdTe. Thus, the red shifts of the first absorption maxima and the PL maxima during the synthesis of the alloyed NCs occur only due to the incorporation of the narrower band gap material as was confirmed by an elemental analysis (see Fig. 29e). At the beginning of the growth the Cd content in the NCs is less than in the initial feed ratio (Cd/Hg = 95/5) and continuously decreases due to the approximately 20 times lower solubility of HgTe compared to CdTe in water. A similar relationship was observed by Sun et al., having obtained a composition of Cd0.23Hg0.77Te from the initial feed ratio of Cd/Hg = 1/1.28
At this point we would like the reader to note the necessity of reconsidering QY determinations of these NIR-emitting samples using IR-26 as a standard reference dye. Its quantum efficiency has been re-examined recently and revealed as 0.05% (at least in 1,2-dichloroethane), which is an order of magnitude lower than the previously reported value.189 Therefore, some of the previously reported QYs of NIR emitting QDs may have been overestimated by a factor of ∼10.


CdSeTe. 
Alloying via replacement of Te ions in the CdTe crystal lattice by another anion constitutes an additional possibility for band gap engineering. Analogous to the CdHgTe NC preparation, the incorporation technique has been applied for a synthesis of alloyed L-cysteine capped CdSeTe and CdSeTe/ZnS particles using CdTe as the initial material.62,88 Although CdSe has a wider band gap (1.74 eV for the wurtzite structure99) than CdTe, the alloyed QDs demonstrate a nonlinear dependence of the band gap on their composition, denoted as optical bowing effect. As a result, the optical band gap of alloyed particles decreases in comparison to CdTe QDs of the same size, which enables a shift of the PL up to 814 nm.88 An additional ZnS shell coating ensures a high QY = 70% of the resulting core–shell particles.62 Piven et al. developed a one-pot synthesis of alloyed TGA-capped CdSeTe and CdSTe NCs, employing a simultaneous injection of NaHSe (Na2S) and NaHTe into the Cd precursor solution.26 In this case the emission efficiency (2–4%) was approximately one order of magnitude lower than that for thiol-capped CdTe NCs, which is determined by the different energetic location of the thiol-related trap surface states for CdTe and CdSe serving as nonradiative channels for CdSe NCs (see below). The measured values of the Stokes shifts for CdSexTe1−x particles with different compositions are comparable or even smaller than those for the reference CdTe NCs, indicating that the PL of the alloys is mainly determined by exciton recombination rather than by surface trap emission. The above-mentioned results suggest that L-cysteine is a beneficial stabilizer for alloyed CdSeTe QDs.

CdSe, CdSe–CdS NCs
Another member of the cadmium chalcogenide group is CdSe. Whereas the organometallic synthesis of this material in the nanoparticulate form is very well developed, there are only a few examples of CdSe NCs obtained by the aqueous approach. The main reason is that CdSe capped with various thiols (viz. 2-mercaptoethanol, TG, TGA) usually exhibits only a weak trap related emission.15 As was explained by Wuister et al., hole trapping on a thiol molecule is responsible for the quenching of the excitonic (band-to-band) emission.190 This process is favoured by the position of the thiol redox energy level within the CdSe band gap, i.e., it is situated at a higher energy than the top of the valence band of CdSe, opposite to CdTe which has a valence band above the redox energy of most thiols. Nevertheless, a successful aqueous synthesis of highly luminescent CdSe NCs has been reported recently.16,17 Stabilization by GSH allows us to obtain small QDs with an average size of 2 nm and a QY of 16%, which has been further enhanced up to 25% by streptavidin coating, suggesting that GSH has a more appropriate energy alignment in contrast to other thiols.17 A QY of 40% was reported in the synthesis of CdSe NCs, employing MPA as a stabilizer and a hydrazine hydrate–Se complex as a Se source, providing size control of the particles in the range of 1.6–3.4 nm and emission covering a wide range from blue to red.16
Analogous to the cases of ZnSe and CdTe described above a postpreparative photochemical treatment can be applied to citrate capped CdSe NCs to enhance their PL. Ambient light treatment of CdSe–CdS core–shell NCs synthesized under microwave irradiation either in solution or in solid multilayer films (prepared by LbL deposition) for several days resulted in a drastic QY enhancement from 0.5–2% up to 25–45%.59 The technique reported has yielded high quality photoactivated micropatterns from LbL NC/PDDA films using TEM copper grids as lithographic masks. The emission increase is accompanied by a blue shift of the PL and the absorption due to photooxidation of the particle surface which was observed for CdSe as well as for CdSe–CdS NCs, assuming that the CdS shell coverage is not complete and allows access to the CdSe core.58 Interestingly, even a thick silica coating on these core–shell particles does not protect them from photooxidation; instead it facilitates an activation process owing to some amount of oxygen trapped within the pores of the silica shell. Laser illumination along with a common heat treatment in the synthesis of citrate capped CdSe and CdSe/CdS has resulted in stable particles in the size range of 3.7–6.3 nm, emitting from 560 to 615 nm with a reported ultimate QY of 60%.55 Citrate being a quite weak ligand relative to thiols permits fast growth of the CdSe NCs even at room temperature so that particles of 2, 2.4, 3 and 3.2 nm were prepared over 20 min, employing a common heat treatment at 20, 50, 75 and 94 °C, respectively.56
HgX and PbX NCs
To the best of our knowledge, HgTe and PbS are the only narrow band gap semiconductor materials successfully prepared in their nanoparticulate forms by the aqueous approach thus far. Bulk mercury chalcogenides are frequently ascribed to the class of semimetals since they exhibit zero band gaps.191 The high reactivity of the metal ions towards their chalcogen counterparts is the main reason for their poor colloidal stability which strongly affects their application. Typically, an aqueous synthesis of both HgTe and PbS NCs is carried out at room temperature by simply mixing the respective metal salts with the corresponding chalcogen sources (H2Te(Se) or NaHTe(Se), Na2S) in the presence of thiol stabilizers. Particles obtained in this way proceed to grow and coalesce under storage even at quite low temperatures and after purification.
NIR and IR emitting aqueous semiconductor NCs carry a large potential for applications as optical amplifiers for telecommunication systems based on the silica fibre technology. Conventional silica fibres have optimal low-loss transmission windows (so-called telecommunication windows) at around 1.3 and 1.55 μm.187 Other possible applications include biolabelling,156,192 especially for in vivo imaging studies,63 electronics193,194 and optoelectronics,195 photovoltaics193,196 and nanophotonics.197
HgX NCs
The aqueous synthesis is the only successful colloidal approach for HgTe nanoparticle preparation since the organometallic method suffers from either high toxicity of the mercury precursors (e.g., dimethylmercury) or severe difficulties in controlling the growth, especially at higher temperatures (>100 °C).65 As mentioned in the previous paragraph, the first reports of a synthesis of HgTe NCs were published by Rogach, Harrison et al., having employed Hg(ClO4)2 and H2Te as the initial precursors in the presence of TG acting as a stabilizer.20,64,198 The particles obtained had a broad size distribution which could be narrowed by size-selective precipitation, their PL covered the spectral region from approx. 900 nm to 2000 nm.27 HgTe NCs with a mean particle size of 3.5 nm show an exceptionally high QY of around 50%. HgS and HgSe colloids prepared applying the same synthetic procedure exhibited even lower thermostability than HgTe with the PL centred at 1 μm and a QY of 0.5%.199,200 In order to enhance the stability of these materials protection and passivation of the mercury chalcogenide core with a CdS layer were suggested.64,199
Another strategy for enhancing the stability as well as for further processing of the NCs is their encapsulation into an appropriate inert matrix, e.g., polymers. Thus, a LbL assembly of HgTe QDs with polyelectrolytes yielded a simple thin-film hybrid polymer/NC LED.187 A composite PDDA/HgTe NC film deposited on ITO-coated glass employed as a substrate/bottom electrode with an evaporated aluminum top electrode above the LbL film emits IR light when pumped electrically, albeit with rather low quantum efficiency (∼0.001%). To a large extent this is attributed to the poor carrier-transport properties of the insulating PDDA. Conjugated polymer matrices hosting semiconductor NCs may improve the characteristics of LEDs fabricated thereof. Koktysh et al. proposed the device architecture shown in Fig. 30a–c, employing the methyl-substituted ladder-type poly(paraphenylene) (MeLPPP) as a host matrix and HgTe NCs transferred from water into toluene which formed a homogeneous coating with a thickness of 100–150 nm on ITO glass.195 The inset of Fig. 30d shows the NIR electroluminescence (EL) spectra of a MeLPPP/HgTe NC device emitting at 1.3 μm at a turn-on voltage of ∼10 V. The EL spectra closely match the PL spectra and exhibit no spectral shift in the presence of an applied field, revealing that in both cases the same emissive species are responsible for the NIR luminescence.
 Fig. 30  (a) Structural formula of MeLPPP. (b) Transfer of aqueous TG-capped HgTe NCs to toluene by partial exchange of TG with dodecanethiol. (c) Representation of the MeLPPP/HgTe NC device. (d) Current–voltage (solid line) and integrated electroluminescence (EL) intensity–voltage (squares connected by a dashed line) traces of the MeLPPP/HgTe NC LED. The inset shows EL spectra of the MeLPPP/HgTe NC device taken at different voltages in comparison with a PL spectrum. Reproduced from ref. 195 Copyright 2004 WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
A composition of HgTe QDs embedded into another conducting polymer, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), has been employed for the manufacture of a hybrid solar cell196 which scheme is shown in Fig. 31. This device represents a combination of the concepts of a NC/polymer-blend solar cell and a solid-state NC-sensitized solar cell. In this architecture water soluble thioglycerol capped HgTe QDs (HgTe-AS) are coated onto nanoporous TiO2 electrodes which are further coated with organic soluble DDT-capped HgTe (HgTe-OS) blended in the polymer matrix (see Fig. 31b).
 Fig. 31  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image and (b) sketch of the device which combines the concepts of a solid-state nanocrystal-sensitized solar cell and a nanocrystal/polymer-blend solar cell. (c) IPCE of the hybrid device (□), and references containing HgTe-OS (○), HgTe-AS (Δ), and solely the polymer without the NCs (×). Reproduced from ref. 196 Copyright 2006 WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
As seen from its IPCE (incident photon to current efficiency) curve (see Fig. 31c) the incorporation of HgTe NCs sufficiently extended the light harvesting spectral region to 1500 nm and thus increased the efficiency to 10% at around 550 nm monochromatic irradiation and short-circuit current densities of 2 mA cm−2 under simulated air mass 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) illumination.
Jang et al. have demonstrated yet another application of aqueous HgTe QDs namely as a channel layer material for flexible thin film transistors.194 The units were fabricated by spin-coating of the particles onto an UV/ozone treated cross-linked poly-4-vinylphenol buffer layer on top of poly-ether-sulfone substrates. Thus-deposited QDs were sintered at 150 °C with subsequent deposition of two gold electrodes and Al2O3 used as a gate dielectric layer.
These fabricated transistors exhibited a field-effect mobility of 4.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an on/off current ratio of about 103. By this, the mobility and on/off current ratio obtained from the device on the bent substrate were very close to those on the flat substrate.
A further improvement of the aqueous HgTe synthesis was performed by Kovalenko and co-workers having extended the size range of the NCs up to 12 nm and accordingly a shifting of the corresponding PL to 4 μm (Fig. 32).80 The technique consists of a 2 step growth of the particles: first, reaction and nucleation with growth at room temperature leading to 3–4 nm NCs, second, heating at 75–80 °C, yielding larger particles with the sizes controllable in the range of 4–12 nm with a subsequent transfer of the obtained HgTe from water to nonpolar organic solvents, employing dodecanethiol for a ligand exchange. It is observed that the QY of these NCs gradually decreased with increasing particle sizes. It is also interesting that a variation in the choice of the thiols (TG, TGA, L-cysteine, mercaptoethanol, and cysteamine) did not influence the NC size in the first stage of the growth but it turned out that it was crucially important for controlling the growth dynamics at elevated temperatures. Additionally, the transferability from the aqueous to the organic phase as well as the optical properties of the larger NCs were affected by this choice.
 Fig. 32  PL (a) and absorption (b) spectra of dodecanethiol-capped HgTe NCs in CCl4. The insets show the size dependence of the PL peaks with the corresponding QYs (a) and illustrate the complete phase transfer for cysteamine used as the initial stabilizer (b). (c) TEM image of ∼9 nm dodecanethiol-capped HgTe NCs emitting at 3 μm. HRTEM images of single crystal (d) and twinned (e) particles. (f) XRD patterns of 3.5 and 7.2 nm HgTe NCs. The line diffraction pattern shows the bulk HgTe (coloradoite) reflexes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. 
PbX NCs
As in the case of HgTe, thiols were successfully used for the stabilization of PbS NCs.22–24 Best results in terms of stability of the particles and their optical properties were achieved by employing a mixture of two ligands: TG and dithioglycerol (DTG).22,23 The variation of the Pb2+/S2−/TG/TGA molar ratio provides an opportunity for controlling the NC properties, e.g., decreasing the Pb2+/S2− initial ratio allows for tuning the PL maxima from approx. 1050 to 1350 nm (Fig. 33). The optimized procedure yields PbS colloids stable against aggregation for 2–3 months, having an average size of 4 ± 1 nm and a QY of 7–10%.22 At the same time, being kept at 37 °C in the dark they continually grow, which was indicated by a red shift of their PL. Neither TG nor DTG being used as a sole ligand leads to a sufficient stability of the NCs. The same tendency was observed in the synthesis of a PbTe NC colloid, employing TG as the stabilizer.199 However, dihydrolipoic acid as a bidentate ligand provides quite stable PbS colloids.24
 Fig. 33  Absorption (a) and PL (b) spectra of PbS NCs of different sizes, obtained by changing the Pb/S molar ratio: (1) 1/0.3, (2) 1/0.4, (3) 1/0.5, (4) 1/0.7. The molar ratio of Pb/TG/DTG was 1/6/2. The measurements were performed 3 days after the sample preparation. Reproduced from ref. 23 Copyright 2004 WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
As an example of an application, a NIR emitting LED with a turn-on voltage of 4–5 V was manufactured on the basis of the conducting polymer poly(p-phenylenevinylene) and PbS NCs.23 An original approach for the synthesis of PbS NCs directly on DNA strands used as a template and as a stabilizer for the NC growth was introduced by Levina et al.25 In contrast to thiol-capped particles, the thus-prepared composite is quite stable in blood plasma at 37 °C; in the best samples a luminescence QY half-life of one week was observed, which makes it a promising system for bio-applications.
Conclusions and outlook
As is clearly seen from the work reviewed, tremendous progress has been made during the last decade in the colloidal aqueous synthesis of semiconductor NCs including both its practical preparative aspects as well as theoretical insight into the processes and mechanisms responsible for the formation of nanoparticles. As a result of intensive investigations many straightforward synthetic techniques providing high quality materials have been developed. The prepared QDs feature excellent emission properties and owing to their size control they cover a wide spectral region from the UV to the IR. The recently depicted syntheses of core–shell and core–shell–shell structures constitute large steps forward, delivering colloidally and chemically stable materials, especially promising for applications requiring continuous contact with oxidative environments, e.g. in vivo bio-imaging. Efficient strategies of the encapsulation of semiconductor particles into polymeric micelles or silica beads also provide robust nanoscaled materials, preserving and even enhancing the optical properties of the parental NCs. Obtaining amphiphilic NCs and their composites displaying versatile solubility and, thus, being capable of penetrating through cell membranes is an additional advantage of the aqueous synthesis. A vast variability of the functionalization of aqueous QDs achievable both directly in the synthesis during their growth and by means of post-preparative handling is a key factor for their processing and subsequent application in various fields ranging from life sciences to photonics. NCs being functionalized directly in the synthesis by the application of various thiol stabilizers are off-the-shelf building blocks for the fabrication of different hybrid structures assembled via self-organization, electrostatic interactions, covalent linking, etc. The assembly of nanoparticles into superstructures of greater complexity is a necessary step in the utilization of nanomaterials, which enlarges the spectrum of their properties. It is believed that the complexity of nanoparticulate architectures will grow not only with respect to spatial dimensions but also along the temporal coordinate, finally leading to dynamic nanometer-scale systems.
In spite of various successful synthetic approaches to several chalcogenide based II–VI and IV–VI NCs, most of the assemblies and functional architectures reported in the literature have been obtained by using CdTe NCs. Indeed, CdTe NCs are the most successful and prominent members of thiol-capped family. Nevertheless, it is very important to stress that the developed processing methods are versatile and are also applicable to other types of thiol-capped NCs. Moreover, most of the NCs synthesized by hot-injection methods (amongst others CdSe NCs and nanorods, their core–shell combinations, CdTe, lead chalcogenides) may undergo surface exchange of the capping agent to short chain thiols, e.g. MPA.201 Such types of “secondary” thiol-capped NCs are well compatible with most of the processing methods described above. Taking into account the variety of materials available from both aqueous and hot-injection syntheses, each offering unique physico-chemical properties, the above-described methods as well as new assembly approaches have literally unlimited applicability.
Successful applications of aqueous QDs and their assemblies in optoelectronics include light-emitting diodes, microarrays of multicolored light-emitting pixels, energy harvesting nanostructures, and photosensitive films. This is closely connected to photonic applications in which these assemblies play the role of subwavelength emitters, tunable light-sources coupled to optical modes of photonic crystals and heterocrystals, spherical microresonators, photonic molecules, and waveguides. Biology related applications include temperature sensitive nanoassemblies, conjugates with “smart” polymers, luminescence coding of multifunctional microbeads and polymer microcapsules suitable for drug delivery systems and biosensors. The ability of the NCs to interact with adjacent nanoparticles or molecules gives rise to the assembly of FRET-based and nanoplasmonic devices as well as various sensors.
Acknowledgements
We are indebted to all our coworkers contributing to the topic over many years. Financial support has been provided by the EU and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through various grants and programs.
Notes and references
N. Gaponik, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, K. Hoppe, E. V. Shevchenko, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7177–7185 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik and A. L. Rogach, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 8685–8693 RSC .
A. Henglein, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 301–305 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 1861–1873 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Eychmüller, in Nanoparticles: From Theory to Application, ed. G. Schmid, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co KGaA, Weinheim,  2004, pp. 50–79 Search PubMed .

          N. Gaponik and A. L. Rogach, in Semiconductor Nanocrystal Quantum Dots: Synthesis, Assembly, Spectroscopy and Applications, ed. A. L. Rogach, Springer, Wien, New York,  2008, pp. 73–100 Search PubMed .
N. Gaponik, S. G. Hickey, D. Dorfs, A. L. Rogach and A. Eychmüller, Small, 2010, 6, 1364–1378 CrossRef CAS .
L. Spanhel, M. Haase, H. Weller and A. Henglein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 5649–5655 CrossRef CAS .
H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1993, 32, 41–53 CrossRef .
T. Vossmeyer, L. Katsikas, M. Giersig, I. G. Popovic, K. Diesner, A. Chemseddine, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 7665–7673 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, L. Katsikas, A. Kornowski, D. Su, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 1772–1778 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rajh, O. I. Micic and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 11999–12003 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, T. Franzl, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, N. Gaponik, V. Lesnyak, A. Shavel, A. Eychmüller, Y. P. Rakovich and J. F. Donegan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14628–14637 CAS .
Y. Li, L. Jing, R. Qiao and M. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9293–9311 RSC .
A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Gao, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3065–3069 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Kalasad, M. K. Rabinal and B. G. Mulimani, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12729–12735 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bäumle, D. Stamou, J.-M. Segura, R. Hovius and H. Vogel, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3828–3831 CrossRef .
C. L. Li, K. Nishikawa, M. Ando, H. Enomoto and N. Murase, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 294, 33–39 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Z. Yang and J. Y. Ying, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1475–1479 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rogach, S. Kershaw, M. Burt, M. Harrison, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 552–555 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gallardo, M. Gutierrez, A. Henglein and E. Janata, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 1080–1090 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Zhao, I. Gorelikov, S. Musikhin, S. Cauchi, V. Sukhovatkin, E. H. Sargent and E. Kumacheva, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 1086–1090 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bakueva, I. Gorelikov, S. Musikhin, X. S. Zhao, E. H. Sargent and E. Kumacheva, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 926–929 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, W. Zhang, X. Chen, F. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Gu and J. Hong, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS .
L. Levina, V. Sukhovatkin, S. Musikhin, S. Cauchi, R. Nisman, D. P. Bazett-Jones and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1854–1857 CrossRef CAS .
N. Piven, A. S. Susha, M. Döblinger and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15253–15259 CAS .
A. L. Rogach, M. T. Harrison, S. V. Kershaw, A. Kornowski, M. G. Burt, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2001, 224, 153–158 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Sun, H. Zhang, J. Ju, J. H. Zhang, G. Qian, C. L. Wang, B. Yang and Z. Y. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6764–6769 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lesnyak, A. Lutich, N. Gaponik, M. Grabolle, A. Plotnikov, U. Resch-Genger and A. Eychmüller, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9147–9152 RSC .
A. Shavel, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5905–5908 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Liu, T.-L. Cheng, C.-C. Shen, W.-L. Tseng and M. Y. Chiang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2162–2167 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lesnyak, A. Plotnikov, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5142–5146 RSC .
Z. Deng, F. L. Lie, S. Shen, I. Ghosh, M. Mansuripur and A. J. Muscat, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 434–442 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Liu, Y.-M. Chen, J.-H. Lin and W.-L. Tseng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 337, 414–419 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, K. Nishikawa, M. Ando, H. Enomoto and N. Murase, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 321, 468–476 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lesnyak, A. Dubavik, A. Plotnikov, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 886–888 RSC .
M. Green, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5797–5809 RSC .
A. L. Rogach, N. Gaponik, J. M. Lupton, C. Bertoni, D. E. Gallardo, S. Dunn, N. Li Pira, M. Paderi, P. Repetto, S. G. Romanov, C. O'Dwyer, C. M. Sotomayor Torres and A. Eychmüller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6538–6549 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cicek, S. Nizamoglu, T. Ozel, E. Mutlugun, D. U. Karatay, V. Lesnyak, T. Otto, N. Gaponik, A. Eychmüller and H. V. Demir, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 061105 CrossRef .
T. Franzl, T. A. Klar, S. Schietinger, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1599–1603 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rakovich, A. Sukhanova, N. Bouchonville, E. Lukashev, V. Oleinikov, M. Artemyev, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, M. Molinari, M. Troyon, Y. P. Rakovich, J. F. Donegan and I. Nabiev, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2640–2648 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mohamed Ali, Y. Zheng, H.-h. Yu and J. Y. Ying, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 9452–9458 CrossRef .
A. S. Susha, A. M. Javier, W. J. Parak and A. L. Rogach, Colloids. Surf., A, 2006, 281, 40–43 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, C. Wang, H. Zhang, Q. Sun, Z. Wang and Y. Cui, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9216–9221 RSC .
I. Nabiev, S. Mitchell, A. Davies, Y. Williams, D. Kelleher, R. Moore, Y. K. Gun'ko, S. Byrne, Y. P. Rakovich, J. F. Donegan, A. Sukhanova, J. Conroy, D. Cottell, N. Gaponik, A. Rogach and Y. Volkov, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3452–3461 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 5047–5052 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5174–5181 RSC .
H. Qian, X. Qiu, L. Li and J. Ren, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 9034–9040 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, L. M. Sai, H. T. Lu, M. Hu, W. Y. Lai, Q. L. Fan, L. H. Wang and W. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zeng, X. Kong, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, L. Tu, J. Zhao and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8587–8593 CAS .
J. Du, X. Li, S. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Hao, C. Xu and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11390–11395 RSC .
Y. He, H. T. Lu, L. M. Sai, Y. Y. Su, M. Hu, C. H. Fan, W. Huang and L. H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3416–3421 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, Y. Li, H. Zhang, X. Zhong and L. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14145–14150 CAS .
J. Cao, B. Xue, H. Li, D. Deng and Y. Gu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 348, 369–376 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-W. Lin, M.-M. Hsieh, C.-P. Liu and H.-T. Chang, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 728–734 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Deng, J.-S. Yu and Y. Pan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 299, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, D. Nagesha, J. W. Ostrander, M. Giersig and N. A. Kotov, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2676–2685 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Y. Tang, M. A. Correa-Duarte, I. Pastoriza-Santos, M. Giersig, N. A. Kotov and L. M. Liz-Marzan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 15461–15469 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Tang, M. A. Correa-Duarte, L. M. Liz-Marzan and N. A. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2830–2831 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Z. He, W. H. Chan and M. M. F. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1293–1300 CAS .
W. C. Law, K. T. Yong, I. Roy, H. Ding, R. Hu, W. Zhao and P. N. Prasad, Small, 2009, 5, 1302–1310 CrossRef CAS .
G.-X. Liang, L.-L. Li, H.-Y. Liu, J.-R. Zhang, C. Burda and J.-J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2974–2976 RSC .
H. Qian, C. Dong, J. Peng, X. Qiu, Y. Xu and J. Ren, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16852–16857 CAS .
M. T. Harrison, S. V. Kershaw, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 123–125 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tsay, M. Pflughoefft, L. A. Bentolila and S. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1926–1927 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, M. Ando, H. Enomoto and N. Murase, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 20190–20199 CAS .
J. Li, X. Hong, D. Li, K. Zhao, L. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Du, J. Li, Y. Bai and T. Li, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1740–1741 RSC .
H. Zhang, D. Wang and H. Möhwald, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 748–751 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, F. Yang, Y. Lin, L. Zhuo, J. Ge and L. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1212–1214 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 190–200 CrossRef CAS .
H. Döllefeld, K. Hoppe, J. Kolny, K. Schilling, H. Weller and A. Eychmüller, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 4747–4753 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Li, H. Sun and B. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2465–2469 CAS .
G.-Y. Lan, Y.-W. Lin, Y.-F. Huang and H.-T. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2661–2666 RSC .
K. Akamatsu, T. Tsuruoka and H. Nawafune, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1634–1635 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakashima, Y. Kobayashi and T. Kawai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10342–10343 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Wei, A. G. Joly, Y. Wang, C. Pope, Y. Zhang, J. O. Bovin and P. Sherwood, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16992–17000 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Kapitonov, A. P. Stupak, S. V. Gaponenko, E. P. Petrov, A. L. Rogach and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 10109–10113 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Zhou, B. Yang and M. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Klayman and T. S. Griffin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 197–199 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, E. Kaufmann, D. Pachinger, J. Roither, M. Huber, J. Stangl, G. Hesser, F. Schäffler and W. Heiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3516–3517 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, J. Han, Y. Liu, M. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22487–22492 CAS .
A. Dubavik, V. Lesnyak, W. Thiessen, N. Gaponik, T. Wolff and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4748–4750 CAS .
A. Dubavik, E. Sezgin, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, P. Schwille and A. Eychmüller, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2150–2156 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hayakawa, Y. Nonoguchi, H.-P. Wu, E. W. G. Diau, T. Nakashima and T. Kawai, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 21, 8849–8853 RSC .
D. Zhou, M. Lin, Z. Chen, H. Sun, H. Zhang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4857–4862 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fang, K. Ma, L. Ma, J. Bai, X. Li, H. Song and H. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12346–12352 CAS .
N. N. Mamedova, N. A. Kotov, A. L. Rogach and J. Studer, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
G.-X. Liang, M.-M. Gu, J.-R. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 415103 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, K. Sun, Z. Tang and N. A. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6006–6013 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hoppe, E. Geidel, H. Weller and A. Eychmüller, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 1704–1706 RSC .
H. Qian, C. Dong, J. Weng and J. Ren, Small, 2006, 2, 747–751 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, S. Gao and J. Y. Ying, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 376–380 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Liu and J.-S. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 333, 690–698 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. C. Glotzer and N. A. Kotov, Science, 2006, 314, 274–278 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, L. Liu, L. Xu, X. Yin and X. Zhong, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 235603 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Q. Ma and X. Su, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 4408–4414 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Acar, R. Kas, E. Yurtsever, C. Ozen and I. Lieberwirth, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10005–10012 CAS .
V. Lesnyak, S. V. Voitekhovich, P. N. Gaponik, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4090–4096 CrossRef CAS .

CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, ed. D. R. Lide, CRC Press, 84th edn  2003–2004 Search PubMed .
U. Resch, H. Weller and A. Henglein, Langmuir, 1989, 5, 1015–1020 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fiore, R. Mastria, M. G. Lupo, G. Lanzani, C. Giannini, E. Carlino, G. Morello, M. De Giorgi, Y. Li, R. Cingolani and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2274–2282 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reiss, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 1843–1852 RSC .
N. P. Osipovich, A. Shavel, S. K. Poznyak, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19233–19237 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Regulacio and M.-Y. Han, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 621–630 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, S. Kirstein, H. Möhwald, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 8360–8363 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grabolle, M. Spieles, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, A. Eychmüller and U. Resch-Genger, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 6285–6294 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lesnyak, A. Wolf, A. Dubavik, L. Borchardt, S. V. Voitekhovich, N. Gaponik, S. Kaskel and A. Eychmüller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13413–13420 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zou, Z. Gu, N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Fang, W. Zhu and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2807–2815 RSC .
A. L. Rogach, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2000, B69–B70, 435–440 CrossRef .
K. Zhao, J. Li, H. Z. Wang, J. Q. Zhuang and W. S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5618–5621 CAS .
K. Boldt, O. T. Bruns, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1959–1963 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, D. Wang, B. Yang and H. Möhwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10171–10180 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, N. A. Kotov and M. Giersig, Science, 2002, 297, 237–240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Volkov, S. Mitchell, N. Gaponik, Y. P. Rakovich, J. F. Donegan, D. Kelleher and A. L. Rogach, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 1600–1602 CrossRef CAS .
S. Srivastava, A. Santos, K. Critchley, K.-S. Kim, P. Podsiadlo, K. Sun, J. Lee, C. Xu, G. D. Lilly, S. C. Glotzer and N. A. Kotov, Science, 2010, 327, 1355–1359 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, A. Wolf, R. Marx, V. Lesnyak, K. Schilling and A. Eychmüller, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4257–4262 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, V. Lesnyak, N. C. Bigall, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2309–2314 CrossRef CAS .
C. Higgins, M. Lunz, A. L. Bradley, V. A. Gerard, S. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, V. Lesnyak and N. Gaponik, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 24486–24494 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mayilo, J. Hilhorst, A. S. Susha, C. Höhl, T. Franzl, T. A. Klar, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14589–14594 CAS .
R. Osovsky, A. Shavel, N. Gaponik, L. Amirav, A. Eychmüller, H. Weller and E. Lifshitz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20244–20250 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yin, F. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Zheng and Z. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10357–10364 CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Sun, M. Li and B. Yang, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 1309–1316 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, C. Wang, M. Li and B. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1885–1889 CAS .
A. Shavel, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19280–19284 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, W. Yang and C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17467–17473 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Wang, H. Zhang, S. H. Xu, N. Lv, Y. Liu, M. J. Li, H. Z. Sun, J. H. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 827–833 CAS .
D. L. Ferreira, F. O. Silva, L. C. d. S. Viol, P. Licinio, M. Valadares, L. A. Cury, M. A. Schiavon and J. L. A. Alves, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 084712 CrossRef .
S. Ho, K. Critchley, G. D. Lilly, B. Shim and N. A. Kotov, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1390–1394 RSC .
H. Bao, Y. Gong, Z. Li and M. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3853–3859 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 803–806 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang and J. Jia, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 344–349 RSC .
H. Zhang, Z. Cui, Y. Wang, K. Zhang, X. Ji, C. Lu, B. Yang and M. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 777–780 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chemseddine and H. Weller, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 636–637 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eychmüller, L. Katsikas and H. Weller, Langmuir, 1990, 6, 1605–1608 CrossRef .
H. Borchert, D. V. Talapin, N. Gaponik, C. McGinley, S. Adam, A. Lobo, T. Möller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9662–9668 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuwen, B. Bao, G. Liu, J. Tian, H. Lu, Z. Luo, X. Zhu, F. Boey, H. Zhang and L. Wang, Small, 2011, 7, 1456–1463 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shavel, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2005, 3613–3623 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lunz, A. L. Bradley, V. A. Gerard, S. J. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, V. Lesnyak and N. Gaponik, Phys. Rev. B, 2011, 83, 115423 CrossRef .
M. Lunz, A. L. Bradley, W.-Y. Chen, V. A. Gerard, S. J. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, V. Lesnyak and N. Gaponik, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 81, 205316 CrossRef .
S. Sekiguchi, K. Niikura, N. Iyo, Y. Matsuo, A. Eguchi, T. Nakabayashi, N. Ohta and K. Ijiro, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4169–4173 CAS .
Q. Yao and S. L. Brock, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 9985–9992 CrossRef CAS .
I. R. Pala, I. U. Arachchige, D. G. Georgiev and S. L. Brock, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3661–3665 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Mohanan, I. U. Arachchige and S. L. Brock, Science, 2005, 307, 397–400 CAS .
I. U. Arachchige and S. L. Brock, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 801–809 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, A.-K. Herrmann and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 8–17 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Xu, H. Kuang, C. Xu and N. A. Kotov, Acc. Chem. Res. DOI:10.1021/ar200305f .
A. Shavel, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 449–451 CrossRef CAS .
D. Costenaro, F. Carniato, G. Gatti, C. Bisio and L. Marchese, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25257–25265 CAS .
S. Wang, N. Mamedova, N. A. Kotov, W. Chen and J. Studer, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 817–822 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jantschke, A.-K. Herrmann, V. Lesnyak, A. Eychmüller and E. Brunner, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 85–90 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, P. Uhlmann, M. Agrawal, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, F. Simon, M. Stamm and A. Eychmüller, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 214–220 RSC .
M. Agrawal, J. Rubio-Retama, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, N. Gaponik, S. Gupta, V. Cimrova, V. Lesnyak, E. López-Cabarcos, S. Tzavalas, R. Rojas-Reyna, A. Eychmüller and M. Stamm, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9820–9824 CrossRef CAS .
G. Katsukis, J. Malig, C. Schulz-Drost, S. Leubner, N. Jux and D. M. Guldi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1915–1924 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Hammond, AIChE J., 2011, 57, 2928–2940 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, I. L. Radtchenko, G. B. Sukhorukov, H. Weller and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 879–882 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, I. L. Radtchenko, M. R. Gerstenberger, Y. A. Fedutik, G. B. Sukhorukov and A. L. Rogach, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 369–372 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, I. L. Radtchenko, G. B. Sukhorukov and A. L. Rogach, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 1449–1452 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Sukhorukov, A. L. Rogach, B. Zebli, T. Liedl, A. G. Skirtach, K. Köhler, A. A. Antipov, N. Gaponik, A. S. Susha, M. Winterhalter and W. J. Parak, Small, 2005, 1, 194–200 CrossRef CAS .
S. Leubner, G. Katsukis and D. M. Guldi, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 253–265 RSC .
N. Cicek, S. Nizamoglu, T. Ozel, E. Mutlugun, D. U. Karatay, V. Lesnyak, T. Otto, N. Gaponik, A. Eychmüller and H. V. Demir, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 061105–061103 CrossRef .
H. V. Demir, S. Nizamoglu, T. Erdem, E. Mutlugun, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 632–647 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lunz, V. A. Gerard, Y. K. Gun'ko, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach and A. L. Bradley, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3341–3345 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ozel, S. Nizamoglu, M. A. Sefunc, O. Samarskaya, I. O. Ozel, E. Mutlugun, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, A. Eychmüller, S. V. Gaponenko and H. V. Demir, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1328–1334 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Lutich, A. Pöschl, J. Guoxin, F. D. Stefani, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 083109 CrossRef .
C. Bertoni, D. Gallardo, S. Dunn, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 034107 CrossRef .
T. Otto, P. Mundra, M. Schelter, E. Frolova, D. Dorfs, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2128–2132 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Bendall, M. Paderi, F. Ghigliotti, N. Li Pira, V. Lambertini, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, G. Visimberga, A. Eychmüller, C. M. S. Torres, M. E. Welland, C. Gieck and L. Marchese, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3298–3302 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gross, I. Mora-Seró, T. Dittrich, A. Belaidi, C. Mauser, A. J. Houtepen, E. D. Como, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5981–5983 CrossRef CAS .
J. Briscoe, D. E. Gallardo, S. Hatch, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik and S. Dunn, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2517–2523 RSC .
X. Luo, J. Han, Y. Ning, Z. Lin, H. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6569–6575 RSC .
X. Cao, C. M. Li, H. Bao, Q. Bao and H. Dong, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3773–3779 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, C. Wang, M. Li, X. Ji, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4783–4788 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, W. Li, C. Wang, M. Li, Y. Tian, D. Zhang, H. Chen and B. Yang, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2006, 291, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ning, H. Zhang, J. Han, C. Yang, Y. Liu, D. Zhou and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6837–6843 RSC .
Y. Yang, C. Tu and M. Gao, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2930–2935 RSC .
A. Guerrero-Martínez, J. Pérez-Juste and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1182–1195 CrossRef .
L. Jing, C. Yang, R. Qiao, M. Niu, M. Du, D. Wang and M. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 420–427 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang and M. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2354–2357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, L. Jing, X. Yu, D. Yan and M. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4123–4128 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, Z. Yuan, J. Yang, A. Zhang, Y. Cao, Q. Jiang, R. Shi, F. Liu and X. Cheng, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 1814–1820 RSC .
P. Yang, M. Ando and N. Murase, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4016–4019 CrossRef CAS .
N. Murase and P. Yang, Small, 2009, 5, 800–803 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, M. Protière and P. Reiss, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2621–2623 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miao, S. G. Hickey, C. Waurisch, V. Lesnyak, T. Otto, B. Rellinghaus and A. Eychmüller, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7059–7065 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dubavik, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10224–10227 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Harrison, S. V. Kershaw, M. G. Burt, A. Eychmüller, H. Weller and A. L. Rogach, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2000, 69, 355–360 CrossRef .
A. L. Rogach, A. Eychmüller, S. G. Hickey and S. V. Kershaw, Small, 2007, 3, 536–557 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Kim, K. Cho, H. Kim, B.-M. Moon and S. Kim, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 1643–1646 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Semonin, J. C. Johnson, J. M. Luther, A. G. Midgett, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2445–2450 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Wuister, C. de Mello Donega and A. Meijerink, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17393–17397 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Nethercot Jr, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1974, 33, 1088–1091 CrossRef .
U. Resch-Genger, M. Grabolle, S. Cavaliere-Jaricot, R. Nitschke and T. Nann, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5, 763–775 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 515–522 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jang, K. Cho, S. H. Lee and S. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 015204 CrossRef .
D. S. Koktysh, N. Gaponik, M. Reufer, J. Crewett, U. Scherf, A. Eychmüller, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 1435–1438 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, J. Roither, M. Kovalenko, G. Pillwein and W. Heiss, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1095–1099 CrossRef .
P. Olk, B. C. Buchler, V. Sandoghdar, N. Gaponik, A. Eychmüller and A. L. Rogach, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 4732–4734 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Harrison, S. V. Kershaw, M. G. Burt, A. Rogach, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2721–2722 RSC .
S. V. Kershaw, M. Harrison, A. L. Rogach and A. Kornowski, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2000, 6, 534–543 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Harrison, S. V. Kershaw, M. G. Burt, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72, 295–307 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. W. Chan and S. Nie, Science, 1998, 281, 2016–2018 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.‡ Present address: Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Vladimir Lesnyak
	Vladimir Lesnyak is presently a Marie Curie fellow at the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Genova, Italy) in the group of Prof. Liberato Manna. He received his PhD degree in chemistry (2005) from the Belarusian State University in Minsk (Belarus) under supervision of Prof. F. N. Kaputsky, developing a synthesis of petroleum resins and methods of their chemical modification. PhD studies were followed by post-doctoral research at the Technical University of Dresden (Germany) in the group of Prof. Alexander Eychmüller from 2006 to 2012. His current research focuses on the synthesis, assembly and applications of colloidal semiconductor and metal nanocrystals.

Nikolai Gaponik
	Nikolai Gaponik is a senior staff scientist at the TU Dresden (Germany). He received his PhD in chemistry (2000) from the Belarussian State University in Minsk (Belarus) under supervision of Prof. D. V. Sviridov. He was a visiting scientist at the LMU in Munich in 2000 (with Prof. J. Feldmann and Dr M. Gao), a DAAD-fellow and later a research scientist in the group of Prof. H. Weller at the University of Hamburg in 2000–2005, and an IKERBASQUE-Fellow in the group of Prof. Y. Rakovich at the Center of Materials Physics, San Sebastian, Spain, in 2011.

Alexander Eychmüller
	The academic career of Alexander Eychmüller started in Göttingen with studies of Physics (PhD, MPI for Biophysical Chemistry, A. Weller and K. H. Grellmann), continued at UCLA (postdoc with M. A. El-Sayed), Berlin (HMI with A. Henglein), and at the University of Hamburg (with H. Weller). Since 2005 he holds a chair in Physical Chemistry/Electrochemistry at the TU Dresden. He published about 200 papers in peer review journals, most of them on the synthesis and characterization of nanosized objects including work on their photophysical, electrochemical and structural properties.

 	Fig. 1  Representative normalized photoluminescence spectra of a series of various aqueous NCs. Reproduced from ref. 47.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of typical thiol capping ligands employed in the aqueous synthesis of NCs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic presentation of the synthesis of aqueous thiol-capped binary semiconductor NCs (ZnSe, CdSe, CdTe, HgTe) using aluminum chalcogenides (Al2Se3, Al2Te3) as the chalcogen source. Courtesy of A. Dubavik (LMU Munich, Germany).	 

 	Fig. 4  (Left) proposed scheme of ZnS layer formation on the surface of ZnSe NCs upon light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 18 Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier. (Right) absorption and PL spectra of ZnSe NCs obtained for various irradiation times. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Absorption (⋯) and PL (—) spectra of ZnSe and Zn1−xCdxSe alloyed QDs. (Spectra of Zn0.75Cd0.25Se, Zn0.62Cd0.38Se, and Zn0.4Cd0.6Se QDs are shown in blue, green, and red, respectively.) (b) Evolution of the absorption (⋯) and PL (—) spectra of Zn1−xCdxSe alloyed QDs with time. (c) QYs and PL maxima of Zn1−xCdxSe alloyed QDs as a function of the Cd molar fraction. (d) Photographs of Zn0.4Cd0.6Se (left) and Zn0.3Cd0.7Se (right) alloyed QDs under visible and UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19 Copyright 2007 WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photographs of the ZnSe0.98Te0.02/GSH colloid (a), the NC–polyurethane composite film under daylight (b) and under UV light (365 nm excitation) (c). Absorption and PL spectra of the ZnSe0.98Te0.02/GSH NC–polymer dispersion and the film after water evaporation (λex = 310 nm) (d). Reproduced from ref. 36.	 

 	Fig. 7  PL (a) and absorption (b) spectra of TGA- and MPA-capped CdTe NCs demonstrate their tuneability over a broad spectral range in the visible and near-infrared (λex. = 450 nm). TEM image of MPA-capped CdTe NCs, 5.5 nm average size, with a PL maximum at 780 nm (c). PL decays of MPA-capped CdTe NCs of increasing sizes (d). Adapted with permission from ref. 13 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM (a) and high resolution TEM (HRTEM) (b) images of 1D CdTe nanocrystals obtained by 8 h storage of 2.4 mM precursor solutions in the presence of TGA and TG at 80 °C. Inset in (a) is their SAED pattern. Corresponding absorption spectrum and a photograph of the solution (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the electric double-layer of aqueous MPA-capped CdTe NCs. The structure consists of: CdTe core, ligand layer, adsorbed layer and diffuse layer. The adsorbed layer corresponds to the contact adsorbed ions, which is only an instantaneous state for a growing NC. The adsorbed cation is predominantly Na+. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 Copyright 2008, WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 10  (a–d) HRTEM images of defective CdTe NCs coarsened via OA and their corresponding simulations (below). (e) Evolution of the CdTe NC sizes as a function of their growth time at different growth temperatures. The solid lines are obtained by fitting the experimental results (dots) with an OA and OR mixed growth model. The dotted and dashed lines represent the fitting by an OA kinetic model and the OR theory, respectively. (f) Zeta potentials of TGA-capped CdTe NCs at different primary particle concentrations. (g) Predicted electrostatic particle–particle interaction energy U(r) between CdTe NCs in solutions with different particle concentrations N0 = 0.3, 0.1 and 0.033 mM at T = 338 K. (h) The OA activation energy (Ea,OA) vs. the electrostatic barrier energy (U(r) max). Adapted with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Absorption (top) and PL (bottom) spectra of size-selected fractions (grey lines) isolated from a crude CdTe NCs colloid (red lines).	 

 	Fig. 12  Significant color differences under UV light after free flow electrophoresis separation (a). PL spectra of the original and separated CdTe NC colloids (b). TEM images of separated CdTe NCs from different fractions show size variations (c). Adapted from ref. 128.	 

 	Fig. 13  Scheme of the one-pot encapsulation of a QD by amphiphilic PAA-ODA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136 Copyright 2011, WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM image of CdTe nanowires. The inset is a corresponding HRTEM image of a nanowire fragment, vectors of the crystal lattice are indicated by arrows. PL spectra of parental CdTe QDs (dashed lines) and the resulting nanowires (solid lines). (b) TEM image of CdTe free-floating films. The inset represents a detailed arrangement of single NCs obtained by HRTEM. PL spectra of the parental CdTe QD colloid and the dispersion of the free-floating sheets. (c) SEM and TEM (inset) images of bundles of twisted CdTe ribbons. Evolution of the PL spectra during the self-organization of NCs into the ribbons. Adapted with permission from ref. 94, 113 and 115 Copyright 2002, 2006, 2010, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM (a), TEM (b), and HRTEM (c) images of the 3D CdTe@Cd-TGA complex hybrid nanostructures. The inset in (c) is photographs of the corresponding dry nanostructures, obtained by a supercritical drying with liquid CO2, under UV lamp excitation. Adapted with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Scheme of the gelation process of 5-HSCH2Tz-capped CdTe and Au NCs (left). TEM image of a fragment of a hybrid CdTe/Au aerogel (CdTe/Au = 1/1.6 wt) (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Reaction steps carried out to obtain microgels covered with CdTe QDs. (b) PL intensity of the P(NIPAM-AA-CdTe) microgels at 620 nm as a function of temperature. Insets are proposed models for the quenching and antiquenching effects. (c) PL intensity measured during repeated heating (40 °C) and cooling (25 °C) cycles of the microgels. Adapted with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic representation of direct (left) and sequential (right) approaches toward combining graphene and QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representations of LbL films containing (a, from top to bottom): only CdTe QDs and PDDA/PSS dielectric spacer, Au NCs and CdTe QDs with no spacer, Au NCs, CdTe QDs, and PDDA/PSS dielectric spacer, which are repeated N times. PL spectrum (b, top) and time resolved PL (b, bottom) of the composite films with N = 2. Adapted with permission from ref. 163 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Scheme of the QD–enzyme–PDDA hybrid formation and corresponding images taken under room and UV light (a) and sensing mechanisms (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Scheme of the fabrication of the CdTe NC–polyurethane composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Preparative procedures for the fabrication of fluorescent CdTe–polystyrene composites. Adapted with permission from ref. 132 Copyright 2003, WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of water-dispersible CdTe NC–polymer composite microspheres via a two step phase transfer (a). TEM images of the microspheres (b). Fluorescence microscope images of the microspheres with orange emission (c). Adapted from ref. 174.	 

 	Fig. 24  Photographs of an aqueous dispersion of CdTe@SiO2 particles under daylight (a) and UV light (b). Silica beads with different distributions of the CdTe crystals: one QD located in the center (c), increasing number of QDs in the center (d, from top to bottom), QDs evenly distributed over the entire beads (e). Adapted with permission from ref. 178 Copyright 2005, WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 25  Formation process of hybrid SiO2-coated CdTe NCs and their subsequent assembly into fibers (left). Microscopy images of fibers under day (top right) and UV light (bottom right). Adapted from ref. 180.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Photographs of vials demonstrating the spontaneous tri-phase transfer of CdTe@mPEG-SH QDs from toluene through water into chloroform with time (from top to bottom) under UV light. (b) Bright field (left panels) and confocal microscopy (right panels) images of live cells acquired after 1 h of incubation in the presence of CdTe@TGA (top) and CdTe@mPEG-SH (bottom) QDs. (c) Simplified scheme of the penetration of the corresponding QDs into a cell. The inset in (c) is a sketch of a CdTe NC capped by mPEG-SH. Adapted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the microwave-assisted synthesis of aqueous CdTe–CdS–ZnS core–shell–shell QDs. Reproduced from ref. 52 Copyright 2008 WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 28  Scheme of the synthetic route for obtaining CdxHg1−xTe NCs. Reproduced from ref. 186 Copyright 2000, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 29  Transmission spectra of H2O and D2O (a), evolution of the PL (b) and absorption spectra (c) of Cd0.95Hg0.05Te NCs as a function of the reflux time, measured in D2O. High-resolution TEM image of Cd0.95Hg0.05Te/TGA NCs (d). Cd/Hg ratio and corresponding composition of the TGA-capped Cd1−xHgxTe particles obtained from the initial feed ratio Cd2+/Hg2+ = 95/5 as a function of the reflux time (e). Adapted from ref. 29.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Structural formula of MeLPPP. (b) Transfer of aqueous TG-capped HgTe NCs to toluene by partial exchange of TG with dodecanethiol. (c) Representation of the MeLPPP/HgTe NC device. (d) Current–voltage (solid line) and integrated electroluminescence (EL) intensity–voltage (squares connected by a dashed line) traces of the MeLPPP/HgTe NC LED. The inset shows EL spectra of the MeLPPP/HgTe NC device taken at different voltages in comparison with a PL spectrum. Reproduced from ref. 195 Copyright 2004 WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image and (b) sketch of the device which combines the concepts of a solid-state nanocrystal-sensitized solar cell and a nanocrystal/polymer-blend solar cell. (c) IPCE of the hybrid device (□), and references containing HgTe-OS (○), HgTe-AS (Δ), and solely the polymer without the NCs (×). Reproduced from ref. 196 Copyright 2006 WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 32  PL (a) and absorption (b) spectra of dodecanethiol-capped HgTe NCs in CCl4. The insets show the size dependence of the PL peaks with the corresponding QYs (a) and illustrate the complete phase transfer for cysteamine used as the initial stabilizer (b). (c) TEM image of ∼9 nm dodecanethiol-capped HgTe NCs emitting at 3 μm. HRTEM images of single crystal (d) and twinned (e) particles. (f) XRD patterns of 3.5 and 7.2 nm HgTe NCs. The line diffraction pattern shows the bulk HgTe (coloradoite) reflexes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  Absorption (a) and PL (b) spectra of PbS NCs of different sizes, obtained by changing the Pb/S molar ratio: (1) 1/0.3, (2) 1/0.4, (3) 1/0.5, (4) 1/0.7. The molar ratio of Pb/TG/DTG was 1/6/2. The measurements were performed 3 days after the sample preparation. Reproduced from ref. 23 Copyright 2004 WILEY VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 
Footnotes
† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.
‡ Present address: Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
