Recent advances in IV–VI semiconductor nanocrystals : synthesis, mechanism, and applications  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA23209C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA23209C
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8104-8130Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent advances in IV–VI semiconductor nanocrystals: synthesis, mechanism, and applications

        
          
            Guanjun 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yingnan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiajia 
            Ning
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yingjin 
            Wei
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Bingbing 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            William W. 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *cd, 
      
        
          
            Guangtian 
            Zou
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Bo 
            Zou
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, China. E-mail: zoubo@jlu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Physics and Technology for Advanced Batteries (Ministry of Education), College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, China
cState Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, China. E-mail: wyu6000@gmail.com
dDepartment of Chemistry and Physics, Louisiana State University Shreveport, LA 71115, USA
Received 
      6th December 2012
    , Accepted 4th February 2013First published on 7th February 2013AbstractThis review is focused on the recent developments of the synthesis, mechanism and applications of IV–VI semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs), including germanium-, tin- and lead-based chalcogenides NCs. First of all, we systematically introduce a series of investigations on the preparation with controllable size and shape via a wide variety of methods. Corresponding growth mechanisms are also discussed. Moreover, the promising potential of IV–VI semiconductor NCs as building blocks with respect to energy, sensors and catalysis is highlighted. For the purpose of enhancing the performance to satisfy the practical applications, tailored nanocomposites by combining noble metals or graphene etc. are further developed. Finally, we present some concluding remarks and perspectives for future developments. We hope this article can provide researchers with the key snapshots of the recent advances and the future challenges, thus achieving a great progress in IV–VI semiconductor NCs.Guanjun XiaoGuanjun Xiao was born in Jilin province, China in 1986 and received his B.S. degree in Physics from Jilin University, China (2008). Since 2008, he has been perusing his Ph.D. degree in Condensed Matter Physics under the supervision of academician Prof. Guangtian Zou and Prof. Bo Zou at State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University, China. His research interests cover the synthesis and mechanism of metal-chalcogenide semiconductor nanocrystals, as well as the investigation of nanocrystals-based electrochemical applications regarding lithium-ion battery, optical switch, photocatalysis, gas sensor and so on.Yingnan WangYingnan Wang obtained his B.S. degree in 2003 from Jilin University, where his Ph.D. degree was awarded in 2010. His dissertation focused on syntheses and assembly of IV–VI and other semiconductor nanocrystals. Afterward, he retained to work as a lecturer at State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University. His research interests include the synthesis, assembly, and optical properties of size-, shape-, and structure-controlled inorganic nanocrystals under high pressure. He is a frequent contributor to ACS Nano, Langmuir, J. Phys. Chem. C, CrystEngComm and other peer-reviewed journals.Jiajia NingJiajia Ning is a postdoctoral researcher at State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics and Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian, China. He received his Ph.D. degree (2010) for material physics and chemistry from State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University. When he was a Ph.D. student, his work was focused on the synthesis, characterization and properties of novel semiconductor nanocrystals, especially for tin-based nanocrystals. His current research interests concentrate on the synthesis of novel semiconductor and metal oxide, as well as their optical, electronic, electrochemical and magnetic properties.William W. YuWilliam W. Yu obtained his BSc and MSc degree from Shandong University and PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests are based on solution dispersible nanomaterials such as quantum dots, metal and metal oxide nanoparticles. He is trying to apply those nanomaterials in alternative energy, biomedicine, and environmental remediation.Guangtian ZouGuangtian Zou is a Professor of State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University, China. He obtained his M.S. degree from Jilin University in the field of solid state physics in 1965. He was elected the academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2001. His research interests concentrate on high-pressure physics and superhard materials.Bo ZouBo Zou is a Professor of State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University, China. He received his Ph.D. degree (2002) in the field of polymer chemistry and physics from Jilin University. In 2001–2002, he studied in Muenster University as a joint training PhD student. From 2003 to 2005, he started his postdoctoral research at Dortmund University, Germany. He was appointed as New Century Excellent Talents in 2006. His scientific interests focus on high-pressure chemistry and functional semiconductor nanocrystals. He has published over 120 papers in peer-reviewed international journals, and their citations exceed 900, giving him an h-index of 18.
1 Introduction
Over the past few decades, IV–VI semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) and their assemblies have attracted considerable attention in various disciplines owing to their unique shape- and size-dependent physical and chemical properties.1–5 Much effort has so far been dedicated to achieving rational control over the morphology, assembly and related applications of the IV–VI nanomaterials.6–9 However, improvement in manipulating the shape, size and size distribution of IV–VI nanomaterials is still a significant challenge in modern materials physics and chemistry.10 Likewise, the current world's demand for energy supply is causing a dramatic escalation of social and political unrest.11,12 All these problems compel us to search for effective routes to build devices that can supply sustainable energy, not only with high efficiency but also environmental awareness.13 One way to relieve the energy crisis is to exploit devices based on renewable energy sources, such as solar cells, thermoelectrics, lithium-ion batteries and so on.14 Aiming at this exploration, researchers have become increasingly engrossed in IV–VI semiconductor NCs-based applications regarding lithium-ion batteries, solar cells, gas sensors and photocatalysis.15–19 In this review, we mainly focus on the recent advances in the research of synthesis, mechanism and applications of IV–VI semiconductor NCs, as well as discussions about challenges and invigorating perspectives for the future development of IV–VI semiconductor NCs-based devices. First of all, we systematically introduce a series of investigations on the preparation and mechanism of various morphologies IV–VI semiconductor NCs, including germanium-, tin- and lead-based chalcogenides by employing diverse methodologies. Since an in-depth understanding and a rational design for the synthesis of high-quality NCs in particular hold the key to determining their performance, it is therefore highly desirable to develop facile and reliable synthetic routes. Secondly, we highlight the IV–VI semiconductor NCs-based device applications chiefly based on the following three aspects: (1) energy storage and conversion such as solar cells, thermoelectrics, lithium-ion batteries and so on; (2) sensors involving gas sensors, photodetectors and strain sensors, etc.; and (3) catalysis covering photodegradation of toxic dyes and catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide. Finally, we discuss the challenges we are facing and future perspectives on the improving physicochemical performances. Despite the virtual advances, great opportunities still exist in the exploitation of novel IV–VI semiconductor NCs-based devices. We hope this review can provide researchers with snapshots of the recent developments and future challenges, thus achieving considerable progress for future nano-engineering applications. We look forward to promoting further developments in the area of IV–VI semiconductor NCs, thus making considerable achievements in the future nano-engineering applications.
2 Size- and shape-controlled synthesis of IV–VI semiconductor NCs
2.1 Preparation and mechanism of germanium-based semiconductor NCs

2.1.1 Germanium oxide NCs. 
In the last decade, germanium oxide (GeO2) has evolved as a promising candidate for applications especially in optoelectronic communications.20,21 The higher bandgap energy (5 eV) makes GeO2 an attractive material for optical devices with luminescent properties.22 Besides, another intriguing property of GeO2 is related to its polymorphism. It is well known that GeO2 exists in three main crystallographic phases, that is tetragonal (rutile-type structure), hexagonal α phase (α-quartz-like structure), and hexagonal β phase (β-quartz-like structure).23 Previous experiments have shown that the stable tetragonal and α phases of GeO2 would transform into the metastable β phase when the temperature rose to above 1049 °C.24 Whereas, nanostructured GeO2 has seldom been highlighted in spite of its potential applications. Most reports on the preparation of GeO2 focus on the one-dimensional (1D) α-structures including GeO2 nanowhiskers synthesized by laser ablation,25 and GeO2 nanowires (NWs) prepared via thermal deposition.26 However, the reported GeO2 NWs and whiskers often form a dense distribution, sometimes with a network structure. For some applications, such as optical waveguides and isolated wires, which do not belong to a network, this would be of great interest due to the high aspect ratio. Hidalgo et al.27 presented that thermal treatment of compacted Ge powder at 600 °C leads to the formation of GeO2 nano- and microwires formed by straight segments and high aspect ratios up to about 2000. Moreover, GeO2 NWs can also be obtained by directly heating metal samples in appropriate oxygen atmospheres, which exhibits simplicity and ease of operation.28 Furthermore, the approach can be extended to fabricate a novel patterned wires of α-GeO2 by means of thermal-oxidation nanostructuring metallic germanium.29Fig. 1 presents a general overview of the morphology of the as-synthesized product that mainly consists of smooth wires with lengths up to several tens of micrometers. A vapor-solid (VS) mechanism followed by a phase transformation or disproportionation process is believed to be responsible for the formation of the patterned wires, one of the typical morphologies of the product. Recently, Liu et al. have successfully synthesized other GeO2 structures, with morphologies similar to hollow walnuts, via a simple one-step process in an emulsion system.30 Gas bubbles associated with the Ostwald ripening process are developed to interpret the formation of hollow nanostructures.
 Fig. 1  SEM image of the synthesized α-GeO2 NWs by thermal-oxidation nanostructuring metallic germanium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2002 John Wiley and Sons. 


2.1.2 Germanium sulfide/selenide NCs. 
Both germanium sulfide (GeS) and selenide (GeSe) are important native p-type layered semiconductors with a an orthorhombic rock-salt structure.31 The values for the narrow band gap of GeS (1.55–1.65 eV) and GeSe (1.1–1.2 eV) overlap well with the solar spectrum, making them the promising candidates for solar cells,32,33 and resistive memory cells.34 GeS can be prepared through chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and laser-assisted CVD methods.35,36 However, these two strategies require some harsh experimental conditions, such as high temperatures, corrosive gases, or long processing time frames. Recently, GeS film has been synthesized through a room-temperature electrochemical deposition process with the use of an ionic liquid as an electrolyte.37 The electrodeposition mechanism follows the induced codeposition of GeCl4 and butanedithiol in ionic liquids generating GeS film. In addition, solution-based synthetic routes represent an attractive alternative for synthesizing the nanoscale crystals due to the morphology-controlled capability and easy preparation of films for device fabrication. In this regard, Schaak et al.38 reported the solution-chemistry route to prepare colloidal GeS in the form of single-crystal nanosheets (NSs). Colloidal GeS NSs were prepared by mixing GeI4 and dodecanethiol at room temperature, followed by heating to 320 °C for ∼24 h. Furthermore, GeSe NSs were obtained with an identical procedure except that trioctylphosphine selenide (TOPSe) was used as the selenium precursor in place of dodecanethiol, as shown in Fig. 2.33 Choi et al.39 achieved comb-like GeSe NCs via an atmospheric vaporization-condensation–recrystallization (VCR) process by using bulk GeSe powder as precursor. The comb-like structures have numerous wire-like fingers on one side of the GeSe body plates (Fig. 3a, b). The GeSe comb geometry is expected to be further applied to semiconducting cantilevers in electro-mechanical sensor or tweezers systems. There are three possible mechanisms that can account for the formation of comb structures, namely surface polarization,40 self catalysis41 and valley-shaped defects.42 Morphology evolution confirms that the best plausible mechanism for the formation of GeSe wire-fingers is valley-shaped defects, which are naturally generated during the growth. Condensates appear on the substrate in the early stage of the VCR process. Then, a GeSe plate grows along [110] direction and the higher density of valley defects at the top surface will further develop into GeSe wire-fingers more frequently, which eventually gives rise to the formation of GeSe comb-like configurations. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are fewer reports about GeSe nanostructures, although their preparation is strongly desired. Such a low popularity of GeSe seems to be related to the lack of facile synthetic routes to form high-quality GeSe nanostructures, prohibiting in-depth studies about their intrinsic electrical and optical/optoelectronic properties.
 Fig. 2  (a) TEM images of GeS and (inset) GeSe NSs. (b) SAED pattern for a polycrystalline sample of GeS NSs. (c) SAED pattern corresponding to a single [100]-oriented GeS NS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 3  Top) Schematic view of the experimental setup for the formation of GeSe comb structures via the vaporization–condensation–recrystallization (VCR) process. a) Representative SEM image of GeSe combs obtained by the VCR process (30 min) on a Si(100) substrate, and b) magnified SEM image of (a). Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. 


2.1.4 Germanium telluride NCs. 
The semiconductor germanium telluride (GeTe) with a band gap of 0.1 eV in the bulk,43 in particular has garnered interest due to its reversible phase-change memory behavior,44 thermoelectrics,45 and other applications. Several reports show that the phase transition and ferroelectric properties of GeTe could be altered systematically with scaling down the material size.46 Previously, faceted GeTe microcrystals with cubic47 and octahedral48 shapes were produced by means of liquid-phase routs. However, the size scales of these materials are far from the quantum regime. Although amorphous GeTe nanoparticles (NPs) were yielded by reacting GeI2-trioctylphosphine (TOP) and TOP-tellurium complex at 250 °C in the presence of an activating alkylthiol,49 the formation of crystalline GeTe of controlled sizes has remained elusive. A low-temperature colloidal synthetic route for the synthesis of crystalline and amorphous GeTe NPs using an amido-germanium precursor was reported.50 The synthesized particles exhibit narrow dispersity at smaller sizes and tend to grow into anisotropic shapes with the increase of reaction time. Alivisatos and coworkers described a simple and highly adaptable synthesis of GeTe NCs of sizes ranging from 8 to 100 nm using colloidal chemistry.51 These NCs have narrow size distributions and exhibit rhombohedral structure characteristic of the polar phase down to particle sizes of less than 10 nm. The study also reveals the surprising stability of polar distortions in freestanding nanometer-sized crystals and provides a platform for developing future fundamental studies of the nature of polar ordering at atomic length scales. Crystalline GeTe NPs were studied via two liquid phase reaction systems, of which a ligand exchange reaction mechanism has been proposed, leading to the formation of well-dispersed GeTe NPs.52 Besides, significant progress has been made in recent years with regard to the synthesis of high-quality GeTe NWs via the metal catalyst mediated vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) method.53–55 As displayed in Fig. 4, the morphology of the synthesized NWs56 with diameters ranging from 50 to 200 nm and lengths up to tens of micrometers is characterized. Au catalysts are routinely observed at the NW ends (Fig. 4a, inset), strongly suggesting that the growth occurs via the VLS mechanism. Despite interests in GeTe, synthesis of high-quality GeTe NCs is relatively unexplored, and little is currently known about its nanoscale properties.
 Fig. 4  (A) Z-contrast TEM image of a straight-helical GeTe NW. The bright spot at the tip corresponds to a high-Z element gold NP; scale bar represents 1 μm. Inset shows a higher magnification Z-contrast image of the Au tip; scale bar represents 150 nm. (B) STEM image of a GeTe NW. (C and D) EDX elemental mapping of Ge (green) and Te (blue) on the same part of the GT NW as shown in part B. Scale bars in parts B to D represent 100 nm. (E) HRTEM image of a single crystalline rhombohedral GeTe NW. The lattice (024) plane with a spacing of 2.15 Å is shown. The NW growth direction is indicated by the white arrow perpendicular to the lattice plane (204); scale bar represents 3 nm. Inset shows a nano-ED pattern taken on the same NW. (F) Low-magnification TEM image of a helical GT NW. A white spot marks the location for HRTEM (top inset) and ED (bottom inset); scale bars represent 1 μm (main panel) and 3 nm (top inset). Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 

2.2 Preparation and mechanism of tin-based semiconductor NCs

2.2.1 Tin oxide NCs. 
Tin oxides have two oxidation states: stannous oxide (SnO) and stannic oxide (SnO2). Therein, rutile-type SnO2, an n-type semiconductor with a wide band gap (Eg = 3.6 eV), has been extensively studied and shown promise in sensors,57–61 lithium ion batteries,62–65 sensitized solar cells,66–69 and catalytic applications.70 Since the properties of nanoscale materials are strongly dependent on their size and shape, it is extremely desirable to be able to achieve size and morphology control during synthesis. Over the past few years, various SnO2 nanostructures, such as 0D NPs71–74 and hollow spheres75,76; 1D NRs,77–81 NWs82,83 and nanotubes (NTs);84–87 2D nanoplates (NPLs)88 and nanobelts (NBs);89–92 as well as 3D hierarchical architectures,93–96 have been prepared by thermal evaporation processes,97–100 hydrothermal methods101–105 and a self assembly routes.106–108 Nevertheless, some of these reported approaches require either high energy consumption or relatively tedious procedures. The template-engaged method is an efficient method for the fabrication of highly ordered well-distributed 1D nanomaterials, especially for NTs and NWs,109–111 but it is inevitable undergo complicated removal procedures.112 In addition, SnO2 NTs were also achieved via a one-pot redox route at room temperature involving the Kirkendall effect.113 In contrast to conventional strategies, the templates in these methods not only serve as the structure-directing scaffold, but also involve themselves as the consumable reactant for shell construction. In this regard, synthesis based on sacrificial templates is inherently advantageous because it generally requires no additional surface functionalization and shell formation is guaranteed by spontaneous chemical reaction. Besides, most works in mesoporous structures have focused on spherical shape, and the resulting hollow spheres are generally single-shelled.114,115 However, the design of hollow NPs with other shapes are still challenging, partly because of the paucity of nonspherical templates and difficulty in forming a uniform coating around surfaces with large variation in curvature.116,117 Chang and coworkers demonstrated a successful fabrication of hollow SnO2 hemispheres with wall thickness from 100 to 800 nm by choosing poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) as sacrificial templates.118 During the calcination step, the PMMA microspheres decomposed while the inorganic SnO2 overlayer remained nearly intact, resulting in SnO2 hemispherical replicates of the PMMA microsphere arrays. Furthermore, Lou et al.119 reported a general route for the preparation of nonspherical SnO2 hollow nanococoons with a size of around 300 nm by templating against α-Fe2O3 crystals under hydrothermal conditions (Fig. 5). Moreover, further endeavours have been made to synthesize double-walled ellipsoidal hollow SnO2 nanococoons by repeated shell-by-shell deposition of SnO2 on silica templates.120
 Fig. 5  a) Overview FESEM image of SnO2 nanococoons; b) several nanococoons with uniform dimensions; c) a cracked nanococoon showing the exposed interior; d) low-magnification TEM image of SnO2 nanococoons; e) enlarged image of several nanococoons; f) a nanococoon with well-defined interior and compact thin shell; g) SAED pattern of SnO2 nanococoons; h) the shell structure of the nanococoons; i) high-resolution TEM image of a nanococoon (scale bars: a) 1 mm; b) 200 nm; c) 50 nm; d) 500 nm; e) 200 nm; f) 50 nm; h) 20 nm; i) 5 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 
Although the reports on the native p-type121 SnO are much fewer in contrast to those on n-type SnO2, it has gained considerable attention because of its potential applications in the fields of photoswitches122 and lithium ions batteries.123 Moreover, SnO can serve as a sacrificial template to prepare SnO2 micro- or nanostructures since it can be readily oxidized to SnO2 at elevated temperatures.124,125 The latest discovery of superconductivity in polycrystalline SnO under high pressure makes this oxide much more fascinating.126 However, the preparation of SnO is relatively difficult because disproportionation or oxidation of SnO can readily occur. It has been reported that SnO diskettes and nanoribbons were obtained by thermal-evaporation127–129 which requires undesired high temperature. Leite et al.130 succeeded in the synthesis of SnO dendrites by a self-catalytic VLS process. Square and round single crystalline SnO platelets were prepared in a sonication route at room temperature.131 Therein, the synergistic effect of tri-sodium citrate and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) is suggested to be essential in tuning the growth rates along different crystallographic planes of tetragonal SnO. Moreover, submillimeter-sized single crystals of SnO exhibiting well-defined symmetric shapes of four-armed star and square plate were successfully synthesized through a hydrothermal reaction.132 Recently, Zou et al. developed a simple nonaqueous route to synthesize NP-attached SnO nanoflowers (NFs)133via decomposition of an intermediate product Sn6O4(OH)4 which was used as a precursor phase.134–136 Sn6O4(OH)4 decomposed to SnO NFs in the presence of an excessive Sn cation (Fig. 6). The average diameters of NFs-9, NFs-13 and NFs-17 are 50, 70 and 110 nm, respectively, indicating that the overall size of these NFs is extremely sensitive to the H2O amount. Furthermore, interesting hierarchical SnO NCs have been achieved by injecting excessive amounts of water, as described in Fig. 7.137 Layerplate-, nest- and stepwise-bipyramid-like nanostructures could be obtained with the increase of water volume. Meanwhile, other morphologies including SnO NPLs, NSs and nanorings appeared as reaction temperature increased.138 The ligand interaction and protection mechanism are proposed to explain the formation of resulting products.
 Fig. 6  TEM images of NF-9 (a and d), NF-13 (b and e), and NF-17 (c and f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 7  SEM images of SnO nanostructures: (a and b) layer-platelike nanostructures; (c and d) nest-like nanostructures; (e and f) stepwise-bipyramid-like nanostructures, according to 20, 30, and 40 μL of water, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 


2.2.2 Tin sulfide NCs. 
Tin sulfide is one of the most important compounds displaying a series of phases, such as SnS, SnS2, Sn2S3 and Sn3S4 due to the versatile coordinating characteristics of tin and sulfur.139,140 In the present review, we mainly focus on the development of SnS and SnS2, which are of particular interest because of their unique structures and attractive properties in photovoltaics,141–143 lithium ion batteries,144–146 photocatalysis,147 and electrochemical capacitors.148 In this regard, SnS nanostructures with various morphologies have been synthesized through different methods.149–151 For instance, epitaxial SnS nanodisks were electrodeposited on a Au(100) single crystal via a cathodic deposition approach.152 Chaudhuri et al.153 reported the synthesis of crystalline SnS NWs over tin metal foils by a simple surfactant-assisted approach. A flake splitting followed by a top-growth mechanism has been elucidated for the formation of the NWs. A solution-phase method was employed to synthesize SnS NPs, but with a relatively larger size.154,155 Eychmüller et al. demonstrated a colloidal chemistry approach to obtain SnS NPs less than 10 nm in size, yet an air sensitive organometallic complex Sn[N(SiCH3)2]2 was employed as a tin precursor.156 Thus Tilley et al.157 developed a method to prepare SnS NPs of only a few nanometers in size using ionic starting materials SnBr2 and Na2S in the presence of various ethanolamines in ethylene glycol. Du et al. proposed a facile way to synthesize SnS hollow NPs by combining laser ablation and chemical etching.158 Moreover, Zou et al. introduced an environmentally benign tin precursor, Sn6O4(OH)4, to synthesize SnS NCs with controllable sizes and shapes.159 However, the synthesis of SnS NSs with well-defined morphologies is still a great challenge.160 Wang et al.161 reported the synthesis of ultralarge single crystal SnS rectangular NSs via the pyrolysis of a single-source precursor. Fig. 8 clearly illustrates that the yielded SnS products were uniform rectangular NSs in a size of 7000 × 3000 × 20 nm. Most reports on the synthesis of SnS NCs are limited to the thermodynamically preferred orthorhombic phase.162,163 A successful preparation of polyhedral SnS that crystallizes in the metastable zinc-blende structure has been developed.164,165
 Fig. 8  Typical SEM images (a) and (b), TEM and HRTEM images (c) and (d) of as-prepared SnS NSs. Inset in (c) is the SAED pattern of a NS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
While SnS2 which has a layered CdI2-type structure, composed of tin atoms sandwiched between two layers of hexagonally disposed close-packed sulfur atoms.166 Nanostructured SnS2 are potential candidates for photocatalysts,167,168 gas sensor169 and lithium ion batteries170,171 due to their unique properties such as larger surface area, greater accessibility to electrolyte, faster transportation of Li+, and accelerated phase transitions.172 Up to now, remarkable progress has been achieved in fabricating various SnS2 nanostructures including NSs,173 NWs,174 NPLs175,176 and hierarchical structures.177 SnS2 hollow structures have also been successfully fabricated via a one-step hydrothermal process.178 Tremel et al.179 reported the synthesis of fullerene- and NT-like SnS2 NPs by vapor transport, whereas an irritative CS2 was introduced. SnS2 NTs were also synthesized by the VLS technique utilizing Bi as a liquid catalyst.180 Zheng et al. developed a hydrothermal method for the fabrication of SnS2 NPLs.181 The heterogeneous nucleation played a key role in the formation of plate-like products, accompanied by Ostwald ripening.


2.2.3 Tin selenide NCs. 
As we know, tin selenides have two stoichiometric phases in the form of SnSe and SnSe2.182,183 SnSe2 NPLs and NPs were obtained by a mechanochemical approach, but with a relatively broad size distribution.184 However, it is yet quite limited with regard to the solution phase synthesis of SnSe2 NCs that has a hexagonal phase and layered structural motif.185,186 While SnSe adopts features of an orthorhombic layered structure that facilitates two-dimensional growth.187,188 SnSe is also emerging as an important narrow bandgap semiconductor that is of interest in a wide range of potential applications, from memory switching devices, anode materials for rechargeable lithium batteries, to solution-processed solar cells.189,190 Despite this promise, progress toward the fabrication of high-quality SnSe NCs is comparatively scarce. Several groups have reported on the colloidal synthesis of SnSe nanomaterials by using TOPSe.191,192 Although this method has been widely applied, phosphines are expensive, toxic, and sensitive to air. Thus, alternative synthetic methods without the use of phosphines have been sought. Qian et al.193 reported the polyol synthesis of SnSe NWs with a relatively large mean diameter of 50 nm. Zhao et al.194 developed a template route to synthesize SnSe NWs, but only polycrystalline products were obtained after a long reaction time, and a tedious process was required to remove the hard template. Brutchey et al.183 presented the solution-phase synthesis of SnSe elongated NCs and demonstrated their utility in solar cells, yet robust controlling over size, shape, and surface chemistry remains a significant hurdle. Jang et al. reported the preparation of SnSe nanocolumns through an oriented attachment of plates via tin precursor chemistry strategy.195 Furthermore, Zou et al. reported a size- and shape- controlled solution synthesis of SnSe NCs by using an environmental friendly Sn6O4(OH)4 and a new selenium precursor – selenourea.196 As depicted in Fig. 9, size-controlled cubic and spherical SnSe NCs with good single-crystalline nature were obtained by adjusting the synthetic parameters.
 Fig. 9  HRTEM images and scheme models of SnSe nanocrystals produced under different reaction conditions. Reaction temperature of 110 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 1:2 (a), 110 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 1:1 (b), 110 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 2:1 (c), 140 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 1:2 (d), 140 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 1:1 (e), 140 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 2:1 (f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.4 Tin telluride NCs. 
Tin telluride (SnTe) is an important narrow band gap semiconductor with a direct band gap of 0.18 eV in bulk material.197 It is worth noting that SnTe has the cubic rock-salt crystal structure, which is different from other IV–VI layered crystal structures (SnS and SnSe).198 It can be applied in mid-IR detectors and thermoelectric devices.199,200 Recently, SnTe has been proposed as a topological insulator that is a new class of quantum matter with an insulating bulk gap and gapless edges or surface states.201,202 Thereby, much more effort needs to be paid to improve the synthetic routes of high-quality SnTe NCs with different shapes. Tilley et al. demonstrated a solution-phase synthesis of size-controlled SnTe NPs.203 Star-shaped agglomerates of SnTe NCs have also been obtained by adopting the nanocrystalline-activated tin metal as a preparative tool reacting with elemental tellurium.204 Rod-shaped SnTe NCs were produced using a continuous hot-injection microreactor.205 Schaak et al. described an diffusion mediated anion exchange pathway that converts colloidal SnSe NSs to porous single-crystal SnTe NSs.206 This chemical transformation reaction provides chemical and crystallographic guidelines for rationally designing secondary nanostructural features into similar architectures. Another successful synthesis of highly monodispersed SnTe NCs with tunable sizes between 4.5 and 15 nm was based on the reaction of Sn[N(SiMe3)2]2 and TOP-tellurium complex in oleylamine.197 Therein, rapid injection plays an important role in dividing the nucleation and growth process which is crucial in producing a narrow size distribution.207 The as-synthesized SnTe NCs have uniform, nearly spherical shapes and can self-assemble into long-range ordered superlattices (Fig. 10). However, it is necessary to avoid the use of toxic, expensive and unstable organic tin precursors to decrease the experimental cost and complexity of the experiment. To this end, Zou et al. introduced Sn6O4(OH)4 as an inexpensive and environmentally benign tin precursor for the synthesis of SnTe NCs.198 By means of adjusting ligands with different lengths of alkyl chains, SnTe NPs with controllable sizes were obtained; besides, single-crystal SnTe NWs were formed via oriented attachment mechanism.
 Fig. 10  (a, b) TEM images of a superlattice of 10.2 nm SnTe NCs capped with oleic acid. (c, d) Representative high-resolution TEM images of SnTe NCs viewed along [001] and [111] zone axes, correspondingly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 

2.3 Preparation and mechanism of lead-based semiconductor NCs
Among lead chalcogenides, studies on lead oxides were rarely reported although they are of great potential in some special fields.208–210 It is reported that PbO NWs, NPLs and microspheres were obtained by using a porous alumina template.211 Recently, Zou et al. presented a facile one-pot approach to synthesize PbO NWs and NBs by using their corresponding bulk materials as precursors.212 Therein, the dissolution–recrystallization process was proposed to play the dominated contribution to the nanosized oxides crystals. In contrast, the lead-based chalcogenides semiconductor materials (PbS, PbSe and PbTe) have been extensively studied in the last few decades owing to their unique intrinsic properties.213–215 As the direct gap semiconductors in the bulk phase, they have a cubic (rock-salt) crystal structure and narrow band gaps (0.28–0.46 eV). Their high dielectric constants (ε∝ = 18.0–24.0) as well as the small electron and hole effective masses (<0.1m*; m*: free electron mass) create excitons with a relatively large effective Bohr radii (20–46 nm).10 Consequently, their optical properties could be evaluated in the limit of extremely strong quantum confinement. Moreover, near-infrared emitting and high nonlinearities of lead chalcogenides NCs render them excellent materials for solar cells,216–218 field-effect transistors,219 and biological applications (imaging and labeling).220,221 Especially, it is more appealing because of the recent discovery of superconducting features in Pb/PbSe core/shell NCs.222 So far, various morphologies of lead chalcogenides NCs have been obtained through different methods. PbTe NWs have been synthesized in a hydrothermal reaction between lead foil and tellurium powder.223 Interestingly, Jin et al.224,225 demonstrated novel pine-like PbS architectures via CVD (Fig. 11a, d). Through these curious structures, a fundamentally different NW growth mechanism that is driven by axial screw dislocations is proposed (Fig. 11b, c). In addition, solution-based synthetic methods can now achieve precise control over the NC size and shape through the manipulation of synthetic variables, such as reaction temperature, reaction time, reaction solvent, and the ratio of capping ligand to precursors. For lead-based chalcogenides NCs, the hot-injection solution approach in organic solvents has been applied, and the first example was the synthesis of PbSe colloidal NCs by Murray et al. in 2001.226 In the following year, Krauss, Wehrenberg and Hollingsworth et al. simultaneously reported similar methods to prepare PbSe NCs.227–229 In these works, a high boiling point ether (diphenylether) was applied as the solvent, combination with lead oleate (prepared in situ from lead acetate and oleic acid), and then TOPSe, as another precursor, was injected into hot reaction solvent to grow PbSe NCs. The size of the NCs could be tuned within a large range (3.5–15 nm) by controlling the reaction temperature and time. The obtained monodispersed NCs exhibited size-dependent absorption spectra after size-selective precipitation. Up to 2004, the synthetic scheme was modified by using noncoordinating solvent octadecene instead of diphenylether.230 The obtained products exhibit narrow size dispersions without the necessity of fractionation procedures such as size-selective precipitation. The first absorption peak ranges from 1100 to 2520 nm by monitoring different sizes NCs. For PbS NCs, in 2003, the synthesis about it by the hot-injection method was first published by Hines and Scholes.231 In the paper, octadecene and oleic acid were used as the solvent and capping ligand, respectively. Meanwhile PbO and expensive (TMS)2S were accordingly employed as the Pb and S precursors. Corresponding absorption spectra spanning from 800 to 1800 nm as a function of the NCs size have been observed. Concerning PbTe, similar to PbSe, the same procedures have been successfully adopted to prepare PbTe NCs.232,233
 Fig. 11  “Pine tree” NWs of PbS (a) due to the combination of two NW growth mechanisms. Screw dislocation driven NW growth of the trunk NW (b) combined with branch VLS driven growth (c) combine to produce this morphology. Upright PbS pine tree NW forests grow on silicon substrates (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Zou et al. also achieved some successes in the fabrication of lead-based chalcogenides NCs.234Fig. 12 shows several TEM images of PbS, PbSe and PbTe NCs obtained via different synthetic protocols. All these NCs exhibit narrow size distributions (5–8%) without any further size-selective process. Depending on the reaction temperature and time, lead-based IV–VI semiconductor NCs often undergo a shape evolution, from nanosphere/polyhedron to nanocube. Because the growth of higher surface energy (111) plane along the <111> direction was faster than that of the lower surface energy (100) face along the <100> direction for the rock salt structure of IV–VI NCs. This would favor the growth of the (111) facets, resulting in the formation of cubic-like nanostructures with the lowest total surface energy.235-237
 Fig. 12  TEM images of size- and shape-tunable Pb-based chalcogenide NCs and their assembled superlattices. All scale bars represent 50 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Compared with II–VI semiconductor NCs, synthesis of lead-based NCs in organic solvents could be achieved in a wide range of reaction conditions, such as large intervals of reaction temperature and time, various reaction solvents, material sources and capping ligands. Taking the case of preparing PbS NCs as a sample, using fatty amines and acids as reaction solvents and capping ligand, monodispersed PbS NCs and NFs could be synthesized at room temperature in less than 3 s and kept sizes and shapes stable with increasing time.238 Similarly, depending on the reaction parameters, different shapes of lead chalcogenides NCs can be obtained, such as stars,239–242 wires,243–245 sheets,246,247 and boxes.248
However, in order to prepare and use various devices fabricated with these NCs in many application fields, there are several important and pivotal factors that should be noted.

2.3.1 Stability. 
Infrared-emitting lead-based IV–VI semiconductor NCs are of increasing interest in both fundamental research and technical application. However, the practical applications are considerably limited by their poor stability. Recently, many groups have studied the instability of lead chalcogenides NCs induced by the thermodynamically unstable surface. Dissolution of PbSe NCs by destructive oxidation was previously presented by Stouwdam and co-workers.249 They found that PbSe NCs exhibited a decrease in their diameter of about 0.3 nm after being stored in ambient conditions for two months. A similar result was reported by Moreels et al., who found an effective diameter reduction of about 0.5 nm under ambient conditions.250 Furthermore, UV irradiation can cause damage to the devices of solar cell fabricated through lead-based IV–VI semiconductor NCs under sun's rays. For example, Yu et al. found that with the help of UV irradiation, oxidation could completely release the oleic acid ligand and damage PbSe NCs in the solution within a shorter period.251 The original black PbSe NCs solution gradually turned into a clear colorless solution with air contact and UV irradiation for 12 days, which could be attributed to the destructive oxidation and dissolution. Obviously, this instable identity greatly restricts the practical applications of lead chalcogenides NCs. In order to resolve this problem, several feasible plans have been proposed by scientists. Hollingsworth and colleagues utilized this instability to controllably synthesize PbSe/CdSe core/shell NCs.252 The obtained core/shell NCs were stable against fading and spectral shifting, and could further undergo additional ZnS shell growth to produce PbSe/CdSe/ZnS NCs. This makes it possible to employ PbSe NCs as stable and biocompatible near-infrared optical labels. Yu et al. also found that PbSe NCs under air exposure exhibited instability dependent on particle concentrations, particle sizes, and light conditions. In addition, PbSe NCs displayed strong size-dependence in their temperature-induced band gap variation. However, under the protection of inert nitrogen gas, the absorption and photoluminescence properties of the PbSe NCs were preserved even with UV irradiation or upon being heated at mild temperatures.251


2.3.2 The area of NCs superlattices. 
For device applications based on lead chalcogenides NCs, such as solar cells and FETs, the primary task is to prepare NCs superlattices on some substrates. Murray and coworkers synthesized monodispersed PbTe NCs to provide quantum dot building blocks for the design of novel materials in n-type FETs with high conductivity.233 Similarly, the assembled PbSe NCs superlattices also displayed excellent properties in FETs and solar cells.219,253 However, the area of obtained periodic NCs superlattices is too small to satisfy the practical applications. In 2008, Talapin et al. clearly pointed out that “To date, the largest superlattices grown in this way have had sub-millimeter dimensions. Is it possible to form much larger ordered nanocrystal assemblies and to transfer them to different substrates? For example, is it possible to deposit a single layer of nanocrystals over an entire 12-in wafer? These are important questions, directly related to the fabrication of nanocrystal-based devices.”254 In addition, previous methods for preparing NCs superlattices usually contained complex and lengthy procedures, triggering the demand for relatively simple approaches to assemble NCs superlattices. Recently, Zou et al. found that when size- and shape-tunable lead chalcogenide NCs were synthesized and subsequently cooled down to room temperature naturally, NCs can easily and quickly interact and form orderly arranged superlattices, which was attributed to solvent evaporation-induced ligand-ligand van der Waals interaction and entropy driving process, as illustrated in Fig. 13.234,255 This powerful capability of self-assembling of NCs provides a significant and extensive direction in the engineering of various morphology-tunable and large-scale single or binary NCs superlattices.
 Fig. 13  A schematic illustration of the assembly process of NPs via different heat treatments. Reprinted with permission from ref. 255. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 

3 Applications and challenges of IV–VI semiconductor NCs
3.1 Energy storage and conversion
3.1.1 Lithium-ion batteries
Lithium-ion batteries are one of the big successes of modern materials electrochemistry and have a great potential for applications in electric and hybrid vehicles due to their high energy density, high voltage, and long lifespan. The search for alternative anode materials and an efficient way of synthesizing them in nanoscale architecture is an ongoing pursuit in the lithium battery research.256 Tin-based IV–VI semiconductor NCs are a class of excellent anode materials for lithium batteries because Li and Sn can form reversible alloys.257 Different morphologies show diverse effects on the final electrochemical performances. Zou et al. demonstrated that stepwise-bipyramid-like SnO nanostructures showed the better properties compared with layer-plate-like and nest-like SnO architectures, probably because these stepwise-bipyramid-like structures have shorter path lengths for Li+ transport and more sufficient contact with conductive carbon during preparation of the electrode.137Fig. 14 presents first discharge-charge curves and cycling behaviors of three different hierarchical architectures, which indicates that stepwise-bipyramid-like structures have the highest first discharge capacity of 535.3 mA h g−1 compared to that of layer-plate-like (460 mA h g−1) and nest-like structure (342 mA h g−1), respectively. Furthermore, the Coulombic efficiency of stepwise-bipyramid-like structure could achieve 55.1% and the discharge capacity reaches 82.1% after 10 cycles. In particular, nanosized electrode materials, including Sn-based ones, possess diverse advantages in storage performance due to the increased number of electrochemically-active sites.258 Thus SnO NFs are promising candidates as anode materials for lithium ion rechargeable batteries.133 Upon the charge–discharge cycleability, the initial charge capacity reached about 1350 mA h g−1 and then quickly decayed to ∼900 mA h g−1. The highest discharge capacity was about 800 mA h g−1, close to the reported theoretical value (875 mA h g−1).259 This high capacity might result from the stable flower-like SnO nanostructure with high surface area. After 20 cycles, the capacity could be retained at 450 mA h g−1. Particularly, different chemical stoichiometry also affects the resulting electrochemical properties. Various morphologies of tetravalent SnO2, particularly for 1D and hollow nanostructures,260,261 have also been extensively studied in lithium batteries due to their unique features that are different from divalent SnO. Lou et al.114 recently reported that SnO2 hollow nanospheres show the highest discharge capacity of 1571 mA h g−1 relative to solid spheres and NPs, as shown in Fig. 15. A possible reason for the hollow nanospheres having a higher lithium storage capacity is because of the internal void space, which probably helps to store more lithium.262 Meanwhile, the 2D NPLs and NSs can also be feasible alternative electrode materials for the next generation lithium ion batteries.176,263 Such layered nanostructures would provide some structural flexibility which would be able to buffer the volume strain induced during the charge–discharge process, thus leading to enhanced lithium storage properties. However, the large volume variation during the lithium insertion process may cause abrupt capacity fading upon extended cycling, hindering the practical application of this metal oxide. Thus, development of the electrode materials for optimized storage capacity and stability remains a great challenge. The discovery of graphene (GN) has triggered a gold rush for worldwide material scientists to search for its potential applications due to its excellent electronic conductivity, mechanical properties and high surface area.264–267 A considerable enhancement can be expected from the incorporation of inorganic nanomaterials into GN, which could not only limit the aggregation of GN, but also boost the lithium storage capacity.268–273 For example, Honma et al.274 demonstrated an enhanced cycling performance and lithium storage capacity of GN–SnO2 nanoporous structure with a large amount of void spaces. It was manifested that the obtained GN–SnO2 electrode exhibited an improved reversible capacity (810 mA h g−1) as well as superior cycling performance (70% retention after 30 cycles) in comparison with that of the bare SnO2 electrode. It may account for the fact that GN NSs are homogeneously distributed between SnO2 NPs. Such a dimensional confinement of the SnO2 NPs by the surrounding GN limits the volume expansion upon lithium insertion, therefore the stress formed during the process of lithium insertion is avoided. Meanwhile, the developed nanopores between SnO2 and GN could be served as buffered spaces during charge–discharge, resulting in the superior cycling performance. In addition, hybrid nanostructures with carbon or noble metal NPs, etc. were also anticipated to exhibit enhanced lithium-ion batteries performance due to the beneficial synergistic effect.275–280 Very recently, Cao et al.281 proposed that the binder strategy is an effective means to improve cycling performance and rate capability for high-capacity electrode materials with large volume variations.
 Fig. 14  (a) First discharge-charge curves of layer-plate-like nanostructures, nest-like nanostructures, and stepwise-bipyramid-like SnO nanostructures between 0.02 and 3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ at a constant current density of 100 mAh g−1. (b) Cycling behavior for electrodes of layer-plate-like nanostructures, nest-like nanostructures, and stepwise-bipyramid-like SnO nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 15  Comparative lithium storage properties of the as-prepared SnO2 hollow nanospheres, SnO2 solid spheres, and SnO2 NPs: (A) Charge-discharge profiles, and (B) Cycling performance. All of the measurements were conducted at a current rate of 160 mA g−1 with a voltage window of 0.01–2.0 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 

3.1.2 Solar cells. 
Solar cells that convert the energy of sunlight into electricity by photovoltaic effect could play an important role in a global sustainable energy solution owing to the abundance of the source.282–284 Importantly, colloidal nanostructures of IV–VI semiconductors have the potential to substantially decrease the fabrication cost of solar cells because of their ability to be solution processed. Hierarchical SnO2 octahedra and hollow SnO2 spheres have been reported to exhibit about 6% photovoltaic performance for dye-sensitized solar cells due to the unique shape-dependent properties.285,286 Meanwhile, it has been demonstrated that, for photovoltaic applications, high-aspect-ratio NWs have the potential to enhance electron transport owing to their direct electron pathway in contrast to NPs.287 Yue et al.288 demonstrated that doped p–n homojunction single-crystalline SnS NW arrays had a high short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) of 7.64 mA cm−2 and energy conversion efficiency of 1.95% under AM1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. Recently, Zhang et al.191 have shown that the maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)/SnSe NWs hybrid solar cells exhibits an improvement by 174% in comparison with the neat P3HT device, while the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) remain almost comparable. However, these devices fail to harvest the infrared (IR) spectral region which contains as much as half of the energy of the solar spectrum. As a result, the optimal bandgaps for solar cells should lie beyond 850 nm.289 Therefore, lead-based IV–VI semiconductors are poised to address the urgent need for low-cost, high-efficiency IR photovoltaics due to their narrow band gaps (0.28–0.46 eV) and high carrier mobility.290,291 For example, Law and co-workers designed the back-contact Schottky solar cells by using the active layer of 5.1 nm PbSe NCs.253 These thin NC cells achieved an external quantum efficiency (EQE) and active layer internal quantum efficiency as high as 60 ± 5% and 80 ± 7%, respectively. Alivisatos et al.218 achieved a high device efficiency of 4.57% by fine-tuning the PbSe NP size. As shown in Fig. 16a, the device configuration is a simple ITO/PEDOT/PbSe/aluminum Schottky junction structure with PbSe NCs being the only photoactive material. The J–V curve for the champion device (η = 4.57%), made with PbSe particles grown at 140 °C and exhibiting a first exciton absorption peak of 1.6 eV, reveals Voc = 470 mV, Jsc = 17.2 mA cm−2, and FF = 57% (Fig. 16b). Besides the improving PCE of solar cells, FF is also an important indicator to evaluate the quality of solar cells. Recently, Bulovic et al.217 fabricated a PbS colloidal NCs-based solar cell using a fullerene derivative as the electron-transporting layer, which exhibits a FF and Voc as high as 62% and 0.47 V, respectively. The results further suggest that the use of the bilayer structure and the oxidation treatment can enhance the shunt resistance of the device by suppressing the charge recombination process, resulting in a high Voc and FF. Likewise, surface treatments have proved to be a powerful tool to provide a reduction in the recombination and to control the band alignment, thereby promoting major breakthroughs in the design and development of solar cells.292,293 Recent works have demonstrated a promising possibility for the use of lead-based IV–VI semiconductor NCs as p–n junctions in solar cells.294 However, so far this architecture has not been applied to achieve high-sensitivity photodetection. In order to further elevate PCE, in 2012, Klimov et al.215 fabricated two types of p–n junction photodiodes in which the photoactive p-layer is made from PbS NCs while the transparent n-layer is fabricated from wide bandgap oxides (ZnO or TiO2). This p–n architecture could significantly reduce the dark current without reducing EQE, which reaches values of up to ∼80%. Moreover, Sargent et al.295 reported a new solar cell architecture by employing infrared-bandgap size-effect-tuned PbS NCs, that overcomes the limitations of past photovoltaics. In that work, the resultant depleted-heterojunction solar cells provide a high efficiency of 5.1% with Jsc, Voc and FF approaching 16 mA cm−2, 0.53 V and 60%, respectively, under AM1.5G illumination.
 Fig. 16  (a) Fabrication of the PbSe Schottky solar cells. (b) The J–V curve for the champion device (η = 4.57%), made with particles grown at 140 °C and exhibiting a first exciton absorption peak of 1.6 eV (measured in solution). Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.3 Supercapacitors. 
Supercapacitors have recently been attracting more attention for the purpose of energy storage than either regular batteries or the typical types of capacitors due to their high power density, moderate energy density, safe operation, and long cycle life. Generally, there are two types of supercapacitors in terms of their operation mechanisms. One is the electrical double layer capacitor, which stores energy via an electrostatic process. The other type of supercapacitor is so called pseudocapacitor, which is based on the rapid redox reactions of the chemical species present in the electrode. The electrochemical performance of the supercapacitors is strongly associated with the intercalation and deintercalation of cations, such as H+, Li+, Na+, and K+ in electrolyte solutions in applied electric fields. It is known that IV–VI semiconductor nanostructures are excellent candidates for supercapacitors, because of their large surface area and prominent capillary pathways, which endows them good charge storage ability and high specific capacitance.296 Jayalakshmi et al.148 identified semiconducting SnS NRs to be an excellent supercapacitor electrode material with robust stability of over 1000 cycles. Recently, Ma et al.297 demonstrated that SnO2/MnO2 core/shell NWs were very promising in supercapacitors due to their low cost, environmentally friendly characteristics, and excellent capacitive performance. The MnO2 shells of the core/shell NWs allow fast and reversible faradic reactions, and facilitate a short ion diffusion path. The SnO2 cores of the core/shell NWs possess a high conductivity and provide a direct path for electron transport. The SnO2/MnO2 core/shell NWs create channels for effective transport within the electrolyte. Fig. 17a displays the CV curves of SnO2/MnO2 core/shell NWs at various scanning rates of 2, 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100 mV s−1 in a 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. It is noteworthy that the core SnO2 NWs make negligible contribution to the capacitance due to the coated MnO2 shell. The charge-storing process that occurs through faradic reactions is inhibited when the charge is stored at the surface or near the surface of the MnO2 shells. The specific capacitance of SnO2 NWs grown on the stainless steel substrate is as low as 0.5 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 scan rate (Fig. 17b). Obviously, specific capacitance declined gradually with the increase of scanning rate. The specific capacitance values are 637 and 329 F g−1 at scanning rates of 2 and 100 mV s−1, respectively (Fig. 17c). However, the SnO2/MnO2 core/shell NWs still retain a high specific capacitance at a high scanning rate. It is meaningful to evaluate the capacitive behavior of SnO2/MnO2 composites at various temperatures. As shown in Fig. 17d, it clearly shows that the specific capacitance and rate capability experience ascents with the increase of temperature, which may be attributed to the decrease of the effective internal resistance. Otherwise, the combination of Sn-based nanocomposites with GN or carbon can further enhance the supercapacitors properties, exhibiting excellent specific capacitance and cycle performance at high charge/discharge current.298,299 Very recently, Wang et al.300 introduced ternary nanocomposites of GN/SnO2/polypyrrole (GSP) as supercapacitor electrode materials. An enhanced specific capacitance (616 F g−1) of GSP is obtained at 1 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO4 compared with GN/SnO2 (80.2 F g−1) and polypyrrole (523 F g−1). The GSP electrode shows better cycle stability and no obvious decay after 1000 galvanostatic cycles at 1 A g−1. Its specific power density and energy density can reach 9973.26 W kg−1, and 19.4 W h kg−1, respectively. Nevertheless, as promising electrode materials for supercapacitors, the development of Sn-based hybrid nanostructures is still in its early stage and requires further research.
 Fig. 17  (a) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of the SnO2/MnO2 composites at different scan rates in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. (b) CV curve of SnO2 NWs (705 μg) grown on the stainless steel substrate at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. (c) Plotted curve of the variation in the specific capacitance of the SnO2/MnO2 composites as a function of the scan rate. (d) Specific capacitance obtained at different scan rates at 3, 27, and 55 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 297. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.4 Field-effect transistors. 
The field-effect transistor (FET) is a transistor that uses an electric field to control the shape and hence the conductivity of one type of charge carriers in a semiconductor material. In 2005, Talapin et al.219 reported on PbSe NC solids for n- and p-channel thin film FETs with current modulations of about 103 to 104, and current density approaching 3 × 104 amperes per square centimeter. The FETs of assembled PbSe NCs thin film not only improve the interparticle spacing, electronic coupling and doping to passivate electronic traps, but also allow reversible switching between n- and p-transport, providing options for complementary metal oxide semiconductor circuits and enabling a range of low-cost, large-area electronic, optoelectronic, thermoelectric and sensing applications. Moreover, it is reported that the films of assembled PbTe NC superlattices would enhance the conductivity by ∼9–10 orders of magnitude while preserving their quantum dot nature.233 Talapin and co-workers developed the device fabrication combining lead chacogenides with noble metals, such as Au or Pt.301,302 For example, field-effect devices with channels assembled from arrays of Au–PbS core-shell nanostructures demonstrate strong p-type doping which is attributed to an intra-particle charge transfer complex. And the electron mobility of gate-controlled charge transport through arrays of FePt–PbS and FePt–PbSe core-shell nanostructures are 0.01 cm2/(V s) and 0.08 cm2/(V s), respectively. Recently, Ha and coworkers303 reported a stretchable FET array of suspended SnO2 NWs, demonstrating excellent performance with high field-effect mobilities of ∼102 cm2 V−1 s−1, current on/off ratios of ∼106, and subthreshold swing values of ∼0.5 V decade−1. Notably, such device performance did not deteriorate when the devices were stretched up to 40%, demonstrating the robustness of stretchable NW devices. Wang et al.304 also fabricated SnO2 NW transistors gated by solution-processed chitosan-based proton conductors, which shows a low operation voltage of ∼1.2 V, a high on/off ratio of 2.3 × 104, a high mobility of 128 cm2 V−1 s−1, and a small subthreshold swing of 90 mV per decade. Such NW FET transistors are promising for portable nanosensors and bioelectronics. However, the undoped NW samples typically exhibit low carrier concentrations and are very sensitive to changes in ambient conditions.305 To address this problem, Ta-doped SnO2 NWs have been developed to serve as a FET device that exhibits field-effect mobility exceeding 100 cm2 V−1 s.306 Nevertheless, previous reports were predominantly focused on individual NW devices which are not representative in the scale desirable for large scale devices.307 Very recently, Liu et al.308 explored a Sb doped SnO2 NW-network-FET that shows an improved electrical property. Fig. 18a–d depict the typical output IDS–VGS and IDS–VDS curves of pure SnO2 and different Sb-doped SnO2 nanonets, respectively. Evidently, the fabricated FETs exhibit a strong gate-dependent behavior, which is typical of an n-type semiconductor. Furthermore, the magnitude of IDS increases with the increase of Sb doping. However, the gate voltage effect becomes less dominant with the increase of dopant concentration, as revealed by the increasing of current or the lesser increment in output current with increasing VGS. The large increase of free electron carrier density caused by Sb doping is responsible for the reduction of the gate effect. The electron mobilities for three samples are estimated to be about 11.5, 6.6 and 4.8 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively.
 Fig. 18  Contact method characterizations. (a) Typical output IDS–VGS characteristic curves. Inset shows the diagram of the nanonets FET configuration. Typical output IDS–VDS characteristic curves of (b) pure SnO2, (c) 1% Sb doping, and (d) 1.5% Sb doping. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.5 Phase-change memory materials. 
Phase-change materials (PCMs) are some of the most promising materials for data-storage applications, and offer a great potential to be an emerging non-volatile optical and electronic memory.44 They are now being actively investigated as a medium for universal solid-state memory that may replace dynamic and flash random access memories.309 Furthermore, reducing the dimensions of the phase-change line to the nanometer scale would improve the performance in terms of speed and power consumption.310 As we know, the key feature of phase-change random access memory (PRAM) is the reversible phase transition of the PCM, caused by an electrical pulse, between the crystalline (low resistivity, SET) and amorphous (high resistivity, RESET) states. A major obstacle in achieving high-density PRAM devices is the large writing currents required to generate sufficient thermal energy for a phase change, particularly during the crystal-to-amorphous phase transition, since a high current is required for melting. Recently, Milliron et al.311 reported the first solution-deposited, electrically switchable phase change memory device, employing SnSe2 as the PCM. However, this device had very limited endurance characteristics lasting only up to one or two switching cycles. Agarwal et al.312 demonstrated that GeTe NWs open interesting opportunities for applications in highly scalable memory devices, as shown in Fig. 19. I–V curves indicate that the obtained GeTe NW memory device initially displays ohmic behavior with a resistance of ∼1.2 kΩ (Fig. 19a), attributed to their original crystalline “SET” state. Upon the application of a current pulse (100 ns; 1.4 mA), the NW undergoes memory switching behavior leading to increased resistance (RESET state), until saturation value of ∼4.0 MΩ is reached (Fig. 19b). As the applied voltage reaches a threshold voltage of 0.75 V, the current rises sharply owing to the recrystallization of the NW (low resistive SET state), thereby recovering its original I–V characteristics. This phenomenon demonstrates that the NW undergoes reversible phase transition from amorphous (RESET) to crystalline (SET) state. Therefore, reactive syntheses involving ternary or higher compositions with GeTe as the foundational compound quickly become a huge concern. Ge2Sb2Te5 NWs have been reported for use as rewritable optical data storage media, because the fast reversible phase change between metastable crystalline and amorphous phases can be induced in a favorable energy range.313,314 Lee et al.315 demonstrated a voltage-induced multi-level resistive switching employing a solid electrolyte memory composed of Cu-doped GeTe. The results reveal that a multi-bit resistive memory with excellent scalability is achievable, and will serve as important guidelines for establishing a complete understanding of the switching mechanism. Apart from the beneficial effects of composition, solid–solid interfaces also play a substantial role in determining the properties of PCMs, particularly at the nanoscale where specific surface area becomes large.316 Simpson and coworkers have introduced GeTe/Sb2Te3 interfacial phase-change memory data storage devices with reduced switching energies, improved write–erase cycle lifetimes and faster switching speeds.317
 Fig. 19  GeTe NW (diameter of 100 nm) memory switching characteristics. (a) Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the NW at different physical states: as-synthesized single crystalline (triangles), amorphous (RESET, squares), and crystalline (SET). Key device parameters such as threshold voltage, RESET, SET, and programming regions are marked. (b) Resistance change of the GeTe NW memory device as a function of writing pulses of varying current amplitude (programming curves). The READ, SET, and RESET regions are clearly separated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2006 American Institute of Physics. 

3.2 Sensors

3.2.1 Gas sensors. 
Gas sensors have significant applications in detecting toxic, pollutant and industrial gases. It has been revealed that the gas sensing properties of Sn-based IV–VI semiconductors strongly depend on its physical properties, such as crystal structure, surface areas, grain size, oxygen adsorption quantities, etc.318–320 Considering that, enormous efforts have been devoted to improving the sensor properties. In general, the decrease of the crystal size will increase the surface area, which will bring more active sites, thus enhancing sensitivities.321–323 Meanwhile, the surface-engineering strategy, such as selectively exposing high-energy facets at the surface of sensing materials could improve sensing performance because of the high chemical activity.324,325 In this regard, Han et al.326 demonstrated that octahedral SnO2 particles with exposed high-energy {221} facets exhibit far better gas-sensing performance over ethanol than those mainly having exposed {110} facets. Fig. 20 shows sensing sensitivity curves of the three kinds of SnO2 particles as a function of ethanol concentration. Obviously, the sensing activity is proportional to the percentage of {221} facets among the exposed surfaces. Otherwise, hollow nanostructures, particularly decorated with additional metal oxides showed enhanced gas sensing properties.327–330 Lee et al.331 reported ultra-fast responding and recovering C2H5OH sensing behaviors (≤5 s) of NiO-functionalized SnO2 hollow spheres. This doping concept might provide an alternative route for improving the gas sensing properties. Recently, Yu et al.332 synthesized SnO2 NTs loaded with Ag2O NPs that show excellent gas sensing behaviors. Fig. 21 displays the ethanol and butanone sensing behaviors of Ag2O-doped SnO2 NTs and Ag@C@SnO2 nanocables, respectively. The dynamic transients of the sensors indicate their ultra-fast response (1–2 s) and ultra-fast recovery (2–4 s) towards ethanol, and response (1–4 s) and recovery (4–5 s) towards butanone. Both the tubular structures of SnO2 and catalytic effect of Ag2O will facilitate surface reactions involving adsorption, dissociation, and the ionization of oxygen. Furthermore, complex nanostructures with multiple functional compositions, such as combining C-coated and GN-based nanomaterials with noble metals (Au, Pt etc.) were also expected to exhibit improved sensing performance.333–335 Very recently, Wu et al.336 presented that core–shell α-Fe2O3@SnO2/Au (FSA) hybrid structures demonstrated enhanced gas sensing performances such as higher sensitivity and faster response-recovery. However, most sensors require high temperatures for their operation (usually above 200 °C), which increases power consumption of the device. As yet, room-temperature gas sensors remain challenging because of their poor sensitivity at a low temperature.337
 Fig. 20  a) Sensitivity curves of SnO2 particles of different shapes as a function of ethanol concentration. R = resistance. b)–d) Morphological models for the octahedral, elongated–octahedral, and lance-shaped SnO2 particles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 326. Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 21  a, b) Dynamic ethanol and c, d) butanone sensing transients for the 15.9% Ag2O-doped SnO2 NTs and Ag@C@SnO2 nanocables at 250 °C. e) Illustration of how ultra-response and ultra-recover can be realized in tubular structure. Sensing materials: (a) and (c): 15.9% Ag2O-doped SnO2 NTs; (b) and (d): Ag@C@SnO2 nanocables prepared after calcination in air at 400 °C for 1 h. Gas-in concentration in (b) was the same as that in (a); Gas-in concentration in (d) was the same as that in (c). Response and recovery time were defined as the time needed to reach 90% of total signal change, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 


3.2.2 Photodetectors. 
Photodetectors or optical switches are indispensable elements in imaging techniques, lightwave communications, and possibly in future memory storage and optoelectronic circuits.338–340 Over the past decade, IV–VI NCs have stimulated a great deal of interest for their potential in photodetectors.341–343 In 2010, Choi et al.39 developed the photo-switching property of GeSe combs that show a quite prompt photo-response. Recently, SnS nanoribbons,344 SnS2 architectures345 and SnSe nanocolumns195 have been explored as visible-light photodetectors. However, many practical applications are highly desirable in the infrared for telecommunications, thermal imaging and biological imaging.346,347 As a narrow-bandgap semiconductor (Eg = 0.41 eV), PbS quantum dots348 were proved to be promising candidates for infrared photodetectors with an internal quantum efficiency of 3%, a ratio of photocurrent to dark current of 630, and a maximum responsivity of 3.1 × 10−3 A W−1. Meanwhile, the visible-blind UV-light photodetectors also show wide concerns as binary switches in various practical applications.349–351 Fang et al.352 fabricated an individual SnO2 NW-based ultraviolet-light sensor that exhibits excellent light selectivity and stability. The results show that under illumination by light, the photocurrent gradually increases with decreasing wavelength of the light source. Nevertheless, enhancing the photoresponse property remains an important aspect for researchers. Xie et al.353 reported that the sensitivity of single SnO2 NW-based devices was remarkably improved by surface functionalization with ZnO NPs, as depicted in Fig. 22. The typical I–V curves indicate that the resistance (2.86 × 106 Ω) of ZnO-functionalized SnO2 NW is only 1/10 of that (2.83 × 107 Ω) of SnO2 NW without functionalization (Fig. 22a). The increase of the conductance should originate from the change of surface structure and defects in SnO2 NWs. Notably, the response sensitivity (S = Rdark/RUV) of the single SnO2 NW functionalized with ZnO NPs is 1.50, which is almost 2 times higher than that of the initial SnO2 NW-based sensor (Fig. 22b). However, apart from the sensitivity, stability and reproducibility, the photocurrent grain is also an essential parameter for the photoresponse devices. Many previous efforts are mainly focused on seeking an effective alternate for semiconductor NCs, but there is little attention to the electrode materials. Very recently, Chen et al.354 reported the first attempt at single SnO2 NW photodetectors made with ferromagnetic nickel electrodes. Surprisingly, as the nickel electrodes were magnetized, the photocurrent gain was greatly enhanced by up to 20 times compared with that of the devices without magnetized electrodes. The underlying mechanism enabling the enhanced gain is attributed to both oxygen-related hole trapping and surface band-bending effects induced by the magnetized ferromagnetic electrodes. These findings represent a new way for the creation of high-efficiency optoelectronic devices based on the coupling between ferromagnetic materials and nanostructured semiconductors.
 Fig. 22  (a) I–V curves of the single SnO2 NW-based device before and after ZnO deposition. The inset is the corresponding SEM image of the single SnO2 NW device after ZnO deposition. The deposition thickness of ZnO is about 10 nm. (b) Photoconductance response curves of the single SnO2 NW-based sensor before and after surface functionalization with ZnO NPs. The wavelength of UV light in our studies is 365 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 353. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.3 Sensors in other special fields. 
Although extensive endeavours have been devoted to gas- and photo-sensing properties, sensors in other special fields are becoming an attractive topic. It is reported that SnO2 NB FETs have been explored as stable pH sensors with a linear pH dependence for the channel conductance in the “on” state.355 Xie and coworkers introduced high-sensitivity humidity sensor based on a single SnO2 NW which exhibits linear response to relative humidity in air from a wide range of environments at room temperature.356 Besides, SnO2 nanodendrites have been used as amperometric hydrogen peroxide sensors that shows a wide linear range, a good limit of detection, a high sensitivity, and good reproducibility.357 Particularly, Masuda et al.358 have recently demonstrated that SnO2 NSs with dye-labeled prostate specific antigen will be used for cancer sensor based on photoelectric conversion effect and molecular recognition. Nowadays, flexible and stretchable electronics is becoming one of the most interesting research fields owing to its novel properties and wide applications in many fields.359,360 Very recently, Liu et al.361 developed strain sensors and switches based on reversibly controlling the semiconducting and insulating states of SnO2 microrods, as shown in Fig. 23. It can be seen that as the strain was increased to above 0.12%, the resistivity increased sharply and reached the instrumental limit (∼2 × 107 Ωcm) at a critical strain of ∼0.14% (Fig. 23a). This state is referred to as the insulating state, and is maintained even when the strain is reduced to zero. Interestingly, the insulating state induced by a mechanical strain can be changed back to the semiconducting state by applying an appropriately large V (Fig. 23b). Switching from the insulating state to the semiconducting state occurred at a certain threshold voltage (VTh) of 6.5 ± 0.2 V. This semiconducting state was maintained even when the voltage was reduced to zero or an opposite voltage was applied. The corresponding I–V curves of the device demonstrate the controllable, nonvolatile, and reversible resistance states of the SnO2 microrod under the application of stress and voltage (inset of Fig. 23b). These results offer potential applications in future flexible electronics.
 Fig. 23  Electrical properties of SnO2 microrods. (a) Resistivity of SnO2 microrod device to mechanical strain at V = 2.0 V. The strain is increased from 0 to 0.186% (pink hexagons), then reduced to 0 (blue open hexagons). The inset shows a schematic illustration of the bent SnO2 device. (b) Resistivity of SnO2 microrod device to applied voltage. The applied voltage is increased from 0 to 10 V (blue open hexagons), then reduced to 0 V (pink hexagons). The inset shows the I–V curves of the SnO2 device in both the insulating and semiconducting states. Reprinted with permission from ref. 361. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 

3.3 Catalysis

3.3.1 Photocatalysis. 
Environmental problems such as organic pollutants and toxic water pollutants provide an impetus for fundamental and applied research in the environmental area. Photocatalysis offers great potential to remedy the effects of environmental pollution because of its simple and exhaustive decomposition process.362,363 Meanwhile, semiconductor NPs possess a higher surface-to-volume ratio than their bulk counterparts, and thus can greatly increase the density of active sites available for adsorption and catalysis.364–366 Sun et al.367 reported photochemical synthesis of nanoporous SnO2 that exhibited higher photocatalytic activity than commercial TiO2 (P25) for degrading methyl orange (MO) solution under the irradiation of a xenon lamp. As we know, the intrinsic properties of materials are determined by not only their chemical composition but also their shapes, sizes and structures.368,369 Meanwhile, it is highly desirable for the photocatalytic system to harness visible light, which accounts for a large proportion of the solar spectrum and artificial light sources.370,371 Recently, Du et al.147 reported that hexagonal SnS2 NPLs have a good performance of photocatalytic degradation on rhodamine B (RhB), and the decolorizing rate can reach 97.7% after being irradiated for 70 min by solar light. Li and coworkers372 also demonstrated that V-shaped SnO2 bipods could serve as an effective visible-light-driven photocatalyst, as shown in Fig. 24. The temporal evolution of the spectral changes accompanying the photodegradation of RhB over SnO2 bipods is depicted in Fig. 24a. Initially, it showed a major absorption band of RhB at 553 nm, while a gradual decrease in absorption with a shift of the band to shorter wavelengths was observed with irradiation by visible light. In addition, an enhanced photocatalytic activity for V-shaped SnO2 bipods was presented in contrast to SnO2 NR and P25, respectively (Fig. 24b). However, enhancing the photocatalytic efficiency to meet the practical application requirements is still a challenge because of the bottleneck of poor quantum yield caused by the rapid recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes.373 Researchers have found that the heterostructural nanocatalysts and GN-based photocatalytic composites could remarkably enhance the photocatalytic activity by extending the photoresponding range and increasing the charge separation efficiency.374–376 In this regard, remarkable progress has been achieved. For example, Patra et al.377 demonstrated that SnO2/CdS heterostructures show an improved photocatalytic degradation of Congo red dye up to 97% compared with that of SnO2 (only 20%). Meanwhile, Wang et al.378 reported that branched SnO2/α-Fe2O3 nanoheterostructures exhibited excellent photocatalytic abilities towards methylene blue (MB), remarkably superior to their α-Fe2O3 precursors, mainly owing to the effective electron–hole separation at the SnO2/α-Fe2O3 interfaces. Furthermore, it is also believed that a more efficient interparticle electron transfer should occur between the two intimately mixed components owing to high degree of contact between the heterophase NPs, thus improving the photocatalytic performance.379 Recently, Hu et al.380 developed a controlled strategy to synthesize SnO2 decorated SnS2 NSs with enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity. Fig. 25a shows the UV-vis spectra of MO solution after simulated sunlight irradiation for various times in the presence of SnS2@SnO2 NCs. During the degradation process, the dye was faded in a stepwise manner with the color of the solution changing from an initial orange to colorless (Fig. 25a, inset). It is noteworthy that the degradation percentage of MO can reach nearly 96% in the presence of SnS2@SnO2, much higher than that of P25 (only 20%), after being visible-light irradiated for 45 min (Fig. 25b). Nevertheless, as a photocatalyst, stability and the ability not to create any second pollution still merit researchers' attention.
 Fig. 24  a) UV/vis absorption spectral changes of an aqueous solution of RhB over the SnO2 bipods electrode as a function of irradiation time (1–4 represent 0, 30, 60, and 170 min, respectively). b) Absorption changes (λ = 553 nm) in the photocatalytic degradation of RhB over SnO2 NRs, V-shaped bipods, and P25 electrodes (C/C0 is the normalized concentration of the solution). Reprinted with permission from ref. 372. Copyright 2006 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 25  (A) The absorbance spectra changes of MO solution in the presence of SnS2@SnO2–2 NCs under visible-light (420 nm < λ < 800 nm) irradiation. (B) Photocatalytic decoloration of MO (10 mg L−1) over (a) SnO2, (b) Degussa P-25, (c) SnS2, (d) SnS2@SnO2-0.5, (e) SnS2@SnO2-1 and (f) SnS2@SnO2-2 under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 380. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.3.2 Catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide (CO). 
The catalytic oxidation of CO has attracted considerable attention because of its wide applications in exhaust abatement for CO2 lasers, automotive emission control, and CO preferential oxidation for proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Meanwhile, manoeuvring the shape and thus the facets of semiconductor NCs has long been considered as a powerful means for tailoring their properties and enhancing their performance in a wide variety of applications including catalysis and sensors.381 It has been recently reported that the SnO2 NPs with exposed high-energy facets, such as {221} or {111}, exhibit an enhanced catalytic activity for the oxidation of CO, due to their high chemical activity resulting from unsaturated coordination of surface atoms.324 Furthermore, it is anticipated that SnO2 has the potential as a support of catalyst for the CO oxidation, because of its large number of oxygen vacancies that are believed to facilitate the catalytic process.382 Xie et al.383 have demonstrated that the Au@SnO2 core/shell supported catalysts will promote the catalytic oxidation of CO. Fig. 26 shows catalytic performance of the different samples oxidizing at 850 °C for 1 h. Obviously, for the Au@SnO2 core/shell catalyst, the temperature for half conversion is about 230 °C, 100 °C lower than that for the non-encapsulated Au–SnO2 catalyst. In particular, it kept stable even if the sample was heated to a high temperature of 850 °C. The high and efficient CO catalytic activity was ascribed to the synergetic confinement effect of Au@SnO2 core/shell nanostructures.
 Fig. 26  Catalytic performance of the different samples oxidizing at 850 °C for 1 h. The activities of the catalysts for the oxidation of CO were measured in a continuous-flow reactor. The reaction gas, a mixture composition of 10% CO in air (from Air Liquid, 99.99% purity), was fed to a 50 mg catalyst at a rate of 70 mL min−1, which corresponds to a space velocity of 84000 cm3 h−1 gcat−1. (A) Well-encapsulated Au@SnO2 core/shell structure as catalyst. (B) Non-encapsulated Au–SnO2 structure as catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 383. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 

4 Summary and outlook
In conclusion, we reviewed the recent efforts made towards achieving synthetic control over the size, morphology and related applications of IV–VI semiconductor NCs involving germanium-, tin-, and lead-based chalcogenides. Since the development of preparation methods and in-depth understanding are essential to ensure the rational design and precise control of nanostructured materials, herein, a number of physical and chemical techniques, for example, hydrothermal method, CVD, template-direct approach and sol–gel strategy etc. have been employed to realize the above-mentioned goals. Moreover, corresponding growth mechanisms, such as oriented attachment, Ostwald ripening, Au–catalytic VLS process and so on, were introduced to interpret the formation of diverse shapes of as-prepared nanomaterials. Finally, we summarised the recent applications that take advantage of IV–VI semiconductor nanostructures. In the present review, we mainly focused on the following three aspects: (1) energy storage and conversion such as solar cells, thermoelectrics, lithium-ion batteries and so on; (2) sensors involving gas sensors, photodetectors and strain sensors, etc.; and (3) catalysis covering photodegradation of toxic dyes and catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide. Notwithstanding the importance of IV–VI semiconductor NCs, the performance remains limited by their specialized morphology, stability and water-solubility for practical applications. The increased activities due to the nanosize-effects showed significant drawbacks in the stability of materials because the thermodynamically unstable surface can induce the aggregation of materials. Moreover, significant device improvements will be made by removing the insulating ligands protecting the NCs and replacing them with small molecules, such as hydrazine or metal chalcogenide clusters.384,385 This will allow much improved interparticle coupling and render them water-soluble to realize practical applications. Furthermore, coupling IV–VI NCs with GN or noble metal nanostructures, as well as suitable semiconductors would also open up new pathways to high-performance NCs-based devices due to the synergetic effects. However, further effort is still needed to maximize their roles. Taking GN nanocomposite as an example, the improvement of the adhesion between GN and inorganic components is especially important for applications that involve charge transfer processes. As a poor interfacial contact will destroy the synergetic effects, and thus diminish the performance of the nanocomposites. In spite of the continuous advancements, great opportunities still exist in the exploitation of novel IV–VI semiconductor NCs devices. We look forward to promoting further developments in this exciting area of research, thus achieving considerable progress in the future nanotechnology applications.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by RFDP (No. 20120061130006), NSFC (Nos. 91227202, 51102108 and 51025206), the National Basic Research Program of China (No. 2011CB808200) and Changjiang Scholar and Innovative Research Team in University (No. IRT1132).
Notes and references
J. Ba, J. Polleux, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2509–2512 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Antunez, J. J. Buckley and R. L. Brutchey, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2399–2411 RSC .
M. J. Polking, J. J. Urban, D. J. Milliron, H. Zheng, E. Chan, M. A. Caldwell, S. Raoux, C. F. Kisielowski, J. W. Ager, R. Ramesh and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1147–1152 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luther, H. Zheng, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16851–16857 CrossRef CAS .
S. Acharya, U. K. Gautam, T. Sasaki, Y. Bando, Y. Golan and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4594–4595 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12527–12535 CrossRef CAS .
R. Demir-Cakan, Y.-S. Hu, M. Antonietti, J. Maier and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1227–1229 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, Q. Wang, Q. Zhang and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2772–2778 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. C. Zeng and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 645–649 CrossRef CAS .
F. W. Wise, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 773–780 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Z. Yang, Y.-N. Zhao and L.-N. He, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 545–567 RSC .
M. M. Khin, S. Nair, J. b. Veluru, M. Rajendiran and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8075–8109 CAS .
D. Pant, A. Singh, G. Van Bogaert, S. Irving Olsen, P. Singh Nigam, L. Diels and K. Vanbroekhoven, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1248–1263 RSC .
Y.-G. Guo, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878–2887 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, A. Eychmüller, S. G. Hickey and S. V. Kershaw, Small, 2007, 3, 536–557 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, G. Du, Q. Meng, Z. Guo, X. Yu, Z. Chen, T. Guo and R. Zeng, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1834–1840 RSC .
A. Tricoli, M. Graf and S. E. Pratsinis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1969–1976 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Shao, X. Li, L. Zhang, H. Xue, C. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7920–7925 CAS .
V. V. Atuchin, T. A. Gavrilova, S. A. Gromilov, V. G. Kostrovsky, L. D. Pokrovsky, I. B. Troitskaia, R. S. Vemuri, G. Carbajal-Franco and C. V. Ramana, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 1829–1832 CAS .
L. Armelao, F. Heigl, P.-S. G. Kim, R. A. Rosenberg, T. Z. Regier and T.-K. Sham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14163–14169 CAS .
P. Hidalgo, E. Liberti, Y. Rodríguez-Lazcano, B. Méndez and J. Piqueras, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17200–17205 CAS .
T. Bielz, S. Soisuwan, R. Kaindl, R. Tessadri, D. M. Toebbens, B. Kloetzer and S. Penner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9706–9712 CAS .
J. F. Sarver and F. A. Hummel, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1960, 43, 336–336 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, N. Wang, I. Bello, C. Lee and S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 3824 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hidalgo, B. Méndez and J. Piqueras, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2521 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hidalgo, B. Méndez and J. Piqueras, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 155203 CrossRef .
H. Dang, J. Wang and S. Fan, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 738–741 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Hu, Q. Li, X. M. Meng, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1396–1399 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou, B. Liu, Q. Li, Z. Li, B. Liu, W. Wu, Q. Zhao, Y. Sui, D. Li, B. Zou, T. Cui, G. Zou and H.-K. Mao, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 979–984 RSC .
A. Onodera, I. Sakamoto, Y. Fujii, N. Moˆri and S. Sugai, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1997, 56, 7935–7941 CrossRef CAS .
L. Makinistian and E. Albanesi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 045206 CrossRef .
H. W. Hillhouse and M. C. Beard, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 245–259 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bräuhaus, C. Schindler, U. Böttger and R. Waser, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 1223–1226 CrossRef .
C. Huang, D. Hewak and J. Badding, Opt. Express, 2004, 12, 2501–2506 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Kalebaila, D. G. Georgiev and S. L. Brock, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2006, 352, 232–240 CrossRef CAS .
S. Murugesan, P. Kearns and K. J. Stevenson, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 5513–5517 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Vaughn, R. J. Patel, M. A. Hickner and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15170–15172 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Yoon, H. J. Song and H. C. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2164–2167 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, X. Y. Kong and J. M. Zuo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 185502 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bierman, Y. K. A. Lau and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2907–2912 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wu, C. R. Elsass, A. Abare, M. Mack, S. Keller, P. M. Petroff, S. P. DenBaars, J. S. Speck and S. J. Rosner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 692–694 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Bahl and K. L. Chopra, J. Appl. Phys., 1970, 41, 2196–2212 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wuttig and N. Yamada, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 824–832 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 105–114 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, J. Wu, Q. Gu and H. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8148–8149 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Buck, I. T. Sines and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3236–3240 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Tuan and B. A. Korgel, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2555–2561 CAS .
M. A. Caldwell, S. Raoux, R. Y. Wang, H. S. Philip Wong and D. J. Milliron, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1285–1291 RSC .
I. U. Arachchige, R. Soriano, C. D. Malliakas, S. A. Ivanov and M. C. Kanatzidis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2737–2743 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Polking, H. Zheng, R. Ramesh and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2044–2047 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Kim, G. Gupta and J. Kim, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 288–292 RSC .
M.-K. Lee, T. G. Kim, B.-K. Ju and Y.-M. Sung, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 938–941 CAS .
A. T. Jennings, Y. Jung, J. Engel and R. Agarwal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6898–6901 CAS .
X. Sun, B. Yu, G. Ng and M. Meyyappan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2421–2425 CAS .
S. Meister, H. Peng, K. McIlwrath, K. Jarausch, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1514–1517 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chao, X. Xu, H. Huang, Z. Liu, B. Liang, X. Wang, S. Ran, D. Chen and G. Shen, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 6654–6658 RSC .
A. Kolmakov, Y. Zhang, G. Cheng and M. Moskovits, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 997–1000 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sun, W. Zhao, Y. Cao, Y. Guan, Y. Sun and G. Lu, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3718–3724 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Jiang and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 16176–16177 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, J. Du, Y. Luan, H. Zou, G. Zhuang and Z. Li, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3404–3410 RSC .
H. Kim and J. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 771–775 RSC .
J. S. Chen, L. A. Archer and X. Wen Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9912–9924 RSC .
M.-S. Park, Y.-M. Kang, G.-X. Wang, S.-X. Dou and H.-K. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 455–461 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Li, X. Huang, R. Ding, Y. Hu, J. Jiang and L. Liao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1859–1864 RSC .
J. Liu, T. Luo, S. Mouli T, F. Meng, B. Sun, M. Li and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 472–474 RSC .
M. A. Hossain, J. R. Jennings, Z. Y. Koh and Q. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3172–3181 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Wang, M. Guo, M. Zhang and X.-D. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 4024–4027 RSC .
S. Gubbala, H. B. Russell, H. Shah, B. Deb, J. Jasinski, H. Rypkema and M. K. Sunkara, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1302–1309 CAS .
L. Shi and H. Lin, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 18718–18722 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhuang, F. Huang, Z. Lin and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16228–16234 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Ho, A. S. W. Wong and G. W. Ho, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 732–736 CAS .
V. Juttukonda, R. L. Paddock, J. E. Raymond, D. Denomme, A. E. Richardson, L. E. Slusher and B. D. Fahlman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 420–421 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singhal, B. Sanyal and A. K. Tyagi, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 903–910 RSC .
H. Wang, B. Li, J. Gao, M. Tang, H. Feng, J. Li and L. Guo, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5177–5181 RSC .
J. Chen, C. Li, F. Xu, W. Lei, L. Sun and Y. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7384–7387 RSC .
B. Cheng, J. M. Russell, Shi, L. Zhang and E. T. Samulski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5972–5973 CrossRef CAS .
A. Birkel, F. Reuter, D. Koll, S. Frank, R. Branscheid, M. Panthofer, E. Rentschler and W. Tremel, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2487–2493 RSC .
D. F. Zhang, L. D. Sun, J. L. Yin and C. H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1022–1025 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres and M. Graetzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3666–3670 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. He, T. H. Wu, C. L. Hsin, K. M. Li, L. J. Chen, Y. L. Chueh, L. J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, Small, 2006, 2, 116–120 CrossRef .
R. Müller, F. Hernandez-Ramirez, H. Shen, H. Du, W. Mader and S. Mathur, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4028–4035 CrossRef .
S. Mathur and S. Barth, Small, 2007, 3, 2070–2075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Y. Lee and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3899–3903 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, N. Du, H. Zhang, J. Yu and D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11302–11305 CAS .
C. Jiang, G. Zhang, Y. Wu, L. Li and K. Shi, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 2739–2747 RSC .
Y. Liu and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 57–62 CrossRef .
H. Ohgi, T. Maeda, E. Hosono, S. Fujihara and H. Imai, Cryst. Growth Des., 2005, 5, 1079–1083 CAS .
Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 1947–1949 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, S. Yang, H. Liu, J. Gong, H. Huang, X. Zhao, R. Zhang and Y. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6180–6181 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1466–1467 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Dong and M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 353–356 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Q. He, X. Zhu, D. Pan, X. Deng and Z. Jiao, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3169–3176 RSC .
H. Uchiyama, Y. Shirai and H. Kozuka, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4839–4843 RSC .
J. Huang, X. Xu, C. Gu, S. Yao, Y. Sun and J. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3283–3290 RSC .
Y. Chen, J. Ma, L. Yu, Q. Li and T. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 6170–6172 RSC .
A. Chen, X. Peng, K. Koczkur and B. Miller, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1964–1965 RSC .
J. Q. Sun, J. S. Wang, X. C. Wu, G. S. Zhang, J. Y. Wei, S. Q. Zhang, H. Li and D. R. Chen, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 1584–1587 CAS .
K.-M. Li, Y.-J. Li, M.-Y. Lu, C.-I. Kuo and L.-J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2453–2456 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Z. Chen, R. Zou and Y. Sun, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 89–93 RSC .
J. S. Chen, M. F. Ng, H. B. Wu, L. Zhang and X. W. Lou, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5133–5136 RSC .
H. B. Wu, J. S. Chen, X. W. Lou and H. H. Hng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24605–24610 CAS .
C. Yu, J. C. Yu, F. Wang, H. Wen and Y. Tang, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 341–343 RSC .
M. Fang, X. Tan, B. Cheng and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1320–1324 RSC .
H. Wang, F. Fu, F. Zhang, H.-E. Wang, S. V. Kershaw, J. Xu, S.-G. Sun and A. L. Rogach, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2140–2148 RSC .
X. M. Yin, C. C. Li, M. Zhang, Q. Y. Hao, S. Liu, L. B. Chen and T. H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8084–8088 CAS .
G. Shang, J. Wu, M. Huang, J. Lin, Z. Lan, Y. Huang and L. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20140–20145 CAS .
N. Wang, X. Cao and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12616–12622 CAS .
L. Shi, Y. Xu and Q. Li, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2104–2108 RSC .
Q. Kuang, T. Xu, Z.-X. Xie, S.-C. Lin, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1019–1023 RSC .
J. Ye, H. Zhang, R. Yang, X. Li and L. Qi, Small, 2010, 6, 296–306 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987–4019 CrossRef CAS .
N. Du, H. Zhang, B. Chen, X. Ma and D. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3028–3030 RSC .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen, G. Qi, X. Duan, Z. Wang, E. P. Giannelis, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 21–23 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, C. M. Li, W. W. Zhou, Q. Y. Yan, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 280–285 RSC .
H. G. Yang and H. C. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5930–5933 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4738–4741 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-E. Chang, D.-Y. Youn, G. Ankonina, D.-J. Yang, H.-G. Kim, A. Rothschild and I.-D. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4019–4021 RSC .
Z. Wang, Z. C. Wang, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 7561–7567 CAS .
X. W. Lou, C. Yuan and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3328–3332 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, D.-H. Lee, S.-H. Kim, B. Yang, S. Maeng and S.-W. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11050–11055 CAS .
K. Sakaushi, Y. Oaki, H. Uchiyama, E. Hosono, H. Zhou and H. Imai, Small, 2010, 6, 776–781 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Cherian, M. V. Reddy, S. C. Haur and B. V. R. Chowdari, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3118–3123 RSC .
Z. R. Dai, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8673–8680 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Xu, H. Yang, C.-S. Lee and A. L. Rogach, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10597–10601 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Forthaus, K. Sengupta, O. Heyer, N. E. Christensen, A. Svane, K. Syassen, D. I. Khomskii, T. Lorenz and M. M. Abd-Elmeguid, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 157001 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Dai, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 9–24 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and Z. W. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1029–1032 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Dai, J. L. Gole, J. D. Stout and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1274–1279 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Orlandi, E. R. Leite, R. Aguiar, J. Bettini and E. Longo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6621–6625 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, S. Xie, H. Li, S. Yan, K. Fan and M. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2005, 507–509 RSC .
Y. Q. Guo, R. Q. Tan, X. Li, J. H. Zhao, Z. L. Luo, C. Gao and W. J. Song, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 5677–5680 RSC .
J. Ning, Q. Dai, T. Jiang, K. Men, D. Liu, N. Xiao, C. Li, D. Li, B. Liu, B. Zou, G. Zou and W. W. Yu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 1818–1821 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uchiyama and H. Imai, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 841–843 CAS .
H. Uchiyama and H. Imai, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9038–9042 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uchiyama, H. Ohgi and H. Imai, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 2186–2190 CAS .
J. Ning, T. Jiang, K. Men, Q. Dai, D. Li, Y. Wei, B. Liu, G. Chen, B. Zou and G. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14140–14144 CAS .
K. Men, J. Ning, Q. Dai, D. Li, B. Liu, W. W. Yu and B. Zou, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 363, 30–34 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Hong, R. Popovitz-Biro, Y. Prior and R. Tenne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10470–10474 CrossRef CAS .
G. Radovsky, R. Popovitz-Biro and R. Tenne, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3004–3015 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sinsermsuksakul, J. Heo, W. Noh, A. S. Hock and R. G. Gordon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1116–1125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Müller, R. Zentel, T. Maka, S. G. Romanov and C. M. Sotomayor Torres, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1499–1503 CrossRef .
M. Devika, N. K. Reddy, K. Ramesh, K. Gunasekhar, E. Gopal and K. T. R. Reddy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, G727–G733 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. P. Tu, X. H. Huang, H. M. Wu and Y. F. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1383–1389 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aso, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 3900–3904 CAS .
T.-J. Kim, C. Kim, D. Son, M. Choi and B. Park, J. Power Sources, 2007, 167, 529–535 CrossRef CAS .
W. Du, D. Deng, Z. Han, W. Xiao, C. Bian and X. Qian, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2071–2076 RSC .
M. Jayalakshmi, M. Mohan Rao and B. Choudary, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 1119–1122 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Vaughn, O. D. Hentz, S. Chen, D. Wang and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5608–5610 RSC .
N. Koteeswara Reddy, M. Devika, Q. Ahsanulhaq and K. R. Gunasekhar, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 4769–4772 CAS .
J. Chao, Z. Wang, X. Xu, Q. Xiang, W. Song, G. Chen, J. Hu and D. Chen, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2746–2753 RSC .
S. Boonsalee, R. V. Gudavarthy, E. W. Bohannan and J. A. Switzer, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5737–5742 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Panda, A. Datta, A. Dev, S. Gorai and S. Chaudhuri, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 2177–2181 CAS .
S. Schlecht and L. Kienle, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 5719–5721 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Koktysh, J. R. McBride and S. J. Rosenthal, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2007, 2, 144–148 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Hickey, C. Waurisch, B. Rellinghaus and A. Eychmüller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14978–14980 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, N. Al-Salim, C. W. Bumby and R. D. Tilley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15990–15991 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, J. Yang, T. Ling and X. Du, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7824–7828 RSC .
J. Ning, K. Men, G. Xiao, L. Wang, Q. Dai, B. Zou, B. Liu and G. Zou, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1699–1703 RSC .
J.-G. Kang, J.-G. Park and D.-W. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 307–310 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Lu, S. Shen, H. Xu and Q. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5226–5228 RSC .
J. R. S. Brownson, C. Georges and C. Lévy-Clément, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6397–6402 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Wang and P. He, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 105707 CrossRef .
E. C. Greyson, J. E. Barton and T. W. Odom, Small, 2006, 2, 368–371 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, D. Han and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4346–4351 RSC .
G. Domingo, R. S. Itoga and C. R. Kannewurf, Phys. Rev., 1966, 143, 536–541 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, S. Song, W. Fan, Y. Xing and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1280–1285 CAS .
Y. C. Zhang, Z. N. Du, S. Y. Li and M. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 153–159 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, L. Huo, H. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Yang and P. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2918 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zai, K. Wang, Y. Su, X. Qian and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3650–3654 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, L.-X. Yuan and Y.-H. Huang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3374–3383 RSC .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhai, N. Du and H. Z. D. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1270–1272 RSC .
Y.-T. Lin, J.-B. Shi, Y.-C. Chen, C.-J. Chen and P.-F. Wu, Nanoscale
Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 694–698 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ludi, I. Olliges-Stadler, M. D. Rossell and M. Niederberger, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5280–5282 RSC .
J.-w. Seo, J.-t. Jang, S.-w. Park, C. Kim, B. Park and J. Cheon, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4269–4273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zai, X. Qian, K. Wang, C. Yu, L. Tao, Y. Xiao and J. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1364–1375 RSC .
J. Xia, G. Li, Y. Mao, Y. Li, P. Shen and L. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 4279–4283 RSC .
A. Yella, E. Mugnaioli, H. A. Therese, M. Panthöfer, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2474–2481 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, E. Mugnaioli, M. Panthöfer, H. A. Therese, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6426–6430 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, D. Lei, L. Mei, X. Duan, Q. Li, T. Wang and W. Zheng, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 832–836 RSC .
A. Ibarz, E. Ruiz and S. Alvarez, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 3422–3428 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Franzman, C. W. Schlenker, M. E. Thompson and R. L. Brutchey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4060–4061 CrossRef CAS .
M. Achimovicova, K. Lucenildo da Silva, N. Daneu, A. Recnik, S. Indris, H. Hain, M. Scheuermann, H. Hahn and V. Sepelak, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5873–5876 RSC .
J. Choi, J. Jin, I. G. Jung, J. M. Kim, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5241–5243 RSC .
X. Yu, J. Zhu, Y. Zhang, J. Weng, L. Hu and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3324–3326 RSC .
D. D. Vaughn, S.-I. In and R. E. Schaak, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8852–8860 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. Chen, Y. Hu, X. Wang, T. Zhang, W. Chen and Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1213–1216 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Xue, J. Yao, S. C. Cheng and Z. W. Fu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A270 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chun, R. M. Walser, R. W. Bene and T. H. Courtney, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1974, 24, 479–481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Guo, M. Li, W.-H. Zhang, X. Liu and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12050–12053 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Baumgardner, J. J. Choi, Y.-F. Lim and T. Hanrath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9519–9521 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shen, D. Chen, X. Jiang, K. Tang, Y. Liu and Y. Qian, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 426–427 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, M. Yosef, M. Steinhart, P. Göring, H. Hofmeister, U. Gösele and S. Schlecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 311–315 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jang, I.-y. Lee, J. Xu, J. Choi, J. Jin, J. H. Park, H. J. Kim, G.-H. Kim and S. U. Son, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 3388–3391 CAS .
J. Ning, G. Xiao, T. Jiang, L. Wang, Q. Dai, B. Zou, B. Liu, Y. Wei, G. Chen and G. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 4161–4166 RSC .
M. V. Kovalenko, W. Heiss, E. V. Shevchenko, J.-S. Lee, H. Schwinghammer, A. P. Alivisatos and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11354–11355 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ning, K. Men, G. Xiao, B. Zou, L. Wang, Q. Dai, B. Liu and G. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 4275–4279 RSC .
I. U. Arachchige and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1583–1587 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ishida, T. Yamada, T. Tsuchiya, Y. Inoue, S. Takaoka and T. Kita, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 122106–122103 CrossRef .
K. Yang, W. Setyawan, S. Wang, M. Buongiorno Nardelli and S. Curtarolo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 614–619 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Hsieh, H. Lin, J. Liu, W. Duan, A. Bansil and L. Fu, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 982 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, N. Al-Salim, J. M. Hodgkiss and R. D. Tilley, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 2721–2723 CAS .
S. Schlecht, M. Budde and L. Kienle, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 6001–6005 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Jin and C.-H. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12218–12220 RSC .
I. T. Sines, D. D. Vaughn, A. J. Biacchi, C. E. Kingsley, E. J. Popczun and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3088–3093 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. Li, L.-W. Wang and A. Paul Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190–195 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cao, C. Hu, G. Peng, Y. Qi and E. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4982–4983 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zou, R. Zhong, S. Han, H. Xu, A. K. Burrell, N. Henson, J. L. Cape, D. D. Hickmott, T. V. Timofeeva, T. E. Larson and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17996–17999 CrossRef CAS .
U. Häussermann, P. Berastegui, S. Carlson, J. Haines and J.-M. Léger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4624–4629 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, X. Sun, S. Luo, L. Sun, X. Wu, M. Cao and C. Hu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2665–2669 CAS .
P. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Sui, C. Wang, B. Liu, G. Zou and B. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5937–5942 RSC .
H.-Y. Si, D. Yuan, J.-S. Chen and G.-M. Chow, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 817–822 RSC .
A. H. Khan, S. Maji, S. Chakraborty, N. B. Manik and S. Acharya, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 186–191 RSC .
B. N. Pal, I. Robel, A. Mohite, R. Laocharoensuk, D. J. Werder and V. I. Klimov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1741–1748 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Rath, M. Bernechea, L. Martinez and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3712–3717 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, L.-Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer, D. Wanger, M. T. Binda, A. C. Arango, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3743–3752 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, S. L. Swisher, T. Ewers, J. Engel, V. E. Ferry, H. A. Atwater and A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8140–8147 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, Science, 2005, 310, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
R. Weissleder, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 316–317 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435–446 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zolotavin and P. Guyot-Sionnest, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8094–8104 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Zhang, J. C. Yu, M. S. Mo, L. Wu, K. W. Kwong and Q. Li, Small, 2005, 1, 349–354 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bierman, Y. K. A. Lau, A. V. Kvit, A. L. Schmitt and S. Jin, Science, 2008, 320, 1060–1063 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bierman and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1050–1059 CAS .
C. B. S. Murray, W. Gaschler, H. Doyle, T. A Betley and C. R. Kagan, IBM J. Res. Dev., 2001, 45, 47–56 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, C. Chen, R. Krishnan, T. D. Krauss, J. M. Harbold, F. W. Wise, M. G. Thomas and J. Silcox, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Wehrenberg, C. Wang and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10634–10640 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller, D. Werder, M. H. Stewart, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11752–11753 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, B. S. Shih and V. L. Colvin, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3318–3322 CrossRef .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Murphy, M. C. Beard, A. G. Norman, S. P. Ahrenkiel, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Mićić, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Urban, D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3248–3255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Dai, B. Zou, W. W. Yu, B. Liu and G. Zou, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 19129–19135 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mokari, M. Zhang and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9864–9865 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, J. Fang, K. L. Stokes and J. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11798–11799 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, J. Fang, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19219–19222 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Dai, X. Yang, B. Zou, D. Li, B. Liu, M. Z. Hu and G. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 199–203 RSC .
T. Huang, Q. Zhao, J. Xiao and L. Qi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4707–4716 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lee, Y. Jun, S. N. Cho and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11244–11245 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao and L. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 359–362 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ni, X. Wang and J. Hong, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 546–551 RSC .
Y. S. Ken-Tye Yong, K. R. Choudhury, M. T. Swihart, J. R. Minter and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5965–5972 CrossRef .
D. V. T. Kyung-Sang Cho, W. Gaschler and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7140–7147 CrossRef .
A. C. Onicha, N. Petchsang, T. H. Kosel and M. Kuno, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2833–2843 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schliehe, B. H. Juarez, M. Pelletier, S. Jander, D. Greshnykh, M. Nagel, A. Meyer, S. Foerster, A. Kornowski, C. Klinke and H. Weller, Science, 2010, 329, 550–553 CrossRef CAS .
S. Acharya, D. D. Sarma, Y. Golan, S. Sengupta and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11282–11283 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. W.Z. Wang, D.Z. Wang and Z. F. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2110–2114 CrossRef .
J. W. Stouwdam, J. Shan, F. C. J. M. van Veggel, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, J. F. Young and M. Raudsepp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2006, 111, 1086–1092 CrossRef .
I. Moreels, B. Fritzinger, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15081–15086 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dai, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Li, R. Li, B. Zou, J. Seo, Y. Wang, M. Liu and W. W. Yu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12320–12324 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pietryga, D. J. Werder, D. J. Williams, J. L. Casson, R. D. Schaller, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4879–4885 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, M. C. Beard, S. Choi, J. M. Luther, M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3904–3910 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1097–1100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Dai, L. Wang, B. Zou, T. Cui, B. Liu, W. W. Yu, M. Z. Hu and G. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11425–11429 CAS .
Z. Wei Seh, W. Li, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, P.-C. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1331 CrossRef .
I. A. Courtney and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2045–2052 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5424–5431 RSC .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395–1397 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, B. Jang, T. Kim, S. M. Oh and T. Hyeon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1845–1850 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Park, G.-X. Wang, Y.-M. Kang, D. Wexler, S.-X. Dou and H.-K. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 750–753 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, Y. Wang, C. Yuan, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2325–2329 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Zhou, M. Ge, X. Xu, Z. Zhang and J. Z. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 46–47 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, T. Wen, C. Chen and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 9286–9303 RSC .
D. Chen, L. Tang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64–98 RSC .
B. Luo, Y. Fang, B. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Song and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5226–5230 CAS .
L. Zhuo, Y. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Yu, X. Zhang and F. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5084–5087 RSC .
Z. Jiang, C. Wang, G. Du, Y. J. Zhong and J. Z. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9494–9496 RSC .
S. Baek, S.-H. Yu, S.-K. Park, A. Pucci, C. Marichy, D.-C. Lee, Y.-E. Sung, Y. Piao and N. Pinna, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1687–1690 RSC .
T. Chen, L. Pan, X. Liu, K. Yu and Z. Sun, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 11719–11724 RSC .
S. Ding, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7155–7157 RSC .
S.-M. Paek, E. Yoo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 72–75 CrossRef .
L. Wang, D. Wang, X. F. Zhang and J. Jin, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 1307–1310 RSC .
J. G. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. H. Nam, S. M. Choi and W. B. Kim, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7829–7836 RSC .
Y. Zhao, J. Li, Y. Ding and L. Guan, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 852–856 RSC .
P. Meduri, C. Pendyala, V. Kumar, G. U. Sumanasekera and M. K. Sunkara, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 612–616 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, Z. Wang and D. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6951–6956 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yang, W. Zhao, J. Zheng, X. Zhang and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 20272–20276 CAS .
X. Zhao, M. Cao and C. Hu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 11737–11742 RSC .
E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 133–135 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gubbala, V. Chakrapani, V. Kumar and M. K. Sunkara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2411–2418 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith and C. Ducati, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1259–1265 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Wang, J.-W. Li, Y.-F. Hou, X.-Y. Yu, C.-Y. Su and D.-B. Kuang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8620–8625 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, P. Liu, Y. Xiao, Y. Jiang, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3663–3667 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Fan, P. Werner and M. Zacharias, Small, 2006, 2, 700–717 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yue, Y. Lin, X. Wen, L. Wang and D. Peng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16437–16441 RSC .
G. I. Koleilat, L. Levina, H. Shukla, S. H. Myrskog, S. Hinds, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 833–840 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 325–331 CrossRef CAS .
K. Szendrei, M. Speirs, W. Gomulya, D. Jarzab, M. Manca, O. V. Mikhnenko, M. Yarema, B. J. Kooi, W. Heiss and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1598–1605 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3046–3052 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, X. Li, B. Lu, L. Chen, Y. Wang, F. Teng, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Pan and E. Xie, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3475–3481 RSC .
L. Etgar, T. Moehl, S. Gabriel, S. G. Hickey, A. Eychmuller and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3092–3099 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, I. J. Kramer, A. R. Barkhouse, X. Wang, G. Konstantatos, R. Debnath, L. Levina, I. Raabe, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3374–3380 CrossRef CAS .
G. Oldfield, T. Ung and P. Mulvaney, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1519–1522 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, E. Khoo, A. Sumboja and P. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4247–4255 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fenghua, S. Jiangfeng, Y. Huafeng, G. Shiyu, Z. Qixian, H. Dongxue, I. Ari and N. Li, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455602 CrossRef .
R. K. Selvan, I. Perelshtein, N. Perkas and A. Gedanken, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1825–1830 CAS .
W. Wang, Q. Hao and W. Lei, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10268–10274 RSC .
E. V. S. Jong-Soo Lee and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9673–9675 CrossRef .
J.-S. Lee, M. I. Bodnarchuk, E. V. Shevchenko and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6382–6391 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shin, C. H. Yoon, M. Y. Bae, Y. C. Kim, S. K. Hong, J. A. Rogers and J. S. Ha, Small, 2011, 7, 1181–1185 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu and Q. Wan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4481–4484 RSC .
Q. Wan, E. Dattoli and W. Lu, Small, 2008, 4, 451–454 CrossRef CAS .
E. N. Dattoli, Q. Wan, W. Guo, Y. Chen, X. Pan and W. Lu, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2463–2469 CrossRef CAS .
R. Graham and D. Yu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4360–4365 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, C. Sun, J. Lu, M. Zheng, K. Y. Lim, M. Nripan, M. Subodh G., S. H. Tang, X. Zhang and C. H. Sow, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 9590–9595 RSC .
T. Matsunaga, N. Yamada, R. Kojima, S. Shamoto, M. Sato, H. Tanida, T. Uruga, S. Kohara, M. Takata, P. Zalden, G. Bruns, I. Sergueev, H. C. Wille, R. P. Hermann and M. Wuttig, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2232–2239 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. R. Lankhorst, B. W. S. M. M. Ketelaars and R. A. M. Wolters, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 347–352 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Wang, M. A. Caldwell, R. G. D. Jeyasingh, S. Aloni, R. M. Shelby, H. S. P. Wong and D. J. Milliron, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 113506–113506 CrossRef .
S.-H. Lee, D.-K. Ko, Y. Jung and R. Agarwal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 223116 CrossRef .
S.-H. Lee, Y. Jung and R. Agarwal, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 626–630 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jung, S.-H. Lee, D.-K. Ko and R. Agarwal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14026–14027 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Choi, G. S. Park, K. H. Kim, S. Cho, W. Y. Yang, X. S. Li, J. H. Moon, K. J. Lee and K. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3272–3277 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Caldwell, R. G. D. Jeyasingh, H. S. P. Wong and D. J. Milliron, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4382–4392 RSC .
R. E. Simpson, P. Fons, A. V. Kolobov, T. Fukaya, M. Krbal, T. Yagi and J. Tominaga, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 501–505 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kida, T. Doi and K. Shimanoe, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2662–2667 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, J. Xu, Z. Xie and G. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2112–2117 CAS .
M. Law, H. Kind, B. Messer, F. Kim and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2405–2408 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pinna, G. Neri, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4345–4349 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Leite, I. T. Weber, E. Longo and J. A. Varela, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 965–968 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Chiu and C.-S. Yeh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7256–7259 CAS .
X. Wang, X. Han, S. Xie, Q. Kuang, Y. Jiang, S. Zhang, X. Mu, G. Chen, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2283–2289 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, L. Li and C. Wang, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 1572–1575 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, M. Jin, S. Xie, Q. Kuang, Z. Jiang, Y. Jiang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9180–9183 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gyger, M. Hübner, C. Feldmann, N. Barsan and U. Weimar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4821–4827 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, J. Zhu, J. Jiang, R. Ding, Y. Feng, G. Wei and X. Huang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10324–10329 RSC .
A. Chowdhury, B. Biswas, R. N. Bera and B. Mallik, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10968–10976 RSC .
G. Xiao, Y. Zeng, Y. Jiang, J. Ning, W. Zheng, B. Liu, X. Chen, G. Zou and B. Zou, Small, 2013, 9 DOI:10.1002/smll.201202083 .
H.-R. Kim, K.-I. Choi, K.-M. Kim, I.-D. Kim, G. Cao and J.-H. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5061–5063 RSC .
X. Chen, Z. Guo, W.-H. Xu, H.-B. Yao, M.-Q. Li, J.-H. Liu, X.-J. Huang and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2049–2056 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Liu, S. Wu, M. Xu, X. Guo and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6453–6459 RSC .
H. Huang, C. Y. Ong, J. Guo, T. White, M. S. Tse and O. K. Tan, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1203–1207 RSC .
A. Kolmakov, D. O. Klenov, Y. Lilach, S. Stemmer and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 667–673 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Guo, S. Wang and S. Wu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1650–1655 RSC .
P. A. Russo, N. Donato, S. G. Leonardi, S. Baek, D. E. Conte, G. Neri and N. Pinna, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11053–11057 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kind, H. Yan, B. Messer, M. Law and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 158–160 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Wang, Y. Sui, J. Ning, Z. Liu, W. Tian, B. Liu, G. Zou and B. Zou, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 234–240 RSC .
H. Li, J. Yang, J. Zhang and M. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6258–6261 RSC .
H. Chen, L. Hu, X. Fang and L. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1229–1235 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mathur, S. Barth, H. Shen, J.-C. Pyun and U. Werner, Small, 2005, 1, 713–717 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, M.-W. Shao, D. Chen, D. D. Duo Ma and S.-T. Lee, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 1536–1539 RSC .
Z. Deng, D. Cao, J. He, S. Lin, S. M. Lindsay and Y. Liu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6197–6207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chao, Z. Xie, X. Duan, Y. Dong, Z. Wang, J. Xu, B. Liang, B. Shan, J. Ye, D. Chen and G. Shen, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3163–3168 RSC .
E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 515–522 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rauch, M. Boberl, S. F. Tedde, J. Furst, M. V. Kovalenko, G. Hesser, U. Lemmer, W. Heiss and O. Hayden, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 332–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138–142 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, P. S. Lee, C. Yan, T. Zhai, X. Fang, M. Liao, Y. Koide, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5145–5149 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, L. Hu, J. Xu, M. Liao, L. Wu and X. Fang, Small, 2011, 7, 2449–2453 CAS .
X. Fang, L. Hu, K. Huo, B. Gao, L. Zhao, M. Liao, P. K. Chu, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3907–3915 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, J. Yan, M. Liao, L. Wu and X. Fang, Small, 2011, 7, 1012–1017 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Kuang, C.-S. Lao, Z. Li, Y.-Z. Liu, Z.-X. Xie, L.-S. Zheng and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11539–11544 CAS .
M.-L. Lu, T.-M. Weng, J.-Y. Chen and Y.-F. Chen, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e26 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng, P. Xiong, C. S. Yun, G. F. Strouse, J. P. Zheng, R. S. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4179–4184 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Kuang, C. Lao, Z. L. Wang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6070–6071 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jia, L. Su, X. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Gu, P.-X. Gao and Y. Lei, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1500–1505 RSC .
Y. Masuda, T. Ohji and K. Kato, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1666–1674 CAS .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, Science, 2010, 327, 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, M. Sakurai and M. Aono, Small, 2012, 8, 3599–3604 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, M. Sakurai and M. Aono, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7209–7215 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rahal, A. Wankhade, D. Cha, A. Fihri, S. Oludchikh, U. Patil and V. Polshettiwar, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7048–7052 RSC .
Q. Han, S. Sun, D. Sun, J. Zhu and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1364–1369 RSC .
M. Yasui, K. Katagiri, S. Yamanaka and K. Inumaru, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 11132–11137 RSC .
X. Hu, H. Ji and L. Wu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12378–12383 RSC .
T. Kou, C. Jin, C. Zhang, J. Sun and Z. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12636–12643 RSC .
H. Wang, F. Sun, Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Chen, Q. Wu and J. C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5641–5645 RSC .
W. W. Wang, Y. J. Zhu and L. X. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xiao, J. Ning, Z. Liu, Y. Sui, Y. Wang, Q. Dong, W. Tian, B. Liu, G. Zou and B. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 2139–2144 RSC .
X. Meng, G. Tian, Y. Chen, Y. Qu, J. Zhou, K. Pan, W. Zhou, G. Zhang and H. Fu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2875–2881 RSC .
X. Xiao and W.-D. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1099–1105 RSC .
G. Wang, W. Lu, J. Li, J. Choi, Y. Jeong, S.-Y. Choi, J.-B. Park, M. K. Ryu and K. Lee, Small, 2006, 2, 1436–1439 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
X. An and J. C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1426–1434 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3634–3640 RSC .
S. Kundu, A. Kar and A. Patra, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10222–10230 RSC .
M. Niu, F. Huang, L. Cui, P. Huang, Y. Yu and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 681–688 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lv, L. Pan, X. Liu and Z. Sun, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12706–12709 RSC .
X. Zhou, T. Zhou, J. Hu and J. Li, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5627–5633 RSC .
H. Zhang, M. Jin and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7656–7673 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, Y. Yin, A. P. Alivisatos, G. A. Somorjai and J. T. Yates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9510–9513 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu, Z. Wu, Q. Zhao, B. Li and Y. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2244–2247 CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, M. Yuan, W. Liu, A. J. Kellock, S. J. Chey, V. Deline and A. G. Schrott, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3657–3662 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, J. Zaumseil, J.-S. Lee and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10085–10092 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Guanjun Xiao	Guanjun Xiao was born in Jilin province, China in 1986 and received his B.S. degree in Physics from Jilin University, China (2008). Since 2008, he has been perusing his Ph.D. degree in Condensed Matter Physics under the supervision of academician Prof. Guangtian Zou and Prof. Bo Zou at State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University, China. His research interests cover the synthesis and mechanism of metal-chalcogenide semiconductor nanocrystals, as well as the investigation of nanocrystals-based electrochemical applications regarding lithium-ion battery, optical switch, photocatalysis, gas sensor and so on.
Yingnan Wang	Yingnan Wang obtained his B.S. degree in 2003 from Jilin University, where his Ph.D. degree was awarded in 2010. His dissertation focused on syntheses and assembly of IV–VI and other semiconductor nanocrystals. Afterward, he retained to work as a lecturer at State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University. His research interests include the synthesis, assembly, and optical properties of size-, shape-, and structure-controlled inorganic nanocrystals under high pressure. He is a frequent contributor to ACS Nano, Langmuir, J. Phys. Chem. C, CrystEngComm and other peer-reviewed journals.
Jiajia Ning	Jiajia Ning is a postdoctoral researcher at State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics and Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian, China. He received his Ph.D. degree (2010) for material physics and chemistry from State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University. When he was a Ph.D. student, his work was focused on the synthesis, characterization and properties of novel semiconductor nanocrystals, especially for tin-based nanocrystals. His current research interests concentrate on the synthesis of novel semiconductor and metal oxide, as well as their optical, electronic, electrochemical and magnetic properties.
William W. Yu	William W. Yu obtained his BSc and MSc degree from Shandong University and PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests are based on solution dispersible nanomaterials such as quantum dots, metal and metal oxide nanoparticles. He is trying to apply those nanomaterials in alternative energy, biomedicine, and environmental remediation.
Guangtian Zou	Guangtian Zou is a Professor of State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University, China. He obtained his M.S. degree from Jilin University in the field of solid state physics in 1965. He was elected the academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2001. His research interests concentrate on high-pressure physics and superhard materials.
Bo Zou	Bo Zou is a Professor of State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University, China. He received his Ph.D. degree (2002) in the field of polymer chemistry and physics from Jilin University. In 2001–2002, he studied in Muenster University as a joint training PhD student. From 2003 to 2005, he started his postdoctoral research at Dortmund University, Germany. He was appointed as New Century Excellent Talents in 2006. His scientific interests focus on high-pressure chemistry and functional semiconductor nanocrystals. He has published over 120 papers in peer-reviewed international journals, and their citations exceed 900, giving him an h-index of 18.

 	Fig. 1  SEM image of the synthesized α-GeO2 NWs by thermal-oxidation nanostructuring metallic germanium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2002 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) TEM images of GeS and (inset) GeSe NSs. (b) SAED pattern for a polycrystalline sample of GeS NSs. (c) SAED pattern corresponding to a single [100]-oriented GeS NS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Top) Schematic view of the experimental setup for the formation of GeSe comb structures via the vaporization–condensation–recrystallization (VCR) process. a) Representative SEM image of GeSe combs obtained by the VCR process (30 min) on a Si(100) substrate, and b) magnified SEM image of (a). Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Z-contrast TEM image of a straight-helical GeTe NW. The bright spot at the tip corresponds to a high-Z element gold NP; scale bar represents 1 μm. Inset shows a higher magnification Z-contrast image of the Au tip; scale bar represents 150 nm. (B) STEM image of a GeTe NW. (C and D) EDX elemental mapping of Ge (green) and Te (blue) on the same part of the GT NW as shown in part B. Scale bars in parts B to D represent 100 nm. (E) HRTEM image of a single crystalline rhombohedral GeTe NW. The lattice (024) plane with a spacing of 2.15 Å is shown. The NW growth direction is indicated by the white arrow perpendicular to the lattice plane (204); scale bar represents 3 nm. Inset shows a nano-ED pattern taken on the same NW. (F) Low-magnification TEM image of a helical GT NW. A white spot marks the location for HRTEM (top inset) and ED (bottom inset); scale bars represent 1 μm (main panel) and 3 nm (top inset). Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  a) Overview FESEM image of SnO2 nanococoons; b) several nanococoons with uniform dimensions; c) a cracked nanococoon showing the exposed interior; d) low-magnification TEM image of SnO2 nanococoons; e) enlarged image of several nanococoons; f) a nanococoon with well-defined interior and compact thin shell; g) SAED pattern of SnO2 nanococoons; h) the shell structure of the nanococoons; i) high-resolution TEM image of a nanococoon (scale bars: a) 1 mm; b) 200 nm; c) 50 nm; d) 500 nm; e) 200 nm; f) 50 nm; h) 20 nm; i) 5 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of NF-9 (a and d), NF-13 (b and e), and NF-17 (c and f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of SnO nanostructures: (a and b) layer-platelike nanostructures; (c and d) nest-like nanostructures; (e and f) stepwise-bipyramid-like nanostructures, according to 20, 30, and 40 μL of water, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Typical SEM images (a) and (b), TEM and HRTEM images (c) and (d) of as-prepared SnS NSs. Inset in (c) is the SAED pattern of a NS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  HRTEM images and scheme models of SnSe nanocrystals produced under different reaction conditions. Reaction temperature of 110 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 1:2 (a), 110 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 1:1 (b), 110 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 2:1 (c), 140 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 1:2 (d), 140 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 1:1 (e), 140 °C and Sn/Se molar ratio of 2:1 (f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a, b) TEM images of a superlattice of 10.2 nm SnTe NCs capped with oleic acid. (c, d) Representative high-resolution TEM images of SnTe NCs viewed along [001] and [111] zone axes, correspondingly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  “Pine tree” NWs of PbS (a) due to the combination of two NW growth mechanisms. Screw dislocation driven NW growth of the trunk NW (b) combined with branch VLS driven growth (c) combine to produce this morphology. Upright PbS pine tree NW forests grow on silicon substrates (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  TEM images of size- and shape-tunable Pb-based chalcogenide NCs and their assembled superlattices. All scale bars represent 50 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  A schematic illustration of the assembly process of NPs via different heat treatments. Reprinted with permission from ref. 255. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) First discharge-charge curves of layer-plate-like nanostructures, nest-like nanostructures, and stepwise-bipyramid-like SnO nanostructures between 0.02 and 3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ at a constant current density of 100 mAh g−1. (b) Cycling behavior for electrodes of layer-plate-like nanostructures, nest-like nanostructures, and stepwise-bipyramid-like SnO nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Comparative lithium storage properties of the as-prepared SnO2 hollow nanospheres, SnO2 solid spheres, and SnO2 NPs: (A) Charge-discharge profiles, and (B) Cycling performance. All of the measurements were conducted at a current rate of 160 mA g−1 with a voltage window of 0.01–2.0 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Fabrication of the PbSe Schottky solar cells. (b) The J–V curve for the champion device (η = 4.57%), made with particles grown at 140 °C and exhibiting a first exciton absorption peak of 1.6 eV (measured in solution). Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of the SnO2/MnO2 composites at different scan rates in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. (b) CV curve of SnO2 NWs (705 μg) grown on the stainless steel substrate at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. (c) Plotted curve of the variation in the specific capacitance of the SnO2/MnO2 composites as a function of the scan rate. (d) Specific capacitance obtained at different scan rates at 3, 27, and 55 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 297. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Contact method characterizations. (a) Typical output IDS–VGS characteristic curves. Inset shows the diagram of the nanonets FET configuration. Typical output IDS–VDS characteristic curves of (b) pure SnO2, (c) 1% Sb doping, and (d) 1.5% Sb doping. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  GeTe NW (diameter of 100 nm) memory switching characteristics. (a) Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the NW at different physical states: as-synthesized single crystalline (triangles), amorphous (RESET, squares), and crystalline (SET). Key device parameters such as threshold voltage, RESET, SET, and programming regions are marked. (b) Resistance change of the GeTe NW memory device as a function of writing pulses of varying current amplitude (programming curves). The READ, SET, and RESET regions are clearly separated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2006 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 20  a) Sensitivity curves of SnO2 particles of different shapes as a function of ethanol concentration. R = resistance. b)–d) Morphological models for the octahedral, elongated–octahedral, and lance-shaped SnO2 particles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 326. Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  a, b) Dynamic ethanol and c, d) butanone sensing transients for the 15.9% Ag2O-doped SnO2 NTs and Ag@C@SnO2 nanocables at 250 °C. e) Illustration of how ultra-response and ultra-recover can be realized in tubular structure. Sensing materials: (a) and (c): 15.9% Ag2O-doped SnO2 NTs; (b) and (d): Ag@C@SnO2 nanocables prepared after calcination in air at 400 °C for 1 h. Gas-in concentration in (b) was the same as that in (a); Gas-in concentration in (d) was the same as that in (c). Response and recovery time were defined as the time needed to reach 90% of total signal change, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) I–V curves of the single SnO2 NW-based device before and after ZnO deposition. The inset is the corresponding SEM image of the single SnO2 NW device after ZnO deposition. The deposition thickness of ZnO is about 10 nm. (b) Photoconductance response curves of the single SnO2 NW-based sensor before and after surface functionalization with ZnO NPs. The wavelength of UV light in our studies is 365 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 353. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Electrical properties of SnO2 microrods. (a) Resistivity of SnO2 microrod device to mechanical strain at V = 2.0 V. The strain is increased from 0 to 0.186% (pink hexagons), then reduced to 0 (blue open hexagons). The inset shows a schematic illustration of the bent SnO2 device. (b) Resistivity of SnO2 microrod device to applied voltage. The applied voltage is increased from 0 to 10 V (blue open hexagons), then reduced to 0 V (pink hexagons). The inset shows the I–V curves of the SnO2 device in both the insulating and semiconducting states. Reprinted with permission from ref. 361. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  a) UV/vis absorption spectral changes of an aqueous solution of RhB over the SnO2 bipods electrode as a function of irradiation time (1–4 represent 0, 30, 60, and 170 min, respectively). b) Absorption changes (λ = 553 nm) in the photocatalytic degradation of RhB over SnO2 NRs, V-shaped bipods, and P25 electrodes (C/C0 is the normalized concentration of the solution). Reprinted with permission from ref. 372. Copyright 2006 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) The absorbance spectra changes of MO solution in the presence of SnS2@SnO2–2 NCs under visible-light (420 nm < λ < 800 nm) irradiation. (B) Photocatalytic decoloration of MO (10 mg L−1) over (a) SnO2, (b) Degussa P-25, (c) SnS2, (d) SnS2@SnO2-0.5, (e) SnS2@SnO2-1 and (f) SnS2@SnO2-2 under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 380. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  Catalytic performance of the different samples oxidizing at 850 °C for 1 h. The activities of the catalysts for the oxidation of CO were measured in a continuous-flow reactor. The reaction gas, a mixture composition of 10% CO in air (from Air Liquid, 99.99% purity), was fed to a 50 mg catalyst at a rate of 70 mL min−1, which corresponds to a space velocity of 84000 cm3 h−1 gcat−1. (A) Well-encapsulated Au@SnO2 core/shell structure as catalyst. (B) Non-encapsulated Au–SnO2 structure as catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 383. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
