Late stage crystallization and healing during spin-coating enhance carrier transport in small-molecule organic semiconductors   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TC00981A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TC00981A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5681-5689Late stage crystallization and healing during spin-coating enhance carrier transport in small-molecule organic semiconductors†

        
          
            Kang 
            Wei Chou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hadayat 
            Ullah Khan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad R. 
            Niazi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Buyi 
            Yan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ruipeng 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Marcia M. 
            Payne
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            John E. 
            Anthony
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Detlef-M. 
            Smilgies
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Aram 
            Amassian
          
        
      *a
aPhysical Sciences and Engineering Division, Solar and Photovoltaic Engineering Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: aram.amassian@kaust.edu.sa
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40506, USA
cCornell High Energy Synchrotron Source, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA
Received 
      12th May 2014
    , Accepted 27th May 2014First published on 28th May 2014AbstractSpin-coating is currently the most widely used solution processing method in organic electronics. Here, we report, for the first time, a direct investigation of the formation process of the small-molecule organic semiconductor (OSC) 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) (TIPS)-pentacene during spin-coating in the context of an organic thin film transistor (OTFT) application. The solution thinning and thin film formation were monitored in situ by optical reflectometry and grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering, respectively, both of which were performed during spin-coating. We find that OSC thin film formation is akin to a quenching process, marked by a deposition rate of ∼100 nm s−1, nearly three orders of magnitude faster than drop-casting. This is then followed by a more gradual crystallization and healing step which depends upon the spinning speed. We associate this to further crystallization and healing of defects by residency of the residual solvent trapped inside the kinetically trapped film. The residency time of the trapped solvent is extended to several seconds by slowing the rotational speed of the substrate and is credited with improving the carrier mobility by nearly two orders of magnitude. Based on this insight, we deliberately slow down the solvent evaporation further and increase the carrier mobility by an additional order of magnitude. These results demonstrate how spin-coating conditions can be used as a handle over the crystallinity of organic semiconductors otherwise quenched during initial formation only to recrystallize and heal during extended interaction with the trapped solvent.
Introduction
In recent years, solution-processed small-molecule organic thin-film transistors (OTFTs) have achieved field-effect mobilities well in excess of 1 cm2 V−1 s−1, with some reports of field effect mobilities above 10 cm2 V−1 s−1.1–5 Such transistor mobilities increasingly surpass those of the best OTFTs prepared via vacuum evaporation and also the performance of hydrogenated amorphous silicon devices by nearly an order of magnitude.6,7 The characteristics of solution-processed OTFTs can vary dramatically depending on the solution processing conditions, especially in the case of small-molecule organic semiconductors, since thin film nucleation and crystallization are highly sensitive to solution drying kinetics.8 Understanding the link between processing conditions and thin film formation and crystallization processes is therefore critical to the successful solution-processing of high performance organic electronic devices.9–11
Although new deposition methods like blade coating, solution shearing, inkjet printing and spray coating are making important advances in the processing of organic semiconductor thin films,1,3,12,13 spin-coating remains one of the most widely used lab-based solution-processing methods both for material screening and device optimization. Uniform, thin, smooth and continuous films are achieved by depositing a drop of solution and subsequently spreading/ejecting and drying it at high rotational speed. During drop casting, the crystallization of the active layer is dictated by the vapor pressure of the solvent and temperature of the solution, and the time scale of crystallization may range from seconds to hours, making it subject to substrate-induced dewetting.8,14,15 During spin-coating, on the other hand, this time may be reduced to the sub-second range by virtue of the rotational speed, which ejects excess solution and causes accelerated drying of the solution.16,17 Spin-coating is thus a highly non-equilibrium process, potentially quenching the solid film formation process and greatly impacting the development of the microstructure.
Current studies of process–structure–performance relationships in organic electronics rely mostly on post-deposition characterization of thin films. Structural studies of this type provide important insight into the final structure of films. However, the understanding of the mechanism of thin film formation in relation to the processing conditions, such as spinning speed, remains undetermined. Clearly, the ability to monitor the solution to solid phase transformation during the spin-coating process is critical for the understanding of the process–structure–performance relationships in spin-coated OTFTs. Time-resolved laser reflectance measurements have already been successfully deployed during the spin-coating process to study the evolution of the in-plane phase separation during film formation and to evaluate the spatially averaged drying rates of polymer blended films.18,19 Ebbens et al. also developed a stroboscopic imaging technique to record optical micrographs of the film formation and phase separation during the spin-coating process.20,21 This technique allowed the reconstruction of the height profile with a precision comparable to atomic force microscopy (AFM). We have recently demonstrated the use of in situ time-resolved UV-visible absorption measurements during spin-coating of polymer semiconductors, revealing the state of aggregation of the polymer semiconductor in the bulk solution as well as the importance of managing the kinetics of solution drying.17 The above-mentioned techniques provide valuable morphological information of polymer blends in the micrometer range and insight into photophysical aggregation, but fail to provide information on the crystallization behavior of small-molecule thin films, where complex processes, such as transient polymorphism, may occur at the early stages of growth.13,22,23
Time-resolved X-ray reflectivity and scattering techniques have been successfully applied in the past to the study of vacuum-deposited small-molecule thin films by both thermal and hyperthermal processes on bare and chemically treated inorganic and organic surfaces,23–29 and to investigate the effects of solvent vapor annealing of small-molecule thin films.14,30 More recently, X-ray scattering has been used to investigate solution processing of small-molecule thin films, including drop-casting and blade-coating of small-molecule thin films for OTFTs8,31 and spin-coating of polymer:fullerene16 and molecule:fullerene22,32 bulk heterojunction organic photovoltaics.
Here, we report the direct investigation of the crystallization behavior of a small-molecule organic semiconductor prepared by spin-coating and its influence on charge carrier mobility in OTFTs by performing in situ and real-time grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) during the spin-coating process. The functionalized pentacene, 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) (TIPS) pentacene (see also Fig. 1a), was chosen for this study, as it is a widely studied soluble organic small-molecule semiconductor capable of achieving carrier mobilities well above 1 cm2 V−1 s−1.1,4 The film formation was investigated for different spinning speeds, ranging between 1000 and 2000 rpm, a rather small range selected to demonstrate the importance of small variations in processing conditions on the kinetics of crystallization. We find the crystallization process to be marked first by a fast step function and followed by a slower crystallization step. To our surprise, we find the fast formation step to be relatively insensitive to the processing conditions investigated despite significant differences in the solvent evaporation rate just prior to the onset of nucleation, whereas the duration of the late stage crystallization is highly dependent upon the selected spinning speed. The change of the evaporation rate and the associated slow crystallization step are shown to strongly affect the carrier mobility by nearly two orders of magnitude. These results reveal new insight into the crystallization process during spin-coating of small-molecule organic semiconductors and highlight the important role of solvent evaporation kinetics and residency time in mediating the microstructural outcome of spin-coating. We have further used these insights to fabricate OTFTs using very slow spinning speed (300 rpm) and demonstrate devices yielding another order of magnitude improvement in carrier mobility. These improvements in carrier transport are reminiscent of the beneficial effects of solvent vapor annealing at the right dose on the performance of small-molecule OTFTs.14
 Fig. 1  (a–c) High speed optical micrographs of the spin-coating process (1000 rpm) revealing bulk liquid ejection well within the first half second of the spin-coating process. (d) In situ thickness evolution obtained from optical reflectometry measurements performed during spin-coating, revealing the thinning behavior of TIPS-pentacene in toluene solution spin-cast at different spinning speeds. Spin-coating is characterized by rapid hydrodynamic thinning at first, followed by evaporation-dominated thinning. The inset shows the thickness of the solution after 1 second of spin-coating as well as the rate of evaporation versus spinning speed, as determined from the slope of solution height versus time in the evaporative regime. 
Experimental details
Sample description
The acene-based small-molecule semiconductor 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) (TIPS) pentacene (Fig. 3a), first described by Anthony and co-workers,32 was dissolved in toluene (1 wt%) in normal ambient conditions and stirred overnight at room temperature. All depositions were performed at room temperature on pre-cut silicon oxide wafers. The wafers were cleaned by consecutively ultrasonicating in soapy de-ionized (DI) water, DI water, toluene, acetone and isopropanol for 20 minutes each. As the substrate needs to be hydrophilic in order to achieve high surface coverage of the TIPS-pentacene film, the sonication was followed by UV ozone treatment for 10 minutes. All solution and sample preparations for the X-ray characterization and device fabrication were performed in air.
Characterization techniques
The spin-coating of TIPS-pentacene was studied at different spinning speeds (1000 rpm, 1250 rpm, 1500 rpm, 1750 rpm and 2000 rpm). Polarized optical micrographs were taken in transmission mode through crossed polarizers using a Nikon Eclipse LV100POL Polarizing Microscope. Scattering experiments were performed at the D1 station at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS, Ithaca, NY) and a Pilatus 100k detector was used with a framing rate of 10 Hz and exposure time of 0.09 seconds. The setup is shown in Fig. 3a. The feasibility of in situ time-resolved GIWAXS during drop-casting and spin-casting was recently demonstrated.8,16 The hard X-ray beam had a wavelength of 1.1688 Å and a size of 0.5 mm horizontal by 0.1 mm vertical. The beam was incident at an angle of 0.15° with respect to the sample plane, which is above the critical angle of the organic semiconductor and below the critical angle of silicon. Silver behenate was used for calibration. The penetration depth for toluene at 10.6 keV is 2.66 mm. For an incidence angle of 0.15°, the maximum thickness in order for the X-rays to reach the substrate is about 3.5 μm and in the order of 1-1.7 μm to allow the scattered signal to reach the area detector. The intensity evolution of the (001) Bragg sheet and satellite peak during the spin-coating process were investigated. The final thickness of the films was evaluated using a Dektak Profilometer. A small scratch was applied to remove the film locally from the sample surface and measure the film thickness. In situ time-resolved optical reflectometry measurements were performed using a F20-UVX spectrometer (Filmetrics, Inc.) equipped with a tungsten halogen and a deuterium light source (Filmetrics, Inc.) over the wavelength range from 400 nm to 1700 nm. Most measurements were performed with an integration time of 0.15 s per reflection spectrum. The solution thickness was extracted using a fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm in the thick film regime (>1 μm) and a coarse model fit based on the transfer matrix formalism over the wavelength range 800–1700 nm for thinner films (<1 μm). High-speed optical microscopy measurements were performed at KAUST on a Nikon LV100 microscope and recorded by a Photron SA-3 CMOS camera mounted on the microscope. The images were recorded at a speed of 3600 frames per second.
Device fabrication
A highly doped n-type silicon wafer (100) with thermally oxidized 300 nm thick SiO2 was used as bottom gate and gate dielectric for top contact OTFT fabrication. Prior to deposition of the organic semiconductor, the substrates were cleaned by consecutive ultrasonication of the substrate in soapy DI water, pure DI water, toluene, acetone and isopropanol for 20 minutes each. All substrates were blown dry with N2 and followed with UV ozone treatment for 10 minutes to form a hydrophilic surface. Solutions of TIPS-pentacene were prepared in toluene (1 wt%) as described above. A pipette was used to drop 80 μl of TIPS-pentacene solution onto the Si/SiO2 substrates and the solution was immediately spin-coated in air. Gold source and drain electrodes were deposited by evaporation through a shadow mask with a channel width (W) of 500 μm and length (L) of 50 μm. All electrical measurements were performed using a Keithley 4200 Semiconductor Characterization System under N2 atmosphere inside a nitrogen-filled glove box.
Results and discussion
A 50 μl drop of the OSC solution was cast on a clean substrate and immediately spin-coated for a duration of 50 seconds. Five different spinning speeds were used (1000, 1250, 1500, 1750 and 2000 rpm) to prepare the various thin films. A series of high speed optical micrographs of the first second of spin-coating experiment are shown in Fig. 1a–c, revealing that the process is initially dominated by a liquid ejection regime. In situ time-resolved optical reflectometry measurements were performed for all five spinning conditions and the time-evolution of solution thickness are summarized in Fig. 1d. The thickness evolution appears to be independent of spinning speed at early times as it is dominated by solution ejection, but transitions after ∼1 second to an evaporation-dominated regime which depends upon rotation speed. From the linear thinning regime below ∼5 μm wet film, we determine the rate of evaporation to range between ∼1.6 and ∼4 μm s−1, for spinning speeds ranging between 1000 and 2000 rpm, respectively. The solution drying time is therefore a strong function of spinning speed and ranges between ∼2.4 s (2000 rpm) and ∼5.4 s (1000 rpm).
An overview of the static GIWAXS patterns right after the spin-coating process (exposure time of 1 second) is presented in Fig. 2, together with static polarized optical microscopy (POM) images showing the polycrystalline appearance of the thin films. The thickness of the dry films was measured by profilometry and is found to decrease with increasing spinning speeds from 66 nm to 37 nm, respectively. This is due to more ejection of the bulk solution during the early stages of spin-coating (see inset of Fig. 1d). The POM images clearly show an increase in lateral feature size and a tendency to form spherulitic shaped domains at lower spinning speeds. At high spinning speeds, the film is composed of a uniform distribution of small domains. The scattering images in Fig. 2 were background subtracted with a scattering pattern obtained without the film. The high intensity in the qz direction represents the (001) Bragg sheet associated to lamellar stacking (peak at qz around 0.4 Å−1), and indicates a highly lamellar ordered thin film well-known to have an “edge-on” orientation with brickwork packing motif and two-dimensional π–π stacking that favors charge-transport in the plane of the semiconductor thin film (Fig. 3a).33 The (001) Bragg sheet of the TIPS-pentacene crystallites have a d-spacing between 1.6–1.7 nm (the detailed values are summarized in the ESI†). The small satellite peak at an azimuthal angle of about 65° represents the (001)′ peak in the (111) orientation and indicates the formation of a mixed polycrystalline texture. Further quantitative comparison of degree of crystallinity on the basis of diffraction peak intensity is difficult given the significant differences in physical thickness. Using the Scherrer equation,34 an out-of-plane correlation length can be derived from the full width at half maximum (FWHM) along the qz direction. The correlation length has a decreasing trend for increasing spinning speeds from 16.3 nm down to 12.5 nm, respectively. The physical thickness is nearly 3–4 times greater than the crystalline thickness estimated by the Scherrer formula, suggesting the film thickness is made up of several lamellar crystallites of TIPS-pentacene. This ratio is similar to drop-cast films of TIPS-pentacene of similar thickness prepared from toluene.8 The azimuthal spread is an indicator for the in-plane mosaicity of the film and was evaluated at the different spinning speeds for the (001) and (001)′ peaks, respectively. Here, a decrease can be found in the width for increasing spinning speeds from 14.8° to 11.0° for the (001) peak, and from 16.0° to 13.3° for the (001)′ peak, indicating a slightly improved lamellar texture in films cast at increasing spinning speed.
 Fig. 2  The left column summarizes the GIWAXS patterns for TIPS pentacene thin-films, as cast by spin-coating at different spinning speeds. The corresponding POM images are shown in the right column. The (001) ordering peak is at a qz around 0.4 Å−1. The thickness of the films was measured using a profilometer. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the in situ GIWAXS setup allowing time-resolved measurements, during the spin-coating process, of the (001) Bragg sheet and the (001)′ Bragg peak at 65° off normal. The inset shows the orientation of the TIPS pentacene crystallites with respect to the substrate. (b) Time-evolution of the (001) Bragg sheet intensity (area under the curve) for all spinning speeds. Inset shows the onset of crystallization with respect to the spinning speed. 
The time evolution of the crystallization process was investigated in situ using time-resolved GIWAXS during spin-coating (Fig. 3a) and by monitoring and plotting the integrated intensity of the (001) and (001)′ reflections with respect to the spin-coating time with 0 second corresponding to the moment spinning starts.16 In Fig. 3b, we show the time-evolution of the (001) normalized intensity for TIPS-pentacene films prepared at all spinning speeds. As no differences could be found in the crystallization kinetics of (001) and (001)′ reflections, we conclude TIPS-pentacene crystallizes in these two orientations simultaneously. We have therefore limited the data representation in Fig. 3b to the evolution of the (001) Bragg sheet intensity, as this had a far better signal-to-noise-ratio than (001)′. Not surprisingly, the onset of crystallization (nucleation) is a strong function of the spinning speed, decreasing by nearly a factor of two, as was previously suggested by optical measurements of solution thinning (Fig. 1). As the in situ optical reflectometry and in situ GIWAXS measurements were performed separately, a direct one-to-one quantitative comparison of the onset of crystallization with respect to solution thickness or concentration cannot be established with a high degree of reliability and has therefore not been performed.
In Fig. 4a, only the lowest and highest spinning speeds are considered and an abrupt increase can be observed in the normalized peak intensity just a few seconds after the onset of spin-coating (highlighted in yellow). The increase indicates a rapid crystallization process over a sub-second timescale. Following this sharp rise, the curves are marked by a slower, more gradual increase (green guide line added), followed by a plateau a few seconds later indicating completion of the crystallization process. Remarkably, the duration of the rapid crystallization process is independent of the spinning speed, whereas the duration of the slow crystallization process is very much spinning speed-dependent. The timeline of the crystallization process is graphically summarized in Fig. 4b for all spin speeds and the exact values can be found in the ESI (Table S2†). The duration of the rapid crystallization process (the width of the yellow area as seen in Fig. 4a and b varies between 0.12 s and 0.28 s) does not appear to show any obvious dependency on the spinning speed. The onset of fast crystallization and the duration of the slow crystallization process, on the other hand, do show clear dependencies. Logically, at lower spinning speeds, less solution is ejected during acceleration (as indicated by the final film thicknesses) and overall the solvent evaporates more slowly, leaving a little more solvent in the drying film, most likely at grain and domain boundaries. The amount of residual solvent cannot be quantified easily, but it is most certainly present as it is the only plausible explanation as to why lamellar crystallization still proceeds for several seconds after the rapid crystallization step instead of quenching immediately. The ejection of less solvent at slow speed and the slower evaporation rate of the solution explains both the longer delay before the onset of fast crystallization at lower spinning speeds (wider black area in Fig. 4b) and a slower crystallization after the fast jump of more than 8 seconds at 1000 rpm (green area in Fig. 4b). This slowing down of the kinetics of the second crystallization step at lower spinning speeds eventually allows the film to form larger crystalline domains as observed in the POM images in Fig. 2, while at high spinning speeds we observe the nucleation and growth of much smaller domains.
 Fig. 4  Panel (a) shows curves of the normalized (001) peak intensity in function of the spinning time during the spin-coating process, for the lowest and highest spinning speed (1000 and 2000 rpm, respectively). The regions of interest (fast and slow crystallization) are marked. The duration of the different processes is summarized in panel (b) for all spinning speeds, as can be derived from the curves in the upper panel. 
Bottom gate, top contact organic thin film transistors (OTFTs) were fabricated under the same conditions as the in situ GIWAXS experiments. The average saturation hole mobility, the threshold voltage and the current on/off ratio were extracted from the transfer curves and summarized in the ESI (Fig. S4†). The carrier mobility shows a strong dependence with the spinning speed, increasing by nearly two orders of magnitude with decreasing spinning speed from 5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 (2000 rpm) to 2.2 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 (1000 rpm). However, as noted earlier, the duration of the rapid crystallization step does not appear to change with spinning speed for the time resolution of these measurements and therefore cannot account for the significant variations of OTFT performance. Instead, it appears as though the second stage of crystallization influences the microstructure and the carrier mobility much more. In Fig. 5, we plotted the carrier mobility with respect to the total crystallization time, namely the sum of the durations of both the rapid and the slow crystallization processes. The plot shows a clear correlation between the carrier mobility of the TIPS-pentacene thin films and the total duration of the crystallization process. It is well known that charge transport, for instance in OTFTs, correlates well with the crystalline order in small-molecule semiconductor thin films, on the condition that said film is also continuous and the semiconductor is π-stacked in the plane of the semiconductor–dielectric interface.33,35 As the films appear to cover the substrate in its entirety, it appears that the improved microstructure is entirely responsible for the improvement in device performance, as seen previously.11,36 The thickness of thin films differs, but it is not expected to directly influence the carrier transport, because all films are in excess of 35 nm thickness and appear to show no pinholes or any evidence of de-wetting.14,37
 Fig. 5  Linear dependency of the hole mobility versus the duration of crystallization (width of the green bars in Fig. 4b, representing the slow crystallization time) for TIPS pentacene OFETs prepared with different spinning speeds. The inset shows the carrier mobility with respect to the spin-coating speed. 
In a prior investigation of the role of solvent vapor annealing of spin-cast TIPS-pentacene thin films from a toluene-based solution, a quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D) was used to detect both the uptake of solvent vapor molecules and the resulting viscoelastic properties of the film and solvent.14 For very small doses of solvent vapor, the solvent molecules were found to adsorb without forming a liquid phase and further crystallization was promoted without causing the film to dewet. This resulted in improvements of the carrier mobility by up to 2 orders of magnitude. The device performance degraded quite dramatically, however, as soon as the solvent vapor molecules transformed into the liquid phase on the surface of the film, highlighting the delicate balancing role that a solvent plays in achieving highly crystalline organic semiconductor thin films. Unlike in the current study, the apparent size of crystalline domains did not increase by solvent vapor annealing; only the lamellar texture and crystallinity improved. This suggests there may be differences in the nucleation density of TIPS pentacene with increasing spinning speed despite apparently exhibiting nearly identical crystallization kinetics in the first regime of nucleation and growth, as observed by the in situ GIWAXS measurements.
In the spin-coating experiments reported in this study, the spinning speed strongly influences the evaporation rate of the solution, as shown by the in situ time-resolved optical reflection measurements (Fig. 1). These measurements revealed that solution thinning is dominated by evaporation for solution thicknesses below 5 μm and that evaporation is significantly slowed down by decreasing the spinning speed. This decrease is seen both in the drying rate of the bulk solution (1–5 μm) and in the final stage of the drying process (<1 μm). Case in point, the time it takes for the last micron of the solution to reach the steady (dry) thickness increases from ∼0.6 s (2000 rpm) to ∼0.8 s (1500 rpm) and up to ∼1.35 s (1000 rpm). This hints that the solvent may reside for an extended period in the forming film, as strongly suggested by the in situ GIWAXS measurements (Fig. 4), and this can promote significant coarsening of the crystallites. The rate of evaporation prior to nucleation and growth of the TIPS pentacene crystallites may promote a different nucleation density, with higher nucleation density occurring for faster drying solutions and a slower nucleation density occurring in case of slow-drying solutions, as suggested by the POM micrographs of the final thin films. However, we have also shown that the spinning speed strongly affects the residence time of trapped solvent in the film and thus promote further crystallization activity well after the initial film formation.
As the slow evaporation rate combined with minute amounts of solvent trapped in the film appear to have a dramatic effect on the crystallization behavior, we attempt to further slow the evaporation process and extend the residency time of the residual solvent by further slowing down the spinning speed. We have fabricated OTFTs using conditions of very slow spinning speed (300 rpm), for which the device characteristics and performance metrics are shown in Fig. 6 and Table 1, respectively. The resulting OTFTs perform remarkably well, with an average (peak) carrier mobility of 0.28 (0.47) cm2 V−1 s−1, which is a full order of magnitude higher than what was achieved at 1000 rpm. This also surpasses what previously has been achieved by spin-coating followed by solvent vapor annealing8 and approaches the performance of OTFTs typically achievable by drop-casting in optimized conditions.
 Fig. 6  Current–voltage sweeps (a) IDS–VG and (b) IDS1/2–VG for organic thin film transistors fabricated by spin-coating a TIPS-pentacene solution at 300 rpm, 1000 rpm and 2000 rpm. 
Table 1 Summary of the average device characteristics for organic thin film transistors fabricated by spin-coating a TIPS-pentacene solution at a very slow speed of 300 rpm




Spinning speed
Avg. mobility [cm2 V−1 s−1]
Std deviation [cm2 V−1 s−1]

V
th [V]

I
on/Ioff




300 rpm
0.28
±0.14
−25 (±4)
105


1000 rpm
0.021
±0.002
−2 (±2)
4 × 103


2000 rpm
0.0005
±0.0002
−16 (±2)
3 × 102




The observations made in this study are consistent with a recent report in which high boiling point solvent additives, such as diphenyl ether and chloronaphthalene, when used in appropriate amounts, resulted in larger crystallites and in better performing devices.38,39 Indeed, the role of high boiling point solvent additives has been investigated extensively in the context of bulk heterojunction organic photovoltaics (OPV) and has been correlated to the further ripening of the blend after the rapid film formation stage is completed.40–43 In the case of solution processable small-molecule OPVs, in situ GIWAXS measurements performed during spin-coating demonstrated that the right amount of diiodooctane in the solution promotes molecular reorganization of the donor and leads to the formation of a thermodynamically stable polymorph of the donor, which does not otherwise form without the use of the additive.22 This phase transformation is responsible for the high power conversion efficiency in the resulting solar cells. The results of the current study nevertheless demonstrate that some of the benefits of solvent additives can be achieved by extending the residency of the processing solvent in the film during and shortly after the thin film formation stage.
Conclusions
Research in the growth and structural evolution of spin-cast organic semiconductor thin films has until recently been limited to post-deposition characterization and has thus resulted in limited insight into the mechanisms of thin film formation. The main cause for this shortcoming has been the absence of in situ characterization tools to investigate common processes, such as spin-coating. Here, we have shown that time-resolved GIWAXS can be employed to study the crystallization during the spin-coating process of organic semiconductors, such as TIPS-pentacene. We provide relevant crystallization data with a time resolution of 100 ms, which makes it possible to follow the kinetics of crystallization and detect two distinct stages of crystallization characterized by their different kinetics. A linear dependency is found between the hole mobility and the total crystallization time, which includes the period of time required for drying of the residual solvent trapped in the thin film. The best transistor characteristics are observed in conditions, which avoided rapid quenching of the crystallization, instead letting the residual solvent evaporate and promote further grain growth. The spin-cast films at lower spinning speeds resulted in the formation of large spherulitic domains as opposed to the much smaller domains formed at higher spinning speeds. This methodology can easily be translated to a wide variety of systems requiring or relying upon spin-coating to achieve films with controlled crystallization and/or phase separation in areas such as electronics, optoelectronics, photovoltaics, thermoelectrics and energy storage.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Fréchet group at UC Berkeley for providing access to a fume hood during synchrotron experiments and for help with profilometry measurements and the Thoroddsen group at KAUST for assistance with high speed optical imaging of the spin-coating process. We'd like to thank Eunhee Lim of the Advanced Light Source for technical assistance. Research reported in this publication was supported by the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) and by KAUST's Office of Competitive Research Funds under award number FIC/2010/04. The authors acknowledge use of the D1 beam line at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source supported by the National Science Foundation and NIH-NIGMS via NSF grant DMR-1332208.
References
Y. Diao, B. C.-K. Tee, G. Giri, J. Xu, D. H. Kim, H. A. Becerril, R. M. Stoltenberg, T. H. Lee, G. Xue, S. C. B. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, Solution coating of large-area organic semiconductor thin films with aligned single-crystalline domains, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 665–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Smith, W. Zhang, R. Sougrat, K. Zhao, R. Li, D. Cha, A. Amassian, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and T. D. Anthopoulos, Solution-Processed Small Molecule-Polymer Blend Organic Thin-Film Transistors with Hole Mobility Greater than 5 cm2 V−1 s−1, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2441–2446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Minemawari, T. Yamada, H. Matsui, J. Tsutsumi, S. Haas, R. Chiba, R. Kumai and T. Hasegawa, Inkjet printing of single-crystal films, Nature, 2011, 475, 364–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Giri, E. Verploegen, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, S. Atahan-Evrenk, D. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, H. A. Becerril, A. Aspuru-Guzik, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Tuning charge transport in solution-sheared organic semiconductors using lattice strain, Nature, 2011, 480, 504–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, X. Li, J. Smith, S. Tierney, R. Sweeney, B. K. C. Kjellander, G. H. Gelinck, T. D. Anthopoulos and N. Stingelin, Solution-processed small molecule transistors with low operating voltages and high grain-boundary anisotropy, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9458–9461 RSC .

          S. M. Sze, Semiconductor Devices: Physics and Technology, John Wiley and Sons, New York, NJ,  2002 Search PubMed .
C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and P. R. L. Malenfant, Organic Thin Film Transistors for Large Area Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, H. U. Khan, M. M. Payne, D.-M. Smilgies and J. E. Anthony, Amassian. A. Heterogeneous Nucleation Promotes Carrier Transport in Solution-Processed Organic Field-Effect Transistors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 291–297 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Dickey, J. E. Anthony and Y. L. Loo, Improving Organic Thin-Film Transistor Performance through Solvent-Vapor Annealing of Solution-Processable Triethylsilylethynyl Anthradithiophene, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1721–1726 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Loo, Solution-processable organic semiconductors for thin-film transistors: Opportunities for chemical engineers, AIChE J., 2007, 53, 1066–1074 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Loo and I. McCulloch, Progress and challenges in commercialization of organic electronics, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 653–662 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Mei, M. A. Loth, M. Payne, W. Zhang, J. Smith, C. S. Day, S. R. Parkin, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, T. D. Anthopoulos, J. E. Anthony and O. D. Jurchescu, High Mobility Field-Effect Transistors with Versatile Processing from a Small-Molecule Organic Semiconductor, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4352–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Sanyal, B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. F. G. Klein, A. Colsmann, C. Munuera, A. Vorobiev, U. Lemmer, W. Schabel, H. Dosch and .E. Barrena, 
              In Situ X-Ray Study of Drying-Temperature Influence on the Structural Evolution of Bulk-Heterojunction Polymer–Fullerene Solar Cells Processed by Doctor-Blading, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 363–367 CrossRef CAS .
G. Giri, R. Li, D.-M. Smilgies, E. Q. Li, Y. Diao, K. M. Lenn, M. Chiu, D. W. Lin, R. Allen, J. Reinspach, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, S. T. Thoroddsen, P. Clancy, Z. Bao and A. Amassian, One-dimensional self-confinement promotes polymorph selection in large-area organic semiconductor thin films, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3573 Search PubMed .
H. U. Khan, R. Li, Y. Ren, L. Chen, M. M. Payne, U. S. Bhansali, D.-M. Smilgies, J. E. Anthony and A. Amassian, Solvent Vapor Annealing in the Molecular Regime Drastically Improves Carrier Transport in Small-Molecule Thin-Film Transistors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2325–2330 Search PubMed .
N. D. Treat, J. A. Nekuda Malik, O. Reid, L. Yu, C. G. Shuttle, G. Rumbles, C. J. Hawker, M. L. Chabinyc, P. Smith and N. Stingelin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 628–633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Chou, B. Yan, R. Li, E. Q. Li, K. Zhao, D. H. Anjum, S. Alvarez, R. Gassaway, A. Biocca, S. T. Thoroddsen, A. Hexemer and A. Amassian, Spin-Cast Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells: A Dynamical Investigation, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1923–1929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abdelsamie, K. Zhao, M. R. Niazi, K. W. Chou and A. Amassian, 
            In situ UV-visible absorption during spin-coating of organic semiconductors: a new probe for organic electronics and photovoltaics, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3373–3381 RSC .
P. C. Jukes, S. Y. Heriot, J. S. Sharp and R. A. L. Jones, Time-Resolved Light Scattering Studies of Phase Separation in Thin Film Semiconducting Polymer Blends during Spin-Coating, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 2030–2032 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mokarian-Tabari, M. Geoghegan, J. R. Howse, S. Y. Heriot, R. L. Thompson and R. A. L. Jones, Quantitative evaluation of evaporation rate during spin-coating of polymer blend films: Control of film structure through defined-atmosphere solvent-casting, Eur. Phys. J. E, 2010, 33, 283–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ebbens, R. Hodgkinson, A. J. Parnell, A. Dunbar, S. J. Martin, P. D. Topham, N. Clarke and J. R. Howse, 
            In Situ Imaging and Height Reconstruction of Phase Separation Processes in Polymer Blends during Spin Coating, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5124–5131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. W. Toolan, N. Pullan, M. J. Harvey, P. D. Topham and J. R. Howse, 
            In Situ Studies of Phase Separation and Crystallization Directed by Marangoni Instabilities During Spin-Coating, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 7033–7037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Perez, K. W. Chou, J. A. Love, T. S. van der Poll, D.-M. Smilgies, T.-Q. Nguyen, E. J. Kramer, A. Amassian and G. C. Bazan, Solvent Additive Effects on Small Molecule Crystallization in Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells Probed During Spin Casting, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6380–6384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kowarik, A. Gerlach, S. Sellner, F. Schreiber, L. Cavalcanti and O. Konovalov, Real-Time Observation of Structural and Orientational Transitions during Growth of Organic Thin Films, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 125504 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Mayer, R. Ruiz, R. L. Headrick, A. Kazimirov and G. G. Malliaras, Early stages of pentacene film growth on silicon oxide, Org. Electron., 2004, 5, 257–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-F. Moulin, F. Dinelli, M. Massi, C. Albonetti, R. Kshirsagar and F. Biscarini, 
            In situ X-ray synchrotron study of organic semiconductor ultra-thin films growth, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2006, 246, 122–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hong, A. Amassian, A. R. Woll, S. Bhargava, J. D. Ferguson, G. G. Malliaras, J. D. Brock and J. R. Engstrom, Real time monitoring of pentacene growth on SiO2 from a supersonic source, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 253304 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Amassian, T. V. Desai, S. Kowarik, S. Hong, A. R. Woll, G. G. Malliaras, F. Schreiber and J. R. Engstrom, Coverage dependent adsorption dynamics in hyperthermal organic thin film growth, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 124701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amassian, V. A. Pozdin, T. V. Desai, S. Hong, A. R. Woll, J. D. Ferguson, J. D. Brock, G. G. Malliaras and J. R. Engstrom, Post-deposition reorganization of pentacene films deposited on low-energy surfaces, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5580–5592 RSC .
T. V. Desai, A. R. Woll, F. Schreiber and J. R. Engstrom, Nucleation and Growth of Perfluoropentacene on Self-Assembled Monolayers: Significant Changes in Island Density and Shape with Surface Termination, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 20120–20129 CAS .
A. Amassian, V. A. Pozdin, R. Li, D.-M. Smilgies and G. G. Malliaras, Solvent vapor annealing of an insoluble molecular semiconductor, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2623–2629 RSC .
D.-M. Smilgies, R. Li, G. Giri, K. W. Chou, Y. Diao, Z. Bao and A. Amassian, Look fast: Crystallization of conjugated molecules during solution shearing probed in situ and in real time by X-ray scattering, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2013, 7, 177–179 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, Y. Gu, C. Wang, W. Zhao, D. Chen, A. L. Briseno and T. P. Russell, Efficient Polymer Solar Cells Based on a Low Bandgap Semi-crystalline DPP Polymer-PCBM Blends, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3947–3951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, J. S. Brooks, D. L. Eaton and S. R. Parkin, Functionalized Pentacene: Improved Electronic Properties from Control of Solid-State Order, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9482–9483 CrossRef CAS .
P. Scherrer, Bestimmung der Größe und der inneren Struktur von Kolloidteilchen mittels Röntgenstrahlen, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Goettingen, Math.-Phys. Kl., 1918, 26, 98–100 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Yang, K. Shin, S. H. Kim, H. Jeon, J. H. Kang, H. Yang and C. E. Park, Enhanced Electrical Percolation Due to Interconnection of Three-Dimensional Pentacene Islands in Thin Films on Low Surface Energy Polyimide Gate Dielectrics, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20302–20307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-I. Shin, J.-H. Kwon, H. Kang and B.-K. Ju, Solution-processed 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) (TIPS) pentacene thin-film transistors with a polymer dielectric on a flexible substrate, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2008, 23, 085009 CrossRef .
R. Ruiz, A. Papadimitratos, A. C. Mayer and G. G. Malliaras, Thickness Dependence of Mobility in Pentacene Thin-Film Transistors, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1795–1798 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Chae, S.-H. Jeong, J. H. Baek, B. Walker, C. K. Song and J. H. Seo, Improved performance in TIPS-pentacene field effect transistors using solvent additives, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4216–4221 RSC .
F. Liu, C. Wang, J. Baral, W. Zhao, L. Zhang, J. J. Watkins, A. L. Briseno and T. P. Russell, Relating Chemical Structure to Device Performance via Morphology Control in Diketopyrrolopyrrole-Based Low Band Gap Polymers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 35, 19248 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Efficiency enhancement in low-bandgap polymer solar cells by processing with alkane dithiols, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Processing additives for improved efficiency from bulk heterojunction solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619–3623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, H. C. Yang, G. W. Yang, S. Sista, R. B. Zadoyan, G. Li and Y. Yang, Fast-Grown Interpenetrating Network in Poly(3-hexylthiophene): Methanofullerenes Solar Cells Processed with Additive, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7946–7953 CAS .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Simultaneous Enhancement of Open-Circuit Voltage, Short-Circuit Current Density, and Fill Factor in Polymer Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636–4643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Radially and azimuthally integrated curves and characteristic dimensions of TIPS pentacene deposited at different spinning speeds. Integrated intensity of the (001) Bragg reflection in the (001) orientation and (111) orientation during the spin-coating of the TIPS pentacene solution at the different spinning speeds. Characteristic times and durations of crystallization. Average saturation hole mobility, threshold voltage and current on/off ratio of OTFT devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc00981aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a–c) High speed optical micrographs of the spin-coating process (1000 rpm) revealing bulk liquid ejection well within the first half second of the spin-coating process. (d) In situ thickness evolution obtained from optical reflectometry measurements performed during spin-coating, revealing the thinning behavior of TIPS-pentacene in toluene solution spin-cast at different spinning speeds. Spin-coating is characterized by rapid hydrodynamic thinning at first, followed by evaporation-dominated thinning. The inset shows the thickness of the solution after 1 second of spin-coating as well as the rate of evaporation versus spinning speed, as determined from the slope of solution height versus time in the evaporative regime.	 

 	Fig. 2  The left column summarizes the GIWAXS patterns for TIPS pentacene thin-films, as cast by spin-coating at different spinning speeds. The corresponding POM images are shown in the right column. The (001) ordering peak is at a qz around 0.4 Å−1. The thickness of the films was measured using a profilometer.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the in situ GIWAXS setup allowing time-resolved measurements, during the spin-coating process, of the (001) Bragg sheet and the (001)′ Bragg peak at 65° off normal. The inset shows the orientation of the TIPS pentacene crystallites with respect to the substrate. (b) Time-evolution of the (001) Bragg sheet intensity (area under the curve) for all spinning speeds. Inset shows the onset of crystallization with respect to the spinning speed.	 

 	Fig. 4  Panel (a) shows curves of the normalized (001) peak intensity in function of the spinning time during the spin-coating process, for the lowest and highest spinning speed (1000 and 2000 rpm, respectively). The regions of interest (fast and slow crystallization) are marked. The duration of the different processes is summarized in panel (b) for all spinning speeds, as can be derived from the curves in the upper panel.	 

 	Fig. 5  Linear dependency of the hole mobility versus the duration of crystallization (width of the green bars in Fig. 4b, representing the slow crystallization time) for TIPS pentacene OFETs prepared with different spinning speeds. The inset shows the carrier mobility with respect to the spin-coating speed.	 

 	Fig. 6  Current–voltage sweeps (a) IDS–VG and (b) IDS1/2–VG for organic thin film transistors fabricated by spin-coating a TIPS-pentacene solution at 300 rpm, 1000 rpm and 2000 rpm.	 

300 rpm	0.28	±0.14	−25 (±4)	105
1000 rpm	0.021	±0.002	−2 (±2)	4 × 103
2000 rpm	0.0005	±0.0002	−16 (±2)	3 × 102
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Radially and azimuthally integrated curves and characteristic dimensions of TIPS pentacene deposited at different spinning speeds. Integrated intensity of the (001) Bragg reflection in the (001) orientation and (111) orientation during the spin-coating of the TIPS pentacene solution at the different spinning speeds. Characteristic times and durations of crystallization. Average saturation hole mobility, threshold voltage and current on/off ratio of OTFT devices. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc00981a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
