Understanding the poor fill factor of solution-processed squaraine based solar cells in terms of charge carrier dynamics probed via impedance and tran ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC03012K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03012K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 14748-14756Understanding the poor fill factor of solution-processed squaraine based solar cells in terms of charge carrier dynamics probed via impedance and transient spectroscopy†

        
          
            Anitha 
            B.
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Vijith 
            K. P.
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Akhil 
            Alexander
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Varun 
            Srivastava
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Manoj A. G. 
            Namboothiry
          
        
      *
      School of Physics, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Thiruvananthapuram (IISER-TVM), Near Jersey Farm, Maruthamala PO, Vithura, Thiruvananthapuram 695 551, Kerala, India. E-mail: manoj@iisertvm.ac.in
Received 
      25th June 2020
    , Accepted 24th July 2020First published on 25th July 2020AbstractThe charge carrier dynamics that radically affect the performance of solution-processed 2,4-bis[4-(N,N-diisobutylamino)-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl]squaraine (DIB SQ):[6,6]-phenyl-C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) based organic solar cells is analyzed by means of steady-state, impedance and transient spectroscopic techniques. Analysis of current density–voltage characteristics using the modified Shockley diode equation and the light intensity-dependent measurements signifies the contribution of shunt and trap-mediated recombination losses in reducing the fill factor (FF) and efficiency of the SQ based device. Bias voltage-dependent impedance spectra modelled with an equivalent circuit reveal information on the physical processes of charge carrier transport and recombination in the device. Poor charge transport limits the FF of the device, evidenced by the dominance of the resistance corresponding to the charge transport processes over the recombination resistance. Transient photovoltage analysis further confirms the existence of bimolecular and monomolecular recombination in the device. Bias dependent transient photocurrent analysis is performed to probe the charge carrier dynamics at the operating voltages of the device, and it reveals that poor charge extraction due to charge trapping also affects the FF of the device. Furthermore, the morphology of the SQ:PCBM blend film is found to be unfavorable for the smooth extraction and transport of the charge carriers, complementing the findings from steady-state, impedance, and transient measurements.
Introduction
Rapid advancements have happened in the field of organic photovoltaics in recent years, by way of innovative device and interfacial engineering and by way of employing novel donor–acceptor pairs.1 The main attraction of organic solar cells (OSCs) lies in the solution processability of the constituent organic semiconductors, enabling low-cost and low-temperature fabrication processing.2 Most recently, the efficiency of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OSCs has improved to more than 17%, achieved through careful design and optimization of polymeric donors and non-fullerene acceptors.3 In OSCs, both polymers and small molecules can serve as donors. Conjugated polymers suffer from batch-to-batch variations, which can lead to significant changes in device performance. In contrast, small-molecule donors offer advantages such as ease of synthesis, functionalization, and purification, and exceptional reproducibility. In recent times, most of the non-fullerene acceptors used in OSCs have been small molecules and have been reported to give better power conversion efficiencies.4 Over 14% efficiency has been reported for all-small molecule-based OSCs (SM-OSCs) by optimizing the morphology of the active layer recently.5 Nevertheless, OSCs with small-molecule donors are still behind polymer-based OSCs in terms of performance, and in most of the SM-OSCs, the poor fill factor is observed to be the major efficiency limiting factor. Hence, it is necessary to gain a deep insight into the device physics of SM-OSCs for further improvement. Among the different small molecules used as donors in OSCs, squaraine (SQ) dyes have attracted much interest as potential donor molecules in BHJ solar cells along with fullerene derivatives as acceptor materials,6–8 and their photovoltaic properties have been investigated extensively. SQ dyes possess high photochemical and thermal stability, exceptional strong absorption in the visible region extending up to the near IR region, and a high absorption coefficient.9 Like many other small molecules, SQ can be synthesized and purified easily. Though vacuum-deposited and solution-processed SQ based photovoltaic devices are reported in the literature,10 adoption of the solution processing technique is preferred in view of fabrication on large area and flexible substrates. However, solution-processed SQ based devices have consistently shown a poor fill factor and this has been reported by various research groups.7,9,11,12 The fill factor (FF), which determines the squareness of the current–voltage response of a solar cell under illumination,13 is a significant parameter governing its performance. Apart from parasitic resistance, charge carrier recombination, electron–hole mobility differences, or imbalanced charge transport, field-dependent exciton dissociation rate and interfaces between different layers and electrodes significantly affect the FF of photovoltaic devices.14–18
Several processes, like the absorption of photons, exciton generation, diffusion, and dissociation into free charges, and charge transport, extraction, and collection, contribute to the photocurrent in OSCs. All these processes should take place effectively to get better device performance. The kinetics of charge carriers within the device is dependent on the quality of the active layer, interface quality, and processing conditions. The presence of defect states in the active layer can cause trapping of charge carriers and can eventually lead to their recombination, causing inefficient charge transport and collection. If there is an imbalance in the electron and hole mobilities, the fill factor may be affected by the Langevin type of recombination.19 The interplay between charge carrier extraction and recombination can thus severely limit the FF and device performance.20 Various techniques like transient absorption,21,22 photo-induced charge carrier extraction by linearly increasing the voltage (photo-CELIV),23–25 transient photovoltage (TPV) and photocurrent (TPC) measurements26–28 and impedance spectroscopy (IS)29–31 are generally employed to study the electrical properties of OSCs. Impedance spectroscopy is a non-destructive, powerful ac characterization technique for extracting information on carrier lifetimes, carrier trapping dynamics, carrier accumulation and recombination.32 In this technique, a small ac perturbation superimposed on a dc bias voltage is applied to the device and the frequency response of the electrical impedance is modelled using electrical elements like resistance and capacitance to obtain an understanding of the mechanisms governing the operation of the solar cells. TPV and TPC measurements are often performed in OSCs to get an insight into the charge carrier dynamics. In TPV and TPC measurements, a short light pulse is used to perturb the system and the response is detected to get information on the underlying phenomena. A combination of steady-state, transient, and frequency domain analysis can provide a better understanding of the charge carrier dynamics in OSCs.
In this article, we have attempted to understand the charge carrier dynamics in solution-processed SQ:PCBM based OSCs that limit their fill factor and so their performance. The device physics of the OSCs are analyzed with a combination of steady-state, impedance, and transient photocurrent/photovoltage measurements. The results are compared with the photovoltaic parameters obtained for the polymeric PTB7:PCBM solar cell. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements of the blend film are further performed to evaluate how the morphology affected the performance of the devices.
Experimental
Materials
2,4-Bis[4-(N,N-diisobutylamino)-2,6-dihydroxyphenyl]squaraine (DIB SQ) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7) and [6,6]-phenyl-C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) were purchased from 1-Material. Molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) and all solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All materials and solvents were used as received.
Device fabrication
The devices were fabricated in the inverted structure with a configuration of ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoO3/Ag, where ZnO serves as the electron transport layer and MoO3 as the electron blocking layer. Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates (8–12 Ω cm−2, Delta Technologies Inc., USA) were used as the cathode for the devices, having a nominal ITO coating thickness of ∼120–160 nm. ITO coated glass substrates were cleaned sequentially with deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol, followed by drying in a vacuum oven and exposure to UV–ozone treatment for 30 min before coating. The ZnO layer of ∼30 nm was obtained by spin coating a solution of ZnO nanoparticles dispersed in a mixture of n-butanol, methanol, and chloroform on the ITO coated glass substrates. ZnO nanoparticles were prepared according to the literature reported elsewhere.33,34 DIB SQ and PCBM (1:6 by weight) were dissolved in ortho-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) with a total concentration of 42 mg ml−1 at least 12 hours before spin coating. The DIB SQ:PCBM solution was spin-cast onto the ZnO layer at a spin speed of 1500 rpm for 2 min, acquiring a thickness of 90 nm. For the comparison of the device performance of the SQ based devices, PTB7:PCBM based devices were also fabricated in the same configuration. The PTB7:PCBM blend solution was prepared by dissolving both the materials with a weight ratio of 1:1.5 at a concentration of 33 mg ml−1 in o-DCB and spin-casting on top of the ZnO layer at a spin rate of 1000 rpm for 2 min to obtain a thickness of 110 nm. Finally, 10 nm MoO3 (hole transport layer) and 100 nm Ag were deposited on top of the active layer by thermal evaporation at a base pressure of ∼10−6 Torr. The device area was kept at 0.09 cm2, as defined by a shadow mask.
Characterization
The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured using a Keithley 6430 sourcemeter in the dark and under illumination of intensity 100 mW cm−2 from a solar simulator. The light intensity from an Oriel 3A solar simulator was calibrated with an NREL calibrated silicon solar cell before the characterization of the devices. Light intensity-dependent studies were performed using neutral density filters. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the active layer were acquired on a Bruker MultiMode 8TM AFM. Impedance measurements were carried out using an Agilent E4980A LCR meter. A 20 mV ac amplitude was used over a frequency range from 2 MHz to 20 Hz. Device impedance was measured under illumination at 100 mW cm−2 light intensity with variable DC bias voltages. To extract the parameters, fitting of the experimental data was performed using EC-Lab software. The best fit for the impedance curves was acquired in such a way that the error percentages were minimum for all the parameters. TPV and TPC measurements were performed using a 532 nm picosecond pulsed laser (Ekspla Nd: YAG laser) having a pulse duration of 100 ps. A Tektronix MDO3104 digital oscilloscope captured transient responses. No background illumination was used during measurement, and different bias voltages were applied for TPC measurements. TPC measurements were done by measuring the voltage drop across a 50 Ω resistor, and transient photovoltage was recorded using 1 MΩ input impedance.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1(a) displays the chemical structures of DIB SQ, PTB7, and PC70BM used for the fabrication of the devices. Fig. 1(b) and (c), respectively, illustrate the device architecture and the energy level alignment of DIB SQ, PTB7, and PCBM with ZnO and MoO3 interfacial layers. More than 20 devices each of SQ:PCBM and PTB7:PCBM were tested and the results of the best devices are reported. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices are shown in Fig. 1(d). The control device, PTB7:PCBM, yielded an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.7 V, a fill factor (FF) of 56% and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.9%. Whereas, for the SQ:PCBM based device, though it exhibited a VOC of 0.84 V, the PCE is limited to 2.6% by a relatively smaller short circuit current density (JSC) value and a low FF of 34%. Parasitic loss mechanisms like resistive losses and recombination can significantly affect the FF of an OSC.13 High series (Rs) and low shunt resistances (Rsh) can be responsible for a reduced FF. Additionally, the FF of a solar cell critically depends on the diode ideality factor, n, which signifies the quality of a junction and is closely associated with the recombination mechanisms.35 To identify how Rs, Rsh, and n values affected the FF of the devices, the cell parameters were extracted by fitting the light J–V curves with the modified Shockley diode equation36 in Matlab and the values are tabulated in Table 1. The Rs and reverse saturation current density (J0) values obtained from the fit for the SQ based device are lower than those for the PTB7:PCBM device. However, it was observed that the Rsh value is low and the n value (2.9) is higher for the SQ:PCBM device compared to those of the PTB7:PCBM device (n = 2.6). This observation suggests that the reduced FF value (34%) of the SQ based device is mainly linked to the presence of shunt pathways. Similarly, FF loss due to recombination is also evident from the higher n value of the SQ based device.
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of DIB SQ, PTB7 and PC70BM, (b) device structure of the fabricated OSCs, (c) schematic of the energy levels of the materials used in this work and (d) J–V characteristics of PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices under 1 sun illumination. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters obtained by fitting the light J–V curves for PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices




S. no.
Device

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)

n


J
0 (μA cm−2)




1
PTB7:PCBM
1.7
289.4
2.6
0.424


2
SQ:PCBM
1.6
193.6
2.9
0.053




To understand the recombination processes in the devices, light intensity-dependent J–V measurements were performed. The J–V characteristics at various illumination intensities ranging from 100 to 0.4 mW cm−2 were measured and various parameters such as the JSC, VOC, and FF of both PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM based devices were estimated for varying intensities of illumination. The solar cell parameters of the PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices as a function of illumination intensity are shown in Fig. 2. The semi-log plot of VOC against light intensity shown in Fig. 2(a) for both devices follows a linear relation at higher illumination intensities. However, as the intensity is decreased further, the plot starts to deviate from linearity and at very low light intensities, it completely deviates from the linear behaviour of the SQ based device (not shown in the figure). The deviation from linear behaviour at very low light intensities is likely due to the presence of shunt recombination pathways, as is evident from the low shunt resistance of the device.37 The dominant recombination mechanism in solar cells is often identified from the slope nkT/q of the VOCversus the natural logarithm of light intensity plot. The value of n ∼ 1 denotes bimolecular recombination while a progressive increase of n points to an increased trap-assisted Shockley–Reed–Hall (SRH) recombination.35 The n values extracted for the PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices are ∼1.4 and 2.6, respectively. The value of n greater than 2 indicates the dominance of non-radiative trap-assisted recombination in the SQ based device. The linear behaviour at very high light intensities and the slight deviation from linearity even at moderate intensities of the semi-log plot of VOCvs. light intensity may be due to the existence of both bimolecular and monomolecular recombination in the SQ:PCBM device. Similarly, the power-law dependence of JSC on the light intensity (JSC ∝ Iα)38 was examined to find out that the value of α is 1.04 for the PTB7:PCBM device and 0.96 for the SQ:PCBM device (Fig. 2(b)). A deviation of the α value from unity also implies defect-mediated recombination.39
 Fig. 2  Light intensity-dependent (a) open-circuit voltage, (b) short circuit current density and (c) fill factor of SQ:PCBM and PTB7:PCBM solar cells. 
Further, the light intensity-dependent fill factor analysis shown in Fig. 2(c) reveals that the FF increases with a decrease in light intensity for both devices, but at very low light intensities, the FF value decreases for both devices. However, the decrement in FF at low light intensities is more pronounced in the SQ based device. At very high light intensities, the generation of charge carriers would be higher and the mode of recombination would be bimolecular rather than trap-assisted as the majority of charge carriers may fill up the traps present in the device.40 With decreasing light intensity, the FF increases as the number of charge carriers and the rate of recombination decrease. However, if trap-assisted recombination is prominent in the device, the probability of free charge carriers recombining with trapped charges increases, thereby decreasing the FF at very low light intensities.41 The reduction in the fill factor at low light intensities for SQ:PCBM solar cells can be correlated to recombination through trap states or to the low shunt resistance of the device.37 At lower light intensities, the FF decrease is mostly determined by shunt resistance, as in the case of VOC. Current loss due to leakage in OSCs is mostly aided by traps or by pinholes in the film.42
To get a better perception of the charge carrier dynamics in the SQ based devices that limit the fill factor, impedance measurements were performed at different bias voltages ranging from 0 to 1 V under a constant illumination of 1 sun. Fig. 3 shows the Nyquist plots for SQ:PCBM and PTB7:PCBM solar cells measured at different bias voltages. Depressed semicircles, a typical feature of BHJ devices, the diameters of which decrease with an increase of bias voltages, are obtained for both devices. Though only a single semicircle is visible for both devices, a parallel resistor–capacitor (R–C) circuit in series with resistance was not found to fit the impedance curves. The presence of two partial arcs at higher voltages is evident in the Nyquist plot of the SQ based devices and, hence, the curves of both PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices were found to fit well to a Matryoshka or ladder-type equivalent circuit,43 as shown in the inset of Fig. 3(a). The equivalent circuit consists of a series resistance Rs, transport resistance R1, depletion capacitance C1, and a parallel combination of recombination resistance R2 and a constant phase element (CPE). Rs accounts for the resistance from the electrodes, the contact layers, and the substrate.27 The ladder-type equivalent circuit is suitable when two different processes have entirely different time scales that occur in the device. When the frequencies of the two processes are close to each other, the Nyquist plot seems to be a single depressed semicircle. The high-frequency region in the Nyquist plot usually represents the transport properties of the charge carriers in the device and is contributed by the R1 ‖ C1 combination. The low frequency response contributed by R2 ‖ CPE can be ascribed to the accumulation and recombination processes taking place in the device. Instead of a capacitor, a non-ideal capacitor CPE is found to fit the IS spectra well, indicating the inhomogeneous nature of the BHJ active layer.44 The CPE exhibits a distribution of relaxation times when connected in parallel to a resistor and the parallel combination of the resistor and the CPE has impedance (1)where Q is the magnitude of the CPE, and a is the “ideality” factor characteristic of the distribution of relaxation time.45 When the value of a is 1, the CPE becomes a pure capacitor, and for a = 0, the CPE represents a pure resistor. For OSCs, it generally takes a value between 0.75 and 1. The chemical capacitance Cμ, which is a measure of the charge carriers generated and accumulated in the active layer, can be calculated using the following equation, where Q and a are the parameters obtained from the equivalent circuit fitting. (2)
 Fig. 3  Impedance spectra of (a) PTB7:PCBM and (b) SQ:PCBM solar cells measured at different bias voltages. Insets of both figures show a clear view of the Nyquist plots of the devices at higher bias voltages. The points represent the measured data and the solid lines represent the fit. 
The different parameters that provide information on the physical processes occurring in the device were extracted from the fitting of the IS spectra for both PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells. The Rs values extracted for both devices from the IS plots are in the order of ∼20–22 Ω (∼1.9–2.1 Ω cm2), which is in good agreement with the Rs values obtained from the Shockley diode model fits of the light J–V characteristics. Fig. 4 shows a comparison of the two different resistances (R1 and R2) and capacitances (C1 and Cμ) extracted from the equivalent circuit fitting of the IS spectra for the PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells. It can be observed that for both PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices, R1 and R2 decrease, and C1 and Cμ increase with an increase of bias voltage. R1 of the SQ:PCBM based solar cell is higher compared to that of the PTB7:PCBM solar cell, while R2 is higher for the PTB7:PCBM solar cell at lower bias voltages. Beyond 0.4 V, R2 decreases rapidly for the PTB7:PCBM device, but a gradual decrease is observed for the SQ:PCBM device, and at higher voltages, the value of R2 becomes higher for the SQ:PCBM device. When comparing the resistances, R1 and R2, of the individual devices, R1 is higher than R2 for the SQ:PCBM solar cell, while the case is vice versa for the PTB7:PCBM based device (see Fig. S1 and S2 given in the ESI†). Recombination and transport resistances provide a clear picture of whether the photo-excited charge carriers are transported and collected effectively or get recombined. A higher recombination resistance indicates that the recombination is low and a higher transport resistance means reduced charge carrier transport. A lower recombination resistance compared to the transport resistance in the SQ:PCBM device implies that the charge carriers generated in the active layer are more likely to be recombined than to be transported and collected. However, the high R2 and low R1 in the PTB7:PCBM device favour the transport and collection of charge carriers before their recombination, suggesting the improved performance of PTB7:PCBM solar cells compared to SQ:PCBM based devices. Xu et al. reported that the FF is directly proportional to the charge collection efficiency, which in turn is strongly correlated to (R2/R1)1/2.44 The higher value of (R2/R1)1/2 for the PTB7:PCBM device than that for the SQ:PCBM device represents an improved charge collection efficiency of the PTB7:PCBM based device. Consequently, the device shows a higher FF in contrast to the SQ:PCBM OSC. The transit time calculated from the extracted parameters for the SQ:PCBM device was observed to be higher than that of the PTB7:PCBM device for all the applied voltages (Fig. 5(a)). This suggests that the charge transport is impaired in the SQ:PCBM device, possibly due to the low charge carrier mobility in SQ.46 From this analysis, it is obvious that the inefficient charge carrier transport is one of the limiting factors in SQ based solar cells, resulting in FF loss.
 Fig. 4  Variation of (a) transport resistance R1, (b) recombination resistance R2, (c) depletion capacitance C1 and (d) chemical capacitance Cμ with applied bias for PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Electron transit time and (b) recombination lifetime as a function of applied bias for PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells. 
The capacitances, C1 and Cμ, were observed to be bias dependent. The increase of depletion capacitance, C1, with applied bias specifies a narrowing of the depletion width and thus a weakening of the built-in voltage. The significant rise of C1 with the increase of applied bias for the PTB7:PCBM device (Fig. 4(c)) is indicative of a weakening of the built-in field, promoting charge carrier recombination.44 Nevertheless, the variation of C1 with applied bias for the SQ:PCBM OSC is rather insignificant. Exciton dissociation in OSCs takes place at the interface of donor–acceptor and is strongly dependent on the electric field at the donor–acceptor interface. The stronger the built-in electric field, the higher the dissociation of excitons and the higher the open circuit voltage, VOC.47 The weakened built-in voltage as observed from the increased depletion capacitance and the lower R2 values at higher bias voltages reveal the reason for the reduced VOC of the PTB7:PCBM device, in contrast to the SQ:PCBM device. The chemical capacitance, Cμ, which denotes the excess charges accumulated in the active layer, increases exponentially with increasing applied bias for both devices, as shown in Fig. 4(d). The accumulated photogenerated charge carriers may either be collected at the electrodes, contributing to the photocurrent, or they can be recombined. It has been reported that monomolecular or trap-assisted recombination is prominent at short circuit, bimolecular recombination is prominent at open circuit and a coexistence of both recombination processes is prominent at voltages in between.14 As observed for the devices in the present study, defect mediated recombination is dominant in the SQ:PCBM OSC, while bimolecular recombination exists in the PTB7:PCBM device. Below 0.4 V bias, the lower R2 and Cμ values observed for the SQ:PCBM device in comparison to the PTB7:PCBM device indicate that monomolecular recombination occurs to a certain extent in the device, which would have led to the reduced short circuit current and fill factor for the device. Above 0.4 V, the sharp fall of R2 for the PTB7:PCBM device suggests the dominance of bimolecular recombination due to the weakening of built-in voltage as the applied bias is increased. In the case of the SQ:PCBM device, at higher applied voltages, the higher value of R2 can be explained by the charge carrier trapping in the active layer along with less bimolecular recombination. With increased injection of charge carriers as bias voltage increases, charges get trapped in the defects, possibly shallow trapping states. As the mobility of the charge carriers in SQ is lower, as witnessed from the higher transit time in Fig. 5(a), the free carriers may not find the trapped charges to recombine before they get detrapped. Thus, the trapped charges may be temporarily refrained from recombining and at the same time, the charges are not effectively transported to the electrodes. One can see that the recombination lifetime, τr, versus bias voltage plot, shown in Fig. 5(b), also follows a similar pattern as that of the R2vs. applied bias plot for both devices.
Transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC) techniques were further used to investigate the fate of separated charge carriers in the devices. Fig. 6(a) presents the TPV plots of PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices held under dark at open-circuit conditions and a constant intensity of the pulse light. From the TPV plot, charge carrier lifetime can be extracted by fitting the decay curve of the TPV spectrum. A single exponential fit was found to be suitable for describing the decay kinetics of the PTB7:PCBM device, yielding a carrier lifetime of ∼318 μs. However, that of the SQ:PCBM based device requires a double exponential fit, accounted for by two different recombination mechanisms operative in the device. The two effective lifetimes obtained for the SQ based devices are 133 and 526 μs. The two characteristic lifetimes may be assigned to the presence of bimolecular recombination, together with trap-assisted recombination. The one with a shorter lifetime can be attributed to bimolecular recombination and the other with a longer lifetime can be attributed to trap-assisted recombination. This result supports the observation from light intensity-dependent J–V measurements that trap-assisted recombination prevails in the SQ:PCBM based device. The transient photovoltage measurements done without background illumination reveal that the SQ:PCBM based OSC has a higher rate of trap-mediated recombination along with bimolecular recombination, in contrast to the PTB7:PCBM based device.
 Fig. 6  (a) Photovoltage and (b) photocurrent transients obtained for PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells. (c) Photocurrent decay time as a function of applied bias for PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells. 

Fig. 6(b) shows the normalized photocurrent transients observed for PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells measured under the short current condition in response to a 100 picosecond laser pulse of constant intensity. The decay kinetics of photocurrent transients can provide information regarding the charge extraction process taking place in the device, and the integrated area under the photocurrent transients is a measure of the amount of charge extracted. The photocurrent decay part can be fitted with a single exponential function to find the charge extraction time. Under the zero bias condition, for both PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells, the decay kinetics are virtually similar with no significant variation in the extraction time. However, the extracted charge is calculated to be less for the SQ:PCBM device, which indicates the probability of the existence of charges that may not be readily extracted due to the presence of traps or unfavourable morphology in the device. To gain an insight into the charge dynamics in the devices under operating conditions, the voltage-dependent photocurrent transients of both PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices at constant pulse intensity and with no background illumination were measured, and they are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). The photocurrent transients for both devices exhibit slow decay kinetics with a photocurrent tail, but the turn-off dynamics for both devices are observed to quicken with an increase of bias voltage. The quickening of the photocurrent transient after light pulse turn-off can be attributed to the competition between recombination and charge transport.48
The lowering of electric field due to accumulation of charges at higher voltages promotes charge recombination and suppresses charge extraction, elucidating the enhanced quickening of decay transients with increased bias. For the SQ:PCBM device, the quickening of the decay dynamics with bias voltage is pronounced even for applied bias closer to the short circuit voltage, signifying the dominance of recombination over charge extraction. The ratio of charge recombination to extraction governs the FF in such a way that the higher the recombination to extraction ratio, the lower the FF.20 Compared to the PTB7:PCBM device, the dominance of the recombination over extraction revealed from the photocurrent transients of the SQ:PCBM device explains its reduced FF. The amount of extracted charge decreases with the increase of bias voltage for both devices, and the decrement is higher for the SQ:PCBM device, which is a clear indication that charge extraction is restricted by charge trapping.48 The extracted charges decrease from approximately 0.59 μC to 67 nC for the PTB7:PCBM device while the decrement for the SQ:PCBM device is from 0.28 μC to 27 nC, as we move on from short circuit to open circuit conditions. As observed from Fig. 6(c), the SQ:PCBM device shows a strong dependence of the decay kinetics of the photocurrent transient on voltage, while the photocurrent decay transients are relatively unaffected by the applied voltage for the PTB7:PCBM device. This indicates that the charge carrier detrapping process in the SQ:PCBM device significantly depends on the local electric field inside the device, whereas it is less field-dependent in the case of the PTB7:PCBM device, enabling more efficient charge extraction and thereby a much higher FF. Overall, the steady-state, impedance and transient measurement results show that a less efficient charge transport and extraction accompanied by trap-assisted recombination affected the FF and JSC of the SQ:PCBM based device and thereby reduced its power conversion efficiency in contrast to the PTB7:PCBM based OSC.
The morphology of the active layer can play a crucial role in governing the transport and lifetime of charge carriers. To evaluate the influence of the morphology of the blend films on the device performance, AFM measurements of both PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices were performed, and the AFM images are shown in Fig. 7. The measurements were done by coating the donor:acceptor blend films on the ITO/ZnO surface, to get identical conditions to those of the solar cell devices. The AFM height images of both PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM blends demonstrate bright regions inserted in a dark matrix, which can be ascribed to the PCBM rich domains embedded in the PTB7 or SQ matrix.49 It is evident from the images that PCBM is evenly distributed in the PTB7:PCBM blend while it seems to be non-uniform in the SQ:PCBM film. The surface topography of the PTB7:PCBM layer on the ITO/ZnO surface displays distinct donor/acceptor domains with a root mean square (RMS) roughness of 3.5 nm, whereas the SQ:PCBM layer exhibits a rather smooth surface with a RMS roughness of 0.23 nm. A smooth active layer can facilitate better charge transport through improved interfacial contact.50,51 However, the PTB7:PCBM layer with the rough surface exhibited better performance than the device with a smooth SQ:PCBM layer. The higher surface roughness (3.5 nm) of the PTB7:PCBM layer indicates the formation of larger donor/acceptor domains compared to that of the SQ:PCBM layer (0.23 nm). The larger the domain size of the donor:acceptor blend, the better the donor/acceptor interpenetrating network, and the higher the extraction of electrons and holes.52 Phase separation of the donor:acceptor domain is also a decisive factor in the performance of OSCs. The phase images (shown in Fig. 7(c) and (d)) exhibit an enhanced phase separation for the PTB7:PCBM layer, but that of the SQ:PCBM blend depicts a very low phase contrast. The improved performance of the PTB7:PCBM based device can be correlated to the large domain size of the PTB7:PCBM blend with a larger surface roughness (3.5 nm) and the enhanced phase separation would have helped to achieve better charge transport and extraction in the device. The PTB7:PCBM blend reveals an appropriate morphology for exciton dissociation and charge transport, and this might have been achieved by the DIO additive being added into the donor:acceptor blend. However, in the case of the SQ:PCBM device, no such additives were added. To understand the effect of additives on the morphology and thus on the performance of the SQ based device, we attempted to add DIO to the SQ:PCBM device, but it critically affected the photovoltaic properties of the device. Further variations in the SQ:PCBM blend combined with proper interfacial engineering need to be performed to optimize the morphology to promote better charge transport and extraction and thus attain a better FF and efficiency.
 Fig. 7  AFM topography images of (a) PTB7:PCBM and (b) SQ:PCBM layers. Phase images of (c) PTB7:PCBM and (d) SQ:PCBM layers. 
Conclusions
The underlying physics of SQ:PCBM and PTB7:PCBM devices are compared through steady-state, impedance, and transient photocurrent/photovoltage measurements. Impedance measurements have provided evidence for the poor charge transport mechanism in the SQ:PCBM based device compared to the PTB7:PCBM device. Transient photovoltage analysis has revealed the presence of trap-mediated recombination in SQ:PCBM along with bimolecular recombination. The voltage-dependent photocurrent transients of both SQ:PCBM and PTB7:PCBM devices indicate that charge extraction is hindered by charge trapping, while detrapping is found to be field-dependent for the SQ:PCBM device, limiting its performance. AFM analysis of the blend films has also revealed an appropriate morphology for exciton dissociation and charge transport in the PTB7:PCBM film while it is unfavorable in the SQ:PCBM film. Optimization of the morphology of the SQ:PCBM blend films followed by proper device and interfacial engineering is necessary to improve the performance of the SQ:PCBM based solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Solar Energy Research Initiative, Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India (Grant reference number: DST/TMD/SERI/S15 (G)) for funding, and the support from Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD, Government of India), and the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research-Thiruvananthapuram (IISER–TVM), Kerala, India. V. K. P gratefully acknowledges the financial support from the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi, India.
References
C. Lee, S. Lee, G.-U. Kim, W. Lee and B. J. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 8028–8086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nelson, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 462–470 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, L. Hong, T. Zhang, Y. Tang, B. Lin, K. Xian, B. Gao, C. An, P. Bi, W. Ma and J. Hou, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 1239–1246 CrossRef .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K.-Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, Z. Jiang, C. Yang, J. Yu, J. Feng, M. A. Adil, D. Deng, W. Zou, J. Zhang, K. Lu, W. Ma, F. Gao and Z. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5393 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Chen, H. Sasabe, T. Igarashi, Z. Hong and J. Kido, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14517–14534 RSC .
G. Wei, S. Wang, K. Renshaw, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1927–1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, G. Wang, L. Yang, J. Wu, F. S. Melkonyan, Y. Huang, Z. Lu, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 847–854 RSC .
B. Ananda Rao, K. Yesudas, G. Siva Kumar, K. Bhanuprakash, V. Jayathirtha Rao, G. D. Sharma and S. P. Singh, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2013, 12, 1688–1699 RSC .
G. Chen, Z. Ling, B. Wei, J. Zhang, Z. Hong, H. Sasabe and J. Kido, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. R. Varma and M. A. G. Namboothiry, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3438–3443 RSC .
G. Chen, H. Sasabe, Z. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Hong, J. Kido and Y. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14661–14666 RSC .
B. Qi and J. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8972–8982 RSC .
S. R. Cowan, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 245207 CrossRef .
C. M. Proctor, J. A. Love and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5957–5961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Bartelt, D. Lam, T. M. Burke, S. M. Sweetnam and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500577 CrossRef .
G. F. A. Dibb, F. C. Jamieson, A. Maurano, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 803–808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Jao, H. C. Liao and W. F. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5784–5801 RSC .
W. Tress, K. Leo and M. Riede, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 155201 CrossRef .
D. Bartesaghi, I. D. C. Pérez, J. Kniepert, S. Roland, M. Turbiez, D. Neher and L. J. A. Koster, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 2–11. Search PubMed .
H. Ohkita, Y. Tamai, H. Benten and S. Ito, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2016, 22, 100–111 Search PubMed .
S. Dai, S. Chandrabose, J. Xin, T. Li, K. Chen, P. Xue, K. Liu, K. Zhou, W. Ma, J. M. Hodgkiss and X. Zhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2268–2274 RSC .
M. T. Neukom, S. Züfle and B. Ruhstaller, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2910–2916 CrossRef CAS .
M. Neukom, S. Züfle, S. Jenatsch and B. Ruhstaller, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2018, 19, 291–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stephen, K. Genevičius, G. Juška, K. Arlauskas and R. C. Hiorns, Polym. Int., 2017, 66, 13–25 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Markvart and L. Castaer, Practical handbook of photovoltaics: fundamentals and applications, Elsevier, Oxford, New York,  2003 Search PubMed .
A. Pockett, H. K. H. Lee, B. L. Coles, W. C. Tsoi and M. J. Carnie, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 10872–10883 RSC .
J. Shi, D. Li, Y. Luo, H. Wu and Q. Meng, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2016, 87, 123107 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Knipper, J. Parisi, K. Coakley, C. Waldauf, C. Brabec and V. Dyakonov, Zeitschrift für Naturforsch. A, 2007, 62, 490–494 CAS .
E. von Hauff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 11329–11346 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Gupta, L. S. Pali and A. Garg, Sol. Energy, 2019, 178, 133–141 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia-Belmonte, A. Munar, E. M. Barea, J. Bisquert, I. Ugarte and R. Pacios, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 847–851 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mohan, V. Nandal, S. Paramadam, K. P. Reddy, S. Ramkumar, S. Agarwal, C. S. Gopinath, P. R. Nair and M. A. G. Namboothiry, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 5523–5530 CrossRef CAS .
P. Calado, D. Burkitt, J. Yao, J. Troughton, T. M. Watson, M. J. Carnie, A. M. Telford, B. C. O’Regan, J. Nelson and P. R. F. Barnes, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2019, 11, 44005 CrossRef CAS .
M. Diantoro, T. Suprayogi, A. Hidayat, A. Taufiq, A. Fuad and R. Suryana, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2018, 9214820 Search PubMed .
R. Steim, T. Ameri, P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf, G. Dennler, M. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3256–3261 CrossRef CAS .
I. Riedel, J. Parisi, V. Dyakonov, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lan, Y. Liu, B. Wu, B. Xu, H. Pu, B. Wei, Y. Peng, W. Tian and F. Zhu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7385–7392 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sharma, M. Chauhan, V. Bharti, M. Kumar, S. Chand, B. Tripathi and J. P. Tiwari, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 26169–26178 RSC .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Servaites, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4410–4422 RSC .
A Todinova, L Contreras-Bernal, M Salado, S Ahmad, N Morillo, J Idígoras and J. A. Anta, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 2891–2901 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Y.-J. Lee and W. Hsu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 123904 CrossRef .
K. A. Luck, V. K. Sangwan, P. E. Hartnett, H. N. Arnold, M. R. Wasielewski, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703805 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, J. Liu, J. Zhao, Y. Li, B. Qiao, D. Song, Y. Huang, Z. Xu, S. Zhao and X. Xu, Materials, 2018, 11, 759 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Qi and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24315–24325 RSC .
Z. Li, W. Wang, N. C. Greenham and C. R. McNeill, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25684–25693 RSC .
Y. Zhang, X. Li, T. Dai, D. Xu, J. Xi and X. Chen, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 24895–24903 RSC .
Z. Wang, Z. Wang, R. Zhang, K. Guo, Y. Wu, H. Wang, Y. Hao and G. Chen, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 398 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhen, Q. Liu, X. Chen, D. Li, Q. Qiao, Y. Lu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8072–8079 RSC .
W. Shen, M. Xiao, J. Tang, X. Wang, W. Chen, R. Yang, X. Bao, Y. Wang, J. Jiao, L. Huang, J. Liu, W. Wang and L. A. Belfiore, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 47451–47457 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc03012kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of DIB SQ, PTB7 and PC70BM, (b) device structure of the fabricated OSCs, (c) schematic of the energy levels of the materials used in this work and (d) J–V characteristics of PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM devices under 1 sun illumination.	 

1	PTB7:PCBM	1.7	289.4	2.6	0.424
2	SQ:PCBM	1.6	193.6	2.9	0.053

 	Fig. 2  Light intensity-dependent (a) open-circuit voltage, (b) short circuit current density and (c) fill factor of SQ:PCBM and PTB7:PCBM solar cells.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Impedance spectra of (a) PTB7:PCBM and (b) SQ:PCBM solar cells measured at different bias voltages. Insets of both figures show a clear view of the Nyquist plots of the devices at higher bias voltages. The points represent the measured data and the solid lines represent the fit.	 

 	Fig. 4  Variation of (a) transport resistance R1, (b) recombination resistance R2, (c) depletion capacitance C1 and (d) chemical capacitance Cμ with applied bias for PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Electron transit time and (b) recombination lifetime as a function of applied bias for PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photovoltage and (b) photocurrent transients obtained for PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells. (c) Photocurrent decay time as a function of applied bias for PTB7:PCBM and SQ:PCBM solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 7  AFM topography images of (a) PTB7:PCBM and (b) SQ:PCBM layers. Phase images of (c) PTB7:PCBM and (d) SQ:PCBM layers.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc03012k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
