Progress on ternary oxide-based photoanodes for use in photoelectrochemical cells for solar water splitting  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00761F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00761F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2126-2157Progress on ternary oxide-based photoanodes for use in photoelectrochemical cells for solar water splitting

        
          
            Dong Ki 
            Lee
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dongho 
            Lee
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Margaret A. 
            Lumley
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kyoung-Shin 
            Choi
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. E-mail: kschoi@chem.wisc.edu
Received 
      19th September 2018
    First published on 30th November 2018AbstractSolar water splitting using photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) has emerged as one of the most promising routes to produce hydrogen as a clean and renewable fuel source. Among various semiconductors that have been considered as photoelectrodes for use in PECs, oxide-based photoanodes are particularly attractive because of their stability in aqueous media in addition to inexpensive and facile processing compared to other types of semiconductors. However, they typically suffer from poor charge carrier separation and transport. In the past few years, there has been tremendous progress in developing ternary oxide-based photoelectrodes, specifically, photoanodes. The use of ternary oxides provides more opportunities to tune the composition and electronic structure of the photoelectrode compared to binary oxides, thus providing more freedom to tune the photoelectrochemical properties. In this article, we outline the important characteristics to analyze when evaluating photoanodes and review the major recent progress made on the development of ternary oxide-based photoanodes. For each system, we highlight the favorable and unfavorable features and summarize the strategies utilized to address the challenges associated with each material. Finally, by combining our analyses of all the photoanodes surveyed in this review, we provide possible future research directions for each compound and an outlook for constructing more efficient oxide-based PECs. Overall, this review will provide a critical overview of current ternary oxide-based photoanodes and will serve as a platform for the design of future oxide-based PECs.
Dong Ki Lee
Dong Ki Lee graduated from Korea University with a BS in Materials Science and Engineering in 2009 and from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) with a MS (2011) and PhD (2015) in Materials Science and Engineering. He worked in Prof. Kyoung-Shin Choi's group as a postdoctoral scholar from 2015 to 2018 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He is currently a senior researcher at the Clean Energy Research Center at the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST). His research interests include the development of photoelectrodes for solar fuel production and electrocatalysts for electrochemical biomass conversion.
Dongho Lee
Dongho Lee received his BS degree in Chemistry from Sogang University (South Korea) in 2014. He is currently a fifth-year student in the materials chemistry PhD program at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, working in Prof. Kyoung-Shin Choi's group. His research focuses on developing new electrodeposition conditions to produce multi-component electrodes (e.g. photoelectrode/protection layer/catalyst) for solar water splitting and understanding charge transfer processes at their interfaces. He was a recipient of a 2014 Fulbright Graduate Study Award.
Margaret A. Lumley
Margaret A. Lumley received her BS degree in Chemistry from the University of California, Santa Barbara in 2015. She is currently a fourth-year graduate student in the materials chemistry PhD program at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, working with Prof. Kyoung-Shin Choi. Her research focuses on the electrochemical synthesis of oxide-based photoelectrode materials, addition of protection layers, and catalyst integration to develop materials for solar water splitting.
Kyoung-Shin Choi
Professor Kyoung-Shin Choi received her PhD in Chemistry from Michigan State University (2000). After two years of postdoctoral research at the University of California, Santa Barbara, she started her independent research at Purdue University as an assistant professor in 2002. She was a visiting scholar at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) during the fall of 2008. In 2012, she joined the chemistry faculty at the University of Wisconsin-Madison as a full professor. Her research combines solid state chemistry, electrochemistry, and materials chemistry to study electrode and catalyst materials for use in photoelectrochemical and electrochemical applications.
1. Introduction
Since the first photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) was reported in 1972,1 PEC-based solar water splitting has become one of the most promising routes for the environmentally benign and sustainable production of hydrogen as a clean fuel.2–5 Semiconductor electrodes that can absorb visible light to generate electron–hole pairs and can separate and transport these charge carriers to the semiconductor/electrolyte interface are the key components of water splitting PECs.5,6 The doping type of the semiconductor electrode determines whether it will serve as the photoanode or photocathode of a PEC; an n-type semiconductor will serve as a photoanode while a p-type semiconductor will serve as a photocathode. To be used as a single photon absorber (i.e. only one electrode of the PEC is a semiconductor electrode) in a PEC that can achieve unassisted water splitting, the semiconductor must have a conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) that straddle the water reduction and oxidation potentials. Semiconductors that meet this requirement while also having a bandgap that allows a solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of greater than 10% are rare. Therefore, efficient PECs will most likely contain an anode and a cathode that are both semiconductors, which will both contribute to the photon absorption and photovoltage generation.5,7 A schematic representation of such a PEC composed of a larger bandgap photoanode and a smaller bandgap photocathode combined in tandem is shown in Fig. 1. For comparison, a PEC composed of a photoanode serving as a single photon absorber paired with a metal cathode is also shown. In the tandem cell, although both electrodes absorb photons and generate electron–hole pairs, only the minority carriers are used to drive chemical reactions. The majority carriers of each electrode move to the back contact and recombine. As a result, only the location of the VBM of the photoanode and CBM of the photocathode are absolutely critical conditions for the selection of materials for solar water splitting. (The CBM of the photoanode and VBM of the photocathode are still important as they affect the photovoltage achievable by each electrode. This will be explained in the next section.) Compared to a PEC which uses a single photon absorber, the use of a tandem cell allows for a greater number of materials to be considered for the construction of a water splitting PEC.
 Fig. 1  Schematic energy diagrams of (a) a PEC composed of a photoanode as a single photon absorber paired with a metal cathode and (b) a PEC composed of a photoanode and a photocathode in tandem (EF: Fermi level, CB: conduction band, and VB: valence band). 
Among various semiconductors that have been investigated as photoelectrodes for solar water splitting, oxide-based photoelectrodes are attractive because of their inexpensive processing costs and better stability in aqueous media compared to other types of semiconductor electrodes. These are critical advantages because the commercial viability of a water splitting PEC is ultimately determined by the cost of hydrogen produced by the PEC, not just the STH efficiency. Early studies on oxide-based photoelectrodes focused on a few types of binary oxides (e.g. TiO2, Fe2O3, WO3, ZnO). However, in the past decade, a significant effort has been made to investigate ternary oxide-based photoelectrodes for application in water splitting PECs. Ternary oxides are composed of two different metal ions combined in an oxide matrix. Using ternary oxides instead of binary oxides provides more opportunities to tune the composition and atomic and electronic structures of photoelectrodes, which can directly impact their photoelectrochemical properties.
The purpose of this article is to provide a critical review of n-type ternary oxides that have been investigated as photoanodes for water splitting PECs. The oxides reviewed in this study meet the following criteria. First, the oxides have a bandgap energy ≤2.5 eV. Second, the oxides have demonstrated a photovoltage gain for water oxidation (i.e. the difference between the photocurrent onset for water oxidation and the thermodynamic water oxidation potential of 1.23 V vs. RHE) of at least ∼0.4 V. This means that their photocurrent onset potentials for water oxidation have been shown to be more negative than ∼0.8 V vs. RHE. Third, there are several studies that contain reliable reports of the photoelectrochemical properties of the oxide being investigated as a photoanode. For each compound reviewed in this study, we will summarize the relevant properties and performances of the compound related to solar water oxidation. Then, we will discuss the advantages and limitations of each compound, major efforts made to overcome these limitations, and possible future research directions. Finally, by integrating our understanding and analyses of all the photoanodes surveyed in this review, we will offer our outlook for constructing more efficient oxide-based photoanodes. The information and discussion provided in this review will be useful not only for the construction of water splitting PECs but also for other types of PECs used for solar fuel production (e.g. CO2 reduction) where water oxidation is used as the anode reaction.
2. Evaluation of photoanodes
Before reviewing the photoanode materials, important factors to consider when evaluating photoanodes are briefly summarized in this section. This overview will be useful to understand the discussions and insights provided in the review section.
Bandgap energy is one of the most important criteria in evaluating a photoanode as it determines the maximum photocurrent density that can be generated by a given material. Fig. 2 shows the relationship between the bandgap and the maximum achievable photocurrent density.8 We emphasize that the relationship shown in Fig. 2 assumes that all photons available in the solar spectrum with an energy equal to or greater than the bandgap energy are utilized by the material. In other words, this plot assumes 100% incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE). (This means that other factors that can affect photocurrent generation, such as photon absorption, electron–hole separation, and interfacial charge injection as well as the band edge positions relative to the water reduction and oxidation potentials, are not considered.)
 Fig. 2  Theoretical maximum photocurrent density (Jmax) as a function of semiconductor bandgap energy calculated using the photon flux of the AM 1.5G solar spectrum8 assuming 100% IPCE. 
To date, photocurrent densities generated by most oxide-based photoanodes are far from the predicted values shown in Fig. 2. This is partly because not all incident photons with energy equal to or greater than the bandgap energy of the semiconductor are absorbed by the semiconductor. One critical factor that affects photon absorption is the absorption coefficient, α, which indicates how strongly a semiconductor absorbs light at a given wavelength. The inverse of the absorption coefficient is the light penetration depth (α−1) and indicates how thick the photoelectrode needs to be to achieve an optical density of 1 at a given wavelength.9 If α−1 is small, a thinner photoanode film can be used, which is advantageous to reduce bulk recombination.
Even if this loss in photon absorption is taken into account and only the number of absorbed photons is used to calculate the expected photocurrent density (using the experimentally obtained absorbance spectra) assuming 100% absorbed photon-to-current efficiency (APCE), the measured photocurrent densities (JPEC) can still be much lower than those predicted (Jabs). This is because not all electron–hole pairs generated by photon absorption can be separated and utilized for photocurrent generation due to bulk and surface recombination. The following equation shows the relationship between JPEC and Jabs.10–12JPEC = Jabs × ηsep × ηox
In this equation, the bulk separation efficiency, ηsep, represents the percentage of photogenerated holes that reach the surface of the semiconductor. The charge injection efficiency, ηox, represents the percentage of surface reaching holes that are injected into the solution to perform the desired oxidation reaction. Since the surface reaching holes that are not used for the desired oxidation reaction are lost to surface recombination (assuming that none are used for photocorrosion), ηox can also be referred to as the surface separation efficiency. When JPEC is measured using a kinetically fast hole acceptor (e.g. sulfite), ηox is assumed to be 1 and ηsep can easily be calculated by dividing JPEC by Jabs. To calculate ηox for water oxidation, JPEC for water oxidation can be divided by JPEC for the oxidation of a hole acceptor with ηox = 1.
Most oxide-based photoelectrodes suffer from an extremely poor ηsep so improving ηsep is critical to increase JPEC to be closer to Jabs. Since ηox can be improved by the addition of an appropriate oxygen evolution catalyst (OEC), ηox of a bare semiconductor electrode is not as important as ηsep. Sulfite and H2O2 are the most commonly used hole acceptors whose ηox is assumed to be equal to 1.13 However, it should be emphasized that this assumption may fail when using a photoanode whose rate of surface recombination is extremely fast (faster than the rate of sulfite or H2O2 oxidation). In this case, the calculated ηsep will be lower than the actual ηsep because the assumption that ηox = 1 is no longer valid (ηox is less than 1).
The limited ηsep of most oxide-based photoanodes is related to their poor charge transport properties. The factors that affect the conductivity of the majority carriers (electrons for n-type photoanodes) are the carrier concentration and the carrier mobility. Improving these properties can help to decrease bulk recombination. The transport properties of the minority carriers (holes for n-type photoanodes) are often evaluated in terms of the minority carrier diffusion length, which is determined by the lifetime and mobility of the minority carriers.14 These charge transport characteristics, which are critical to understanding and optimizing the performance of photoanodes, are discussed in the review section when available.
Finally, the CBM of the photoanode is another critical factor to consider as it dictates the maximum photovoltage that can be achieved by a given photoanode. (We assume that any material selected as a photoanode already has a VBM properly located to use holes for water oxidation as this is an absolute requirement for photoanodes used in a tandem PEC.) As previously mentioned, the photovoltage gain for water oxidation is the difference between the photocurrent onset for water oxidation and the thermodynamic potential for water oxidation (1.23 V vs. RHE). The most negative photocurrent onset potential that can be achieved by a photoanode is equal to its flatband potential (EFB) and the photocurrent onset will be the same as the EFB when no holes are lost to surface recombination. The EFB is not an intrinsic property of a semiconductor, however, as it can be changed by altering the carrier density. Furthermore, since the EFB of any non-degenerate semiconductor cannot be more negative than its CBM, the CBM is the factor that ultimately limits the EFB position, and, therefore, the maximum photovoltage that can be achieved for water oxidation.

Fig. 3 illustrates how the photovoltage for water oxidation plays a role in determining the STH efficiency of a PEC. In this figure, two hypothetical photoanodes with the same bandgap but different photocurrent onset potentials are compared. Photoanode A can achieve a photovoltage for water oxidation of ∼1 V and photoanode B can achieve a photovoltage for water oxidation of ∼0.7 V. When these photoanodes are combined with a photocathode, the operating current density (Jop) of the resulting PECs can be determined by the point where the photoanode and photocathode J–V curves intersect (the crossing point). In this example, a photocathode that can achieve a photovoltage for H2 evolution of 0.6 V is used. By looking at the crossing point, it is evident that photoanode A can achieve a much higher Jop than photoanode B. This means that the STH efficiency achieved by photoanode A will be higher even though photoanodes A and B have the same bandgap. (The Jop multiplied by 1.23 V provides the STH efficiency of a PEC performing unassisted solar water splitting.) Even when photoanode A is compared with another photoanode that has a smaller bandgap (photoanode C), photoanode A can achieve a higher Jop if photoanode C exhibits only a very limited photovoltage. (The smaller bandgap of photoanode C results in higher photocurrent generation in the high bias region where the photocurrent approaches the photocurrent limited by photon absorption, Jabs.) This is why the CBM position is a very important factor for evaluating a photoanode. This is also why photoanodes that have not shown an onset potential for water oxidation more negative than 0.8 V vs. RHE are not covered in this review.
 Fig. 3  A scheme showing J–V plots of three hypothetical photoanodes and their Jops when combined with a photocathode in a PEC. Photoanodes A and B have the same bandgap but photoanode A has an earlier photocurrent onset potential. Photoanodes B and C have the same photocurrent onset potential but photoanode C has a smaller bandgap. 
3. Review of ternary oxide-based photoanodes
3.1. Metal ferrites

ZnFe2O4. 
ZnFe2O4 possesses many advantageous features of Fe2O3, which has been extensively studied as a photoanode. These include a relatively narrow bandgap (1.9–2.1 eV), exceptional (photo)stability in basic media, and the low cost and environmentally benign nature of its constituent elements.15,16 One major benefit of ZnFe2O4 over Fe2O3 for use in a water splitting PEC is its CBM position. The CBM of Fe2O3 is more positive than the water reduction potential by ∼200 mV while that of ZnFe2O4 is slightly more negative than the water reduction potential,15 which was confirmed by its ability to produce H2 when used as a photocatalyst.17,18 This feature makes ZnFe2O4 more thermodynamically suitable for use in a water splitting PEC. However, despite this advantage, the performances of ZnFe2O4 photoanodes demonstrated to date have been inferior to those of Fe2O3.19,20 The most notable performances of ZnFe2O4 demonstrated for solar water oxidation have been summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparison of solar water oxidation performances of ZnFe2O4 photoanodes where ZnFe2O4 was used as a single photon absorber




Electrode
Preparation method
Onset (VRHE)

J at 1.23 VRHE (mA cm−2)
Electrolyte
IPCE at 400 nm and 1.23 VRHE
Stability




ZnFe2O422
Aerogel assisted-chemical vapor deposition
0.88
0.35
pH 14 NaOH
10%
—


ZnFe2O423
Drop-casting a Zn solution on FeOOH followed by annealing and microwave treatment
0.64
0.24
pH 14 NaOH
7%
3 h stable


ZnFe2O424
Drop-casting a Zn solution on FeOOH followed by annealing and H2 treatment
0.75
0.32
pH 14 NaOH
—
3 h stable


ZnFe2O4/NiFeOx25
Drop-casting a Zn solution on FeOOH followed by annealing and H2 treatment
0.53
0.35
pH 14 NaOH
8% at 1.1 VRHE
24 h stable


TiO2/ZnFe2O4/NiFeOx26
Drop-casting a Zn solution on FeOOH followed by microwave treatment and H2 treatment
0.62
0.92
pH 14 NaOH
8%
11 h stable


ZnFe2O4/NiFeOx27
Drop-casting a Zn solution on FeOOH followed by annealing and H2 heat treatment
0.85
1.00
pH 14 NaOH
6%
—


ZnFe2O428
Atomic layer deposition on an inverse opal structured-substrate
0.90
0.26
pH 13 NaOH
2%
3 h stable


ZnFe2O429
Spray pyrolysis, Ti doping
0.95
0.35
pH 14 NaOH
3%
5 h stable




ZnFe2O4 was first investigated as a photoanode by Blasse and co-workers in 1985.21 The authors prepared ZnFe2O4 as a pellet using solid state methods and subsequently annealed at 700 °C in a N2 atmosphere to improve its n-type character. However, photocurrent generated by the resulting ZnFe2O4 photoanode in pH 14 NaOH under illumination using 300 nm light was low (0.01 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE). Wijayantha and co-workers investigated ZnFe2O4 electrodes prepared by aerogel-assisted chemical vapor deposition (CVD),22 where the particle size and porosity of ZnFe2O4 films could be controlled by changing the solvent used for the precursor solution. The authors observed that a decrease in particle size (from ∼150–200 nm to ∼25–40 nm) and an increase in surface area improved the photocurrent density of ZnFe2O4 for water oxidation from 0.08 mA cm−2 up to 0.16 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 14 NaOH. This result suggests that bulk electron–hole recombination is one of the major limitations of ZnFe2O4, which is also a major challenge for Fe2O3.
Lee and co-workers prepared ZnFe2O4 by first growing an array of FeOOH nanorods (diameter = 40 nm, thickness = 400 nm) on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) using chemical bath deposition.23 They then drop-casted an aqueous Zn(NO3)2 solution onto their FeOOH electrodes and annealed to form ZnFe2O4. After removing the excess ZnO layer in NaOH solution, pure ZnFe2O4 films could be obtained. While the photocurrent density of the as-prepared ZnFe2O4 photoanodes was not considerable (∼0.02 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 14 NaOH), it increased to 0.24 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE after a microwave heat treatment. The authors examined the effect of the microwave treatment on ηsep and ηox by comparing the photocurrent densities for water oxidation and H2O2 oxidation.10,30 The authors showed that the microwave treatment caused ηsep to increase from 4% to 8% at 1.23 V vs. RHE by improving the crystallinity of ZnFe2O4, which was confirmed by a decrease in the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of X-ray diffraction (XRD) peaks. The authors also showed that the microwave treatment increased ηox from 10% to 80% at 1.23 V vs. RHE by decreasing surface defect sites formed during the removal process of the excess ZnO layer. Lastly, the authors performed a stability test at 1.23 V vs. RHE and showed that a stable photocurrent density of 0.24 mA cm−2 could be maintained for 3 h without the aid of an OEC.
In a follow-up paper by Lee and co-workers, the microwave treatment was replaced with a H2-treatment (i.e. annealing at 200 °C in a H2 atmosphere).24 The H2 treatment created additional oxygen vacancies, which was confirmed by the O 1s spectra obtained using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The treatment also resulted in a 10-fold increase in the carrier density, which was confirmed by a decrease in slope of the Mott–Schottky plots measured in pH 14 NaOH. A corresponding shift of the EFB was not observed, however. The authors showed that the H2 treatment could increase the ηsep from 2% to 8% and the ηox from 35% to 90% at 1.23 V vs. RHE compared to the untreated sample. The photocurrent density for water oxidation achieved by the H2-treated ZnFe2O4 without the addition of an OEC layer was 0.32 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 14 NaOH.
Recently, Sivula and co-workers examined the effect of adding a NiFeOx OEC layer.25 They prepared H2-treated ZnFe2O4 using the method reported by Lee and co-workers24 and deposited the NiFeOx OEC on the surface by drop-casting a solution containing Fe and Ni precursors followed by annealing at 100 °C.25 Although the same synthesis method was used, the pristine ZnFe2O4 photoanode prepared by Sivula and co-workers showed an earlier photocurrent onset (∼0.53 V vs. RHE compared to ∼0.75 V vs. RHE) and a lower photocurrent density at 1.23 V vs. RHE (0.18 mA cm−2 compared to 0.32 mA cm−2) for water oxidation in pH 14 NaOH electrolyte. The authors reported that the EFB of ZnFe2O4 is ∼0.5 V vs. RHE, which was determined by the photocurrent onset for H2O2 oxidation (i.e. construction of a Butler plot using the J–V plot for H2O2 oxidation). Their results showed that the addition of the NiFeOx OEC resulted in a negligible change in photocurrent onset potential for water oxidation; however, the fill factor increased considerably and a photocurrent density of 0.35 mA cm−2 was achieved at 1.23 V vs. RHE. The authors concluded that although the addition of the OEC could improve the ηox for water oxidation from 42% to 75% at 1.23 V vs. RHE, the low ηsep (12% at 1.23 V vs. RHE) is a major limitation of ZnFe2O4.
In a more recent study, Lee and co-workers synthesized ZnFe2O4 using a combination of microwave treatment and H2 treatment.26 In addition, they added a thin TiO2 layer between the FTO substrate and ZnFe2O4 layer to block electron injection from FTO to the electrolyte. The bottom TiO2 layer was prepared by spin coating a Ti(IV) diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution on FTO followed by annealing at 250 °C. The thickness of the resulting TiO2 layer was 2–7 nm. FeOOH nanorods were then deposited on the FTO/TiO2 substrate using the previously reported method.23 An aqueous Zn(NO3)2 solution was drop-casted onto FeOOH followed by microwaving for 2 min to form ZnFe2O4 without pre-annealing the sample in a furnace. The excess ZnO was then removed by soaking in a NaOH solution. Based on the XRD patterns, the resulting ZnFe2O4 electrode showed comparable crystallinity to a ZnFe2O4 electrode prepared by annealing in a furnace at 800 °C for 20 min. However, the microwave treatment resulted in ZnFe2O4 nanorods with a smaller average diameter (60 nm vs. 80 nm) than those prepared by annealing in a furnace and also better maintained the conductivity of the FTO substrate. The resulting FTO/TiO2/ZnFe2O4 electrode generated a photocurrent density of 0.22 mA cm−2 for water oxidation at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 14 NaOH. When the FTO/TiO2/ZnFe2O4 electrode was subsequently treated with H2 at 200 °C for 2 h to increase the concentration of oxygen vacancies, the photocurrent density for water oxidation was increased from 0.22 mA cm−2 to 0.79 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE. The authors showed that the H2 treatment increased ηsep from 10% to 24% and ηox for water oxidation from 51% to 77%. The authors then deposited an amorphous NiFeOx OEC layer on the H2-treated FTO/TiO2/ZnFe2O4 by photolysis of a solution containing Fe(III) and Ni(II) precursors using 1 sun illumination for 10 min, followed by a heat treatment at 100 °C for 30 min. The resulting FTO/TiO2/ZnFe2O4/NiFeOx electrode generated a photocurrent density for water oxidation of 0.92 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 14 NaOH.
In 2018, Sivula and co-workers reported an additional study of ZnFe2O4 photoanodes where they discussed the effect of spinel inversion.27 In a normal spinel structure, the divalent ions are stabilized in the tetrahedral (Td) sites while the trivalent ions are stabilized in the octahedral (Oh) sites. The inversion degree (δ) is defined by the fraction of Td sites occupied by the trivalent ion, which is Fe3+ in the case of ZnFe2O4. The authors used Rietveld refinement to show that δ increased from 0.13 to 0.30 when the annealing temperature was decreased from 800 °C to 600 °C. The authors also showed that a higher degree of spinel inversion resulted in superior majority charge carrier transport properties, and, therefore, a higher ηsep. For example, the ηsep of ZnFe2O4 annealed at 600 °C (17%) was considerably higher than that of ZnFe2O4 annealed at 800 °C (8%) at 1.23 V vs. RHE. The authors postulated that the conductivity of ZnFe2O4 is likely based on small polaron hopping, and changes in the electronic structure that accompany the normal-inverse spinel transition could aid charge transport via a hopping mechanism. The ZnFe2O4 sample with δ = 0.30 generated photocurrent densities of 0.8 mA cm−2 and 1.0 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 14 NaOH without and with the addition of a NiFeOx OEC, respectively. These photocurrent densities are the highest obtained for ZnFe2O4 used as a single photon absorber for solar water oxidation. This study demonstrates that the factors affecting small polaron-based charge transport can be significantly different from those affecting charge transport through the conduction band. (Structural disorder is generally known to be unfavorable for charge transport through the conduction band.) This study also shows that understanding and improving small polaron-based charge transport is critical in improving the photoelectrochemical properties of oxide-based photoelectrodes.
Atomic doping, which increases the majority carrier density of a material, is another possible method to improve ηsep. Li and co-workers prepared Ti-doped ZnFe2O4 by spray pyrolysis followed by additional annealing steps where Ti4+ ions substitutionally replaced Fe3+ ions.29 The authors showed a slight shift of the (220) peak in the XRD pattern to a higher two theta value as evidence for incorporation of Ti into the ZnFe2O4 lattice. The atomic percent of Ti present in the Fe site of the ZnFe2O4 lattice was determined to be 6% by XPS. The authors obtained a J–V plot for water oxidation in pH 14 NaOH and showed that the photocurrent density at 1.23 V vs. RHE improved from 0.05 to 0.35 mA cm−2 by Ti doping, although the photocurrent onset potential was identical at 0.95 V vs. RHE. Mott–Schottky measurements showed that the carrier density of ZnFe2O4 increased upon Ti doping although no change of the EFB (0.85 V vs. RHE) was observed.
Another effective way to increase ηsep is to deposit an extremely thin layer of ZnFe2O4 on a high surface area, wide-bandgap substrate (e.g. TiO2 nanotube arrays,31 Al-doped ZnO nanorod arrays32). For example, Kuang and co-workers deposited a thin layer of ZnFe2O4 (15 nm) on Al-doped ZnO nanowire arrays.32 The diameter and thickness of the Al-doped ZnO nanowires were ∼130 nm and ∼7 μm, respectively. The resulting Al-doped ZnO and Al-doped ZnO/ZnFe2O4 nanowires generated photocurrent densities of 0.30 mA cm−2 and 1.72 mA cm−2, respectively, at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 6.5 Na2SO4. This means that most of the photocurrent (∼1.42 mA cm−2) was generated by the ZnFe2O4 layer. This value, which was obtained without the use of an OEC, is significantly higher than the photocurrent obtained by ZnFe2O4 electrodes deposited on typical 2D conducting substrates. ZnFe2O4 has also been used as an overlayer on other photoanodes. For example, it has been combined with Fe2O3 to enhance electron–hole separation33,34 and with BiVO4 to increase the stability of BiVO4 in basic media while simultaneously increasing light absorption.35
Decreasing surface recombination is another possible strategy to improve the performance of ZnFe2O4. Choi and co-workers showed that an Al treatment can be an effective way to passivate the surface of ZnFe2O4.34 The Fe3+ ions exposed on the surface of ZnFe2O4 have imperfect coordination environments, which can generate surface states that facilitate surface recombination.36 The authors postulated that forming a thin ZnFe1−xAlxO4 solid solution layer on the surface could provide a means to reduce the number of Fe3+ ions exposed at the surface. The authors tested this postulation using a Fe2O3/ZnFe2O4 composite electrode where ZnFe2O4 served as an overlayer. The Al2O3 surface layer was added by drop-casting an aqueous Al(NO3)3 solution on the Fe2O3/ZnFe2O4 electrode followed by annealing in air at 520 °C. The excess Al2O3 was then removed by soaking in 1 M NaOH. The J–V plots for water oxidation by the Fe2O3/ZnFe2O4 electrodes performed in pH 14 NaOH showed that the photocurrent density at 1.23 V vs. RHE was improved from 0.04 to 0.30 mA cm−2 by the Al treatment. When Co2+ ions were adsorbed on the surface of the Al-treated Fe2O3/ZnFe2O4 to serve as an OEC, the photocurrent density at 1.23 V vs. RHE increased to 0.39 mA cm−2, and the photocurrent onset was shifted from 0.85 to 0.65 V vs. RHE.
To elucidate the major differences between ZnFe2O4 and Fe2O3 photoanodes, Bein and co-workers prepared 20 nm-thick ZnFe2O4 and Fe2O3 films by atomic layer deposition (ALD) followed by annealing at 600 °C.28 The EFB and carrier densities of the resulting films were 0.64 V vs. RHE and 2 × 1017 cm−3 for ZnFe2O4 and 0.75 V vs. RHE and 2 × 1018 cm−3 for Fe2O3. Although the carrier density of ZnFe2O4 was lower than that of Fe2O3, it possessed a more negative EFB, probably because the CBM of ZnFe2O4 is located above that of Fe2O3. The J–V plots for water oxidation measured in pH 13 NaOH showed that while the photocurrent onset potential of ZnFe2O4 (0.9 V vs. RHE) was more negative than that of Fe2O3 (1.1 V vs. RHE), the photocurrent density at 1.23 V vs. RHE of ZnFe2O4 (0.05 mA cm−2) was considerably lower than that of Fe2O3 (0.24 mA cm−2). The UV-vis absorption spectra showed that although ZnFe2O4 and Fe2O3 have comparable bandgaps, the absorbance of ZnFe2O4 was significantly lower in the visible region (Fig. 4), suggesting that poor photon absorption by ZnFe2O4 is the major reason for its lower photocurrent density. (The lower carrier density of the ZnFe2O4 film compared to the Fe2O3 film used in this study could have also made a contribution to its lower photocurrent generation.) Additionally, intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) was used to compare the charge transfer properties of these two compounds for water oxidation. The results showed that the rates of charge transfer for water oxidation were comparable, while the rate of surface recombination of ZnFe2O4 was slower than that of Fe2O3. The room temperature carrier mobilities of ZnFe2O4 and Fe2O3 were previously reported to be 3 × 10−8 cm2 V−1 s−137 and 6 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1,38 respectively. These results suggest that the low mobility of ZnFe2O4 may be an additional factor that causes the photocurrent of ZnFe2O4 to be inferior to that of Fe2O3.
 Fig. 4  Reflectance-corrected absorbance (Acorr) spectra of ALD-deposited ZnFe2O4 and Fe2O3 films with corresponding photographs of the films. Adapted with permission from ref. 28 John Wiley & Sons. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Continuous improvement of the photoelectrochemical properties of ZnFe2O4 summarized here suggests that further enhancement of the performance of ZnFe2O4 may be achieved when multiple strategies are combined. However, remarkable improvements in the light absorption properties, bulk separation, and photocurrent onset potential will be necessary in order to consider using ZnFe2O4 as the primary photon absorber in a photoanode system.


MgFe2O4 and CuFe2O4. 
MgFe2O4 is an n-type oxide that also possesses a spinel structure with a bandgap of 2.0–2.2 eV.16 However, only a few studies investigating the performance of MgFe2O4 as a photoanode have been reported to date.21,39–41 These reports include studies using MgFe2O4 as an overlayer on Fe2O340 and as an n-type layer on p-type CaFe2O4 to form a heterojunction.41 Therefore, there is limited information available about the properties of MgFe2O4 used as a single photon absorber. The CBM of MgFe2O4 has been confirmed to be more negative than 0 V vs. RHE by both Mott–Schottky measurements and detection of H2 produced by MgFe2O4 when it was used as a photocatalyst.42
CuFe2O4 is another n-type oxide and its bandgap has been reported to be 1.3–1.5 eV.16 CuFe2O4 has a disordered spinel structure where Cu2+ and Fe3+ ions readily occupy both Td and Oh sites.43,44 The degree of inversion can vary depending on the synthesis method. The CBM of CuFe2O4 was also confirmed to lie above 0 V vs. RHE by detection of H2 produced by CuFe2O4 when it was used as a photocatalyst.45
In a paper mentioned previously in the ZnFe2O4 section, Sivula and co-workers compared the photoelectrochemical properties of MgFe2O4 and CuFe2O4 with those of ZnFe2O4 (Fig. 5).25 To prepare their electrodes, FeOOH films were used as precursor films and the second metal atom was incorporated by drop-casting a solution containing Mg, Cu, or Zn ions followed by annealing. After forming the desired spinel compounds, the excess oxides were removed by soaking the films as follows: MgO and CuO were dissolved in 7 M HNO3 and ZnO was dissolved in 5 M NaOH. The authors then annealed the CuFe2O4 films in air at 550 °C to improve crystallinity and annealed the MgFe2O4 and ZnFe2O4 films at 200 °C under H2 flow to increase the carrier density by increasing oxygen vacancies, which was confirmed by XPS O 1s spectra.
 Fig. 5  Photoelectrochemical properties of CuFe2O4 (CFO), MgFe2O4 (MFO), and ZnFe2O4 (ZFO) in pH 14 NaOH, where H, 550, and NFO represent H2 heat treatment, annealing in air at 550 °C, and the addition of a NiFeOx OEC, respectively: (a–c) J–V plots obtained in pH 14 NaOH under AM 1.5G illumination with Butler plots (J2vs. E) shown as insets. For H2O2 oxidation, 0.5 M H2O2 was dissolved in the solution. (d–f) Efficiencies for bulk charge separation (ηbulk = ηsep) and the interfacial hole transfer reaction (ηsurface = ηox). Adapted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The authors determined the indirect bandgaps of MgFe2O4 and CuFe2O4 to be 2.0 eV and 1.3 eV, respectively. When H2O2 was used as a hole scavenger, MgFe2O4 and CuFe2O4 generated photocurrent densities of 0.10 mA cm−2 and 0.30 mA cm−2, respectively, at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 14 NaOH. Based on these results, the ηsep at 1.23 V vs. RHE was determined to be 2% for MgFe2O4 and 3% for CuFe2O4 (Fig. 5). These are both significantly lower than the ηsep of ZnFe2O4 (12%) reported in the same paper. The authors estimated the EFB of MgFe2O4 to be ∼0.65 V vs. RHE and the EFB of CuFe2O4 to be ∼0.8 V vs. RHE using the photocurrent onset potentials measured for H2O2 oxidation (i.e. construction of Butler plots using the J–V plots for H2O2 oxidation). It is not clear whether these positive EFB values are due to insufficient doping levels or extremely fast surface recombination near the EFB. If the latter is true, the injection rate for H2O2 oxidation cannot be 100% in the potential region near the EFB and the photocurrent onset potential does not accurately represent the EFB.
Lastly, the water oxidation photocurrent densities at 1.23 V vs. RHE were 0.02 mA cm−2 for MgFe2O4 and 0.01 mA cm−2 for CuFe2O4. After the deposition of a NiFeOx OEC, the photocurrent densities increased to 0.04 mA cm−2 and 0.15 mA cm−2 for MgFe2O4 and CuFe2O4, respectively, at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 14 NaOH. Based on these results, the ηox was calculated to be 50% for MgFe2O4 and 43% for CuFe2O4 at 1.23 V vs. RHE after the addition of the NiFeOx OEC (Fig. 5). The performances of MgFe2O4 and CuFe2O4 for water oxidation are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Comparison of solar water oxidation performances of MgFe2O4 and CuFe2O4 photoanodes




Electrode
Preparation method
Onset (VRHE)

J at 1.23 VRHE (mA cm−2)
Electrolyte
IPCE at 1.1 VRHE, 400 nm
Stability




MgFe2O4/NiFeOx25
Drop-casting a Mg solution on FeOOH followed by annealing and H2 heat treatment
0.64
0.04
pH 14 NaOH
3.5%
1 h stable


CuFe2O4/NiFeOx25
Drop-casting a Cu solution on FeOOH followed by two annealing processes in air
0.80
0.15
pH 14 NaOH
4.0%
24 h stable




Since the limitations of MgFe2O4 and CuFe2O4 are very similar to those of Fe2O3 and ZnFe2O4, which have been intensively studied as photoanodes, the various methods that have been proven to enhance the photoelectrochemical properties of Fe2O3 and ZnFe2O4 may be applied to enhance the photoelectrochemical properties of MgFe2O4 and CuFe2O4. The most critical task for the consideration of MgFe2O4 and CuFe2O4 as viable photoanodes is the identification of effective methods to improve their extremely poor bulk charge separation.


BiFeO3. 
BiFeO3 has a rhombohedrally distorted perovskite structure in which the displacements of the Bi, Fe, and O atoms in the distorted structure remove the center of symmetry and cause BiFeO3 to be ferroelectric.46
The bandgap of BiFeO3 is reported to be 2.4–2.6 eV based on Tauc plots; however, UV-vis absorption spectra of BiFeO3 commonly show the light absorption onset to be around 600 nm.47–49 This suggests that its bandgap could be as low as 2.1 eV, although its absorption coefficient near the absorption onset region may be low. One paper reported the color of BiFeO3 to be red-orange, providing additional support that BiFeO3 may have a lower bandgap energy than reported.50 An EFB of n-type BiFeO3 as negative as −0.30 V to 0 V vs. RHE has been reported based on Mott–Schottky measurements, indicating that the CBM of BiFeO3 is much more negative than 0 V vs. RHE.48,49 These advantageous features encourage the investigation of BiFeO3 as a photoanode material for solar water splitting.
Without the addition of any extrinsic dopants, both n-type and p-type BiFeO3 have been obtained, suggesting that intrinsic defects responsible for both n-type doping and p-type doping can readily form in BiFeO3. The defects that can lead to n-type doping include oxygen vacancies51 while the defects that can lead to p-type doping include Bi vacancies.52 This means that the doping type of BiFeO3 is determined by which type of defects preferentially form using a given synthesis condition. For example, BiFeO3 electrodes prepared by pulsed laser deposition49 and by sputtering53 are reported to be n-type as prepared. On the other hand, BiFeO3 electrodes prepared by chemical bath deposition47,54 and by low pressure-CVD48 are reported to be p-type as prepared.
It has also been reported that the ferroelectric nature of BiFeO3 allows the band bending at the BiFeO3/electrolyte interface to flip (i.e. upward to downward or downward to upward) upon the application of an electric field resulting in n-to-p (or p-to-n) conversion.47,49,54,55 However, it is not clear whether the observed n-to-p (or p-to-n) conversion upon the application of an electric field is truly caused by the ferroelectricity of BiFeO3. It is possible that the observed conversion may be caused by the creation of more defects that can serve as donors or acceptors during the application of the electric field, which altered the majority carrier type. If the as-prepared BiFeO3 is very lightly doped and the EFB is located near the middle of its bandgap, the conversion between n-type and p-type behaviors may be observed even with a small change in acceptor or donor concentration. In fact, some studies reporting n-to-p (or p-to-n) conversion of BiFeO3 when an electric field was applied showed both n- and p-type behavior, which is demonstrated as a switching of the sign of the photocurrent (i.e. cathodic to anodic or anodic to cathodic) during a single potential sweep prior to the application of the electric field (Fig. 6).47,49,54 This behavior is typically observed with a very lightly doped semiconductor. After applying an electric field, the resulting samples also showed a change in the sign of the photocurrent during a single potential sweep (Fig. 6), which means that even the electric field-treated samples are still very lightly doped. The only obvious change observed after the electric field treatment was a shift in the potential where the cathodic to anodic photocurrent conversion occurred (equivalent to the EFB) (Fig. 6).47,49,54,55 (When n-to-p conversion was observed the EFB was shifted to the positive direction and when p-to-n conversion was observed the EFB was shifted to the negative direction.) We note that increasing the carrier density by applying a potential (or an electric field) to a photoelectrode to create more defects has been achieved even when the photoelectrode is not ferroelectric.56 Also, if the n-to-p (or p-to-n) conversion is achieved solely by flipping of the band bending associated with the ferroelectricity, it should be confirmed that the EFB before and after applying the electric field remains unchanged. Therefore, more careful and systematic studies will be necessary to support the claim that the ferroelectricity of BiFeO3 is the reason that n-to-p (or p-to-n) conversion of BiFeO3 can easily change when an electric field is applied.
 Fig. 6  
J–V plots of BiFeO3 films in pH 7 Na2SO4 under illumination (power density not specified) before (red) and after (green) electric field treatment (i.e. applying −8 V vs. Ag/AgCl). The dark current is shown by the black line. ((a) EFB of as-prepared sample, (b) EFB of E-field-treated sample, (c) arrow indicating the p-to-n conversion caused by the E-field-treatment. It should be noted that both the as-prepared and E-field-treated samples show p-to-n conversion within a single scan at the location of their EFBs. Also, outside of the shaded area, the E-field-treatment does not result in p-to-n conversion). Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2016 American Institute of Physics Publishing LLC. 
While the bandgap and band positions of BiFeO3 look promising, there have been only a few studies investigating the photoelectrochemical properties of BiFeO3.47–49,54,55 The highest performing n-type BiFeO3 showed a water oxidation photocurrent density of 0.17 mA cm−2 at 0.85 V vs. RHE in a pH 6 Na2SO4 solution with a photocurrent onset potential of 0.15 V vs. RHE.49 The highest performing p-type BiFeO3 showed a water reduction photocurrent density of −0.05 mA cm−2 at 0.10 V vs. RHE in a pH 6 Na2SO4 solution with a photocurrent onset potential of 0.55 V vs. RHE.49 The photostability of n-type BiFeO3 for water oxidation has also been demonstrated in pH 6 and pH 9 electrolytes by Moniz and co-workers.48 The authors showed that when combined with a Ni borate OEC, n-type BiFeO3 generated a photocurrent density of 0.6 mA cm−2 at 1.7 V vs. RHE for 3 h. Evolved H2 and O2 gases were collected during the stability test, and Faradaic efficiencies for H2 and O2 evolution were calculated to be 85% and 70%, respectively.
The results obtained for BiFeO3 so far clearly show that BiFeO3 is an interesting compound that has the potential to be used as a photoelectrode with significant room for improvement. Most studies of BiFeO3 to date have focused primarily on demonstrating switching of the doping type; however, facile conversion of the doping type means that both the as-prepared and converted BiFeO3 electrodes are very lightly doped. The focus of future studies should lie in preparing optimally doped n-type or p-type BiFeO3 to systematically assess its potential as a photoanode or photocathode for solar water splitting.

3.2. Metal tungstates

CuWO4. 
CuWO4 is an extensively studied photoanode material with a bandgap of 2.2–2.3 eV. The α−1 of CuWO4 has been reported as ∼600 nm at λ = 450 nm by Hamann and co-workers.57 The α−1 was determined from the UV-vis absorption spectrum of an 80 nm-thick compact and smooth CuWO4 film prepared by ALD. The authors noted that their measured α−1 value is shorter than a previously reported value (∼2500 nm at λ = 450 nm)58 and attributed this difference to different densities of the two films. The film with the longer light penetration depth was prepared by spray pyrolysis and was not a dense film.
CuWO4 has several advantages when compared with WO3. First, its bandgap is smaller than that of WO3 (∼2.6 eV), allowing utilization of a greater portion of visible light. The reduction in bandgap results from an upward shift of the VBM caused by the mixing of Cu 3d and O 2p orbitals, while the CBM remains similar to that of WO3 (Fig. 7a).58 Additionally, CuWO4 is reported to be chemically and photoelectrochemically stable in pH 7–9, where WO3 is not stable.59–61 (WO3 is stable only in strongly acidic solutions).62Fig. 7b shows J–t plots obtained for CuWO4 and WO3 photoanodes in pH 7 borate buffer at an applied potential of 1.23 V vs. RHE. Both films used in this study were prepared by electrodeposition. CuWO4 showed stable photocurrent generation for 12 h, while WO3 showed a continuous photocurrent decay.58,61 The fact that CuWO4 is stable during water oxidation even without the addition of an OEC suggests that either CuWO4 is thermodynamically stable against photocorrosion or the rate of photocorrosion of CuWO4 is considerably slower than the rate of water oxidation.
 Fig. 7  (a) Band diagrams for CuWO4 and WO3. Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) J–t plots of CuWO4 and WO3 photoanodes at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 7 borate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
The fundamental limitation of CuWO4 appears to be its extremely poor ηsep. Smith and co-workers examined photocurrent generation in pH 7 phosphate buffer using H2O2 as a hole scavenger and reported that the ηsep of their porous CuWO4 film, which was prepared by spray pyrolysis, was only 3% at 1.23 V vs. RHE.63 Considering that the oxidation of H2O2 can cause a current doubling effect, the actual ηsep may be even lower than this reported value.64 Hamann and co-workers confirmed the current doubling effect of H2O2 by comparing photocurrents generated for the oxidation of H2O2 and sulfite in pH 9 borate buffer (Fig. 8) using their ALD-deposited CuWO4 electrodes.65 Their results showed that the photocurrent obtained for H2O2 oxidation was much higher than the photocurrent obtained for sulfite oxidation. For example, the photocurrent densities at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the oxidation of H2O2 and sulfite were 0.29 mA cm−2 and 0.16 mA cm−2, respectively. The use of sulfite resulted in a shift of the onset potential from 0.85 to 0.6 V vs. RHE compared to water oxidation. However, although the sulfite oxidation photocurrent was enhanced in the low bias region (<1.23 V vs. RHE), photocurrents for sulfite oxidation and water oxidation became comparable in the high bias region (>1.23 V vs. RHE). This result suggests that the major challenge of using CuWO4 as a photoanode is its extremely poor ηsep. Since the ηox for water oxidation is not a serious limiting factor for CuWO4, it is also expected that the use of an OEC will not drastically increase the photocurrent of CuWO4 for water oxidation. Indeed, studies that report the combination of CuWO4 with an OEC to achieve photocurrent enhancement have been very rare. Only an incremental increase in photocurrent for water oxidation has been observed when manganese phosphate was used as an OEC on a CuWO4 or a CuWO4/WO3 composite photoanode.61,66
 Fig. 8  
J–V plots of CuWO4 for water oxidation (black), sulfite oxidation (red), and H2O2 oxidation (blue) in pH 9 borate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. The vertical dashed gray line represents the thermodynamic potential for water oxidation (1.23 V vs. RHE). Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As previously mentioned, one approach to increase ηsep is atomic doping, which can increase the carrier density and improve charge transport properties, thus improving electron–hole separation. Smith and co-workers introduced Fe3+ into the CuWO4 lattice to substitute the octahedrally coordinated Cu2+ using a spray pyrolysis method.63 The doped CuWO4 showed an increase in photocurrent for both water oxidation (from 0.13 mA cm−2 to 0.14 mA cm−2) and H2O2 oxidation (from 0.27 mA cm−2 to 0.42 mA cm−2) at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 7 phosphate buffer. However, the exact role of the dopant was not confirmed in this study because no direct evidence was provided to confirm an increase in the charge carrier density of the doped sample. In addition to Fe3+, Zn2+ and Co2+ have also been investigated as dopants to substitute Cu2+, although the addition of these atoms has not been shown to improve the photoelectrochemical performance.61,67
H2-Treatments have also been employed to increase the carrier density and ηsep of CuWO4.68,69 For example, Diao and co-workers annealed their CuWO4 film in a 5% hydrogen atmosphere (5% H2 and 95% Ar) at 250 °C and observed an increase in the photocurrent density from 0.30 mA cm−2 to 0.45 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 7 phosphate buffer.69 The authors confirmed that the carrier density was increased by 2.7 times using Mott–Schottky analysis, although the EFB remained unchanged. They also used XPS to show that the oxygen vacancies generated by the H2 treatment were accompanied by an increase in the concentration of W5+ in CuWO4.
Other attempts to improve the performance of CuWO4 have involved minimizing the bulk resistance of the material. For example, multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were added to make composites with CuWO4 to provide alternative conductive pathways for charge carriers.70 In this study, CuWO4 films were prepared by spray pyrolysis, and MWCNTs were added to the CuWO4 precursor solution with a MWCNT:CuWO4 ratio of 1:10000 by weight. Although the addition of MWCNTs resulted in an enhancement of the photocurrent for water oxidation in pH 10 carbonate buffer solution, the degree of enhancement was not significant. (An increase from 0.20 mA cm−2 to 0.225 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE was observed.)
Fabrication of nanostructured films with a particle size smaller than the charge carrier diffusion length is another important strategy to improve ηsep. The hole diffusion length of CuWO4 was determined to be 30 nm by time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) measurements of a CuWO4 thin film grown by CVD.71 The short carrier diffusion length of CuWO4 provides a challenge when trying to design nanostructured materials that can effectively increase bulk charge separation. Several attempts have been made to develop high surface area CuWO4 electrodes, including the conversion of nanostructured WO3.60,69,72 For example, Li and co-workers produced a CuWO4 photoanode composed of vertically oriented CuWO4 nanoflakes with dimensions of ∼1 μm × ∼1 μm × ∼20–30 nm. This electrode showed the best performance among all undoped CuWO4 photoanodes but the photocurrent density achieved by this sample for water oxidation in pH 9.5 borate buffer was still only ∼0.4 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE.72
A few groups have investigated the presence of surface states in CuWO4 photoelectrodes as a possible cause for this low photocurrent generation. Bartlett and co-workers prepared a dense, polycrystalline CuWO4 film by spin-coating a sol–gel precursor containing Cu and W and studied the presence of surface states using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).73 From Mott–Schottky analysis, the authors observed Fermi level pinning in the potential region of 0.81–1.01 V vs. RHE when low frequencies were used. This Fermi level pinning disappeared as the frequency was increased. The authors also observed that the Fermi level pinning was present both in the dark and under illumination in the same potential region. Based on these observations, the authors concluded that the Fermi level pinning was caused by the presence of permanent surface states in their CuWO4, although the specific energetic locations of these states could not be determined. The authors discussed that the presence of these surface states can limit the rate of water oxidation and can also serve as recombination centers in the low bias region, thus delaying the photocurrent onset for water oxidation.
On the other hand, Hamann and co-workers reported that their CuWO4 films prepared by ALD or spray pyrolysis commonly did not show Fermi level pinning in Mott–Schottky plots obtained in the dark or under illumination.74 Instead, the authors used Bode plots, cyclic voltammetry (CV), and EIS analysis to show that surface states are formed only under electrochemical or photoelectrochemical water oxidation conditions. Based on these results, the authors concluded that surface states in their CuWO4 electrodes are not intrinsic states but are formed due to water oxidation intermediates. The authors stated that recombination of these intermediate species with electrons in the conduction band of CuWO4 is responsible for the difference in the photocurrent onset potentials for sulfite and water oxidation.
In addition to challenges related to bulk recombination and the presence of surface states, CuWO4 has a relatively wide bandgap. Thus, an attempt to decrease the bandgap of CuWO4 has been made to improve photon absorption. Choi and co-workers formed solid solutions of CuWO4 and CuMoO4 and produced CuW1−xMoxO4 films by electrodeposition followed by annealing at 500 °C in air.75 The CuW0.35Mo0.65O4 photoanode showed a successful decrease in the bandgap from 2.3 eV to 2.0 eV. In addition to an increase in the photon absorption, the CuW0.35Mo0.65O4 photoanode also showed enhanced photocurrent generation for water oxidation (e.g. 0.06 mA cm−2 for CuWO4 and 0.15 mA cm−2 for CuW0.35Mo0.65O4 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 7 phosphate buffer). However, using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the authors showed that Mo doping decreases the bandgap by lowering the CBM of CuWO4, rather than raising the VBM, which is thermodynamically unfavorable for solar H2 production. Therefore, the authors concluded that the bandgap reduction achieved by CuW1−xMoxO4 is not desirable for solar water splitting applications.
The results and understanding of CuWO4 provided to date suggest that unless new strategies are developed to drastically increase ηsep of CuWO4, further improving the photoelectrochemical properties of CuWO4 for use as a single photon absorber will be challenging. Also, when compared with ternary metal ferrites that have the same bulk separation problem, both the CBM and bandgap of CuWO4 are less favorable, making CuWO4 less promising for future development as a photoanode.


α-SnWO4. 
α-SnWO4 has several attractive features for use as a photoanode; it possesses a bandgap of 1.64–2.1 eV76–79 and it has a favorable α−1 of ∼70 nm at λ = 450 nm.77 The α−1 value was determined based on the UV-vis transmittance and reflectance spectra of a dense and smooth 180 nm-thick α-SnWO4 film prepared by DC magnetron sputtering. The EFB determined using Mott–Schottky analysis is reported to be −0.14 V to 0 V vs. RHE.78–80 This confirms that the CBM of α-SnWO4 lies at a more negative potential than 0 V vs. RHE, which is advantageous for application in a water splitting PEC.
Despite the benefits outlined above, α-SnWO4 has not yet shown promising photocurrent generation. Rao and co-workers compared the photocurrent for water oxidation and sulfite oxidation using nanoporous α-SnWO4 electrodes prepared by hydrothermal conversion of WO3 in an aqueous SnCl2 solution.79 The photocurrent generated by this electrode for sulfite oxidation was very low and was similar to that observed for water oxidation (0.08 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE, pH 7 phosphate buffer) (Fig. 9a). The negligible difference between the sulfite and water oxidation photocurrents suggests that the major limitation of α-SnWO4 is not surface recombination but bulk recombination.
 Fig. 9  Chopped light J–V plots of α-SnWO4 prepared by (a) Rao and co-workers measured in pH 7 phosphate buffer (adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society), (b) Bartlett and co-workers measured in pH 5 phosphate buffer (adapted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015 Elsevier), and (c) Takanabe and co-workers measured in a pH 3 sulfate solution. (d) Comparison between the first and second J–V scans of α-SnWO4 prepared by Takanabe and co-workers. For (c) and (d), the numbers in parentheses refer to the thicknesses of the films in nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2015 American Institute of Physics Publishing LLC. All J–V plots were measured under AM 1.5G illumination. 
One difficulty in producing high quality α-SnWO4 photoelectrodes is that α-SnWO4 contains Sn2+, which can be easily oxidized to Sn4+. It has been reported that Sn4+ defects can behave as electron traps in Sn2+-containing metal oxide photocatalysts, decreasing their photocatalytic activity.79–82 Therefore, the use of an inert or vacuum atmosphere during annealing is necessary to produce highly crystalline α-SnWO4.76,79,83 Even when inert conditions such as Ar or N2 atmospheres were used for annealing during the solid state syntheses of α-SnWO4 powders, Mössbauer spectroscopy83 and XPS78 studies have revealed the presence of Sn4+ in the α-SnWO4 samples. Therefore, special care is necessary to avoid the production of Sn4+ impurities or defects during the synthesis of α-SnWO4.
In addition to challenges associated with Sn2+ oxidation during synthesis, some studies have reported that electrochemical oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ can also readily occur in aqueous solutions.76,79 For example, Rao and co-workers and Bartlett and co-workers used nanoporous α-SnWO4 films prepared by hydrothermal methods and reported that nonzero dark current was present in their J–V plots obtained in pH 7 phosphate buffer or pH 5 phosphate buffer, respectively, under chopped illumination (Fig. 9a and b). The authors claimed that this may be due to the electrochemical oxidation of Sn2+ in α-SnWO4. However, Takanabe and co-workers did not observe such dark current (Fig. 9c) in a J–V plot obtained in 0.2 M sulfate (pH 3) for their dense and highly crystalline α-SnWO4 film, which was prepared by DC magnetron sputtering followed by annealing at 600 °C in a N2 environment.80 The discrepancy in these studies suggests that the electrochemical instability of Sn2+ in the α-SnWO4 lattice may not be an intrinsic problem of α-SnWO4 and can be affected considerably by the quality of the film (i.e. crystallinity, surface defects). It may also be possible that the electrochemical dark current observed by other groups may be due to the oxidation of Sn2+ in other Sn2+-containing impurities, rather than the oxidation of Sn2+ in the α-SnWO4 lattice.
The photostability of Sn2+ in α-SnWO4 is another concern because the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ may occur by photogenerated holes during photoelectrochemical water oxidation. For example, Takanabe and co-workers showed a significant decrease in the photocurrent for water oxidation after one LSV sweep under illumination. They attributed this decrease to the generation of Sn4+ during the first sweep, which can act as an electron trap site during subsequent sweeps (Fig. 9d).80 Rao and co-workers investigated the anodic photocorrosion of α-SnWO4 by monitoring changes in photocurrent generation during three consecutive LSV sweeps under illumination.79 They used three different electrolytes: aqueous pH 7 phosphate buffer, an aqueous solution containing Fe(CN)64−/3−, and anhydrous acetonitrile containing 1 M LiClO4 as a supporting electrolyte (Fig. 10). The degree of surface oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ was measured from the Sn 3d5/2 XPS spectra. The photocurrent for water oxidation measured in aqueous pH 7 phosphate buffer showed a significant decay between the first and third LSV sweeps, accompanied by the detection of a large amount of Sn4+ by XPS. However, photocurrent measured in an aqueous solution containing Fe(CN)64−/3− as a kinetically fast redox couple showed negligible photocurrent decay after three LSV sweeps. This result suggests that the photooxidation of Sn2+ on the α-SnWO4 surface may not be a serious issue if α-SnWO4 is coupled with an OEC that can increase the rate of water oxidation to be comparable to that of Fe(CN)64− oxidation. The authors also noted that the formation of Sn4+ in α-SnWO4 did not occur in nonaqueous conditions, meaning that the oxidation of α-SnWO4 requires the presence of water (SnWO4 + H2O + 2h+ → SnO2 + WO3 + 2H+). This suggests that the addition of a protection layer, which can prevent direct contact with water, may be an effective strategy to prevent photocorrosion of α-SnWO4.
 Fig. 10  (a) Differences in photocurrent density at different applied potentials between the first and third LSV measurements of α-SnWO4 under AM 1.5G illumination in aqueous pH 7 phosphate buffer, an aqueous electrolyte containing Fe(CN)64−/3−, and nonaqueous anhydrous acetonitrile containing 1 M LiClO4. (b) Sn 3d5/2 XPS spectra of α-SnWO4 as-synthesized (top), after LSV measurements in the nonaqueous electrolyte (middle), and after LSV measurements in the aqueous electrolyte without a kinetically fast redox couple (bottom). Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Judging from its bandgap, CBM, α−1, and photocurrent onset potential, α-SnWO4 has the possibility to become an efficient photoanode if methods to produce high quality α-SnWO4 electrodes and strategies to effectively reduce bulk recombination in α-SnWO4 can be developed.


Fe2WO6. 
Fe2WO6 is reported to have a favorable bandgap of 1.5–1.7 eV; however, there are only a few studies reporting its performance as a photoanode.84,85 Although this bandgap is well-suited for solar water splitting, Fe2WO6 has several limitations that may ultimately prevent its use as a photoanode for a water splitting PEC. Abdi and co-workers synthesized Fe2WO6 thin films using spray pyrolysis and found that its EFB lies at 0.6–0.65 V vs. RHE using Mott–Schottky analysis.85 The authors also estimated the VBM to be ∼1.7 eV below the Fermi level from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements. Since the bandgap of their Fe2WO6 was measured to be 1.7 eV, these results indicate that the CBM lies very close to the Fermi level (0.6–0.65 V vs. RHE). This positive CBM position will fundamentally limit the photovoltage gain for water oxidation by Fe2WO6.
Another major limitation of Fe2WO6 is its long α−1 of 1000 nm at λ = 450 nm, which indicates that Fe2WO6 is not a good photon absorber.85 This α−1 value was determined by UV-vis measurements using dense, polycrystalline Fe2WO6 films prepared by spray pyrolysis. Furthermore, the ηsep and hole diffusion length of this Fe2WO6 film were determined to be only 5% and 10 nm, respectively.85 Due to the unfavorably positioned band edges, poor light absorption properties, and severe bulk recombination, Fe2WO6 is not likely to be a promising photoanode candidate for a water splitting PEC.

3.3. BiVO4
BiVO4 is an n-type semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.4–2.5 eV that has proven to be one of the most promising photoanodes for use in a water splitting PEC. The CBM is located at ∼0 V vs. RHE, which is favorable for H2 evolution.15 BiVO4 has been reported to have an EFB as negative as ∼0.1 V vs. RHE.20,86–92 Additionally, a photocurrent onset potential as negative as ∼0.25 V vs. RHE has been demonstrated for water oxidation when BiVO4 was combined with an OEC.20,86–91,93–96 A photocurrent onset of 0.25 V vs. RHE is equivalent to achieving a photovoltage of ∼1 V for water oxidation. Photoanodes with a bandgap that can utilize visible light and achieve such a high photovoltage for water oxidation are rare. Because of this favorable photocurrent onset potential, BiVO4 can achieve unassisted solar water splitting even when it is combined with an inexpensive single junction photocathode (e.g. p-Si, p-Cu2O) whose photovoltage for water reduction is limited.20,97–99
Another extraordinary feature of BiVO4 is its exceptionally high ηsep. While typical oxide-based photoanodes demonstrate ηseps of <10% at 1.23 V vs. RHE, ηsep for BiVO4 has been reported to be ≥90% at 1.23 V vs. RHE.20,87,89 Even in the low bias region, BiVO4 shows an exceptional ηsep, reaching as high as 70% at 0.6 V vs. RHE.87 Additionally, BiVO4 does not suffer from extremely fast surface recombination like many other oxide-based materials, meaning that all surface reaching holes can be used for sulfite oxidation. In other words, ηox for sulfite oxidation can accurately be assumed to equal 1. As a result, the photocurrent onset for sulfite oxidation is very close to the EFB of BiVO4. (For oxides whose rate of surface recombination is faster than the rate of sulfite oxidation, the photocurrent onset potentials for sulfite oxidation are much more positive than their EFBs.) When BiVO4 is combined with an OEC that can increase the rate of water oxidation to be equivalent to that of sulfite, the photocurrent onset for water oxidation also becomes very close to its EFB. Another advantage of BiVO4 is that although it is not thermodynamically stable against photocorrosion, its rate of photocorrosion is slow. This means that the photocorrosion of BiVO4 can be kinetically suppressed as long as holes are quickly consumed by interfacial charge transfer reactions. Combined, these features make BiVO4 an exceptional candidate for an oxide-based photoanode to be used in solar water oxidation. As a result, most recent PECs constructed to perform unassisted solar water splitting that generated sustainable photocurrent for at least 1 hour employed BiVO4 as the sole photoanode or in conjunction with another photoanode.20,90,93,96–107 The configurations and performances of these PECs are summarized in Table 3. The most notable performances of BiVO4 photoanodes for solar water oxidation where BiVO4 was used as a single photon absorber are summarized in Table 4.
Table 3 STH efficiencies (η) achieved by BiVO4-based PECs constructed for unassisted solar water splitting




BiVO4 photoanode
Coupled photocathode
Electrolyte

J
op (mA cm−2)
STH η (%)
Stability





a 1-jn and 2-jn stand for single junction and double junction, respectively.






Si PV cells



H2-Treated Mo-doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH with H2-treated Ti-doped Fe2O3/TiO2/Ni2FeOx20
Two 1-jna Si
pH 9 carbonate
4.5 (BiVO4)
5.6 (BiVO4)
8 h stable


3.2 (Fe2O3)
3.9 (Fe2O3)


6.3 (together)
7.7 (together)


W-Doped BiVO4/Co–Pi98
2-jna Si
pH 7 phosphate
4.2
5.2
1 h stable


W-Doped BiVO4/Co–Pi97
2-jna Si 1-jna Si
pH 7 phosphate
4.0 (2-jn)
4.9 (2-jn)
1 h stable


3.0 (1-jn)
3.6 (1-jn)







Perovskite PV cells



Mo-Doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH on an inverse nanocone substrate96
FA0.83Cs0.17PbI2Br
pH 7 phosphate
5.7
7.0
6 h stable


Mo-Doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH on a nanocone substrate93
CH3NH3PbI3
pH 7 phosphate
5.0
6.2
10 h gradual decrease


H2-Treated Mo-doped BiVO4/Co-Ci90
CH3NH3PbI3
pH 9 carbonate
3.5
4.3
12 h stable







Metal oxide photocathode



H2-Treated Mo-doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH99
Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2
pH 9 borate
2.5
3.0
12 h stable




Table 4 Comparison of solar water oxidation performances of BiVO4 photoanodes where BiVO4 was used as a single photon absorber




Electrode
Preparation method
Onset (VRHE)

J at 1.23 VRHE (mA cm−2)
Electrolyte
Stability





a Performances obtained by stacking two BiVO4 films.





BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH87
Electrodeposition of a BiOI film followed by annealing with a V solution
0.20
4.5
pH 7 phosphate
50 h stable


N2-Treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH94
Electrodeposition of a BiOI film followed by annealing with a V solution and post-treatment with N2
0.24
4.7
pH 9 borate
450 h stable


BiVO4/NiFeOx-B95
Electrodeposition of a BiOI film followed by annealing with a V solution
0.22a
4.9a
pH 9 borate
10 h stable


BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH108
Electrodeposition of an amorphous Bi film followed by annealing with a V solution
0.32a
5.9a
pH 9 borate
100 h stable


Mo-Doped BiVO4/NiFeOOH109
Solid state reaction followed by ball milling and post annealing
0.28
3.8
pH 9 borate
1100 h stable


W-Doped BiVO4/Co–Pi98
Spray pyrolysis followed by annealing
0.30
4.0
pH 7 phosphate
60 h stable


H2-Treated Mo-doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH20
Drop-casting followed by annealing and post-treatment with H2
0.24
5.0
pH 9 carbonate
8 h stable


Mo-Doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH on a nanocone substrate93
Drop-casting on a nanocone shaped glass/SiOx/Pt/SnO2 substrate followed by annealing
0.21
5.8
pH 7 phosphate
10 h gradual decrease


Mo-Doped BiVO4/Fe(Ni)OOH on an inverse nanocone substrate96
Drop-casting on an inverse nanocone shaped glass/TiO2/Pt/SnO2 substrate followed by annealing
0.22
6.0
pH 7 phosphate
6 h stable




Due to the unique and remarkable features of BiVO4, which have enabled the generation of considerable photocurrent, BiVO4 has been used as a model system to test various strategies to improve photoelectrochemical properties and stabilities of oxide-based photoanodes. For this reason, recent studies on BiVO4 have provided a greater understanding of oxide-based photoelectrodes overall. Because we have previously reviewed the background of and progress made on BiVO4 through 2013,110 in this paper we chose to highlight the most significant developments made since 2013 in understanding and improving BiVO4 photoanodes.

Morphology tuning. 
The effective hole diffusion length of pristine BiVO4 is ∼57–75 nm,111–113 which is longer than that of many other oxides. Therefore, it should be relatively easy for BiVO4 to achieve a high ηsepvia nanostructuring. Choi and co-workers synthesized a high surface area porous BiVO4 film (average particle size ∼76 nm) using an electrodeposited BiOI film as the precursor film.86,87 An array of extremely thin BiOI plates were electrodeposited perpendicular to the FTO substrate with ample void space between the plates (Fig. 11a). This BiOI film was converted to a BiVO4 film by drop-casting a V-containing solution followed by annealing. During annealing, each BiOI plate formed multiple BiVO4 particles that were interconnected with minimum grain boundaries between the particles, which ensured good electrical continuity all the way to the underlying FTO (Fig. 11b and c). The void space between the BiOI plates in the pristine BiOI films ensured that the BiVO4 particles formed from different BiOI sheets remained separate, resulting in the formation of high surface area BiVO4 (31.8 m2 g−1).87 Any excess V2O5 formed during annealing was removed by dissolution in 1 M NaOH. The resulting BiVO4 achieved ηseps of 70% and 90% at 0.6 and 1.23 V vs. RHE, respectively.87
 Fig. 11  SEM images of (a) a BiOI precursor film on FTO (side view) and (b) top and (c) side view images of a BiVO4 film obtained from the BiOI film. Adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014 American Association for the Advancement of Science. SEM images of (d) a thicker and more densely packed BiOI film and (e and f) a resulting BiVO4 film. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. (g) J–V plots of BiVO4 films shown in (b and c) (blue) and (e and f) (red) for sulfite oxidation in pH 9 borate buffer containing 0.2 M sulfite under AM 1.5G illumination. The black line represents the dark current. 
In a more recent study, Choi and co-workers modified the deposition conditions of BiOI to grow thicker and more densely packed BiOI plates (Fig. 11d). This resulted in the formation of larger, columnar-type BiVO4 particles (Fig. 11e and f), which are more crystalline than the BiVO4 particles discussed above. The average diameter of the particles (∼110 nm) was still sufficiently small to maintain a high ηsep while the thick, dense-BiVO4 film increased photon absorption per unit area of the film. As a result, an enhancement in the photocurrent density of BiVO4 was observed (Fig. 11g).94 We found that most of the high-performing BiVO4 films reported to date, which can generate a photocurrent density for sulfite oxidation of ∼5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE, are commonly composed of BiVO4 nanoparticles with an average particle size in the range of 100–200 nm.20,93,94,96,108


Increasing the majority carrier density. 
Atomic doping has been used to increase the majority carrier density of BiVO4. The most commonly reported successful doping studies of BiVO4 involve Mo6+ or W6+ doping into the V5+ site.88,97,114–119 An optimum level of doping can increase the carrier density and thus the electrical conductivity of BiVO4, resulting in an increase in ηsep. One interesting doping strategy reported by van de Krol and co-workers is gradient doping.97 They demonstrated this concept using a dense, 200 nm-thick BiVO4 film prepared by spray pyrolysis. They incorporated W6+ into their film with a doping level of 1% at the bottom and 0% at the top of the BiVO4 film. Their goal was to allow band bending to extend across the entire thickness of the BiVO4 film, thus increasing ηsep. The resulting film showed a ηsep of 60% at 1.23 V vs. RHE, which was significantly higher than that of the uniformly 1% W-doped BiVO4 film (38% at the same potential).
In addition to doping the V5+ site of BiVO4, Choi and co-workers investigated a series of lanthanide (Ln) metal ions as dopants into the Bi3+ site.120 The authors observed a systematic change in the size of the BiVO4 lattice according to the size of the lanthanide ion incorporated and also confirmed no change in morphology after doping, which is important to conduct a meaningful doping study. If the morphology of a doped sample is different from that of the pristine sample, it is extremely difficult to isolate the effect of doping. They reported that Sm and Yb doping resulted in photocurrent enhancement for both sulfite and water oxidation, while La and Ce doping resulted in the opposite effect. These effects were explained by changes in the electronic structure of the doped BiVO4 samples compared to the pristine one, as elucidated by DFT calculations. To explain the experimental results observed for Sm and Yb doping, both Ln doping and O vacancies (the intrinsic defect of BiVO4) needed to be considered simultaneously in the calculations. This suggests that understanding the interactions between intrinsic defects and extrinsic dopants may be important to more accurately understand the behavior of doped semiconductors.
Another commonly used method to increase the carrier density of BiVO4 without introducing metal ion dopants is the use of post-synthesis gas treatments. For example, annealing BiVO4 films in a H2 atmosphere, referred to as H2-treatment, has been reported to increase the carrier density and therefore the ηsep and photocurrent generation of BiVO4.113,121,122 A few studies reported that H2 treatment of BiVO4 can not only create O vacancies but also incorporate H atoms into the BiVO4 lattice.113,122 Sharp and co-workers122 and Abdi and co-workers113 reported that the presence of H in O vacancies plays a critical role in the charge transport properties of H2-treated BiVO4. Abdi and co-workers attempted to create O vacancies without H incorporation using Ar treatment instead of H2 treatment and did not observe any increase in photocurrent.113 They concluded that O vacancies alone are not responsible for the observed photocurrent enhancement. However, the authors did not comment on whether Ar treatment was able to generate the same level of oxygen vacancies as H2 treatment. Since Ar is an inert gas and may not interact with O in the BiVO4 lattice in the same way as H2 gas, it is possible that the concentration of O vacancies created by Ar treatment may have been significantly less than the concentration of O vacancies created by H2 treatment. Therefore, it is not clear whether the difference in photocurrent obtained after Ar treatment and H2 treatment was due to the incorporation of H in O vacancies or due to the different amounts of O vacancies created. In order to clearly isolate the effect of H incorporation into O vacancies, comparing the performances of BiVO4 electrodes containing the same concentration of O vacancies with and without the presence of H will be necessary.
Abdi and co-workers also compared the charge transport properties of H2-treated BiVO4 and W-doped BiVO4 (Table 5).113 Their results showed that while both H2 treatment and W doping commonly increased the majority carrier density, they had drastically different effects on other charge transport properties. The H2 treatment marginally improved the mobility of both electrons and holes while significantly improving the hole lifetime. As a result, the diffusion length of the holes was greatly improved in the H2-treated BiVO4. In contrast, W doping decreased the mobility of both electrons and holes significantly and also decreased the lifetime of the holes, significantly decreasing the diffusion length of the holes. The authors explained that W ions in the BiVO4 lattice can serve as recombination centers by trapping photogenerated charge carriers.
Table 5 Bulk charge transport properties of pristine, H2-treated, and 1% W-doped BiVO4 photoanodes.113 (μ: carrier mobility, μe: electron mobility, μh: hole mobility, τ: carrier lifetime, Lh: carrier diffusion length, Nd: carrier density)







μ (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

τ (ns)

L
h (nm)

N
d (cm−3)




BiVO4
0.07
0.04
0.03
43
57
7.0 ± 1.7 × 1018


H2-BiVO4
0.08
0.045
0.035
109
101
1.1 ± 0.3 × 1021


W-BiVO4
0.02
0.01
0.01
32
28
2.9 ± 0.8 × 1021




Another method employed to increase O vacancies in BiVO4 is N2 treatment. Choi and co-workers treated their nanoporous BiVO4 films using N2 (350 °C for 2 h while flowing N2) and observed an increase in the carrier density and a corresponding increase in ηsep.89 They compared the properties of their N2-treated sample with a H2-treated sample and saw comparable effects on ηsep. Additionally, the authors observed that N2 treatment resulted in nitrogen incorporation into the BiVO4 lattice, which was confirmed by electron probe micro-analysis (EPMA) and XPS. This result is surprising because incorporation of nitrogen into an oxide lattice typically requires the use of NH3 at much higher temperatures (≥500 °C). However, nitrogen incorporation into mesoporous V2O5 by annealing under N2 flow has been reported previously,123,124 suggesting a high affinity of mesoporous vanadium-containing oxides for nitrogen. The authors computationally showed that nitrogen incorporation can decrease the bandgap of BiVO4 by raising the VBM, which is highly desirable for application in water splitting PECs (Fig. 12a). The authors also experimentally confirmed a decrease of 0.2 eV in the bandgap by IPCE measurements (Fig. 12b) and UV-vis absorption spectra.
 Fig. 12  (a) Electronic band structure of pristine BiVO4 and BiVO4 with charge-balanced N doping (9% O replaced with 6% N and 3% O vacancies) (b) IPCE of BiVO4 (black) and N2-treated BiVO4 (red) at 0.6 V vs. RHE in pH 7 phosphate buffer containing 1 M Na2SO3 showing a decrease in bandgap by 0.2 eV after N incorporation. Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. 
Choi and co-workers also discussed the possibility that N incorporation can influence the charge carrier mobility of BiVO4.89 Electron transport in most oxide-based photoelectrodes, including BiVO4, is achieved through small polaron hopping,125 in which the transport of charge carriers also involves a deformation of the crystal lattice. The authors noted that N incorporation can change the static dielectric constant of BiVO4, which would lower the activation energy of small polaron hopping and improve the polaron mobility. Since they did not directly measure a change in mobility, it is not clear whether this change in mobility truly contributed to the increased photocurrent generation caused by N doping. However, an important message delivered by this work is that a dopant atom that is introduced into a host oxide material may have multiple effects that alter the photoelectrochemical properties of that material via different mechanisms. This study, along with the study by Abdi and co-workers comparing the effects of H2 treatment and W doping,113 illustrates that a comprehensive understanding of doping effects is critical to effectively control the charge transport properties of a photoanode by composition tuning.
To date, studies that have attempted to increase the mobility of small polarons have been rare. One interesting study reported by Chueh and co-workers showed the effect of temperature on the mobility of small polarons.126 The authors compared photocurrent generation by Mo-doped BiVO4 coupled with a CoPi OEC for water oxidation at various temperatures. As the temperature increases, the deformation of a crystal lattice becomes easier. This causes an increase in the polaron mobility, resulting in an increase in the photocurrent density (Fig. 13). For example, increasing the temperature from 25 °C to 42 °C resulted in an increase in photocurrent from 2.6 to 4.0 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. RHE. It should be noted that for covalent semiconductors, such as Si, where the electrons are delocalized and transport occurs through the conduction band, the electron mobility decreases when the temperature increases due to enhanced phonon scattering.127,128 Therefore, an increase in mobility caused by an increase in temperature is unique for semiconductors in which charge transport occurs through small polaron hopping. The operating temperature of a PEC is expected to be greater than room temperature under solar illumination, which may be advantageous for PECs which use oxide-based photoelectrodes whose charge transport involves small polaron hopping.
 Fig. 13  Temperature-dependent J–V plots of the CoPi/Mo:BiVO4/SnO2/Si photoanode in pH 7 phosphate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Coupling with oxygen evolution catalysts. 
In general, the rate of water oxidation on the bare BiVO4 surface is significantly slower than that of sulfite oxidation. After a few initial studies demonstrated that the photocurrent achieved by BiVO4 for water oxidation could be considerably increased by the addition of OECs such as Co–Pi,129 RhO2,118 and FeOOH,130 various OECs have been coupled with BiVO4 photoanodes.131–134
When an OEC is used as an electrocatalyst on a conducting substrate, it increases the rate of water oxidation only through an increase in the rate constant for water oxidation (kox). However, when an OEC is coupled with a photoanode to utilize photogenerated holes for water oxidation, OECs can also increase the rate of water oxidation by increasing the number of holes available for water oxidation. This is achieved when an OEC improves bulk or surface electron–hole separation in some way. For instance, the OEC can serve as a hole sink, which affects the band bending of the photoanode, or it can decrease surface recombination by passivating surface states.135–137 Broadly speaking, any compound that can increase the rate of water oxidation when coupled with a photoanode can be regarded as an oxygen evolution catalyst. However, some studies use the term “catalyst” only when the rate of water oxidation is increased through an increase in kox. Therefore, when a study states that an additional layer is not truly acting as an OEC, although the rate of water oxidation increases, this means that the rate of water oxidation is increased by a mechanism that does not involve an increase in kox.
Since the rate of photoelectrochemical water oxidation is affected not only by kox but also by the number of holes available for water oxidation, which can increase by decreasing the rate of surface recombination (krec), an OEC should be chosen while taking into account its effect on both krec and kox.136,138 For example, even if an OEC can increase kox, if it increases krec more drastically, a decrease in the rate of water oxidation may result. In the same manner, even if an OEC does not significantly increase kox, if it can effectively decrease krec, it can improve the rate of water oxidation. While kox is an intrinsic property of an OEC, krec depends critically on the interfacial structure at the photoanode/OEC junction. Therefore, even for one photoanode material, the optimum OEC may be different depending on the surface structure of the photoanode, which can be affected by the synthesis condition.
Choi and co-workers demonstrated the importance of minimizing recombination at the photoanode/OEC junction by comparing the effects of FeOOH and NiOOH OECs on water oxidation by a BiVO4 photoanode87 (Fig. 14). The authors showed that when tested as an electrocatalyst on a FTO substrate, NiOOH showed a better catalytic performance, meaning that NiOOH possessed a higher kox under their experimental conditions. However, when placed on BiVO4, FeOOH performed better than NiOOH. The authors postulated that this is due to decreased recombination at the BiVO4/FeOOH interface compared to the BiVO4/NiOOH interface. This postulation was supported by comparing the photocurrents of BiVO4/FeOOH and BiVO4/NiOOH electrodes for sulfite oxidation. Since the rate of sulfite oxidation should be equally fast on BiVO4, FeOOH, and NiOOH surfaces, a decrease in photocurrent observed after the addition of a FeOOH or NiOOH layer on BiVO4 can only be due to loss of holes to recombination at the BiVO4/OEC interface. The authors showed that the photocurrent for sulfite oxidation achieved by BiVO4/NiOOH was significantly lower than that achieved by BiVO4/FeOOH, confirming that FeOOH forms a better interface with BiVO4 and thus experiences reduced interfacial recombination. The authors also prepared a BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH photoanode, where FeOOH and NiOOH were deposited consecutively. This electrode performed better than BiVO4/FeOOH and BiVO4/NiOOH because it utilized the advantages of both OECs: the minimum recombination achieved by the BiVO4/FeOOH interface and the fast water oxidation kinetics achieved by the NiOOH/electrolyte interface. The authors also constructed BiVO4/NiOOH/FeOOH films to confirm that this electrode showed the worst performance due to opposite effects. As mentioned earlier, recombination at the photoanode/OEC junction depends on the surface structure of the photoanode (e.g. surface termination, surface composition). Therefore, we note that although FeOOH formed the best interface with the BiVO4 synthesized by Choi and co-workers, this does not necessarily mean that FeOOH will be the best OEC for BiVO4 with different surface terminations produced by other synthesis methods.
 Fig. 14  
J–V plots of (a) BiVO4/FeOOH, (b) BiVO4/NiOOH, (c) BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH, and (d) BiVO4/NiOOH/FeOOH comparing photocurrent generation for 1.0 M sulfite oxidation (dashed) and water oxidation (solid) measured in pH 7 phosphate buffer. Photocurrent for sulfite oxidation achieved by bare BiVO4 is shown as the black dashed line for comparison. All J–V plots were measured under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


Stability. 
Stable operation of photoelectrodes is another critical factor to consider for the practical construction of PECs. According to the Pourbaix diagram constructed for BiVO4, BiVO4 is thermodynamically stable in the water stability region (0–1.23 V vs. RHE) between pH 1 and 11.139 However, experimentally observed stabilities of BiVO4 can vary depending on the sample quality. This is because V2O5 is a highly soluble oxide62 and the solubility of any V-containing ternary oxide can be significantly affected by its crystallinity as well as its V content. Since the anodic photocorrosion of BiVO4 involves its dissolution, and the dissolution is affected by the crystallinity of the electrode, the crystallinity of BiVO4 is a critical factor that can affect its rate of photocorrosion. The BiVO4 films used for solar water splitting applications are typically produced via low temperature annealing and are composed of nanocrystalline particles, meaning that they cannot have the perfect crystallinity of single crystalline BiVO4. As a result, the chemical and photoelectrochemical stabilities of BiVO4 can be seriously underestimated if the BiVO4 films used for stability tests are not highly crystalline. One simple way to check the crystallinity of a sample is to calculate the crystalline domain size using the Scherrer equation based on the FWHM of XRD peaks. If the crystalline domain size calculated from the Scherrer equation is significantly smaller than the particle size observed by SEM, a significant portion of each BiVO4 particle (i.e. the outer region of each particle) has poor crystallinity or is amorphous. These samples are expected to show poor chemical and photoelectrochemical stabilities.
Domen and co-workers demonstrated impressive photostability of Mo-doped BiVO4 with a Ni–Fe OEC for over 1100 hours in 1.0 M borate buffer (pH 9) with a photocurrent density of 2.6 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. RHE.109 The authors synthesized highly crystalline BiVO4 particles (particle size ∼300–500 nm) by annealing at 800 °C for 2 h, ball milling to crush the particles, and re-annealing at 700 °C for 2 h. The resulting BiVO4 showed excellent crystallinity and its XRD pattern showed well-resolved Bragg diffraction peaks even in the high two theta region (>55°) (Fig. 15). The authors showed that their highly crystalline BiVO4 generated stable photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 9 borate buffer for 2 hours without the use of an OEC. The authors also noted that a less crystalline BiVO4 film that they used as a control sample did not show any signs of photocorrosion when the photocurrent was measured in pH 9 borate buffer at 0.6 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5G illumination or at 2 V vs. RHE in the dark. This suggests that the photoanodic dissolution of BiVO4 occurs only under conditions where a considerable number of holes are generated and accumulate on the BiVO4 surface. This also implies that the addition of an OEC that can minimize hole accumulation on the BiVO4 surface is critical to achieve photostability. To attain longer-term photostability for water oxidation, the authors added a Ni-source (dissolved from the substrate) and a Fe-source (impurity from the electrolyte) to the electrolyte so that the Ni–Fe OEC could be deposited on BiVO4 during water oxidation and continuously regenerated if the OEC layer was damaged during the test. Thus, the two critical factors enabling long-term operation were the high crystallinity of BiVO4 and prevention of OEC loss during water oxidation.
 Fig. 15  (a) XRD patterns of Mo-doped BiVO4 particles annealed at different temperatures. BM stands for “ball milling.” The miller indices of BiVO4 (JCPDS no. 83-1699) are shown at the bottom. (b) SEM images of the corresponding BiVO4 particles (scale bar = 1 μm). Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. 
Choi and co-workers performed a systematic investigation of the chemical stability, photoelectrochemical stability for sulfite oxidation, and photoelectrochemical stability for water oxidation using their nanoporous BiVO4 photoelectrode.94 The authors showed that their nanoporous BiVO4 did not show any signs of chemical dissolution after being immersed in pH 9 borate solution in the dark for 2 months (Fig. 16). Judging from the FWHMs of XRD peaks, the nanoporous BiVO4 used in this study is very crystalline relative to BiVO4 prepared from other methods. The authors also showed that BiVO4 can achieve photostability for sulfite oxidation for 500 hours when operated at 0.6 V vs. RHE in pH 9 borate buffer (Fig. 17a). However, BiVO4 coupled with a FeOOH/NiOOH OEC showed photoanodic dissolution when water oxidation was performed under the same conditions for more than 50 hours. The authors noted that the photocurrent generated by BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH for water oxidation was less than that generated by BiVO4 for sulfite oxidation, meaning that BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH did not utilize all of the surface-reaching holes for water oxidation. Thus, the slower rate of water oxidation compared to sulfite oxidation resulted in the accumulation of holes at the BiVO4 surface, leading to photocorrosion.
 Fig. 16  (a) XRD patterns, (b) UV-vis spectra, and (c) photocurrent measurements for sulfite oxidation (0.2 M) of BiVO4 in pH 9 borate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination before (black) and after (blue) immersion in pH 9 borate for 50 days in the dark. SEM images (d) before and (e) after immersion are also shown. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. 
 Fig. 17  (a) J–t plot of BiVO4 for sulfite oxidation at 0.6 V vs. RHE in pH 9 borate buffer containing 0.7 M Na2SO3. The slight photocurrent decrease observed over time was not due to photocorrosion but due to the depletion of sulfite. When the electrolyte was replenished at 200 h and 300 h, the photocurrent increased to its initial level. (b) J–t plot of the BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH film in a V5+-saturated pH 9 borate electrolyte at 0.6V vs. RHE. Unlike the sulfite measurement where the electrolyte was replaced only twice over 500 h, the electrolyte was replenished every 24 h to maintain a constant photocurrent level. All measurements were performed under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. 
When a photoanode is photostable for sulfite oxidation but not for water oxidation, the rate of photocorrosion is significantly slower than the rate of sulfite oxidation but faster than the rate of water oxidation. In this case, the photocorrosion of the photoanode can be kinetically suppressed if the surface-reaching holes can be consumed with a rate comparable to that for sulfite oxidation. Therefore, one way to enhance the photostability of BiVO4 during water oxidation is to increase the rate of water oxidation to the level of sulfite oxidation by improving the OEC. We note that when a higher performing BiVO4 photoanode is used, (i.e. greater number of surface-reaching holes) the prevention of photocorrosion during water oxidation becomes more difficult and requires a better OEC.
Another possible route to kinetically suppress photocorrosion is to force the rate of photocorrosion to be slower than the rate of water oxidation. When the rate of water oxidation is slower than the rate of sulfite oxidation, a fraction of the surface-reaching holes may accumulate at the surface. The accumulated holes can destabilize the BiVO4 lattice at the surface, increasing its solubility and resulting in V leaching. Choi and co-workers postulated that V5+ loss may not be a consequence of photocorrosion but instead may serve as a key intermediate step in the photocorrosion of BiVO4.94 In other words, the loss of V5+ may facilitate the photooxidation of Bi3+ and/or lattice oxide ions in BiVO4 by making reorganization around these ions easier. In this case, preventing V5+ leaching may be an effective strategy to slow the rate of BiVO4 photocorrosion. The authors tested this postulation by using a V5+-saturated electrolyte, which can suppress V5+ leaching by Le Châtelier's principle, and demonstrated stable generation of a photocurrent density of 3.2 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. RHE in pH 9 borate buffer over 450 hours (Fig. 17b).94
Another major research focus for BiVO4 has been to extend its chemical stability to higher pH conditions using protection layers. The use of a strongly basic solution eliminates the need for buffers and can help BiVO4 to be paired with a broad range of photocathodes. ALD is one of the most commonly used methods to deposit a protection layer on BiVO4.140,141 For example, Lewis and co-workers deposited an amorphous 1 nm-thick TiO2 layer on a flat BiVO4 film using ALD.140 The resulting BiVO4/TiO2/Ni OEC photoanode generated a stable photocurrent density of 1.3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE for 2 hours in pH 13 KOH. Choi and co-workers demonstrated the use of ZnFe2O4 as a protection layer35 that can also provide additional photon absorption. They deposited the ZnFe2O4 layer on the BiVO4 surface by photodeposition of FeOOH followed by drop-casting an aqueous Zn(NO3)3 solution and annealing. This resulted in a 10 nm-thick ZnFe2O4 layer conformally coated on a nanoporous BiVO4 photoanode. When Co2+ was adsorbed on the BiVO4/ZnFe2O4 photoanode surface to serve as an OEC, a stable photocurrent of 2.5 mA cm−2 was obtained at 1.23 V vs. RHE for 1 hour in pH 13 KOH.
More recently, Choi and co-workers demonstrated the use of an electrodeposited TiO2 layer as an excellent protection layer for BiVO4.142 Compared with ALD, electrodeposition is inexpensive, easily accessible, and fast (e.g. less than 1 min to deposit a 5 nm-thick TiO2 layer). The excellent conformal nature of the electrodeposited TiO2 coating layer was confirmed by comparing the chemical stability of BiVO4 with and without the TiO2 layer immersed in pH 12 solution for one month (Fig. 18). The BiVO4 of the BiVO4/TiO2 electrode showed no change in crystallinity while the unprotected BiVO4 electrode showed signs of dissolution and loss of crystallinity.
 Fig. 18  (a) A high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of a BiVO4/TiO2 film. XRD patterns of (b) BiVO4 and (c) BiVO4/TiO2 electrodes before (black) and after (red) 30 days of immersion in pH 12 phosphate buffer. Adapted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
The authors also reported that the BiVO4/TiO2 electrode showed photoelectrochemical stability for sulfite oxidation (Fig. 19a) but not for water oxidation at 0.6 V vs. RHE in pH 12 phosphate buffer for 40 hours. Therefore, the chemical stability gained by the addition of TiO2 was sufficient to achieve stable photoelectrochemical sulfite oxidation but not stable photoelectrochemical water oxidation. As we explained above, the solubility of BiVO4 when holes have accumulated at the surface is not the same as the solubility of BiVO4 in the dark. Therefore, to ensure the photostability of BiVO4/TiO2 for water oxidation, the addition of an OEC that can prevent the accumulation of holes on the BiVO4 surface is critical. Indeed, the authors demonstrated that a stable photocurrent density of 1.6 mA cm−2 could be achieved at 0.6 V vs. RHE in pH 12 phosphate buffer for 20 h when the BiVO4/TiO2 electrode was combined with a FeOOH/NiOOH OEC (Fig. 19b).
 Fig. 19  (a) J–t plots at 0.6 V vs. RHE of BiVO4 (black) and BiVO4/TiO2 (red) electrodes for sulfite oxidation measured in pH 12 phosphate buffer containing 1 M Na2SO3. (b) J–t plots at 0.6 V vs. RHE of BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH (green) and BiVO4/TiO2/FeOOH/NiOOH (blue) electrodes for water oxidation measured in pH 12 phosphate buffer. All measurements were obtained under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 


Light management. 
Another important factor to consider in further improving photocurrent generation by a photoelectrode is light management that can increase photon absorption. Pilosh and co-workers demonstrated that the insertion of a thin Pt layer between two indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) layers (i.e. glass/ITO/Pt/ITO) increased light absorption through reflection of light off the Pt layer.143 Cui and co-workers demonstrated that using a cone-shaped SiOx/Pt/SnO2 substrate increased light absorption by Mo-doped BiVO4 by offering multiple light scattering in the nanocone structure while simultaneously enhancing bulk charge separation93 (Fig. 20). The resulting nanocone Mo-doped BiVO4 generated a photocurrent for sulfite oxidation of 6.05 ± 0.3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE (0.5 M Na2SO3, pH 7 phosphate). For comparison, a flat Mo-doped BiVO4 film with the same thickness (700 nm) generated a photocurrent of 2.93 ± 0.12 mA cm−2 at the same potential. When combined with a FeOOH/NiOOH OEC, nanocone Mo-doped BiVO4 generated a photocurrent for water oxidation of 5.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 7 phosphate buffer. This is one of the best performances reported for BiVO4 to date. This result shows the importance of optimizing light management to maximize the performance of each photoanode.
 Fig. 20  (a) Synthesis process for BiVO4 deposited on SiOx nanocone arrays. (b) SEM image of SiOx/Pt/SnO2 nanocone arrays and (c) cross-sectional SEM image of Mo-doped BiVO4 on the SiOx/Pt/SnO2 nanocone substrate (scale bars = 500 nm), (d) J–V plots of the nanocone Mo-doped BiVO4 films in pH 7 phosphate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The progress made in the past five years in understanding and improving BiVO4 photoanodes has been truly impressive and has led to the achievement of a photocurrent density for water oxidation as high as ∼6 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE (Table 4). The fundamental limitation of using BiVO4 as a photoanode is its relatively wide bandgap. When BiVO4 is used in a PEC composed of a photoanode and a photocathode in tandem, the bandgap of BiVO4 is too wide to achieve a STH efficiency ≥10%.144–146 However, we note that a photoanode can be composed of more than one photon absorber; BiVO4 can be coupled with one or more smaller bandgap n-type semiconductors. Since there is no other photoanode developed to date that can achieve a ηsep of close to 100% like BiVO4, keeping BiVO4 as one of the photon absorbers in the photoanode will allow for the most efficient utilization of photons with energy ≥2.4 eV and can result in a higher photocurrent than that achieved by the smaller bandgap photoanode alone. This postulation is well-supported by a recent study by Lee, van de Krol, and co-workers where BiVO4 and Fe2O3 were used as dual photoanodes.20 Although Fe2O3 possesses a much smaller bandgap than BiVO4 and should ideally utilize all photons that can be utilized by BiVO4, the combination of BiVO4 and Fe2O3 photoanodes resulted in a higher photocurrent density than that demonstrated by Fe2O3 alone (Fig. 21). Designing optimum multilayer photoanodes containing BiVO4 should be one focus of future research to achieve a PEC with a STH efficiency ≥10%.
 Fig. 21  
J–V plots of BiVO4, Fe2O3, and BiVO4||Fe2O3, where BiVO4 and Fe2O3 are used as dual photoanodes, intersected with J–V plots of two serially connected c-Si solar cells in pH 9 carbonate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. The c-Si solar cells were placed behind the photoanodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. 

3.4. Other metal vanadates

Copper vanadates. 
Copper vanadates have recently received growing attention as photoanode candidates for water splitting PECs. Neale and co-workers first investigated γ-Cu3V2O8 as a photoanode in 2015.147 An aqueous precipitation reaction was used to form Cu3V2O7(OH)2·2H2O followed by dip-coating onto FTO and annealing to form γ-Cu3V2O8. The resulting films were composed of interconnected nanoparticles with diameters of ∼20 nm. They demonstrated a photocurrent for water oxidation of 10 μA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE and a photocurrent for sulfite oxidation of 100 μA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. RHE in pH 9.2 borate buffer. The hole diffusion length of γ-Cu3V2O8 has been measured to be ∼20–40 nm.148 High-throughput screening studies of the CuO–V2O5 phase space have reported several additional copper vanadate phases with bandgaps of ∼2 eV.149,150 Of these, α-CuV2O6, β-Cu2V2O7, γ-Cu3V2O8, Cu11V6O26, and Cu5V2O10 have been systematically investigated as photoanodes for solar water splitting.147,148,151–156 All of these copper vanadate compounds commonly show a bandgap in the range of 1.8–2.0 eV, which is favorable for utilizing a significant portion of visible light. However, the water oxidation photocurrent for this class of compounds remains below 100 μA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE, regardless of the phase or electrode preparation conditions.
One strategy that has been used to improve the photocurrent generation of copper vanadate photoanodes is Mo and W doping into the V-site. Doping that substitutionally replaces V5+ ions with Mo6+ or W6+ ions in ternary vanadate oxides, such as BiVO4, has been shown to effectively increase the carrier densities of the host oxide materials.110,157 For example, Neale and co-workers showed that Mo doping of γ-Cu3V2O8 increased the photocurrent density for water oxidation from 10 μA cm−2 to 25 μA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE and for sulfite oxidation from 100 μA cm−2 to 180 μA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. RHE in pH 9.2 borate buffer.147 The authors confirmed that the increase in photocurrent was due to an increase in the carrier density as observed by Mott–Schottky analysis. However, Mo doping did not shift the photocurrent onset potential for either water or sulfite oxidation.
Choi and co-workers prepared Mo-doped and W-doped Cu11V6O26 using nanofibrous CuO films as precursor films158 and annealing with a VO(acac)2 solution containing Mo or W precursors.155 Dopant atom incorporation was confirmed by slight peak shifts in the XRD patterns to lower two theta values. Mott–Schottky analysis was also used and a decrease in the slope and a shift in the EFB to the negative direction was observed for both Mo and W doping, indicating an increase in the carrier concentration (EFBs: Cu11V6O26 = 0.64–0.73 V vs. RHE, Mo:Cu11V6O26 = 0.51–0.60 V vs. RHE, W:Cu11V6O26 = 0.51–0.60 V vs. RHE). An example of the photocurrent enhancement observed for sulfite oxidation in pH 9.2 borate buffer after doping of Cu11V6O26 is shown in Fig. 22. The highest photocurrent density seen in this study was achieved by the optimally doped W:Cu11V6O26 film and reached a value of 70 μA cm−2 for water oxidation at 1.23 V vs. RHE and 145 μA cm−2 for sulfite oxidation at 1.0 V vs. RHE in pH 9.2 borate buffer. In addition to this enhancement, W doping caused a shift in the onset potential from 0.99 to 0.87 V vs. RHE for water oxidation and 0.65 to 0.58 V vs. RHE for sulfite oxidation (inset Fig. 22), which agrees well with the Mott–Schottky results.
 Fig. 22  Chopped light J–V scans for pristine (black), Mo-doped (blue), and W-doped (red) Cu11V6O26 for sulfite oxidation in pH 9.2 borate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. The inset shows the photocurrent obtained by sweeping the potential from the open circuit potential (OCP) under illumination to the negative direction to accurately determine the photocurrent onset potentials. Adapted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
As there are many different copper vanadate phases that exist, Gregoire and co-workers investigated the effect of the Cu:V ratio on the chemical, electrochemical, and photoelectrochemical stabilities of copper vanadates. They sputter coated libraries with the composition Cu1−xVxOz, with x ranging from 0.1 to 0.75.159 The authors performed chemical (48 hour soak), electrochemical (2 hours of operation at 1.23 V vs. RHE), and photoelectrochemical (40 minutes of operation at 1.23 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5G illumination) stability tests in pH 9.2 borate buffer. They found that all phases with x < 0.67 were chemically stable and all phases with x < 0.57 were electrochemically stable under these conditions. This means that all phases discussed above, excluding α-CuV2O6, should be both chemically and electrochemically stable in pH 9.2 solution. Photoelectrochemical stability tests were performed for all phases with x < 0.5 and the results showed that that the phases with a higher Cu:V ratio (e.g. Cu11V6O26 and γ-Cu3V2O8) appeared to be more photostable. Indeed, Sharp and co-workers showed stable photocurrent generation of ∼65 μA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 9.2 borate buffer for water oxidation for more than 20 h using γ-Cu3V2O8 prepared by reactive co-sputtering.148 In addition, Choi and co-workers showed that Cu11V6O26 can be operated even in pH 13 KOH solution for 2 hours at 1.4 V vs. RHE without significant photocurrent decay, which is impressive for a V-containing photoelectrode.155
Recently, Sharp and co-workers also performed a systematic investigation to elucidate the effects of the varying Cu and V stoichiometries on the photoelectrochemical properties of copper vanadates using β-Cu2V2O7, γ-Cu3V2O8, Cu11V6O26, and Cu5V2O10 electrodes prepared by reactive co-sputtering.156 They measured the performance of copper vanadate photoelectrodes for sulfite oxidation in pH 9.3 borate buffer and found that the phases with the highest Cu:V ratio (e.g. Cu5V2O10) showed the highest photocurrent generation. They determined that Cu5V2O10 had the highest absorption coefficient and the highest IPCE and APCE values for sulfite oxidation (IPCE = 7% and APCE = 10% at 350 nm and 1.23 V vs. RHE). These results indicate that the phases with a higher Cu:V ratio exhibit better photon absorption and charge separation properties.
Although copper vanadate photoanodes represent an interesting class of materials to study because of the rich Cu–V–O phase space that exists, they appear to commonly suffer from serious bulk recombination judging from their very low photocurrent generation. Another critical limitation of this class of compounds appears to be their extremely positive photocurrent onsets for water oxidation. The most negative onset potential achieved for water oxidation by a copper vanadate photoanode to date is only 0.82 V vs. RHE using 3% W-doped Cu11V6O26 in pH 13 KOH solution.155 Additionally, the EFB of this photoelectrode is the most negative reported to date but still lies at 0.58 V vs. RHE, even after optimum doping levels were achieved for maximum photocurrent generation. This suggests that the EFB positions of copper vanadates may be fundamentally limited by their CBM positions, which will prevent copper vanadate photoanodes from achieving considerable photovoltages for water oxidation. Accurate measurements of the CBM positions of copper vanadates would be useful to determine their viability as photoanodes for solar water splitting.


Iron vanadates. 
There are several polymorphs of iron vanadate with the formula FeVO4 but triclinic FeVO4 is the only phase that can form under ambient conditions. The potential of triclinic FeVO4 as a photoanode was first reported from a high-throughput screening study performed in 2007 by Sayama and co-workers.160 Although FeVO4 has a chemical formula reminiscent of BiVO4, it is has a distinctly different crystal structure from that of BiVO4. For example, while Bi in BiVO4 is coordinated by 8 oxygen atoms, Fe in FeVO4 is coordinated by either 5 or 6 oxygen atoms.110,161 The bandgap of FeVO4 is ∼2.0 eV,162–166 which is smaller than that of BiVO4. However, similar to the copper vanadate family discussed above, the most negative EFB reported for FeVO4 to date is ∼700 mV below the water reduction potential,165 which limits the maximum photovoltage achievable by this compound for water oxidation to ∼500 mV. This suggests that the smaller bandgap of FeVO4 compared with BiVO4 is most likely caused by the very positive position of its CBM, which is not favorable for achieving a high STH efficiency.
To date, the photocurrent reported for FeVO4 remains quite low, and substitutional doping into the V-site has been investigated as one possibility to improve the photocurrent generation, as discussed for copper vanadates and BiVO4 above. Baeg and co-workers compared FeVO4 and 5% W-doped FeVO4 electrodes prepared by spin-coating metal–organic precursors onto FTO substrates followed by thermal annealing.163 The incorporation of W into the lattice was confirmed by a slight shift of the main XRD peak to a lower two theta value due to the larger ionic radius of W6+ compared to V5+. The pristine film showed a photocurrent generation of 50 μA cm−2 for water oxidation at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 7 phosphate buffer, which was increased to 100 μA cm−2 for the W-doped film. The onset for photoelectrochemical water oxidation for both samples was ∼0.7 V vs. RHE. The enhancement in the photocurrent implies an increase in the carrier density after doping; however, Mott–Schottky analysis was not performed to confirm this. IPCE of the W-doped sample was also measured and reached a maximum value of 6.5% at 400 nm with an applied bias of 1.7 V vs. RHE in the same solution.
In addition to doping, the synthesis of nanoporous FeVO4 electrodes has been investigated as a strategy to shorten the charge extraction path length.164 A nanoporous FeVO4 film was prepared by a drop-casting method with the addition of citric acid to facilitate the formation of pores. SEM images of the films after annealing revealed interconnected nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼50–100 nm and a pore size of ∼50–200 nm. The nanoporous FeVO4 photoelectrode showed a photocurrent for water oxidation of 100 μA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE (pH 7 phosphate buffer), which is higher than the photocurrent generated by undoped FeVO4 photoanodes prepared by other methods but still remains low.
Most recently, Abdi and co-workers performed in-depth studies on pristine and Mo-doped FeVO4 photoanodes to determine the origin of this low photocurrent generation.165 FeVO4 and Mo-doped FeVO4 films were prepared by spray pyrolysis onto FTO followed by annealing in air. SEM images revealed densely packed particles with a diameter of ∼500 nm. The thickness of the films was varied from 25–800 nm and films with a thickness of 200–400 nm were found to generate the highest photocurrent. Moving forward, all samples discussed will be 200 nm-thick samples. The Mo-doped samples showed slight shifts in their XRD peaks to lower two theta values, indicating that Mo6+ was indeed incorporated into the lattice. The authors determined that the 2% Mo-doped sample showed the highest photocurrent generation (Fig. 23), and Mott–Schottky analysis revealed a decrease in the slope of this sample compared to that of the undoped sample, indicating an increase in the carrier concentration. However, the EFBs of both pristine and 2% Mo-doped samples were equal at 0.7 V vs. RHE. By comparing the photocurrent for sulfite oxidation and water oxidation, the authors determined that Mo doping increased ηsep from 2% to 2.5% at 1.6 V vs. RHE. In addition, ηox for water oxidation at 1.6 V vs. RHE was found to increase from 80% to 100% after Mo doping. These results show that severe bulk recombination is one of the major limitations of FeVO4 and the improvement in ηsep that resulted from Mo doping was negligible. The maximum IPCE achieved by the pristine and Mo-doped FeVO4 films for water oxidation at 1.6 V vs. RHE in pH 7 phosphate buffer were 2% and 8%, respectively, at 375 nm. The authors also used TRMC to determine the carrier transport properties of FeVO4 and Mo-doped FeVO4. They found a hole mobility of 4.6 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for their pristine sample and 1.3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for their 2% Mo-doped sample. The hole diffusion length was determined to be ∼2 nm for the undoped sample and ∼7 nm for the Mo-doped sample. The extremely short diffusion length of FeVO4 also suggests that improving bulk separation by nanostructuring may be difficult.
 Fig. 23  Chopped light J–V plots of undoped and Mo-doped FeVO4 for water oxidation in pH 7 phosphate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. The inset shows the change of the current density with the Mo doping level at 1.8 V vs. RHE. Adapted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
While triclinic FeVO4 is the most well-studied iron vanadate phase, there are a few other iron vanadates that have been investigated as photoanodes (e.g. Fe2VO4, FeV2O4, Fe2V4O13).167,168 Among these compounds, we note that Fe2VO4 and FeV2O4 contain reduced iron and vanadium species (Fe2+, V3+, and V4+) that may not be stable during photoelectrochemical water oxidation. Therefore, their photostabilities need to be investigated carefully. Indeed, Bhattacharya and co-workers performed J–t scans for water oxidation in pH 7 phosphate buffer at 1.6 V vs. RHE and observed that FeVO4, Fe2VO4, and FeV2O4 all showed significant photocurrent decay after 30 minutes of testing.167
The studies reported so far indicate that iron vanadates commonly suffer from extremely short hole diffusion lengths and severe bulk recombination. Successful atomic doping that can result in a considerable increase in ηsep of iron vanadates has not yet been demonstrated. Nanostructuring may be one strategy to alleviate the low photocurrent generation caused by extremely short hole diffusion lengths. However, another fundamental limitation for iron vanadates is their EFB positions that remain very positive (≥0.5 V vs. RHE) even with doping.165,168 This suggests that iron vanadates will have the same challenges as copper vanadates for use as photoanodes in a water splitting PEC.

3.5. Others

Fe2TiO5. 
Fe2TiO5 has a narrow bandgap of 2.0–2.1 eV,169–171 is composed of cheap and abundant materials, and exhibits chemical stability in neutral and basic conditions (pH 7–14).172–174 Various techniques such as single crystal growth by the Czochralski method,170,172 dip-coating sol–gel precursors,173,175 solvothermal synthesis,171 and template-based methods using polystyrene opals169 or aluminum oxide templates176 have been used to make Fe2TiO5 thin films.
Compared with TiO2, the bandgap of Fe2TiO5 is significantly smaller. While the bandgap of Fe2TiO5 is comparable to that of Fe2O3, the CBM and VBM of Fe2TiO5 are believed to straddle the water reduction and oxidation potentials, making Fe2TiO5 more suitable than Fe2O3 for solar water splitting applications (Fig. 24).171,175,177,178
 Fig. 24  Band energy diagrams for TiO2, Fe2TiO5, and Fe2O3. Adapted with permission from ref. 178 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Lee and co-workers showed that Fe2TiO5 can produce a photocurrent for water oxidation as high as 0.93 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in 1 M NaOH after optimization of synthesis conditions and the addition of appropriate underlayers and catalysts.176 The authors prepared a nanotubular Fe2TiO5 film by a spin-coating method using porous alumina as a hard template. The alumina template was removed after the synthesis by dissolution in 0.25 M NaOH. The authors determined that the optimum wall thickness of the Fe2TiO5 nanotubes was 10–15 nm, and an increase in the wall thickness to 20–25 nm resulted in a decrease in photocurrent. This suggests that Fe2TiO5 suffers from a short carrier diffusion length like Fe2O3 and other Fe-containing oxide-based photoanodes. The as-prepared nanotubular Fe2TiO5 electrode showed a photocurrent density for water oxidation of 0.34 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE with a photocurrent onset potential of 0.8 V vs. RHE (Fig. 25a). To further increase the photocurrent, the authors added a TiO2 underlayer between the Fe2TiO5 nanotubes and the FTO substrate. The TiO2 layer can serve as a barrier to block electron injection from FTO to the electrolyte, which can occur when the FTO substrate is in direct contact with the electrolyte.179 When photoexcited electrons are consumed on the FTO substrate of the photoanode, it is equivalent to the loss of charge carriers by recombination. Furthermore, since the VBM of TiO2 is below that of Fe2TiO5, TiO2 can serve as a hole blocking layer that prevents the injection of holes from the VBM of Fe2TiO5 to FTO, suppressing recombination loss at the FTO/Fe2TiO5 interface.180 The addition of the TiO2 underlayer resulted in a negative shift of the onset potential by 200 mV and a slight enhancement of the photocurrent (Fig. 25a).
 Fig. 25  (a) J–V plots and (b) J–t plots of Fe2TiO5 nanotube arrays on FTO substrates with different modifications: pristine Fe2TiO5 on FTO (blue); Fe2TiO5 with a TiO2 underlayer (green); H2-treated Fe2TiO5 (purple); and combined TiO2 underlayer, H2 treatment, and cocatalyst (FeNiOx) modified Fe2TiO5 (red). Adapted with permission from ref. 176 John Wiley & Sons. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, (c) J–V plots of pristine (red) and SnOx treated (blue) Fe2TiO5 films. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. All measurements were performed in 1 M NaOH under AM 1.5G illumination. 
Lee and co-workers also treated their Fe2TiO5 with H2 at 300 °C for 4 h to increase the donor density by creating oxygen vacancies, which was confirmed by Mott–Schottky analysis.176 The H2-treated sample showed an improvement in photocurrent generation in the high bias region (≥0.95 V vs. RHE) resulting from improved electron–hole separation. Finally, a FeNiOx OEC was deposited to facilitate hole transfer for water oxidation.176 With all of these modifications combined, the resulting TiO2/H2-treated Fe2TiO5/FeNiOx photoanode demonstrated a significantly improved photoelectrochemical performance for water oxidation with an onset potential of 0.5 V vs. RHE and a photocurrent of 0.93 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE. Additionally, this photoelectrode demonstrated stable photocurrent generation for water oxidation over 2.5 h at 1.23 V vs. RHE (Fig. 25b). We note that the EFB of this nanotubular Fe2TiO5 film determined by Mott–Schottky analysis was between 0.3 and 0.45 V vs. RHE, which is far below its reported CBM.176 This suggests that atomic doping that can further increase the carrier density and raise the EFB may further improve its performance.
Another strategy to improve the performance of Fe2TiO5 was reported by Wong and co-workers.171 In this study, a porous Fe2TiO5 film with a particle size of 30–50 nm was prepared by solvothermal synthesis. An extremely thin layer of SnOx was then coated on top of the Fe2TiO5 film by drop-casting an aqueous SnCl4·5H2O solution and annealing in air at 750 °C for 20 min. The authors reported that the presence of SnOx on the surface of Fe2TiO5 effectively passivated existing surface states and significantly increased the photocurrent by reducing surface recombination (Fig. 25c). For example, after the SnOx treatment, the photocurrent for water oxidation increased from 0.1 mA cm−2 to 0.36 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in 1 M NaOH.
The highest performing Fe2TiO5 photoelectrode reported to date was prepared by cathodic electrodeposition of Fe(OH)3 on a vertically aligned nanotube array of TiO2 followed by annealing in air at 550 °C for 2 h.181 Although Fe2TiO5 was deposited as an extremely thin layer (2–3 nm), the high surface area of the TiO2 nanotubes (tube length of 7.8 μm, tube wall thickness of 10 nm, and pore size of ∼50 nm) (Fig. 26a and b) resulted in considerable photon absorption by Fe2TiO5. At the same time, the use of a thin Fe2TiO5 layer reduced the distance that holes and electrons need to travel, significantly decreasing bulk recombination. Since the VBM of Fe2TiO5 lies above that of TiO2, TiO2 can serve as a hole blocking layer while also efficiently transferring any photogenerated holes from TiO2 to the Fe2TiO5 layer. The CBMs of TiO2 and Fe2TiO5 are comparable (∼0 V vs. RHE), and it appears that electron injection from the Fe2TiO5 layer to TiO2 occurred without any problem. After the addition of a Co-based OEC, which was denoted as Coox in their study, an impressive photocurrent for water oxidation of 4.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE was achieved in 1 M KOH solution by the Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox photoanode (Fig. 26c). The TiO2 nanotube arrays contributed a photocurrent of only 0.8 mA cm−2 at this potential, meaning that the Fe2TiO5 layer was responsible for generating an additional 3.3 mA cm−2. Furthermore, APCE spectra of Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox confirmed that photons absorbed by Fe2TiO5 were effectively utilized in this system for photocurrent generation. The Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox photoanode also demonstrated photostability; it maintained a photocurrent density of 3 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. RHE for 2 h (Fig. 26d).
 Fig. 26  (a) SEM and (b) HRTEM images of a Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox nanotube array (scale bars: 200 nm, 100 nm, and 5 nm for (a), inset of (b), and (b), respectively). (c) J–V plots (solid lines) for pure Fe2O3 (dark grey), pure TiO2 (black), TiO2/Coox (green), Fe2TiO5–TiO2 (light grey), and Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox (red). Dashed lines denote dark current. (d) J–t plot for the Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox photoanode measured at 0.4 V vs. RHE in 1 M KOH under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. 
There have also been several studies using Fe2TiO5 as an additional layer on Fe2O3 photoanodes.174,177,178,182,183 Although Fe2TiO5 cannot enhance the photon absorption of Fe2O3 because Fe2TiO5 and Fe2O3 have similar bandgaps, the formation of the Fe2TiO5/Fe2O3 junction has been shown to improve electron–hole separation in both layers. This is because the CBMs and VBMs of these two compounds are aligned such that holes move toward the Fe2TiO5 layer while electrons move toward the Fe2O3 layer.174,177,178,183 For example, Kaunisto and co-workers used transient absorption spectroscopy to observe a slower decay of long-lived hole signals when Fe2TiO5 was present as a top layer on Fe2O3 compared to Fe2O3 alone.183 These long-lived surface holes resulted in an increase in photocurrent for water oxidation obtained in 0.1 M NaOH from ∼0.02 mA cm−2 by Fe2O3 to ∼0.75 mA cm−2 by Fe2TiO5/Fe2O3 at 1.23 V vs. RHE. In this study, the authors prepared the Fe2TiO5 shell on the Fe2O3 core by mixing Fe2O3 and TiO2 nanoparticles, spin-coating onto a FTO substrate, and annealing at 680 °C in air. The Fe2TiO5/Fe2O3 composite prepared with 15 mol% TiO2 showed the best improvement of the photocurrent without forming a segregated TiO2 phase.
Schmuki and co-workers reported that another possible advantage of using a Fe2TiO5 overlayer on Fe2O3 is to decrease surface recombination.182 The authors thermally oxidized Fe foil to produce Fe2O3 nanoflakes followed by sequential immersion in a Fe(NO3)3 solution and a TiCl3 solution. These films were then annealed in air at 850 °C for 1 min to form an Fe2TiO5 overlayer. From HRTEM images, the formation of a 10–15 nm-thick Fe2TiO5 coating layer was confirmed. The authors showed that the addition of the Fe2TiO5 overlayer resulted in a decrease in the transient photocurrent observed in the J–V plots for water oxidation, an increase in photocurrent (from 0.22 mA cm−2 to 0.78 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE), and a cathodic shift of the onset potential compared to pristine Fe2O3 (from 0.7 to 0.62 V vs. RHE) in 1 M KOH.184 The authors also observed a decrease in the semiconductor–electrolyte charge transfer resistance when Fe2TiO5 was present. They concluded that all observed changes were caused by Fe2TiO5 serving as a surface passivation layer.
Judging from the band positions and photoelectrochemical performances demonstrated thus far, it appears that Fe2TiO5 is one of the most promising photoanode candidates among the Fe-containing oxides. Although it suffers from bulk recombination, a considerable amount of photocurrent was generated when Fe2TiO5 was deposited as a thin layer on a high surface area, wide-bandgap substrate. Its chemical and photoelectrochemical stability in strong base (e.g. pH 14) is also attractive. However, very few studies have been performed to optimize Fe2TiO5 electrodes using atomic doping to move its EFB closer to its reported CBM. Various strategies that have been used for the development of Fe2O3 and other ferrite electrodes may also be used to further improve the photoelectrochemical properties of Fe2TiO5.


SnNb2O6. 
SnNb2O6 is an n-type semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.3–2.6 eV.185–187 The α−1 of SnNb2O6 is reported to be 500 nm at λ = 450 nm, which compares favorably with other oxide-based photoelectrode materials.188 SnNb2O6 has been primarily investigated as a visible light photocatalyst for H2 evolution in the presence of a hole acceptor (e.g. methanol or lactic acid) or for O2 evolution in the presence of an electron acceptor (e.g. AgNO3).81,82,185,189–191 These studies confirm that the CBM and VBM positions of SnNb2O6 can enable the utilization of photogenerated holes and electrons for water reduction and oxidation, respectively. The bandgap of SnNb2O6 is comparable to that of BiVO4, but the band positions of SnNb2O6 are thermodynamically more suitable for photoelectrochemical water splitting than those of BiVO4.81,192
One critical issue in the synthesis of SnNb2O6 is control of the oxidation state of Sn ions. Like α-SnWO4, Sn in SnNb2O6 exists as Sn2+. This provides a challenge during the synthesis because Sn2+ in Sn2+-containing oxides can easily be oxidized to Sn4+ when heated in the presence of oxygen.192 SnO is also known to disproportionate into Sn4+ and Sn0 at high temperature even when an inert atmosphere is used.193 This can affect the synthesis of SnNb2O6 when SnO is used as a precursor. Since the presence of Sn4+ ions or Sn4+-containing impurity phases may serve as defect sites that can increase electron–hole recombination in SnNb2O6, the synthesis of SnNb2O6 using a mild temperature and an inert environment is preferable. For example, Takanabe and co-workers used XPS and Auger spectroscopy to show that SnNb2O6 prepared by flux-assisted synthesis at 600 °C in a N2 environment contained a smaller amount of Sn4+ compared to SnNb2O6 prepared by solid state synthesis at 800 °C in a N2 environment.82 Kudo and co-workers used thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) to compare the formation of Sn4+ in SnNb2O6 and SnO. Since the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ in air involves the incorporation of oxygen, an increase in weight will be observed if this oxidation occurs.81 Their result showed that considerable oxidation of Sn2+ in SnO occurs at ∼500 °C, but considerable oxidation of Sn2+ in SnNb2O6 does not occur until ∼800 °C. This result indicates that once Sn2+ is stabilized in the SnNb2O6 lattice, Sn2+ is more stable against thermal oxidation. This result also suggests that developing a synthesis method to form SnNb2O6 at a lower temperature and then performing subsequent annealing at a higher temperature when necessary (e.g. to improve crystallinity) will be a more effective strategy to decrease the formation of Sn4+.
Despite the attractive bandgap and band positions of SnNb2O6, SnNb2O6 did not receive great attention as a photoanode candidate until 2017 when Kudo and co-workers reported the first successful investigation of its photoelectrochemical properties.186 In this study, the authors prepared SnNb2O6 particles through the reaction of a Na2Nb2O6·H2O precursor with molten SnCl2 at 500 °C in a N2 atmosphere followed by an additional annealing step at 900 °C in a N2 atmosphere. The authors then used the particle transfer (PT) method to fabricate SnNb2O6 photoanodes.194 Using this method, the SnNb2O6 powder was first drop-casted onto a glass substrate. Then, a Ti contact layer was deposited on top of the powder by thermal vapor deposition to form an ohmic contact with SnNb2O6. A conductive Sn layer was then deposited on the Ti contact layer using vacuum vapor deposition to increase the mechanical strength and conductivity. The resulting Sn/Ti/SnNb2O6 sample was bound to a new glass substrate with carbon tape and was lifted off the original glass substrate. Finally, all loosely bound SnNb2O6 powder was removed by sonication in water.
The authors subsequently added a CoOx OEC by drop-casting an aqueous Co(NO3)2 solution followed by heating at 100–500 °C for 2 h in air. The authors stated that the use of an annealing temperature greater than 200 °C resulted in a drastic photocurrent decrease, which they postulated may be due to the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+. It may also be due to the incorporation of Co ions into the SnNb2O6 lattice, thus creating recombination sites at the SnNb2O6/CoOx interface.
While the bare SnNb2O6 electrode showed negligible photocurrent, the SnNb2O6/CoOx photoanode generated considerable photocurrent for water oxidation (Fig. 27a). For example, optimum loading of CoOx (0.5 wt%) resulted in a photocurrent density of 1.5 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. RHE (Fig. 27b) in pH 9.4 borate buffer. The authors reported the photocurrent onset potential to be 0.3 V vs. RHE, but the LSV shown in Fig. 27a suggests that the onset may be even more negative than 0.3 V vs. RHE. This means that SnNb2O6 can provide a photovoltage of almost 1 V for water oxidation. The SnNb2O6/CoOx photoanode also showed an excellent fill factor and the photocurrent generated in the low bias region was considerable (e.g. 0.8 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. RHE). These results are exciting because such excellent performance in the low bias region is not common for oxide-based photoanodes. The LSVs shown in Fig. 27a resemble those of early reports of BiVO4, where the electron–hole separation in BiVO4 was not optimized.86,130 Furthermore, the SnNb2O6/CoOx photoanode showed excellent stability over a 10 hour J–t measurement at 0.6 V vs. RHE in the same solution with a Faradaic efficiency close to 100% for both H2 and O2 production (Fig. 27c). Additionally, the IPCE and applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) at 0.6 V vs. RHE were reported to be 18% and 0.39%, respectively.
 Fig. 27  (a) J–V and (b) J–t plots at 1.2 V vs. RHE for the bare SnNb2O6 (red) and SnNb2O6/CoOx photoelectrodes in pH 9.4 borate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. The CoOx loading amount was varied from 0.1–5.0 wt%. (c) H2 and O2 evolution using a three-electrode system composed of a SnNb2O6/CoOx (0.5 wt%) WE, a Pt CE, and an Ag/AgCl RE. The inset shows the photocurrent density at 0.6 V vs. RHE. Adapted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The observation that the addition of an OEC drastically improved the photocurrent generation by SnNb2O6 suggests that the bare SnNb2O6 photoanode suffers from severe surface recombination and its ηox for water oxidation is extremely low. Thus, bulk recombination in SnNb2O6 may not be as serious as it is in other photoanode materials. This also indicates that the negligible photocurrent generated by bare SnNb2O6 photoanodes reported in other studies187,190,195,196 may also be due to the lack of an OEC that can increase the rate of water oxidation to be faster than that of surface recombination.
We note that the dark current of SnNb2O6 prepared by Kudo and co-workers is negligible, (Fig. 27a) indicating that Sn2+ in the SnNb2O6 lattice is electrochemically stable between 0 and 1.4 V vs. RHE. The authors mentioned that photooxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ in SnNb2O6 can occur during water oxidation by photogenerated holes. However, the authors also showed that the degree of photooxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ can be suppressed by the presence of a CoOx OEC that can utilize a greater fraction of surface-reaching holes for the water oxidation reaction. Lastly, their results showed that although the formation of Sn4+ cannot be completely suppressed, the presence of Sn4+ may not be detrimental for the photocurrent generation as long as SnNb2O6 is coupled with an OEC that can cause the rate of water oxidation to be faster than the rate of surface recombination.
To better understand the charge transport properties of SnNb2O6, future studies should include the determination of ηsep as well as in-depth investigations of the carrier mobility and carrier diffusion length. The photocurrent of SnNb2O6 is expected to be further enhanced with composition tuning if challenges related to the suppression of Sn4+ formation can be successfully addressed. Adding a surface protection layer that can prevent the formation of Sn4+ during photocurrent generation may also become an effective strategy to improve the photoelectrochemical properties of SnNb2O6.

4. Summary and outlook
Compared with our knowledge of ternary oxide-based photoelectrodes ten years ago, tremendous progress has been made in developing and understanding oxide-based photoanodes for use in PECs. In this review, we have provided a critical evaluation of ternary oxide-based photoanodes that have met our selection criteria laid out in the introduction. The results summarized here clearly show that the performance of most oxide-based photoanodes is limited by their severe bulk recombination. Therefore, improving the charge transport properties of both majority and minority carriers to improve bulk separation is the key to improving the photoelectrochemical properties of oxide-based photoanodes. Atomic doping, defect control (either generation or suppression), and morphology tuning were discussed as the primary strategies to improve charge carrier separation. Additionally, multiple studies demonstrated that a dopant introduced for a certain purpose can affect other properties of the host compound. For example, a dopant introduced to increase the majority carrier density can either improve or diminish the minority carrier transport properties, or a dopant introduced to enhance photon absorption can also improve the mobility of the majority carriers. Therefore, obtaining a comprehensive understanding of the effects of a dopant and identification of a dopant that can simultaneously improve multiple properties of a photoanode can offer effective strategies for atomic doping. Also, while the carrier transport in most oxide-based photoanodes occurs through small polaron hopping, our understanding of the formation and transport of small polarons is still very limited. Examples discussed in this review demonstrated that factors that can negatively affect the carrier transport in a semiconductor whose conduction is through the CB can result in an increase in the bulk separation efficiency of an oxide-based semiconductor whose transport is through small polaron hopping. Future studies that can enhance our understanding of small polaron-based transport and provide rational strategies to further enhance charge transport properties of oxide-based photoanodes are imperative.
BiVO4 stands out from other oxide-based photoanodes due to its unusually high bulk charge separation efficiency (∼100% at 1.23 V vs. RHE). Thus, BiVO4 can be used as the foundation to pursue two different research directions. The first is to obtain a better understanding of the key features of BiVO4 that are responsible for its high bulk separation efficiency. This knowledge can be used to develop materials with new compositions that can achieve comparable bulk separation while achieving a lower bandgap energy than BiVO4. The second approach is to develop BiVO4-based photoanodes where high surface area BiVO4 is coupled with one or two additional photoanodes that have smaller bandgaps than BiVO4. The smaller bandgap semiconductors can be deposited as extremely thin layers to maximize their bulk separation. The use of high surface area BiVO4 as the substrate will ensure that even if these smaller bandgap semiconductors are deposited as extremely thin layers, they can absorb a sufficient amount of photons to significantly increase the photocurrent generation.
Although many challenges still remain, an increase in the scope of oxide-based materials that have been investigated and the strategies and knowledge accumulated to overcome their limitations will further accelerate the development of oxide-based photoanodes. We would like to conclude our review by acknowledging the efforts of all the research groups that have made a significant contribution to the advancement of oxide-based PECs. We wish them the best of luck in their future studies.
List of abbreviations


α
Absorption coefficient

α
−1
Light penetration depth

δ
Inversion degree

A
corr
Reflectance-corrected absorbance
ABPEApplied bias photon-to-current efficiency
ALDAtomic layer deposition
AM 1.5GAir mass 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2)
APCEAbsorbed photon-to-current efficiency
CBMConduction band minimum
CVCyclic voltammogram
CVDChemical vapor deposition
DFTDensity functional theory
EDSEnergy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy

E
FB
Flatband potential
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EPMAElectron probe micro-analysis
FTOFluorine-doped tin oxide
FWHMFull width at half maximum
HRTEMHigh-resolution transmission electron microscopy
IMPSIntensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy
IOInverse opal
IPCEIncident photon-to-current efficiency
ITOIndium-doped tin oxide

J
abs
Expected photocurrent density using absorbance spectra

J
op
Operating current density

J–tCurrent density–time

J–VCurrent density–potential

J
PEC
Measured photocurrent density

k
ox
Rate constant for water oxidation

k
rec
Rate constant for surface recombination
LSVLinear sweep voltammogram
MWCNTMulti-walled carbon nanotubes
OCPOpen circuit potential
OECOxygen evolution catalyst
OhOctahedral

η
bulk/ηsepBulk separation efficiency

η
ox/ηsurfaceCharge injection efficiency (or surface separation efficiency)
PECPhotoelectrochemical cell
PTParticle transfer
RHEReversible hydrogen electrode
SEMScanning electron microscopy
STHSolar-to-hydrogen
TdTetrahedral
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
TRMCTime-resolved microwave conductivity
UPSUltraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy
VBMValence band maximum
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
XRFX-ray fluorescence

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy through Grant DE-SC0008707.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1978, 29, 189–222 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991–1022 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fornarini, A. J. Nozik and B. A. Parkinson, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 3238–3243 CrossRef CAS .
The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) G-173 spectra, https://www.nrel.gov/grid/solar-resource/spectra-am1.5.html.

          R. E. Hummel, The Optical Constants, Electronic Properties of Materials, Springer, Newyork, NY, 4th edn,  2011, ch. 10, pp. 215–225 Search PubMed .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958–964 RSC .
J. M. Foley, M. J. Price, J. I. Feldblyum and S. Maldonado, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5203–5220 RSC .
M. Zhou, J. Bao, W. Bi, Y. Zeng, R. Zhu, M. Tao and Y. Xie, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1420–1425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Govindaraju, G. P. Wheeler, D. Lee and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 355–370 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Lark-Horovitz and V. A. Johnson, Photoelectric Phenomena, Solid State Physics PART B Electrical, Magnetic, and Optical Properties, Academic Press, Newyork and London,  1959, ch. 12, vol. 6, pp. 393–406 Search PubMed .
K. Sivula and R. van de Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Taffa, R. Dillert, A. C. Ulpe, K. C. L. Bauerfeind, T. Bredow, D. W. Bahnemann and M. Wark, J. Photonics Energy, 2016, 7, 012009 CrossRef .
X. Xu, A. K. Azad and J. T. S. Irvine, Catal. Today, 2013, 199, 22–26 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Borse, J. S. Jang, S. J. Hong, J. S. Lee, J. H. Jung, T. E. Hong, C. W. Ahn, E. D. Jeong, K. S. Hong, J. H. Yoon and H. G. Kim, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2009, 55, 1472–1477 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, J.-W. Jang, Y. H. Jo, F. F. Abdi, Y. H. Lee, R. van de Krol and J. S. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. J. De Haart and G. Blasse, Solid State Ionics, 1985, 16, 137–139 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Tahir and K. G. U. Wijayantha, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 119–125 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, J.-W. Jang, J. Y. Kim, S. H. Choi, G. Magesh, J. Lee and J. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401933 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, Y. J. Jang, J. H. Kim, J.-W. Jang, S. H. Choi and J. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19144–19151 RSC .
N. Guijarro, P. Bornoz, M. Prévot, X. Yu, X. Zhu, M. Johnson, X. Jeanbourquin, F. Le Formal and K. Sivula, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 103–117 RSC .
J. H. Kim, Y. J. Jang, S. H. Choi, B. J. Lee, J. H. Kim, Y. B. Park, C.-M. Nam, H. G. Kim and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12693–12700 RSC .
X. Zhu, N. Guijarro, Y. Liu, P. Schouwink, R. A. Wells, F. Formal, S. Sun, C. Gao and K. Sivula, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801612 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. Hufnagel, K. Peters, A. Müller, C. Scheu, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing and T. Bein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4435–4443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, N. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Qian, S. Zhang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7571–7577 RSC .
K. Itoh and J. O. M. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 1266–1271 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, X.-Y. Li, Q.-D. Zhao, X. Quan and G.-H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2165–2174 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Xu, H.-S. Rao, X.-D. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5124–5129 RSC .
Z. Luo, C. Li, D. Zhang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9013–9015 RSC .
K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4863–4869 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 447–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Spray, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3497–3506 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ravinder, J. Alloys Compd., 1999, 291, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. G. Gardner, F. Sweett and D. W. Tanner, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1963, 24, 1175–1181 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Benko and F. P. Koffyberg, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 1183–1188 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1248–1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Kim, P. H. Borse, J. S. Jang, E. D. Jeong, O.-S. Jung, Y. J. Suh and J. S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5889–5891 RSC .
R. Dom, P. H. Borse, K.-S. Hong, S. Choi, B. S. Lee, M. G. Ha, J. P. Kim, E. D. Jeong and H. G. Kim, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2015, 67, 1639–1645 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsoncheva, E. Manova, N. Velinov, D. Paneva, M. Popova, B. Kunev, K. Tenchev and I. Mitov, Catal. Commun., 2010, 12, 105–109 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Balagurov, I. A. Bobrikov, M. S. Maschenko, D. Sangaa and V. G. Simkin, Crystallogr. Rep., 2013, 58, 710–717 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, J. Yan, Z. Lu, X. Cheng and Y. Tang, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 476, 715–719 CrossRef CAS .
C. Michel, J.-M. Moreau, G. D. Achenbach, R. Gerson and W. J. James, Solid State Commun., 1969, 7, 701–704 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Zhou, L. You, J. Wang, M. Shen and L. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 022902 CrossRef .
S. J. A. Moniz, C. S. Blackman, P. Southern, P. M. Weaver, J. Tang and C. J. Carmalt, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16343–16353 RSC .
J. Song, T. L. Kim, J. Lee, S. Y. Cho, J. Cha, S. Y. Jeong, H. An, W. S. Kim, Y.-S. Jung, J. Park, G. Y. Jung, D.-Y. Kim, J. Y. Jo, S. D. Bu, H. W. Jang and S. Lee, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 642–655 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rong, M. Chu, Y. Tang, C. Zhang, X. Cui, H. He, Y. Zhang and P. Xiao, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 5712–5723 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Paudel, S. S. Jaswal and E. Y. Tsymbal, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 104409 CrossRef .
T. Rojac, A. Bencan, G. Drazic, N. Sakamoto, H. Ursic, B. Jancar, G. Tavcar, M. Makarovic, J. Walker, B. Malic and D. Damjanovic, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 322–327 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ji, K. Yao, Y.-F. Lim, Y. C. Liang and A. Suwardi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 062901 CrossRef .
D. Cao, Z. Wang, N. Nasori, L. Wen, Y. Mi and Y. Lei, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 11207–11211 CrossRef .
Y.-L. Huang, W. S. Chang, C. N. Van, H.-J. Liu, K.-A. Tsai, J.-W. Chen, H.-H. Kuo, W.-Y. Tzeng, Y.-C. Chen, C.-L. Wu, C.-W. Luo, Y.-J. Hsu and Y.-H. Chu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15795–15801 RSC .
S. Wang, P. Chen, J.-H. Yun, Y. Hu and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8500–8504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, O. Zandi and T. W. Hamann, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2826–2830 RSC .
J. E. Yourey and B. M. Bartlett, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7651–7660 RSC .
J. E. Yourey, K. J. Pyper, J. B. Kurtz and B. M. Bartlett, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8708–8718 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hill and K.-S. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5006–5014 RSC .
C. R. Lhermitte and B. M. Bartlett, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1121–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Pourbaix, Atlas of electrochemical equilibria in aqueous solutions, National Association of Corrosion Engineers, Houston TX,  1974 Search PubMed .
D. Bohra and W. A. Smith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 9857–9866 RSC .
A. Theuwis, I. E. Vermeir and W. P. Gomes, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1996, 410, 31–42 CrossRef .
Y. Gao and T. W. Hamann, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1285–1288 RSC .
K. M. Nam, E. A. Cheon, W. J. Shin and A. J. Bard, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 10897–10903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Yourey, J. B. Kurtz and B. M. Bartlett, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 10394–10401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, N. Rong, F. Liu, M. Chu, H. Dong, Y. Zhang and P. Xiao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 361, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hu, P. Diao, D. Xu, M. Xia, Y. Gu, Q. Wu, C. Li and S. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5892–5901 RSC .
N. Gaillard, Y. Chang, A. Deangelis, S. Higgins and A. Braun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 3166–3176 CrossRef CAS .
D. Peeters, O. Mendoza Reyes, L. Mai, A. Sadlo, S. Cwik, D. Rogalla, H. Schütz, H.-W. Becker, J. Hirst, S. Müller, D. Friedrich, D. Mitoraj, M. Nagli, M. Caspary Toroker, R. Eichberger, R. Beranek and A. Devi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10206–10216 RSC .
W. Ye, F. Chen, F. Zhao, N. Han and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9211–9217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Pyper, J. E. Yourey and B. M. Bartlett, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24726–24732 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao and T. W. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2700–2704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Hill, Y. Ping, G. A. Galli and K.-S. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2440–2446 RSC .
K. J. Pyper, T. C. Evans and B. M. Bartlett, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2015, 26, 474–478 CrossRef CAS .
M. Harb, A. Ziani and K. Takanabe, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2016, 253, 1115–1119 CrossRef CAS .
I.-s. Cho, C. H. Kwak, D. W. Kim, S. Lee and K. S. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10647–10653 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, P. Sarker, C. Zhao, L. Zhou, R. L. Grimm, M. N. Huda and P. M. Rao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1459–1470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ziani, M. Harb, D. Noureldine and K. Takanabe, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 096101 CrossRef .
Y. Hosogi, Y. Shimodaira, H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1299–1307 CrossRef CAS .
D. Noureldine, D. H. Anjum and K. Takanabe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10762–10769 RSC .
J. Solis, J. Frantti, V. Lantto, L. Häggström and M. Wikner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 13491–13500 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Khader, M. M. Saleh and M. E. El-Naggar, J. Solid State Electrochem., 1998, 2, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi, A. Chemseddine, S. P. Berglund and R. Van De Krol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8553–8557 RSC .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Park, D. Kang and K.-S. Choi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1238–1246 RSC .
T. W. Kim, Y. Ping, G. A. Galli and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, Y. Jo, J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. J. Kang, Y. H. Lee, D. S. Kim, Y. Jun and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11820–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ding, J. Shi, D. Wang, Z. Wang, N. Wang, G. Liu, F. Xiong and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4589–4595 RSC .
A. J. E. Rettie, H. C. Lee, L. G. Marshall, J.-F. Lin, C. Capan, J. Lindemuth, J. S. McCloy, J. Zhou, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11389–11396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, W. Liu, W. Chen, W. Chen, G. Zhou, P.-C. Hsu, R. Zhang, Z. Liang, S. Fan, Y. Zhang and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501764 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Lee and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kuang, Q. Jia, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada, A. Kudo and K. Domen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 6, 1501645 CrossRef .
S. Xiao, C. Hu, H. Lin, X. Meng, Y. Bai, T. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Qu, K. Yan, J. Xu, Y. Qiu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19091–19097 RSC .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Han, F. F. Abdi, R. van de Krol, R. Liu, Z. Huang, H.-J. Lewerenz, B. Dam, M. Zeman and A. H. M. Smets, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2832–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, J. H. Kim, M. T. Mayer, M.-K. Son, A. Ummadisingu, J. S. Lee, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 412–420 CrossRef .
Y.-S. Chen, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 974–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ding, W. Qin, N. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Yan, J. Shi and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15608–15614 RSC .
P. Chakthranont, T. R. Hellstern, J. M. McEnaney and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701515 CrossRef .
N. Kornienko, N. A. Gibson, H. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, S. Aloni, S. R. Leone and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5525–5535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, G. V. Govindaraju, D. K. Lee, K.-S. Choi and T. L. Andrew, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22449–22455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, S. Han, Y. H. Jo, Y. Bak and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1266–1274 RSC .
P. Bornoz, F. F. Abdi, S. D. Tilley, B. Dam, R. van de Krol, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16959–16966 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Bai, J.-H. Yun, G. Liu and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800486 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kuang, Q. Jia, G. Ma, T. Hisatomi, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, T. Yamada, A. Kudo and K. Domen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16191 CrossRef .
Y. Park, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2321–2337 RSC .
F. F. Abdi, T. J. Savenije, M. M. May, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2752–2757 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Pala, A. J. Leenheer, M. Lichterman, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3424–3430 RSC .
J.-W. Jang, D. Friedrich, S. Müller, M. Lamers, H. Hempel, S. Lardhi, Z. Cao, M. Harb, L. Cavallo, R. Heller, R. Eichberger, R. van de Krol and F. F. Abdi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701536 CrossRef .
H. S. Park, K. E. Kweon, H. Ye, E. Paek, G. S. Hwang and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17870–17879 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, R. Wang and B. A. Parkinson, ACS Comb. Sci., 2013, 15, 639–645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. S. Parmar, H. J. Kang, A. Bist, P. Dua, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1926–1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Berglund, A. J. E. Rettie, S. Hoang and C. B. Mullins, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7065–7075 RSC .
W. Luo, Z. Yang, Z. Li, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, S. Yan, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Energy
Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4046–4051 RSC .
W. Zhang, F. Wu, J. Li, D. Yan, J. Tao, Y. Ping and M. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2232–2239 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Govindaraju, J. M. Morbec, G. A. Galli and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 19416–19424 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Y. Ling, X. Lu, F. Qian, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, V. Lordi, C. Rocha Leao and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10957–10964 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Cooper, S. B. Scott, Y. Ling, J. Yang, S. Hao, Y. Li, F. M. Toma, M. Stutzmann, K. V. Lakshmi and I. D. Sharp, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5761–5771 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bhaway, K. Kisslinger, L. Zhang, K. G. Yager, A. L. Schmitt, M. K. Mahanthappa, A. Karim and B. D. Vogt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19288–19298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, Y. Liu, B. B. Garcia, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, Y.-H. Jeong and G. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8789–8795 RSC .

          R. W. Daniele Ielmini, Electrical Transport in Transition Metal Oxides, Resistive Switching: From Fundamentals of Nanoionic Redox Processes to Memristive Device Applications, Wiley,  2015, ch. 6, pp. 165–196 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Ye, M. Boloor, A. Poletayev, N. A. Melosh and W. C. Chueh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2044–2052 RSC .
P. Singh and N. M. Ravindra, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 36–45 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Jacoboni, Theory of Electron Transport in Semiconductors: A Pathway from Elementary Physics to Nonequilibrium Green Functions, Electronic Interactions, Springer, Berlin,  2010, ch. 9, pp. 127–161 Search PubMed .
D. K. Zhong, S. Choi and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18370–18377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Seabold and K. S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2186–2192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, H. Han, F. Zhang, D. Wang and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1369–1376 RSC .
S. K. Choi, W. Choi and H. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6499–6507 RSC .
J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. J. Kang, G. Magesh, J. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. Lee and J. S. Lee, J. Catal., 2014, 317, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guevarra, A. Shinde, S. K. Suram, I. D. Sharp, F. M. Toma, J. A. Haber and J. M. Gregoire, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 565–580 RSC .
Y. Ma, F. Le Formal, A. Kafizas, S. R. Pendlebury and J. R. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20649–20657 RSC .
C. Zachäus, F. F. Abdi, L. M. Peter and R. van de Krol, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3712–3719 RSC .
M. R. Nellist, F. A. L. Laskowski, J. Qiu, H. Hajibabaei, K. Sivula, T. W. Hamann and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, K. G. U. Wijayantha and A. A. Tahir, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 309–322 RSC .
F. M. Toma, J. K. Cooper, V. Kunzelmann, M. T. McDowell, J. Yu, D. M. Larson, N. J. Borys, C. Abelyan, J. W. Beeman, K. M. Yu, J. Yang, L. Chen, M. R. Shaner, J. Spurgeon, F. A. Houle, K. A. Persson and I. D. Sharp, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12012 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, M. F. Lichterman, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Hu, I. D. Sharp, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19618–19624 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Lichterman, M. R. Shaner, S. G. Handler, B. S. Brunschwig, H. B. Gray, N. S. Lewis and J. M. Spurgeon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4188–4191 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, A. Kvit and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4704–4712 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pihosh, I. Turkevych, K. Mawatari, T. Asai, T. Hisatomi, J. Uemura, M. Tosa, K. Shimamura, J. Kubota, K. Domen and T. Kitamori, Small, 2014, 10, 3692–3699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Seitz, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck and T. F. Jaramillo, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1372–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 CrossRef .
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 70 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Seabold and N. R. Neale, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1005–1013 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Jiang, M. Farmand, C. H. Wu, Y.-S. Liu, J. Guo, W. S. Drisdell, J. K. Cooper and I. D. Sharp, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3334–3345 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Q. Yan, A. Shinde, D. Guevarra, P. F. Newhouse, N. Becerra-Stasiewicz, S. M. Chatman, J. A. Haber, J. B. Neaton and J. M. Gregoire, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500968 CrossRef .
P. F. Newhouse, D. A. Boyd, A. Shinde, D. Guevarra, L. Zhou, E. Soedarmadji, G. Li, J. B. Neaton and J. M. Gregoire, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7483–7494 RSC .
W. Guo, W. D. Chemelewski, O. Mabayoje, P. Xiao, Y. Zhang and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27220–27227 CrossRef CAS .
M.-w. Kim, B. Joshi, H. Yoon, T. Y. Ohm, K. Kim, S. S. Al-Deyab and S. S. Yoon, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 708, 444–450 CrossRef CAS .
I. Khan and A. Qurashi, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14370 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cardenas-Morcoso, A. Peiro-Franch, I. Herraiz-Cardona and S. Gimenez, Catal. Today, 2017, 290, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Lumley and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9472–9479 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Jiang, G. Segev, L. H. Hess, G. Liu, G. Zaborski, F. M. Toma, J. K. Cooper and I. D. Sharp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10627–10633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ye, H. S. Park and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12464–12470 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Cardiel, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 9262–9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Q. Yan, J. Yu, R. J. R. Jones, N. Becerra-Stasiewicz, S. K. Suram, A. Shinde, D. Guevarra, J. B. Neaton, K. A. Persson and J. M. Gregoire, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 9349–9352 RSC .
T. Arai, Y. Konishi, Y. Iwasaki, H. Sugihara and K. Sayama, J. Comb. Chem., 2007, 9, 574–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Robertson and E. Kostiner, J. Solid State Chem., 1972, 4, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Morton, I. J. Slipper, M. J. K. Thomas and B. D. Alexander, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 209–214 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Biswas and J.-O. Baeg, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14451–14457 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang and Y. Bi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2478–2482 RSC .
M. Zhang, Y. Ma, D. Friedrich, R. van de Krol, L. H. Wong and F. F. Abdi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 548–555 RSC .
M. Balamurugan, G. Yun, K.-S. Ahn and S. H. Kang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 7625–7634 CrossRef .
H. Mandal, S. Shyamal, P. Hajra, A. Bera, D. Sariket, S. Kundu and C. Bhattacharya, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 4992–4999 RSC .
D. Tang, A. J. E. Rettie, O. Mabayoje, B. R. Wygant, Y. Lai, Y. Liu and C. B. Mullins, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3034–3042 RSC .
X. An, H. Lan, R. Liu, H. Liu and J. Qu, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 7966–7971 RSC .
B. Morosin, R. J. Baughman, D. S. Ginley and M. A. Butler, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 1978, 11, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Bassi, S. Y. Chiam, Gurudayal, J. Barber and L. H. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22490–22495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Ginley and M. A. Butler, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 2019–2021 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kozuka and M. Kajimura, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2001, 22, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, T. Wang, Z. Luo, S. Liu and J. Gong, Small, 2016, 12, 3415–3422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Courtin, G. Baldinozzi, M. T. Sougrati, L. Stievano, C. Sanchez and C. Laberty-Robert, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6567–6577 RSC .
H. Zhang, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702428 CrossRef .
J. Deng, X. Lv, J. Liu, H. Zhang, K. Nie, C. Hong, J. Wang, X. Sun, J. Zhong and S.-T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5348–5356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kment, F. Riboni, S. Pausova, L. Wang, L. Wang, H. Han, Z. Hubicka, J. Krysa, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3716–3769 RSC .
D. Eisenberg, H. S. Ahn and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14011–14014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, H. Dotan, M. Stefik, K. Sivula, A. Rothschild, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2699–2702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, J. He, T. Yao, Z. Sun, W. Cheng, S. He, Y. Xie, Y. Peng, H. Cheng, Y. Sun, Y. Jiang, F. Hu, Z. Xie, W. Yan, Z. Pan, Z. Wu and S. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2015, 5, 1–7 CAS .
L. Wang, N. T. Nguyen and P. Schmuki, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2048–2053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-P. Ruoko, K. Kaunisto, M. Bärtsch, J. Pohjola, A. Hiltunen, M. Niederberger, N. V. Tkachenko and H. Lemmetyinen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2859–2864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Le Formal, N. Tétreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 737–743 RSC .
Y. Hosogi, K. Tanabe, H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, Chem. Lett., 2004, 33, 28–29 CrossRef CAS .
R. Niishiro, Y. Takano, Q. Jia, M. Yamaguchi, A. Iwase, Y. Kuang, T. Minegishi, T. Yamada, K. Domen and A. Kudo, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 629–632 RSC .
S. Liang, R. Liang, L. Wen, R. Yuan, L. Wu and X. Fu, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Katayama, H. Hayashi, Y. Kumagai, F. Oba and I. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9604–9611 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Seo, T. H. Noh, S. Park, C. W. Lee, S. H. Kim, H. J. Kim, H. K. Park and K. S. Hong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 17517–17523 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, Y. Zhao, L. Shang, R. Shi, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8239–8242 RSC .
Y. Hosogi, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 578–579 CrossRef CAS .
D. Noureldine and K. Takanabe, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7656–7670 RSC .
S. Uma, J. Singh and V. Thakral, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 11624–11630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Minegishi, N. Nishimura, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1120–1124 RSC .
S. Xun, Z. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Jiang and H. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 685, 647–655 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, S. Liang, J. Bi, M. Liu, L. Zhou, L. Wu and X. Wang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1355–1363 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Dong Ki Lee
	Dong Ki Lee graduated from Korea University with a BS in Materials Science and Engineering in 2009 and from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) with a MS (2011) and PhD (2015) in Materials Science and Engineering. He worked in Prof. Kyoung-Shin Choi's group as a postdoctoral scholar from 2015 to 2018 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He is currently a senior researcher at the Clean Energy Research Center at the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST). His research interests include the development of photoelectrodes for solar fuel production and electrocatalysts for electrochemical biomass conversion.

Dongho Lee
	Dongho Lee received his BS degree in Chemistry from Sogang University (South Korea) in 2014. He is currently a fifth-year student in the materials chemistry PhD program at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, working in Prof. Kyoung-Shin Choi's group. His research focuses on developing new electrodeposition conditions to produce multi-component electrodes (e.g. photoelectrode/protection layer/catalyst) for solar water splitting and understanding charge transfer processes at their interfaces. He was a recipient of a 2014 Fulbright Graduate Study Award.

Margaret A. Lumley
	Margaret A. Lumley received her BS degree in Chemistry from the University of California, Santa Barbara in 2015. She is currently a fourth-year graduate student in the materials chemistry PhD program at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, working with Prof. Kyoung-Shin Choi. Her research focuses on the electrochemical synthesis of oxide-based photoelectrode materials, addition of protection layers, and catalyst integration to develop materials for solar water splitting.

Kyoung-Shin Choi
	Professor Kyoung-Shin Choi received her PhD in Chemistry from Michigan State University (2000). After two years of postdoctoral research at the University of California, Santa Barbara, she started her independent research at Purdue University as an assistant professor in 2002. She was a visiting scholar at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) during the fall of 2008. In 2012, she joined the chemistry faculty at the University of Wisconsin-Madison as a full professor. Her research combines solid state chemistry, electrochemistry, and materials chemistry to study electrode and catalyst materials for use in photoelectrochemical and electrochemical applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic energy diagrams of (a) a PEC composed of a photoanode as a single photon absorber paired with a metal cathode and (b) a PEC composed of a photoanode and a photocathode in tandem (EF: Fermi level, CB: conduction band, and VB: valence band).	 

 	Fig. 2  Theoretical maximum photocurrent density (Jmax) as a function of semiconductor bandgap energy calculated using the photon flux of the AM 1.5G solar spectrum8 assuming 100% IPCE.	 
JPEC = Jabs × ηsep × ηox

 	Fig. 3  A scheme showing J–V plots of three hypothetical photoanodes and their Jops when combined with a photocathode in a PEC. Photoanodes A and B have the same bandgap but photoanode A has an earlier photocurrent onset potential. Photoanodes B and C have the same photocurrent onset potential but photoanode C has a smaller bandgap.	 

ZnFe2O422	Aerogel assisted-chemical vapor deposition	0.88	0.35	pH 14 NaOH	10%	—
ZnFe2O423	Drop-casting a Zn solution on FeOOH followed by annealing and microwave treatment	0.64	0.24	pH 14 NaOH	7%	3 h stable
ZnFe2O424	Drop-casting a Zn solution on FeOOH followed by annealing and H2 treatment	0.75	0.32	pH 14 NaOH	—	3 h stable
ZnFe2O4/NiFeOx25	Drop-casting a Zn solution on FeOOH followed by annealing and H2 treatment	0.53	0.35	pH 14 NaOH	8% at 1.1 VRHE	24 h stable
TiO2/ZnFe2O4/NiFeOx26	Drop-casting a Zn solution on FeOOH followed by microwave treatment and H2 treatment	0.62	0.92	pH 14 NaOH	8%	11 h stable
ZnFe2O4/NiFeOx27	Drop-casting a Zn solution on FeOOH followed by annealing and H2 heat treatment	0.85	1.00	pH 14 NaOH	6%	—
ZnFe2O428	Atomic layer deposition on an inverse opal structured-substrate	0.90	0.26	pH 13 NaOH	2%	3 h stable
ZnFe2O429	Spray pyrolysis, Ti doping	0.95	0.35	pH 14 NaOH	3%	5 h stable

 	Fig. 4  Reflectance-corrected absorbance (Acorr) spectra of ALD-deposited ZnFe2O4 and Fe2O3 films with corresponding photographs of the films. Adapted with permission from ref. 28 John Wiley & Sons. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photoelectrochemical properties of CuFe2O4 (CFO), MgFe2O4 (MFO), and ZnFe2O4 (ZFO) in pH 14 NaOH, where H, 550, and NFO represent H2 heat treatment, annealing in air at 550 °C, and the addition of a NiFeOx OEC, respectively: (a–c) J–V plots obtained in pH 14 NaOH under AM 1.5G illumination with Butler plots (J2vs. E) shown as insets. For H2O2 oxidation, 0.5 M H2O2 was dissolved in the solution. (d–f) Efficiencies for bulk charge separation (ηbulk = ηsep) and the interfacial hole transfer reaction (ηsurface = ηox). Adapted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

MgFe2O4/NiFeOx25	Drop-casting a Mg solution on FeOOH followed by annealing and H2 heat treatment	0.64	0.04	pH 14 NaOH	3.5%	1 h stable
CuFe2O4/NiFeOx25	Drop-casting a Cu solution on FeOOH followed by two annealing processes in air	0.80	0.15	pH 14 NaOH	4.0%	24 h stable

 	Fig. 6  
J–V plots of BiFeO3 films in pH 7 Na2SO4 under illumination (power density not specified) before (red) and after (green) electric field treatment (i.e. applying −8 V vs. Ag/AgCl). The dark current is shown by the black line. ((a) EFB of as-prepared sample, (b) EFB of E-field-treated sample, (c) arrow indicating the p-to-n conversion caused by the E-field-treatment. It should be noted that both the as-prepared and E-field-treated samples show p-to-n conversion within a single scan at the location of their EFBs. Also, outside of the shaded area, the E-field-treatment does not result in p-to-n conversion). Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2016 American Institute of Physics Publishing LLC.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Band diagrams for CuWO4 and WO3. Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) J–t plots of CuWO4 and WO3 photoanodes at 1.23 V vs. RHE in pH 7 borate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  
J–V plots of CuWO4 for water oxidation (black), sulfite oxidation (red), and H2O2 oxidation (blue) in pH 9 borate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. The vertical dashed gray line represents the thermodynamic potential for water oxidation (1.23 V vs. RHE). Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Chopped light J–V plots of α-SnWO4 prepared by (a) Rao and co-workers measured in pH 7 phosphate buffer (adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society), (b) Bartlett and co-workers measured in pH 5 phosphate buffer (adapted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015 Elsevier), and (c) Takanabe and co-workers measured in a pH 3 sulfate solution. (d) Comparison between the first and second J–V scans of α-SnWO4 prepared by Takanabe and co-workers. For (c) and (d), the numbers in parentheses refer to the thicknesses of the films in nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2015 American Institute of Physics Publishing LLC. All J–V plots were measured under AM 1.5G illumination.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Differences in photocurrent density at different applied potentials between the first and third LSV measurements of α-SnWO4 under AM 1.5G illumination in aqueous pH 7 phosphate buffer, an aqueous electrolyte containing Fe(CN)64−/3−, and nonaqueous anhydrous acetonitrile containing 1 M LiClO4. (b) Sn 3d5/2 XPS spectra of α-SnWO4 as-synthesized (top), after LSV measurements in the nonaqueous electrolyte (middle), and after LSV measurements in the aqueous electrolyte without a kinetically fast redox couple (bottom). Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 



Si PV cells

H2-Treated Mo-doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH with H2-treated Ti-doped Fe2O3/TiO2/Ni2FeOx20	Two 1-jna Si	pH 9 carbonate	4.5 (BiVO4)	5.6 (BiVO4)	8 h stable
3.2 (Fe2O3)	3.9 (Fe2O3)
6.3 (together)	7.7 (together)
W-Doped BiVO4/Co–Pi98	2-jna Si	pH 7 phosphate	4.2	5.2	1 h stable
W-Doped BiVO4/Co–Pi97	2-jna Si 1-jna Si	pH 7 phosphate	4.0 (2-jn)	4.9 (2-jn)	1 h stable
3.0 (1-jn)	3.6 (1-jn)



Perovskite PV cells

Mo-Doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH on an inverse nanocone substrate96	FA0.83Cs0.17PbI2Br	pH 7 phosphate	5.7	7.0	6 h stable
Mo-Doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH on a nanocone substrate93	CH3NH3PbI3	pH 7 phosphate	5.0	6.2	10 h gradual decrease
H2-Treated Mo-doped BiVO4/Co-Ci90	CH3NH3PbI3	pH 9 carbonate	3.5	4.3	12 h stable



Metal oxide photocathode

H2-Treated Mo-doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH99	Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2	pH 9 borate	2.5	3.0	12 h stable


BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH87	Electrodeposition of a BiOI film followed by annealing with a V solution	0.20	4.5	pH 7 phosphate	50 h stable
N2-Treated BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH94	Electrodeposition of a BiOI film followed by annealing with a V solution and post-treatment with N2	0.24	4.7	pH 9 borate	450 h stable
BiVO4/NiFeOx-B95	Electrodeposition of a BiOI film followed by annealing with a V solution	0.22a	4.9a	pH 9 borate	10 h stable
BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH108	Electrodeposition of an amorphous Bi film followed by annealing with a V solution	0.32a	5.9a	pH 9 borate	100 h stable
Mo-Doped BiVO4/NiFeOOH109	Solid state reaction followed by ball milling and post annealing	0.28	3.8	pH 9 borate	1100 h stable
W-Doped BiVO4/Co–Pi98	Spray pyrolysis followed by annealing	0.30	4.0	pH 7 phosphate	60 h stable
H2-Treated Mo-doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH20	Drop-casting followed by annealing and post-treatment with H2	0.24	5.0	pH 9 carbonate	8 h stable
Mo-Doped BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH on a nanocone substrate93	Drop-casting on a nanocone shaped glass/SiOx/Pt/SnO2 substrate followed by annealing	0.21	5.8	pH 7 phosphate	10 h gradual decrease
Mo-Doped BiVO4/Fe(Ni)OOH on an inverse nanocone substrate96	Drop-casting on an inverse nanocone shaped glass/TiO2/Pt/SnO2 substrate followed by annealing	0.22	6.0	pH 7 phosphate	6 h stable

 	Fig. 11  SEM images of (a) a BiOI precursor film on FTO (side view) and (b) top and (c) side view images of a BiVO4 film obtained from the BiOI film. Adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014 American Association for the Advancement of Science. SEM images of (d) a thicker and more densely packed BiOI film and (e and f) a resulting BiVO4 film. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. (g) J–V plots of BiVO4 films shown in (b and c) (blue) and (e and f) (red) for sulfite oxidation in pH 9 borate buffer containing 0.2 M sulfite under AM 1.5G illumination. The black line represents the dark current.	 

BiVO4	0.07	0.04	0.03	43	57	7.0 ± 1.7 × 1018
H2-BiVO4	0.08	0.045	0.035	109	101	1.1 ± 0.3 × 1021
W-BiVO4	0.02	0.01	0.01	32	28	2.9 ± 0.8 × 1021

 	Fig. 12  (a) Electronic band structure of pristine BiVO4 and BiVO4 with charge-balanced N doping (9% O replaced with 6% N and 3% O vacancies) (b) IPCE of BiVO4 (black) and N2-treated BiVO4 (red) at 0.6 V vs. RHE in pH 7 phosphate buffer containing 1 M Na2SO3 showing a decrease in bandgap by 0.2 eV after N incorporation. Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  Temperature-dependent J–V plots of the CoPi/Mo:BiVO4/SnO2/Si photoanode in pH 7 phosphate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  
J–V plots of (a) BiVO4/FeOOH, (b) BiVO4/NiOOH, (c) BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH, and (d) BiVO4/NiOOH/FeOOH comparing photocurrent generation for 1.0 M sulfite oxidation (dashed) and water oxidation (solid) measured in pH 7 phosphate buffer. Photocurrent for sulfite oxidation achieved by bare BiVO4 is shown as the black dashed line for comparison. All J–V plots were measured under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) XRD patterns of Mo-doped BiVO4 particles annealed at different temperatures. BM stands for “ball milling.” The miller indices of BiVO4 (JCPDS no. 83-1699) are shown at the bottom. (b) SEM images of the corresponding BiVO4 particles (scale bar = 1 μm). Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) XRD patterns, (b) UV-vis spectra, and (c) photocurrent measurements for sulfite oxidation (0.2 M) of BiVO4 in pH 9 borate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination before (black) and after (blue) immersion in pH 9 borate for 50 days in the dark. SEM images (d) before and (e) after immersion are also shown. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) J–t plot of BiVO4 for sulfite oxidation at 0.6 V vs. RHE in pH 9 borate buffer containing 0.7 M Na2SO3. The slight photocurrent decrease observed over time was not due to photocorrosion but due to the depletion of sulfite. When the electrolyte was replenished at 200 h and 300 h, the photocurrent increased to its initial level. (b) J–t plot of the BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH film in a V5+-saturated pH 9 borate electrolyte at 0.6V vs. RHE. Unlike the sulfite measurement where the electrolyte was replaced only twice over 500 h, the electrolyte was replenished every 24 h to maintain a constant photocurrent level. All measurements were performed under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) A high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of a BiVO4/TiO2 film. XRD patterns of (b) BiVO4 and (c) BiVO4/TiO2 electrodes before (black) and after (red) 30 days of immersion in pH 12 phosphate buffer. Adapted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) J–t plots at 0.6 V vs. RHE of BiVO4 (black) and BiVO4/TiO2 (red) electrodes for sulfite oxidation measured in pH 12 phosphate buffer containing 1 M Na2SO3. (b) J–t plots at 0.6 V vs. RHE of BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH (green) and BiVO4/TiO2/FeOOH/NiOOH (blue) electrodes for water oxidation measured in pH 12 phosphate buffer. All measurements were obtained under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Synthesis process for BiVO4 deposited on SiOx nanocone arrays. (b) SEM image of SiOx/Pt/SnO2 nanocone arrays and (c) cross-sectional SEM image of Mo-doped BiVO4 on the SiOx/Pt/SnO2 nanocone substrate (scale bars = 500 nm), (d) J–V plots of the nanocone Mo-doped BiVO4 films in pH 7 phosphate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 21  
J–V plots of BiVO4, Fe2O3, and BiVO4||Fe2O3, where BiVO4 and Fe2O3 are used as dual photoanodes, intersected with J–V plots of two serially connected c-Si solar cells in pH 9 carbonate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. The c-Si solar cells were placed behind the photoanodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 22  Chopped light J–V scans for pristine (black), Mo-doped (blue), and W-doped (red) Cu11V6O26 for sulfite oxidation in pH 9.2 borate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. The inset shows the photocurrent obtained by sweeping the potential from the open circuit potential (OCP) under illumination to the negative direction to accurately determine the photocurrent onset potentials. Adapted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Chopped light J–V plots of undoped and Mo-doped FeVO4 for water oxidation in pH 7 phosphate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. The inset shows the change of the current density with the Mo doping level at 1.8 V vs. RHE. Adapted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  Band energy diagrams for TiO2, Fe2TiO5, and Fe2O3. Adapted with permission from ref. 178 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) J–V plots and (b) J–t plots of Fe2TiO5 nanotube arrays on FTO substrates with different modifications: pristine Fe2TiO5 on FTO (blue); Fe2TiO5 with a TiO2 underlayer (green); H2-treated Fe2TiO5 (purple); and combined TiO2 underlayer, H2 treatment, and cocatalyst (FeNiOx) modified Fe2TiO5 (red). Adapted with permission from ref. 176 John Wiley & Sons. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, (c) J–V plots of pristine (red) and SnOx treated (blue) Fe2TiO5 films. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. All measurements were performed in 1 M NaOH under AM 1.5G illumination.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) SEM and (b) HRTEM images of a Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox nanotube array (scale bars: 200 nm, 100 nm, and 5 nm for (a), inset of (b), and (b), respectively). (c) J–V plots (solid lines) for pure Fe2O3 (dark grey), pure TiO2 (black), TiO2/Coox (green), Fe2TiO5–TiO2 (light grey), and Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox (red). Dashed lines denote dark current. (d) J–t plot for the Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox photoanode measured at 0.4 V vs. RHE in 1 M KOH under AM 1.5G illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) J–V and (b) J–t plots at 1.2 V vs. RHE for the bare SnNb2O6 (red) and SnNb2O6/CoOx photoelectrodes in pH 9.4 borate buffer under AM 1.5G illumination. The CoOx loading amount was varied from 0.1–5.0 wt%. (c) H2 and O2 evolution using a three-electrode system composed of a SnNb2O6/CoOx (0.5 wt%) WE, a Pt CE, and an Ag/AgCl RE. The inset shows the photocurrent density at 0.6 V vs. RHE. Adapted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

α
	Absorption coefficient

α
−1
	Light penetration depth

δ
	Inversion degree

A
corr
	Reflectance-corrected absorbance
ABPE	Applied bias photon-to-current efficiency
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
AM 1.5G	Air mass 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2)
APCE	Absorbed photon-to-current efficiency
CBM	Conduction band minimum
CV	Cyclic voltammogram
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
DFT	Density functional theory
EDS	Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy

E
FB
	Flatband potential
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EPMA	Electron probe micro-analysis
FTO	Fluorine-doped tin oxide
FWHM	Full width at half maximum
HRTEM	High-resolution transmission electron microscopy
IMPS	Intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy
IO	Inverse opal
IPCE	Incident photon-to-current efficiency
ITO	Indium-doped tin oxide

J
abs
	Expected photocurrent density using absorbance spectra

J
op
	Operating current density

J–t	Current density–time

J–V	Current density–potential

J
PEC
	Measured photocurrent density

k
ox
	Rate constant for water oxidation

k
rec
	Rate constant for surface recombination
LSV	Linear sweep voltammogram
MWCNT	Multi-walled carbon nanotubes
OCP	Open circuit potential
OEC	Oxygen evolution catalyst
Oh	Octahedral

η
bulk/ηsep	Bulk separation efficiency

η
ox/ηsurface	Charge injection efficiency (or surface separation efficiency)
PEC	Photoelectrochemical cell
PT	Particle transfer
RHE	Reversible hydrogen electrode
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
STH	Solar-to-hydrogen
Td	Tetrahedral
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TRMC	Time-resolved microwave conductivity
UPS	Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy
VBM	Valence band maximum
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
