Toward high-performance organic photovoltaics: the new cooperation of sequential solution-processing and promising non-fullerene acceptors  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2MH00376G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2MH00376G
(Minireview)
Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 2097-2108Toward high-performance organic photovoltaics: the new cooperation of sequential solution-processing and promising non-fullerene acceptors

        
          
            Siru 
            Guo
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yingyue 
            Hu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Meng 
            Qin
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Jianshu 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yinghan 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiaqiang 
            Qin
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Pei 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *
      College of Polymer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, P. R. China. E-mail: qinmeng@scu.edu.cn; chengpei@scu.edu.cn
Received 
      25th March 2022
    , Accepted 27th May 2022First published on 27th May 2022AbstractOrganic photovoltaics (OPVs) have long been a hot topic due to their light weight, low cost, and flexibility. Simple blend-based OPVs have sufficient donor/acceptor (D/A) interfaces and high exciton dissociation efficiency, which result in certified high power conversion efficiency (PCE) exceeding 18%. However, the difficult morphology control and poor device stability limit further progress toward higher PCE and future application. Sequential solution-processing with tunable vertical phase distribution, D/A interfaces, and charge transportation pathways not only benefit device stability but can also overcome the up-scaling challenge. In recent years, the development of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) has been very rapid, which is attributed to their tunable energy levels, bandgaps, planarity, and crystallinity. In this minireview, the opportunities for the cooperation of sequential solution-processing and NFAs are revealed based on their characteristics, such as diverse molecular shapes, abundant functional groups and heteroatoms, and various aggregation states for NFAs; independent active layer processing, controllable D/A interfaces, and excellent device stability for sequential solution-processing. Few but important existing examples are discussed to display the prospects of sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs toward high PCE, good device stability, high semitransparency, and large-area industrial manufacture. Finally, some possible research directions are predicted and the main issues that need to be overcome are proposed for sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs toward higher performance.
Siru Guo
Siru Guo received her M.E. in Materials Engineering from Xinjiang Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2021, under the direction of Prof. Shilie Pan. Afterwards, she joined Prof. Pei Cheng's group at Sichuan University as a research assistant. Now, her research is focused on high-performance organic solar cells.
Yingyue Hu
Yingyue Hu is pursuing her B.E. in 2022 in Polymer Science and Engineering from Sichuan University, China. At the same time, she has been pursuing her Ph.D. degree under the supervision of Prof. Pei Cheng at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. Her research interests cover the application and preparation of high-performance organic solar cells.
Meng Qin
Meng Qin received her Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Yanlin Song. Afterwards, she worked as a research associate at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). She is currently an associate professor at Prof. Jianshu Li's group in College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. Her research is focused on responsive optical and electronic devices.
Pei Cheng
Pei Cheng received his B.E. in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Sichuan University in 2011. He then joined Prof. Xiaowei Zhan's group at ICCAS/Peking University, and received his Ph.D. in Chemistry (2016). Dr. Cheng worked in Prof. Yang Yang's group in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at UCLA from 2017 to 2020 as a postdoc researcher. He is currently a professor at College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. His research interests are focused on organic solar cells and functional optoelectronic devices.
1. Introduction
Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) are promising candidates for high solar energy utilization, offering the advantages of low cost, light weight, and flexibility.1–7 Accordingly, the development of OPVs has received much attention, which has seen significant efficiency improvements over the past two decades. In the early stages of OPV development (1950s–1980s), the active layer was composed of only a single organic material, which showed extremely low PCE due to the very low exciton dissociation efficiency.8 As the planar heterojunction structure of the active layer (evaporated donor and acceptor bilayer) was reported by Tang,9 obvious improvements in the photocurrent and PCE had been achieved due to new D/A interfaces and low charge recombination. Nevertheless, shortcomings such as the short exciton diffusion length and insufficient D/A interfaces area still exist, leading to a relatively low PCE. Until 1995, when the concept of bulk heterojunction was realized by the simple blending of the donor and the acceptor,10,11 the D/A blend had dominated as active layers with bi-continuous interpenetration network and high exciton dissociation efficiency, which achieved great success with certified PCE exceeding 18%.12–14 However, there are insurmountable disadvantages in device processing, including hard morphology control, severe charge recombination, and poor device stability. Therefore, a trend-setting approach that combines the advantages of the evaporated D/A bilayer and simple D/A blend concepts is urgently desired.
In 2009, the first report on sequential solution-processed OPVs tried to integrate the superiority of the evaporated D/A bilayer and simple D/A blend concepts.15 The photoactive layer of the sequential solution-processed device is formed by sequentially coating the donor layer and the acceptor layer, which enables the D/A interfaces and film morphology to be precisely controlled and optimized. Such a construction with tunable vertical phase distribution, tunable D/A interfaces, and charge transportation pathways not only ensures sufficient exciton dissociation interfaces but also facilitates higher charge collection efficiency.16–23 In addition, considering that the laboratory-to-mass production conversion, slot die coating24,25 and blade coating26–28 are more easily transferred to the roll-to-roll technology, and the unique features described above, sequential solution-processed OPVs have great potential for high-performance and large-area modules.
Over the past two decades, fullerene and fullerene derivative acceptors have stood out for their unique spherical conjugated structure, offering strong electron affinity and electron transport; thus, they were considered to be key components in obtaining efficient OPVs.29 However, this perception was shaken by the advent of ITIC-type NFAs since 2015.30 The rapid and burgeoning development of NFAs is attributed to their distinct superiority, namely, tunable energy levels that allow devices to obtain high open-circuit voltages (VOC) and reach suitable energy level offsets; tunable bandgaps that expand the absorption in the near-infrared (NIR) region and can complement the absorption range of the donor well; tunable planarity and crystallinity provide more opportunities for active layer morphology control and stability enhancement.31–34 Considering the advantages of sequential solution-processing and NFAs, their cooperation has a great potential to improve the processing solubility, photon absorption, exciton dissociation, charge transportation and extraction, as well as device stability, which will become the next big wave in the OPVs field. To date, sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs have already achieved great success with PCE over 18%.35,36
In this minireview, the opportunities for the cooperation of sequential solution-processing and NFAs are revealed based on their characteristics, such as diverse molecular shapes, abundant functional groups and heteroatoms, various aggregation states for NFAs, independent active layer processing, controllable D/A interfaces, and excellent stability for sequential solution-processing. Few but important existing examples are discussed to display the prospects of sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs toward high PCE, good device stability, high semitransparency and large-area industrial manufacture. Finally, some possible research directions are predicted and the main issues that need to be overcome are proposed for sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs toward higher performance. Enhancing the unique capabilities of sequential solution-processed NFAs OPVs and new device design strategies, PCEs beyond 20% or even higher are just around the corner, and will dramatically push the technology development beyond laboratory research.
2. Opportunities for the cooperation of sequential solution-processing and NFAs
This part presents a more in-depth analysis and discussion of the abovementioned advantages, trying to guide device designs targeting higher performance (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Advantages of sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs. 
2.1 NFAs with various molecular shapes
For spherically-structured fullerene acceptor materials, the molecular structure is difficult to tune and more prone to crystallization and aggregation. Excessive crystallization or aggregation of fullerene acceptors will form grain boundaries between the ordered regions, allowing the energy barrier to be overcome for greater charge transport.37 In addition, excessive crystallization or aggregation also weakens the continuity of the D/A interfaces, making the acceptor layer ineffectively add or penetrate into the donor layer, and fail to form good phase separation, all of which will affect the charge transport properties of the device. Moreover, fullerene acceptors are susceptible to dimer formation by double addition reactions under irradiation. Dimerization can lead to very rapid losses in the PCE over a short time duration, and crystallization drives ultimate device failure, which plays a negative role in the long-term device stability.38 Promising NFAs with various molecular shapes can overcome the limitations of fullerene acceptors, and the combination with sequential solution-processing could lead to significant advances in both PCE and device stability.39
In the history of NFAs development, many important NFAs have been synthesized with diverse molecular shapes, such as quasi-planar, twisted planar, star-shaped, and polymers (linear-shaped). Applying these advantages of NFAs to sequential solution-processing not only facilitates the regulation of solubility of the acceptor materials but also creates more opportunities to regulate molecular alignment, which may benefit efficient and stable OPV devices. Since sequential solution-processing could control and optimize the donor layer and acceptor layer separately, the π–π stacking of the acceptor layer and the molecular orientation relative to the D/A interfaces can be flexibly tuned by the variation of the NFAs shapes, thus adjusting the absorption range of the materials and the exciton dissociation, which further maximizes the short-circuit current density (JSC).
For sequential solution-processing, one key issue is to choose a suitable orthogonal solvent, which means that when coating the acceptor solution, the solvent only acts to process the acceptor layer on top of the donor layer without destroying the donor layer. However, finding orthogonal solvents that swell the donor layer without destroying the donor layer is difficult; thus, NFAs with diverse molecular shapes can be a good mediator. In general, twisted planar configurations of NFAs have better solubility than quasi-planar configurations due to the reduced intermolecular forces. Also, the three-dimensional (3D) star-shaped NFAs show a more distorted structural configuration, which is beneficial to suppress excessive aggregation and enhance exciton dissociation. The unique 3D configuration not only inherits the high electron mobility and isotropic charge transport properties of the fullerenes but also maintains the advantages of NFAs in terms of the tunability.40 The combination of NFAs with various shapes and sequential solution-processing can increase the room for selecting the donor materials, control the D/A interfaces, enhance the device stability, and ultimately improve the device performance.
2.2 NFAs with abundant functional groups or heteroatoms
Traditional fullerene acceptor materials have extremely few functional groups available (only ester groups) and limited sites for chemical modulation, making it difficult to form intermolecular interactions with the donor materials, which is further detrimental for controlling the film morphology. Unlike fullerene acceptors, the promising NFAs have various functional groups and heteroatoms, such as halogens, halogen-like, sulfur, selenium, and carbonyl, which provide many possibilities for constructing interactions between donors and acceptors. In particular, multiple D/A interactions (e.g., covalent bonds, coordination bonds, and hydrogen bonds) in sequential solution-processed systems can be formed and controlled by layer-by-layer deposition, which is conducive for preparing high-performance OPVs.
Not as singular as the solubility of fullerenes, the many functional groups of NFAs provide solubility versatility, offering wider choices of solvents for sequential solution-processing. Besides, NFAs with various functional groups or heteroatoms perform excellently in tuning the molecular orientation relative to the D/A interfaces in sequential solution-processed devices. Moreover, compared to sequential solution-processed fullerene-based OPVs, NFA-based devices show significant superiority in vertical phase distribution. With the merits of diverse functional groups of NFAs, the surface energy is adjustable, which is beneficial for constructing ideal vertical phase distribution in sequential solution-processed devices, allowing both donors and acceptors to be enriched at the corresponding electrodes and facilitating charge transportation and extraction.
2.3 NFAs with diverse aggregation states
Although fullerene acceptors have ultrafast charge transfer capability at the D/A interfaces and high electron mobility, they have a strong tendency to overaggregate due to their spherical structure with unique and non-adjustable aggregation states. This drawback limits the application of fullerenes to sequentially deposited structures since their solubility is hard to adjust, resulting in a limited choice of orthogonal solvents. For NFAs with anisotropic conjugated structures, various molecular shapes, abundant functional groups/heteroatoms, and diverse aggregation states, including amorphous, microcrystalline, orientation, and entanglement, which represent great opportunities for ensuring effective π–π interactions, tunable molecular orientation relative to the D/A interfaces, and enhanced device stability.
In the simple blend structure, the aggregation states of donors and acceptors are hardly controlled. Fortunately, the sequential solution-processing concept provides an effective strategy for improving the device performance by controlling the aggregation states of donors and acceptors separately. By flexibly applying the diverse aggregated states of NFAs to sequential solution-processed devices, the crystallinity of the acceptor materials can be effectively controlled and form the preferred face-on orientation. Thus, the combination of sequential solution-processing and NFAs with various aggregated states is a potential method to construct favorable film morphology of the active layer, which will benefit in improving the PCE and device stability.
2.4 Potential in preparing semitransparent OPVs
Semitransparent OPVs are becoming increasingly competitive toward multifunctional applications. In semitransparent OPVs, the average visible transmittance (AVT) and PCE are equally preferred. Currently, the donors of high-performance semitransparent OPVs are usually medium- or wide-bandgap materials, and trying to improve the AVT by simply reducing the donor content will be detrimental to exciton dissociation, charge transport, and extraction, thus greatly reducing the PCE of the device.
However, sequential solution-processing can solve the abovementioned problems. Benefitting from the sequential solution-processed concept, the donor layer and acceptor layer can be individually and precisely optimized; a reduction in the donor layer thickness can not only reduce visible light absorption but also has less impact on exciton dissociation, charge transport, and extraction. Combining the tunability of NFAs to further broaden the absorption of semitransparent OPVs in the NIR range can not only achieve synergistic improvements in PCE and AVT but also make great advances in device stability, which will be a strong candidate for constructing high-performance semitransparent OPVs.
2.5 Potential in large-area OPVs
The goal of research into OPVs is achieving commercial application and solving the fundamental problem of energy scarcity. Although the PCE of simple blend devices already exceeds 19% at the lab-scale,14 the serious scale lag effect of efficiency limits the application in large-area fabrication. For example, non-geminate recombination and surface recombination at the active layer-electrode can be enhanced as the area increases, both of which constrain the development of large-area simple blend-based OPVs.28 The relatively poor device stability is another important factor affecting the mass production of simple blend-based devices. It is noteworthy that the morphology of the simple blend is a delicate balance involving many parameters, including material properties, phase purity, domain size, and post-processing processes, and small variations will affect the PCE and stability of the device.
However, the sequential solution-processing strategy can form effective vertical phase distribution in the active layer, allowing acceptors to enrich at the cathode and donors to enrich at the anode. As the active layer is processed and optimized independently, sequential solution-processing is less dependent on the D/A ratio or external conditions, and maintains a relatively stable performance. For sequential solution-processing, the formation of film morphology is primarily dependent on thermodynamic diffusion and is less sensitive to the device area. While spin-coating is currently the common fabrication method in the laboratory, methods such as slot-die coating and blade-coating, which are more easily transferable to mass production, will further drive the application of sequential solution-processing methods in constructing large-area OPVs.26,28,41–44 On this basis, blessed with the rapidly developing NFAs, the cooperation enables tunable absorption, controlled morphology, excellent device stability, and increased versatility in large-area device fabrication, making sequential the solution-processing NFA-based active layer a very promising candidate for the next generation of large-area OPVs.
3. Discussion of existing examples for sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs
In the last three years, scientists have been exploring many ideas to construct high-performance sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs, including exploring solvents/additives systems as well as constructing ternary components systems. In addition, the recent progress in solution-processed fullerene-free semitransparent OPVs and large-area OPVs is discussed. The chemical structures of the donors and acceptors discussed in this section are shown in Fig. 2 and 3, respectively.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of the discussed polymer donors. 
 Fig. 3  Chemical structures of the discussed NFAs. 
3.1 Exploring the solvents/additives systems
Specific solvent selection is an efficient and easy way to regulate the interdiffusion of the active layers and form the desired film morphology. Since the donor layers and acceptor layers of the sequential solution-processing concept are treated separately, it is necessary to ensure that the bottom layer cannot be rapidly dissolved or partially washed off by the solvent from the top layer when deposited. Therefore, selecting appropriate solvents for desired interpenetration can offer sufficient D/A interfaces, which leads to efficient exciton dissociation.45,46
However, the similar solubility features of some donor and acceptor materials pose obstacles in finding suitable orthogonal solvents to dissolve the donor layers and acceptor layers. Hou et al.47 proposed a method to tune the interdiffusion between the donor layers and acceptor layers using mixed solvents in 2018. The donor PBDB-TFS1 was dissolved by chlorobenzene (CB) and the acceptor IT-4F was dissolved by mixed solvents of tetrahydrofuran (THF) and o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB). During the deposition of the top layer solution (IT-4F in THF and o-DCB), the acceptor was penetrated into the donor film as the solvents THF evaporated and o-DCB were concentrated, leading to a good distribution of the donor and acceptor components. By adjusting the amount of o-DCB, efficient vertical phase distribution of the active layers and preferred D/A interfaces were achieved, resulting in a maximum output of 13% PCE. Toward an environment-friendly process, scientists have tried to replace traditional toxic solvents with low toxicity or ecofriendly solvents. In 2019, Huang et al.26 prepared high-performance sequential solution-processed OPVs based on PM6 and IT-4F using nonhalogenated solvents (xylene/n-butyl alcohol (3:1, v/v)). The selective and partial swelling of the amorphous regions without significantly destroying the crystalline part of PM6 was achieved using nonhalogenated solvents, resulting in ideal phase gradient distribution with good charge transportation. Compared to devices with the same system using CB as the solvent, no apparent drop in the PCE (nonhalogenated solvents: 12.9%; CB: 13.2%) occurred, but solvent contamination was reduced. Later, Ade's group48 applied ecofriendly solvents, namely, (R)-(+)-limonene (LM)-processing donor layer (PBnDT-FTAZ) and 2-methyltetrahydrofuran-processing acceptor layer (IT-M) to fabricate sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs. LM and PBnDT-FTAZ had the largest Flory–Huggins interaction parameter (χ) compared with CB, o-xylene, 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene (TMB), and 2,6-dimethylanisole (DMA) (Fig. 4(a)), which was beneficial for achieving large domain spacings in LM cast films and improving the molecular order of PBnDT-FTAZ. Accordingly, the fill factor (FF) (70%) and PCE (12.5%) based on sequential solution-processing were higher than the corresponding simple blend-based devices (FF: 43–68%, PCE: 5.7–12.0%). To investigate the interfacial properties of sequential solution-processed structures more thoroughly, Hodgkiss et al.49 fabricated relatively simple sequential solution-processing systems and analyzed the photophysical properties of several representative devices using different solvents of the top layer (1,8-octanedithol (ODT), dichloromethane (DCM), and 1-chloronaphthalene (CN)). As a result, they found that rapid exciton diffusion and long-range Förster resonant energy transfer can balance the morphological requirements for exciton quenching and charge extraction.
 Fig. 4  (a) Estimated PBnDT-FTAZ: solvent interaction parameter χ. Adapted with permission.48 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) The relationship between PCE and CN content for each layer of the PBDB-T/PYT OPVs. Adapted with permission.51 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) and (d) Dependence of JSC and VOC on the light intensity of PM6/Y6 OPVs. Adapted with permission.52 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (e) J–V curves of PBDB-TF/Y6 OPVs processed with or without solid additives. Adapted with permission.53 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (f) J–V curves. Adapted with permission.36 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, doping additives is another available strategy to control the morphology of the active layer and enhance the device performance for sequential solution-processed OPVs.50 For example, Min et al.51 designed devices with high PCE by controlling the amount of CN additives. The solvent additive CN added in the PYT acceptor layer could increase the aggregation of the polymer donor PBDB-T, increase the time of film formation, and control the film morphology, which induced the desired vertical phase distribution. Also, it was found that the PCE of the devices increased monotonically with the CN content varying from 0 to 2.5% in the PYT layer when the PBDB-T layer was free of CN. However, when CN was only added to the PBDB-T layer, the effect on the efficiency of the devices can be negligible (Fig. 4(b)). Meanwhile, with the help of a strategy to control the additive dosages, sequential solution-processed device yielded higher PCE (15.17%) compared with its simple blend counterpart (14.06%). Chen et al.52 further extended the use of additives to both the bottom and top layers. By introducing the additive 1,10-decanediol (DDO) in PM6 and another additive CN in Y6, the molecular orientation of PM6 and the crystallinity of Y6 became ordered. Applying this strategy, the device showed lower bimolecular recombination (α is close to 1) and less trap-assisted recombination (n has minimum value) (Fig. 4(c) and (d)), which was attributed to the formation of ideal vertical phase distribution. In addition, the more balanced electron and hole mobility (μe/μh = 1.19) ensured efficient charge transportation and extraction. These all resulted in a high FF (77.45%) and high PCE (16.93%) of the sequential solution-processed device in this system.
Although high boiling point solvent additives are often used to modify the morphology of the active layer, the poor stability of the device cannot be avoided due to the formed metastable film morphology. Thus, solid additives were introduced. Very recently, Tan et al.53 fabricated sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs by introducing the solid additive (2,2′-(perfluoro-1,4-phenylene)dithiophene (DTBF)). In this work, DTBF was used in the donor layer (PBDB-TF), acceptor layer (Y6), or both the donor and acceptor layers. Adding DTBF in the donor layer could weaken the molecular packing and increase the surface roughness. In addition, with the volatilization of the solid additive DTBF, suitable space will be left on the surface of the donor layer for the better embedding of the acceptor, resulting in sufficient D/A interfaces. As a result, the addition of DTBF enhanced molecular alignment and exciton dissociation. Based on these advantages, the solid additive-processed devices showed improved performance, namely, D/A with a PCE of 12.7%, D (DTBF)/A with a PCE of 15.4%, D/A (DTBF) with a PCE of 14.7%, and D (DTBF)/A (DTBF) with a PCE of 16.4% (Fig. 4(e)). Later, Peng et al.36 reported a solid additive wax for constructing the desired blend film morphology based on sequential solution-processing. The introduction of wax into the donor layer (PM6) induced phase separation, allowing the formation of nanopores in the donor film, which provided suitable channels for subsequent acceptor layer (L8-BO) deposition and thus contributed to organizing sufficient D/A interfaces. Due to the favorable unique interdigitated structure, the molecular packing of PM6, charge carrier mobility, and charge extraction were significantly increased, resulting in a PCE up to 18.74% (Fig. 4(f)).
3.2 Constructing ternary components systems
To overcome the limitations of D/A binary systems, ternary components systems were developed.54–56 In recent years, several groups57–60 have tried to combine sequential solution-processing and ternary components systems. In 2018, Yang et al.61 fabricated a ternary OPV with a controlled structure by sequential solution-processing. In this controlled structure, the third component (second acceptor) was spin-coated first as the bottom layer, then followed by the D:A binary blend as the top layer (Fig. 5(a)). With this structural design, two possible working mechanisms were formed in the device: one was the formation of parallel heterojunctions, such as D/A1 and D/A2 acting simultaneously; the other was the formation of a p–n heterojunction and an n-type layer enriched in the cathode. Consequently, the ternary component OPV with a controlled structure was more favorable for improving the charge separation, transportation, and extraction. Four devices (PTB7-Th:ITIC/IDIC; PBDB-T:ITIC/IDIC; PTB7-Th:PC71BM/IDIC; PBDB-T:PC71BM/IDIC) with controlled structures constructed in this work achieved 14–21% improvement compared to the corresponding simple ternary blend-based devices. In 2020, Chen et al.58 employed ultranarrow bandgap material F8IC and medium bandgap materials IT-4F as alloy acceptors for the top layer, which had complementary light absorption and good compatibility. Benefitting from the synergistic effects of the alloyed acceptors, the crystallinity of the top layer was reduced, and the film exhibited less molecular aggregation and more uniformly distributed fibrous texture, which facilitated exciton diffusion, charge generation, and transportation. In addition, the thickness and morphology of the active layer had been optimized, resulting in a more heat-resistant device with better stability (Fig. 5(b)).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagrams of controlled-ternary OPV. Adapted with permission.61 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Normalized PCE of the devices with active layer annealing at 160 °C at different times. Adapted with permission.58 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) The normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of PTB7-Th/FOIC (N2200) OPVs. Adapted with permission.62 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) J–V curves of PM6/BO-4Cl OPVs with different weight ratios of BTP-S2. Adapted with permission.35 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) and (f) Relative aggregation rate and energy loss of PBDB-T:FOIC and sequential solution-processed devices. Adapted with permission.63 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Other than small molecular acceptors, polymer acceptors were employed as the third component in sequential solution-processed OPVs since they may inhibit morphology change. Ma et al.62 added low-content polymer acceptor N2200 to the small molecular acceptor FOIC to improve not only the PCE but also the storage stability of the device, retaining 90% of the original PCE after 30 days. Due to the favorable gradient distribution between the donor (PTB7-Th) layer and the acceptor (FOIC) layer formed by sequential solution-processing, introducing N2200 into FOIC significantly improved the ordering of the molecular packing, as can be seen from the marked increase in the 0–0 transition peaks of the absorption curve in Fig. 5(c). Simultaneously, the incorporation of a small amount of N2200 reduced bimolecular recombination and gave more balanced electron-hole mobility (μe/μh = 0.907), resulting in a higher FF (68.9%) than the comparison devices. Furthermore, N2200 with flexible polymer bridging chains enhanced the interaction between the donor layer and the acceptor layer, and further improved the mechanical strength of the device, which was an effective pathway to realize the synergistic optimization of PCE and long-term stability. Chen et al.35 constructed high-performance sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs by adding BTP-S2 into the BO-4Cl acceptor layer in 2021. The addition of the third component (BTP-S2) reduced the miscibility between PM6 and BO-4Cl, leading to more favorable vertical phase distribution. The sequential solution-processed ternary devices (BTP-S2 with weight ratio of 25%) showed an enhanced FF (from 75.4% to 78.04%) and JSC (from 26.81 mA cm−2 to 27.14 mA cm−2) compared with corresponding binary devices, which led to a high PCE of 18.16% (Fig. 5(d)).
Although constructing a ternary system is deemed to be an effective way to enhance the PCE and stability of OPVs, the rational control of morphological evolution is another pressing challenge. Therefore, a deep investigation of nanostructure formation is desired. In 2020, Ma et al.63 achieved the above equilibrium by fabricating multi-layer OPVs with sequential blade coating, resulting in higher PCE (11.91%) than the corresponding binary system (10.45% for PBDB-T:FOIC and 10.04% for PBDB-T:IT-M). The bottom layer PBDB-T:IT-M provided many crystalline cores for the top layer PBDB-T:FOIC. Such an optimized structure stimulated the crystallization of PBDB-T while limiting the aggregation of FOIC (Fig. 5(e)), which created better vertical phase separation and more balanced crystallization kinetics. In addition, the low energy losses shown in Fig. 5(f), including charge generation loss, recombination loss, and non-radiative loss, also contributed to the high PCE of the device prepared by sequential blade coating.
3.3 Recent progress in sequential solution-processed fullerene-free semitransparent OPVs
In general, achieving high PCE and high AVT in semitransparent OPVs is a trade-off.64,65 In 2020, Huang et al.66 employed PTB7-Th/IEICO-4F to fabricate semitransparent OPVs by sequential solution-processing. Since IEICO-4F has strong absorption in the NIR range at 750–950 nm, weak absorption in the visible range, and the donor and acceptor layers can be deposited separately, increasing the thickness of IEICO-4F can improve the PCE without significantly affecting the AVT. In this work, the effect of different thickness of the acceptor layers on the PCE and AVT of the device was investigated. It was found that maintaining a given thickness of 60 nm for PTB7-Th layers, the PCE of the device increased with the thickness of the IEICO-4F layer increasing from 50 to 70 nm (Fig. 6(a)), while the AVT was only lost by 2.8% (Fig. 6(b)). Later, Wei et al.67 made progress by controlling the thickness of the donor and acceptor layers through sequential solution-processing, resulting in an increase in the AVT without significantly affecting the PCE. As the wide bandgap donor material (PBDB-T-2F) mainly absorbed photons in the visible region and the narrow bandgap acceptor material (Y6) mainly in the NIR, decreasing the concentration of the donor would be a direct and effective way to increase the transmittance of the device. As shown in Fig. 6(c), the three different thicknesses combinations of PBDB-T-2F/Y6 devices deposited sequentially had higher transmittance than the corresponding thicknesses of the simple blend-based devices at a wavelength of 400–660 nm, while it presented opposite transmission trend in the NIR region (660–850 nm). Besides, the correlation between PCE and AVT with an active layer thickness (Fig. 6(d)) showed that for sequential solution-processed devices, changes in the active layer thickness did not significantly affect the PCE () (simple blend is equivalent to the BHJ in the diagram; sequential solution-processing is equivalent to the SD in the diagram) but were more sensitive to transmittance () (AVT is equivalent to the VLT in the diagram), and the PCE and AVT displayed a much weaker correlation (). Therefore, employing sequential solution-processing to tune the active layer thickness facilitated an optimal compromise between the PCE and AVT of the device, playing a pioneering role in the realization of semitransparent applications (such as greenhouse68).
 Fig. 6  (a) and (b) J–V and transmittance curves of sequential solution-processed PTB7-Th/IEICO-4F semitransparent OPVs with different thicknesses of IEICO-4F. Adapted with permission.66 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Transmission spectra of PBDB-T-2F/Y6 semitransparent OPVs. (d) The relative changes of PCE to AVT for the simple blend and sequential solution-processed devices. Adapted with permission.67 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
3.4 Recent progress in sequential solution-processed fullerene-free large-area OPVs
Through the persistent efforts of scientists, the PCE of lab-scale cells is over 19%, but there are challenges in achieving the leap from laboratory to large-area, where many aspects of large-area OPVs, including device processing, PCE, and equipment development, lag far behind that of the lab-scale.69 In 2019, Min et al.27 employed a promising sequential solution-processing method to blade-coat the active layers, which had led to significant improvements in both the performance and application dissemination of large-area OPVs. To demonstrate the versatility of the above technique, they prepared devices based on J71/ITC6-IC and PTQ10/IDIC with areas of 0.04, 0.20, and 1.00 cm2 respectively, and although there was a slight decrease in the performance as the device area increased, the PCE remained above 10% (Fig. 7(a) and (b)). Impressively, the performance of the devices obtained by the sequential deposition method was higher than that of simple blend-based devices with the same area, for example, based on J71/ITC6-IC with 0.04 cm2 area from 10.11% to 11.42%, 0.20 cm2 from 9.14% to 11.13%, and 1.00 cm2 from 9.20% to 10.35%, which further validated the feasibility and great potential of the sequential solution-processing method for preparing large-area OPVs.
 Fig. 7  
J–V curves of sequential solution-processed OPVs with various device areas based on (a) J71/ITC6-IC and (b) PTQ10/IDIC. Adapted with permission.27 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) J–V curves of simple blend and sequential solution-processed devices with different active areas. (d) The diagram of sequential solution-processed large-area solar modules. (e) The image of solar modules. Adapted with permission.28 Copyright 2020, Cell Press. 
In 2020, Min's group28 continued to make the OPV area larger using the same strategy and constructed large-area solar modules based on PM6/Y6 of 3.3 cm2 and 11.52 cm2 (Fig. 7(d) and (e)), respectively. Undoubtedly, benefiting from the multiple advantages of sequential solution-processing configurations and NFAs, the abovementioned large-area devices all exhibited higher PCE (3.3 cm2: 13.88%, 11.52 cm2: 11.86%, respectively) compared to simple blend-based devices due to the significant enhancement in FF (3.3 cm2: 55.78% for simple blend and 63.92% for sequential solution-processing, respectively; 11.52 cm2: 50.12% for simple blend and 57.85% for sequential solution-processing, respectively) (Fig. 7(c)), which further confirmed the good compatibility of the sequential solution-processing strategy for constructing large-area modules.
4. Summary and outlook
In summary, the cooperation of sequential solution-processing (independent active layer processing, controllable D/A interfaces, and excellent device stability) and promising NFAs (diverse molecular shapes, abundant functional groups and heteroatoms, and various aggregation states) provide many opportunities to construct high-performance OPVs. In these sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs, the solvent selections of the top layer are enriched, and the molecular arrangement and vertical phase distribution are more controllable, which facilitate the enhancement in the PCE and device stability. In addition, the cooperation of sequential solution-processing and promising NFAs exhibits attractive potential for fabricating high-performance semitransparent OPVs as well as large-area OPVs.
We believe that the combination of sequential solution-processing and promising NFAs will become the next big wave in the field of OPVs. In the near future, some research areas and key issues of sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs may deserve further attention. (1) Introducing chemical bonds or entanglements between polymers in the bottom donor layer to regulate polymer packing and aggregation, which may benefit photon absorption and hole transportation. (2) Constructing micro-ordered structures in the bottom polymer donor layer by aluminum oxide template or nanoimprint, which may benefit exciton dissociation and both hole/electron transportation. (3) Employing a “protective layer” (conductive layer or ultrathin insulating layer) between the donor layer and the acceptor layer to tune the D/A interfaces for balanced exciton dissociation and charge recombination; in addition, this “protective layer” may enhance the device stability by stabilizing the D/A interfaces. (4) Constructing molecular interactions (covalent bonds, coordination bonds, hydrogen bonds, etc.) between the donor layer and the acceptor layer to restrain the molecular movement, which may enhance the device stability. (5) Introducing a pressure field, magnetic field, or protonated solvents to make the molecular orientation relative to the substrate with preferred face-on orientation, thus enhancing the photon absorption and charge transportation; in addition, molecular orientation relative to the D/A interfaces could also be tuned for efficient exciton dissociation. (6) Applying large bandgap p-type materials (bandgap >3 eV, such as metal-oxide and 2D carbon materials) as bottom donor layers and NIR-absorbing NFAs as the top layer enabled the construction of semitransparent OPVs with ultrahigh AVT. With persistent efforts, large-area OPV modules with >20% PCE and good device stability will become achievable, and will dramatically accelerate the strong development of the energy utilization technology.
Author contributions
Writing-original draft, S. G., M. Q. and P. C.; writing-review & editing, Y. H., J. L. and P. C.; funding acquisition, Y. W. and J. Q.; supervision, M. Q. and P. C.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51873127 and No. 22179087).
Notes and references
Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 723–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Duan, K. Zhang, C. Zhong, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9071–9104 RSC .
Y. Chen, X. Wan and G. Long, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2645–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yao, L. Ye, H. Zhang, S. Li, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7397–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Brabec, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1185–1199 RSC .
P. Cheng, X. Zhao and X. Zhan, Acc. Mater. Res., 2022, 3, 309–318 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng and Y. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 1218–1228 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Chamberlain, Sol. Cells, 1983, 8, 47–83 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglla, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart. https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html (accessed 2022. 03. 25).
S. Bao, H. Yang, H. Fan, J. Zhang, Z. Wei, C. Cui and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2105301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Y. Xu, H. Yao, P. Bi, L. Hong, J. Zhang, Y. Zu, T. Zhang, J. Qin, J. Ren, Z. Chen, C. He, X. Hao, Z. Wei and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102420 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Ayzner, C. J. Tassone, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20050–20060 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, B. Kan, A. J. Pearson, A. J. Parnell, J. F. K. Cooper, X. K. Liu, P. J. Conaghan, T. R. Hopper, Y. Wu, X. Wan, F. Gao, N. C. Greenham, A. A. Bakulin, Y. Chen and R. H. Friend, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18225–18233 RSC .
D. Zhang, W. Zhong, L. Ying, B. Fan, M. Li, Z. Gan, Z. Zeng, D. Chen, N. Li, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105957 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, J. Hou, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301349 CrossRef .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, N. Zhou, S. J. Lou, J. Smith, D. B. Tice, J. W. Hennek, R. P. Ortiz, J. T. L. Navarrete, S. Li, J. Strzalka, L. X. Chen, R. P. H. Chang, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 825–833 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, J. S. Moon, J. Seifter, J. Jo, J. H. Park, O. O. Park and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Lee, P. E. Schwenn, A. R. Smith, H. Cavaye, P. E. Shaw, M. James, K. B. Krueger, I. R. Gentle, P. Meredith and P. L. Burn, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 766–770 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. van Franeker, S. Kouijzer, X. Lou, M. Turbiez, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500464 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, G. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Xiao, M. A. Adil, G. Lu, J. Zhang and Z. Wei, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800333 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, E. Feng, H. Li, Z. Shen, W. Liu, J. Guo, Q. Luo, J. Zhang, G. Lu, C. Ma and J. Yang, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 4236–4242 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, K. Zhang, B. Xie, J. Xiao, H.-L. Yip, H. Yan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802832 CrossRef .
R. Sun, J. Guo, C. Sun, T. Wang, Z. Luo, Z. Zhang, X. Jiao, W. Tang, C. Yang, Y. Li and J. Min, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 384–395 RSC .
R. Sun, Q. Wu, J. Guo, T. Wang, Y. Wu, B. Qiu, Z. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Hu, J. Guo, M. Shi, C. Yang, F. Huang, Y. Li and J. Min, Joule, 2020, 4, 407–419 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512–516 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z. G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, O. Inganas, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119–128 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. S. Tan, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 720–731 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhan, S. Li, X. Xia, Y. Li, X. Lu, L. Zuo, M. Shi and H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, L. Yu, H. Meng, L. Dai, H. Yan, R. Li and Q. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2108797 CrossRef .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2411–2425 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2544–2582 RSC .
M. Li, Q. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Geng and L. Ye, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4851–4873 RSC .
Y. Q. Pan and G. Y. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4570–4600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng, H. Bai, N. K. Zawacka, T. R. Andersen, W. Liu, E. Bundgaard, M. Jorgensen, H. Chen, F. C. Krebs and X. Zhan, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500096 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Sun, J. Guo, Q. Wu, Z. Zhang, W. Yang, J. Guo, M. Shi, Y. Zhang, S. Kahmann, L. Ye, X. Jiao, M. A. Loi, Q. Shen, H. Ade, W. Tang, C. J. Brabec and J. Min, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3118–3132 RSC .
Y. Lin, H. F. Dam, T. R. Andersen, E. Bundgaard, W. Fu, H. Chen, F. C. Krebs and X. Zhan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 8007–8010 RSC .
W. Liu, S. Liu, N. K. Zawacka, T. R. Andersen, P. Cheng, L. Fu, M. Chen, W. Fu, E. Bundgaard, M. Jørgensen, X. Zhan, F. C. Krebs and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19809–19814 RSC .
K. Weng, L. Ye, L. Zhu, J. Xu, J. Zhou, X. Feng, G. Lu, S. Tan, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, P. Jiang, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Yu, Q. He, W. Zhou, L. Tan and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26213–26221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, S. Zhang, N. Liang, J. Kong, C. Yang, H. Yao, L. Ma and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802499 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, Z. Chen, Q. Zhang, Z. Fei, R. Henry, M. Heeney, B. T. O’Connor, W. You and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808153 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Park, S. Chandrabose, M. B. Price, H. S. Ryu, T. H. Lee, Y. S. Shin, Z. Wu, W. Lee, K. Chen, S. Dai, J. Zhu, P. Xue, X. Zhan, H. Y. Woo, J. Y. Kim and J. M. Hodgkiss, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105924 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, H. Tang, J. Huang, C. Yan, K. Liu, Q. Yang, D. Hu, R. Singh, J. Lee, S. Lu, G. Li and Z. Kan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3044–3052 RSC .
Q. Wu, W. Wang, Y. Wu, Z. Chen, J. Guo, R. Sun, J. Guo, Y. Yang and J. Min, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010411 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Hu, Z. Xie, H. Mao, L. Tan, Y. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102291 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, G. Wu, Y. Cui, X. Wei, L. Hong, T. Zhang, C. Zou, S. Hu, J. Hou and Z. Tan, Small, 2021, 17, 2103497 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng and X. Zhan, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 462–485 RSC .
L. Lu, M. A. Kelly, W. You and L. Yu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 491–500 CrossRef CAS .
Q. An, F. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Tang, Z. Deng and B. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 281–322 RSC .
M. Ren, G. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Xiao, X. Jiao, Y. Zou, H. L. Yip and Y. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13077–13086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wan, L. Zhang, Q. He, S. Liu, B. Huang, L. Hu, W. Zhou and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909760 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, X. Ma, J. H. Son, S. Y. Jeong, L. Niu, C. Xu, S. Zhang, Z. Zhou, J. Gao, H. Y. Woo, J. Zhang, J. Wang and F. Zhang, Small, 2022, 18, 2104215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Zhang, X. Y. Du, Z. H. Chen, T. Wang, Z. Q. Yang, H. Yin, Y. Yang, W. Qin and X. T. Hao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 12, 2103371 CrossRef .
P. Cheng, R. Wang, J. Zhu, W. Huang, S. Y. Chang, L. Meng, P. Sun, H. W. Cheng, M. Qin, C. Zhu, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705243 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. Zhu, H. B. Naveed, H. Zhao, K. Zhou and W. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903609 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, B. Lin, Z. Bi, X. Zhou, H. B. Naveed, K. Zhou, H. Yan, Z. Tang and W. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000826 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chang, P. Cheng, G. Li and Y. Yang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1039–1054 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Davy, M. Sezen-Edmonds, J. Gao, X. Lin, A. Liu, N. Yao, A. Kahn and Y. L. Loo, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1039–1054 Search PubMed .
Y. Song, K. Zhang, S. Dong, R. Xia, F. Huang and Y. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18473–18481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Wang, P. Cheng, S. Tan, C. H. Chen, B. Chang, C. S. Tsao, L. Y. Chen, C. A. Hsieh, Y. C. Lin, H. W. Cheng, Y. Yang and K. H. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003576 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, P. Cheng, T. Li, R. Wang, Y. Li, S. Y. Chang, Y. Zhu, H. W. Cheng, K. H. Wei, X. Zhan, B. Sun and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1071–1077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xue, P. Cheng, R. P. S. Han and X. Zhan, Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 194–219 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Siru Guo
	Siru Guo received her M.E. in Materials Engineering from Xinjiang Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2021, under the direction of Prof. Shilie Pan. Afterwards, she joined Prof. Pei Cheng's group at Sichuan University as a research assistant. Now, her research is focused on high-performance organic solar cells.

Yingyue Hu
	Yingyue Hu is pursuing her B.E. in 2022 in Polymer Science and Engineering from Sichuan University, China. At the same time, she has been pursuing her Ph.D. degree under the supervision of Prof. Pei Cheng at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. Her research interests cover the application and preparation of high-performance organic solar cells.

Meng Qin
	Meng Qin received her Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Yanlin Song. Afterwards, she worked as a research associate at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). She is currently an associate professor at Prof. Jianshu Li's group in College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. Her research is focused on responsive optical and electronic devices.

Pei Cheng
	Pei Cheng received his B.E. in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Sichuan University in 2011. He then joined Prof. Xiaowei Zhan's group at ICCAS/Peking University, and received his Ph.D. in Chemistry (2016). Dr. Cheng worked in Prof. Yang Yang's group in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at UCLA from 2017 to 2020 as a postdoc researcher. He is currently a professor at College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. His research interests are focused on organic solar cells and functional optoelectronic devices.

 	Fig. 1  Advantages of sequential solution-processed fullerene-free OPVs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of the discussed polymer donors.	 

 	Fig. 3  Chemical structures of the discussed NFAs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Estimated PBnDT-FTAZ: solvent interaction parameter χ. Adapted with permission.48 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) The relationship between PCE and CN content for each layer of the PBDB-T/PYT OPVs. Adapted with permission.51 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) and (d) Dependence of JSC and VOC on the light intensity of PM6/Y6 OPVs. Adapted with permission.52 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (e) J–V curves of PBDB-TF/Y6 OPVs processed with or without solid additives. Adapted with permission.53 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (f) J–V curves. Adapted with permission.36 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagrams of controlled-ternary OPV. Adapted with permission.61 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Normalized PCE of the devices with active layer annealing at 160 °C at different times. Adapted with permission.58 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) The normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of PTB7-Th/FOIC (N2200) OPVs. Adapted with permission.62 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) J–V curves of PM6/BO-4Cl OPVs with different weight ratios of BTP-S2. Adapted with permission.35 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) and (f) Relative aggregation rate and energy loss of PBDB-T:FOIC and sequential solution-processed devices. Adapted with permission.63 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) and (b) J–V and transmittance curves of sequential solution-processed PTB7-Th/IEICO-4F semitransparent OPVs with different thicknesses of IEICO-4F. Adapted with permission.66 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Transmission spectra of PBDB-T-2F/Y6 semitransparent OPVs. (d) The relative changes of PCE to AVT for the simple blend and sequential solution-processed devices. Adapted with permission.67 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  
J–V curves of sequential solution-processed OPVs with various device areas based on (a) J71/ITC6-IC and (b) PTQ10/IDIC. Adapted with permission.27 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) J–V curves of simple blend and sequential solution-processed devices with different active areas. (d) The diagram of sequential solution-processed large-area solar modules. (e) The image of solar modules. Adapted with permission.28 Copyright 2020, Cell Press.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
