Novel synthesis, properties and applications of emerging group VA two-dimensional monoelemental materials (2D-Xenes)  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QM00629K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QM00629K
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 6333-6391Novel synthesis, properties and applications of emerging group VA two-dimensional monoelemental materials (2D-Xenes)

        
          
            Karim 
            Khan†
*ab, 
      
        
          
            Ayesha Khan 
            Tareen
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Qudrat Ullah 
            Khan†
d, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Iqbal
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Zhongyi 
            Guo
          
        
      c
aSchool of Electrical Engineering & Intelligentization, Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan (DGUT), Dongguan, 523808, Guangdong Province, P. R. China. E-mail: karim_khan_niazi@yahoo.com
bInstitute of Microscale Optoelectronics, Collaborative Innovation Centre for Optoelectronic Science & Technology, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Micro-Nano Photonic Information Technology, Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: hzhang@szu.edu.cn
cCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Guangdong Research Center for Interfacial Engineering of Functional Materials, Shenzhen University, 3688 Nanhai Ave, Shenzhen, 518060, People's Republic of China
dKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems, Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
eDepartment of Bio-Chemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (K.P.K.), 23200, Pakistan
Received 
      26th April 2021
    , Accepted 18th June 2021First published on 2nd July 2021AbstractTwo-dimensional materials (2D materials) have been the focal point of recent advanced research owing to their new properties and probability for enlightening fascinating novel phenomena. One sub-group of the atomically thin 2D material family with great potential is the mono-elemental 2D-crystals called “Xenes” (“ene” Latin word meaning sheets and X = group III–VI elements). 2D-Xenes are the newest and most active area of research in the nanomaterial (NM) family. Modern synthesis and highly sensitive characterization techniques offer the opportunity to investigate theoretically envisaged 2D-Xenes with atomic accuracy under ideal conditions and allow experimental investigations to support theory. The experimentally supported theoretically proposed synthetic 2D-Xenes of the group V elements (phosphorene (PP), arsenene (AN), antimonene (AM), and bismuthene (BM)), also known as pnictogen elements, are similar to semiconductor (SC) materials. Thus, the group V 2D-Xene analogs of graphene offer exciting potential for future novel nano-devices, e.g., optoelectronic, biomedical, and sensing devices. In this topical review, we briefly provide various aspects of the group V 2D-Xenes, ranging from their synthetic methodologies to their applications in different devices. Briefly, we will first explain the different potential methods to synthesize the group V 2D-Xenes and present a brief synopsis of the key information about their properties obtained by theoretical calculations and experimental investigations. Finally, we discuss in detail the possible applications of group V 2D-Xenes for fundamental oriented studies and their limitations and future prospective.
Karim Khan
Dr Karim Khan (0000-0001-8689-9245) was born in Paharpur, Dera-Ismail-Khan, K.P.K., Pakistan. He received his BSc Degree (2005) from Gomal University, MSc (2009) in Physics from the University of Peshawar, MPhil (2012) in Solid State Physics from the University of the Punjab, Pakistan, and did research at the “National Centre for Physics”, Quaid-e-Azim University, Pakistan. He received his PhD (2016) from the Chinese Academy of Sciences and he also served as a Postdoctoral Fellow in Shenzhen University (2017–2019) and Dongguan University of Technology (2019–2021), China. To date, he has over 69 scientific publications and 2 patents. The total citations of all his publications is more than 1400 times, and his H index is 19. His current research focuses on 2D electrocatalyst materials and their applications in energy producing/storage/saving devices and developing sensors for biomedical applications.
Ayesha Khan Tareen
Dr Ayesha Khan Tareen (0000-0002-7238-6366) is presently a Post-Doctoral Fellow in Shenzhen University. She received her PhD (Physical Chemistry/Materials) in 2018 from Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering (NIMTE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), MPhil (Analytical Chemistry) in 2015 from “The Islamia University of Bahawalpur” and BSc (Honors) in Chemistry in 2012 from Government College University Lahore, Pakistan. Her research interests are focused on superconductivity and 2D- and transition metal nitride material synthesis and applications in different fields especially for electro, photo-catalysts for energy conversion and storage, dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and bio-sensors.
Han Zhang
Prof. Dr Han Zhang (0000-0002-0166-1973) received his BS Degree from Wuhan University in 2006 and PhD from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in 2010. He is currently a Director of Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 2D-materials and Devices, and the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. His current research focuses on the ultrafast and nonlinear photonics of 2D-materials. He is also a Highly Cited Researcher of the Clarivate Analytics in 2018 and 2019. He was awarded the Fellow of the Optical Society of America in 2019. In the past five years, Prof. Han Zhang's group has published more than 100 papers, including 4 in Physics Reports, 3 in PNAS, 4 in Chem. Soc. Rev., 8 in Nat. Comm., 16 in Adv. Mater. The total citations of all his publications is more than 39000 times, and his H index is 109.

Key learning points
1. Overview of the broad significance of the group V 2D-monoelemental materials (Xenes).
2. Outlined the recent progress in the group-V Xenes, ranging from their synthesis and structures to properties.
3. Applications of the group-V 2D-Xenes.
4. Challenges and future guidelines.

1. Introduction
Two-dimensional materials (2D materials) are at the forefront in materials research because of their smart electronic properties, which can be utilized for a wide range of applications. In 2004, Novoselov and Geim1 discovered the first 2D material, graphene, and subsequently, the 2D family of materials grew and many new members were added with time. They brought enormous advancement in the latest technology, with their utilization ranging from drug delivery to transistors. This attention has resulted in the investigation of graphene and its linked/related materials (graphene oxide (GO), fluoro-graphene, graphane, etc.) for more than a decade. 2D materials are known to play indispensable roles in a range of scientific and technological innovations because of their novel chemical and physical properties.2–7 In contrast to the conventional bulky materials, 2D materials provide a large specific surface area (SSA) for loading other materials, functional modification, and their atomic level layers show outstanding photo-chemical and photo-physical properties, which are favorable for the development of new, multifunctional nano-platforms.
Since the discovery of graphene, the development of new 2D materials, for instance, metal oxides, transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), and phosphides, has attracted significant attention. 2D materials are atomically thin sheets, which show novel optical, electronic and mechanical properties with outstanding potential in scientific research and a wealth of fundamental knowledge in advanced sciences for future device applications. The inspiring development of graphene has encouraged scientists to innovate and investigate other potential 2D materials for large scale production. The excellent physical properties of 2D materials begin from the natural structural properties of their component elements, which are structurally joined by covalent bonds with a definite symmetry and low dimensionality. The increasing research on graphene displays both its basic scientific significance and promising use in diverse scientific fields including electronics, gas storage, high-performance sensing devices, catalysts, membranes, and hard coatings. This unusual scientific sensation opens a new door to other 2D material family members, with the goal of complementing the physical properties of graphene.8,9 For instance, graphene is a semimetal with no band gap in its pristine form, which prevents its utilization in many electronic and optoelectronic sensing technologies. Therefore, there was very good motivation to alter its properties using a different type of engineering or search for new 2D materials, with increased but tunable band gaps and good optical, electronic, catalytic, and electrochemical characteristics.
In the last few decades, there has been an significant increase in the number of 2D materials, such as single-layer/few-layer (SL/FL) TMDCs, BP (expressed as 2D form of phosphorene (PP)), layered borides, and MXenes.10–12 However, although they exhibit high carrier mobilities, the zero BG of graphene and the limited BGs of transition metal nitrides, carbides, and carbo-nitrides (known as MXenes) restrict their application in bio-imaging, optical sensing, and field-effect transistors (FETs). Although, TMDCs have a finite BG, their low carrier mobility hinders their application in various sensing fields. The 2D hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is an excellent proton conductor due to its high electrical resistance, but its insulating nature restrict its application in certain devices. Consequently, superior nanosize materials with suitable activity are greatly required.13–16
To date, most conventional 2D materials obtained from the limited bulk solid library are stacked and weakly bound in layers (for instance, graphite, MoS2, h-BN and 2D-BP). Furthermore, the relatively small quantity of bulk layer materials (LMs) basically limits the variety of structures and properties that can be obtained from 2D materials, decreasing the chance to comprehend the relation between these materials. The synthetic 2D materials (SE-2D materials) present a superior variety of properties due to their substrates and choice of constituent elements. Currently, particular interest is shifting toward elemental 2D materials, given that they can be chemically modified in synthetic investigations. Through this type of assessment, development in the preparation and chemistry of elemental SE-2D materials, their perspectives and challenges in this promising field can be achieved.2,17 In this new family of 2D materials, their probable properties have not been completely discovered, and thus their commercial device applications are still mainly in their infancy. Thus, in the pursuit of a variety of high-performance future nano-devices, further research on LMs is necessary, which can reveal a wide operating range depending on their properties, for instance, carrier mobility and electronic band gap.
Starting with graphene and its derivatives, and then TMDCs, BP, and most recently the 2D-Xene family, especially group V Xenes, i.e., phosphorene (PP),18,19 arsenene (AN),20 antimonene (AM),21–31 and bismuthene (BM),32 have come into the spotlight. However, in the case of these 2D materials, there are several drawbacks that prevent their use in many practical electrical and optoelectronic applications. Monoelement sheet nanomaterials (NMs) have sparked interest due to their enhanced graphene content and adjustable electrical, optical, catalytic, and electrochemical properties. Therefore, the newly developed family of monoelemental, atomically thin 2D materials, called “Xenes” (“ene” Latin word meaning sheets, and here, X = VA group elements) are a cutting edge family of materials and a very active field of NM research for device applications. The potential 2D-Xenes adopt their morphology from sp2-hybridized alkenes and usually consist of probably SL atoms arranged into a honeycomb-like structure, which is the chemically simplest case present in the elemental 2D materials.
The 2D-Xenes are interesting to study and investigate their different synthetic methods and properties regarding their application. The 2D material Xenes have great potential as a new area of materials science with diverse possible uses and they offer ultimate thickness scaling for nanoelectronics, which will significantly develop electrostatic power and permit several low power adaptable applications, for instance, ultrathin channel FETs, optoelectronic devices, renewable energy producing/saving devices, and sensors. Currently, the study of PP (in SL case) is still in progress and will be further discussed in detail later.33–35 The synthesis of other 2D material Xenes was also attempted using the neighboring group IVA of graphene, i.e. group IIIA, group V and group VIA. SL and FL Xenes in groups IIIA–VIA (X = B (borophene),36,37 C (G), Si (silicene),38–43 Ge (germanene),44,45 Sn (stanene),38,41,46,47 PP,18,19 AN,20 AM,21–31 BM,32 and Te (tellurene)44,48), have also been fabricated and characterized, exhibiting a wide range of properties, but several of them are still not known. The other neighboring group (VA) overcomes the limitations of traditional 2D materials without a band gap due to its sizeable band gap, which is in high demand in logic electronics. Here, in this review, we primarily focus on the techniques for the synthesis, properties and novel device uses of elemental 2D materials of group V monoelements.15,16,49–98
The first important member of this family is PP, which was discovered after G can possibly be isolated from a substrate (including BP or PP) that is not an obvious and isolated 2D-structure. This isolation reveals that the structure bond along the in-plane direction is stronger in comparison to that in the out-of-plane direction, which is an interaction that is a very important feature of synthetic 2D materials (SE-2D materials). In addition, given that the in-plane bonding is stronger in SE-2D materials, the range of probable component elements is restricted to those with the propensity form strong covalent bonds (i.e., metals and non-metal elements), as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). In this figure, across the periodic table, researchers have developed 2D materials using the II–VA group elements, especially 2D-Xenes, where each family is shown by different color codes. Specially, the group V 2D material Xenes are highlighted at the right side of Fig. 1(a). Fig. 1(b) shows a timeline of the experimentally synthesized current monoelemental 2D material Xenes and those expected in the future.
 Fig. 1  (a) Synthetic elemental 2D material (SE2D material) specifications in the periodic table. (b) Timeline of experimentally synthesized current monoelemental 2D material Xenes, where “Th.” means theoretical. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. 
It should be noted that most 2D materials have been rediscovered and that modern research is an expansion of the work already done in these fields a long time ago. In the 1960s,100 graphite oxide was formed, ML/FL MoS2 was reported a few decades ago101,102 and BP itself was discovered in 1914.102 Hexagonal ML AN and AM, of the group V Xenes, have achieved new interest as novel members of the 2D-SCs,103 particularly based on the successful experimental formation of ML AN nanoribbons (NRs),104 ML AM,105 and AM NRs.106 ML-AN is expected to have a quasi-particle and optical band gap of 2.47 and 1.6 eV according to the GW and Bethe–Salpeter equation estimates,107 respectively, which can be calculated using data from photoemission, inverse photoemission, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. These two BGs are greater compared to that of ML-BP (2.47 vs. 2.0–2.2 eV and 1.6 vs. 1.3 eV, respectively).108 In ML-AN, its band gap can be modulated via an electric field, strain and defect engineering.109 Hence, ML-AN has great potential for application in electronics and optoelectronics. According to ab initio quantum transport calculations, sub-10 nm ML-AN metal-oxide-SC-FETs (MOS-FETs) can fulfill both the low power and good efficiency needs of the International Technology Roadmap for SCs (ITRS) in next few decades. The ML-AN0-based MOS-FETs outperform the MoS2 FETs with Ti-electrodes and are analogous to the black-2D-PP and the 2D-AM MOS-FETs with respect to on-current based ab initio quantum transport calculations.110 Different modifications have also been made in the group V Xenes to alter their properties using different layers, coating, doping, hybrid structure formations, etc. and study their different applications.2 Here, for the group V (group 15, pnictogens) 2D material Xene family, we will explain in detail their synthetic methods, properties, and applications reported to date, and especially the future concerns regarding the large-scale industrial applications of these 2D-Xenes based on theoretical investigations and experimental research.110
In the next section, we will explain all the available group V 2D-Xenes in detail. Here, we will mainly concentrate on the group V Xenes, where a comprehensive overview on the 2D material Xenes of group IVA is presented due to the exponentially increasing research ranging from their synthesis to their potential industrial applications together with their characterization. In the next section, the 2D group V Xenes, i.e., P (PP),18,19 As (AN),20 Sb (AM),21–30 and Bi (BM),32 will be discussed in detail. The transition from metallic conductors to semiconductors (SCs) (group V Xenes) after a reduction in the number of layers and resulting electronic, optical, and electrocatalytic properties are a significant feature of these materials, which demand further exploration.
2. Group V Xene member structures and their properties
The group VA elements are also called the pnictogen group, which include nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), arsenic (As), antimony (Sb) and bismuth (Bi). The last four elements are solid, and in the bulk possess a layer structure.16,53,54,61,71,73,75,78,80,82,89,90,92,97 These elements exist as few-layer allotropes with a rhombohedral and orthorhombic structure. In the orthorhombic structure, the layers are connected through vdW forces, whereas in the rhombohedral structure, interlayer interactions occur with an increase in energy as the atomic number increases. The single-element 2D material counterparts of group VA have attracted significant attention due to their intrinsically open BG. Similar to the group V materials, SL 2D materials are derived from their bulk form, i.e., bulk BP, As, Sb, and Bi, or deposited support substrate materials, which are called PP, AN, AM, and BM, respectively. It is known that similar to ML BP, i.e., PP, there is no nomenclatural explanation for the expression “-ene” (for instance a CC double bond), and moreover no linguistic reason for the suffix “-ene” for ML materials. At present, the suffix “-ene” is deliberately used for SL-2D materials in the literature, and thus we will also employ the same trend. SL BP, As, Sb, and Bi have special structures, depending upon their bulk counterparts. These materials are monoelemental, but their characteristics differ considerably depending on their crystal arrangement and doping or layer thickness. Their tunable electronic properties are beneficial for different nano-devices, ranging from (bio) sensors to energy-related devices. Also, they have good stability, and thus it can be envisaged that these materials will enjoy exponential growth.111 The direct band gap of SL-PP is about 1.5 eV,13 and therefore it is attractive for applications in electronics and superfast optoelectronics. The exfoliated flakes PP are incredibly oxophilic, which formulate the BP hydrophilic surface in air and convert it into phosphoric acid and related groups, and finally the material degrades. The degradation of the 2D-BP flakes can be obviously seen by calculating their topography and also characterizing their electrical transport nature with respect to time. Consequently, the breakthrough and synthesis of new 2D material Xenes have resulted in suitable BGs, but their durability under ambient conditions is still challenging for technology. Unlike G, PP has an anisotropic orthorhombic configuration, which is ductile in the plane crystal directions, but rigid on the other side. This results in remarkable electronic, mechanical, optical and transport properties, which reflect lattice anisotropy. α-As has an arrangement analogous to that of ML BP, whereas AN resulting from gray As is β-AN (buckle honeycomb, germanene analogous configuration). There are other possible 2D allotropes of As, Sb, and Bi, but due to their instability, they do not exist.112 Sb, which is a non-hygroscopic, gray semimetal, has a layer configuration and looks similar to BP, but with shorter out-of-plane atom-to-atom distances, and thus its stronger interlayer interactions hinder mechanical exfoliation. Although the properties of single and FL Sb have already been discovered from a theoretical study, their laboratory separation and characterization are a very recent scientific advancement. PP, a ML of BP, is a member of family of SC group V 2D materials, and current results have uncovered its elevated carrier mobility, UV-absorption, optical and other smart properties, which are desirable in optoelectronic applications.113
2.1. Phosphorene
In 1935, Hultgren et al.114 studied the configuration of BP via XRD and verified its orthorhombic structure, which showed its thermodynamic stability as a P allotrope. The structural and physical properties of BP are analogous to that of graphite, i.e., both are black and flaky conducting materials with a layer structure formed through linked atoms. Afterward, red P was changed into crystal BP.115 P shows manifold bulk allotropes,116 including the extremely reactive white, red, and purple P, and comparatively inert BP. PP is one of the few SE-2D materials that can be isolated straightforwardly from a bulk material, especially BP. BP shows an orthorhombic crystal arrangement consisting of stacked, weakly interacting layers. The out-of-plane BP orthorhombic layers are buckled to form ridged rows (Fig. 2(a)), resulting in considerable anisotropy for mechanical strength, thermal and electrical conductance, and optical properties.117 In comparison with the other two allotropes of P (red and white P), BP has not attracted much attention in the last century due to its poor formation conditions and restricted applications. However, since the exclusive optoelectronic properties of FL 2D-BP was discovered in 2014, FL 2D-BP attracted significant attention in materials research among researchers. In contrast to G, the sp3-hybridization of the P atoms within the 2D-BP structure results in a triangular pyramid arrangement, which forms a bilayer arrangement along the zigzag direction and a puckered structure along the armchair direction. FL 2D-BP is the thinnest direct BG SC with a layer-dependent BG that can be engineered from 0.3 to 2.0 eV by decreasing the bulk to a monolayer component. Also, within its layer planes, FL 2D-BP has exclusive optical, mechanical, and thermo-electric properties, electrical conductance and Poisson's ratio, causing it to work in a highly anisotropic way and show important potential for use in nanodevices.118 More importantly, the bio-degradability of FL 2D-BP is a paramount advantage in its bio-medical use.2 Based on the nomenclature, it is worth noting that the present literature usually deals with isolated 2D-phosphorus as BP given that it has a BP structure with >5 layers. Specifically, it has a semiconducting buckled honeycomb ML, expressed as blue phosphorus,119 and a very complex alternative structure based on diverse buckling systems. PP is reactive and rapidly oxidizes in environmental conditions, which offers a small window in which models can be employed outside of a restricted atmosphere.
 Fig. 2  Layered crystal structures of group V elements: (a) consisting of parallel puckered layers with the Cmca space group (α phase) and (b) consisting of parallel buckled layers with Rm space group (β phase). (c) Stable phases and natural layered crystals of P, As, Sb and Bi crystals. Adapted with permission from ref. 142. 
The mechanism of degradation is due to introduction of dissolved O2 from adsorbed H2O, which is sped up after exposure to the light. Consequently, BP can be utilized in deoxygenated aqueous solution,120 yielding a large-scale pathway for the production of PP. However, to achieve technological significance, BP and PP will need robust passivation methods. A physical encapsulation method via the use of polymer or h-BN layers has already been studied, which was efficient, but did not demonstrate scalability and durability simultaneously. If encapsulation is carried out using a thin Al2O3 layer via atomic layer deposition (ALD),121 it is proven to be effective for long term stability (Fig. 2(b)). In addition, scientific applications also demand new synthetic ways for the modification of the carrier concentration and type in PP and BP. Non-covalent, inorganic functional group passivation can induce n-type and p-type doping via surface charge transfer, as established through Cs2CO3 and MoO3 deposition, respectively.122 Passivation with diazonium salts is linked to structural changes in 2D materials, and hence changes their electronical and optoelectronic characteristics as well. Conversely, covalent functionalization utilizing diazonium salts forms a stable passivation layer on BP, resulting in p-type doping (Fig. 2(c)) and environmental durability.123
2.2. Arsenene
Grey As possesses a rhombohedral layer structure with interlayer interactions compared to BP, where its atoms are arranged into hexagonal puckered layers and connected through vdW forces.124 The “top-down” methods for AN exfoliation are considerably very convoluted. However, recently, an experimental study of pure 2D As NSs through liquid phase exfoliation (LPE) in aqueous and organic solutions was reported.125 Additionally, As can be observed in two more allotropes, i.e., black As (α-As) and yellow (γ-As). Yellow As consists of tetrahedral As molecules analogous to white P,126 whereas the much less studied black As is metastable and possesses an orthorhombic crystal arrangement and puckered layer configuration similar to that of BP.127,128 Therefore, black As is considered to be a “cousin” of BP. Analogous to BP, grey As has a tunable band gap depending on the number of layers, where bilayer grey As has a small band gap of 0.37 eV and that of monolayer grey As is 2.49 eV.129 However, information regarding black As is significantly restricted and particularly deficient in experimental statistics. Black As is very anisotropic, and recently it was calculated that its direct BG SC is almost 0.31 eV.130
Recently, AN, a SL of grey-As has emerged as a novel 2D material. This SL-AN was studied via theoretical calculations in its stable form, but has not been isolated and characterized to date. It is envisaged that the SL AN β-phase is a wide band gap SC, with elevated charge carrier mobility. The band gap of AN increases from 0.175 (bulk) to 2.49 (ML) eV.131 The indirect band gap of 2D-AN can be engineered to a direct band gap by exerting a minute strain.132 Several 2D-vdW heterostructures of AN with other 2D materials have been theoretically studied.133 The simulation-based studies of AN have proposed numerous additional properties, for instance, thermal conductance and thermoelectric transport.132 The exceptional configurations and properties of AN make it an attractive material for broad use in photocatalysis, nano-electronics, opto-electronics, etc. Recently, ML AN NRs with a thickness of 14 nm were synthesized via a plasma-assisted method.134 However, to date, the synthesis and exploration of FL AN are still challenging due to its fast degradation, resulting in the formation of As2O3, which lacks the properties of 2D-AN.135 Arsenite, As(III), is noxious and inhibits the action of various enzymes. Currently, significant research is ongoing to overcome these limitations and study the potential applications of As.
2.3. Antimonene
The AM Xene, an SL of Sb, is distinctive among the 2D materials due to its strong spin–orbit coupling (SOC). Topological 2D materials exhibiting SOC have a wide range of possible applications. In this case, ML AM is a trivial SC, but can be modified into a 2D topological insulator (TI) through strain. Furthermore, FL-AM (initiating at almost seven to eight layers) is a 3D topological semimetal, where even in bulk carriers, it also possesses topologically confined surface states, which is similar to the standard TIs. ML materials resulting from orthorhombic-As are expressed in the current literature as α-As (in some studies it is denoted as w-As from the word “washboard”, whereas in the classical literature, orthorhombic-As is indicated as ε-As), which has an arrangement analogous to that of ML BP, whereas the AN resulting from gray As is β-AN (buckle honeycomb, germanene analogous configuration). Completely new properties appear when a transition occurs from a ML to FL structure. In conclusion, as observed in numerous experimental investigations, AM generally exhibits high stability under normal conditions, and H2O combined with its physical properties, demonstrates new uses for this new material. For clarity, we should mention the absence of double bonds in the Sb-lattice configuration, which is similar to the case of graphite, and thus the name AM is not totally accurate. Nevertheless, we will employ it because it is the most established literature classification.
2.4. Bismuthene
In the 2D form, Bi is illustrated to form a buckle honeycomb configuration analogous to that of 2D-silicon or blue P. According to the nomenclature, this structure is occasionally regarded as BL, given that the atoms exist in two separate positions in the buckled honeycomb arrangement. Due to the high atomic weight and concurrently huge SOC of Bi, it is a common constituent in topological non-trivial systems. Certainly, the 2D-Bi ML was forecasted as a 2D-TI. However, the topological properties in the buckled honeycomb Bi layers are still under debate, where contradictory experimental data suggests the strong influence of the substrate on the properties of the overlying Bi-layers. In this system, due to the contradictory results, electrical transport calculations for an isolated buckled honeycomb layer are imperative to understand its electronic nature. In air, Bi oxidizes to provide a radiant, sparkling surface oxide layer. This suggests that an atomic-level thin Bi film will be vulnerable to oxidation. In contrast, the chemistry of nanosize Bi allotropes remains largely unknown. The little information available suggests that buckled honeycomb Bi exhibits reasonable insensitivity toward adventitious adsorbate impurities under UHV conditions. The simulation studies on the buckled honeycomb allotrope with a terminal methyl indicate that an unattached layer should retain the buckled honeycomb configuration along exceptionally vigorous topological states (i.e., energy gap increasing by almost 1 eV in magnitude). Consequently, more knowledge can be achieved through the chemical functionalization of 2D-Bi layers with increased topological electronic properties and enhanced stability under ambient conditions.123
2D-Bi can exist in two phases, i.e., a β-phase analogous to the rectangular symmetry of BP and a β-phase that has a hexagonal (111)-oriented structure. The β-phase, which is known as metallic Bi, has a rhombohedral crystal analogous to that of other high atomic weight group V elements but with lower anisotropy, given that the difference between its out-plane and in-plane bond strength is just 12%. Both structures are similar to bulk Bi and illustrated to be TI.136 However, although 2D-Bi was one of the first SE-2D materials to be isolated, it is relatively less studied in 2D materials research. Experimental studies have focused on thin films formed on different substrates by MBE, resulting in two discrete atomically flat phases, a buckled honeycomb allotrope, which is similar to the bulk Bi(111) plane,137,138 and a distorted Bi(110) plane.139 In 2D-Bi, the weak interlayer bonding results in the development of atomically smooth, planar layers.140 To understand the buckled honeycomb or (111) oriented layers, researchers normally employ surfaces with a three- or six-fold proportion (e.g., Si(111) or Bi2Te3), although it is not limited to this (e.g., Si(001) or W(110), which have four-fold symmetry).141 For both phases, the occurrence of any vdW interfaces or surfactant layers between the substrate and 2D-Bi layers is mediated via autonomous electronic development. An early experimental study on FL buckled honeycomb films carefully investigated the crystalline symmetry and development method of the resultant over-layers 2D-Bi.143 The results were promising for precise electronic transport measurements, which can modulate the topological properties of 2D-Bi. This transport is possible through the weak mechanical adhesion of the Si(111)-supported buckled honeycomb film.144
The analogous structures of BP were demonstrated on both highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG)145 and Si surfaces.146 During their formation, the resultant allotrope thickness was dependent on the number of layers, for instance, the deposition of the first ∼4 ML on an Si(111) substrate resulted in a similar BP phase, whereas further deposition resulted in the buckle honeycomb phase. Buckle honeycomb and similar allotropes of BP demonstrate weak interlayer interaction and in-plane atomic corrugation. Electronic structure neighbour measurements showed different results, which were attributed to doping effects and local strain from substrates. Again, the 2D atomic layer topological nature is not clear, even though early measurements on a BP analogous allotrope indicate non-trivial edge states on HOPG.123 All the crystalline structures of the group V 2D materials are summarized in Fig. 2, and the structural types of bulk and 2D-As, Sb, and Bi are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the fundamental structures of arsenic, antimony, bismuth and phosphorene in their bulk and low-dimensional form112




Material type
Crystal structure
Bulk electric properties
2D electric properties




Arsenic
Rhombohedral (β, grey As)
Metal properties down to 3 layers147
2L β-arsenic 0.37 eV147




Orthorhombic (α, layer)
—
1L β-arsenic 2.49 eV147


Cubic (yellow As)


Amorphous (black As)


Antimony
Rhombohedral (grey Sb)
Metal properties down to 2 layers20,129,147
1L β-antimony 2.28 eV20,129,147


Amorphous (black Sb)


Bismuth
Rhombohedral (metallic Bi)
Metal properties down to 3 layers148
2L α-bismuth 0.18 eV148


1L α-bismuth 0.30 eV148


2L β-bismuth 0.23 eV148


1L β-bismuth 0.32 eV148


Phosphorene
Orthorhombic (α, P)
Metal properties down to 2 layers
1L phosphorene 1.45 eV149


2L phosphorene 1.02 eV149




3. General properties of group V 2D-Xenes
Generally, the properties of as-synthesized materials are basically dependent on the corresponding applied synthetic protocols. In this section, the experimental characterization-based properties of group V 2D-Xenes will be discussed considering theoretical calculations. These theoretically calculated properties for the group V 2D-Xenes will help to set appropriate fabrication conditions for the synthesis of new group V 2D-Xenes. The epitaxial growth of group V 2D-Xenes on substrates produces a vertically buckled lattice and good contact with the substrate, offering a possibility to create the quantum spin Hall state in group V 2D-Xenes. This is a new smart property being employed in flexible electronic devices. Besides N2, all the other group V elements (i.e., P, Ar, Sb, and Bi) are identified to form bulk solids with layered structures, although BP is the only case together with these exhibiting cleaving ability to the ML limit.123
All the group V elements except N2 are predicted to form buckled honeycomb allotropes. This similarity indicates that alloying in these SE-2D materials may be possible, resulting in a huge degree of tunable properties (mainly electronic). However, although these prefigured bulk structures are suitable for the formation of atomic-size SE-2D materials, the direct formation of group V MLs is complicated due to the toxicity of P, As and Sb. In the case of atomically thin BP and Bi, a very recent report experimentally confirmed the existence of Sb based on 2D materials (2D-AM). Here, we explore the properties of group V SL 2D-Xenes at 300 K, which are mostly theoretically derived with some possible experimental results, and thus will assist in the understanding of their novel nanodevice applications. Fig. 3 shows the group V 2D-Xene material members, and some of their interesting properties. In the following section, we will give details about most of the properties of group V 2D-Xenes that make them suitable for use in novel nano-devices and other applications.
 Fig. 3  Group V 2D-Xene family, their structure, and applications. 
3.1. Physical properties
As a practical strategy, ML silicene encapsulation offers a working method for the manufacture of transistors, which can be possibly applied using epitaxial 2D-Xenes. The variation in the buckling parameter governs the modification of electronic properties, followed by electronic states. In the case of group V Xenes, PP exfoliated from naturally existing BP is the thermodynamically most stable known unconventional P allotrope.150 Similar to graphite, BP is comprised of vertically stacked PP layers collectively bound by weak vdW forces.151 The stable phases of the group V Xenes are five relaxed honeycomb structures (α, β, γ, ε, and δ) and four non-honeycomb configurations (ξ, η, θ, and ι) (Fig. 4(a)). The average binding energies of the group V ML-allotropes show that the energetically favorable stable phases are the α- and β-phases, illustrated in Fig. 4(b), where α-PP with a puckered configuration is the most stable.
 Fig. 4  (a) Top view of ML group V (P, As, Sb, and Bi) allotropes with five honeycomb structures (α, β, γ, ε, and δ) and four non-honeycomb configurations (ξ, η, θ, and ι) and (b) average binding energies together with the energetic stability for the “α” and “β” phases. Adapted with permission from ref. 152. 
AN may have both puckered and buckled ML structures, whereas AM and BM are more likely to possess a buckled structure. For the AN, AM and BM ML allotropes, they are all equivalent to the β-phases with a buckled structure and have the lowest energy. The α- and β-phases are stable for PP and AN, while only the β-phase is stable for AM and 2D-BM.152 Additionally, the normal layer crystals of As, Sb and Bi have a β-phase. The α-phase energy BGs142 of the group V 2D-Xenes, i.e., PP, AN, AM, and BM, are smaller than that of their corresponding β-phases. The effective electron mass of the conduction bands (CB) and degenerate bands split. Thus, the effective electron mass values decrease going down the group V 2D-Xenes. A direct band gap exists when there is no SOC, whereas there is an indirect band gap when SOC is present. PP is the most interesting, and thus will be explained in more detail. PP differentiates itself from the other layered 2D-Xenes due to its distinctive structural properties. Beside the armchair side, it has a puckered structure (Fig. 5(a)), but a BL arrangement along the zigzag direction (Fig. 5(b)). This structure anisotropy can be obviously observed in its neighboring bonding arrangement. Along the zigzag side, the bond angle known as the hinge angle is 94.3° and the neighboring P–P bond length is 2.253 Å. These values are small compared to the equivalent dihedral angle along the zigzag path (103.3°) and link bond length (2.287 Å). The lattice constants at 3.30 and 4.53 Å along two perpendicular directions are not the same.153 This exclusive structural agreement, similar to a network of connected axes (Fig. 5(c and d)), results in anisotropic physical (electrical transport, band gap, and thermoelectric) and mechanical (Poisson's ratio, Young's modulus, and critical strain) properties, guiding the design of discrete nanodevices utilizing this directional selectivity.154
 Fig. 5  2D-PP structure. (a) and (b) Armchair and zigzag side views, (c) top view, and (d) P–P bonding arrangement, where every P-atom is linked with three surrounding P-atoms, forming a puckered configuration, which is similar to a hinge network that shows anisotropic rotational deformation under strain. Adapted with permission from ref. 155. 
The charge carrier mobility for an electron and hole of SL group V Xenes at RT with the α-phase has an inverse relation with their effective mass. This means that a decrease in effective mass results in increased/higher charge carrier mobility (10–1000 cm2 V−1 s−1), which is compared in Table 2 for all the group V elemental 2D-Xenes.155Table 2 also shows the elemental electronic and structural parameters for the group V elements, which were obtained from HSE06 hybrid exchange–correlation function estimation considering SOC.
Table 2 Elemental electronic and structural parameters for group V elements obtained from HSE06 hybrid exchange–correlation function estimation considering SOC




2D-Xenes
Lattice constant a/b (nm)
Buckling (Å)
Bond length d (nm)
Effective electron mass M* (m0) electron/hole
Electron/hole mobilities μ (103 cm2 V−1 s−1)
Energy gap Eg (meV)
In-plane stiffness C (J m−2) pristine electron/hole




Armchair (A), zigzag (Z), a/b = lattice constant, M* = effective mass, and y = y-axis.




α-P
4.53/3.36156
0.25038
2.247156
1.12y/6.35y157
1.10–1.14/0.08157
1500156
28.94/101.60157


β-P
3.33/3.33156
—
2.267156
—
—
2620156
—


α-As
3.69/4.76156
—
2.429156
0.17x/0.50y, 0.48x/0.50y158
0.100–1
1660156
52158


β-As
3.61/3.61156
1.40159
2.453156
—
0.030–0.020
2200156
—


α-Sb
4.35/4.89156


2.748156
0.21(A), 0.16(Z)158
0.150
1180156
32158


β-Sb
4.12/4.12156
1.65159
2.755156
—
0.030
1550(SOC), 2280156
—


α-Bi
4.59/5.01156


—
—
—
30(SOC), 140156
—


β-Bi
4.34/4.34156
1.73159
2.979156
—
0.500
320(SOC), 800156
23.9148




3.2. Chemical properties
Chemical functionalization is studied as the main method to tune the properties of the group V 2D-Xenes. The durability of the group V 2D-Xenes is the main challenge in fabricating devices. The group V Xene family, PP,160–164 AN,165–169 AM,170 and BM,171,172 are generally functionalized with F, Cl, Br, I, O, H, OH, and CH3 and other functional groups, which induce several potential structural, electronic, and magnetic properties and topological edge states. Compared to physical adsorption, chemical functionalization results in the formation of a large surface area in the group V 2D-Xenes. Among the functionalized group V 2D-Xene materials, PP was the first to be examined. Wang et al.160 reported the chemical properties of oxidized PP. It was observed that the degree of O-functionalization of PP is influenced by its BG. In addition, the band gap of PP oxide can be tuned efficiently through an outer strain or an electric field. Subsequently, Zhu et al.161 anticipated a novel stable blue PP oxide (B-PO). First-principle calculations indicated that B-PO is a thin band gap SC and it can be transformed from SC to semimetal through a quantum phase transition under strain. Furthermore, unusual effects were observed by investigating the efficient novel phase transition and the basic developing fermions. B-PO can contribute to the discovery of the basic nature of quantum phase transitions and fermions, and it can be applied in nano-devices. Encouraged by the incredible nature of functionalized PP, scientists have started to discover other group-V 2D-Xenes.
Zhang et al.165 studied novel planar magnet and Dirac 2D materials obtained from hydrogenated AN, where the semi-hydrogenated AN was a quasi-planar magnet. However, surprisingly, the completely hydrogenated AN was an extremely planar Dirac material, with three-fold rotational symmetry similar to that of G. The electronic nature of AN was modulated by H2, varying from a SC (bare 2D-AN) to a zero-BG metallic material (partially hydrogenated AN), and further to a Dirac material (completely hydrogenated AN). Afterward, the electronic and structural properties of the AN functionalized through hydroxylation, halogenation, and methylation were also studied. Definitely, the pristine 2D-AN buckling height decreased through hydrogenation, resulting in a flat layer. Other polar groups (F, Cl, Br, I, OH and CH3) were also employed to functionalize AN MLs, which possessed diverse buckling heights of 0.11, 0.05, 0.07, 0.14, 0.06 and 0.02 Å, respectively. This fine structural difference in the functionalized AN structure results in extraordinary richness in its electronic characteristics, for instance the variety of bulk band gaps present make it a potential quantum spin Hall (QSH) insulator.166,167 Similarly, these polar groups were also established in 2D-AM and 2D-BM MLs to modify their electronic and structural properties. Notably, the SOC opened a QSH-gap in the chemically decorated AN, AM and BM 2D-Xenes.173 The considered edge states of the NRs also confirmed that functionalized group V 2D-Xenes, i.e., AN, AM and BM, are a superior 2D-TIs.
3.3. Electrical properties
The electronic properties of 2D-Xenes are governed by their BGs and SOC. After chemisorption of group V elements, the size of the spin orbit stimulated gap can exceed that of all the currently estimated 2D material Xenes by many orders of magnitude. These fundamental properties associated with the structure of 2D-Xenes can create opportunities for their application in practical nano-devices, especially in spintronics. The group V 2D-Xenes possess SC-like band structures. The group V 2D-Xene materials exist in two phases (α and β-phases). The SL electronic band energy levels show broad band PL properties. The α- and β-phases of the group V 2D-Xenes with their BGs and associated photo spectrum are presented in Fig. 6. Phosphorus has an orthorhombic crystalline form, where its atoms are arranged into hexagonal puckered layers held together by van der Waals (vdW) forces. This structural form, the so-called BP, can be divided into individual monolayers, which are termed phosphorene. The ML, FL and bulk-BP possess a direct BG, ranging from ∼0.3 eV (bulk) to ∼2.0 eV (ML).113
 Fig. 6  (a) Group-V MLs at the HSE06 level of theory electronic band structures. (b) Energy level calculation at the HSE06 level with a broad band PL spectrum. Adapted with permission from ref. 152. 
The relationship among the ML, BL and tri-layer band structure illustrates a red shift with an increase in the number of layers, together with a simultaneous splitting of the bands (Fig. 7(a)).174 Alternatively, the band dispersion remains nearly unchanged. For both the ML and multilayers, the band gap is at the Γ-point of the Brillouin zone. In contrast, it should be noted that for ML 2D-PP, its VB top is almost flat, and thus its maximum slightly off the Γ-point cannot be excluded based on DFT calculations from symmetry considerations.175 However, if the off-centered highest point exists, then it is almost too low to be calculated at room temperature (RT). For the bulk BP, its band gap is also direct (at Z), as determined via angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) calculations (Fig. 7(b)).113 To date, there are no ARPES calculations for FL or ML 2D-PP. The presence of a direct band gap for any number of layer sets 2D-PP apart from MoS2 and WS2, which show an indirect to direct band gap transition when moving from bulk to ML. Conversely, it must be noted that a number of the least known chalcogenides, for instance ReS2, TiS3 and InSe, have a direct band gap for both ML and multilayers. In optoelectronic applications, the occurrence of a direct band gap independent of the number of layers is beneficial, given that it is simple to manufacture stable devices using FL rather than ML 2D-PP. Another reason why 2D-PP is exciting for applications in optoelectronic is that a large part of the electromagnetic range is covered via its thickness-dependent BGs, ranging from the visible to mid infrared (IR) region, which is covered by the most common semiconductor TMDCs. The band gap with respect to thickness was computed utilizing the GW-method in the G0W0 estimate (Fig. 7(c)).
 Fig. 7  (a) DFT-based band structures for one, two and three layers of 2D-PP, and for bulk BP, calculated using the PBEsol functional. Γ = (0, 0) indicates the 2D Brillouin zone centre. (b) Comparison of angle-resolved photoemission spectra with bands achieved with Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof-based function DFT calculations in bulk BP. The inset illustrates the first 3D Brillouin zone in BP. (c) Band gap with respect to the number of layers from theory (G0W0 and Bethe–Salpeter equation (BSE) and experiment (PL)). EF, Fermi energy and k, wave vector. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. 
Considering that the exciton binding energy is extremely big in 2D materials, a direct comparison between the electronic BGs, for instance, that from band structure calculation, G0W0 calculations and the BG calculations from optical measurements, can be confusing. For instance, the differentiation in the calculated optical band gap value shown in Fig. 7(c) and the Bethe–Salpeter equation can be recognized as the theoretical value calculated under vacuum, while the experimental results were obtained using a sample supported on a dielectric substrate.113
3.4. Optical properties
Chemical functionalization is an efficient way to alter the optoelectronic properties of the group V 2D-Xenes. Chemical functionalization via molecules with strong electron-donating/accepting capabilities causes PL wavelength modification due to the noticeable change in the electronic properties of 2D-Xenes, and specially a similar trend can be seen in group V element sheets. The electronic properties of hydrogenated zigzag and armchair AM nanostructures (NSs) were calculated from their LUMO and HOMO gap and density of states (DOSs). Furthermore, because of the buckled direction, the H2 passivation width of the 2D-AM NS HOMO–LUMO gap extended from 0.15 to 0.41 eV. The electronic properties of 2D-AM NSs can be engineered by manipulating their width, edge orientation, H2 passivation and morphology (nano-ribbons (NRs) and nanotubes (NTs)) for their application in chemical sensors and spintronic devices.25 The group V 2D-Xenes present distinct optical properties, which broaden their novel applications. First-principle calculations predicted that the stimulated absorption spectrum is anisotropic along the zigzag and armchair directions for linearly polarized light.157,176 The first absorption peak band edge was observed at the band gap and decreased rapidly with an increase in thickness along the armchair direction, whereas the peak was located at 3.14 eV in ML and decreased with an increase in thickness along the zigzag direction. Theoretical calculations indicate that ML PP absorbs light in the range of 1.1 and 2.8 eV along the armchair direction and is transparent toward light in the same energy window along the zigzag direction, covering the IR region and a fraction of the visible light region, which is of great interest.176 Furthermore, the polarization energy range is tunable for a broad range by altering the stacking layer numbers, which shows potential for the design of devices.177 The optical conductance flow in black PP, which can show physical properties similar to the optical properties of AM,178 is appropriate in ultraviolet (UV) optical nano-size devices, microelectronic devices and solar cells. The dielectric function becomes negative at 5.1 eV and 9.0 eV for α-AM 2D-Xene and 6.9 eV and 8.4 eV for β-AM 2D-Xene, showing their metallic nature in the electromagnetic UV spectrum. Additionally, the resultant electron energy loss spectrum disclose plasmon energies of around 9 eV, which also suggest its metallic performance regarding light reflection. For α-AM and β-AM, the refractive indices at zero energy limits and in the UV region scale up to 3.6 are 2.3 and 1.5, respectively. 2D-AM, a novel group V 2D-Xene material different from PP, is theoretically envisaged to show outstanding electronics and optical properties with superior durability. However, its common and practical applications are critically lagging because of the lack of efficient synthesis methods to obtain enhanced quality FL AM and AM quantum dots (QDs), and profound knowledge of the process involved in the interaction of light with AM.
Han Zhang and coworkers179 developed an electrochemical exfoliation and sonochemical approach for the synthesis of FL-AM, which was formed with a decreased thickness of 31.6 nm and AM QDs with an average lateral size of 3.4 nm. Also the corresponding nonlinear optical response was studied for the first time in the visible range. It was revealed that AM has a huge nonlinear refractive index of ≈10−5 cm2 W−1 and high durability almost for months in environmental conditions. The experimental conclusion is possibly a significant step toward the fabrication of AM-derived nonlinear photonic devices (optical-switcher, beam shaper, Kerr shutter, etc.), where its unsteady counterpart PP cannot be employed.179 Considering that PP is highly anisotropic, it shows dichroism, and thus different polarization of light, which absorbs at different rates. Dichroism is particularly obvious in frequencies equivalent to the band gap energy, where light with a polarization component along the armchair direction is absorbed because the electron wave function precise equilibrium of the CBs and VBs forbids absorption along the zigzag direction. Certainly, for an electronic transition, the direction-dependent optical absorption is related to the square of the dipole matrix elements 〈f|x,y|i〉, where x,y is the momentum operator, and |i〉 and |f〉 are the initial (occupied) and final (unoccupied) states, respectively. In ML 2D-PP,  between the CB bottom and VB top is finite, permitting the transition of an electron, whereas the y-polarized light transition is forbidden because of symmetry.
In ML PP, the optical transition strength among the discrete bands is shown in Fig. 8(a) and the modeled absorption spectra for x and y excitation are presented in Fig. 8(b and c), respectively.113 The optical conductivity assortment rules are identical to that for optical absorption.113 Considering that the optical properties of 2D-PP are very anisotropic, they can be used to describe the crystallographic axis direction. The absorption and extinction coefficient polar versions are illustrated in Fig. 8(c) for the ML-thick sample and its dumbbell shape is directed toward the crystallographic center. Additionally, in bulk BP, there is a huge enhancement in optical conductance start from around 3 eV, which is initiated in a band nesting section. Therefore, in the UV region, PP can be utilized as a photo-detecting material through its high response.113
 Fig. 8  (a) Dipole-allowed transitions in ML 2D-PP. (b) ML 2D-PP NS dipole response to impulse excitation polarized light along the x and y directions. (c) For 40 nm-thick BP the absorption coefficient polar representation for normal incident light, with the excitation energies superior to the band gap (ω0) illustrated on the left. (d) Lowest energy exciton wave functions in ML PP. (e) PL spectra measured for different number of PP layers. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. 
3.5. Mechanical properties
The mechanical properties of the group V 2D-Xene materials are dependent on their lattice parameters and strain engineering. In addition, it is important to observe the strain in the group V 2D-Xene materials. From a future perspective, it will be important to map the strain-property relation for the engineering of group V 2D-Xenes. It will be useful to develop methods to systematize strain to realistically design group V 2D-Xene heterostructure devices and flexible/wearable electronics. In PP, under compressive strain, ripples are generated, and it also demonstrates strong BG anisotropy. For example, armchair (A) direction ripples and strain up to −20% with a band gap transformation from 0.84 to 0.51 eV, and at higher strain, remains almost constant. Along the zigzag (Z) direction, ripples cause strain of ∼−30% and a transition occurs from SC to metal.180 In addition, either in- or out-of-plane strain in the group V 2D-Xenes, e.g., in ML 2D-PP, can considerably change their BG. A plane strain of ∼−2% can transform ML PP from a direct to an indirect gap SC.181,182 It is noticeable that with sufficient compression (−10.2%) or expansion (+11.3%), the strain band gap may change from indirect to direct biaxial strain. The DOSs and electron–phonon (e–h) coupling is significantly enhanced near the Fermi-level and phonon softening in the low frequency region. The SC transition temperature even can increase due to biaxial strain (∼4%) from 3 K to 16 K. The lattice structure (thickness and lattice constant) and mechanical properties (strain, Young's modulus, and Poisson's ratio) of PP are presented in Table 3. Strain can modify the lattice parameters, carrier mobility, electronic BG, thermal conductivity, phase transition, polarization, piezoelectric, chemical reactions and device activity (Table 4). The group V 2D-Xene materials have potential as useful materials for next-generation nanodevices, and therefore, in the next section, we will first study their different synthesis techniques because the properties of as-synthesized materials properties are directly dependent on their synthetic methods, which directly influence the device applications.
Table 3 PP sensors at room temperature




Material
Fabrication
Detection of molecule/analyte
LOD
Sensor type
Ref.




2D-PP sheets
Mechanical exfoliation
NO2
20–1000 ppb
FET

260



2D-PP NSs/Si3N4
Chemically exfoliated
NH3
1 ppm
p-type

261



2D-PP NSs/Si3N4
Chemically exfoliated
NO2
7 ppb
p-type

261



2D-PP Pt-NPs


H2
5 ppm
Chemi-resistive

262





Table 4 Phosphorene-based HER electrocatalysts




Phosphorene material
Electrolyte
Electrocatalyst loading (mg cm−2)

η (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Ref.




Edge-PP
0.5 M H2SO4
NA
550
NA

325



Basal-PP
0.5 M H2SO4
NA
1130
NA

325



NH2-PP
IM KOH
0.04
290
63

326



MoS2-PP
0.5 M H2SO4
0.102
85
68

327



Ni2P@PP
0.5 M H2SO4
NA
107
38.6

328



PP/Co2P
IM KOH
0.14
336 (100 mA cm−2)
72

329



PP/Co2P
0.5 M H2SO4
0.14
340 (100 mA cm−2)
62

329





4. Methods for the synthesis of group V 2D-Xenes
Moving away from naturally existing materials, the fabrication and study of exclusively synthetic elemental 2D materials has appeared as an exhilarating frontier of 2D materials research. Especially, SE-2D materials offer the chance to expand the library of synthetic 2D materials together with enhanced structure flexibility, and therefore more diverse characteristics compared to the existing bulk LMs. This tailorability is achieved via the modulation of the growth conditions and substrate properties, resulting in an extensive phase space for pristine mono-element systems. Widespread cooperation with theoretical study is vital to realize the full potential of these novel 2D materials in a proficient approach. The first progress in the fabrication of SE-2D materials offered inspiration for the improved inspection of the periodic table, with the aim to speed up the innovation of materials, together with the properties of bulk vdW forces. This synergistic effect between computational study (for instance, stable structure prognostic modeling and understanding the matter QSs that materialize in the 2D limit) and experimental approaches (e.g., fabrication, studying and processing) will give the fundamental principles that are essential to determine the characteristics of proposed materials, which will result in the significant advancement of SE-2D materials. The progress in the synthesis of SE-2D materials highlights numerous potential opportunities regarding novel material systems and their upcoming utilization for wide applications. Notably, numerous SE-2D materials (i.e., those based on Si, Ge, Sn, As, Sb and Bi) show great promise due to the topologically non-trivial nature caused by their elevated atomic number. TIs and their correlated electronic phases have significant potential as novel matter electronic states with low dissipation. Spin polarized conducting pathways are appropriate in high speed spintronic, electronic, and quantum computer applications. Thus, research in these directions will most likely produce many fundamental and technological advances in the upcoming years.
Other members of the 2D-Xene material family have demonstrated different challenges with respect to their synthesis, characterization and exploitation compared to G. Here, first we will specify the synthesis of 2D-Xenes, especially the group V Xenes. Atomically thin materials are fabricated via two main methods, isolation from the bulk, which is called the top-down method (e.g., mechanical cleavage and LPE), and bottom-up methods (e.g., physical vapor deposition (PVD), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and wet-chemical solvothermal reaction). The former is broadly applied via micromechanical cleavage. Alternatively, the bottom-up method is not restricted to materials possessing layer structures. However, it requires high-purity conditions and accurate control over the resulting layer thickness. For each of the group V Xenes, their reported synthetic methods are summarized in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Scheme showing the methods for the synthesis of 2D-Xenes. Adapted with permission from ref. 183. 
Several methods fulfill the above-mentioned criteria, including CVD, surface decomposition and segregation. The melting point of the group V elements is low, which considerably decreases the deposition potential, and therefore low temperatures have to be utilized. At present, analogous to the tetrel group, deposition methods are dominantly based on MBE. In the case of the CVD method, it has certain challenges, which should be overcome by finding appropriate low melting point precursors that can decompose at low temperature. Furthermore, the different synthetic methods, proposed structures, and characterization of the group V 2D-Xenes will also be summarized and discussed. Here, in this section, two approaches for the manufacture of 2D-Xenes (bottom-up and top-down synthetic methods) are summarized, and subsequently discussed for the group V elements.
(a) Bottom-up synthesis method
The bottom-up synthesis methods, such as PVD and CVD, for the 2D-Xenes have two distinct purposes: (1) growth of single 2D-sheets and (2) synthesis of bulk, layer structures that are suitable for the detachment of the individual 2D Xene material NSs. To date, epitaxial surface support growth at high temperature, under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) is another method to obtain MLs of different group V elemental 2D-NSs. Substrates also have an important function during the synthesis of 2D-Xenes.
(b) Top-down synthesis method
This method includes exfoliation techniques to fabricate 2D material Xenes, and thus can also be categorized into different exfoliation methods as follows:
(1) Chemical exfoliation
(2) Mechanical exfoliation
(3) Liquid phase exfoliation
The top-down exfoliation techniques involve the removal of distinct layers from substrates or layer bulk crystals via different methods. Chemical methods are utilized for separating 2D-Xene materials from their support. Typically liquid and mechanical exfoliation methods are employed to separate 2D-Xene materials from their layered bulk counterparts. In contrast, mechanical and liquid exfoliation methods are only applied for layered materials that are bound via vdW forces.38 The novel plasma (Ar+)-assisted thinning method has been recently verified to produce PP ML, which is an analogous substitute to laser-supported MoS2 thinning. The viability of these techniques for the synthesis of PP allows the potential use of chemical and other high-energy thin layer substituents. The first isolated 2D material is graphene, which offered a route for the discovery of many analogous 2D materials, i.e., h-BN, TMDCs, Xenes, and MXenes. The group V material-based 2D-Xenes emerged with growing research significance, good development momentum, and excellent practical applications. As cousins PP, the group V 2D-Xenes, i.e., AN, AM and BM, has attracted tremendous interest because of their exciting structures and attractive electronic properties. Currently, these remarkable properties have motivated increasing studies on PP, which demonstrates its large potential for upcoming technological applications in different fields. These 2D family members have increased the chances for the multifunctional applications of 2D-Xene materials, including optoelectronics, electronics, thermo-electrics, sensors, topological spintronics, and Na- and Li-batteries. Due to their significant BGs, which have been calculated theoretically and confirmed experimentally, the group V 2D-Xene materials can be synthesized via the top-down approach and bottom-up synthesis method.
4.1. Synthesis of phosphorene
Over the last two years, the cousins of PP, i.e., group V Xenes, have also attracted significant attention due to the weak vdW interaction between their layers and fabrication as free-standing 2D-Xenes. In science and technology, PP has altered the scene in numerous research areas, predominantly in condensed matter physics, and recently it has been applied as an important basic component of potential nano-devices. However, despite the strong attention and large quantity of experimental achievements by nano-device analysts, the extensive realization of PP still has not occurred to date. This is mostly because of the complexity involved in the consistent production of good samples, particularly on a large scale. Therefore, the main focus of this section is the fabrication of 2D layered BP, which is called PP, paving the way for understanding the elevated presentation of nano-devices.
Considering that PP is the primary atomic layer of BP, research on its synthesis is important. Procedures involving mechanical exfoliation make it difficult to obtain standardized samples with special layers given that anyone can obtain flakes, and they are also time-consuming. The major issue is that the activity of BP-based devices is dependent on the number of layers, and moreover the crystal quality of BP. Thus, the search for novel exfoliating media is essential to discover environmentally friendly solvents, and thus to avoid the utilization of noxious and unusable solvents. The research on BP in device manufacturing is problematic due to its quick degradation under environmental conditions.183 The majority of research on PP employs SiO2 as a substrate due to its economical, good-quality, insulating and transparent nature. h-BN is an additional alternative, given that it is flat and comparatively free of charge impurities, which offers enhanced carrier mobilities. h-BN further elevates the dielectric constant in insulating material, resulting in strong electrostatic repulsion damping via the charged impurities responsible for the decrease in carrier mobility.113
Micromechanical exfoliation is the primary technique initially used to fabricate materials with a SL morphology. Specifically, inside a glove box, Scotch tape is utilized to exfoliate PP from its bulk, and subsequently, it is transferred to a substrate. This is a simple method to produce high-quality 2D-Xene materials. However, they easily deteriorate upon exposure to the ambient environmental. Thus, numerous theoretical studies have been performed to reveal their prosperous and unusual properties. Significantly, DFT-calculated ML and FL group V NSs were fabricated experimentally through LPE, mechanical exfoliation, plasma-assisted processes, PVD technique and MBE. Various strategies were applied to shield PP from degradation using different types of capping materials, including AlOx,121 PMMA (poly-methyl methacrylate),184 PMMA/PVA (polyvinyl alcohol),185 ZEP520A,186 PMMA/MMA (methyl methacrylate),187 and PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane).188–191 Conventional micromechanical exfoliation normally results in a low density of PP flakes, leaving traces on the surface of the tape, and thus decreasing the value of PP. Various characterizations have also been applied to ameliorate the mechanical exfoliation technique.192–194
Currently, bulk BP exfoliation is the general method employed for the production of PP. In the bulk structure, BP is formed mainly via the chemical vapor transport method, which is similar to CVD but generates bulk crystals.195 The 2D NSs are separated from the bulk through micromechanical exfoliation196 or solution-based exfoliation processes.197 The micromechanical exfoliation procedure is tedious and relies on efficient stochastic ways to place and obtain flakes with the required thickness, which is complex due to the relatively quick environmental degradation of BP. Thus, numerous researchers have focused on the development of the CVD-based growth of BP and PP. BP thin films were developed straightforwardly on Si/SiO2 wafers and flexible polymers, even though high pressure treatment was necessary to fabricate the BP thin film. Au(111) substrate-grown ML blue P was obtained via UHV MBE. According to the freestanding predictions, this phase is buckled in a 4 × 4 form for blue P and shows a BG of 1.1 eV, but its full properties are still not well known. This fabrication method guarantees the direct growth of PP phases.123

4.1.1. Synthesis of phosphorene via mechanical exfoliation113. 
Among the group V 2D-Xene materials, PP was the first to be discovered and is the main one, which shows a direct BG through engineering, from 0.3 eV in the bulk to 2.0 eV in the ML, and an elevated hole mobility greater than 10000 cm2 V−1 s−1. The BP exfoliation energy was calculated to be −151 meV per atom via multilevel quantum chemical calculations,198 which is substantially greater than that of graphite, accounting for the relative difficulty in exfoliating BP. This is related to the non-negligible layer electronic density overlap.199 A subject of discussion is whether the bonding between the layers can be categorized as vdW type.113 The micro-cleavage of bulk BP crystals utilizing the ‘Scotch tape’ technique is analogous to that utilized to obtain graphene and TMDCs, which can produce contamination-free ML and FL PP samples that are perfect for elementary research. However, using this process, only small-size crystals can be formed.
The first monolayer phosphorene synthesized via the mechanical exfoliation of bulk black phosphorus possessed a thickness of 0.85 nm. Subsequently, to overcome the problems associated with mechanical exfoliation, the liquid exfoliation method was introduced in 2014. Liquid exfoliation involves the ultrasonic exfoliation of BP dispersed in a solvent, which is suitable for large-scale manufacturing. The resultant PP is formed in the liquid phase, which can be isolated in different sizes by centrifugation and processed via liquid processing, for instance, spin coating. BP can be exfoliated utilizing numerous solvents. Among the anhydrous solvents, polar aprotic solvents, for instance, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), dimethylformamide (DMF),200N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP)201 and N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP),202 are employed to manufacture the majority of homogeneous and durable dispersions. Aqueous solutions can also be utilized by adding a surfactant stabilizer to deoxygenated water to prevent PP from contacting the oxidizing agents.120 LPE can produce PP with a thickness down to the ML limit. After exfoliation, the samples can be thinned in plasma (Ar+), which is a method that conserves the crystal, as confirmed via Raman measurements.113
C. Gomez et al.190 utilized a transitional viscoelastic surface to exfoliate flakes, which augmented their production and decreased the impurities in the flakes. A new method to alter the mechanical exfoliation method is to utilize two PDMS stamps. The first stamp is placed in a Petri dish, whereas the other one is placed in a cylindrical tube with a diameter of 1 cm. After exfoliation, the flakes are transported on the curve PDMS stamp, regardless of the preferred substrate. Subsequently, the covered flakes are rolled onto the substrate. These steps are all performed under dry conditions to remove the protection layer, which avoids contamination on the surface of the flakes. Considering the fast degradation rate of PP, Yang et al.203 studied a quick, noninvasive and very precise method to determine the number of layers of PP utilizing phase-shifting interferometry (PSI). PL measurements also established the reliability of these results. PSI employed almost un-focused and very low-density light from an LED to accomplish rapid imaging to avoid any damage to the PP samples. Although, the PP formed by mechanical exfoliation has high structural and electronic properties, its yield is very low, which cannot fulfill industrial supplies. Thus, LPE was applied for the large-scale production of PP. The exfoliation in LPE depends on the solvent and surface energy of the 2D materials. It is significant to decide an appropriate solution to achieve competent exfoliation and generate a steady distribution. The LPE method roughly relies on ultra-sonication, including organic solvent-based exfoliation, stabilizer-dependent exfoliation, ionic liquid-based exfoliation, salt-assisted exfoliation, intercalate-supported exfoliation and ion-exchange exfoliation. Additionally, ultra-sonication can be executed either through the tip or bath sonication method.


4.1.2. Synthesis of phosphorene via degradation. 
Liquid-phase exfoliation has been reported since 2014 by many authors using different solvents.204 All these reported methods are based on the exfoliation of bulk BP prepared via high-pressure synthesis and also vapor phase transport growth. Alternatively, PP can be prepared through chemical exfoliation, where a solvent molecule assists the intercalation between adjacent layers of a solid to weaken the vdW bonds between them. The PP sheets were prepared via choline chloride urea diluted in ethanol viscosity tuning, which is a promising method that also protects the grown phosphorene flakes from chemical degradation.205 Also, Ryder et al.206 managed to suppress the chemical degradation of exfoliated phosphorene through functionalization using covalent aryl diazonium, and also air-stable phosphorene films were reported through oxygen and argon plasma etching, providing a promising method for the growth of this 2D material.207
The phosphorus lone pairs at the PP surface are preferential chemisorption sites for O2,208 leading to the development of O2 defects, which make the surface of PP hydrophilic, eventually ensuing the formation of a mixture of phosphoric and acid oxide. After exposure in air for a few hours, an important boost in the surface roughness was obtained by Alexandra Carvalho et al.,113 resulting in the formation of bubble-like spots, as shown in the AFM images209,210 (Fig. 10(a)). After the degradation of PP, the Raman signatures disappear. The incidence of the Raman peaks can be relatively ambiguous, given that oxidation continues layer by layer. The Raman signal tend to show the absolutely degraded top layer, while the Raman spectrum from the PP underneath remains almost unchanged. Chemisorbed O2 can be directly detected via Fourier transform IR (FTIR) spectroscopy and XPS.210,211 It is predictable that the oxidation of PP is much faster in FL samples compared to bulk crystals, in which oxidation remains limited to the outermost layer (Fig. 10(b)). Oxidation is recognized to occur in air, but whether O2 alone in the absence of light and water can bring detectable degradation is still a subject of discussion. AlOx encapsulation using atomic layer deposition is another route for suppressing the degradation of PP (Fig. 10(c)).
 Fig. 10  Encapsulated PP, protecting it from oxidation. (a) AFM and optical microscopy analysis of the degradation of PP in air after exfoliation. (b) Device cross-section through scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) analysis illustrating PP covered by oxide layers. (c) Flexible PP-based transistor encapsulated in AlOxvia ALD and mechanical bending after 5000 bending cycles. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. 


4.1.3. Synthesis of phosphorene via bottom-up approach. 
There was no reported study on the bottom-up synthesis of layer BP until the recent synthesis of BP QDs utilizing white P as a starting material on silicon substrates.212 Orthorhombic PP QDs were successfully fabricated on completely deoxidized Si(111) at 20 °C and oxide-covered Si(100) at 15 °C (Fig. 11(a–d)).213 The as-grown BPQDs were characterized via AFM and XPS on an Si substrate and Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 11(e and f), respectively).
 Fig. 11  AFM results of BPQDs grown on Si(111). (a) AFM morphology. (b) Statistical size distribution. (c) Statistical height distribution. (d) Height profiles along lines 1 and 2. (e) XPS spectra of BP QDs/Si(111) with different environmental contact times and (f) Raman spectra. Adapted with permission from ref. 213. 
BP QDs were fabricated uniformly in a pyramid shape on silicon substrates, where the fabrication followed Frank van der Merwe growth. A formerly unknown P allotrope, currently known as blue P, was theoretically envisaged by DFT.214 Its structure consists of a hexagonal arrangement of buckled P atoms. This new structure was synthesized via MBE deposition on an Au(111) surface and its BG was analyzed utilizing STM and ARPES. The deposition source was BP evaporated at 260 °C, producing P4 molecules, while the substrate was maintained at this temperature. The homogeneous SL blue P consisted of triangular morphology P-clusters at low temperature and possessed a band gap of 1.10 eV. In addition, the SL structure of blue P on Au(111) was analogous to 2D Si grown on an Ag(111) substrate. This substrate surface caused breakage of the sublattice symmetry partner with the synthesis of a (4 × 4) superstructure. Computational studies of the non-covalent bonding and arrangement of the heterostructure of blue P have been performed for a variety of substrates including boron phosphide,215 gallium nitride,216 tellurium SL-functionalized Au(111)217 and multilayer blue P.218 The obtained findings demonstrate the potential applications of blue P NRs and NTs not only in optoelectronics and electronics,219 but also for energy conversion, for instance, photocatalysis of water splitting.220 Compared to the group IVA elements, BP and the subsequent pnictogens are thermally less durable, thus restricting the temperature range for appropriate deposition conditions. Furthermore, PP was explored to be chemically active, and the quick chemical degradation of PP-based electronic devices after contact with environmental conditions221 showed the need to investigate other PP fabrication methods. The degradation of PP can be avoided via passivation using either surface functionalization or more efficiently by oxide layer surface passivation using ALD222 or self-assembled SLs of octadecyltrichlorosilane.223 Passivation surface functionalization has been carried out by numerous researchers via non-covalent224 and covalent functionalization.206 To make PP stable under ambient conditions, functionalization and optimization of its properties have become necessary to generate future electronics, and also substantial efforts are in demand to completely comprehend the mechanism for the synthesis of BP and its sensitivity and stability on substrates for its uninterrupted growth.225

4.2. Synthesis of arsenene

4.2.1. Fabrication of arsenene via top-down approach. 
Very few experimental data has been reported to date on the fabrication of AN. Tsai et al. demonstrated a top-down approach, which is a novel type of synthetic method, i.e., plasma-assisted process, to synthesize ML AN on InAs. During the ML AN fabrication process, they introduced N2 ions in the InAs substrate.226–228 Upon heat treatment, the N2 ions react with As, and In is squeezed out of the surface to fabricate AN layers. The ML AN obtained via this process was not a SL and continuous sheets, rather a ribbons morphology was formed. Gusmao et al.229 also successfully fabricated AN via an exfoliation method carried out for 2 h, exchanging in two types of kitchen blenders, namely a top and bottom shear mixer. The As-NSs were separated through centrifugation, aqueous washing, and then centrifugation at various rotations per minute (rpm). Several hydrothermal/solvothermal techniques were also studied for the synthesis of AN.230 P. Vishnoi et al.231 successfully isolated non-oxidized FL AN NSs and nanodots through the exfoliation of grey As-crystals in solvents. To prepare the AN NSs, crystals of grey-As were sonicated, dehydrated and de-gassed in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone in a sealed vessel under an N2 environment. The AFM analysis indicated that 3.1 nm-thick layers were obtained and the XPS analysis showed an intense peak at 41.5 eV, which is clearly attributed to the As-element, with a very weak peak at 45.0 eV, corresponding to oxide impurities. Seyyed Mohsen Beladi-Mousavi et al.232 used an LPE method to fabricate FL AN, another member of the pnictogens, supported by sonication and without the addition of any surfactant (Fig. 12(a–f)). The exfoliation process was carried out in different solvents. Among them, N-methylpyrrolidone provided the highest level of stable AN NSs. The microscopy and spectroscopic analysis authenticated the formation of high-quality FL AN NSs with a large lateral facet.
 Fig. 12  Solvent exfoliation of As in a variety of solvents through tip ultra-sonication and its application in a vapor sensor. (a) and (b) Layered As bulk crystal SEM analysis. (c) As crystal exfoliation via tip sonication and centrifugation. (d) Tip ultra-sonication setup with minimized contact with the environment. (e) AN dispersions in different solvents 1 day after ultra-sonication and (f) after 2000 rpm centrifugation. Adapted with permission from ref. 232. (g) Grey As (bulk) and AN atomic sheet structures. Rhombohedral unit cell (a = b = 3.7598 Å and c = 10.5475 Å). (h) and (i) Scheme for the preparation of AN NSs in NMP and nano-dots in toluene from grey As. (j) TEM analysis, (k) selected-area electron diffraction, (l) HR-TEM analysis (inset shows Fourier transform), and (m) AFM analysis of the AN NSs. Adapted with permission from ref. 233. 


4.2.2. Fabrication of arsenene via ultra-sonication. 
Pratap Vishnoi et al.233 prepared NSs and nano-dots of AN via the ultra-sonication of grey As in appropriate solvents. Fig. 12(g–m) illustrate a schematic of the process used to obtain FL AN NSs through the exfoliation of grey-As and the AFM/TEM results. The results from TEM and Raman spectroscopy were consistent, demonstrating the buckled hexagonal structure (β-phase) of the NSs. The AN nano-dots showed blue PL in the range of 400–460 nm. First-principle calculations and optical spectroscopy showed that FL AN is a large band gap semiconducting material. The FL AN NSs functionalized with a 4-nitrobenzenediazonium salt can be produced via a simple and large-scale procedure, and thus have potential to be utilized in AN-based devices. This study demonstrated the requirement for the further study of NS-based elemental As and that AN exhibits a band gap of ∼2.3 eV, which correlates with the theoretical value. The nanodots exhibited blue emission in the range of 400–460 nm. The experimental findings support the theoretical predictions on AN.233 There are also other methods for the synthesis of multilayer AN with a rhombohedral configuration.
In presence of N2 plasma, InAs forms multilayer AN NRs on its surface, but it is pragmatic that this configuration in not homogeneous on the substrate, forming a heap of multilayer NRs with a wash-board arrangement, and the BG was measured to be 2.3 eV.234 The methods for the scalable synthesis of AN include CVD, but there are many restrictions because of the volatility of As and the thermal stability of the starting materials. However, in the SC industry, the starting materials of hydrides and aryl/alkyl hydrides for As are broadly utilized due to their low thermal decomposition, and appropriate substrates can be developed for the future deposition of 2D As on large-area substrates. Lastly, although computational calculations for orthorhombic AN have been performed, there is no experimental confirmation for its thriving fabrication. According to Schmidt et al.,235 pure orthorhombic As is metastable, whereas the AsxP1−x crystal is thermodynamically stable, leading to the successful preparation of layer AsxP1−x materials (where x = 0, 0.25, 0.4, and 0.83) via exfoliation methods.236

4.3. Synthesis of antimonene

4.3.1. Antimonene (2D-AM) fabrication via top down approach. 
4.3.1.1. Mechanical exfoliation of antimonene. 
Ares et al.237 utilized mechanical exfoliation technology for the fabrication of AM. In a typical procedure, Scotch tape was used to yield thick AM flakes and the yield was enhanced by substituting the Scotch tape with a soft visco-elastic polymer (gel-film from Gel-Pak). Subsequently, the visco-elastic polymer containing the sample was pressed against an SiO2 substrate, resulting the fabrication of thin Sb-flakes with a large area in a further systematic system. The AFM image showed FL-Sb flakes with a distinct ML terrace (Fig. 13(a)). Similar to exfoliated graphene on SiO2, ripples were formed based on the conformation of Sb on the basic SiO2 substrate. The calculated height of a terrace was ∼0.9 nm (Fig. 13(a and b)), which well-matched the existence of H2O in the flakes and SiO2, as is usually experienced in other 2D materials, for instance, graphene and dichalcogenides.1,238,239 The XEDS and HR-TEM analyses established the elevated feature of the material and its rhombohedral structure (β-phase). To check the durability of the material, it was stored for two months without additional safety measures. Afterwards, the flakes were measured, with no considerable changes observed.1
 Fig. 13  (a) AFM image of ∼0.2 mm2 Sb flake and (b) its height histogram. (c) Same flake in (a) but after nano treatment. (d) Profile of the green line in (c), where the lowest step height is ∼0.4 nm, matching an ML-Sb layer. (e) Profiles taken along the lines in (f–h). (f) Two Sb-layers immediately after exfoliation and (g) measured after 60 days. (h) Figure taken instantaneously after (g) with sample absorbed in H2O. Adapted with permission from ref. 142. 
4.3.1.2. Liquid-phase exfoliation of antimonene. 
Gibaja et al.240 successfully applied the LPE method to acquire ML or FL of numerous 2D materials on a scalable level,241,242 including durable suspensions of FL-BP.240 This was a great move toward the manufacturing of an enormous quantity of layers floating in different solvents with high quality. The sonication of the bulk Sb structure in an isopropanol (iPrOH)–H2O (4:1) mixture provided a colorless and exceptionally stable dispersion, illustrating the Faraday-Tyndall effect (Fig. 14(a)). The whole lateral dimensions of the isolated MLs were over 1–3 mm2 with a particle size of 4 nm. Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) combined with STEM was applied to determine the structure of the β-phase 2D-Sb and flake composition. E. Martínez-Periñán et al.243 also synthesized 2D-Sb using liquid exfoliation and analyzed its energy storage application.
 Fig. 14  (a) Structure of β-Sb and SEM analysis of a layered Sb crystal. Exfoliated FL-Sb presenting the Faraday-Tyndall effect. (b) AFM image of FL-Sb drop-casted on SiO2, showing over micron-level lateral dimensions. (c) Height histogram of the image in (b), where diverse thicknesses of the terraces are obvious. (d) AFM image presenting atomic periodicity. (e) Fast-Fourier transform (FFT) of the image in (d), presenting matching along the hexagonal lattice as anticipated for β-Sb. (f) Low magnification HAADF analysis of a flake along an atomic-resolution image (along the [012] direction). Adapted with permission from ref. 142 and 240. 
4.3.1.3. Electrochemical exfoliation of antimonene. 
Han Zhang and co-workers179 introduced a simple and low-cost multiple electrochemical exfoliation method. In addition, a sonochemical technique was also utilized, in which the solvent molecules go into the bulk Sb and enlarge its interlamination spaces, finally cleaving the bulk material layers into QDs.179 However, compared to mechanical exfoliation, molecular assembly, and CVD, the electrochemical approach is low cost and can allow large-scale manufacturing (Fig. 15).244 Furthermore, it can avoid the use of harsh chemicals through the enchanting benefit of electrochemical activation, resulting in the simplest refinement step.245 Consequently, it is significant to discover electrochemical exfoliation techniques to fulfill the need of scalable synthesis, similar to the electrochemical exfoliation technique for graphene,246 MoS2,247 and PP.248 The formation of AM with enhanced features on a large-scale via a cost-efficient method is very advantageous for its use in real devices.
 Fig. 15  (a) Electrochemical exfoliation of Sb two-electrode system scheme using an Sb crystal and (b) AFM image of exfoliated ML-Sb nanoflake. (c) and (d) TEM/HRTEM images of ML-Sb flake. (e) Raman spectra of bulk Sb and 31.6 nm-thick ML-Sb illustrated in (b). (f) Exfoliated multilayer Sb Sb3 d5/2 peak XPS spectrum. Adapted with permission from ref. 179. 
Lu et al.179 reported the electrochemical exfoliation of FL AM. Compared with other methods, this method is economical for obtaining a significant among of 2D materials. Furthermore, this technique avoids the use of numerous chemicals by taking advantage of electrochemical activation, offering a simple treatment method (Fig. 15(a)).249 In this process, Na2SO4 solution was applied as the electrolyte and DC-power was applied. An Sb-crystal was directly linked to a conducting wire, while the counter electrode was prepared using Pt-wire (diameter of 0.5 mm). The working electrode of the Sb-crystal and the Pt-wire were incompletely immersed in the electrolyte, preventing contamination and electrolysis. The entire method was performed at a constant voltage of −6 eV for 60 min to ensure that the Na-ions were fully embedded and their exfoliation inside the Sb-cathode, and finally the exfoliated 2D-Sb NSs were centrifuged. The XPS spectrum illustrates a main symmetric photoelectron peak at 528 eV, in accordance with Sb–Sb 3d5/2 orbital bonding (Fig. 15(e)). The existence of only one peak indicates that the FL AM has a non-oxidation feature. The AFM image showed flakes with a size of ∼31.6 nm, with a flat surface and an uneven profile (Fig. 15(b)).


4.3.2. Fabrication of antimonene via bottom-up approach. 
AM is defined as Sb-atoms with ML and FL arrangements. AM is a different compared to the 2D-Xene crystals because of its strong SOC and radical enhancement of its properties from ML to FL arrangements. J. Ji et al.23 fabricated the 2D β-phase of AM single crystals via vdW epitaxy on a mica substrate. The theoretical predictions showed that in contrast to PP, AM was not easily oxidized and was thermodynamically very stable under an O2-atmosphere at the RT. The measured conductivity of the synthesized AM polygons was about 104 S m−1 and they were transparent in the visible spectrum window, allowing their novel applications as flexible transparent conductive electrodes. Zhang et al.147 observed that AM with high stability has buckled structures with the estimated BG of 2.28 eV. The buckled honeycomb ML is shown in Fig. 16(a), comprised of hybridized orbitals between the pz (out-of-plane) and sp2 (in-plane) bands and possessing partially hybridized sp3-bands. If the group-V elemental ML was exceedingly enlarged, the buckled ML transformed into a flat honeycomb arrangement, as illustrated by the flat AM ML (FAM) in Fig. 16(b). AM generally has a buckled and flat honeycomb-like structure (Fig. 16(a)) compared to the flat ML-G, as shown in Fig. 16(b). The epitaxial growth of an atomically flat ML-Sb honeycomb via MBE on an Ag(111) substrate is shown in Fig. 16(c). According to the STM image, the ML AM film obviously shows a flat G-like honeycomb lattice, lacking noticeable atomic buckling. Specifically, the lattice match between the Ag(111) substrate and FAM lattice can result in the possible arrangement of the flat 2D-AM honeycomb lattice.
 Fig. 16  (a) Buckled honeycomb pattern together with the hybridization between the sp2 (in-plane) and pz (out-of-plane) orbitals and the flat honeycomb structure through decoupled orbitals. (b) DFT analysis, (c) STM analysis showing a plane hexagonal graphene-like structure, and (d) clean Ag(111) substrate. (e) LEED pattern of Ag(111) grown Sb, showing an Ag(111)-(√3 × √3) superstructure. (f) ML-Sb scalable STM analysis. Inset: Yellow line at the terrace edge. (g) HR-STM image of Sb in the White Square in (f), representing a well-organized honeycomb-like lattice. (h) Red line profile in (g). Adapted with permission from ref. 27. 
In contrast to the bonding in the former buckled structure, the Sb-atom sp2-orbitals in the flat honeycombs couple with the pz-orbital, which reserves the sp2-orbitals in FAM, comparable with the bonding arrangement in ML graphene. The presence of the flat 2D-AM ML perhaps induces exclusive properties different from its buckled arrangement pattern. Generally, Ag(111) with a hexagonal symmetry is utilized as the substrate based on its facile method to achieve a clean and defect-free surface, making it a suitable template for the formation of 2D honeycomb-type materials, for instance h-BN, silicene, and borophene. Initially, a fresh Ag(111) substrate was sputtered for numerous rounds and annealed until an individual Ag(1 × 1) diffraction spot was observed in the LEED image (Fig. 16(d)) and its clean surface verified via STM. Subsequently, at 353 K, Sb-atoms were deposited on the substrate and a six new hexagonal diffraction spots were obtained (Fig. 16(e)). These spots demonstrated a √3 × √3 super-structure relating to the Ag(111) surface lattice. An obvious and easy LEED model in reciprocal space showed the pure crystallinity and good quality of the as-grown ML Sb-film. Moreover, similar patterns based on LEED were also obtained throughout the surface of the sample (8 mm × 8 mm size), showing a continuous and high-quality ML Sb-film, which was confirmed by STM (Fig. 16(f)). The noticeable height of the Sb-film was ∼2.2 Å, which was less than that of the earlier one (2.8 Å), showing the formation of ML Sb with a less buckling pattern. The HR-STM image in Fig. 16(g) (white square in Fig. 16(f)) shows an ordered honeycomb-like lattice, with the calculated period/lattice of ∼5.01 Å (Fig. 16(h)). In contrast to the free-standing Sb-lattice constant (4.13 Å) for the buckling arrangement, the larger lattice constant of 5.01 Å showed that the as-fabricated Sb-film on Ag(111) definitely possessed a lower buckling configuration.
The understanding and exploration of flat Sb-honeycombs extend the construction of 2D atomic-level thin films and offer a capable path to tailor their topological properties for future technology.27 Jianping Ji et al.250 studied the vdW epitaxial growth of FL AM mono-crystalline polygons, their atomically microstructure and stability under normal atmospheric conditions (Fig. 17). Contamination-free, FL AM mono-crystal polygons were synthesized on different substrates, including flexible ones, through vdW epitaxy growth. TEM and Raman spectroscopy revealed that the obtained AM polygons had a buckled rhombohedral single-atom crystal structure, which is consistent with the computational study of mainly the stable β-phase allotrope. The especially enhanced durability of the 2D-AMs was observed following aging in air in 30 days. Theoretical simulations showed the resemblance of the 2D-AMs with PP, where AM is least preferably oxidized and has superior thermodynamic stability in an O2 environment at RT. Furthermore, the AM polygons have high electrical conductance up to 104 S m−1 and high-quality optical transparency in the visible spectrum, showing potential applications as transparent conducting electrodes.
 Fig. 17  Mica substrate-based AM polygons grown through vdW epitaxy. (a) Synthesis configuration of the sample. (b) vdW epitaxial scheme. (c–f) Optical analysis of representative AM polygons along triangular, hexagonal, rhombic and trapezoidal shapes, respectively. (g) AFM topography of a triangular AM layer with 4 nm thickness. (h) AFM topography of a miniature AM sheet. Adapted with permission from ref. 250. 

4.4. Fabrication of the bismuthene via the top-down approach

4.4.1. Fabrication of bismuthene via hot pressing and sonochemical exfoliation method. 
Hussain et al.251 studied a proficient hot-pressing way to synthesize BM from Bi-NPs. The Bi-NPs were compacted using an appropriate press, while heated at a particular temperature. By applying AFM, the lowest thickness was determined to be about 2.55 nm. Lu et al.32 applied a sonochemical exfoliation technique to synthesize super BM with improved stability. The AFM analysis of the fabricated BM demonstrated that the NSs possess a height of ∼4 nm along a flat surface. Qi-Qi Yang et al.252 synthesized BM via acid-intercalated exfoliation, illustrating strong nonlinearity (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Scheme for the synthesis of bulk Bi in NSs via H2SO4-assisted liquid exfoliation (a), SEM analysis of bulk Bi (b), H2SO4-intercalated Bi powder (c) and Bi NSs (d), with respective photographs illustrated in the insets. Adapted with permission from ref. 252. 
The rediscovery of the 2D-BP has extended the 2D family to the group V elements, where among them, BM is the most recent member, exhibiting outstanding catalytic and optoelectronic properties and biocompatibility as a 2D-TI. It is difficult to mechanically exfoliate bulk Bi given that it is the equivalent of BP. Therefore, to date, information on the growth of 2D-Bi is lacking, and examination on its non-linear optical characteristics is rare. A very novel strategy was introduced by combining acid-interaction and LPE to productively convert metal bulk-Bi into FL-SC, which resulted in unseen optoelectronic properties, for instance tunable nonlinear responses all way to the near-IR (NIR) range.252 This range is significant in military and telecommunication applications. However, the currently functionalized materials are enormously limited in this range. The origin of the good saturable absorption was systematically discovered via time-resolved spectroscopy on the range of fs to μs, which illustrated ultrafast carrier dynamics from fs to ps in an untimely phase and extended exciton bleach revival up to μs. Regarding to its use, the as-synthesized 2D-Bi was used as a saturable absorber to mode lock a Tm-doped fiber laser and productively obtain a 2 μm NIR-wavelength output. This is an effective and large-scale technique to synthesize the novel 2D family member BM together with outstanding durability. Furthermore, the discovery of its powerful and broad nonlinear reactions expanding into the NIR range and elementary photo-induced dynamics shows the full potential of 2D-Bi for application in optoelectronic and nonlinear optics devices.252 Besides the development in the methods for the synthesis of the group V Xenes, the progress in simplistic synthetic methods is essential using computational studies. The scalable formation accompanying the significant development and control of the layer thickness of the group V Xenes is the present requirement in device manufacturing. The outstanding characteristics of ML and FL group V Xenes can be well recognized via elementary studies through dissimilar factors, for instance, the strain effect, doping, defect nature, and quantum size effects. In the group V Xenes, the perceptions and considerations for research in fundamental physics can result in new approaches for the investigation of novel fascinating phenomena and progress in the field of 2D materials.


4.4.2. Fabrication of bismuthene via MBE deposition. 
The synthesis of 2D-Bi depends on MBE deposition in UHV utilizing Bi as a starting precursor. The probability was discussed to grow 2D-Bi on an Si substrate, but earlier efforts on Si(111) were unsuccessful in manufacturing any 2D-Bi layer.253,254 Reis et al.255 carried out combined studies, i.e., theoretical and experimental, on the capability of 2D-Bi to grow on SiC(0001) via MBE, resulting in a (√3 × √3)R30° honeycomb structure (Fig. 19(A–C)) with a BG of 0.8 eV, which was characterized via STM (Fig. 19(D and E)), LEED and ARPES. The experimental findings well matched the theoretical predictions. Proceeding the growth of the 2D-Bi film, the substrate H-termination was chemically desorbed at 650 °C. Simultaneously, the substrate was infused with Bi atoms, and after that the temperature was reduced to 500 °C. Additionally, four SLs of Bi(110) NRs were grown on epitaxial graphene on top of a 4H-SiC(001) substrate at RT with a band gap of 0.4 eV.256 In addition, applying first-principle DFT calculations, Liu et al. proposed a method for the stabilization of buckled 2D-Bi SL through in-layer biaxial strain and an electric field on ultrathin Bi(111) films fabricated on Bi2Te3(111) substrates.257 Currently, no CVD method has been reported for 2D-Bi deposition. The major issue is the lack of appropriate starting materials that can be efficiently decomposed at temperatures below the melting point of Bi, which is considerably lower than that of Sb and As. Beside the MBE method, the synthesis of FLs 2D-Bi was studied through sonochemical exfoliation and measured as a model material in ultrafast adsorption32 and ultrafast photonic devices.258 In comparison to true vdW structures similar to orthorhombic BP, “top-down” methods for heavy group V elements that have a rhombohedral geometry show major problems due to the increase in interlayer connections. Table 5 presents a summary of the methods for the synthesis of 2D pnictogens.259
 Fig. 19  (A) Scheme of a 2D-Bi layer placed on a three-fold-symmetric SiC(0001) substrate in (√3 × √3)R30° equal registry. (B) Topographic STM analysis with 2D-Bi fully covering the substrate. Flakes are extended ≈25 nm, restricted by domain boundaries. (C) Substrate height taken along the red line in (B). Step heights relate to SiC steps. (D) Honeycomb pattern. (E) STM analysis for occupied and empty states (left and right section), respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 255. 
Table 5 Summary of the methods for the synthesis of 2D pnictogens259




2D pnictogens
Synthesis method


Top-down
Bottom-up




PP
Scotch-tape exfoliation
Plasma-assisted method


Liquid-phase exfoliation
Chemical vapor deposition


Shear exfoliation
Wet chemistry method


Tip-sonication-based exfoliation
Pulsed laser deposition


Electrochemical exfoliation




AS
Scotch-tape exfoliation
Plasma-assisted method


Shear exfoliation




AN
Scotch-tape exfoliation
VdW epitaxy


Liquid-phase exfoliation
Molecular beam epitaxy


Shear exfoliation
Plasma-assisted method


BM
Sonochemical exfoliation
Epitaxial growth


Shear exfoliation
Molecular beam epitaxy


Hot-pressing method
Pulsed laser deposition




Wet-chemistry method





5. Applications of group V 2D-Xenes
The simple, even small-scale formation and potential properties of group V 2D-Xenes have guided the way for the design and exhibition of diverse nanodevices for use in the laboratory to some industrial level in advanced manufacturing areas. The tremendously high pace of the early progress suggests amazing potential and many more novel nano-device applications for group V 2D-Xenes. Here, we will highlight the main areas of the device applications of the group V 2D-Xenes in opto-electronics, electronics, photovoltaics, batteries, biomedical applications, and others and will also discuss new topics of potential future work. Fig. 20 shows a schematic representation of the applications of the group V Xenes.
 Fig. 20  Scheme showing the applications of group V Xenes. 
5.1. Applications of phosphorene
PP is a novel member of the 2D materials family and has gained important consideration in recent times. The simplest, albeit small-scale formation and potential properties of PP have led to the design and display of diverse devices uses in daily life in the fields of the photovoltaics, electronics, opto-electronics, batteries, biomedicine, and others because of its exclusive physico-chemical properties and outstanding biocompatibility. FL 2D-BP is considered a possible biological imaging agent in cancer diagnosis because of its intrinsic fluorescence and photo-acoustic (PA) properties together with insignificant cytotoxicity. FL 2D-BP-based photo-thermal and photo-dynamic therapies have emerged with outstanding anti-tumor therapeutic efficiencies because of its novel physical characteristics, for instance NIR optical absorbance, large extinction coefficients, bio-degradability and generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) or heat upon light irradiation. In addition, FL 2D-BP is a talented drug delivery platform due to its elevated drug loading capacity resulting from its puckered layer configuration together with an ultra-large SSA, as well as its convenient size with simplistic surface chemical modification. The exceptionally elevated speed of its untimely progress recommends extraordinary potential and numerous novel nanodevice applications for PP. The application of PP in different devices includes batteries, transistors and biomedical devices. We will also explain the issues of its potential future employment.2 Particularly, the recent photo-electronic applications of FL 2D-BP in biomedicine has achieved a significant breakthrough because of its unique electronic properties. Its biomedical applications include bio-imaging, photo-therapy, and stimuli-responsive drug release. For more details about the biomedical applications of 2D-BP, please refer to our recently published review.2Table 3 shows the applications of group V sensors at RT.

5.1.1. Phosphorene as FETs. 
When fabricating FET devices, the interface between the channel materials and metal electrodes must be considered carefully due to the contact resistance. This is the main factor in the device performances in the short channel for group V 2D-Xene FETs. Low contact resistance is in demand for practical applications. In conventional bulk SC channel materials, substitutional doping and strong interface bonds are standard methods to set up contacts between the electrodes and SCs. Conversely, it is difficult for metal electrodes to produce strong covalent bonding on the surface of dangling bond-free 2D materials without destroying their electrical performance. Different techniques have utilized to comprehend the fabrication of low contact resistance devices, including choice of metallic electrode, modification of the SBH height, tuning the interface morphology, and introducing tunneling layers.118,263,264 Different from graphene, which develops Ohmic contact with metals, 2D group V Xenes generally265 suffer from high contact resistance due to the SBH at the metal–SC interface, significantly limiting the carrier injection.266,267 The presence of Schottky barrier physical properties and selecting appropriate metal electrodes for targeted268 channel materials are significant.269–271 Utilizing first-principles calculation and quantum transport simulation, Lu et al. studied the contact of 2D group V Xene FETs with a series of metals,272–276 including Al, Ni, Cu,277 Sc,278 Ti,279 Py,280 Cr,281 Pd, Er,282 Au, and Ag.283 In addition, semi-metallic materials have also been employed, for instance G. According to ab initio quantum transport simulation, FETs with 2D graphene electrodes offer advanced activity compared to bulk metal electrodes due to their smaller and tunable SBH and lack of metal-induced gap states in their channels. The performance limit of group V 2D Xene FETs with graphene electrodes surpasses that of ML MoS2, carbon NTs, and advanced silicon FETs, satisfying the requirements of the latest ITRS.
For FET applications, it is generally preferred to decrease the sub-threshold swing, increase the current and obtain a well-defined saturated drain current in the high drain–source bias region.284–286 Consequently, it is essential to optimize the device parameters, for instance, (i) channel length, (ii) channel thickness, and (iii) contact resistance. Channel length: different performance indexes of optimal sub-10 nm PP FETs meaningfully fulfil the criteria of ITRS for high-performance devices.287–289 Selecting a suitable transport direction, Ion/Ioff can be enhanced <108 by the boosted tunneling efficiency.290 Compared with MoS2 FETs, PP FETs have fast Ion/Ioff speed and produce a higher J0. Thus, black arsenic-phosphorus (AsP) was synthesized with highly tunable chemical compositions and employed as back-gate FETs.291 Channel thickness: the thickness of 2D SCs is an important parameter to decide their basic electronic properties and device performances. Das et al.292 reported that the J0 and Ion/Ioff ratio of PP FETs increased up to (∼102) depending on the layer thickness, as established from the transfer properties resulting from a robust technique. Yin and Yoon293 theoretically studied ML BP FETs that yielded a comparable on-state current with bulk P, without the limitation of a lower DOS. Meanwhile, ML PP FETs can also maintain a steep Ion/Ioff ratio and oppose gate-induced drain leakage. The Ion/Ioff ratio of an ML-trilayer AM-based FET also be increased up to 4: 87 × 108 with a 10 nm channel length.294 Strain and temperature parameters295,296 are also applied to regulate the performance of group V 2D Xene FETs. Yan et al. inspected the temperature-based transport properties of PP FETs.297 According to their results, with an increase in temperature, the off-state channel current increased and the on-state current decreased, which is due to the charge conduction limiting mechanism. A very low off-state channel current results in low power utilization, which is significant for digital devices. Diverse transport measurements revealed that these SC materials have potential applications in logic electronics. Liangzhi Kou et al.155 fabricated FETs by utilizing PP (Fig. 21(a and b)). In 2018, Zhong et al.298 studied FET-based stable black arsenene (AS), showing high carrier mobility and large Ion/Ioff ratios (Fig. 21(c)).
 Fig. 21  FETs. (a) and (b) FL PP device and performance, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 155. (c) Transfer characteristics of ML As device. Adapted with permission from ref. 298. (d) BL 2D-PP FET and cross-section analysis of a distinctive metal contact with BL 2D-PP channel. A, C, E and G show four areas, and B, D and F represent three edges. Red rows illustrate path (A → B → C →F → graphene or A → B → C → D → E → G) of electrons or holes from contact metal (A) to BL 2D-PP channel. (e) BL 2D-PP FET electron and hole lateral SBH comparison by utilizing WFA ΦBL,L e/h, WFA, ab initio QTS ΦBL,L e/h, tran, and experimental interpretation ΦBL,L e/h, and exp. Adapted with permission from ref. 275. 
It is unpredictable to assess the SBH in ML 2D material-based FETs with very close electrodes according to the work function (WF) estimation due to the presence of Fermi-level pinning. Han Zhang and co-workers275 carried out the first detailed investigation on BL PP-based FETs using numerous metals with a wide WF range (Al, Ag, Au, Ti, Cr, Ni, Cu, and Pd) based on ab initio electronic band results and quantum transport simulation (QTS) (Fig. 21(d and e)). Different from the one type of SB recognized in ML PP FETs, two types of SBs were recognized in the BL PP FETs, i.e., perpendicular SBs in the whole PP layer and metalized, the height of which was calculated from the energy band analysis (EBA); and lateral SB in the metal and channel BL PP, the height of which was calculated from the QTS. Vertical SBHs demonstrate improved reliability than lateral SBHs of ML PP FETs from QTS in comparison to the well-known WFA. Consequently, there should be a general and better method than WFA to approximate the lateral SBHs of ML SC transistors with strongly interrelated electrodes depending on EBA for the BL equivalent.275 With respect to QTS, p-type lateral Schottky contacts are produced in BL 2D-PP and Pd, Ti, Ni, Ag, and Au electrodes with the hole SBH of 0.11, 0.18, 0.19, 0.20, and 0.21 eV, while n-type lateral Schottky contacts are produced between BL PP and Cr, Al, and Cu electrodes with an electron SBH of 0.27, 0.31, and 0.32 eV, respectively. The SBHs and theoretical polarity well-match the present experiments. These results offer an approach to design the BL PP–metal interfaces, which are vital in fabricating BL PP devices.275 The variable band gap energy with elevated hole mobility at RT (up to 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1 with ∼10 nm thickness) of PP make it appropriate for optoelectronic and electronic applications. Generally, the device design anticipated to date is based on FETs. The PP channels based on FETs always have high current on/off ratios (Ion/off) (≈105). For BP transistors, their sub-threshold swings are still high, where a value of 69 meV dec−1 was obtained together with a high k-dielectric. With the careful selection of the channel length, contacts, and dielectric thickness, there is a high probability to get definite drain current saturation in high drain source bias section, the required characteristic for the radio frequency applications, which is absent in graphene-based transistors. The first studies demonstrated that PP-based transistors fabricated with a channel length of ∼300 nm performed well in the radio frequency region, showing a peak short circuit current, with the cutoff frequency (fT) and highest oscillation frequency of 12 GHz and 30 Hz, respectively. The most important challenge to date is the control of the nano-device thickness and inhibition of degradation process, depending on the SBH and type of conduction. Both the mobility and the spectral response depend significantly on the number of PP layers. Simultaneously, as is distinct in other 2D materials, the band gap is directly dependent on thickness, where for the majority of small frequency applications, it is an excellent compromise to employ an ML channel (with a thickness of ∼10 nm), resulting in superior carrier mobility. Consequently, superior driving currents can be achieved with a lower Ion/off ratio. Presently, control of the channel thickness remains an obstacle due to the lack of large-scale exfoliation techniques capable of generating samples in a narrow thickness range. In this aspect, exfoliation in plasma or liquid thinning is a promising solution. The further critical characteristic of FET devices is the selection of the contacts. For 2D-heterostructures, the contacts usually decide the type of conduction and bound drain-source current (Ids). Therefore, good Ohmic contact materials are in demand. In BP-based devices, TiO2/Co contacts result in a high SBH, and consequently a decrease in Ids through thermionic emission. On PP, Ids and Vds of the Ti/Au contacts do not have a linear relation, even at low biases. The contacts can be made Ohmic if graphene is used by tuning its WF utilizing the gate-modulation effect. A PP-based FET prototype encapsulated with graphene and h-BN contacts is provided in Fig. 22(a–c) and its design is shown in Fig. 22(d). Its characteristics (Ids works as a back-gate and source-drain bias) are presented in Fig. 22(e and f). BP layer transportation is determined via the relative energy arrangement of two graphene contacts (Fig. 22(g)). Besides resolving the drawback of thermionic emission, which decreases transportation, the graphene/BP arrangement is beneficial to for a vdW structure and can be completely encapsulated with h-BN (compared to BP with conventional nonflexible contacts, which are not completely encapsulated through h-BN, hence causing leakage).113
 Fig. 22  PP-based FET, contact with graphene and encapsulated with h-BN, demonstrating the device optical image subsequent to the final transfer process (a). Red and black areas show BP crystal and one of the graphene strips, correspondingly. (b) Optical image of device after contact. (c) AFM topography of the device. (d) G-contacted PP device scheme. (e) Back-gate voltage (Vbg) reliance of Ids at different top-gate voltages (Vtg). (f) Vds dependent on bias current at different dislocation fields. Vbg is fixed at −30 V. (g) Top and bottom scheme showing the band position for Vtg values of −4 and 4 V, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. 
The most significant use of SCs in devices is as a transistor in the field of digital electronics. The recent decades have witnessed an incessant decrease in the size of transistors, which is recently down to almost 20 nm. However, this length range is statistically approaching quantum confinement and results in complexity related to heat dissipation. This offers inspiration to investigate novel device and material design. For digital transistor applications, desirable candidates for fast operation should have a high charge carrier mobility, high Ion/off (requires a modest band gap larger than 0.4 eV)299 for efficient switching, high conductance and low off-state conductance during low-power use. All these issues are essential for the complete functioning of devices. Graphene has an extraordinarily elevated carrier mobility (2 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1),300 with semi-metallic character, but it cannot attain a small off-state current or a high Ion/off ratio (typically near to 5),301 which restricts its application in digital logic devices.
Generally, TMDC layers have a band gap of approximately 1.5 eV, and thus they possess an incredibly high Ion/off ratio (1 × 108 for SL MoS2) and ultralow standby power consumption, but their modest carrier mobility (200 cm2 V−1 s−1 or even lower) restricts their activity. Additional diverse properties of 2D materials are highly desirable, and accordingly PP seems to meet approximately all the criteria as a high-quality transistor material. For PP-based transistors, the tunable band gap of 0.3–2 eV of PP ensures a large Ion/off ratio, and its mobility of 600 cm2 V−1 s−1 at RT (which increases up to 103 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 120 K and an elevated at lower temperatures) generates practically quick operations. These characteristics are significant for constructing transistors through high current and power output, which are the most significant features for creating high-speed logic circuits and high-frequency power amplifiers. The superiority of PP-based FETs has been experimentally illustrated (Fig. 23(a)).302 In a vacuum environment (∼1 × 10−5 mbar), the channel shifted from the “on” to “off” condition and the drain current decreased by a factor of 105 at RT,153 as shown in Fig. 23(b). The drain current modulation was 4 orders of magnitude larger than that of graphene and approaching that of MoS2-based devices.
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of PP FET. (b) At RT, ISD of 5 nm-thick device with respect to gate voltage for 90 nm SiO2 on an Si-supported substrate with VSD of 10 mV (red curve) and 100 mV (green curve). Hole side gate doping for both drain-source biases and drain current modulation up to 105. (c) Schematic of device structure in which FL PP flakes are exfoliated into ML MoS2 to form a vdW heterojunction, while Au and Ni are deposited as contacts. (d) 2D p–n diode gate tunable I–V characteristics. Current increases with respect to Vbg. I–V values are shown in the inset. Inset shows rectification ratio as a function of Vbg. Adapted with permission from ref. 155. 
Consequently, improved performances were achieved experimentally for PP FETs, for example, current fluctuations can be decreased using an Al2O3 encapsulation layer over the device for improved durability and robustness.303 In PP, its elevated carrier mobility produces quick function, which can reach the gigahertz frequency level. Measurements illustrated a short circuit current gain fT of 12 GHz and a maximum oscillation frequency (fmax) of 20 GHz in 300 nm channel length devices. PP-based devices may present advantages over graphene transistors for high frequency electronics because of the superior current diffusion properties generated from the moderate BG of PP. Therefore, it can be considered an exceptional future material for elevated thin film electronic technology for function in the multi-gigahertz frequency region and outside this region. Due to the attractive band gap of PP and its high mobility, it not only has potential applications in transistors, it also shows exceptional efficiency in other semiconducting electronics, analogue circuits and amplitude-modulated demodulators, which can operate as an active material in loudspeakers and radio receivers, while linked with audible signals.304 For example, BP-QDs mixed with polyvinyl-pyrrolidone were used to form a flexible active layer of a memory device, which showed a non-volatile rewrite memory effect with a high Ion/Ioff ratio and good durability.155 Channel materials that have ambipolar property can offer symmetric n- and p-type charge transfer properties. It is necessary to make simplified and space-saving circuit designs. Das et al.284 observed enhanced e−–h+ transport properties in PP FETs with a field-effect mobility of 38 and 172 cm2 V−1 s−1 for e− and h+, respectively. Zhu et al.305 developed an ambipolar P amplifier, where ∼8.7 V was achieved at the symmetric DC bias of VGS = −1.6 V and VDS = −2.1 V with the source or gate. Even though charge trapping sites survive on the surface, PP FETs are still capable of showing inherent ambipolar properties.295,306 Similarly, a black As FET manifested ambipolar charge transport nature, which indicated higher or comparative electronic237 and electric transport anisotropies between the armchair and zigzag directions than any other identified 2D systems.


5.1.2. Phosphorene as a photodetector. 
Considering the tunable BG of ML PP, ranging from the IR to visible range, and its elevated absorption coefficient in the UV window, it is very suitable as a photo-detector (PD). The PD as a thick FL PP channel can be applied in IR detection and important NIR telecommunication systems.307 In essential circumstances, the photovoltaic effect presents absorption in the IR region, with an internal quantum efficiency (QE) close to 50% and dark current of 220 nA, which is three orders of magnitude lower than that of graphene with the PD under analogue bias.308 PP FETs show a broadband photo-response (PR) in the visible to UV range,309 as observed in the stimulated optical spectrum shown in Fig. 24(b).310 The photovoltaic effect is verified to exist in p–n junctions (generated by a split-gate or ionic-gel gate)307,311 and FETs.307 Considering that BP is ambipolar, the conductance type may be restricted in FETs. The optical PDs based on the BP can work both in the hole and electron doping regions. The existing working levels in these two regions are different due to the band arrangement required through WF contacts. In Ti/Au contacts, the most favorable operating conditions are achieved in the p-type region, together with a PR of 4.8 mA W−1 in the visible frequency with 1 and 4 ms rise and fall times, respectively.307 2D-PP has an elevated PR in the UV region (above ∼5 eV), almost one order in degree larger than that at frequencies near the absorption edge (Fig. 24(a)). A similar effect is observed for bulk samples, resulting from band nesting,313 which provides an increase in diverging singularities in the absorption spectrum of 2D-SCs. In the case of thick ML 2D-PP transistors, elevated UV reactions are predicted by optical conductance calculations, and the intonation of the PR current under dark-light conditions is illustrated in Fig. 24(a). For elevated doping, it is suggested that the thermoelectric (TE) and bolometric (BE) effects (change in electric conductance according to temperature) become predominant. Therefore, in highly doped samples, BE is dominant at high bias, whereas the photo-induced TE is dominant at low bias.314 The BE current generation under illumination can be differentiated from photoelectric current production via the ISD polarity according to the bias (Fig. 24(b)).113
 Fig. 24  (a) 2D-PP-based UV PD PR and photocurrent after illumination. Dark intervals illustrated by I and II regions. (b) Diagram of a PP-based phototransistor band at zero and finite bias. The photocurrent, Ip, polarity of different origins is highlighted: TE, B and photovoltaic (PV). φB, WF of G; Idc, dark current; and Ip, photocurrent. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. (c) Schematic of multilayer PP FET. (d) ML PP flake between two Ti/Au electrodes. (e) ML PP sensor relative conductance change (ΔG/G0) vs. time (seconds), presenting sensitivity toward NO2 (5–40 ppb). (f) Id–Vg curves of ML PP FET under different NO2 levels, illustrating up-shifted curves with an increase in concentration increase. Adapted with permission from ref. 312. (g) and (h) Optical and AFM analysis of the BP sensor. (i) Dynamic response curves. (h) Thickness-dependent multi-cycle responses. Adapted with permission from ref. 260. 


5.1.3. Phosphorene as a sensing material. 
Initially in 2014, Chen et al. predicted by a first-principles study that PP was a higher gas sensing material compared to the previously studied graphene and MoS2.312 They also described the mechanism where the high charge transfer in this process is the driving force for the strong adsorption of analytes on the surface of PP. Initial experimental information was reported in 2015 in two different publications, which exploited PP as an active gas sensing element. Zhou et al. utilized chemically formed PP in FET devices to sense NO2 down to 5 ppb under an Ar flow (Fig. 24(c and d)).315 With a change in the concentration of NO2, an increase in conductance was observed, indicating charge transfer from the hole doping and consistent with the p-type PP SC electronic structure (Fig. 24(e and f)). The conductivity variation was well fitted with the Langmuir isotherm, verifying that NO2 adsorption occurred via active sites and charge transfer was the major sensing mechanism, leading to the response of manufactured sensor. Similarly, Cui et al.260 inserted PP sheets into an FET utilizing the “Scotch tape” mechanical exfoliation method (Fig. 24(h and i)) and used the resultant device in NO2 detection for a broad concentration range of 20–1000 ppb (Fig. 24(i)). Fig. 24(j) illustrates the PP layer thickness-dependent sensitivity toward the target analyte by means of the optimum thickness (i.e. 4.8 nm). Theoretical simulations demonstrated that the sensitivity change according to thickness was governed by the band gap for thinner layers (<10 nm) and through efficient alteration in thickness after gas adsorption in the thicker sheets (>10 nm). It was also inferred that PP exhibited a considerably superior response toward NO2 over analytes such as H2S, H2, and CO, signifying that layer PP can be successfully utilized in developing discrete gas sensing devices.
Donarelli et al. extended device assimilation through chemiresistive engineering using drop-casting chemically exfoliated PP NSs over an Si3N4 support, emulated with Pt-inter-digitated electrodes.261 The resultant analytical devices exhibited a p-type response toward NH3 and NO2 with LODs of 1 ppm and 7 ppb at RT, respectively, with minimum interference from CO2 or CO. As a function of PP morphology, the high edge-plane content enhanced the sensitivity of this 2D material to the target gaseous molecules. Further progress in the sensing properties of PP toward gaseous analytes was understood by surface functionalization via the integration of metal NPs on the surface of PP. Jung et al.262 reported chemi-resistive H2-sensing, which is usually not achieved using pure PP, by incorporating either Pt or Au-NPs directly on the surface of PP. The PP Pt-NP-based devices could sense H2 as low as 5 ppm at RT, without large changes in its response during the 30 day test period. The improved stability of PP toward environmental conditions (humidity and O2) was attributed to the efficient blockage of electrons on its surface through the NPs. It was also noticeable that with the inclusion of Au-NPs in PP, the WF could be further adjusted via electron transfer from Au, and hence presence of oxidizing gases resulted in a change in response (i.e. from p-type to n-type). This has been proven to be suitable for the manufacturing of tunable PP-based gas sensors.
Lei et al.316 also discovered that metal doping affects the sensitivity of PP toward CO using first-principle calculations. Based on this study, it was observed that the presence of metals including Ca, K, Na, Li, Sr, Ba, and La enhanced the CO energy adsorption on the surface of PP. These results were ascribed to the enhanced coupling between the tested metals and CO, showing that these systems can be possibly applied in electrically transduced CO-gas sensors. PP-based materials are slowly gained progress in gas sensing devices because of their interesting electrical properties, such as tunable BG, large electronic anisotropy, and high SSA. PP has many fascinating characteristics for the development of sensors, but its limited stability to H2O and O2 remains major obstacles in its practical use. This problem can be somewhat solved via the insertion of NPs or by utilizing protective coatings, which will restrain the ambient effect.192 Furthermore, new scalable and facile chemical strategies for the fabrication of PP with accurately controlled compositions and structures are required for its industrialization and further development in gas sensing practical applications.113


5.1.4. Phosphorene as an electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution reaction. 
Weihan Li et al.317 prepared PP via liquid exfoliation using bath-sonication. Linear sweep voltammetry was carried out in 0.1 M HClO4 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (Fig. 25(a)). All the potentials were calibrated to a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Khang Ngoc Dinh et al.318 integrated PP with other active materials as another strategy to advance the HER because of its high Fermi level, high carrier mobility, and capability to create synergistic effects between dissimilar materials.319,320 R. He, J. Hua et al.321 deposited MoS2 flakes on PP to construct MoS2-PP interfaces. In the Mott–Schottky analyses, it was observed that the flat-band potential of PP was more negative than that of the MoS2 nanoflakes (−0.29 V compared to −0.21 V, respectively); therefore, the Fermi level of the previous is higher than that of the latter. Consequently, electrons transferred from PP to MoS2 through the heterojunction. Furthermore, the BG of MoS2-PP was found to be smaller compared to that of MoS2, illustrating a buildup of electrons on MoS2 in the MoS2-BP heterostructure. Consequently, the MoS2-PP hybrid displayed outstanding activity with η = 85 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of 68 mV dec−1, (Fig. 25(b)), whereas PP and MoS2/C illustrated quite lower HER catalytic activity and high Rct.
 Fig. 25  Summary of 2D-PP-based electrocatalysts for the HER. (a) LSV curves of PP catalyst prepared using high-cost BP for the HER in 0.1 M HClO4. Adapted with permission from ref. 317. (b) Tafel plots of PP, MoS2/C, MoS2-PP, and Pt/C catalysts. (c) Cu stripping curves on glassy carbon, MoS2/C and MoS2-PP. (d) Exchange j0 of PP, MoS2/C, MoS2-PP, and Pt/C catalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 321. (e) Tafel plots for Ni2P@PP and Pt/C. (f) Stability of Ni2P@PP with time-dependent current density curves under η = 107 mV with inset TEM image and SAED pattern after continuous sweeps for 24 h. Adapted with permission from ref. 322. 
Thanks to the electron donating effect from PP to MoS2, the Gibbs free energy for H2 adsorption (ΔGH*) is lowered; therefore, exchange j0 can reach 0.66 mA cm−2, which is 22-fold higher than that of MoS2 or PP and relatively equivalent to that of the benchmark Pt/C (Fig. 25(c)). It is noticeable that MoS2 and MoS2-PP have the same number of active sites, as illustrated in the Cu stripping curves (Fig. 25(d)). Hence, the noteworthy increment in HER activity after hybridization is not because of the enhancement in surface area, but the catalyst synergistic effect. One more example is the construction of an Ni2P and PP heterostructure (Ni2P@PP).322 After the formation of a composite with ultrafine Ni2P nanocrystals, Ni2P@PP illustrated almost 300-fold improvement in electrical conductivity (from 2.12 × 102 to 6.25 × 104 S m−1) and over 3-orders of magnitude increment in charge carrier concentration compared to that of pure PP. Outstanding HER electrochemical activity was achieved in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution with a small η = of 107 mV at −10 mA cm−2, together with a Tafel slope of 38.6 mV dec−1 with 24 h stability (Fig. 25(e and f)). This enhancement is due to the prevention of the restacking of PP by utilizing Ni2P nanocrystals as barriers and enhanced carrier level. Commercial Ni2P and PP show a higher η = 311 mV and 600 mV, respectively. Besides Ni2P and MoS2, further active materials for the HER were also fabricated via coupling with PP, for instance BP/Co2P323 and MoSe2-PP.324Table 4 presents a summary of the PP-based HER electrocatalysts.


5.1.5. Phosphorene as an electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction. 
To date, transition metal oxides/hydroxides such as IrO2/RuO2330,331 and NiFeV-layered double hydroxides332 have been measured as benchmark electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Therefore, slow kinetics is still motivating the search for competent electrocatalysts for the OER. The growth of PP on nitrogen-doped graphene (EBP@NG)333 provided enough positive carbon sites on NG and decrease η for the rate-determining step (OOH* formation). EBP@NG illustrated good OER activity with η = 310 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and remained stable for 12 hours, which can compete with the well-known RuO2. In addition, heteroatom doping and functionalization of PP are also promising ways to enhance its OER kinetics. Shaijumon et al.38 reported N2-functionalized PP QDs, which demonstrated enhanced OH-adsorption on P atoms because of the difference in electronegativity between P and N. Tellurium and sulfur doping in PP were also observed to result in the faster transfer of electrons and crystal defects, and therefore, a higher number of active sites in PP than that in its undoped counterpart.334,335Table 6 shows summary of the PP-based electrocatalysts for the OER.318
Table 6 PP-based electrocatalysts for the OER318




Phosphorene
Electrolyte
Electrocatalyst loading (mg cm−2)

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Ref.




PP/N-doped G
1 M KOH
0.3
310
89

72



S-doped PP
1 M KOH
NA
310 (onset)
75

73



Te-doped PP
1 M KOH
0.02
260 (onset)
NA

74







5.1.6. Electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction. 
The conversion of the inert N2 molecule into ammonia (NH3) via electrochemical methods using an electrocatalyst is an environmentally friendly alternative to the traditional Haber–Bosch process. The quick surface oxidation of PP under environmental conditions has been determined to be critical problem for numerous applications, but there is an approach to overcome this shortcoming, which called heteroatom doping. For example, nitrogen-doped PP (N-PP) can be synthesized by combining the ball milling and microwave techniques. Guangrui Xu et al.336 synthesized N-doped PP NSs, exhibiting exceptional electrocatalytic performances as a novel type of non-metallic catalyst for the NRR, with an ammonia yield rate of 18.79 μg h−1 mgcat−1 and 21.51% FE at a low η = 0 V vs. RHE. DFT calculations showed that the high NRR FEs originated from the enhanced hydrophobicity on the N- and O-doped PP surfaces, which hindered the competing HER in KOH solution and promoted the NRR. This finding not only initiates a competent approach to chemically functionalize 2D PP, but also opens a novel opportunity to utilize N-doped PP NSs as metal-free catalysts. Table 7 presents a summary of the NRR performance of PP electrocatalysts.
Table 7 Summary of NRR performance of phosphorene electrocatalysts




Catalyst
Electrolyte
NH3 yield (μg h−1 mg−1)
FE (%)

η vs. RHE (V)
Ref.




N-PP
0.1 M KOH
18.79
21.51
0

336



PP
—
31.37
5.07
−0.7

337



SnO2−x nanotube-supported PP QDs
—
48.87
14.6
−0.4

338





Zhang et al.337 experimentally showed that PP obtained from a facile LE method was an advanced metal-free elemental electrocatalyst for the NRR, which attained a high NH3 yield of 31.37 μg h−1 mgcat−1 with a 5.07% FE at −0.7 V vs. RHE, and good cycle durability. Downscaling bulk BP into QDs is beneficial for obtaining a large surface area, and therefore more active sites compared to the bulk. However, PP QDs tend to agglomerate, resulting in a decrease in the number of active sites. The aggregation problem could be solved and the reaction kinetics enhanced when black SnO2−x NTs were utilized as a conductive and robust support for PP QDs.338 The PP QDs attached on the surface of the SnO2−x nanotubes dispersed in THF as a result of their high surface energy. Benefitting from their synergistic effect, the PP/SnO2−x nanotubes achieved a higher NH3 yield of 48.87 μg h−1 mgcat−1 with an FE of 14.6% at −0.4 V vs. RHE, compared to SnO2−x nanotubes and PP QDs. The development of highly efficient electrocatalysts for the NRR is still challenging. Xiongyi Liang et al.339 carried out DFT-based screening to investigate the potential of 23 atomic transition metals (Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Y, Zr, Nb, Mo, Tc, Ru, Rh, Pd, Ag, Cd, W, Pt and Au) supported on a PP ML for the NRR. The theoretical results showed that the V single atom anchored on the PP ML exhibits good thermal stability, selectivity and outstanding catalytic activity with a low onset potential of 0.18 V. Importantly, rational design principles and electronic descriptors between the intrinsic electronic properties and activation barrier have been developed. Our work offers a new promising noble metal-free catalyst for the NRR and reveals profound insights into the origin of their activity to guide the further design of NRR catalysts.


5.1.7. Phosphorene for other electrocatalysis. 
Besides the mostly explored OER, HER, and NRR, PP also has wider applications in other electrochemical technologies such as the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR). Ping et al.340 studied the ORR catalyst performance of metal nanoparticle-decorated PP (M-TLPP, M = Pt, Ag, and Au). Their theoretical calculations suggested that interfacial charge transfer occurs from PP to the metal, with 0.02, 0.12, and 0.23 electrons obtained per metal atom of Ag, Au, and Pt, respectively. For the evaluation of the ORR electrocatalysts, Ag-TLPP and Au-TLPP exhibited enhanced activities (half-wave potentials increased by 46 mV and 68 mV, respectively) compared to that of carbon-supported metal nanoparticles, whereas inferior activity was observed with Pt-TLPP. These findings show the potential of PP as a direct tool to adjust the electronic structure of supported metals for enhanced ORR activity.
Wu et al. reported the use of an anatase TiO2 NS and PP (ATN-PP) hybrid as a support for Pd (Pd/ATN-BP), which was then utilized for electrochemical EOR.341 Due to the high surface area of PP, a surface area of ∼462.1 mA mgPd−1 was achieved for Pd/ATN-PP. In addition, the distinctive structure of ATN-PP facilitates electrolyte penetration and electron transfer and the synergistic effect between Pd and ATN-PP has a large effect on the reaction intermediates. Consequently, a mass peak J0 = 5023.8 mA mgPd−1 was obtained, which is almost 7-fold higher than that of commercial Pd/C. The same group further fabricated a hybrid of PP and activated graphene as another support for Pd nanoparticles through the ball-milling method.342 They reported that PxOy is beneficial for water adsorption, resulting in an increase in OHad, thus making the total oxidation of COad into CO2 possible. The Pd/activated graphene-PP catalysts also showed improved anti-CO poisoning capability.


5.1.8. Cathode material applications of phosphorene as a supercapacitor. 
PP showed a specific capacity of ∼2290 mA h g−1 in a sodium ion battery (SIB), but after 50 charging–discharging cycles, the capacity decreased to 114 mA h g−1, which is ascribed to Na+ diffusion due to the collapse in structure caused by the volume expansion of PP.343 PP will also encounter a similar difficulty when utilized alone because of its layer structure. However, this condition can be alleviated when PP is composited with other materials, for instance G, but it cannot totally solve the above-mentioned issue considering the limited energy storage mechanism and layered structure properties of PP. Thus, it is essential to discover new electrochemical energy storage devices to overcome the drawbacks of volume expansion, where ion diffusion in PP is substituted via redox reaction at the interface. Furthermore, PP has the disadvantage of environmental instability.
The lone pairs of electrons on PP give it some unique catalytic properties, but these lone pairs also result in environmental instability. The possibility of oxidation may be eradicated when the fabrication time is decreased to the greatest extent. Lei Zu344 solved the three above-mentioned problems by exfoliating PP from BP via electrochemical cathodic exfoliation in an organic solvent devoid of applying sonication or high temperature and pressure with a maximum yield of ∼93.1% within 5 minutes (Fig. 26). The PP electrode fabricated using this method has the advantage of not undergoing volume expansion because of the stored energy from the redox reaction of the iodide ions at the PP electrode and electrolyte interface, rather than ion diffusion in the PP layers. The electrochemical analysis was carried out in a two-electrode system and the redox peaks were analyzed for both PP and AC via CV analysis (Fig. 26(A)). Therefore, the PP electrode can maintain good stability in the redox cycle. Performing different electrochemical analyses, PP was confirmed to have an efficient electrocatalytic effect on the redox reaction of iodide ions because of the subsistence of high electroactive lone pairs in the P atoms than AC (Fig. 26(B and C)). The quick charge transfer process was analyzed from EIS measurements (Fig. 26(D)). The maximum discharging capacity attained was up to 3181.5 F g−1 when J0 = 0.25 A g−1 (Fig. 26(E)). The capacitance was also checked by increasing J0, for example, when it increased up to 2.5 A g−1, the capacitance was 684.3 F g−1, showing that PP has good supercapacitor electrochemical property (Fig. 26(F)). PP was employed as the cathode in the range of −0.3 to 0.7 eV and polyaniline (PANI) as the anode in the range of −0.3 to 0.7 eV (Fig. 26(G)). The discharge specific energy density was 203.7 W h kg−1 (Fig. 26(H)) and the charge discharge retention was ∼100%. Fig. 26(I) shows the charge–discharge performance and stability of the device when J0 = 125 mA g−1.
 Fig. 26  Electrochemical properties of PP. (A) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of PP and acetylene black (AC). (B) and (C) CV curves of PP and AC at different scan rates, respectively. (D) EIS patterns and equivalent circuit (inset) of PP and AC. (E) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of PP and AC. (F) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of PP with different discharge J0. (G) CV curves of PP cathode and anode. (H) Charge–discharge cycles of the supercapacitor. (I) Charge–discharge maintained in supercapacitor. Adapted with permission from ref. 344. 

5.2. Applications of arsenene

5.2.1. Applications of arsenene as a sensor. 
An FL-As NS-based vapor sensor with an inter-digitized gold electrode was assembled. Currently, AM, SL- and FL-SC materials have gained huge interest because of their exclusive properties, offered through their excessively thin layers. Seyyed Mohsen Beladi Mousavi et al.232 prepared FL AN utilizing an LPE method assisted by sonication without the use of a surfactant (Fig. 27). They demonstrated the application of this material in a vapor sensor based on EIS. The device showed a selective response toward acetone or methanol vapor, which was dependent on the selected resonance frequency. The vapor-based sensing device exhibited long-term stability with highly reproducible results. EIS was utilized to observe the change in the electronic properties of the deposited material after the adsorption of different gases, for instance, acetonitrile, acetone, methanol, ethanol diethyl ether, THF, dichloromethane (DCM), hexane, chloroform, and IPA (Fig. 27(a)). As a reference, environmental air was also tested. Impedance Bode-plots were recorded by utilizing sinusoidal AC potential perturbation in the frequency range of 1 × 105–0.1 Hz with a root mean square (RMS) of 10 mV. In the presence of methanol vapors, EIS showed a strong resonance frequency peak at ≈10 Hz (Fig. 27(a), black). In the case of methanol, at this frequency the phase shift was much higher than that of all the tested samples, allowing the quick and accurate detection of the methanol vapors (Fig. 27(b)). The AN NS response for methanol vapor was also examined through a time scan study, where the phase change was measured in 2750 s for methanol vapors. In only a few seconds, the vast phase shift (0° (air) ↔ 68° (methanol)) validated the ultrafast performance of 2D-AN NSs as a selective gas detector (Fig. 27(c)). The EIS studies on other compounds at 0.1 Hz also exposed a big phase change for acetone, which was considerably larger than that of the other gasses (Fig. 27(a), red, and Fig. 27(d)). At 0.1 Hz, similar to the methanol, the time scan study demonstrated a very fast phase change after the absorbance of acetone vapors (Fig. 27(e)).
 Fig. 27  Vapor sensor fabricated using 2D-AN. (a) Impedance phase spectra for a range of solvents. (b) EIS at 10 Hz in different solvents as in “a”. (c) 2D-AN-based sensor phase change in methanol vapors and in environmental air within 5 cycles at 10 Hz. (d) Impedance phase in a range of solvents as in “a” at 0.1 Hz. (e) 2D-AN-based sensor phase change in acetone vapors and in atmospheric air within 5 cycles at 0.1 Hz. (f) Durability of acetone and methanol vapor sensing device for 3 weeks. Adapted with permission from ref. 232. (g) Total DOS plot of CO, CO2, N2, NH3, NO and NO2 on AN and pristine AN. (h) and (i) AN-adsorbed plotted partial DOSs for NO2 and NO molecules, respectively. Negative and positive values stand for spin-down and up states, respectively. Black dashed line indicates Fermi level. (j) Plotted allocation of spin density in NO and NO2 with an iso-value of ±0.003 e Å−3. Adapted with permission from ref. 345. 
Hence, the stability of the acetone and methanol sensing devices was analyzed after 3 weeks (Fig. 27(f)). After this time, for methanol and acetone, the phase shift response was 97% and 94% of the original response, respectively, showing the stability of the sensors.232 Based on first-principles calculations, Can Liu et al.345 studied the chemisorbed and physisorbed states of CO2, CO, N2, NH3, NO2 and NO molecules adsorbed on pure 2D-AN ML. In addition, NO and NO2 adsorption can result in conspicuous changes in the DOSs near the Fermi level. Noticeably, only NO adsorption and NO2 can approach a magnetic moment of1 μB. Thus, these outcomes can give a simulated basis for the potential use of the AN ML in gas sensors with magnetic and electrical methods. In detail, to confirm the effect of gas adsorption on the electronic properties of 2D-AN, the total DOS of 2D-AN ML with PdP sorption of CO2, CO, N2, NH3, NO2, and NO molecules was calculated.
The adsorption of the non-magnetic CO, CO2, N2 and NH3 molecules caused numerous states at the VBs. However, the adsorption of these four molecules can offer a clear change in the DOSs at the Fermi level. The adsorption of the non-magnetic CO, CO2, N2, and NH3 molecules has a small effect on the electronic structure of AN. Conversely, magnetic molecules, for instance, NO and NO2, have no electron pairs, and thus hybridization occurs near the 2D-As atom, while it is in contact with AN. It can be seen from the NO-adsorbed structure that the DOSs shifted toward a lower energy than the pristine 2D-AN, representing n-type doping for 2D-AN (Fig. 27(g and h)). For the adsorption of NO2, the DOSs transferred somewhat to a lower energy, which also shows n-type doping in AN with the NO2 molecule acting as an electron donor. It was also found that the adsorption of an H2O or O2 molecule cannot change these outcomes.
The calculated band structure has a limited indirect band gap of 2.51 eV (Fig. 28(a)), in agreement with the previous result of 2.49 eV at the HSE06 level. For CO, CO2, N2 and NH3, no prominent differences were noticed that could be attributed to the BG. However, NO adsorption can significantly alter the BG down to 1.23 eV. Later, with the adsorption of NO2 on 2D-AN, the band gap was modified to 1.12 eV. PBE was also applied to calculate the band structures, showing very comparable properties to that obtained from HSE06. The relation between the 2D-AN ML and NO could be further examined from the partial DOSs, as suggested in Fig. 28(c). The differences around the Fermi level for NO were mostly induced through the N2p and O2p orbitals, which moved toward the spin-up electrons in the DOS peak. Furthermore, the NO-adsorbed total magnetic moment and local magnetic moment were 1 μB and 0.94 μB, respectively.
 Fig. 28  BG structures of (a) pure adsorbed, (b) CO molecule, (c) CO2 molecule, (d) N2 molecule, (e) NH3 molecule, (f) NO molecule and (g) NO2 molecule adsorbed AN calculated at the HSE06 level. Spin-up and spin-down states represented by blue and red lines, respectively. Fermi level represented by green dashed line. Adapted with permission from ref. 345. 
In the NO2-system, the spin-up electron DOS peak was mainly contributed from the As4p, N2p and O2p orbitals (Fig. 28(b)). Meanwhile, the adsorption of an NO2 molecule on AN also resulted in spin polarization, with a 1 μB magnetic moment, while the NO2 molecule local magnetic moment was 0.64 μB. It can be concluded that the NO molecule mainly contributes to the magnetic property during adsorption, as shown in Fig. 28(d). Conversely, in the NO2-adsorbed system, the magnetic moment is isolated over the AN and NO2 molecule due to the strong hybridization in the NO2 AN system, which corresponds to a large adsorption energy, as presented in Table 8.345 The p–p hybridization was the more significant orbital observed in the NO2-adsorbed system compared to the NO-adsorbed system, as illustrated in the DOS plot (Fig. 28(b and c)).
Table 8 
E
a, adsorption energy; ρ, charge transfer from the AN to gas molecule; and spin, local magnetic moment on gas molecules




Analyte

E
a (eV)

ρ (e)
Spin (μB)




CO
−0.23
0
0


CO2
−0.33
0
0


NO
−0.15
0.07
0.94


NO2
−0.31
0.21
0.64


NH3
−0.16
0.04
0


N2
−0.13
0
0






5.2.2. Arsenene as an electrocatalyst for HER and OER for overall water splitting. 
Narayan N. Som et al.346 using DFT calculations and considering the binding energy, studied the activity of arsenene as a catalyst for the OER and HER. Arsenene showed potential for the HER, and thus to further increase its HER catalytic activity, it was substituted with dopant B, N, O, Ge, Ga and Se atoms. After doping, the HER activity increased by 82% for the O-doped AN and the OER activity by 87% for the B-doped AN compared to that of pristine arsenene.


5.2.3. Anode material applications of arsenene in magnesium-ion batteries. 
Magnesium-ion batteries (MIBs) have gained attention as enhanced energy storage devices due to their cost efficient and dendrite-free Mg-metal anodes. However, the passivation layers produced on Mg-anodes result in slow Mg2+ ion diffusion. Xiao-Juan Ye et al.347 reported alternative anodes to Mg-metal via Mg insertion in 2D-AN (Fig. 29). First-principles calculations exposed the following results: (1) on the ML (BL) AN and AN/G heterostructure, Mg can be adsorbed with adsorption energies in the range of 0.82–2.48 eV, with good energetic stability in the Mg-adsorbed AN systems. (2) ML AN has a ∼3-times higher specific capacitance (1429.41 mA h g−1) than that of AN BL and AN/G heterostructure. Among them, ML AN has the lowest average open-circuit voltage. (3) Compared to BL AN, ML AN and its heterostructure show low Mg diffusion barriers (0.08–0.33 eV), corresponding to a quick charge/discharge capacity. (4) For the duration of the magnetization procedure, the small volume changes (<16%) in the AN-based materials indicate superior cycle recyclability. Thus, the combination of a low average open-circuit voltage, good Mg mobility, ultrahigh capacity, and high structural stability makes ML AN a potential anode material for MIBs.347
 Fig. 29  2D-AN layers and capacity values of the MIBs. Adapted with permission from ref. 347. 

5.3. Applications of antimonene

5.3.1. Cancer therapy applications of antimonene. 
Recently, AM has been illustrated as a 2D-elemental LM. Based on 2D PEGylated AM-NSs, a novel photonic drug delivery system was introduced.3 This system with excellent photo-thermal properties has multiple advantages including high drug loading capacity, spatiotemporally controlled drug discharge with deep tumor penetration, stimulated by NIR light (extrinsic stimulus) and moderate acidic pH (intrinsic stimulus). Moreover, it can be used for excellent multimodal imaging, and important tumor inhibition with no apparent side effects and degradability, addressing numerous restrictions of cancer nano-medicines. For the first time, the intracellular fate of the prepared NSs was also exposed, offering deep insights that can develop the understanding of the cellular-level nano-bio interactions of AM-based NSs and other novel 2D materials. To best of our knowledge, for the first time, in our lab Han Zhang and co-workers3 reported an AM-based photonic drug-delivery system, perhaps marking an exciting jumping-off research point for the use of AM NMs in cancer diagnosis.3 Considering its low invasiveness and highly selective nature, photo-thermal therapy (PTT) has gained significant attention as a powerful method in cancer therapy. However, the preparation of perfect photo-thermal agents (PTAs) has faced extensive challenges.348 For example, one restriction is that few PTAs have mandatory absorption spectra for NIR photo-thermal transduction.
Upcoming 2D-NMs with their exciting chemical and physical characteristics can present innovative solutions for this absorption restriction, for instance, graphene derivatives (e.g., GO and rGO) and TMDs (e.g., MoS2 and WS2). However, there are concerns about the safety and biocompatibility of these materials, which are still not very clear. Analogous challenges are presented for other inorganic PTAs, e.g., noble-metal NMs (e.g., Au and Ag), Cu-based materials and carbon nanotubes. Organic PTAs have been designed to decrease the concerns related to inorganic PTAs. However, several of are still subject to different limitations including complex fabrication, imprecise degradation, and bio-safety concerns. Consequently, the progress in novel NM-based PTAs is imperative and has medical importance. Han Zhang and co-workers348 studied PTT, showing considerable potential in cancer theranostics. However, the development of NM-based PTAs with acceptable photo-thermal conversion efficacy (PTCE) and biocompatibility are still key challenges (Fig. 30). There is an innovative generation of PTA-based AM QDs that was developed via the liquid exfoliation technique. The surface modification of the AM-QDs using polyethylene glycol (PEG) drastically improved both their biocompatibility and durability in the physiological system. For example, 45.5% PTCE was obtained via the PEG-coated AM QDs, which is higher than that of many other NM-based PTAs, for instance, G, Au, MoS2, and BP. The AM-QD-based PTAs also displayed exclusive quick NIR-induced degradability. The PEG-coated AM QDs were applied for both in vivo and in vitro studies and prominent NIR-induced tumor ablative capability was observed. These biomedical applications by developing completely new PTA platforms are expected to expand the utilization of AM.348
 Fig. 30  (a) IR images of MCF-7 tumor-bearing mice (G1: saline; G2: only NIR; G3: only PEG-coated AMQDs; G4: PEG-coated AMQDs + NIR; and 808 nm, 1 W cm@2). (b) Tumor site temperature changes. (c) Comparative tumor volumes after different treatments. (d) Collected tumors from each group on day 14. Adapted with permission from ref. 348. 
Micro-RNA shows a degree of change in the different stages of cancer and can influence cellular changes, carcinogenesis and metastasis. However, although fluorescence methods utilizing dye molecules were considered, label-free miRNA molecular level quantification is very difficult. Han Zhang and co-workers349 introduced a surface plasmon resonance sensor using 2D-NMs of AM for the definite label-free detection of clinically related biomarkers, for instance, miRNA-155 and miRNA-21 (Fig. 31). First-principles energetic estimation revealed that AM has significantly stronger interaction with ssDNA compared to graphene, which is already used in DNA molecule detection, because of the more delocalized 5s/5p orbitals in AM. An LOD of 10 aM was achieved, which is 2.3–10000 times greater than that of the present miRNA sensing devices. This mixture was not tried before for exotic sensing species and SPR structural design, corresponding to a move toward ultrasensitive detection of DNA and miRNA, and offers a capable opportunity for early cancer diagnosis, detection of changes, and imaging.349
 Fig. 31  Schematic strategy for integrating AM NM sensor with miRNA to detect AM miRNA hybridization events. (a) Assembly of AM NSs on Au film. (b) Adsorption of AuNR–ssDNAs on AM NSs. (c) Different concentrations miRNA solution flowed over AM surface, forming a double-strand with complementary AuNR–ssDNA. (d) Interaction between AuNR–ssDNA and miRNA result in the release of AuNR–ssDNA from the AM NSs. The reduction of AuNR–ssDNA in on the SPR surface significantly decreases the SPR angle. Adapted with permission from ref. 349. 


5.3.2. Antimonene as electrocatalyst for HER and OER for overall water splitting. 
Li et al.350 theoretically studied a hybrid electrocatalyst of RuS2 nano-dot-modified antimonene. The improvement in HER activity is most probably from heteroatom doping, functionalization, and coating of 2D-NSs. For the first time, Ren et al.351 studied electrocatalytic complete water splitting using FL antimonene NSs. For complete water splitting, the catalyst showed OER activity with η = 0.81 V at 10 mA cm−2, and for the OER η = 2.3 V at 1 mA cm−2. After 5 h nonstop cycling, AM showed outstanding durability with an insignificant decrease in J0. In another theoretical study, it was indicated that AM retains metallicity even if layered structure Sb is cut to three layers. This will efficiently promote the activation of the catalyst when interacting with nanomaterials. Thus, AM may be an ideal support catalyst for further research. However, investigations of AM-based catalysis are still rare.


5.3.3. Anode material applications of antimonene as a supercapacitor. 
The growing requirements and progress in renewable and sustained energy resources demand renewable energy storage devices to make the green-energy demand possible. Numerous synthesis methods have been introduced by our group to form 2D material-based composites for renewable energy with more advantages than most of the previously published/introduced electrocatalytic materials, even benchmark materials, with high stability, cost efficiency, and high output power generation.65,81,352–356 The generation of environmentally safe renewable energy is of great interest, but saving energy is also another issue to solve. Due to their competitive energy density, elevated power density, excellent operation safety, long life cycle, and small charge separation as alternative energy storage platforms, electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLC) and supercapacitors are measured as an energy storage platform with considerable potential. Supercapacitors are widely studied and predicted as potential devices for energy application, ranging from elevated power electronics to quick charge portable electronic devices, and electric vehicles and hybrid electrical automobiles to cellular technology. Therefore, Emiliano Martínez-Periñán et al.,357 for the first time, studied the supercapacitor applications of AM. The supercapacitance was tested based on the charging and discharging profile obtained from a bare screen-printed electrode (SPE) and modified AM (Fig. 32(A)).
 Fig. 32  (A) Charge/discharge profiles recorded in 0.5 M H2SO4 with unmodified and modified AM SPEs applying 1 μA. (B) Capacitance values versus applied current obtained from (C). (C) Specific capacitance values versus specific applied current obtained from charging–discharging profiles. (D) Relative capacitance for successive charging–discharging cycles with respect to the initial cycle capacitance. Adapted with permission from ref. 357. 
AM, as an energy storage material, was utilized as a supercapacitor electrode, exhibiting a capacitance of 1578 F g−1 and high charge J0 of 14 A g−1 (Fig. 32(C)). As the amount of AM increased at the SPE, the specific capacitance also increased, until optimized at 18.0 ng, as shown in Fig. 32(B). The system also displayed high viable energy and power densities of the 20 mW h kg−1 and 4.8 kW kg−1, respectively. Also, due to its outstanding charge storage ability, AM exhibited good cycling capabilities.357 Specifically, 10000 galvanostatic cycles were tested to determine the charging discharging capacity. After an initial drop to 65%, the consecutive cycles maintained a capacitance between 65% and 63% of the initial capacitance (Fig. 32(D)). Hence, the energy storage capabilities significantly improved using AM compared to a carbon electrode in both cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charging.


5.3.4. Transistor applications of antimonene. 
Ji et al.358 fabricated FETs by utilizing AM polygons with HfO2 as the top-gate dielectric, where AM was epitaxially grown as channel materials with competitive conductivity together with outstanding optical transparency, which may have potential optoelectronic applications. Wang et al.359 reported the relation between device activity and channel length of As and AM FETs based on ab initio methods. The simulated MOSFETs with a sub-10 nm or even 4 nm channel showed exceptional electrical properties and can fulfill both low power and high-performance demands in ITRS.286 Chang et al.360,361 proposed AM and AS tunneling FETs based on a lateral ML to multilayer heterostructure. The multilayer area has gapless metallic states, which significantly increase the possibility of tunneling and the drain-source current. According to ab initio electronic configuration and quantum transport calculations, even a 1 nm-scale multilayer can boost the current and permit a quick device Ion/Ioff ratio. However, there is need for research to discover the carrier mobility limit and low Ion/Ioff ratio for AS and BM FETs. Jianping Ji et al.250 reported thin film transistor-based AM polygons with hafnium oxide (HfO2) as the top-gate dielectric. After the synthesis of the sample, the device was mainly supported on a mica support (Fig. 33(a)). The electrical contact was established via standard electron beam lithography (EBL) follow by metal deposition of a ∼10 nm-thick chromium and 30 nm-thick Au layer. Then as the top gate, the HfO2 dielectric 15 nm and finally 50 nm thick Au layer were grown via ALD. Fig. 33(b) shows the typical AM device optical analysis. The fabricated AM device electrical Ids–Vds characteristics are shown for three typical devices with a thickness of 30, 40 and 50 nm, and the 2D-AM thicknesses measured at zero gate bias (Fig. 33(c)).
 Fig. 33  (a) Schematic of top-gate 2D-AM thin-film transistor. (b) Optical analysis of fabricated device on triangular 2D-AM NSs. (c) Ids–Vds characteristics of three tested devices at Vg = 0 V. Inset: Ids–Vg curve of 30 nm thick AM device at bias voltage of 0.05 V. (d) Tested device electrical conductance after bending. Inset: Bent AM device on mica support. (e) Transmittance spectra of three typical AM polygons with a thickness of 4, 7 and 18 nm. (f) Sample thickness versus AM polygon transmittance. Adapted with permission from ref. 250. 
The I–V curves showed superior Ohmic behavior for the 30-nm thick AM device with a 1 mm channel length and 3.5 mm width, and the electrical resistance was calculated to be 600 Ω and the electrical conductivity 1.6 × 104 S m−1. Theoretical predictions also support these results, where the semimetal to SC transition will only occur with a decrease in the thickness of AM thickness to one atomic layer. The AM channel metallic properties showed no gating effects when the gate voltage was swept from −4 to 4 V. The mica substrate-based AM devices also exhibited high flexibility. The mica-supported AM sample was attached to an iron rod with a smooth surface to verify the bending effect. The variations in the measured electrical conductivity of the 30 nm thick AM device after the device was constantly bent 100 times are illustrated in Fig. 33(d). In this curve, the Ids–Vds characteristics were measured following bending after every five times for a total of 100 times bending. After 100 times bending, the electrical conductance only deceased by 4% compared to the first bending. The synthesized AM polygons have good transparency in the visible light region with nanometer thickness.250 The transmittance spectra of three typical AM polygons are in the range of 400 to 700 nm. Utilizing the transmitted light intensity, the transmittance measured through the AM polygons on the mica substrate and divided by that of the blank mica substrate. Practically, the transmittance of the AM polygons is not dependent on wavelength in the range of 450 to 700 nm as with Nafion. The sample thickness verses transmittance was plotted at 532 nm. For the AM polygons with a thickness of 18 nm, the transmittance remained over 80%. In the visible light region, the good electrical conductance combined with good optical transparency of AM may guide its fascinating application in transparent conductive electrode-related research.250

5.4. Applications of bismuthene

5.4.1. Bismuthene as an FET. 
Yang et al.362 reported the fabrication of Bi NS-based FETs at the centimeter level with considerable carrier mobility (Fig. 34(a and b)). To date, all the group V 2D elements, except N2, have been experimentally integrated in FETs, showing outstanding viability and potential in optoelectronics and electronics.
 Fig. 34  (a) and (b) 10 nm-thick BM device and carrier mobility, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 362. 


5.4.2. Bismuthene as electrocatalyst for the reduction of CO2 and NRR. 
Changsheng Cao et al.363 obtained atomically thin BM via in situ electrochemical alteration from ultrathin Bi-based metal–organic layers. The FL BM possessed abundant active sites together with high inherent activity and selectivity (ca. 100%), partial J0, and fairly good stability in a potential range exceeding 0.35 V for the synthesis of formate. It even delivered a J0 exceeding 300 mA cm−2 without compromised selectivity. In contrast, BM showed a significantly inferior CO2RR performance, showing the superiority of the in situ electrochemical transformation method. Considering the mass-transfer limitation of CO2, no electrocatalyst has been reported to date that can meet the commercial requirements (J0 ≥ 200 mA cm−2) in a typical electrochemical-type cell. Thus, overcome this limitation, the use of flow cell reactors may be an efficient solution. Hence, the CO2RR activity of BM was further measured in a flow cell (Fig. 35(a)). Moreover, an increase in the electrolyte concentration (1.0 M KHCO3) can further enhance the CO2RR performance of BM, giving a J0 larger than 200 mA cm−2. In the meantime, the realization of high J0 would not compromise selectivity (Fig. 35(c)), showing the advantage of flow cell reactors.
 Fig. 35  Electrocatalytic CO2RR performances of bismuthene and bulk Bi. (a) LSV curves in Ar or CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) Potential-dependent FE of formate and gas products. (c) Partial J0 of formate. (d) Comparison of FEformate and jformate for bismuthene and recently reported Bi-based catalysts (at −1.1 V vs. RHE). (e) Long-term stability test of bismuthene at −0.9 V for 12 h. Adapted with permission from ref. 363. 
Fa Yang et al.364 carried out the first simple scalable synthesis of free-standing BM from simple reduction reaction, revealing its high electrocatalyst activity for the production of formate via CO2RR (Fig. 36(a)). The electrocatalyst activity is obvious from the high FE (99% at −580 mV vs. RHE), and as the thickness of BiNSs decreased, small η < 90 mV (Fig. 36(b)) and high durability (no decrease in catalyst activity after 75 h and annealing at 400 °C) (Fig. 36(f)).
 Fig. 36  Electro-reduction of CO2 to formate using 2D-Bi NSs with different thickness. LSV (solid line pH 7.2) and N2 saturated (dash line pH 8.8) 0.5 M KHCO3 aqueous solution with the same Bi loading of 0.39 mg cm−2. (b) Comparative FEs for formate for different applied potentials with different thicknesses. (c) Charging J0 differences Δj plotted against scan rate for ECSA. (d) Tafel plots of partial HCOO−J0. (e) Nyquist plots. (f) Long-time stability of 2D-Bi NSs (0.65 nm) at a potential of −0.58 V and FEs for HCOO− and H2. Adapted with permission from ref. 364. 

Fig. 36(c) shows the electrochemical active surface area (ECSA) of BiNSs, revealing their thickness-dependent CO2RR performance. To better understand the electrochemical activity of BiNSs, the kinetics was studied from the Tafel slope, which was found to be 87.6 mV dec−1 for a thickness of 0.65 nm. This value is lower compared to that of similar materials with different thicknesses (i.e., 4.2 nm and 11.3 nm), as shown in Fig. 36(d). The electrochemical impedance spectra are provided in Fig. 36(e). The DFT study also proposed structure-selectivity for CO2 reduction in the selective formation of HCOO− over the BM(111) facet and thicker NSs because of the distinctive compressive strain. This finding stimulates the need for experimental observation of BM in different fields.
Yu Wang et al.365 conducted DFT calculations considering the reported SOC nontrivial thickness-dependent catalyst performance of 2D layered BM, where SOC has an essential effect on increasing the catalysis. J0 rapidly increased and reached 10 mA cm−2 at −0.68 V vs. RHE. In comparison to other BiNSs, which have theoretical η = −0.64 V for 1L-Bi, −0.49 V for 3L-Bi, −0.50 V for 4L-Bi, −0.54 V for 5L-Bi, and −0.56 V for 6L-Bi, this performance is noticeably enhanced. Consequently, kinetic theoretical calculations clearly demonstrated that 2L-Bi has the highest activity given that 1L-Bi is less active compared to thicker BM NSs. Besides the kinetic simulations, the simulated polarization curve well match the experimentally recorded curve (Fig. 37), showing that there may still be opportunities for improving the activity of experimentally prepared Bi NSs.
 Fig. 37  Comparison of the experimental and theoretical polarization curves of ultrathin Bi NSs. A background J0 of −0.65 mA cm−2 is included in the theoretical curves. The layer number of the Bi catalysts in is not given explicitly, but may be close to and even less than 9L, given that it was reported that the as-prepared Bi NSs appeared to be thinner (more transparent to electron beam) than its precursor BiOI NSs (9–10 layers). The 9L-Bi theoretical polarization curve was obtained through extrapolation. Adapted with permission from ref. 365. 
Na Han et al.366 investigated CO2RR-based 2D Bi using combined theoretical and experimental studies. The CO2 reduction starts with the protonation of a C or O atom in the OCHO* intermediate. Upon the addition of a second proton, OCHO* is transformed into HCOO. Finally, it is released from the catalyst as formate. The CO2 protonation energy of the O atom in COOH* is higher (+1.16 eV) and the H adsorption free energy on 2D Bi is sufficiently positive to forbid the HER.366 This is in agreement with experimental findings. The CO2RR activity of BiNSs was investigated in a gas-sealed two-section electrochemical cell (Fig. 38(a)). The FEs of the diverse products in Fig. 38(b) illustrate that the initial FE for the production of formate is 16%, which increases and remains at 100% at −1.7 V. Therefore, the FEs of the two gaseous products remain especially small at a wide window of η.366 In addition, the FE of commercial Bi nanopowder for the production of formate was also studied for comparison, as shown in Fig. 38(c). The catalyst showed a stable cathodic current density of 15–16 mA cm−2 with apparently no loss in activity (Fig. 38(d)). The same group carried out another experiment for CO2RR based on 2D Bi.
 Fig. 38  Electrochemical measurements of BiNSs. (a) Polarization curves of BiNSs and commercial Bi nanopowder in N2-or CO2-saturated 0.5 M NaHCO3. (b) Potential-dependent FE of HCOO−, CO, and H2 on BiNSs compared to FE of HCOO− on Bi nanopowder. (c) BiNS and commercial Bi nanopowder potential-dependent HCOO− partial J0. (d) Amperometric (i ∼ t) stability of BiNSs at η = 680 mV for 10 h. Adapted with permission from ref. 366. 
The material was prepared via the facile solvothermal synthesis of ultrathin Bi2O2CO3 (BOC) NSs and their cathodic conversion to mesoporous (mp) Bi NSs (Fig. 39(a)). The respective conversion FE is given in Fig. 39(b). Bi2O2CO3 demonstrated CO2RR activity for formate production with a large cathodic J0 = ∼18 mA cm−2 at 1.1 V and a high FE = 100% for a broad potential range. A comparison of the FE for HCOO− in mesoporous Bi, Sn, In, and N-doped carbon is provided in Fig. 39(c). The formate partial J0 of mesoporous Bi NSs and commercial Bi nanopowder is shown in Fig. 39(d), and the inset shows their corresponding Tafel slopes. The long-time stability of the mesoporous Bi NSs at −0.8 V for 12 h and free energy diagram for HCOOH on the Bi(101), (111), and (012) planes are shown in Fig. 39(e and f), respectively.367 In addition, the CO2RR can proceed on a BiOBr-supported 2D Bi catalyst to attain elevated selectivity for formate of over 90% and J0 = 200 mA cm−2, which is almost two times higher than that of Bi catalysts.368
 Fig. 39  Electrocatalytic performance of reduced mesoporous Bi nanosheets for CO2 reduction to formate. (a) Polarization curves of mesoporous Bi NSs and commercial Bi nanopowder in N2- or CO2-saturated 0.5 M NaHCO3. (b) FE of HCOO−, H2, and CO on mesoporous Bi NSs compared to FE of HCOO− on commercial Bi nanopowder. (c) Comparative FE of HCOO− in mesoporous Bi, Sn, In, and N-doped carbon. (d) Formate partial J0 of mpBi NSs and commercial Bi nanopowder, and inset shows their respective Tafel slopes. (e) Long-standing stability of mesoporous Bi NSs at −0.8 V for 12 h. (f) Free energy diagram for HCOOH on Bi(101), (111), and (012) planes. Adapted with permission from ref. 367. 
Wang et al.369 also studied the thickness-dependent CO2RR activity of BM, where bilayer Bi showed the best catalytic activity among the studied BM because of its considerable stabilized energy from SOC. Atoms with delocalized p-electrons near the edge sites can offer abundant catalyst active sites for the adsorption and activation of N2. The stability of bismuthene was tested by cycling and current versus time (i–t) measurements at 0.8 V vs. RHE. It was observed that there was no noteworthy loss in J0 for 25 h. In addition, after six cycling tests, the NH3 yield and FE did not decrease noticeably.370 Additionally, the NH3 production activity of mosaic BM and Bi nanoparticles was compared, which showed that the NH3 yield and FE of Bi nanoparticles are inferior to that of mosaic BM under the similar conditions. However, the FE can also be surprisingly increased using an amalgamation of low-dimensional nanoparticles and K+, where K+ will stabilize the nitrogen reduction intermediates and control proton transfer to enhance the selectivity.371 Besides, Cu foil grown a 2D Bi array was a stable 3D catalyst electrode with a high FE of 10.26%.372


5.4.3. Anode material applications of bismuthene in sodium-ion batteries. 
LIBs are very well known in the present energy storage market, but may be replaced by the more efficient sodium-ion battery (SIB). SIBs are more cost-efficient due to the abundance of Na.373,374 Areal capacities with a higher mass loading are significant for SIBs in their useful applications, which make it necessary to synthesize novel electrode materials with high areal capacities.375,376 Bi is an intriguing anode candidate material because of its high theoretical volumetric capacity of ∼3800 mA h cm−3 and constructive sodium alloying potential.377,378 Generally, the Bi sodiation mechanism involves two steps, intercalation and alloying.379,380 The enormous volume change during intercalation and alloying reactions is the major critical problem obstructing the advancement of this type of battery. Therefore, BM can offer much better reversibility because of the enhanced gaps between its exfoliated NSs, allowing the diffusion of further Na+ into the crystal without structure pulverization.377,381,382 The BM battery consists of a BM electrode dispersed on a carbon film-supported TEM grid, and an Na metal counter electrode on sharp tungsten. A solid electrolyte Na2O layer developed on the Na metal surface. A piezo-positioner was used to drive the tungsten probe to form the contact between Na/Na2O and bismuthene. After the connection, a constant negative potential was applied to bismuthene to drive Na+ through the electrolyte.382 Consequently, BM with improved flexibility could sustain larger volume expansion than that of its bulk counterpart.
Zhou et al.383 also observed the anisotropic volume expansion of 142% along the z-axis because of the alloy reaction during the sodiation process. On the contrary, BM thin NSs with a large aspect ratio can reduce this expansion strain. Fig. 40(a) shows that BM exhibited long-standing cycle repeatability with a capacity of 317 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at J0 = 1.2 mA cm−2, showing the good stability of 2D-Bi throughout the charging–discharging. Fig. 40(b) demonstrates the outstanding rate activity specified by the stable capacity = 381 mA h g−1 at j0 = 0.2 mA cm−2, and the high reversible capacity = 263.2 mA h g−1 maintained at high J0 = 2 mA cm−2, which is notably higher than that of pristine graphene (3.4 mA h g−1 at J0 = 2 mA cm−2). Extraordinarily, a stable and high areal Na storage capacity of 12.1 mA h cm−2 was obtained for the Bi/G composite with variable thickness. Furthermore, the parallel electrode potential profiles indicate that increasing the areal loading does not lead to the obstruction of ion diffusion due to the interrelated network arrangement (Fig. 40(c)).
 Fig. 40  2D Bi/G (a) cycle activity at J0 = 1.2 mA cm−2 after 20 cycles at 0.05 mA cm−2. (b) Rate activity and comparison with graphene film at various J0. (c) 5th cycle potential in the range of 0.1–2.1 V vs. Na/Na+. Adapted with permission from ref. 383. 


5.4.4. Bismuthene as a sensing material. 
P. Snehha et al.384 studied the adsorption of the toxic gases NH3, NO2 and PH3 on the surface of Bi NTs by applying the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in accordance with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) function. BiNT as a chemiresistor sensor gave response for the NH3, NO2 and PH3 gas molecules with respect to three essential properties, known as adsorption energy, band gap difference, and Bader charge transfer. Hussain et al.251 fabricated 2D-Bi with an Au mirror coating as a saturable absorber, as illustrated in Fig. 41(a). In the presence of a circulator mode-lock, in the TM-doped fiber laser, light travels in one dimension in the ring cavity and passes through the BM SA two times in each trip (Fig. 41(a)). When the mode-locking threshold power was ∼2.0 W, an excellent performance was obtained, with a maximum available pumping power and output power of 7 W and 110 mW, respectively. Fig. 41(b) shows the 60 ns pulsing period, which was steady, together with a cavity fundamental frequency of ∼16.7 MHz. Therefore, for this mode-locking laser, a maximum pulse energy of 6.6 nJ was attained, which is higher than that of graphene, WS2, and MoS2. Further efforts, for instance, optimizing the laser cavity and increasing the thickness and homogeneity of Bi SA, are still required to decrease the inter-pulse fluctuation level and enhance the stability of the mode-lock state. Fig. 41(c) shows an almost Gaussian profile with ∼1 ns FWHM duration. At 2030 nm, the output spectrum was obtained, realizing an NIR function wavelength, which is significantly required for military and telecommunication applications. In the spectrum, the 3 dB FWHM of 4.5 nm provides a Fourier transform-restricted pulse width of ∼978 fs, which indicates that the mode-lock pulses are greatly chirping, and therefore more laser cavity dispersion optimization and Bi SA growth quality will pave the way toward more stable mode-lock and shorter laser pulses.251
 Fig. 41  (a) Laser pulse loop, (b) single pulse and (c) mode-lock state of 2 μm fabricated BM SA with Tm-doped fiber laser. Inset illustrates the laser spectrum. LD = laser diode. Adapted with permission from ref. 251. 

6. Conclusions, perspectives, challenges and future directions
2D-materials were selected for research in materials science by chance. Even though these materials were discovered a long time ago, recently, they have enjoyed an enormous increase in interest, given that they now present a great number of applications. Commencing with graphene and its derivatives, TMDCs, and BP, in recent times AN, AM, and BM emerged. These materials are 2D monoelemental (2D-Xenes), but their characteristics are considerably different according to their structure, number of layers, and doping. These materials are easy to obtain from their bulk counterparts or grown on support materials. Their band gap properties are predictable to locate a position in energy-related and (bio) sensing devices. They are durable, and thus it can be envisaged that the investigation of these materials will benefit from their exponential growth. The group V 2D-Xenes offer an exciting potential for future novel nano-devices, e.g., optoelectronic, biomedical, and sensing devices. In this topical review, we briefly presented various aspects of the group V 2D-Xenes, from the methodologies for their synthesis to their applications in different directions. Briefly, we first explained the different potential methods to synthesize the group V 2D-Xenes, offering a concise synopsis of the key outcomes about their properties, which were obtained by theoretical calculations and experimental investigations. Finally, we discussed in detail the potential applications of the group V 2D-Xenes for fundamental oriented studies, and their limitations as well as future prospective.
The SE-2D materials have major challenges in their fabrication, investigation and application, which are frequently inhibited through the requirement for particular applied conditions, advanced fabrication methods, and element selection with covalent bonding tendencies and substrates that display weak contacts. In addition, smart chemical processing methods, for instance, those utilized in the fabrication of PP, prevent the requirement for compound passivation. Computational studies can offer guidance by estimating the level of chemical interaction in the deposited layer and substrate, which may reduce the experimental attempts and result in the surface alloy development and rebuilding of bulk materials. Moreover, their stability relies on systematic study using numerous autonomous methods to study their 2D structure and properties. To date, numerous studies are still reliant exclusively on in situ UHV formation and investigation. Due to their buckled property, 2D-Xenes can possibly work as a nano-device technology platform with manifold physical features for elementary research and devices applications. In intrinsic and functionalized Xenes, the various material properties give a broad amount of freedom in designing competent, on-demand and reconfigurable devices in electronic, photonic, spintronic, mechanical, thermal, chemical energy and sensor nano-systems. There are many fabrication and technological problems, which are still to be resolved. Among them, the most important is stability issues after exposure to the environment, which hinders the development of large-scale synthesis routes for device manufacturing. Suitable key factors include friendly design for devices, neutral substrates, and progress in scalable production technologies (for instance, CVD), which are challenging issues for viable Xene nanodevice technology. However, in recent times, technological and synthetic reported advancements are encouraging for exploring the distinctive topological phenomena in 2D-Xenes and their utilization in modern device architectures.
The group V 2D-Xenes can be synthesized using the top-down and bottom up synthesis methods. The top-down exfoliation methods are utilized for the synthesis of group V 2D-Xenes because the layers in their bulk form have weak vdW interaction, and thus they are easy to peel from the bulk metal crystal.123 In comparison, the bottom-up epitaxial and non-epitaxial growth techniques (MBE and CVD, respectively) can produce scalable 2D-Xenes on various substrates. However, there is still a need to develop new synthesis routes, which should be more economic and easier to apply. Thus, further economical synthetic approaches are needed to form the 2D group V element Xenes. It is realistic that by choosing appropriate precursors and solvents at optimized temperatures, the NS form of the group V 2D-Xene materials can be formed advantageously in the upcoming era. The physical, electrical, mechanical, and chemical properties of the group V 2D-Xene materials can also be further modified for suitable applications and their atomic-level studies. However, despite the substantial progress in this area, many problems remain unaddressed.
In addition, for these materials, the collective opportunities are improved through their incorporation in vertical and lateral heterostructures, which convey novel properties depending on the interlayer coupling in the atomic-level thin layers. In addition, there are numerous fields accessible for the application of individual materials. Moreover, their properties may offer an opportunity to explore the metallicity (and promising superconductivity) at the atomic-level thin edge. Among the most mature SE-2D materials, the applications of PP are significant, given that it exhibits a huge guarantee of being a 2D-SC with a thickness-engineered BG, high carrier mobility, and anisotropic optical and electric properties. However, currently, there is no reported large-scale production using the PVD or CVD technique to manufacture thickness-controlled, large-area PP. Sb and As are envisaged to have bulk layer configurations similar to the highly buckled honeycomb layers of blue phosphorus, but with comparatively stronger interlayer coupling and tendency to form 2D allotropes (i.e., AN and AM). The synthesis of AM was just recently reported, and to date, AN still has not been formed. Consequently, there are a lot of chances to explore these materials properties. BM shows topologically non-trivial electronic states, which can probably be tuned for scientific study in device manufacturing, even though the particular advantages of BP, such as is allotrope forms, remain uncertain.
Furthermore, inadequate characterization constantly cannot afford full depiction of the structure and properties of the resultant material.123 Orthogonal methods need to be utilized to describe the structure with the least artifacts and misconceptions (for example, STM and cross-section transmission electron microscopy (CS-TEM)). In addition, the separation of SE-2D materials from their substrates should be an imperative investigation. Specially, 2D-Bi is still not isolated from its growth substrates for characterization of the support-free materials. To improve the efficiency of these experiments, general, robust techniques are required to conserve the fundamental SE-2D material structures and properties for ex situ investigations and device manufacturing. Non-covalent elements are promising candidates as fully encapsulating layers deposited in situ (e.g., AlOx or silicon), or potential organic or atomic molecule passivation ad-layers, which offer inert, consistent shielding and promise in reversible desorption. Nonetheless, quick development of this field proposes that there is huge potential to form materials with unparalleled properties, which are not understood in natural existing materials.123
There are some challenges left for the successful application of the group V 2D-Xenes as photo-catalysts. The limitation of materials and their rapid degradation are bottlenecks that restrict their development and application. Their fast degradation in the ambient environment is a problematic question. Their higher charge carrier recombination rate and change in BG position with tunability hinder their real application as photocatalysts. Therefore, it is very important to extend efficient strategies such as group V 2D-Xene-based heterostructure approaches or passivation. Despite these issues, the group V 2D-Xenes with a few layers can maintain good crystallinity after exfoliation under laboratory conditions. The Rc is a major factor limiting the performance of group V 2D-Xene materials in FETs, especially at short-channel lengths, and must be lowered by at least an order of magnitude to <100 Ω μm. This requires the contact regions to be degenerately doped by either the direct growth of metallic multilayer 2D materials or implantation. Increasing our understanding on the doping and uniform growth of group V 2D Xenes and heterostructures should allow the fabrication of next-generation low-power, high-speed devices, for instance thin-tunneling FETs.
The group V 2D Xene-based electrocatalysts are still in the infancy. Their problems in terms of low-yield production and poor air stability remain to be overcome to realize their practical implementation. However, the long-term electrochemical cycling properties of group V 2D-Xene-based catalysts have demonstrated that they are promising candidates for electrocatalysis. Determining the precise role played by the group V 2D-Xenes during the electrocatalytic process is essential, which partially depends on in situ analysis and theoretical calculations. Nonetheless, during the electrocatalytic OER, HER, and NRR, rapid gas bubbling will cause complexity for these in situ techniques. Therefore, the development of engineering in situ equipment also has great significance. To enhance their air/water stability, strategies can include physical or chemical surface protection. Physically covering the group V 2D-Xenes involves encapsulation to protect them. However, encapsulation is not cost-efficient for large-scale application. New scalable and facile chemical strategies that permit the fabrication of group V 2D-Xenes with accurately controlled compositions and structures require further development for their industrialization. Chemical strategies involve surface protection with balanced heterostructures or surface functionalization, which is more economic large-scale application and also enhances functional properties rather than just protects as in encapsulation.
Abbreviations

AMAntimonene
ANArsenene
AFMAtomic force microscopy
ALDAtomic layer deposition
ARPESAngle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
BMBismuthene
BPBlack phosphorus
BLBilayer
CVDChemical vapor deposition
CBConduction band

f
T
Cutoff frequency
DOSsDensity of states
EDLCElectrochemical double-layer capacitor
EBLElectron beam lithography
EELSElectron energy loss spectroscopy
EBAEnergy band analysis
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
FLFew layer
FETField-effect transistor
GGAGeneralized gradient approximation
HOPGHighly oriented pyrolytic graphite
IRInfrared
LPELiquid-phase exfoliation
LMLayered material
MBEMolecular beam epitaxy
MIBMagnesium-ion battery
NRNano-ribbon
NSNanostructure
PDPhoto-detector
PVDPhysical vapor deposition
PTTPhotothermal therapy
PTAPhotothermal agent
PBEPerdew–Burke–Ernzerhof
PPPhosphorene
QTSQuantum transport simulation
QDQuantum dot
QEQuantum efficiency
RTRoom temperature
RMSRoot mean square
ITRSInternational technology roadmap for semiconductors
SLSingle layer
SSASpecific surface area
SBHSchottky barrier height
STEMScanning transmission electron microscopy
SE-2D materialsSynthetic two-dimensional materials
SCSemiconductor
SOCSpin orbit coupling
2DTwo dimensional
TITopological insulator
TMDCTransition metal dichalcogenide
UVUltraviolet
VBValance Band
vdWvan der Waals
WFWork function
ZZigzag

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts.
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qiu, W. X. Ren, T. Jeong, M. Won, G. Y. Park, D. K. Sang, L.-P. Liu, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Omnipotent phosphorene: a next-generation, two-dimensional nanoplatform for multidisciplinary biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5588–5601 RSC .
W. Tao, X. Ji, X. Zhu, L. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, P. E. Saw, W. Li, N. Kong and M. A. Islam, Two-Dimensional Antimonene-Based Photonic Nanomedicine for Cancer Theranostics, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802061 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. Fal, L. Colombo, P. Gellert, M. Schwab and K. Kim, A roadmap for graphene, Nature, 2012, 490, 192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu, X. Liang and H. Xiang, Recent developments in carbon-based materials as high-rate anode for sodium ion batteries, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4089–4106 RSC .
S. Zhao, Y. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Zheng, X. Luan, Y. Gao and Y. Li, Controllable growth of graphdiyne layered nanosheets for high-performance water oxidation, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4153–4159 RSC .
S. Jiang, L. Meng, W. Ma, G. Pan, W. Zhang, Y. Zou, L. Liu, B. Xu and W. Tian, Dual-functional two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks for water sensing and harvesting, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4193–4201 RSC .
W. Tao, N. Kong, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, A. Sharma, J. Ouyang, B. Qi, J. Wang, N. Xie, C. Kang, H. Zhang, O. C. Farokhzad and J. S. Kim, Emerging two-dimensional monoelemental materials (Xenes) for biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2891–2912 RSC .
Q. Bao, H. Zhang, B. Wang, Z. Ni, C. H. Y. X. Lim, Y. Wang, D. Y. Tang and K. P. Loh, Broadband graphene polarizer, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 411–415 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, S. P. Zhong, Z. B. Zhang, Z. Q. Zheng, Y. P. Zhang and H. Zhang, Broadband photodetectors based on 2D group IVA metal chalcogenides semiconductors, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 15, 115–138 CrossRef .
Z. Li, H. Xu, J. Shao, C. Jiang, F. Zhang, J. Lin, H. Zhang, J. Li and P. Huang, Polydopamine-functionalized black phosphorus quantum dots for cancer theranostics, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 15, 297–304 CrossRef .
W. Liao, Y. Huang, H. Wang and H. Zhang, van der Waals heterostructures for optoelectronics: Progress and prospects, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 16, 435–455 CrossRef .
K. Khan, A. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, Z. Gou and Z. Han, Recent developments in emerging two-dimensional materials and their applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 9, 1–9 CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, A. Mahmood, Q. khan, Y. Zhang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo and H. Zhang, Going green with batteries and supercapacitor: Two dimensional materials and their nanocomposites based energy storage applications, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 58, 100254 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, K. H. Thebo, U. Khan, R. Wang, S. S. Shams, Z. Han and Z. Ouyang, A comprehensive review on synthesis of pristine and doped inorganic room temperature stable mayenite electride, [Ca24Al28O64]4+(e−)4 and its applications as a catalyst, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2018, 54, 1–19 CrossRef .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Gou and H. Zhang, Recent advances in two-dimensional materials and their nanocomposites in sustainable energy conversion applications, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 21622–21678 RSC .
W. Tao, N. Kong, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, A. Sharma, J. Ouyang, B. Qi, J. Wang, N. Xie, C. Kang, H. Zhang, O. C. Farokhzad and J. S. Kim, Emerging two-dimensional monoelemental materials (Xenes) for biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2891–2912 RSC .
L. Kou, C. Chen and S. C. Smith, Phosphorene: fabrication, properties, and applications, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2794–2805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qiu, W. X. Ren, T. Jeong, M. Won, G. Y. Park, D. K. Sang, L.-P. Liu, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Omnipotent phosphorene: a next-generation, two-dimensional nanoplatform for multidisciplinary biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5588–5601 RSC .
C. Kamal and M. Ezawa, Arsenene: Two-dimensional buckled and puckered honeycomb arsenic systems, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 085423 CrossRef .
G. Abellán, P. Ares, S. Wild, E. Nuin, C. Neiss, D. R. S. Miguel, P. Segovia, C. Gibaja, E. G. Michel and A. Görling, Noncovalent functionalization and charge transfer in antimonene, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 14581–14586 CrossRef .
P. Ares, J. J. Palacios, G. Abellán, J. Gómez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Recent progress on antimonene: a new bidimensional material, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703771 CrossRef .
J. Ji, X. Song, J. Liu, Z. Yan, C. Huo, S. Zhang, M. Su, L. Liao, W. Wang and Z. Ni, Two-dimensional antimonene single crystals grown by van der Waals epitaxy, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Martínez-Periñán, M. P. Down, C. Gibaja, E. Lorenzo, F. Zamora and C. E. Banks, Antimonene: A Novel 2D Nanomaterial for Supercapacitor Applications, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702606 CrossRef .
V. Nagarajan and R. Chandiramouli, First-principles investigation on structural and electronic properties of antimonene nanoribbons and nanotubes, Phys. E, 2018, 97, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pumera and Z. Sofer, 2D monoelemental arsenene, antimonene, and bismuthene: beyond black phosphorus, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605299 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z.-L. Liu, C. Cheng, X. Wu, H. Liu, C. Liu, J.-O. Wang, S.-Y. Zhu, Y.-Q. Wang and D.-X. Shi, Epitaxial Growth of Flat Antimonene Monolayer: A New Honeycomb Analogue of Graphene, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2133–2139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharma, S. Kumar and U. Schwingenschlögl, Arsenene and antimonene: two-dimensional materials with high thermoelectric
figures of merit, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2017, 8, 044013 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. Song and J. Qu, Antimonene: From experimental preparation to practical application, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 58, 1574 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Y. Shao, H. Liu, Z. Feng, Y. L. Wang, J. T. Sun, C. Liu, J. O. Wang, Z. L. Liu and S. Y. Zhu, Epitaxial Growth and Air-Stability of Monolayer Antimonene on PdTe2, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605407 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Su, X. Tang, X. Fan, D. Ma, W. Liang, Y. Li and H. Zhang, Halogenated Antimonene: One-Step Synthesis, Structural Simulation, Tunable Electronic and Photoresponse Property, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905857 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, Z. Liang, L. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. Song, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, B. Dong, Y. Xiang and F. Xing, Few-layer Bismuthene: Sonochemical Exfoliation, Nonlinear Optics and Applications for Ultrafast Photonics with Enhanced Stability, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1700221 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, J. Zhu, R. Cao, H. Wang, Z. Guo, D. K. Sang, J. Tang, D. Fan, J. Li and H. Zhang, Liquefaction of water on the surface of anisotropic two-dimensional atomic layered black phosphorus, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Qiu, A. Singh, D. Wang, J. Qu, M. Swihart, H. Zhang and P. N. Prasad, Biocompatible and biodegradable inorganic nanostructures for nanomedicine: Silicon and black phosphorus, Nano Today, 2019, 25, 135–155 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, T. Fan, Y. Zhou, H. Zhang and L. Mei, 2D Black Phosphorus–Based Biomedical Applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808306 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Y. Xie, Z. Zhang, C. Zhong, Y. Li, Z. Chen and Y. Chen, Dirac nodal lines and tilted semi-Dirac cones coexisting in a striped boron sheet, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1707–1713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-c. Yi, W. Liu, J. Botana, L. Zhao, Z. Liu, J.-y. Liu and M.-s. Miao, Honeycomb boron allotropes with Dirac cones: a true analogue to graphene, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2647–2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, Elemental analogues of graphene: silicene, germanene, stanene, and phosphorene, Small, 2015, 11, 640–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dávila, L. Xian, S. Cahangirov, A. Rubio and G. Le, Lay, Germanene: a novel two-dimensional germanium allotrope akin to graphene and silicene, New J. Phys., 2014, 16, 095002 CrossRef .
M. Houssa, A. Dimoulas and A. Molle, Silicene: a review of recent experimental and theoretical investigations, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 253002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Lin, R. Arafune, K. Kawahara, N. Tsukahara, E. Minamitani, Y. Kim, N. Takagi and M. Kawai, Structure of silicene grown on Ag (111), Appl. Phys. Express, 2012, 5, 045802 CrossRef .
A. Molle, C. Grazianetti, L. Tao, D. Taneja, M. H. Alam and D. Akinwande, Silicene, silicene derivatives, and their device applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6370–6387 RSC .
N. Gao, J. Li and Q. Jiang, Bandgap opening in silicene: Effect of substrates, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 592, 222–226 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, X. Cai, S. Yi, J. Chen, Y. Dai, C. Niu, Z. Guo, M. Xie, F. Liu and J.-H. Cho, Multivalency-driven formation of Te-based monolayer materials: a combined first-principles and experimental study, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 106101 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Dimoulas, Silicene and germanene: Silicon and germanium in the “flatland”, Microelectron. Eng., 2015, 131, 68–78 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Y. Cai, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Quantum thermal transport in stanene, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 045423 CrossRef .
M. Liao, Y. Zang, Z. Guan, H. Li, Y. Gong, K. Zhu, X.-P. Hu, D. Zhang, Y. Xu and Y.-Y. Wang, Superconductivity in few-layer stanene, Nat. Phys., 2018, 14, 344–348 Search PubMed .
S. Yang, B. Chen, Y. Qin, Y. Zhou, L. Liu, M. Durso, H. Zhuang, Y. Shen and S. Tongay, Highly crystalline synthesis of tellurene sheets on two-dimensional surfaces: Control over helical chain direction of tellurene, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 104002 Search PubMed .
I. Abood, S. Elshahat, K. Khan, L. Bibbò, A. Yadav and Z. Ouyang, Slow light with high normalized delay-bandwidth product in low-dispersion photonic-crystal coupled-cavity waveguide, Opt. Commun., 2019, 439, 181–186 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bibbò, K. Khan, Q. Liu, M. Lin, Q. Wang and Z. Ouyang, Tunable narrowband antireflection optical filter with a metasurface, Photonics Res., 2017, 5, 500–506 CrossRef .
L. Bibbò, Q. Liu, K. Khan, A. Yadav, S. Elshahat, I. Abood and Z. Ouyang, Radiation-direction steerable nanoantennae, SN Appl. Sci., 2019, 1, 844 CrossRef .
L. Bibbò, Q. Liu, K. Khan, A. Yadav, S. Elshahat, Z.-L. Deng and Z. Ouyang, High-speed amplitude modulator with a high modulation index based on a plasmonic resonant tunable metasurface, Appl. Opt., 2019, 58, 2687–2694 CrossRef .
H. Chen, L. Gao, Z. Qin, Y. Ge, K. Khan, Y. Song, G. Xie, S. Xu and H. Zhang, Recent advances of low-dimensional materials in Mid-and Far-infrared photonics, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 21, 100800 CrossRef .
M. Dai, C. Huo, Q. Zhang, K. Khan, X. Zhang and C. Shen, Electrochemical Mechanism and Structure Simulation of 2D Lithium-Ion Battery, Adv. Theory Simul., 2018, 1, 1800023 CrossRef .
M. Dai, K. Khan, S. Zhang, K. Jiang, X. Zhang, W. Wang, L. Liang, H. Cao, P. Wang and P. Wang, A direct method to extract transient sub-gap density of state (DOS) based on dual gate pulse spectroscopy, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Elahi, M. F. Khan, S. Rehman, H. W. Khalil, M. A. Rehman, D.-K. Kim, H. Kim, K. Khan, M. Shahzad and M. W. Iqbal, Enhanced electrical and broad spectral (UV-Vis-NIR) photodetection in a Gr/ReSe 2/Gr heterojunction, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 10017–10027 RSC .
S. Elshahat, I. Abood, K. Khan, A. Yadav, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Five-line photonic crystal waveguide for optical buffering and data interconnection of picosecond pulse, J. Light Technol., 2018, 37, 788–798 Search PubMed .
S. Elshahat, I. Abood, K. Khan, A. Yadav and Z. Ouyang, High-capability micro-optical buffer based on coupled hexagonal cavity in photonic crystal waveguide, Appl. Nanosci., 2019, 9, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS .
S. Elshahat, I. Abood, K. Khan, A. Yadav, Q. Wang, Q. Liu, M. Lin, K. Tao and Z. Ouyang, Ultra-wideband slow light transmission with high normalized delay bandwidth product in W3 photonic crystal waveguide, Superlattices Microstruct., 2018, 121, 45–54 CrossRef CAS .
S. Elshahat, K. Khan, A. Yadav, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Slow-light transmission with high group index and large normalized delay bandwidth product through successive defect rods on intrinsic photonic crystal waveguide, Opt. Commun., 2018, 418, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, Z. Shi, K. Khan, R. Cao, W. Liang, A. K. Tareen, Y. Zhang, W. Huang, Z. Guo and X. Luo, Recent advances in doping engineering of black phosphorus, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5421–5441 RSC .
M. Iqbal, A. Ali, K. S. Ahmad, F. M. Rana, J. Khan, K. Khan and K. H. Thebo, Synthesis and characterization of transition metals doped CuO nanostructure and their application in hybrid bulk heterojunction solar cells, SN Appl. Sci., 2019, 1, 647 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, C. Zheng, K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam and B. Wang, Two dimensional nanomaterials-enabled smart light regulation technologies: Recent advances and developments, Optik, 2020, 220, 165191 CrossRef CAS .
J. Khan, H. Ullah, M. Sajjad, W. B. Jatoi, A. Ali, K. Khan and K. H. Thebo, Controlled synthesis of ammonium manganese tri-fluoride nanoparticles with enhanced electrochemical performance, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 075074 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, L. Jia, Z. Wenwei, X. Wei, Y. Ye and S. Weijie, Low Temperature Synthesis of Nano Porous 12CaO·7Al2O3 Powder by Hydrothermal Method, J. Wuhan Univ. Technol., Mater. Sci. Ed., 2016, 31, 1201–1205 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. Khan Tareen, S. Elshahat, A. K. Yadav, U. Khan, M. Yang, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of cationic doped [Ca24Al28O64]4 +.(4e-) composite via rapid citrate sol-gel method, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 3819–3830 RSC .
K. Khan, A. Khan Tareen, U. Khan, A. Nairan, S. Elshahat, N. Muhammad, M. Saeed, A. Yadav, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Single step synthesis of highly conductive room-temperature stable cation-substituted mayenite electride target and thin film, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–9 CAS .
K. Khan, A. Khan Tareen, J. Li, U. Khan, A. Nairan, Y. Yuan, X. Zhang, M. Yang and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of tin-doped mayenite electride composite as a non-noble metal durable electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 13498–13506 RSC .
K. Khan, J. Li, W. Zou, W. Xu, Y. Yang and W. Song, Low temperature synthesis of nano porous 12CaO·7Al2O3 powder by hydrothermal method, J. Wuhan Univ. Technol., Mater. Sci. Ed., 2016, 31, 1201–1205 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, S. Ali Khan, Q. khan, Q. U. Khan, M. Saeed, A. Siddique Saleemi, M. Kiani, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Fe-doped mayenite electride composite with 2D reduced Graphene Oxide: As a non-platinum based, highly durable electrocatalyst for Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 19809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, M. F. Khan, Z. Shi, C. Ma, S. S. Shams, R. Khatoon, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Synthesis, properties and novel electrocatalytic applications of the 2D-borophene Xenes, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 59, 100283 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, Q. Khan, R. Wang, S. A. Khan, A. S. Saleemi, Q. U. Khan, Y. Zhang and Z. Ouyang, Novel two dimensional carbon-chromium nitride based composite as an electrocatalyst for Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, A. Mahmood, Y. Zhang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo and H. Zhang, Going green with batteries and supercapacitor: Two dimensional materials and their nanocomposites based energy storage applications, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2019, 58, 100254 CrossRef .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. U. R. Sagar, B. Zhang, W. Huang, A. Mahmood, N. Mahmood, K. Khan and H. Zhang, Recent Progress, Challenges, and Prospects in Two-Dimensional Photo-Catalyst Materials and Environmental Remediation, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–77 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Recent developments in emerging two-dimensional materials and their applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 387–440 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Recent developments in emerging two-dimensional materials and their applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 387–440 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, S. A. Khan, Q. U. Khan, M. Rauf, H. Zhang and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of Graphitic Shells like carbon nano onions: Non-noble-metal electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, S. A. Khan, Q. U. Khan, M. Rauf, H. Zhang and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of mayenite electride nanoparticles encapsulated in graphitic shells like carbon nano onions: non-noble-metal electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), Front. Chem., 2020, 7, 934 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, S. Elshahat, N. Muhammad, J. Li, I. Aboodd, L. Bibbò, A. Yadav, R. U. R. Sagar and U. Khan, Facile metal-free reduction-based synthesis of pristine and cation-doped conductive mayenite, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 24276–24285 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, S. Elshahat, A. Yadav, U. Khan, M. Yang, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of a cationic-doped [Ca24Al28O64]4+(4e−) composite via a rapid citrate sol-gel method, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 3819–3830 RSC .
K. Khan, A. k. tareen, U. Khan, A. Nairan, S. Elshahat, N. Muhammad, M. Saeed, A. Yadav, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Single step synthesis of highly conductive room-temperature stable cation-substituted mayenite electride target and thin film, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 4967 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, L. Wang, M. Aslam, C. Ma, N. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Sensing Applications of Atomically Thin Group IV Carbon Siblings Xenes: Progress, Challenges, and Prospects, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2005957 CrossRef CAS .
Q. U. Khan, M. A. Mushtaq, S. A. Khan, M. Kiani, F. Zaman, K. Khan, I. Mehmood, K. Tahir, A. K. Tareen and U. Khan, Enhancement of mechanical and electrical properties for in-situ compatibilization of immiscible polypropylene/polystyrene blends, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 105301 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Khan, A. Jalil, Q. U. Khan, R. M. Irfan, I. Mehmood, K. Khan, M. Kiani, B. Dong, N. Z. Khan and J.-L. Yu, New physical insight into crystal structure, luminescence and optical properties of YPO4: Dy3+/Eu3+/Tb3+ single-phase white-light-emitting phosphors, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 817, 152687 CrossRef CAS .
R. Khatoon, Y. Guo, S. Attique, K. Khan, A. K. Treen, M. U. Haq, H. Tang, H. Chen, Y. Tian and M. Nisar, Facile synthesis of α-Fe2O3/Nb2O5 heterostructure for advanced Li-Ion batteries, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 837, 155294 CrossRef CAS .
B. Luigi, K. Karim, L. Qiang, L. Mi, Q. Wang and Z. Ouyang, Tunable narrowband antireflection optical filter with a metasurface, Photonics Res., 2017, 5, 500 CrossRef .
N. Muhammad, A. D. Khan, Z.-L. Deng, K. Khan, A. Yadav, Q. Liu and Z. Ouyang, Plasmonic spectral splitting in ring/rod metasurface, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 397 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Saleemi, A. Abdullah, M. Saeed, M. Anis-ur-Rehman, A. Mahmood, K. Khan and M. Kiani, and S.-l. Lee, Structural and Magnetoresistance Properties of Transfer-Free Amorphous Carbon Thin Films, Crystals, 2019, 9, 124 CrossRef .
Z. Shi, R. Cao, K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, X. Liu, W. Liang, Y. Zhang, C. Ma, Z. Guo and X. Luo, Two-Dimensional Tellurium: Progress, Challenges, and Prospects, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–34 CrossRef PubMed .
A. D. Smith, K. Elgammal, F. Niklaus, A. Delin, A. C. Fischer, S. Vaziri, F. Forsberg, M. Råsander, H. Hugosson and L. Bergqvist, Resistive graphene humidity sensors with rapid and direct electrical readout, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19099–19109 RSC .
X. Tang, Z. Yang, K. Khan, N. Muhammad and Z. Ouyang, Theoretical and Cold-Test Investigation of a Four-Port High-Frequency System for a 0.14-THz Dual-Sheet-Beam Backward-Wave Oscillator, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2018, 65, 5068–5074 CAS .
A. K. Tareen, K. Khan, M. Aslam, X. Liu and H. Zhang, Confinement in two-dimensional materials: Major advances and challenges in the emerging renewable energy conversion and other applications, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 61, 100294 CrossRef .
A. K. Tareen, G. S. Priyanga, K. Khan, E. Pervaiz, T. Thomas and M. Yang, Nickel-Based Transition Metal Nitride Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 3941–3954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Tareen, G. S. Priyanga, K. Khan, E. Pervaiz, T. Thomas and M. Yang, Nickel-Based Transition Metal Nitride Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 3941–3954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Velez-Fort, C. Mathieu, E. Pallecchi, M. Pigneur, M. G. Silly, R. Belkhou, M. Marangolo, A. Shukla, F. Sirotti and A. Ouerghi, Epitaxial graphene on 4H-SiC (0001) grown under nitrogen flux: Evidence of low nitrogen doping and high charge transfer, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10893–10900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, K. Khan, X. Zhang, H. Qin, J. Jiang, L. Miao, K. Jiang, P. Wang, M. Dai and J. Chu, A subgap density of states modeling for the transient characteristics in oxide-based thin-film transistors, Microelectron. Reliab., 2016, 60, 67–69 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, K. Khan, J. Zou, H. Zhang and Y. Li, Recent Advances in Emerging 2D Material-Based Gas Sensors: Potential in Disease Diagnosis, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901329 CrossRef .
W. Zou, K. Khan, X. Zhao, C. Zhu, J. Huang, J. Li, Y. Yang and W. Song, Direct fabrication of C12A7 electride target and room temperature deposition of thin films with low work function, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 036408 CrossRef .
N. R. Glavin, R. Rao, V. Varshney, E. Bianco, A. Apte, A. Roy, E. Ringe and P. M. Ajayan, Emerging Applications of Elemental 2D Materials, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1904302 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Heavens, Optical properties of thin films, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1960, 23, 1 CrossRef .
E. MoS, Molybdenum disulfide, J. Phys. Chem., 1960, 23, 1 Search PubMed .

          W. O. Snelling, Self-igniting incendiary devices, US Pat., 2958277,  1960 Search PubMed .
M. Pumera and Z. Sofer, 2D Monoelemental Arsenene, Antimonene, and Bismuthene: Beyond Black Phosphorus, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605299 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Tsai, S.-W. Wang, C.-H. Hsiao, C.-W. Chen, H. Ouyang, Y.-L. Chueh, H.-C. Kuo and J.-H. Liang, Direct Synthesis and Practical Bandgap Estimation of Multilayer Arsenene Nanoribbons, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 425–429 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ji, X. Song, J. Liu, Z. Yan, C. Huo, S. Zhang, M. Su, L. Liao, W. Wang and Z. Ni, Two-dimensional antimonene single crystals grown by van der Waals epitaxy, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Tsai, C. W. Chen, C. H. Hsiao, H. Ouyang and J. H. Liang, The Advent of Multilayer Antimonene Nanoribbons with Room Temperature Orange Light Emission, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8409 RSC .
Y. Wang, P. Huang, M. Ye, R. Quhe and Y. Pan, Many-body Effect, Carrier Mobility, and Device Performance of Hexagonal Arsenene and Antimonene, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2191–2201 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, V. Tran, Y. Jia, H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. Xu and F. Xia, Highly anisotropic and robust excitons in monolayer black phosphorus, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 517–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, Y. Liu, Z. Song, Y. Li, W. Wang, H. Lin, L. Wang and Y. Li, Structures, mobility and electronic properties of point defects in arsenene, antimonene and an antimony arsenide alloy, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4159–4166 RSC .
Y. Wang, M. Ye, M. Weng, J. Li, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Guo, Y. Pan, L. Xiao, J. Liu, F. Pan and J. Lu, Electrical Contacts in Monolayer Arsenene Devices, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29273–29284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Meng, R. W. Xiu, J. Taeho, W. Miae, P. G. Young, S. D. Kipkemoi, L. Li-Ping, Z. Han and K. J. Seung, Omnipotent phosphorene: a next-generation, two-dimensional nanoplatform for multidisciplinary biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5588–5601 RSC .
M. Pumera and Z. k. Sofer, 2D Monoelemental Arsenene, Antimonene, and Bismuthene: Beyond Black Phosphorus, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605299 CrossRef PubMed   (1605291–1605298).
A. Carvalho, M. Wang, X. Zhu, A. S. Rodin, H. Su and A. H. C. Neto, Phosphorene: from theory to applications, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16061 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hultgren, N. S. Gingrich and B. E. Warren, The Atomic Distribution in Red and Black Phosphorus and the Crystal Structure of Black Phosphorus, J. Chem. Phys., 1935, 3, 351 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lange, P. Schmidt and T. Nilges, Au3SnP7@Black Phosphorus: An easy access to black phosphorus, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 38, 1–10 Search PubMed .
D. Bryant, The Chemistry of Phosphorus, Cheminform, 2006, 37, 1–5 CrossRef .
X. Ling, H. Wang, S. Huang, F. Xia and M. S. Dresselhaus, The renaissance of black phosphorus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4523–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Allain, J. Kang, K. Banerjee and A. Kis, Electrical contacts to two-dimensional semiconductors, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1195–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu and D. Tománek, Semiconducting Layered Blue Phosphorus: A Computational Study, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 176802 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang, S. A. Wells, J. D. Wood, J. H. Lee, X. Liu, C. R. Ryder, J. Zhu, J. R. Guest, C. A. Husko and M. C. Hersam, Stable Aqueous Dispersions of Optically and Electronically Active Phosphorene, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 11688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, D. Jariwala, K.-S. Chen, E. Cho, V. K. Sangwan, X. Liu, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Effective passivation of exfoliated black phosphorus transistors against ambient degradation, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6964–6970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiang, C. Han, J. Wu, S. Zhong, Y. Liu, J. Lin, X.-A. Zhang, W. Ping Hu, B. Özyilmaz and A. H. C. Neto, Surface transfer doping induced effective modulation on ambipolar characteristics of few-layer black phosphorus, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Mannix, B. Kiraly, M. C. Hersam and N. P. Guisinger, Synthesis and chemistry of elemental 2D materials, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0011–0014 CrossRef .
L. Cartz, S. Srinivasa, R. Riedner, J. Jorgensen and T. Worlton, Effect of pressure on bonding in black phosphorus, J. Chem. Phys., 1979, 71, 1718–1721 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi, A. M. Pourrahimi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Atomically Thin 2D-Arsenene by Liquid-Phased Exfoliation: Toward Selective Vapor Sensing, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807004 Search PubMed .
M. Biffin, G. Bocksteiner, J. Miller and D. Paul, Reduction by sulphoxides: The mechanism of deoxygenation of heterocyclic N-oxides and tertiary amine N-oxide, Aust. J. Chem., 1974, 27, 789–799 CrossRef CAS .
P. Smith, A. Leadbetter and A. Apling, The structures of orthorhombic and vitreous arsenic, Philos. Mag., 1975, 31, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Hesse, Putrescine, Spermidine, Spermine, and Related Polyamine Alkaloids, Alkaloids Chemistry & Pharmacology,  1984, chap. 3, vol. 22, pp. 85–188 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhu, J. Guan and D. Tománek, Strain-induced metal-semiconductor transition in monolayers and bilayers of gray arsenic: A computational study, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 161404 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, C. Chen, R. Kealhofer, H. Liu, Z. Yuan, L. Jiang, J. Suh, J. Park, C. Ko and H. S. Choe, Black arsenic: a layered semiconductor with extreme in-plane anisotropy, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800754 CrossRef PubMed .

          B. Douglas and S.-M. Ho, Structure and Chemistry of Crystalline Solids,  2006 Search PubMed .
H. J. Zhai, B. Kiran, J. Li and L.-S. Wang, Hydrocarbon analogues of boron clusters—planarity, aromaticity and antiaromaticity, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 827–833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Lau and R. Pandey, Stability and Electronic Properties of Atomistically-Engineered 2D Boron Sheets, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2906–2912 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, Y. Jiao, G. Gao, Y. Gu, A. Bilic, Z. Chen and A. Du, Graphene-like Two-dimensional Ionic Boron with Double Dirac Cones at Ambient Condition, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3022–3028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Bezugly, J. Kunstmann, B. Grundkötter-Stock, T. Frauenheim, T. Niehaus and G. Cuniberti, Highly Conductive Boron Nanotubes: Transport Properties, Work Functions, and Structural Stabilities, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4997–5005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, B.-j. Feng, M. Arita, A. Takayama, R.-Y. Liu, T. Someya, W.-C. Chen, T. Iimori, H. Namatame and M. Taniguchi, Proving nontrivial topology of pure bismuth by quantum confinement, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 117, 236402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. De Renzi, M. G. Betti and C. Mariani, Quantum size effects and temperature dependence of low-energy electronic excitations in thin Bi crystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 4767–4776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, A. Divenere, G. K. Wong, J. B. Ketterson, J. R. Meyer and J. I. Hong, Growth-mode modification of Bi on $mathrm{CdTe}(111)A$ using Te monolayer deposition, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 2324–2328 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagao, J. Sadowski, M. Saito, S. Yaginuma, Y. Fujikawa, T. Kogure, T. Ohno, Y. Hasegawa, S. Hasegawa and T. Sakurai, Nanofilm Allotrope and Phase Transformation of Ultrathin Bi Film on Si(111)-7 × 7, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 105501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Scott, M. V. Kral and S. A. Brown, Bi on graphite: Morphology and growth characteristics of star-shaped dendrites, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 205424 CrossRef .
H. Hattab, E. Zubkov, A. Bernhart, G. Jnawali, C. Bobisch, B. Krenzer, M. Acet, R. Möller and M. Horn-von Hoegen, Epitaxial Bi(111) films on Si(001): Strain state, surface morphology, and defect structure, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 8227–8231 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, S. Guo, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Gao, J. Gómez-Herrero, P. Ares, F. Zamora, Z. Zhu and H. Zeng, Recent progress in 2D group-VA semiconductors: from theory to experiment, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 982–1021 RSC .
D. West, Y. Sun, S. Zhang, T. Zhang, X. Ma, P. Cheng, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Jia and Q. Xue, Identification of magnetic dopants on the surfaces of topological insulators: Experiment and theory for Fe on Bi2Te3(111), Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 081305 CrossRef .
T. Hirahara, T. Nagao, I. Matsuda, G. Bihlmayer, E. V. Chulkov, Y. M. Koroteev, P. M. Echenique, M. Saito and S. Hasegawa, Role of Spin-Orbit Coupling and Hybridization Effects in the Electronic Structure of Ultrathin Bi Films, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 146803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Kowalczyk, O. Mahapatra, D. N. Mccarthy, W. Kozlowski, Z. Klusek and S. A. Brown, STM and XPS investigations of bismuth islands on HOPG, Surf. Sci., 2011, 605, 659–667 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kokubo, Y. Yoshiike, N. Kan and H. Hirayama, Ultrathin Bi(110) films on Si (111) 3 × 3 - B substrates, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 075429 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Li, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Atomically thin arsenene and antimonene: semimetal–semiconductor and indirect–direct band-gap transitions, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 3155–3158 CrossRef .
E. Aktürk, O. Ü. Aktürk and S. Ciraci, Single and bilayer bismuthene: Stability at high temperature and mechanical and electronic properties, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 014115 CrossRef .
Y. Cai, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Layer-dependent Band Alignment and Work Function of Few-Layer Phosphorene, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Black phosphorus field-effect transistors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lange, P. Schmidt and T. Nilges, Au3SnP7@ black phosphorus: an easy access to black phosphorus, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 4028–4035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, M. Xie, F. Li, Z. Yan, Y. Li, E. Kan, W. Liu, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Semiconducting group 15 monolayers: a broad range of band gaps and high carrier mobilities, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 1698–1701 CrossRef .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, Phosphorene: An Unexplored 2D Semiconductor with a High Hole Mobility, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Low, R. Roldán, H. Wang, F. Xia, P. Avouris, L. M. Moreno and F. Guinea, Plasmons and Screening in Monolayer and Multilayer Black Phosphorus, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 106802 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kou, C. Chen and S. C. Smith, Phosphorene: Fabrication, Properties, and Applications, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2794–2805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Z. Xiao, G. Xiao, Q.-Y. Rong and L.-L. Wang, Theoretical discovery of novel two-dimensional VA-N binary compounds with auxiticity, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 22027–22037 RSC .
J. Qiao, X. Kong, Z.-X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, High-mobility transport anisotropy and linear dichroism in few-layer black phosphorus, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and Y. Ding, Electronic structure and carrier mobilities of arsenene and antimonene nanoribbons: a first-principle study, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 254 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-C. Zhang, A.-X. Zhang and S.-D. Guo, and Y.-f. Duan, Thermoelectric properties of β-As, Sb and Bi monolayers, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 24537–24546 RSC .
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, Phosphorene oxide: stability and electronic properties of a novel two-dimensional material, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 524–531 RSC .
L. Zhu, S.-S. Wang, S. Guan, Y. Liu, T. Zhang, G. Chen and S. A. Yang, Blue phosphorene oxide: strain-tunable quantum phase transitions and novel 2D emergent fermions, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6548–6554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Boukhvalov, A. Rudenko, D. Prishchenko, V. Mazurenko and M. Katsnelson, Chemical modifications and stability of phosphorene with impurities: a first principles study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 15209–15217 RSC .
A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, P. Trevisanutto, D. Campbell, D. Coker and A. C. Neto, Phosphorene oxides: Bandgap engineering of phosphorene by oxidation, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 085407 CrossRef .
J. Dai and X. C. Zeng, Structure and stability of two dimensional phosphorene with [double bond, length as m-dash] O or [double bond, length as m-dash] NH functionalization, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 48017–48021 RSC .
S. Zhang, Y. Hu, Z. Hu, B. Cai and H. Zeng, Hydrogenated arsenenes as planar magnet and Dirac material, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 022102 CrossRef .
Y.-P. Wang, W.-X. Ji, C.-W. Zhang, P. Li, F. Li, M.-J. Ren, X.-L. Chen, M. Yuan and P.-J. Wang, Controllable band structure and topological phase transition in two-dimensional hydrogenated arsenene, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Li and J. Ma, Quantum spin Hall insulators in functionalized arsenene (AsX, X = F, OH and CH 3) monolayers with pronounced light absorption, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9657–9666 RSC .
D. Wang, L. Chen, C. Shi, X. Wang, G. Cui, P. Zhang and Y. Chen, Quantum spin Hall insulator in halogenated arsenene films with sizable energy gaps, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 28487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Wang, W.-X. Ji, C.-W. Zhang, P. Li, S.-F. Zhang, P.-J. Wang, S.-S. Li and S.-S. Yan, Two-dimensional arsenene oxide: A realistic large-gap quantum spin Hall insulator, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 213101 CrossRef .
T. Zhou, J. Zhang, Y. Xue, B. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Jiang and Z. Yang, Quantum spin–quantum anomalous Hall effect with tunable edge states in Sb monolayer-based heterostructures, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 235449 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, Y. Dai, L. Kou, T. Frauenheim and T. Heine, Robust two-dimensional topological insulators in methyl-functionalized bismuth, antimony, and lead bilayer films, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1083–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Liu, J.-J. Zhou and Y. Yao, Valley-polarized quantum anomalous Hall phases and tunable topological phase transitions in half-hydrogenated Bi honeycomb monolayers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 165430 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, W. Zhou, Y. Ma, J. Ji, B. Cai, S. A. Yang, Z. Zhu, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Antimonene oxides: Emerging tunable direct bandgap semiconductor and novel topological insulator, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3434–3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ding, G. Gao and K. Yao, High-efficient thermoelectric materials: The case of orthorhombic IV-VI compounds, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li and I. Appelbaum, Electrons and holes in phosphorene, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 115439 CrossRef .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Layer-controlled band gap and anisotropic excitons in few-layer black phosphorus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235319 CrossRef .
T. Low, A. Rodin, A. Carvalho, Y. Jiang, H. Wang, F. Xia and A. C. Neto, Tunable optical properties of multilayer black phosphorus thin films, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 075434 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and W. Wu, Piezotronics and piezo-phototronics: fundamentals and applications, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2013, 1, 62–90 CrossRef .
L. Lu, X. Tang, R. Cao, L. Wu, Z. Li, G. Jing, B. Dong, S. Lu, Y. Li and Y. Xiang, Broadband Nonlinear Optical Response in Few-Layer Antimonene and Antimonene Quantum Dots: A Promising Optical Kerr Media with Enhanced Stability, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700301 CrossRef .
A. A. Kistanov, Y. Cai, K. Zhou, S. V. Dmitriev and Y.-W. Zhang, Large electronic anisotropy and enhanced chemical activity of highly rippled phosphorene, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6876–6884 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, Phosphorene: an unexplored 2D semiconductor with a high hole mobility, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ge, W. Wan, F. Yang and Y. Yao, The strain effect on superconductivity in phosphorene: a first-principles prediction, New J. Phys., 2015, 17, 035008 CrossRef .
S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, Z. Guo, S. Li, Q. Bao and H. Zhang, Emerging trends in phosphorene fabrication towards next generation devices, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600305 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Anugrah, M. C. Robbins, P. A. Crowell and S. J. Koester, Determination of the Schottky barrier height of ferromagnetic contacts to few-layer phosphorene, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 103108 CrossRef .
Z. Luo, J. Maassen, Y. Deng, Y. Du, R. P. Garrelts, M. S. Lundstrom, D. Y. Peide and X. Xu, Anisotropic in-plane thermal conductivity observed in few-layer black phosphorus, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Saito and Y. Iwasa, Ambipolar insulator-to-metal transition in black phosphorus by ionic-liquid gating, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3192–3198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tayari, N. Hemsworth, I. Fakih, A. Favron, E. Gaufrès, G. Gervais, R. Martel and T. Szkopek, Two-dimensional magnetotransport in a black phosphorus naked quantum well, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, H. Jussila, L. Karvonen, G. Ye, H. Lipsanen, X. Chen and Z. Sun, Polarization and thickness dependent absorption properties of black phosphorus: new saturable absorber for ultrafast pulse generation, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Favron, E. Gaufrès, F. Fossard, A.-L. Phaneuf-L’Heureux, N. Y. Tang, P. L. Lévesque, A. Loiseau, R. Leonelli, S. Francoeur and R. Martel, Photooxidation and quantum confinement effects in exfoliated black phosphorus, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, A. Castellanos-Gomez, L. Vicarelli, E. Prada, J. O. Island, K. L. Narasimha-Acharya, S. I. Blanter, D. J. Groenendijk, M. Buscema, G. A. Steele, J. V. Alvarez, H. W. Zandbergen, J. J. Palacios and H. S. J. van der Zant, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 025001 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, P. J. Jeon, J. Lee, K. Choi, H. S. Lee, Y. Cho, Y. T. Lee, D. K. Hwang and S. Im, Dual gate black
phosphorus field effect transistors on glass for NOR logic and organic light emitting diode switching, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5778–5783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Island, G. A. Steele, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Environmental instability of few-layer black phosphorus, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 011002 CrossRef .
M. A. Meitl, Z.-T. Zhu, V. Kumar, K. J. Lee, X. Feng, Y. Y. Huang, I. Adesida, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Transfer printing by kinetic control of adhesion to an elastomeric stamp, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 33 CrossRef CAS .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Buscema, R. Molenaar, V. Singh, L. Janssen, H. S. J. van der Zant and G. A. Steele, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 011002 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, Z. Hu, J. Zhang, F. Hu, D. Xiang, J. Wu, B. Lei, L. Wang, W. P. Hu and W. Chen, Strongly Modulated Ambipolar Characteristics of Few-layer Black Phosphorus in Oxygen, Condensed Matter - Materials Science, 2017, 4, 777–780 Search PubMed .
A. Chernikov, T. C. Berkelbach, H. M. Hill, A. Rigosi, Y. Li, O. B. Aslan, D. R. Reichman, M. S. Hybertsen and T. F. Heinz, Exciton Binding Energy and Nonhydrogenic Rydberg Series in Monolayer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 076802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and H. Kanda, Direct-bandgap properties and evidence for ultraviolet lasing of hexagonal boron nitride single crystal, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 404–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sansone, L. Maschio, D. Usvyat, M. Schütz and A. J. Karttunen, Toward an Accurate Estimate of the Exfoliation Energy of Black Phosphorus: A Periodic Quantum Chemical Approach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 7, 131–136 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shulenberger, A. D. Baczewski, Z. Zhu, J. Guan and D. Tomanek, The Nature of the Interlayer Interaction in Bulk and Few-Layer Phosphorus, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 8170–8175 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yasaei, B. Kumar, T. Foroozan, C. Wang, M. Asadi, D. Tuschel, J. E. Indacochea, R. F. Klie and A. Salehi-Khojin, High-Quality Black Phosphorus Atomic Layers by Liquid-Phase Exfoliation, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1887–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, J.-H. Lee, X. Liu, K.-S. Chen and M. C. Hersam, Solvent Exfoliation of Electronic-Grade, Two-Dimensional Black Phosphorus, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3596–3604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sotor, G. Sobon, M. Kowalczyk, W. Macherzynski and K. M. Abramski, Ultrafast thulium-doped fiber laser mode locked with black phosphorus, Opt. Lett., 2015, 40, 3885–3888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, R. Xu, J. Pei, Y. W. Myint, F. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Z. Yu and Y. Lu, Optical tuning of exciton and trion emissions in monolayer phosphorene, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, 312 CrossRef .
E. A. Lewis, J. R. Brent, N. Savjani, D. J. Lewis, P. O’Brien and S. J. Haigh, Production of few-layer phosphorene by liquid exfoliation of black phosphorus, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13338–13341 RSC .
A. Ng, T. E. Sutto, B. R. Matis, Y. Deng, P. D. Ye, R. M. Stroud, T. H. Brintlinger and N. D. Bassim, Chemically exfoliating large sheets of phosphorene via choline chloride urea viscosity-tuning, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 155601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, Y. Yang, D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks, G. C. Schatz and M. C. Hersam, Covalent functionalization and passivation of exfoliated black phosphorus via aryl diazonium chemistry, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sruthi, A. Taimur, B. Sivacarendran, G. E. Collis, B. Vipul, A. Igor, S. Sharath, B. Madhu and W. Sumeet, Effects of plasma-treatment on the electrical and optoelectronic properties of layered black phosphorus, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 12, 244–249 CrossRef .
A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker and A. H. C. Neto, Oxygen Defects in Phosphorene, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 046801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Favron, E. Gaufrès, F. Fossard, A.-L. Phaneuf-L’Heureux, N. Y.-W. Tang, P. L. Lévesque, A. Loiseau, R. Leonelli, S. Francoeur and R. Martel, Photooxidation and quantum confinement effects in exfoliated black phosphorus, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 826–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, D. Jariwala, K.-S. Chen, E. Cho, V. K. Sangwan, X. Liu, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Effective Passivation of Exfoliated Black Phosphorus Transistors against Ambient Degradation, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6964–6970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Edmonds, A. Tadich, A. Carvalho, A. Ziletti, K. M. O'Donnell, S. P. Koenig, D. F. Coker, B. Özyilmaz, A. H. Castro Neto and M. S. Fuhrer, Creating a Stable Oxide at the Surface of Black Phosphorus, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14557–14562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, Z. Zhao, H. Chen, L. Zheng, X. Li, J. Chen, Y. Sun, F. Liu, Y. Guo and Y. Liu, Regioregular bis-pyridal [2, 1, 3] thiadiazole-based semiconducting polymer for high-performance ambipolar transistors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17735–17738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, X. Han, Z. Li, W. Liu, X. Li, J. Wu, Z. Guo and H. Liu, Epitaxial Growth of Few-Layer Black Phosphorene Quantum Dots on Si Substrates, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1801048 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu and D. Tománek, Semiconducting layered blue phosphorus: a computational study, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 176802 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Mogulkoc, M. Modarresi, A. Mogulkoc and B. Alkan, Electronic and optical properties of boron phosphide/blue phosphorus heterostructures, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 12053–12060 RSC .
K. Ren, S. Wang, Y. Luo, Y. Xu, M. Sun, J. Yu and W. Tang, Strain-enhanced properties of van der Waals heterostructure based on blue phosphorus and g-GaN as a visible-light-driven photocatalyst for water splitting, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 4816–4823 RSC .
C. Gu, S. Zhao, J. L. Zhang, S. Sun, K. Yuan, Z. Hu, C. Han, Z. Ma, L. Wang and F. Huo, Growth of quasi-free-standing single-layer blue phosphorus on tellurium monolayer functionalized Au (111), ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4943–4949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, C.-C. Ren, S.-F. Zhang, W.-X. Ji, C.-W. Zhang, P. Li and P.-J. Wang, Electronic Structural and Optical Properties of Multilayer Blue Phosphorus: A First-Principle Study, J. Nanomater., 2019, 2019, 4020762 Search PubMed .
J. Xiao, M. Long, C.-S. Deng, J. He, L.-L. Cui and H. Xu, Electronic structures and carrier mobilities of blue phosphorus nanoribbons and nanotubes: a first-principles study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4638–4646 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, Y. Shen, Y. Ma, S. Wu and Z. Zhou, A water splitting photocatalysis: blue phosphorus/g-GeC van der Waals heterostructure, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 093902 CrossRef .
S. P. Koenig, R. A. Doganov, H. Schmidt, A. Castro Neto and B. Özyilmaz, Electric field effect in ultrathin black phosphorus, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 103106 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, S. McDonnell, X. Qin, A. Azcatl, L. Cheng, R. Addou, J. Kim, P. D. Ye and R. M. Wallace, Al2O3 on black phosphorus by atomic layer deposition: an in situ interface study, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13038–13043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Merola, P. Memmolo, L. Miccio, R. Savoia, M. Mugnano, A. Fontana, G. D’ippolito, A. Sardo, A. Iolascon and A. Gambale, Tomographic flow cytometry by digital holography, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, 16241 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hu, H. Gao, L. Gao, F. Li, N. Xu, X. Long, Y. Hu, J. Jin and J. Ma, Covalent functionalization of black phosphorus nanoflakes by carbon free radicals for durable air and water stability, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5834–5839 RSC .
A. Na, B. Hga and A. Zs, Elements beyond graphene: Current state and perspectives of elemental monolayer deposition by bottom-up approach, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 18, 100502 CrossRef .
H.-S. Tsai, C.-C. Lai, H. Medina, S.-M. Lin, Y.-C. Shih, Y.-Z. Chen, J.-H. Liang and Y.-L. Chueh, Scalable graphene synthesised by plasma-assisted selective reaction on silicon carbide for device applications, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13861–13869 RSC .
H.-S. Tsai, C.-H. Hsiao, C.-W. Chen, H. Ouyang and J.-H. Liang, Synthesis of nonepitaxial multilayer silicene assisted by ion implantation, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9488–9492 RSC .
H.-S. Tsai, Y.-Z. Chen, H. Medina, T.-Y. Su, T.-S. Chou, Y.-H. Chen, Y.-L. Chueh and J.-H. Liang, Direct formation of large-scale multi-layered germanene on Si substrate, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21389–21393 RSC .
R. Gusmão, Z. Sofer, D. Bouša and M. Pumera, Pnictogen (As, Sb, Bi) Nanosheets for Electrochemical Applications Are Produced by Shear Exfoliation Using Kitchen Blenders, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 14609–14614 CrossRef .
L. Cai, J. He, Q. Liu, T. Yao, L. Chen, W. Yan, F. Hu, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhao and T. Hu, Vacancy-induced ferromagnetism of MoS2 nanosheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2622–2627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vishnoi, M. Mazumder, S. K. Pati and C. N. R. Rao, Arsenene nanosheets and nanodots, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 14091–14095 RSC .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi, A. M. Pourrahimi, Z. K. Sofer and M. Pumera, Atomically Thin 2D-Arsenene by Liquid-Phased Exfoliation: Toward Selective Vapor Sensing, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 29, 1807004 CrossRef .
P. Vishnoi, M. Mazumder, S. K. Pati and C. R. Rao, Arsenene nanosheets and nanodots, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 14091–14095 RSC .
H.-S. Tsai, S.-W. Wang, C.-H. Hsiao, C.-W. Chen, H. Ouyang, Y.-L. Chueh, H.-C. Kuo and J.-H. Liang, Direct synthesis and practical bandgap estimation of multilayer arsenene nanoribbons, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 425–429 CrossRef CAS .
O. Osters, T. Nilges, F. Bachhuber, F. Pielnhofer, R. Weihrich, M. Schöneich and P. Schmidt, Synthesis and identification of metastable compounds: Black arsenic—Science or fiction?, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2994–2997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, M. Köpf, A. N. Abbas, X. Wang, Q. Guo, Y. Jia, F. Xia, R. Weihrich, F. Bachhuber and F. Pielnhofer, Black arsenic–phosphorus: layered anisotropic infrared semiconductors with highly tunable compositions and properties, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4423–4429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ares, F. Aguilar-Galindo, D. Rodríguez-San-Miguel, D. A. Aldave, S. Díaz-Tendero, M. Alcamí, F. Martín, J. Gómez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Mechanical isolation of highly stable antimonene under ambient conditions, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6332–6336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tao, E. Cinquanta, D. Chiappe, C. Grazianetti, M. Fanciulli, M. Dubey, A. Molle and D. Akinwande, Silicene field-effect transistors operating at room temperature, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. N. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and surface forces, Academic Press,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. Xu, S. Zhang, F. Wang, J. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Pei, Y. W. Myint, B. Xing, Z. Yu and L. Fu, Extraordinarily bound quasi-one-dimensional trions in two-dimensional phosphorene atomic semiconductors, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2046–2053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Hao, S. Yuan, S. Lin, H. M. Yau, J. Dai and S. P. Lau, Field-Effect Transistors Based on Amorphous Black Phosphorus Ultrathin Films by Pulsed Laser Deposition, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Electrochemical Exfoliation of Layered Black Phosphorus into Phosphorene, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10443–10445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Martínez-Periñán, M. P. Down, C. Gibaja, E. Lorenzo, F. Zamora and C. E. Banks, Antimonene: A Novel 2D Nanomaterial for Supercapacitor Applications, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702606 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal′ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, A roadmap for graphene, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pei, S. E. Lowe, G. P. Simon and L. Z. Yu, Electrochemical exfoliation of graphite and production of functional graphene, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 20, 329–338 CrossRef .
C. Y. Su, A.-Y. Lu, Y. Xu, F.-R. Chen, A. N. Khlobystov and L.-J. Li, High-Quality Thin Graphene Films from Fast Electrochemical Exfoliation, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2332–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Na, P. Kim, H. K. Ji, J. H. Ye and C. J. Lee, Large-Area Atomically Thin MoS2 Nanosheets Prepared Using Electrochemical Exfoliation, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6902 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kojima, S. Nakamura, T. Motoori, H. Itoh, K. Shimizu, N. Yamane, Y. Ohno, S. Ban, K. Yoshida and K. Hoshi, Progressive Transformation of Germinal Centers: A Clinicopathological Study of 42 Japanese Patients, Int. J. Surg. Pathol., 2003, 11, 101–107 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yu, S. E. Lowe, G. P. Simon and Y. L. Zhong, Electrochemical exfoliation of graphite and production of functional graphene, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 20, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ji, X. Song, J. Liu, Z. Yan, C. Huo, S. Zhang, M. Su, L. Liao, W. Wang, Z. Ni, Y. Hao and H. Zeng, Two-dimensional antimonene single crystals grown by van der Waals epitaxy, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
N. Hussain, T. Liang, Q. Zhang, T. Anwar, Y. Huang, J. Lang, K. Huang and H. Wu, Ultrathin Bi Nanosheets with Superior Photoluminescence, Small, 2017, 13, 1701349 CrossRef PubMed .
Q.-Q. Yang, R.-T. Liu, C. Huang, Y.-F. Huang, L.-F. Gao, B. Sun, Z.-P. Huang, L. Zhang, C.-X. Hu, Z.-Q. Zhang, C.-L. Sun, Q. Wang, Y.-L. Tang and H.-L. Zhang, 2D bismuthene fabricated via acid-intercalated exfoliation showing strong nonlinear near-infrared responses for mode-locking lasers, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21106–21115 RSC .
R. Miwa, T. Schmidt and G. Srivastava, Bi covered Si (111) surface revisited, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2003, 15, 2441 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuzumaki, T. Shirasawa, S. Mizuno, N. Ueno, H. Tochihara and K. Sakamoto, Re-investigation of the Bi-induced Si (111)-(3× 3) surfaces by low-energy electron diffraction, Surf. Sci., 2010, 604, 1044–1048 CrossRef CAS .
F. Reis, G. Li, L. Dudy, M. Bauernfeind, S. Glass, W. Hanke, R. Thomale, J. Schäfer and R. Claessen, Bismuthene on a SiC substrate: A candidate for a high-temperature quantum spin Hall material, Science, 2017, 357, 287–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-T. Sun, H. Huang, S. L. Wong, H.-J. Gao, Y. P. Feng and A. T. S. Wee, Energy-gap opening in a Bi (110) nanoribbon induced by edge reconstruction, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 246804 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-Y. Liu, Y. Huang, Q.-Y. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, C. Cao and Y. He, Strain and electric field tunable electronic structure of buckled bismuthene, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 39546–39555 RSC .
T. Chai, X. Li, T. Feng, P. Guo, Y. Song, Y. Chen and H. Zhang, Few-layer bismuthene for ultrashort pulse generation in a dissipative system based on an evanescent field, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17617–17622 RSC .
X. Yu, W. Liang, C. Xing, K. Chen, J. Chen, W. Huang, N. Xie, M. Qiu, X. Yan, Z. Xie and H. Zhang, Rising 2D pnictogens for catalytic applications: status and challenges, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 6, 4883–5230 Search PubMed .
S. Cui, H. Pu, S. A. Wells, Z. Wen, S. Mao, J. Chang, M. C. Hersam and J. Chen, Ultrahigh sensitivity and layer-dependent sensing performance of phosphorene-based gas sensors, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Donarelli, L. Ottaviano, L. Giancaterini, G. Fioravanti, F. Perrozzi and C. Cantalini, Exfoliated black phosphorus gas sensing properties at room temperature, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 025002 CrossRef .
S.-Y. Cho, H.-J. Koh, H.-W. Yoo and H.-T. Jung, Tunable chemical sensing performance of black phosphorus
by controlled functionalization with noble metals, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7197–7205 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, H. Yang and P. Hu, Interfacial Engineering for Fabricating High-Performance Field-Effect Transistors Based on 2D Materials, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700384 CrossRef .
Z. Cheng, K. Price and A. D. Franklin, Contacting and gating 2-D nanomaterials, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2018, 65, 4073–4083 CAS .
D. S. Schulman, A. J. Arnold and S. Das, Contact engineering for 2D materials and devices, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3037–3058 RSC .
A. V. Penumatcha, R. B. Salazar and J. Appenzeller, Analysing black phosphorus transistors using an analytic Schottky barrier MOSFET model, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–9 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Bao, T. Pei, R. Ma, Y.-Y. Zhang, L. Sun, G. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Li and C. Gu, Introduction of interfacial charges to black phosphorus for a family of planar devices, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6870–6878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Pan, M. Ye, R. Quhe, Y. Wang, Y. Guo, H. Zhang, Y. Dan, Z. Song and J. Li, Three-layer phosphorene-metal interfaces, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 707–721 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Sun, C. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Pan, M. Ye, Z. Song, R. Quhe, Y. Wang and H. Zhang, Electrical contacts in monolayer blue phosphorene devices, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1834–1849 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hirose, T. Osada, K. Uchida, T. Taen, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and Y. Akahama, Double carrier transport in electron-doped region in black phosphorus FET, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 193101 CrossRef .
F. Yang, Z. Zhang, N. Z. Wang, G. J. Ye, W. Lou, X. Zhou, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. Chang and X. H. Chen, Quantum hall effect in electron-doped black phosphorus field-effect transistors, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6611–6616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, Y. Wang, M. Ye, R. Quhe, H. Zhong, Z. Song, X. Peng, D. Yu, J. Yang and J. Shi, Monolayer phosphorene–metal contacts, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2100–2109 CrossRef CAS .
R. Quhe, Y. Wang, M. Ye, Q. Zhang, J. Yang, P. Lu, M. Lei and J. Lu, Black phosphorus transistors with van der Waals-type electrical contacts, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14047–14057 RSC .
R. Quhe, X. Peng, Y. Pan, M. Ye, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, S. Feng, Q. Zhang, J. Shi and J. Yang, Can a black phosphorus Schottky barrier transistor be good enough?, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3959–3966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, Y. Dan, Y. Wang, M. Ye, H. Zhang, R. Quhe, X. Zhang, J. Li, W. Guo and L. Yang, Schottky barriers in bilayer phosphorene transistors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12694–12705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. Ye, M. Weng, J. Li, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Guo, Y. Pan, L. Xiao and J. Liu, Electrical contacts in monolayer arsenene devices, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29273–29284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-P. Ling, S. Sakar, S. Mathew, J.-T. Zhu, K. Gopinadhan, T. Venkatesan and K.-W. Ang, Black phosphorus transistors with near band edge contact Schottky barrier, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
L. Li, M. Engel, D. B. Farmer, S.-J. Han and H.-S. P. Wong, High-performance p-type black phosphorus transistor with scandium contact, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4672–4677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-M. Chang, K.-L. Fan, A. Charnas, D. Y. Peide, Y.-M. Lin, C.-I. Wu and C.-H. Wu, Experimental analysis of the Schottky barrier height of metal contacts in black phosphorus field-effect transistors, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 135306 CrossRef .
N. Haratipour, S. Namgung, R. Grassi, T. Low, S.-H. Oh and S. J. Koester, High-performance black phosphorus MOSFETs using crystal orientation control and contact engineering, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2017, 38, 685–688 CAS .
B. Jiang, X. Zou, J. Su, J. Liang, J. Wang, H. Liu, L. Feng, C. Jiang, F. Wang and J. He, Impact of Thickness on Contact Issues for Pinning Effect in Black Phosphorus Field-Effect Transistors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801398 CrossRef .
C.-H. Wang, J. A. C. Incorvia, C. J. McClellan, A. C. Yu, M. J. Mleczko, E. Pop and H.-S. P. Wong, Unipolar n-type black phosphorus transistors with low work function contacts, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2822–2827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Oliva, E. A. Casu, W. A. Vitale, I. Stolichnov and A. M. Ionescu, Polarity control of top gated black phosphorous FETs by workfunction engineering of pre-patterned Au and Ag embedded electrodes, IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc., 2018, 6, 1041–1047 CAS .
S. Das, M. Demarteau and A. Roelofs, Ambipolar phosphorene field effect transistor, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11730–11738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Q. Cai, J. Lei, G. Yang, J. Xue, D. Chen, B. Liu, H. Lu, R. Zhang and Y. Zheng, Performance of monolayer blue phosphorene double-gate MOSFETs from the first principles, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20956–20964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, Z. Song, S. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Li, W. Wang and J. Lu, Sub-5 nm monolayer arsenene and antimonene transistors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22363–22371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Tie, J. Li, M. Ye, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Pan, Y. Wang, R. Quhe and F. Pan, High-performance sub-10-nm monolayer black phosphorene tunneling transistors, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2658–2668 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Tie, J. Li, M. Ye, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Pan, Y. Wang, R. Quhe and F. Pan, High-performance sub-10-nm monolayer black phosphorene tunneling transistors, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2658–2668 CrossRef CAS .
R. Quhe, Q. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Li, X. Zhang, D. Chen, K. Liu and Y. Ye, Simulations of quantum transport in sub-5-nm monolayer phosphorene transistors, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2018, 10, 024022 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang and C. Hobbs, Theoretical study of phosphorene tunneling field effect transistors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 083509 CrossRef .
F. Luigi, C. Antonio, B. Stefania, B. Benedetta, C. Annamaria, L. Fulvio, M. Antonio, A. L. Cristina, S. Umberto and J. M. Guralnik, Relationship of Plasma Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids to Circulating Inflammatory Markers, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 2006, 1, 439–446 Search PubMed .
S. Das, W. Zhang, M. Demarteau, A. Hoffmann, M. Dubey and A. Roelofs, Tunable Transport Gap in Phosphorene, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1–7 CrossRef .
D. Yin and Y. Yoon, Design strategy of two-dimensional material field-effect transistors: Engineering the number of layers in phosphorene FETs, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 214312 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Zhou, H. Zou, M. Li and F. Ouyang, Monolayer–Trilayer Lateral Heterostructure Based Antimonene Field Effect Transistor: Better Contact and High On/Off Ratios, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2018, 12, 1800038 CrossRef .
X. Feng, X. Huang, L. Chen, W. C. Tan, L. Wang and K. W. Ang, High mobility anisotropic black phosphorus nanoribbon field-effect transistor, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801524 CrossRef .
M. Hu, Z. Yang, W. Zhou, A. Li, J. Pan and F. Ouyang, Field effect transistors based on phosphorene nanoribbon with selective edge-adsorption: a first-principles study, Phys. E, 2018, 98, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, H. Wang and I. Sanchez Esqueda, Temperature-dependent transport in ultrathin black phosphorus field-effect transistors, Nano Lett., 2018, 19, 482–487 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhong, Q. Xia, L. Pan, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, H. X. Deng, J. Li and Z. Wei, Thickness-dependent carrier transport characteristics of a new 2D elemental semiconductor: black arsenic, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802581 CrossRef .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Ultrahigh electron mobility in suspended graphene, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
A. Das, S. Pisana, B. Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K. Saha, U. V. Waghmare, K. S. Novoselov, H. R. Krishnamurthy, A. K. Geim and A. C. Ferrari, Monitoring dopants by Raman scattering in an electrochemically top-gated graphene transistor, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 210–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Black phosphorus field-effect transistors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ji, M.-K. Joo, Y. Yun, J.-H. Park, G. M. Lee, B. H. Moon, H. Yi, D. Suh and S. C. Lim, Suppression of Interfacial Current Fluctuation in MoTe\\r2\\r Transistors with Different Dielectrics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 1, 1–5 Search PubMed .
W. Zhu, M. N. Yogeesh, S. Yang, S. H. Aldave, J.-S. Kim, S. Sonde, L. Tao, N. Lu and D. Akinwande, Flexible Black Phosphorus Ambipolar Transistors, Circuits and AM Demodulator, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1883–1890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, M. N. Yogeesh, S. Yang, S. H. Aldave, J.-S. Kim, S. Sonde, L. Tao, N. Lu and D. Akinwande, Flexible black phosphorus ambipolar transistors, circuits and AM demodulator, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1883–1890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Seo, B. Park, Y. Kim, H. U. Lee, H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, Y. Kim, J. Won, Y. J. Kim and J. Lee, Black phosphorus quantum dot-based field-effect transistors with ambipolar characteristics, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 576–582 CrossRef CAS .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Fast and Broadband Photoresponse of Few-Layer Black Phosphorus Field-Effect Transistors, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3347–3352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Youngblood, C. Chen, S. J. Koester and M. Li, Waveguide-integrated black phosphorus photodetector with high responsivity and low dark current, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 247–252 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, X. Liu, F. Afshinmanesh, W. Li, G. Xu, J. Sun, B. Lian, A. G. Curto, G. Ye and Y. Hikita, Polarization-sensitive broadband photodetector using a black phosphorus vertical p–n junction, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 707–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lin, H. Zhang and X.-L. Cheng, First-principle study on the optical response of phosphorene, Front. Phys., 2015, 10, 1–9 CrossRef .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Photovoltaic effect in few-layer black phosphorus PN junctions defined by local electrostatic gating, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kou, T. Frauenheim and C. Chen, Phosphorene as a superior gas sensor: selective adsorption and distinct I–V response, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2675–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Gan, Q. Zhang, Y.-J. Zhao, Y. Cheng and U. Schwingenschlögl, Order-disorder phase transitions in the two-dimensional semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide alloys Mo1−xWxX2 (X = S, Se, and Te), Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Low, M. Engel, M. Steiner and P. Avouris, Origin of photoresponse in black phosphorus phototransistors, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 081408 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Abbas, B. Liu, L. Chen, Y. Ma, S. Cong, N. Aroonyadet, M. Köpf, T. Nilges and C. Zhou, Black phosphorus gas sensors, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5618–5624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lei, Z. Y. Yu, H. Y. Shen, X. L. Sun, N. Wan and H. Yu, CO Adsorption on Metal-Decorated Phosphorene, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 3957–3965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, M. Li, J. Li, J. Liang, X. Keegan, R. Adair, Y. Hu, Q. Xiao, X. Cui, R. Li, F. Brandys, R. Divigalpitiya, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Phosphorene Nanosheets Exfoliated from Low-cost and High-quality Black Phosphorus for Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 7508–7515 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Dinh, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu and W. Sun, Phosphorene-based Electrocatalysts, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 6437–6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sofer, D. Sedmidubsky, T. Huber, J. Luxa, D. Bouša, C. Boothroyd and M. Pumera, Back Cover: Layered Black Phosphorus: Strongly Anisotropic Magnetic, Electronic, and Electron-Transfer Properties (Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 10/2016), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3516 CrossRef CAS .
M. Batmunkh, M. Bat-Erdene and J. G. Shapter, Phosphorene and Phosphorene-Based Materials – Prospects for Future Applications, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8586–8617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. He, J. Hua, A. Zhang, C. Wang and J. Peng, Molybdenum Disulfide–Black Phosphorus Hybrid Nanosheets as a Superior Catalyst for Electrochemical Hydrogen Evolution, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4311–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Luo, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. T. Tan, Z. Li, A. Abutaha, X. L. Wu, Q. Xiong, K. A. Khor and K. Hippalgaonkar, Multifunctional 0D–2D Ni2P nanocrystals-black phosphorus heterostructure, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601285 CrossRef .
J. Wang, D. Liu, H. Huang, N. Yang, B. Yu, M. Wen, X. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, In-Plane Black Phosphorus/Dicobalt Phosphide Heterostructure for Efficient Electrocatalysis, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 2630–2634 CrossRef .
H. Jiang, J. Gu, X. Zheng, M. Liu, X. Qiu, L. Wang, W. Li, Z. Chen, X. Ji and J. Li, Defect-rich and ultrathin N doped carbon nanosheets as advanced trifunctional metal-free electrocatalysts for the ORR, OER and HER, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 322–333 RSC .
Z. Sofer, D. Sedmidubský, Š. Huber, J. Luxa, D. Bouša, C. Boothroyd and M. Pumera, Layered Black Phosphorus: Strongly Anisotropic Magnetic, Electronic, and Electron-Transfer Properties, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3382–3386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shao, H. Sun, L. Miao, X. Chen, M. Han, J. Sun, S. Liu, L. Li, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Facile preparation of NH2-functionalized black phosphorene for the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2494–2499 RSC .
R. He, J. Hua, A. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Peng, W. Chen and J. Zeng, Molybdenum disulfide–black phosphorus hybrid nanosheets as a superior catalyst for electrochemical hydrogen evolution, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4311–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Z. Luo, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. T. Tan, Z. Li, A. Abutaha, X.-L. Wu, Q. Xiong, K. A. Khor, K. Hippalgaonkar, J. Xu, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Li-Ion Batteries: Multifunctional 0D-2D Ni2P Nanocrystals-Black Phosphorus Heterostructure, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601285 CrossRef .
D. J. Wang, D. Liu, H. Huang, N. Yang, B. Yu, D. M. Wen, D. X. Wang, P. P. K. Chu and P. X.-F. Yu, In-Plane Black Phosphorus/Dicobalt Phosphide Heterostructure for Efficient Electrocatalysis, Angew. Chem., 2017, 130, 2630–2634 CrossRef .
K. N. Dinh, Q. Liang, C.-F. Du, J. Zhao, A. I. Y. Tok, H. Mao and Q. Yan, Nanostructured metallic transition metal carbides, nitrides, phosphides, and borides for energy storage and conversion, Nano Today, 2019, 25, 99–121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, P. Cui, G. Zhao, K. Rui, M. Lao, Y. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Jiang, H. Pan and S. X. Dou, Low-Coordinate Iridium Oxide Confined on Graphitic Carbon Nitride for Highly Efficient Oxygen Evolution, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12540–12544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Dinh, P. Zheng, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, R. Dangol, Y. Zheng, B. Li, Y. Zong and Q. Yan, Ultrathin porous NiFeV ternary layer hydroxide nanosheets as a highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, Small, 2018, 14, 1703257 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yuan, J. Li, M. Yang, Z. Fang, J. Jian, D. Yu, X. Chen and L. Dai, Ultrathin black phosphorus-on-nitrogen doped graphene for efficient overall water splitting: dual modulation roles of directional interfacial charge transfer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4972–4979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, M. Khurram, Z. Sun and Q. Yan, Uniform tellurium doping in black phosphorus single crystals by chemical vapor transport, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 4098–4103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chang, A. Nie, S. Yuan, B. Wang, C. Mu, J. Xiang, B. Yang, L. Li, F. Wen and Z. Liu, Liquid-exfoliation of S-doped black phosphorus nanosheets for enhanced oxygen evolution catalysis, Nanotechnology, 2018, 30, 035701 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Xu, H. Li, A. S. R. Bati, M. Bat-Erdene, M. J. Nine, D. Losic, Y. Chen, J. G. Shapter, M. Batmunkh and T. Ma, Nitrogen-doped phosphorene for electrocatalytic ammonia synthesis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15875–15883 RSC .
L. Zhang, L. X. Ding, G. F. Chen, X. Yang and H. Wang, Ammonia Synthesis Under Ambient Conditions: Selective Electroreduction of Dinitrogen to Ammonia on Black Phosphorus Nanosheets, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 2638–2642 CrossRef .
Y.-T. Liu, D. Li, J. Yu and B. Ding, Stable Confinement of Black Phosphorus Quantum Dots on Black Tin Oxide Nanotubes: A Robust, Double-Active Electrocatalyst toward Efficient Nitrogen Fixation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 16591–16596 CrossRef .
X. Liang, X. Deng, C. Guo and C.-M. L. Wu, Activity origin and design principles for atomic vanadium anchoring on phosphorene monolayer for nitrogen reduction reaction, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2925–2932 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, B. Lu, N. Wang, J. E. Lu and S. Chen, Oxygen Reduction Reaction Catalyzed by Black Phosphorus-Supported Metal Nanoparticles: Impacts of Interfacial Charge Transfer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24707–24714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, J. Fan, Q. Li, P. Shi, Q. Xu and Y. Min, Palladium Nanoparticles Anchored on Anatase Titanium Dioxide-Black Phosphorus Hybrids with Heterointerfaces: Highly Electroactive and Durable Catalysts for Ethanol Electrooxidation, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701799 CrossRef .
T. Wu, Y. Ma, Z. Qu, J. Fan, Q. Li, P. Shi, Q. Xu and Y. Min, Black Phosphorus-Graphene Heterostructure-supported Pd Nanoparticles with Superior Activity and Stability for Ethanol Electro-oxidation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5136–5145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Graydon, Quantum optics: Black phosphorus potential, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 746 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zu, X. Gao, H. Lian, C. Li, Q. Liang, Y. Liang, X. Cui, Y. Liu, X. Wang and X. Cui, Electrochemical prepared phosphorene as a cathode for supercapacitors, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 770, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, C.-S. Liu and X. Yan, Arsenene as a promising candidate for NO and NO2 sensor: A first-principles study, Phys. Lett. A, 2017, 381, 1092–1096 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Som, V. Mankad and P. K. Jha, Hydrogen evolution reaction: The role of arsenene nanosheet and dopant, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 9, 1–8 Search PubMed .
X.-J. Ye, G.-L. Zhu, J. Liu, C.-S. Liu and X.-H. Yan, Monolayer, Bilayer, and Heterostructure Arsenene as Potential Anode Materials for Magnesium-Ion Batteries: A First-Principles Study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 15777–15786 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tao, X. Ji, X. Xu, M. A. Islam, Z. Li, S. Chen, P. E. Saw, H. Zhang, Z. Bharwani and Z. Guo, Antimonene Quantum Dots: Synthesis and Application as Near-Infrared Photothermal Agents for Effective Cancer Therapy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11896–11900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xue, W. Liang, Y. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Xiang, Y. Zhang, Z. Dai, Y. Duo, L. Wu and K. Qi, Ultrasensitive detection of miRNA with an antimonene-based surface plasmon resonance sensor, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Chen, J. Huang, Y. Hou and Z. Wen, Interfacial engineering of Ru–S–Sb/antimonene electrocatalysts for highly efficient electrolytic hydrogen generation in neutral electrolyte, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1–5 RSC .
X. Ren, Z. Li, H. Qiao, W. Liang, H. Liu, F. Zhang, X. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Huang, D. Zhang, J. Li, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Few-Layer Antimonene Nanosheet: A Metal-Free Bifunctional Electrocatalyst for Effective Water Splitting, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4774–4781 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, S. Elshahat, N. Muhammad, J. Li, I. Aboodd, L. Bibbò, A. Yadav, R. U. R. Sagar, U. Khan and Z. Ouyang, Facile metal-free reduction-based synthesis of pristine and cation-doped conductive mayenite, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 24276–24285 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, S. Elshahat, A. Yadav, U. Khan, M. Yang, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of cationic doped [Ca24Al28O64]4+.(4e−) composite via rapid citrate sol-gel method, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 3819–3830 RSC .
W. Zou, K. Khan, X. Zhao, C. Zhu, J. Huang, J. Li, Y. Yang and W. Song, Direct Fabrication of C12A7 Electride Target and Room Temperature Deposition of Thin Films with Low Work Function, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 1–20 Search PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, L. Jia, U. Khan, A. Nairan, Y. Yuan, X. Zhang, M. Yang and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of Tin doped mayenite electride compositeas a non-noble metal, durable electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 13498–13506 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, K. H. Thebo, U. Khan, R. Wang, S. S. Shams, Z. Han and Z. Ouyang, A comprehensive review on synthesis of pristine and doped inorganic room temperature stable mayenite electride, [Ca24Al28O64]4+(e−)4 and its applications as a catalyst, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2018, 54, 1–19 CrossRef .
E. Martínez-Periñán, M. P. Down, C. Gibaja, E. Lorenzo, F. Zamora and C. E. Banks, Antimonene: A Novel 2D Nanomaterial for Supercapacitor Applications, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702606 CrossRef .
J. Ji, X. Song, J. Liu, Z. Yan, C. Huo, S. Zhang, M. Su, L. Liao, W. Wang and Z. Ni, Two-dimensional antimonene single crystals grown by van der Waals epitaxy, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. Huang, M. Ye, R. Quhe, Y. Pan, H. Zhang, H. Zhong, J. Shi and J. Lu, Many-body effect, carrier mobility, and device performance of hexagonal arsenene and antimonene, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2191–2201 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang, Novel antimonene tunneling field-effect transistors using an abrupt transition from semiconductor to metal in monolayer and multilayer antimonene heterostructures, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13652–13660 RSC .
D. Seo and J. Chang, Doping-free arsenene heterostructure metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistors enabled by thickness modulated semiconductor to metal transition in arsenene, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Wu, Y. Lyu and J. Hao, Centimeter-scale growth of two-dimensional layered high-mobility bismuth films by pulsed laser deposition, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 98–107 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cao, D. D. Ma, J. F. Gu, X. Xie, G. Zeng, X. Li, S. G. Han, Q. L. Zhu, X. T. Wu and Q. Xu, Metal-organic Layers Derived Atomically Thin Bismuthene for Efficient Carbon Dioxide Electroreduction to Liquid Fuel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 15124–15130 CrossRef .
F. Yang, A. O. Elnabawy, R. Schimmenti, P. Song, J. Wang, Z. Peng, S. Yao, R. Deng, S. Song, Y. Lin, M. Mavrikakis and W. Xu, Bismuthene for highly efficient carbon dioxide electroreduction reaction, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Zhu and Y. Li, Spin–Orbit Coupling-Dominated Catalytic Activity of Two-Dimensional Bismuth toward CO2 Electroreduction: Not the Thinner the Better, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 10, 4663–4667 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Han, Y. Wang, H. Yang, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Ultrathin bismuth nanosheets from in situ topotactic transformation for selective electrocatalytic CO 2 reduction to formate, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1320 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, N. Han, J. Deng, J. Wu and J. Lu, Selective CO2 Reduction on 2D Mesoporous Bi Nanosheets, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801536 CrossRef .
F. P. G. De Arquer, O. S. Bushuyev, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, M. I. Saidaminov, C. S. Tan, L. N. Quan, A. Proppe and M. G. Kibria, 2D Metal Oxyhalide-Derived Catalysts for Efficient CO2 Electroreduction, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802858 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Low, A. Chaves, J. D. Caldwell, A. Kumar, N. X. Fang, P. Avouris, T. F. Heinz, F. Guinea, L. Martin-Moreno and F. Koppens, Polaritons in layered two-dimensional materials, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 182–194 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Laiquan, T. Cheng, X. Bingquan, J. Huanyu, Z. Yao and Q. S. Zhang, 2D Mosaic Bismuth Nanosheets for Highly Selective Ambient Electrocatalytic Nitrogen Reduction, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2902–2908 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Hao, Y. Guo, L.-W. Chen, M. Shu, X.-Y. Wang, T.-A. Bu, W.-Y. Gao, N. Zhang, X. Su, X. Feng, J.-W. Zhou, B. Wang, C.-W. Hu, A.-X. Yin, R. Si, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, Promoting nitrogen electroreduction to ammonia with bismuth nanocrystals and potassium cations in water, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 448–456 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Rong, J. Lei, K. Wenhan, W. Huanbo, Z. Runbo, C. Hongyu, L. T. Shuai, L. Baihai, L. Yonglan and S. Xuping, Electrocatalytic N2-to-NH3 conversion with high faradaic efficiency enabled using a Bi nanosheet array, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 5263–5266 RSC .
D. Larcher and J.-M. Tarascon, Towards greener and more sustainable batteries for electrical energy storage, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Weil and S. Passerini, A cost and resource analysis of sodium-ion batteries, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 1–11 CrossRef .
S. Zhao, R. Fang, Z. Sun, S. Wang, J. P. Veder, M. Saunders, H. M. Cheng, C. Liu, S. P. Jiang and F. Li, A 3D multifunctional architecture for lithium–sulfur batteries with high areal capacity, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800067 CrossRef .
S. Guo, X. Hu, W. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Gao, S. Zhang, K. Zhang, Z. Zhu and H. Zeng, Mechanistic understanding of two-dimensional phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony high-capacity anodes for fast-charging lithium/sodium ion batteries, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 29559–29566 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi and M. Pumera, 2D-Pnictogens: alloy-based anode battery materials with ultrahigh cycling stability, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6964–6989 RSC .
M. Y. Chung, An experimental investigation of free-surface structures in turbulent channel flow at low Reynolds numbers, Retrovirology, 1998, 10, 1 Search PubMed .
C.-H. Lim, B. Selvaraj, Y.-F. Song, C.-C. Wang, J.-T. Jin, S.-S. Huang, C.-H. Chuang, H.-S. Sheu, Y.-F. Liao and N.-L. Wu, Insight into microstructural and phase transformations in electrochemical sodiation–desodiation of a bismuth particulate anode, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21536–21541 RSC .
E. Edison, S. Sreejith, C. T. Lim and S. Madhavi, Beyond intercalation based sodium-ion batteries: the role of alloying anodes, efficient sodiation mechanisms and recent progress, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2567–2582 RSC .
J. Sturala, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Chemistry of layered pnictogens: phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7551–7557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, C. Zhu, S. Zhang, X. Hu, K. Zhang, W. Zhou, S. Guo, F. Xu and H. Zeng, Ultrathin bismuth nanosheets for stable Na-ion batteries: clarification of structure and phase transition by in situ observation, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Chen, M. Chen, J. Wang, X. Liu, B. Wei, Z. Wang, J. Li, L. Gu and Q. Zhang, Few-Layer Bismuthene with Anisotropic Expansion for High-Areal-Capacity Sodium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807874 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Snehhaa, V. Nagarajanb and R. Chandiramouli, Novel bismuthene nanotubes to detect NH3, NO2 and PH3 gas molecules - A first-principles insight, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 712, 102–111 CrossRef .

Footnote† Equal contribution.This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Karim Khan
	Dr Karim Khan (0000-0001-8689-9245) was born in Paharpur, Dera-Ismail-Khan, K.P.K., Pakistan. He received his BSc Degree (2005) from Gomal University, MSc (2009) in Physics from the University of Peshawar, MPhil (2012) in Solid State Physics from the University of the Punjab, Pakistan, and did research at the “National Centre for Physics”, Quaid-e-Azim University, Pakistan. He received his PhD (2016) from the Chinese Academy of Sciences and he also served as a Postdoctoral Fellow in Shenzhen University (2017–2019) and Dongguan University of Technology (2019–2021), China. To date, he has over 69 scientific publications and 2 patents. The total citations of all his publications is more than 1400 times, and his H index is 19. His current research focuses on 2D electrocatalyst materials and their applications in energy producing/storage/saving devices and developing sensors for biomedical applications.

Ayesha Khan Tareen
	Dr Ayesha Khan Tareen (0000-0002-7238-6366) is presently a Post-Doctoral Fellow in Shenzhen University. She received her PhD (Physical Chemistry/Materials) in 2018 from Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering (NIMTE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), MPhil (Analytical Chemistry) in 2015 from “The Islamia University of Bahawalpur” and BSc (Honors) in Chemistry in 2012 from Government College University Lahore, Pakistan. Her research interests are focused on superconductivity and 2D- and transition metal nitride material synthesis and applications in different fields especially for electro, photo-catalysts for energy conversion and storage, dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and bio-sensors.

Han Zhang
	Prof. Dr Han Zhang (0000-0002-0166-1973) received his BS Degree from Wuhan University in 2006 and PhD from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in 2010. He is currently a Director of Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 2D-materials and Devices, and the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. His current research focuses on the ultrafast and nonlinear photonics of 2D-materials. He is also a Highly Cited Researcher of the Clarivate Analytics in 2018 and 2019. He was awarded the Fellow of the Optical Society of America in 2019. In the past five years, Prof. Han Zhang's group has published more than 100 papers, including 4 in Physics Reports, 3 in PNAS, 4 in Chem. Soc. Rev., 8 in Nat. Comm., 16 in Adv. Mater. The total citations of all his publications is more than 39000 times, and his H index is 109.

Key learning points
1. Overview of the broad significance of the group V 2D-monoelemental materials (Xenes).
2. Outlined the recent progress in the group-V Xenes, ranging from their synthesis and structures to properties.
3. Applications of the group-V 2D-Xenes.
4. Challenges and future guidelines.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Synthetic elemental 2D material (SE2D material) specifications in the periodic table. (b) Timeline of experimentally synthesized current monoelemental 2D material Xenes, where “Th.” means theoretical. Adapted with permission from ref. 99.	 

 	Fig. 2  Layered crystal structures of group V elements: (a) consisting of parallel puckered layers with the Cmca space group (α phase) and (b) consisting of parallel buckled layers with Rm space group (β phase). (c) Stable phases and natural layered crystals of P, As, Sb and Bi crystals. Adapted with permission from ref. 142.	 

Arsenic	Rhombohedral (β, grey As)	Metal properties down to 3 layers147	2L β-arsenic 0.37 eV147

	Orthorhombic (α, layer)	—	1L β-arsenic 2.49 eV147
Cubic (yellow As)
Amorphous (black As)
Antimony	Rhombohedral (grey Sb)	Metal properties down to 2 layers20,129,147	1L β-antimony 2.28 eV20,129,147
Amorphous (black Sb)
Bismuth	Rhombohedral (metallic Bi)	Metal properties down to 3 layers148	2L α-bismuth 0.18 eV148
1L α-bismuth 0.30 eV148
2L β-bismuth 0.23 eV148
1L β-bismuth 0.32 eV148
Phosphorene	Orthorhombic (α, P)	Metal properties down to 2 layers	1L phosphorene 1.45 eV149
2L phosphorene 1.02 eV149

 	Fig. 3  Group V 2D-Xene family, their structure, and applications.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Top view of ML group V (P, As, Sb, and Bi) allotropes with five honeycomb structures (α, β, γ, ε, and δ) and four non-honeycomb configurations (ξ, η, θ, and ι) and (b) average binding energies together with the energetic stability for the “α” and “β” phases. Adapted with permission from ref. 152.	 

 	Fig. 5  2D-PP structure. (a) and (b) Armchair and zigzag side views, (c) top view, and (d) P–P bonding arrangement, where every P-atom is linked with three surrounding P-atoms, forming a puckered configuration, which is similar to a hinge network that shows anisotropic rotational deformation under strain. Adapted with permission from ref. 155.	 


α-P	4.53/3.36156	0.25038	2.247156	1.12y/6.35y157	1.10–1.14/0.08157	1500156	28.94/101.60157
β-P	3.33/3.33156	—	2.267156	—	—	2620156	—
α-As	3.69/4.76156	—	2.429156	0.17x/0.50y, 0.48x/0.50y158	0.100–1	1660156	52158
β-As	3.61/3.61156	1.40159	2.453156	—	0.030–0.020	2200156	—
α-Sb	4.35/4.89156	
	2.748156	0.21(A), 0.16(Z)158	0.150	1180156	32158
β-Sb	4.12/4.12156	1.65159	2.755156	—	0.030	1550(SOC), 2280156	—
α-Bi	4.59/5.01156	
	—	—	—	30(SOC), 140156	—
β-Bi	4.34/4.34156	1.73159	2.979156	—	0.500	320(SOC), 800156	23.9148

 	Fig. 6  (a) Group-V MLs at the HSE06 level of theory electronic band structures. (b) Energy level calculation at the HSE06 level with a broad band PL spectrum. Adapted with permission from ref. 152.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) DFT-based band structures for one, two and three layers of 2D-PP, and for bulk BP, calculated using the PBEsol functional. Γ = (0, 0) indicates the 2D Brillouin zone centre. (b) Comparison of angle-resolved photoemission spectra with bands achieved with Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof-based function DFT calculations in bulk BP. The inset illustrates the first 3D Brillouin zone in BP. (c) Band gap with respect to the number of layers from theory (G0W0 and Bethe–Salpeter equation (BSE) and experiment (PL)). EF, Fermi energy and k, wave vector. Adapted with permission from ref. 113.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Dipole-allowed transitions in ML 2D-PP. (b) ML 2D-PP NS dipole response to impulse excitation polarized light along the x and y directions. (c) For 40 nm-thick BP the absorption coefficient polar representation for normal incident light, with the excitation energies superior to the band gap (ω0) illustrated on the left. (d) Lowest energy exciton wave functions in ML PP. (e) PL spectra measured for different number of PP layers. Adapted with permission from ref. 113.	 

2D-PP sheets	Mechanical exfoliation	NO2	20–1000 ppb	FET	
260

2D-PP NSs/Si3N4	Chemically exfoliated	NH3	1 ppm	p-type	
261

2D-PP NSs/Si3N4	Chemically exfoliated	NO2	7 ppb	p-type	
261

2D-PP Pt-NPs	
	H2	5 ppm	Chemi-resistive	
262


Edge-PP	0.5 M H2SO4	NA	550	NA	
325

Basal-PP	0.5 M H2SO4	NA	1130	NA	
325

NH2-PP	IM KOH	0.04	290	63	
326

MoS2-PP	0.5 M H2SO4	0.102	85	68	
327

Ni2P@PP	0.5 M H2SO4	NA	107	38.6	
328

PP/Co2P	IM KOH	0.14	336 (100 mA cm−2)	72	
329

PP/Co2P	0.5 M H2SO4	0.14	340 (100 mA cm−2)	62	
329


 	Fig. 9  Scheme showing the methods for the synthesis of 2D-Xenes. Adapted with permission from ref. 183.	 

 	Fig. 10  Encapsulated PP, protecting it from oxidation. (a) AFM and optical microscopy analysis of the degradation of PP in air after exfoliation. (b) Device cross-section through scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) analysis illustrating PP covered by oxide layers. (c) Flexible PP-based transistor encapsulated in AlOxvia ALD and mechanical bending after 5000 bending cycles. Adapted with permission from ref. 113.	 

 	Fig. 11  AFM results of BPQDs grown on Si(111). (a) AFM morphology. (b) Statistical size distribution. (c) Statistical height distribution. (d) Height profiles along lines 1 and 2. (e) XPS spectra of BP QDs/Si(111) with different environmental contact times and (f) Raman spectra. Adapted with permission from ref. 213.	 

 	Fig. 12  Solvent exfoliation of As in a variety of solvents through tip ultra-sonication and its application in a vapor sensor. (a) and (b) Layered As bulk crystal SEM analysis. (c) As crystal exfoliation via tip sonication and centrifugation. (d) Tip ultra-sonication setup with minimized contact with the environment. (e) AN dispersions in different solvents 1 day after ultra-sonication and (f) after 2000 rpm centrifugation. Adapted with permission from ref. 232. (g) Grey As (bulk) and AN atomic sheet structures. Rhombohedral unit cell (a = b = 3.7598 Å and c = 10.5475 Å). (h) and (i) Scheme for the preparation of AN NSs in NMP and nano-dots in toluene from grey As. (j) TEM analysis, (k) selected-area electron diffraction, (l) HR-TEM analysis (inset shows Fourier transform), and (m) AFM analysis of the AN NSs. Adapted with permission from ref. 233.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) AFM image of ∼0.2 mm2 Sb flake and (b) its height histogram. (c) Same flake in (a) but after nano treatment. (d) Profile of the green line in (c), where the lowest step height is ∼0.4 nm, matching an ML-Sb layer. (e) Profiles taken along the lines in (f–h). (f) Two Sb-layers immediately after exfoliation and (g) measured after 60 days. (h) Figure taken instantaneously after (g) with sample absorbed in H2O. Adapted with permission from ref. 142.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Structure of β-Sb and SEM analysis of a layered Sb crystal. Exfoliated FL-Sb presenting the Faraday-Tyndall effect. (b) AFM image of FL-Sb drop-casted on SiO2, showing over micron-level lateral dimensions. (c) Height histogram of the image in (b), where diverse thicknesses of the terraces are obvious. (d) AFM image presenting atomic periodicity. (e) Fast-Fourier transform (FFT) of the image in (d), presenting matching along the hexagonal lattice as anticipated for β-Sb. (f) Low magnification HAADF analysis of a flake along an atomic-resolution image (along the [012] direction). Adapted with permission from ref. 142 and 240.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Electrochemical exfoliation of Sb two-electrode system scheme using an Sb crystal and (b) AFM image of exfoliated ML-Sb nanoflake. (c) and (d) TEM/HRTEM images of ML-Sb flake. (e) Raman spectra of bulk Sb and 31.6 nm-thick ML-Sb illustrated in (b). (f) Exfoliated multilayer Sb Sb3 d5/2 peak XPS spectrum. Adapted with permission from ref. 179.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Buckled honeycomb pattern together with the hybridization between the sp2 (in-plane) and pz (out-of-plane) orbitals and the flat honeycomb structure through decoupled orbitals. (b) DFT analysis, (c) STM analysis showing a plane hexagonal graphene-like structure, and (d) clean Ag(111) substrate. (e) LEED pattern of Ag(111) grown Sb, showing an Ag(111)-(√3 × √3) superstructure. (f) ML-Sb scalable STM analysis. Inset: Yellow line at the terrace edge. (g) HR-STM image of Sb in the White Square in (f), representing a well-organized honeycomb-like lattice. (h) Red line profile in (g). Adapted with permission from ref. 27.	 

 	Fig. 17  Mica substrate-based AM polygons grown through vdW epitaxy. (a) Synthesis configuration of the sample. (b) vdW epitaxial scheme. (c–f) Optical analysis of representative AM polygons along triangular, hexagonal, rhombic and trapezoidal shapes, respectively. (g) AFM topography of a triangular AM layer with 4 nm thickness. (h) AFM topography of a miniature AM sheet. Adapted with permission from ref. 250.	 

 	Fig. 18  Scheme for the synthesis of bulk Bi in NSs via H2SO4-assisted liquid exfoliation (a), SEM analysis of bulk Bi (b), H2SO4-intercalated Bi powder (c) and Bi NSs (d), with respective photographs illustrated in the insets. Adapted with permission from ref. 252.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Scheme of a 2D-Bi layer placed on a three-fold-symmetric SiC(0001) substrate in (√3 × √3)R30° equal registry. (B) Topographic STM analysis with 2D-Bi fully covering the substrate. Flakes are extended ≈25 nm, restricted by domain boundaries. (C) Substrate height taken along the red line in (B). Step heights relate to SiC steps. (D) Honeycomb pattern. (E) STM analysis for occupied and empty states (left and right section), respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 255.	 


PP	Scotch-tape exfoliation	Plasma-assisted method
Liquid-phase exfoliation	Chemical vapor deposition
Shear exfoliation	Wet chemistry method
Tip-sonication-based exfoliation	Pulsed laser deposition
Electrochemical exfoliation	

AS	Scotch-tape exfoliation	Plasma-assisted method
Shear exfoliation	

AN	Scotch-tape exfoliation	VdW epitaxy
Liquid-phase exfoliation	Molecular beam epitaxy
Shear exfoliation	Plasma-assisted method
BM	Sonochemical exfoliation	Epitaxial growth
Shear exfoliation	Molecular beam epitaxy
Hot-pressing method	Pulsed laser deposition

	Wet-chemistry method

 	Fig. 20  Scheme showing the applications of group V Xenes.	 

 	Fig. 21  FETs. (a) and (b) FL PP device and performance, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 155. (c) Transfer characteristics of ML As device. Adapted with permission from ref. 298. (d) BL 2D-PP FET and cross-section analysis of a distinctive metal contact with BL 2D-PP channel. A, C, E and G show four areas, and B, D and F represent three edges. Red rows illustrate path (A → B → C →F → graphene or A → B → C → D → E → G) of electrons or holes from contact metal (A) to BL 2D-PP channel. (e) BL 2D-PP FET electron and hole lateral SBH comparison by utilizing WFA ΦBL,L e/h, WFA, ab initio QTS ΦBL,L e/h, tran, and experimental interpretation ΦBL,L e/h, and exp. Adapted with permission from ref. 275.	 

 	Fig. 22  PP-based FET, contact with graphene and encapsulated with h-BN, demonstrating the device optical image subsequent to the final transfer process (a). Red and black areas show BP crystal and one of the graphene strips, correspondingly. (b) Optical image of device after contact. (c) AFM topography of the device. (d) G-contacted PP device scheme. (e) Back-gate voltage (Vbg) reliance of Ids at different top-gate voltages (Vtg). (f) Vds dependent on bias current at different dislocation fields. Vbg is fixed at −30 V. (g) Top and bottom scheme showing the band position for Vtg values of −4 and 4 V, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 113.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of PP FET. (b) At RT, ISD of 5 nm-thick device with respect to gate voltage for 90 nm SiO2 on an Si-supported substrate with VSD of 10 mV (red curve) and 100 mV (green curve). Hole side gate doping for both drain-source biases and drain current modulation up to 105. (c) Schematic of device structure in which FL PP flakes are exfoliated into ML MoS2 to form a vdW heterojunction, while Au and Ni are deposited as contacts. (d) 2D p–n diode gate tunable I–V characteristics. Current increases with respect to Vbg. I–V values are shown in the inset. Inset shows rectification ratio as a function of Vbg. Adapted with permission from ref. 155.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) 2D-PP-based UV PD PR and photocurrent after illumination. Dark intervals illustrated by I and II regions. (b) Diagram of a PP-based phototransistor band at zero and finite bias. The photocurrent, Ip, polarity of different origins is highlighted: TE, B and photovoltaic (PV). φB, WF of G; Idc, dark current; and Ip, photocurrent. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. (c) Schematic of multilayer PP FET. (d) ML PP flake between two Ti/Au electrodes. (e) ML PP sensor relative conductance change (ΔG/G0) vs. time (seconds), presenting sensitivity toward NO2 (5–40 ppb). (f) Id–Vg curves of ML PP FET under different NO2 levels, illustrating up-shifted curves with an increase in concentration increase. Adapted with permission from ref. 312. (g) and (h) Optical and AFM analysis of the BP sensor. (i) Dynamic response curves. (h) Thickness-dependent multi-cycle responses. Adapted with permission from ref. 260.	 

 	Fig. 25  Summary of 2D-PP-based electrocatalysts for the HER. (a) LSV curves of PP catalyst prepared using high-cost BP for the HER in 0.1 M HClO4. Adapted with permission from ref. 317. (b) Tafel plots of PP, MoS2/C, MoS2-PP, and Pt/C catalysts. (c) Cu stripping curves on glassy carbon, MoS2/C and MoS2-PP. (d) Exchange j0 of PP, MoS2/C, MoS2-PP, and Pt/C catalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 321. (e) Tafel plots for Ni2P@PP and Pt/C. (f) Stability of Ni2P@PP with time-dependent current density curves under η = 107 mV with inset TEM image and SAED pattern after continuous sweeps for 24 h. Adapted with permission from ref. 322.	 

PP/N-doped G	1 M KOH	0.3	310	89	
72

S-doped PP	1 M KOH	NA	310 (onset)	75	
73

Te-doped PP	1 M KOH	0.02	260 (onset)	NA	
74


N-PP	0.1 M KOH	18.79	21.51	0	
336

PP	—	31.37	5.07	−0.7	
337

SnO2−x nanotube-supported PP QDs	—	48.87	14.6	−0.4	
338


 	Fig. 26  Electrochemical properties of PP. (A) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of PP and acetylene black (AC). (B) and (C) CV curves of PP and AC at different scan rates, respectively. (D) EIS patterns and equivalent circuit (inset) of PP and AC. (E) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of PP and AC. (F) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of PP with different discharge J0. (G) CV curves of PP cathode and anode. (H) Charge–discharge cycles of the supercapacitor. (I) Charge–discharge maintained in supercapacitor. Adapted with permission from ref. 344.	 

 	Fig. 27  Vapor sensor fabricated using 2D-AN. (a) Impedance phase spectra for a range of solvents. (b) EIS at 10 Hz in different solvents as in “a”. (c) 2D-AN-based sensor phase change in methanol vapors and in environmental air within 5 cycles at 10 Hz. (d) Impedance phase in a range of solvents as in “a” at 0.1 Hz. (e) 2D-AN-based sensor phase change in acetone vapors and in atmospheric air within 5 cycles at 0.1 Hz. (f) Durability of acetone and methanol vapor sensing device for 3 weeks. Adapted with permission from ref. 232. (g) Total DOS plot of CO, CO2, N2, NH3, NO and NO2 on AN and pristine AN. (h) and (i) AN-adsorbed plotted partial DOSs for NO2 and NO molecules, respectively. Negative and positive values stand for spin-down and up states, respectively. Black dashed line indicates Fermi level. (j) Plotted allocation of spin density in NO and NO2 with an iso-value of ±0.003 e Å−3. Adapted with permission from ref. 345.	 

 	Fig. 28  BG structures of (a) pure adsorbed, (b) CO molecule, (c) CO2 molecule, (d) N2 molecule, (e) NH3 molecule, (f) NO molecule and (g) NO2 molecule adsorbed AN calculated at the HSE06 level. Spin-up and spin-down states represented by blue and red lines, respectively. Fermi level represented by green dashed line. Adapted with permission from ref. 345.	 

CO	−0.23	0	0
CO2	−0.33	0	0
NO	−0.15	0.07	0.94
NO2	−0.31	0.21	0.64
NH3	−0.16	0.04	0
N2	−0.13	0	0

 	Fig. 29  2D-AN layers and capacity values of the MIBs. Adapted with permission from ref. 347.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) IR images of MCF-7 tumor-bearing mice (G1: saline; G2: only NIR; G3: only PEG-coated AMQDs; G4: PEG-coated AMQDs + NIR; and 808 nm, 1 W cm@2). (b) Tumor site temperature changes. (c) Comparative tumor volumes after different treatments. (d) Collected tumors from each group on day 14. Adapted with permission from ref. 348.	 

 	Fig. 31  Schematic strategy for integrating AM NM sensor with miRNA to detect AM miRNA hybridization events. (a) Assembly of AM NSs on Au film. (b) Adsorption of AuNR–ssDNAs on AM NSs. (c) Different concentrations miRNA solution flowed over AM surface, forming a double-strand with complementary AuNR–ssDNA. (d) Interaction between AuNR–ssDNA and miRNA result in the release of AuNR–ssDNA from the AM NSs. The reduction of AuNR–ssDNA in on the SPR surface significantly decreases the SPR angle. Adapted with permission from ref. 349.	 

 	Fig. 32  (A) Charge/discharge profiles recorded in 0.5 M H2SO4 with unmodified and modified AM SPEs applying 1 μA. (B) Capacitance values versus applied current obtained from (C). (C) Specific capacitance values versus specific applied current obtained from charging–discharging profiles. (D) Relative capacitance for successive charging–discharging cycles with respect to the initial cycle capacitance. Adapted with permission from ref. 357.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Schematic of top-gate 2D-AM thin-film transistor. (b) Optical analysis of fabricated device on triangular 2D-AM NSs. (c) Ids–Vds characteristics of three tested devices at Vg = 0 V. Inset: Ids–Vg curve of 30 nm thick AM device at bias voltage of 0.05 V. (d) Tested device electrical conductance after bending. Inset: Bent AM device on mica support. (e) Transmittance spectra of three typical AM polygons with a thickness of 4, 7 and 18 nm. (f) Sample thickness versus AM polygon transmittance. Adapted with permission from ref. 250.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) and (b) 10 nm-thick BM device and carrier mobility, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 362.	 

 	Fig. 35  Electrocatalytic CO2RR performances of bismuthene and bulk Bi. (a) LSV curves in Ar or CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) Potential-dependent FE of formate and gas products. (c) Partial J0 of formate. (d) Comparison of FEformate and jformate for bismuthene and recently reported Bi-based catalysts (at −1.1 V vs. RHE). (e) Long-term stability test of bismuthene at −0.9 V for 12 h. Adapted with permission from ref. 363.	 

 	Fig. 36  Electro-reduction of CO2 to formate using 2D-Bi NSs with different thickness. LSV (solid line pH 7.2) and N2 saturated (dash line pH 8.8) 0.5 M KHCO3 aqueous solution with the same Bi loading of 0.39 mg cm−2. (b) Comparative FEs for formate for different applied potentials with different thicknesses. (c) Charging J0 differences Δj plotted against scan rate for ECSA. (d) Tafel plots of partial HCOO−J0. (e) Nyquist plots. (f) Long-time stability of 2D-Bi NSs (0.65 nm) at a potential of −0.58 V and FEs for HCOO− and H2. Adapted with permission from ref. 364.	 

 	Fig. 37  Comparison of the experimental and theoretical polarization curves of ultrathin Bi NSs. A background J0 of −0.65 mA cm−2 is included in the theoretical curves. The layer number of the Bi catalysts in is not given explicitly, but may be close to and even less than 9L, given that it was reported that the as-prepared Bi NSs appeared to be thinner (more transparent to electron beam) than its precursor BiOI NSs (9–10 layers). The 9L-Bi theoretical polarization curve was obtained through extrapolation. Adapted with permission from ref. 365.	 

 	Fig. 38  Electrochemical measurements of BiNSs. (a) Polarization curves of BiNSs and commercial Bi nanopowder in N2-or CO2-saturated 0.5 M NaHCO3. (b) Potential-dependent FE of HCOO−, CO, and H2 on BiNSs compared to FE of HCOO− on Bi nanopowder. (c) BiNS and commercial Bi nanopowder potential-dependent HCOO− partial J0. (d) Amperometric (i ∼ t) stability of BiNSs at η = 680 mV for 10 h. Adapted with permission from ref. 366.	 

 	Fig. 39  Electrocatalytic performance of reduced mesoporous Bi nanosheets for CO2 reduction to formate. (a) Polarization curves of mesoporous Bi NSs and commercial Bi nanopowder in N2- or CO2-saturated 0.5 M NaHCO3. (b) FE of HCOO−, H2, and CO on mesoporous Bi NSs compared to FE of HCOO− on commercial Bi nanopowder. (c) Comparative FE of HCOO− in mesoporous Bi, Sn, In, and N-doped carbon. (d) Formate partial J0 of mpBi NSs and commercial Bi nanopowder, and inset shows their respective Tafel slopes. (e) Long-standing stability of mesoporous Bi NSs at −0.8 V for 12 h. (f) Free energy diagram for HCOOH on Bi(101), (111), and (012) planes. Adapted with permission from ref. 367.	 

 	Fig. 40  2D Bi/G (a) cycle activity at J0 = 1.2 mA cm−2 after 20 cycles at 0.05 mA cm−2. (b) Rate activity and comparison with graphene film at various J0. (c) 5th cycle potential in the range of 0.1–2.1 V vs. Na/Na+. Adapted with permission from ref. 383.	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) Laser pulse loop, (b) single pulse and (c) mode-lock state of 2 μm fabricated BM SA with Tm-doped fiber laser. Inset illustrates the laser spectrum. LD = laser diode. Adapted with permission from ref. 251.	 
AM	Antimonene
AN	Arsenene
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
ARPES	Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
BM	Bismuthene
BP	Black phosphorus
BL	Bilayer
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
CB	Conduction band

f
T
	Cutoff frequency
DOSs	Density of states
EDLC	Electrochemical double-layer capacitor
EBL	Electron beam lithography
EELS	Electron energy loss spectroscopy
EBA	Energy band analysis
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
FL	Few layer
FET	Field-effect transistor
GGA	Generalized gradient approximation
HOPG	Highly oriented pyrolytic graphite
IR	Infrared
LPE	Liquid-phase exfoliation
LM	Layered material
MBE	Molecular beam epitaxy
MIB	Magnesium-ion battery
NR	Nano-ribbon
NS	Nanostructure
PD	Photo-detector
PVD	Physical vapor deposition
PTT	Photothermal therapy
PTA	Photothermal agent
PBE	Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof
PP	Phosphorene
QTS	Quantum transport simulation
QD	Quantum dot
QE	Quantum efficiency
RT	Room temperature
RMS	Root mean square
ITRS	International technology roadmap for semiconductors
SL	Single layer
SSA	Specific surface area
SBH	Schottky barrier height
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscopy
SE-2D materials	Synthetic two-dimensional materials
SC	Semiconductor
SOC	Spin orbit coupling
2D	Two dimensional
TI	Topological insulator
TMDC	Transition metal dichalcogenide
UV	Ultraviolet
VB	Valance Band
vdW	van der Waals
WF	Work function
Z	Zigzag
Footnote
† Equal contribution.

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
