Fabrication and assembly of ultrathin high-efficiency silicon solar microcells integrating electrical passivation and anti-reflection coatings   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE42230E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE42230E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3071-3079Fabrication and assembly of ultrathin high-efficiency silicon solar microcells integrating electrical passivation and anti-reflection coatings†Yuan Yao‡a, Eric Brueckner‡a, Lanfang Lib and Ralph Nuzzo*abaFredrick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. E-mail: r-nuzzo@illinois.edubDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USAReceived 3rd July 2013, Accepted 20th August 2013First published on 20th August 2013AbstractIntensive research into ultra-thin silicon solar cell applications has generated interesting approaches to reducing both critical materials usage and their associated device and module-level costs. Here we report an extension of previous work on micro-scale Si solar cells, devices fabricated using precise methods of micromachining Si(111) wafers in conjunction with wafer-scale processing. Here we describe a simple yet robust approach to fabricate the silicon microcells by re-designing the device structure, incorporating a thermally grown oxide layer to serve as a wet-etch and diffusion mask, and illustrate modes of light management and array assembly that can provide high-efficiency PV conversion of light to electrical energy. We report a best cell efficiency of 11.7% under an AM1.5D solar spectrum for an optically thin (30 µm thick) device, which is a substantial improvement over previously reported Si solar µ-cells. We show that the improvement attends to both the optimization made in the doping profiles of the device and the presence of the thermal oxide layer, which doubles as an effective electrical passivation and anti-reflection layer. External quantum efficiency measurements specifically show a marked improvement in the blue response that results from mitigating losses due to surface recombination in the high-surface-area, micro-scale devices. We highlight new strategies for integrating these devices into functional, interconnected arrays, using front and backside electrical bus contacts, with optimized spatial distributions on transparent glass substrates. This geometry, with optimized reflector and waveguiding planarization layers, creates a simple concentrator module by redirecting light via internal reflection to illuminate the sidewalls and bottom surfaces.Broader contextWidespread implementation of silicon-based photovoltaic (PV) technology is still limited in no small measure by high materials costs. One interesting approach to reduce materials consumption is shown in recent reports from our group by utilizing thin, micro-scale PV devices of single-crystalline Si. Here, by incorporating a thermal oxide as an effective electrical passivation and anti-reflection layer, along with other components in the device fabrication, we demonstrate substantial improvements in microcell design that enhances process reliability, energy conversion efficiencies, and modes of module assembly. New strategies for integrating these devices into functional, interconnected arrays via transfer assembly are also highlighted in this paper, where special attention has been paid to optimizing the spatial geometry with a diffuse backside reflector for maximum power output. The ultrathin, light-weight microcells presented in this work offer a potential route to decrease the cost of photovoltaic energy by reducing requirements for lithographic patterning and the usage of the most expensive materials components.IntroductionGreen energy demands have prompted an accelerating development of photovoltaic (PV) technologies that harvest and convert abundant solar energy into electrical power.1 To date, crystalline silicon (single- or poly-crystalline) has been the dominant PV material in commercial modules (>85% share) due to its natural abundance, established processing routes, and excellent conversion efficiencies.2,3 Widespread implementation, however, is limited in no small measure by high costs, over 50% of which originates from wafer production.4An interesting approach to reduce materials costs is utilizing ultrathin silicon (with the thickness in the range of 5–50 µm, ut-Si) as the active PV material for solar cells.3,5 Due to the large material losses that attend conventional wafering,4 so-called kerf-free ut-Si—materials generated variously by epitaxial growth,6 amorphous Si deposition and recrystallization,7–9 or exfoliating Si layers from ingots—10is very attractive for terrestrial PV applications. The limited thicknesses of these PV devices further permit relaxed purity requirements (because of shorter carrier diffusion lengths) within the Si, further improving their economic viability.11 These classes of solar cells, however, retain challenges, ones both fundamental and practical, that must still be overcome. Surface recombination due to the high surface-to-volume ratio of thin devices requires careful consideration as does the design of suitable light trapping schemes to compensate for their thin geometry and poor optical absorption. Additionally, “superstrates” and/or transfer methods for manipulating these mechanically fragile films must be carefully chosen to insure net process designs that are cost-effective and tolerant to the extreme environments encountered in solar cell processing.Recent reports from our group have shown that thin (2–50 µm), micro-scale (µ-scale) PV devices of single-crystalline Si can be fabricated using traditional semiconductor processing routes and then, following complete device fabrication, retrieved from a donor source wafer and patterned deterministically by transfer assembly as sparse arrays on light-weight, flexible substrates.11 This approach is particularly interesting since it: (1) overcomes challenges associated with deleterious handling of thin, fragile semiconductor membranes; (2) removes restrictions on high temperature processes since full device fabrication is completed on-wafer prior to transfer assembly; (3) allows easy integration with secondary optical components for light management (e.g., micro-lens arrays,11 nanostructured surfaces,12,13 and luminescent waveguides14) to compensate for inherently low absorption; (4) allows for application-specific distributions and orientations of devices to create, for example, semitransparent displays11 or high voltage modules;15 and (5) is amenable to fabricating multiple generations of devices from a single Si wafer to decrease material costs.11 The design of our earliest generations of µ-cells, however, require crucial improvements to address fundamental criteria for optimal carrier collection efficiency. While bulk recombination is reduced due to their thin geometry, surface recombination becomes a substantial loss mechanism from unpassivated dangling bonds since a passivation layer (e.g., thermal oxide, silicon nitride) is not incorporated.16 Additionally, based on inferences coming from electrical data, optimization of the doping profile remains an important, albeit technically challenging, need. Specifically, the earlier µ-cells likely suffered from a degradation in performance due to a low carrier lifetime in the highly doped regions (i.e., heavy doping effects).17 Finally, previously reported fabrication methods require two costly depositions of Cr/Au during the process sequence, the metals from which can act as deep level traps18,19 for carriers as well as impurities that can severely degrade dopant sources if the wafers are not cleaned to very demanding tolerances.Here, by adopting a different doping profile and utilizing robust masking layers, we report a simplified and highly scalable fabrication process whereby thin, ribbon-like solar cells are fabricated from a bulk single-crystalline Si wafer. These µ-cells retain all the features needed for use as solid-phase inks suited for transfer assembly20 onto secondary substrates. Together they provide means of integration with low-cost materials that work synergistically with the Si to harvest and efficiently convert solar radiation to electrical energy. This protocol uses a thermally grown oxide layer as a robust etching and diffusion mask to bolster fabrication reliability, while also doubling as an effective passivation and anti-reflection (AR) layer to further improve device performance. With an optimized emitter doping concentration, we demonstrate conversion efficiencies of 11.7% (fill factor (FF) = 0.762) in an optically thin (30 µm) device under a simulated AM1.5D solar spectrum. We present design criteria for assembling printed µ-cells in optimized spatial distributions and strategies for integrating them with backside reflectors as well as polymer waveguides that efficiently manage (e.g., reflect and redirect) incident solar radiation to improve performance. By increasing the optical path length within the µ-cells and orthogonalizing light to illuminate once-invisible sidewalls, we leverage the increased surface area of the µ-scale devices, while mitigating inherent loss mechanisms from them, to dramatically improve power generation for cells with this form factor.Silicon solar µ-cell fabricationThe µ-cell design is shown in Fig. 1A, highlighting the layout of the phosphorus- (n+, green), and boron- (p+, blue), and intrinsically (p, gray) doped regions. The entire top surface is phosphorus doped to form the emitter (n+) layer, while the back surface field (BSF, p+) is formed by boron doping the whole bottom surface following undercut etching. The entire device, except the bottom surface, is covered (i.e. passivated) by a thermal oxide (purple layer), which serves to eliminate dangling bonds and minimize surface recombination, while at the bottom, minority carrier recombination is reduced by the built-in electrical field from the BSF.21 A vertical contact scheme is adopted here, which compliments the design of Yoon, et al.11 where both emitter and base contacts are coplanar on the top surface. The principal benefit of the doping geometry is that it enables us to eliminate two photolithography steps from the process flows that defined the doping regions on top of the device, simplifying the fabrication process and reducing shading losses from frontside contacts and metal interconnections. Fig. 1  (A) Schematic illustration of the µ-cell design (oxide on the front and right side is removed to show the doping geometry); (B) schematic illustration of key processing steps in fabricating Si solar µ-cells on a Si(111) wafer with colorized scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image insets tracking oxide (pink) thickness on the top and sidewall of the silicon (blue) ink throughout the fabrication; (C) colorized top-view SEM image of fully fabricated Si solar µ-cells (blue) with deposited Au contacts (yellow), with the inset showing a zoomed-in image of the break-away anchors tethering the devices to the donor wafer; (D) optical image of planarized arrays of µ-cells on a glass substrate over ~600 mm2. Fig. 1B schematically illustrates the key processing steps for creating the devices (see ESI and Fig. S1† for a detailed fabrication protocol). A Si (111) p-type, boron-doped, single crystalline Czochralski wafer (resistivity 7.5–10 O cm), which we refer to as the donor wafer, was first doped by unmasked phosphorous (n+) diffusion from solid doping sources to form the emitter layer (the ESI and Fig. S2–S4† show data for the optimization of the phosphorus doping condition). After growth of the top oxide mask layer (~530 nm) by wet oxidation, patterning of this layer by photolithography and deep etching with inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) defined the lateral dimensions and thickness of the devices, respectively. For purposes of anisotropic undercut etching in tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH), the short axes of the devices were aligned parallel to the <110> direction, exposing the fast etching {110} planes along their sidewalls.49 The exposed sidewalls of the Si structures were then briefly etched in a TMAH solution to create a canopy-type structure where the Si sidewall was recessed ~2.5 µm below the edge of the top oxide layer. A second wet oxidation created ~250 nm of SiO2 on the sidewalls and trench floor while increasing the thickness of the top oxide to ~600 nm (Fig. S5A†). An unmasked flood reactive ion etching (flood RIE) step fully removed oxide on the trench floor while preserving the sidewall oxide, due in part to the canopy structure (Fig. S5B†). With the protection of the top and sidewall oxide, the devices were then released in an anisotropic undercut etch in TMAH, yet remained tethered to the donor wafer in their lithographically defined locations, connected by break-away anchors (Fig. 1C inset) to structures which were not undercut (long bars whose short axis is orthogonal to the <110> direction). Utilizing the existing thermal oxide as a diffusion mask, the exposed bottom surfaces of the µ-cells were doped with a boron solid-source to form the BSF, yielding fully functional devices. SEM images show that a thermal oxide of ~170 nm and ~25 nm remains on the top and sidewalls of the devices, respectively (Fig. S5C†), serving as both passivation and AR layers, as discussed later. The completed µ-cells demonstrated here are 1.5 mm long, 100 µm wide and 30 µm thick (Fig. 1A and C). Contact pads (50 µm × 50 µm) on top of the device were formed through photolithography, oxide etching, and metal (Ti/Au) deposition. With the completion of these steps, the devices are then amenable for integration via transfer assembly into arbitrarily large and sparse arrays, an example of which is shown in Fig. 1D.Silicon solar µ-cell characterizationElectrical measurements of individual µ-cells were carried out after transfer-printing20 them onto a glass substrate patterned with a Au backside contact bus line running transverse to the cell long dimension as shown in Fig. 1D. Devices were tested in the dark as well as under simulated AM1.5D illumination of 1000 W m-2 at room temperature. Baseline analyses of the solar µ-cells were performed by mounting the glass substrate on a non-reflective anodized aluminum (AA) plate to suppress reflection (see ESI and Fig. S9† for measurement details and reflection data) from the testing table, and assuming the illumination area is only the top surface area of the device for current density (J) and efficiency (?) calculations. Measurements were also performed with additional components introduced that enhance the PV performance of the µ-cell, and serve as quantitative points of comparison to the baseline analysis (subscript “base”). These additions (which are discussed in the following sections) include a polymeric planarization layer (subscript “PL”); a diffuse backside reflector (BSR, Labsphere Spectralon® target, subscript “BSR”); or both (subscript “PL, BSR”).The inset of Fig. 2A shows a representative dark curve measured for an individual µ-cell, with a diode ideality factor (m) of 1.82. The baseline light curve of our best cell is presented in Fig. 2A, with Jsc, open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and ? of 28.7 mA cm-2, 0.534 V, 0.762, and 11.7%, respectively. These values all show substantial improvement from the previous report11 on Si solar µ-cells and, when coupled with a backside reflector to extend the effective optical path length of the cell, provide energy conversion efficiencies that compare favorably with traditional Si solar cells. Fig. 2  (A) Light (blue) J–V curve of our best performing device and a representative dark curve (red) measured on an AA plate (inset shows the same dark J–V curve plotted in semi-log form with ideality factor (m) of 1.82); (B) SEM images of fully fabricated Si solar µ-cells on the donor wafer; (C) statistical analysis and histogram plot (inset) of efficiencies of devices evenly distributed on a donor wafer. Thermal oxide as masking material, passivation layer and AR coatingA fundamental requirement for efficient transfer assembly is the release of the active device from the donor wafer by the undercut etching of a thin sacrificial layer between them.22 Previous reports23–25 of transfer-printed µ-scale, inorganic semiconductor devices rely on differential etching rates of disparate materials in the semiconductor stack. Homogeneous systems, such as the one discussed here, have no etch rate distinction between the active device layer and the donor wafer. SiO2/SiNx from low pressure and plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD and PECVD, respectively) and/or e-beam evaporated Au layers26–28 have been used as masking structures on the device's sidewalls to prevent complete lateral etching across the wafer surface, but thermally grown SiO2 is known to be a denser masking material that is less prone to etchant permeability29 compared to PECVD films and is simpler and potentially more cost-effective for use in this form of implementation than these previous processes. As shown in Fig. 2B, the superior wet-etch masking properties of a thermally grown oxide layer in TMAH allows the creation of dense and defect-free arrays of devices over large areas. The fabrication yield is greatly improved for these µ-cells, generally >95%, and primarily limited by imperfections in the photolithography mask and particulates on the wafer during processing. The conformal oxide layer coats the top and sidewall surfaces and also serves as a diffusion mask to protect the p–n junction during the subsequent boron doping step, which is essential to achieving consistent device performance over large areas. Fig. 2C and S6† show statistical analyses of PV metrics from µ-cells evenly distributed (i.e., every sixth device) over the entire fabricated device area. The low standard deviation of all the PV metrics illustrates the robustness of the new process design. We believe the efficacies of the processing and economies of the materials usage retain constraints that are now governed only by photolithography capabilities and requirements for achieving reliable doping profiles over large areas.Two of the key attributes for efficient terrestrial solar cell operation are: (1) efficiently harvesting solar radiation across the entire solar spectrum; and (2) minimization of parasitic charge carrier recombination. For the solar µ-cell motif, the addition of a thermal oxide layer with processing-centric advantages due to its wet-etch and diffusion masking properties, provides important functional contributions as a direct consequence of its ability to act as both an anti-reflection (AR) coating and electrical passivation layer. The AR coating suppresses optical loss from reflection, while high level surface recombination expected for µ-scale devices (due to their increased surface area) is minimized by effective passivation. These effects are clearly evidenced in data showing the photocurrent generation achieved with and without the conformal oxide layer. The J–V plot shown in Fig. 3A illustrates this, where a 32.1% decrease (9.0 mA cm-2) in Jsc and a 6.6% (0.034 V) decrease in Voc, results in a significant drop of ? from 10.89% to 6.80% for a µ-cell after removal of the oxide layer (these devices were first etched in buffered oxide etchant 6?:?1, and tested both immediately and after the formation of a native oxide layer in air, see Fig. S7A and Table 2 in ESI† for device performance data). Further measurements definitively establish that both mechanisms contribute to the decrease in performance. The results from external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements which illustrate this point are presented in Fig. 3B. The µ-cell with a thermal oxide layer (black curve, Jsc = 27.0 mA cm-2) shows a higher EQE at all wavelengths as compared to the one without it (red curve, Jsc = 18.2 mA cm-2). This enhancement is especially evident in the blue region, where photons with relatively high energy are absorbed near the surface, a region where generated charge carriers are expected to be lost by recombination when the passivation layer is absent.30 The AR effect is markedly evidenced by the peaks in the black curve that appears around 310 and 490 nm. The relative frequency-dependent optical enhancements from the top oxide layer of this device (Fig. S7D,† where two peak positions largely match those found in the EQE data) were estimated based on its thickness (~250 nm, based on cross-sectional SEM, see Fig. S7B†) and the known refractive indices of crystalline silicon and its thermal oxide (see Fig. S7C† for calculated reflections). The results of this calculation were then used to model, using the experimental data (red curve in Fig. 3B), the EQE of non-passivated silicon µ-cell where only benefits from the AR effects are present. The result of this simulation is presented in Fig. 3B (blue dashed line, see ESI for calculation methods†). The difference between the two EQE curves (blue and red) suggests a 1.9 mA cm-2 increase in current output under AM1.5D solar spectrum due to AR effects, which is about 22% of the total enhancement seen in the full cell (8.8 mA cm-2). It is worth noting that, although the top oxide thickness was not optimized for optical absorption, the layer thickness is tunable in principle to provide higher absorption at different wavelengths (see ESI Fig. S7E† for EQE plots from other devices with different optical interference due to variations in top oxide thickness). Although better AR coatings31–34 can be developed through multi-layer dielectric deposition, the single layer thermal oxide is advantageous in terms of the simplicity of its means of integration into the fabrication protocol and its multifunctionallity—acting as both a robust mask material and passivation layer—without requirements for additional processing. Fig. 3  (A) (a) J–V characteristics and (B) external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of Si solar µ-cells with (black) and without (red) the thermal oxide layer; a simulated EQE curve (blue dashed line) for a non-passivated device with enhancements only from AR coating is also plotted in (B). Integrating µ-cells on secondary substratesA unique feature of these µ-cells is the ability to deterministically assemble them into organized and functional layouts via transfer printing techniques.35 Rapid delivery of devices onto receiving substrates can be achieved via multiple stamp inking and printing cycles with automated tools in high throughput.35 A glass slide was used in our studies as a model receiving substrate for devices. A UV-curable adhesive (Norland Optical Adhesive (NOA), see ESI for experimental details†) was spin-coated on the substrate, then partially cured to remain tacky, to mediate the transfer process. For the vertically-contacted devices shown here, electrical contact must be made to the backside of the µ-cell. For this purpose, bottom electrodes (300 nm thick, 150 µm wide and 30 mm long) were deposited through a shadow mask onto the adhesive layer, serving as the electrical interconnect for the p+ layer of the printed µ-cells, as shown by the schematic and SEM images in Fig. 4A. A viscoelastic stamp with pyramid relief features36 was used to selectively retrieve the devices from the donor wafer and deliver them to the glass substrate in high transfer yields (100% in the case of Fig. 1D, see ESI for experimental details†). The configuration shown in Fig. 4A yields fully functional Si solar µ-cells and is the configuration for which device testing in Fig. 2 and S6† was conducted (i.e., without planarization). Printed µ-cells were planarized in a simple flow-based coating process that eliminates the need for additional registered levels of photolithography. To do so, a poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) block was laminated to the printed array of µ-cells, creating an air gap between the PDMS and substrate (Fig. 4B, left). NOA, the photocurable liquid resin, was then flowed by capillary action into the air gap and cured under illumination with UV light through the PDMS block, resulting in planarized µ-cells embedded in a polymer matrix (Fig. 4B, right) with low topological variations (Fig. S8A†) over the areal expanse of the array (Fig. 1D). The intimate contact between the planarization layer and the device (i.e., no air gap) is highlighted by the inset SEM image shown in Fig. 4B. The planarization layer electrically insulates the bottom electrode, thereby rendering the array ready for top-side (n+) interconnection. As one means for interconnection, Ag paste (PELCO Conductive Silver 187, Ted Pella) was screen-printed through an aligned stencil mask (see ESI for experimental details†) to achieve a relatively narrow (~150 µm, see Fig. 4C) and thin (20–50 µm, see Fig. S8B†) electrode. These dimensions are ones that high-resolution printing methods37 could easily improve upon. Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations (left) and colorized (Au contacts: yellow; µ-cells: blue; Ag paste: silver) SEM images (right, with zoomed-in insets) of the key steps to build a module of silicon solar µ-cells: (A) transfer-assembly onto a glass substrate with pre-patterned Au electrodes; (B) planarization by flowing a photocurable resin (NOA) under a PDMS block via capillary action; (C) interconnection by screen-printing Ag paste. Optical enhancements to µ-cells embedded in polymer waveguideThe system described here—Si solar µ-cells embedded in a transparent polymer matrix on a glass substrate of comparable refractive indices—inherently creates a simple geometric concentrator especially when coupled with a BSR, as illustrated in Fig. 5A. Light incident on the transparent areas between µ-cells is reflected by the diffuse BSR where it is then redirected to the µ-cell through internal reflection within the planarization layer and glass substrate. Additionally, since the µ-cells fabricated here have a thickness smaller than the optical absorption length of Si for near-infrared light,38 BSRs can reflect the transmitted photons and help to extend the effective optical path within the device for improved performance. We use a modified Monte Carlo ray tracing method that deals with reflection and scattering processes at all interfaces to model such attributes of the photon flux (F) incident on the various surfaces of the µ-cell.39 As shown in Fig. 5B, for a planarized µ-cell on a diffuse BSR, the photon flux, normalized to Ftop, on the top, bottom, and sidewall surfaces are 1, 0.55, and 0.36, respectively. These data show that photons are reflected from the BSR and then redirected to the µ-cell's sidewalls and bottom, with the planarization layer serving as a simple waveguiding structure. Similar concentrating structures have been studied by us11,14,24,40 in the past, using a variety of µ-cell types, and by others41 using macro-scale solar cells. Although attaining maximum concentration is limited by the relative leakiness of the waveguiding structure (and scattering losses), it does provide a simple means to exploit an effective 180° acceptance angle and utilizes the otherwise un-illuminated sidewalls and bottom of the µ-scale devices for effective photon capture. The increased illumination on devices afforded by the planarization layer and diffuse BSR results in a direct boost of their PV performance. This is shown by the data given in Fig. 5C, where the I–V curves of printed individual µ-cells with different optical components (i.e., planarization layer and BSR) are compared. In all cases Isc increases significantly with a slight increase in Voc. The trends are consistent with an increasing incident photon flux onto the cell. As explained subsequently, a µ-cell on an AA plate without planarization receives illumination largely on the top surface only, and therefore its curve (red) (Isc = 37.1 µA) is used as the baseline for comparison. Adding a planarization layer or BSR to the baseline results in a 16.7% increase (blue curve, Isc,PL = 43.3 µA) and 63.6% increase (green curve, Isc,BSR = 60.7 µA) in output, respectively. Incorporating both of these optical components to a µ-cell increases photocurrent generation by 95.7% (blue curve, Isc,PL,BSR = 72.6 µA). Overall, the power generated from the three conditions increases 17.3%, 60.4%, and 102% from the baseline power (13.9 µW). Assuming the photocurrent is proportional to incident photon flux, the concentration ratio achieved here for a single cell is 1.96, a value in the range expected for a waveguide not fully satisfying total internal reflection (TIR) criteria.41 Fig. 5  (A) Cross-sectional illustration of the concentrator geometry: Si solar µ-cells embedded in a polymer waveguide on a glass substrate with a diffuse BSR; (B) simulated photon flux (cross-sectional view) incident on bottom and sidewall surfaces for a device in the concentrator layout shown in (A); (C) I–V curves of µ-cells with different optical components; (D) experimental (Isc/Isc,0) and simulated (Ftotal/Ftop) relative enhancements for devices with different intercell spacings (s); (E) efficiencies and (F) fill factors of µ-cells with different series resistance under various concentration ratios. For a µ-cell in an array layout, the edge-to-edge spacing (s) between the cells controls available waveguiding area with positive implications on device performance with increasing s. To optimize s for the highest concentration ratio and maximum power generation, cells in arrays with varying s were tested. The values of Isc/Isc,0 provided by these measurements are shown in Fig. 5D, where Isc,0 represents photocurrent generated only by photons incident on the top surface of the µ-cell (i.e., s = 0), approximated by Isc of a non-planarized µ-cell on an AA plate at s = 25 µm. On a diffuse BSR with planarization (black filled squares in Fig. 5D), Isc/Isc,0 increases with s because of the expansion of the capture cross-section area for subsequently waveguided light to the printed µ-cells. Isc/Isc,0 plateaus (maximum value 1.95) at s ˜ 500 µm due to leaky waveguiding and propagation losses in the NOA matrix. Using the optical simulation method described above (with modification to accommodate the array layout), the total incident photon flux (Ftotal) was calculated and normalized to the direct illumination on the top surface of the µ-cell (Ftop) to determine the relative enhancement (Ftotal/Ftop) at different s. The values of Ftotal/Ftop (red line in Fig. 5D) are compared directly with experimental Isc/Isc,0, assuming that Isc increases linearly with incident photon flux. The simulation without parameter fitting shows good agreement with experiment as the enhancement saturates at a similar value (1.90) at comparable s. The small discrepancy is likely attributable to more efficient utilization of photons for these µ-cells when under concentration, which is not accounted for in the simulation since light absorption, not photocurrent generation, is being modeled. Microcells in the control group (measured on an AA plate without planarization) show negligible enhancement (Isc/Isc,0 and Ftotal/Ftop ˜ 1, see Fig. 5D) for all s in both the experimental (black circles) and simulated (red dashed line) results, a result of both the low reflectivity of the substrate and absence of the waveguide layer.The effects of concentration on the PV parameters of the device were independently explored. We found that the silicon solar µ-cells fabricated in this work show increasing efficiency up to ~8 suns, as shown by the data presented in Fig. 5E. While a modest value, this performance metric is sufficient to efficiently manage increased solar flux incident on the solar cells from the BSR and waveguiding layers. Efficiency vs. concentration becomes strongly dependent upon a degradation in the fill factor at higher flux due to what appears to be high series resistance Rs within the µ-cell, as shown in the data presented in Fig. 5F. Lateral resistance within the ribbon-like µ-cell is thought to be the main contributor to the measured series resistance of approximately 0.8 O cm2 for the representative devices shown in Fig. 5E and F, as calculated using the method described by Aberle, et al.42Silicon solar µ-cell moduleWe used the guidance from Fig. 5D to build an interconnected array of printed µ-cells and supporting optical components with optimized spatial distributions. In this demonstration, 10 Si µ-cells were transferred onto a glass substrate with an edge-to-edge spacing of 500 µm to maximize their power generation, then planarized and interconnected using the methods described earlier (Fig. 6A, it should be noted that the small-scale array shown here can be, in a straightforward approach, scaled up to much larger area arrays, as shown in Fig. 1D). The I–V characteristics of the 10-cell module measured on a non-reflective AA plate are plotted (blue curve) in Fig. 6B, showing a Isc,PL of 0.395 mA, Voc,PL of 0.512 V, FFPL of 0.731, and a maximum power (Pmax,PL) of 0.148 mW. The Isc,PL for the module is 8.7% lower than the sum of Isc,PL (0.432 mA) of all the individual solar cells prior to interconnection due to shading losses from the Ag paste electrodes, which covers around 10% of the top surface of the µ-cells. With a diffuse BSR (see red curves in Fig. 6B), the module shows an Isc,PL,BSR of 0.711 mA, Voc,PL,BSR of 0.534 V, FFPL,BSR of 0.709, and a Pmax,PL,BSR of 0.269 mW. Both Isc and Voc are increased due to enhanced illumination on the µ-cells via waveguiding and reflection from the BSR. These data implicitly illustrate an interesting attribute of the µ-cell form factor. Given that the cells in this module only weigh around 0.1 mg, the peak power-referenced Si consumption is only 0.4 g Wp-1. This value is much lower than that (around 10 g Wp-1)43 of commercial Si solar cells. Although costs associated with cell fabrication and module assembly need to be taken into account, the trends illustrate that sparse array layout of µ-scale devices offers a potential route to decrease the cost of PV energy by reducing the usage of the most expensive materials components, given scalable means of manufacturing and suitable modes of optical integration. Fig. 6  (A) Optical image of a 10-cell module with a screen-printed Ag paste top interconnect; (B) I–V (solid lines) and P–V (dashed lines) plots of the same module measured on an AA plate (blue) and on a diffuse BSR (red). ConclusionIn summary, fabrication and assembly (i.e. transfer-printing, planarization, and interconnection) strategies have been developed for this new generation of Si solar µ-cells. A simplified fabrication method is demonstrated, which offers improved device performance as well as higher process reliability compared to previous work. The thermal oxide on the µ-cells not only acts as an etching and diffusion mask during fabrication, but serves as a passivation and simple AR coating that enhances the overall energy conversion efficiency without additional processing for its integration. We report here a route to integrate active solar µ-cells in a simple concentrator system with low-cost polymer materials that efficiently manage incident solar radiation by waveguiding light to otherwise shadowed surfaces. Transfer-printing techniques allow these µ-cells to be assembled into arbitrary geometries to maximize incident illumination on devices and target low semiconductor material consumption per watt at the module level. In this report, a 10-cell module, interconnected by screen-printing Ag paste, demonstrates a Si consumption of only 0.4 g/Wp. The device structure presented here, however, is still relatively simple compared to the best high-efficiency research and industrial PV devices (e.g. the world-record PERL cell44–47). Efforts can be made to further enhance their energy conversion efficiency by incorporating advanced features45–48 that reduce photon escape loss (e.g. in addition to the use of an optimized backside reflector, to incorporate surface texturing and double layer AR coating to minimize top surface reflection), carrier recombination loss (e.g. selective emitter and BSF diffusion, rear surface passivation layer with embedded atomic hydrogen, and utilization of float zone substrate with lower impurities) as well as parasitic resistive loss (e.g. highly doped regions under metal contacts, metal gridlines, and higher base doping concentration to minimize series resistance) in this generation of microcells. Additionally, these devices have shown the capability to efficiently manage modest solar flux, therefore important areas of future work include coupling devices with light trapping structures (e.g. luminescent waveguide) to achieve higher concentration ratios and lower material consumption, as well as conforming printed µ-cell arrays on flexible substrates to three-dimensional structures to further improve their angular light capture properties.AcknowledgementsThis work is part of the ‘Light-Material Interactions in Energy Conversion’ Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC0001293 (subcontract no. 67N-1087758). The experiments used facilities at the Materials Research Laboratory and Center for Microanalysis of Materials at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, supported by the US Department of Energy, Division of Materials Sciences under Award no. DE-FG02-07ER46471. We thank Prof. A. A. Rockett and Dr X. Sheng for useful discussions on external quantum efficiency measurements.ReferencesD. Ginley, M. A. Green and R. Collins, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 355–364 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Bagnall and M. Boreland, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4390–4396 CrossRef PubMed .C. A. Wolden, J. Kurtin, J. B. Baxter, I. Repins, S. E. Shaheen, J. T. Torvik, A. A. Rockett, V. M. Fthenakis and E. S. Aydil, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2011, 29, 030801 Search PubMed .H. Rodriguez, I. Guerrero, W. Koch, A. L. Endrös, D. Franke, C. Häßler, J. P. Kalejs and H. J. Möller, in Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, ed. A. Luque and S. Hegedus, John Wiley & Sons, 2nd edn,  2011, pp. 218–264 Search PubMed .F. Dross, K. Baert, T. Bearda, J. Deckers, V. Depauw, O. El Daif, I. Gordon, A. Gougam, J. Govaerts and S. Granata, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 770–784 CAS .V. Depauw, I. Gordon, G. Beaucarne, J. Poortmans, R. Mertens and J.-P. Celis, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 033516 CrossRef .M. Green, P. Basore, N. Chang, D. Clugston, R. Egan, R. Evans, D. Hogg, S. Jarnason, M. Keevers and P. Lasswell, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 857–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Song, D. Inns, A. Straub, M. L. Terry, P. Campbell and A. G. Aberle, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 513, 356–363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. L. Terry, A. Straub, D. Inns, D. Song and A. G. Aberle, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 172108 CrossRef .F. Dross, J. Robbelein, B. Vandevelde, E. Van Kerschaver, I. Gordon, G. Beaucarne and J. Poortmans, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2007, 89, 149–152 CrossRef CAS .J. Yoon, A. J. Baca, S.-I. Park, P. Elvikis, J. B. G. Iii, L. Li, R. H. Kim, J. Xiao, S. Wang, T.-H. Kim, M. J. Motala, B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, J. A. Lewis, R. G. Nuzzo, P. M. Ferreira, Y. Huang, A. Rockett and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 907–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Shir, J. Yoon, D. Chanda, J.-H. Ryu and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3041–3046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. J. Corcoran, S. Kang, L. Li, X. Guo, D. Chanda and R. G. Nuzzo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4239–4246 CAS .J. Yoon, L. Li, A. V. Semichaevsky, J. H. Ryu, H. T. Johnson, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 343,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms1318 .A. J. Baca, K. J. Yu, J. Xiao, S. Wang, J. Yoon, J. H. Ryu, D. Stevenson, R. G. Nuzzo, A. A. Rockett, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 208–211 CAS .M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 1999, 7, 327–330 CAS .M. A. Shibib, F. A. Lindholm and F. Therez, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1979, 26, 959–965 CrossRef PubMed .A. Tavendale and S. Pearton, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1983, 16, 1665 CrossRef CAS .C.-T. Sah, in Fundamentals of Solid-State Electronics, World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.,  1991, p. 282 Search PubMed.M. A. Meitl, Z.-T. Zhu, V. Kumar, K. J. Lee, X. Feng, Y. Y. Huang, I. Adesida, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .K. A. Munzer, K. T. Holdermann, R. E. Schlosser and S. Sterk, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1999, 46, 2055–2061 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Baca, J.-H. Ahn, Y. Sun, M. A. Meitl, E. Menard, H.-S. Kim, W. M. Choi, D.-H. Kim, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5524–5542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S.-I. Park, Y. Xiong, R.-H. Kim, P. Elvikis, M. Meitl, D.-H. Kim, J. Wu, J. Yoon, C.-J. Yu and Z. Liu, Science, 2009, 325, 977–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Yoon, S. Jo, I. S. Chun, I. Jung, H.-S. Kim, M. Meitl, E. Menard, X. Li, J. J. Coleman, U. Paik and J. A. Rogers, Nature, 2010, 465, 329–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H.-S. Kim, E. Brueckner, J. Song, Y. Li, S. Kim, C. Lu, J. Sulkin, K. Choquette, Y. Huang, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 10072–10077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Lee, S. Park and D.-I. Cho, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 1999, 8, 409–416 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Baca, M. A. Meitl, H. C. Ko, S. Mack, H.-S. Kim, J. Dong, P. M. Ferreira and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3051–3062 CrossRef CAS .S. Lee, S. Park and D.-i. Cho, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, 2699 CrossRef CAS .G. Yan, P. C. H. Chan, I. M. Hsing, R. K. Sharma, J. K. O. Sin and Y. Wang, Sens. Actuators, A, 2001, 89, 135–141 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Spitzer, S. P. Tobin and C. J. Keavney, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1984, 31, 546–550 CrossRef PubMed .H. Nagel, A. G. Aberle and R. Hezel, Prog. Photovoltaics, 1999, 7, 245–260 CAS .O. Schultz, S. W. Glunz and G. P. Willeke, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2004, 12, 553–558 CAS .J. Zhao and M. A. Green, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1991, 38, 1925–1934 CrossRef CAS .D. Bouhafs, A. Moussi, A. Chikouche and J. M. Ruiz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 52, 79–93 CrossRef CAS .A. Carlson, A. M. Bowen, Y. Huang, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5284–5318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Kim, J. Wu, A. Carlson, S. H. Jin, A. Kovalsky, P. Glass, Z. Liu, N. Ahmed, S. L. Elgan, W. Chen, P. M. Ferreira, M. Sitti, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 17095–17100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, M. J. Motala, X. Guo, S.-I. Park, Y. Xiong, J. Yoon, R. G. Nuzzo, J. A. Rogers and J. A. Lewis, Science, 2009, 323, 1590–1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Budianu, M. Purica, E. Rusu, E. Manea and R. Gavrila, Semiconductor Conf., 2002. CAS 2002 Proc. Int., 2002, 1, 215–218 Search PubMed .L. Li, X. Sheng, E. P. Brueckner, Y. Yao, J. A. Rogers and R. G. Nuzzo, Frontiers in Optics 2012/Laser Science XXVIII,  2012, FW6A.4 Search PubMed .X. Sheng, L. Shen, T. Kim, L. Li, X. Wang, R. Dowdy, P. Froeter, K. Shigeta, X. Li, R. G. Nuzzo, N. C. Giebink and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 991–996 CrossRef CAS .G. Smestad and P. Hamill, Appl. Opt., 1984, 23, 4394–4402 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Aberle, S. R. Wenham and M. A. Green, Conf. Rec. IEEE Photovoltaic Spec. Conf., 1993, 133–139 Search PubMed .A. G. Aberle and P. I. Widenborg, in Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, ed. A. Luque and S. Hegedus, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2nd edn,  2011, pp. 452–486 Search PubMed .M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 827–837 Search PubMed .J. Zhao, A. Wang, P. Altermatt and M. A. Green, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 3636–3638 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhao, A. Wang, M. A. Green and F. Ferrazza, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1991–1993 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhao, A. Wang and M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 1999, 7, 471–474 CAS .T. Saga, NPG Asia Mater., 2010, 2, 96–102 CrossRef .O. Tabata, R. Asahi, H. Funabashi, K. Shimaoka and S. Sugiyama, Sens. Actuator, A, 1992, 34, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee42230e‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Broader contextWidespread implementation of silicon-based photovoltaic (PV) technology is still limited in no small measure by high materials costs. One interesting approach to reduce materials consumption is shown in recent reports from our group by utilizing thin, micro-scale PV devices of single-crystalline Si. Here, by incorporating a thermal oxide as an effective electrical passivation and anti-reflection layer, along with other components in the device fabrication, we demonstrate substantial improvements in microcell design that enhances process reliability, energy conversion efficiencies, and modes of module assembly. New strategies for integrating these devices into functional, interconnected arrays via transfer assembly are also highlighted in this paper, where special attention has been paid to optimizing the spatial geometry with a diffuse backside reflector for maximum power output. The ultrathin, light-weight microcells presented in this work offer a potential route to decrease the cost of photovoltaic energy by reducing requirements for lithographic patterning and the usage of the most expensive materials components.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Schematic illustration of the µ-cell design (oxide on the front and right side is removed to show the doping geometry); (B) schematic illustration of key processing steps in fabricating Si solar µ-cells on a Si(111) wafer with colorized scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image insets tracking oxide (pink) thickness on the top and sidewall of the silicon (blue) ink throughout the fabrication; (C) colorized top-view SEM image of fully fabricated Si solar µ-cells (blue) with deposited Au contacts (yellow), with the inset showing a zoomed-in image of the break-away anchors tethering the devices to the donor wafer; (D) optical image of planarized arrays of µ-cells on a glass substrate over ~600 mm2.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Light (blue) J–V curve of our best performing device and a representative dark curve (red) measured on an AA plate (inset shows the same dark J–V curve plotted in semi-log form with ideality factor (m) of 1.82); (B) SEM images of fully fabricated Si solar µ-cells on the donor wafer; (C) statistical analysis and histogram plot (inset) of efficiencies of devices evenly distributed on a donor wafer.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) (a) J–V characteristics and (B) external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of Si solar µ-cells with (black) and without (red) the thermal oxide layer; a simulated EQE curve (blue dashed line) for a non-passivated device with enhancements only from AR coating is also plotted in (B).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations (left) and colorized (Au contacts: yellow; µ-cells: blue; Ag paste: silver) SEM images (right, with zoomed-in insets) of the key steps to build a module of silicon solar µ-cells: (A) transfer-assembly onto a glass substrate with pre-patterned Au electrodes; (B) planarization by flowing a photocurable resin (NOA) under a PDMS block via capillary action; (C) interconnection by screen-printing Ag paste.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Cross-sectional illustration of the concentrator geometry: Si solar µ-cells embedded in a polymer waveguide on a glass substrate with a diffuse BSR; (B) simulated photon flux (cross-sectional view) incident on bottom and sidewall surfaces for a device in the concentrator layout shown in (A); (C) I–V curves of µ-cells with different optical components; (D) experimental (Isc/Isc,0) and simulated (Ftotal/Ftop) relative enhancements for devices with different intercell spacings (s); (E) efficiencies and (F) fill factors of µ-cells with different series resistance under various concentration ratios.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Optical image of a 10-cell module with a screen-printed Ag paste top interconnect; (B) I–V (solid lines) and P–V (dashed lines) plots of the same module measured on an AA plate (blue) and on a diffuse BSR (red).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee42230e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
