“In rust we trust”. Hematite – the prospective inorganic backbone for artificial photosynthesis  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE23668K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE23668K
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 407-425Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms“In rust we trust”. Hematite – the prospective inorganic backbone for artificial photosynthesis

        
          
            Debajeet K. 
            Bora
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Artur 
            Braun
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Edwin C. 
            Constable
          
          
        
      b
aLaboratory for High Performance Ceramics, Empa. Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, CH-8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland. E-mail: artur.braun@alumni.ethz.ch;  Fax: +41 58 765 4150;   Tel: +41 58 765 4850
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland. E-mail: edwin.constable@unibas.ch;  Fax: +41 61 267 1020;   Tel: +41 61 267 1001
cAdvanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720, USA. E-mail: dkbora@lbl.gov;  Fax: +1 510 486 7588;   Tel: +1 510 486 7831
Received 
      1st October 2012
    , Accepted 4th December 2012First published on 4th December 2012AbstractThe search for affordable high performance electrode materials in photoelectrochemical hydrogen production by solar water splitting is an ongoing quest. Hematite is a photoanode material with an electronic band gap suitable for efficient absorption of visible light in a photoelectrochemical cell (PEC). Although its poor electronic structure makes hematite a controversial candidate for PEC, it remains promising because it is an earth abundant, chemically stable and low cost material – necessary prerequisites for PEC to become a competitive cost-efficient solar fuel economy. In addition to reviewing some recent PEC research on hematite and its relevant physical and chemical characteristics, we show how hematite obtained by a low cost synthesis can be refined by hydrothermal treatment and further functionalized by coating with phycocyanin, a light harvesting protein known for photosynthesis in blue-green algae.Debajeet K. BoraDr Debajeet K. Bora obtained his M.Sc. in Nanoscience and Technology from Tezpur University, India in 2007. Dr Bora carried out his Ph.D. dissertation in “Artificial Photosynthesis and Nanotechnology” at the University of Basel with Prof. Edwin C. Constable, and at Empa, the Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology. Currently Dr Bora is working as a physicist post-doctoral fellow at the Advanced Light Source Division of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory at Berkeley, USA. His current interest is in the in situ investigation of electronic structure changes in artificial photosynthetic catalysts under dilute aqueous conditions.Artur BraunDr Artur Braun is a surface physicist from RWTH Aachen and KFA Jülich (magnetic films) and holds a doctoral degree in electrochemistry from ETH Zürich and Paul Scherrer Institute (supercapacitors). Dr Braun was a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Elton Cairns and Prof. Stephen P. Cramer at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (lithium batteries and protein spectroscopy) and a postdoctoral scholar with Prof. Gerald P. Huffman at the University of Kentucky (fossil fuels) before he returned to Switzerland and became a Marie Curie Fellow and group leader at the Empa Laboratory for High Performance Ceramics (fuel cells). Artur has a prestigiously low Erdös number of 3, and he has authored over 100 publications. Due to his expertise in electrochemical energy materials and their electronic structure and transport properties, and in situ/operando synchrotron and neutron methods, he is a board member of Current Applied Physics, an Elsevier journal of the Korean Physical Society. Dr Braun considers artificial photosynthesis a chance, not a challenge.Edwin C. ConstableEdwin Constable is a Professor of Chemistry at the University of Basel. His interests cover all aspects of transition metal chemistry, and he has published over 500 articles and book chapters in supramolecular and nanoscale chemistry. He is currently most involved in the design of materials for sustainable materials science technologies addressing the energy challenges of the 21st Century. He has recently been awarded the Sustainable Energy Award of the Royal Society of Chemistry, and an ERC Advanced Grant for the development of materials science strategies utilizing Earth-abundant metals. He is currently Vice Rector for research at the University of Basel.

Broader context
The components of photo-electrochemical cells (PECs) for solar hydrogen production by water splitting must be based on “no-cost” materials rather than on low-cost materials. Hematite is in many aspects an attractive photoanode alternative, but extensive materials engineering is required before hematite, “rust,” can compete with the performance of conventional systems. But there is encouraging progress going on in making hematite a high performance PEC photoanode. Meanwhile, functionalization of hematite with phycocyanin proteins from another potential low cost source, blue green algae, shows that nano-bio hybrid architectures are possible where hematite provides both a functional and a structural backbone for artificial photosynthesis. C-phycocyanin, a light harvesting antenna molecule found in cyanobacteria, has been taking part in water splitting reaction since 3 billion years ago. The purpose of this molecule is to funnel the light harvested energy into the reaction centre. Inspired by this function, we have utilized this molecule to build a hybrid integrated photoanode system from nanostructured hematite and C-phycocyanin. The functionality and stability of the resulting photoanode system make it possible to employ it for photoelectrochemical solar splitting. Since this approach is based on simple dip coating fabrication steps, scale-up could make it promising for large scale applications.

Introduction
The increasing demand for clean energy sources is driving research for the development of alternative energy technologies. Based on the requirement for clean, preferably carbon-neutral technologies, hydrogen is considered as an ecologically benign green fuel with high energy density.2 Plants and cyanobacteria produce hydrogen through the water splitting machinery of the photosynthetic process.1 This photon-driven water-splitting method provides inspiration for current approaches to biomimetic or low-tech hydrogen generating technologies. The basic energy conversion scheme in the photon-driven water-splitting method is the transformation of light energy into chemical energy. Artificial inorganic photonic systems are expected to play an important role in the sustainable production of hydrogen by photoelectrochemical water splitting using sunlight as a primary energy source. Photoelectrochemical cells3 mimic the processes of photosystem I and II4 and work on simple principles of semiconductor electrochemistry.5 A simplistic architecture of a typical photoelectrochemical cell is presented in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Basic building principle of an electrochemical cell with a wired photoanode and photocathode in aqueous electrolyte and illuminated by sunlight. 
Here we focus on the use of hematite as a photoanode in PECs for solar hydrogen generation by water splitting. Note that the photoanode is the oxygen evolving electrode, whereas the hydrogen is generated at the photocathode.
Photoelectrochemistry at the interface between inorganic and organic components is chosen as an alternative to increase the efficiency of a photoelectrochemical cell. The system acts like an “artificial photosynthetic device” whereby it mimics the functions of photosystem II and photosystem I. With the current advent of nanotechnology and surface functionalization strategies, it is possible to develop such hybrid photoelectrode systems based on nanobiointerface concepts. Based on this, recently many systems have been developed. In our case, we have developed a novel kind of photoelectrode system at the interface of nanostructured hematite electrodes and the light harvesting membrane protein C-phycocyanin. In this perspective article, we discuss some effective surface functionalization strategies for increasing the efficiency of hematite-based photoelectrode systems. Our functionalized hematite system showed a two-fold increase in the photocurrent in comparison to pristine ones by both hydrothermal and bioconjugation modification techniques. These strategies can be further extended to other metal oxide systems such as WO3 or ZnO.
Photoelectrochemical cells and the choice of hematite
The photoelectric effect was discovered by Becquerel in 1839.6 In semiconductor electrodes, this effect is more prominent because the photogenerated electron–hole pair drives the redox reaction. The presence of the electric field facilitates the photocurrent or photovoltage once charge carriers of opposite signs are generated.7 The semiconductor–electrolyte interface is critical and the potential differences between the two phases (semiconductor and liquid) are controlled by the space-charge layer, considered to be part of the electrical double layer.7 The photocurrent is determined by the electric field in this space-charge layer.
The PEC is an application of this concept and was originally developed by Fujishima and Honda in 1972,8 who employed an n-type TiO2 electrode (photoanode) for the photoelectrolysis of water at an efficiency of 0.1%. Only a short time later, Calvin designed a PEC cell in which the electrode surface was optically sensitized with dye molecules.9 In this sensitized photoelectrode, the generation of the photocurrent is also determined by the space-charge layer at the semiconductor–dye–electrolyte interface. The photoresponse in a PEC cell is generally determined by the potential barrier generated at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface through thermodynamic equilibration. This equilibrium is established by the equalization of Fermi levels, where the majority charge carriers (an electron in the case of n-type semiconductors) are transferred from the electrode to the electrolyte.10
Gerischer has proposed a model for the kinetics and energetics of electron-transfer across semiconductor–electrolyte junctions.7 In addition to understanding the physical chemistry of the PEC cell, significant efforts have been devoted to the development and optimization of sustainable photoelectrode materials. Numerous semiconducting metal oxide photoelectrodes have been tested for photoelectrochemical applications,11a and of these hematite (α-Fe2O3) is attractive on the basis of its stability in electrolyte and its absorption spectrum.11b
One factor favoring hematite semiconductor electrodes is the high abundance of iron with an average estimate of 2 to 3% in sedimentary rocks rising to 8.5% in basalt and gabbro, making it the fourth most abundant element in the earth's crust.12 Furthermore, iron compounds are generally biocompatible13 and relatively benign.14 An additional factor in favor of iron-based and hematite materials is the low per unit cost.
Hematite photoanodes were first investigated in PECs by Bard and Hardee,15 who found hematite to be very stable in neutral and alkaline electrolytes under PEC operating conditions. The low efficiencies observed were interpreted using Gärtner theory for semiconductor photoresponse,16 and it was proposed that poor light absorption capability and a short hole diffusion length limited the efficiency. Hematite modified by surface pretreatment has been shown to have improved properties, and it was observed that the photocurrent onset was delayed due to a very low Faradic rate constant for water oxidation chemistry.17 Inspired by these observations, we developed hematite-based hybrid nanostructures for enhancing photocurrent through the surface functionalization and hydrothermal modification of pristine hematite electrodes.
Electronic structure of hematite and iron oxides
Iron oxide is a seemingly simple compound, but there exists a manifold of iron oxide phases, which are strongly correlated electron systems with complex electronic structures. Furthermore, the surfaces of these oxides may interact with the ambient environment/air and further complicate the structure, for example by hydroxylation. Under PEC conditions in the favored alkaline electrolyte, the electrode is exposed to water and additional hydroxyl groups, with which the iron oxide surfaces form even more complex phases. The complexity of the electronic structure is reflected by the catalytic properties and transport properties.11c Iron oxides are trivially summarized as rusts, particularly when the iron oxide is formed in the presence of water or humidity. Certainly, we must take this case into account under PEC conditions.
It belongs to one of the different phases of iron oxide or rust. Rust itself is nothing but hydrated ferric oxide or iron(III) oxyhydroxides. We cannot utilize rust directly for solar water splitting because of slow electronic conduction with polaron hopping.11d
Hematite possesses a corundum structure18a with Fe(III) cations in a slightly distorted octahedral environment. Hematite has optical absorption bands in the UV and near IR region due to crystal field and CT transitions.19a The band gap ranges from 1.9–2.2 eV with an indirect phonon-assisted band-gap transition.20 The LMCT absorption at 400 nm combined with pair excitation processes at 485–500 nm results in the evolution of a broad absorption band 400–600 nm.21 The light absorption of hematite in the long wavelength region is far larger than that of the closely related phases such as maghemite and magnetite.18b
In hematite nanoparticles, it has been observed that the relative intensities of different spectral regions change with particle size.19b,c This is believed to be due to enhancement of the pair excitation in larger particles together with a redshift of the CT band.22
The electronic structure of pristine hematite comprises an empty conduction band with Fe 3d character and a valence band originating from Fe 3d(2t2g) and O 2p orbitals.18b When hematite is used as a photoanode in a PEC, the interaction with aqueous electrolyte can influence its electronic structure, especially at the semiconductor liquid junction. Even in the absence of an external electric bias, a chemically induced surface potential gradient can be generated.23a For a long time, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy has been a helpful analytical tool in order to probe charge carrier dynamics and the electronic structure of photo-electrochemical systems. One recent work on hematite is found in ref. 23b.
In studying the electronic structure of hematite, oxygen K-edge soft X-ray spectroscopy has proven to be useful. The spectroscopic sensitivity of the oxygen K-edge depends on the local bonding. The pre-peaks of the K-shell absorption edge are governed by the 3d components in the unoccupied p–d hybrid wave functions.24 Photoemission spectroscopy confirms that hematite is a charge transfer insulator, i.e. hematite has a band gap between the O 2p and Fe 3d bands.25 The oxygen NEXAFS spectrum of hematite originates from transitions from the O 1s core orbitals to Fe (3d–4s) and Fe 4p-like bands or molecular orbitals having some O 2p character.26 The doublet in the pre-edge region at 528–530 eV originates from transitions of Fe 3d–O 2p states with t2g and eg orbital symmetry.27 NEXAFS spectroscopy at the O K-edge was also used to investigate the band edge electronic structure of bulk and nanoscale hematite.28 The band gap widening in iron oxide nanoparticles is potentially important for application in solar cells.29,30 Recently, ex situ X-ray absorption studies of hematite nanoparticulate films anodized at 600 mV anodic bias produced an extra transition in the upper Hubbard band (UHB), which we interpreted as being related to a highly oxidized Fe species.31aFig. 2 shows the NEXAFS spectra of a pristine 4 layer film (600 nm thin) and a 10 layer film (1500 nm) anodized at 600 mV.
 Fig. 2  Top – oxygen K-edge NEXAFS spectra obtained at BESSY-II ex situ from 600 nm pristine hematite (dotted line) and 1500 nm hematite anodized at 600 mV (solid line), and their difference spectrum (middle panel). The third peak at 532.85 eV is the result of anodization in KOH and is not present in pristine hematite. Bottom – the NEXAFS spectrum recorded in situ in a liquid cell at the Advanced Light Source under 500 mV anodic bias in KOH electrolyte and 1.5 AM illumination. 
The extra peak at 533 eV is formed upon anodization at 600 mV. An anodization potential of 200 mV was not sufficient to create this peak. The extra transition reveals that surface electronic states can be altered by the PEC operating conditions. The difference spectrum at the bottom in Fig. 2 shows clearly the t2g–eg doublet from hematite and the new state from anodization, which most likely corresponds to a hydroxyl or oxo-hydroxyl group at the surface of the hematite. Hence, at the hematite surface we have indeed a rust-like species. In a recent study, the electronic structure of a working Si-doped hematite photoanode system was studied in situ with O K-edge NEXAFS spectroscopy. During this study, we have observed two different types of O K-edge NEXAFS spectra under dark and light conditions at different applied bias which suggested the presence of two types of holes which were assigned to transitions into the CTB and UHB, as shown in the lower panel of Fig. 2.31b Being a small polaron conductor, hematite becomes conductive at high temperatures,32a,32b and various models have been proposed to describe these properties. Bosman and Van Daal developed a hopping conduction model in a narrow band gap semiconductor to elucidate the charge transport mechanism of various transition metal oxides,33 and they also studied the frequency dependence of conductivity at low temperatures. In contrast, Gardner used DC conductivity measurements to show that below 1073 K, hematite behaves as an extrinsic semiconductor with the conductivity very sensitive to stoichiometry.34 Hematite is paramagnetic above 956 K, with a weak ferromagnetic character at room temperature. The Morin transition temperature to an antiferromagnetic state occurs at 260 K due to magnetic compensation of sublattices.35 Hematite nanoparticles with particle sizes of around 8 nm show superparamagnetic relaxation at room temperature.36
Hematite in the PEC environment
The photoanodes in a photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) comprise thin films of hematite on a conducting and typically transparent substrate, such as FTO on glass. Hematite films and nanoparticles have controversial semiconducting behaviour because of their dependence on thickness and surface properties. The surfaces are highly influenced by pre-treatment processes which may partially convert hematite into magnetite.17,31a Nevertheless, the stability of hematite in solution at pH > 4 combined with an absorption having energy greater than the band gap makes it suitable for photoelectrochemical water oxidation.15,37,38 Hematite has the disadvantages of low quantum efficiency and high resistivity. Processes such as charge mobility and charge transfer across the interface39 play a critical role in these intrinsic limitations. Topography plays a role, and hematite thin films with needle-like nanoparticles on conducting glass substrates were found to be more efficient than the films of sintered particles.40
Photogenerated holes form narrow bands with 3d character, and this is a major factor affecting the behaviour of hematite when in contact with aqueous electrolytes.39 Decreased efficiency of hematite in the long wavelength region is due to limitations of carrier diffusion length. The electron–hole pairs are located deep in the semiconductor bulk, and the low mobility combined with the small diffusion length of holes results in a high probability of recombination. On the other hand, efficiency is greater at short wavelengths due to the generation of the electron–hole pair in the near-surface region where a space charge layer exists. In this case the photogenerated holes do not have to diffuse a long distance to oxidize the water molecule. In the water oxidation process, the charge transfer kinetics are slow due to energy mismatching between the acceptor d orbitals of hematite and donor p orbitals of the O2–OH− redox couple.39 The photocurrent can drastically decrease when electronic defects are located at or near the surface where the holes are supposed to enter the electrolyte.41 Some studies have suggested that poor photocurrents also arise as a result of grain boundaries, surface states or crystalline imperfection acting as recombination sites for carrier trapping.42–45
Hematite nanoparticles
Hematite nanoparticles are finding increasing use in a wide range of applications due to their physicochemical properties. Photoanode films have been fabricated for photoelectrochemical water oxidation using 5–16 nm nanoparticles.46 Nanoparticles were prepared by thermal decomposition of iron oleate precursors. Only the smallest particles of 5 nm constitute pure hematite, with other sizes being mixed phases, although the phase content could be varied with processing temperature. Nanoparticles of 12 nm average diameter showed a maximum photocurrent density as a result of reduced electron–hole recombination due to optimal matching of nanoparticle size with the hole diffusion length. Hematite nanoparticles have been electrodeposited on the surface of TiO2 nanotube arrays obtained via anodization of Ti foil,47 and tuning of PEC activity was achieved by varying the coverage of hematite nanocrystals through pretreatment with aqueous iron(III) salts.
Photocatalytic water oxidation by hematite nanocrystals has been studied, and a high photocatalytic O2 evolution rate of 1072 mmol h−1 g−1 was obtained in comparison to bulk and sonicated hematite.48 In addition to PEC applications, the high specific charge storage capacity of hematite nanoparticles has led to their being incorporated into lithium ion batteries. It was found that 30 nm nanocrystals had an optimal discharge capacity. Mesoporous hematite anodes with a specific capacity of 1360 mA h g−1 have been used in lithium ion batteries.49,50 Also here, morphology plays an important role in nanocrystals due to the reduction in the diffusion length of lithium ions. The chemical oxidation of organics on hematite surfaces is actively investigated, and hematite has been studied as a heterogeneous catalyst for the degradation51,52 and alkylation53 of phenols. In the photodegradation of azo dyes such as orange II on hematite surfaces by photo oxidative processes, it was found that the catalytic oxidation was sustainable in a cyclic repetitive way, with the rate strongly depending on the sintering temperature of the nanoparticles.54,55 The photoelectrochemical properties of hematite films also depend on the sintering temperature.56 High temperature treatment of nanoparticles can be used to reduce the insulating maghemite phase, which drastically decreases the performance of hematite films.57 Structural changes of hematite nanoparticles induced by high temperature treatment have been studied with Fe K-edge XANES spectroscopy. The intensities of the two peaks at 7129 eV and 7132.7 eV (indicated by the dashed lines in the left panel in Fig. 3) are systematically redistributing, and the pre-edge peak (deconvoluted for the sample heated at 550 °C in the lower right panel in Fig. 3) intensities are changing as well depending on heat treatment temperature. The t2g peak at around 7113 eV decreases with annealing temperature due to changes in oxidation state and site symmetry (Fig. 3).58Fig. 4 displays the evolution of nanoparticle size with heat treatment temperature from 250 to 900 °C validated by XRD and light scattering techniques.
 Fig. 3  Left panel – Fe K-shell absorption spectra of hematite nanoparticles heated from 250 °C to 900 °C. Lower right panel – deconvoluted pre-edge peak of the XANES spectrum for 550 °C annealed iron oxide nanoparticles (size ∼100 nm). Upper right panel – relative spectral weight of the t2g peak versus annealing temperature. 
 Fig. 4  Evolution of particle size (top, from light scattering) and crystallite size (bottom, from XRD using Scherrer's equation) of iron oxide nanoparticles annealed from 250 °C to 900 °C. 
Infrared spectroscopy studies centering on the vibrational mode at 690 cm−1 confirmed the presence of maghemite phases in hematite nanoparticles.59 The overall structural features of hematite nanoparticles are controlled by both the particle size and growth kinetics,60–63 and significant differences exist between bulk material and the nanoscale. For instance, in heat capacity measurements of 13 nm hematite nanoparticles (T = 1.5 to 350 K) using semi-adiabatic and adiabatic calorimetry, higher heat capacities were obtained than the bulk, and they were attributed to a greater ratio of surface water to bulk hematite.64
We have learned that the structural, electronic and optical properties and transport properties of hematite depend on the size. This naturally includes the magnetic properties. Bulk hematite is weakly ferromagnetic at room temperature, but below the Morin transition temperature at 260 K, a first order spin reorientation becomes important,65–68 and there is a loss in net magnetic moment and an antiferromagnetic transformation. On the other hand, in nanocrystalline hematite (size ∼200 nm) no spin reorientation is observed upon cooling, and ferromagnetic behavior persists to T = 2 K.69–74
The use of nanoscale hematite for solar energy applications is largely determined by its electronic properties, particularly by the widening of the band gap energy and to a lesser extent by quantum confinement effects.75 Due to strongly localized Fe 3d states, it is very unlikely that quantum confinement effects will be observed in nanoscale hematite.76,77 It has been concluded that small particle size may influence the energy positions of the electronic states which define the semiconductor band gap,78 yet a recent study shows no change in the electronic properties of hematite.79 Here, oxygen K-edge absorption and emission spectroscopies have been employed to study valence-band and conduction-band electronic structures of nanoscale hematite with different size ranges. Similar techniques have been used to study the electronic properties of bulk hematite.80–83 A strong correlation between the hematite optical band gap and the energy separation between the onset of emission and absorption spectra was obtained, and it was found that nanoparticles down to 8 nm did not show any changes in the band gap controlled by variation in size.84
Synthesis of hematite nanoparticles
Top-down approach
Mechanical milling is one top-down method for the synthesis of hematite nanoparticles. Hematite–maghemite composites may be prepared by mechanical milling in air at 300 RPM in hardened steel vials using hardened steel balls.85 Planetary ball milling of hematite powders in air or ethanol has also been investigated.86 X-ray diffraction with Rietveld structure refinement and Mössbauer spectroscopy showed partial transformation from α-Fe2O3 to a spinel phase after extensive milling in air, while only the α-Fe2O3 phase was obtained when the material was dispersed in ethanol. Average grain sizes for the nanostructured hematite milled in air were always smaller than those milled in ethanol, reaching a minimum of about 11 nm. Pure hematite particles of an average size of 14 nm in diameter have been obtained from ball milling in a vertical vibrating mixer mill,87 and Mössbauer and magnetization measurements indicate the existence of strong interparticle interactions that can be varied by particle dispersion. The milled nanoparticles had surface areas of around 15 m2 g−1 and degrees of crystallinity from 9 to 50%. In another study, the effect of rotational speed was investigated and a minimum crystallite size of 17.1 nm in diameter with a degree of crystallinity of 9.37% was obtained at 600 rpm for 10 hours.88
Bottom-up approach
Iron oxide nanoparticles have been prepared from molecular precursors by methods including sonochemistry,89 mechanochemistry,90 hydrolysis,91 thermolysis92 and co-precipitation.93 Co-precipitation in the bulk is an economic and versatile technique that may be used to synthesize large amounts of materials with different compositions and particle sizes. Nanoparticles obtained in batch co-precipitation have a broad size distribution, and a greater control of the synthesis conditions is required.94 Near monodisperse nanoparticles have been produced by thermal decomposition of an iron–cupferron complex in octylamine.95 Organometallic complexes of iron have also been used as precursors, and an Fe(CO)5, oleic acid and trimethyl oxide mixture in octyl ether has been used for maghemite synthesis.96 Magnetite can be prepared from [Fe(acac)3] in oleic acid, 1,2-hexadecanediol, olyelamine and diphenyl ether.97 The reaction of ferrocene with hydrazine in PEG-2000 in a surfactant assisted solvothermal synthesis leads to ferromagnetic Fe3O4 nanodiscs which can be used in high density recording media.98
While hematite nanoparticles can be prepared from molecular precursors by a range of techniques,99–103 simple and affordable iron(III) salts, such as chloride or nitrate, can also be used for the synthesis of iron oxides and ferrites, but typically do not lead to nanomaterials in the absence of additives. Combustion flame synthesis has been used to produce hematite nanoparticles.103a Surfactants can act as surface-capping groups and stabilize iron oxide nanomaterials. The morphology of iron oxide nanomaterials may be controlled by the choice of precursors and additives. A versatile, low cost and scalable dip coating technique has been developed recently for the synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles through a benign chemistry route.104 Unlike some processes where large aggregates or products with variable oxidation states or matrix inclusion are obtained, the new technique is free from these problems. A main characteristic of this benign route is the lower temperature of the thermal treatment. The technique also yields a stoichiometric hematite product with small particle size and high homogeneity.
Biomolecules are effective templates for the growth and self-assembly of nanostructures,105 and the hydrothermal reaction of iron salts with amino acids leads to the formation of hematite nanocubes.106 We have modified this method to obtain hematite nanoarchitectures with well-defined geometries and with surface modification that can be further utilized for functionalization of the nanoparticle surface and fabrication of bioconjugates. The amino acid is crucial for the controlled crystallization of hematite nanomaterials.
Bare hematite in photoelectrochemical cells
Hematite nanocrystals have been used to prepare photoanodes for the photooxidation of water. Thin films of the nanoparticles (bare or pristine hematite) are prepared by deposition methods. We will now discuss the development and optimisation of photoanodes using bare hematite (without any other surface modification).
Pristine hematite films for PEC applications
Thermal decomposition of solid FeCl3·6H2O on FTO is a simple and low cost method for preparing hematite thin films.107 The study showed that the film obtained resembles a cactus-like field with 20 nm thick porous crystal plates as was evident from SEM imaging.
The particle size in nanocomposite hematite–SnO2 thin films fabricated from homogeneously mixed precursor solutions may be controlled by varying the precursor composition and post-deposition annealing conditions.108 Composite films with optimised particle sizes exhibit quantum confinement effects. Sivula developed a solution-based colloidal deposition of mesoporous hematite thin films giving a water splitting photocurrent density of 0.56 mA cm−2,56 and a saturation photocurrent density of 1 mA cm−2 was obtained before dark current onset. On annealing the hematite film, the nanoparticle size was increased, drastically changing the optical properties of the film. From XPS and SQUID measurements, it was concluded that tin was doped into the hematite lattice by temperature activated diffusion. Hematite thin films have also been prepared by pulsed laser deposition from hematite targets.109 Films with a thickness of 70 nm using a SiO2 sphere template gave the highest photocurrent densities of 275 μA cm−2 under AM 1.5 solar irradiation. Spray pyrolysis of 0.11 M FeCl3 in ethanol has also been used for the preparation of hematite thin films giving a maximum photocurrent density of 3.7 mA cm−2 under optimized conditions.110 A photocurrent efficiency of 1.84% was reported at an applied potential of 0.2 V vs. the saturated calomel electrode (SCE) at a pH of 14. In a different study, reactive ballistic deposited hematite films, prepared by evaporative deposition of Fe metal in oxygen onto a substrate, showed an IPCE of 10% at 420 nm in 1 M KOH.111
Hematite films can also be prepared by electrodeposition, which is a low cost, versatile and easily up-scalable technique.112 Films were deposited on glass substrates using a non-aqueous precursor solution with subsequent thermal oxidation in air. High current densities allow for deposition of more structured and porous films and also yield a smaller size of the crystallite along the crystallographically preferred 110 direction.
Spin-coated hematite films on FTO obtained from polymeric precursors prepared by the condensation of citrate salts have also been investigated for photoelectrochemical water splitting.113 The precursors significantly influence the photoelectrochemical functionality of hematite films. For example, hematite films obtained by the aerosol-assisted chemical vapour deposition of a [Fe6(PhCOO)10(acac)2(O)2(OH)2]·3C7H8 exhibit a photocurrent density of 600 μA cm−2.40 Hematite films of differing thickness with a polycrystalline hexagonal structure were prepared by radio frequency magnetron sputtering,114 and showed good photocatalytic behaviour under visible light irradiation. The thicker films showed enhanced photocatalytic action due to the higher surface roughness, which provided more reactive sites for photocatalysis. In addition to the photocatalytic activity, the film thickness also influences the optical and photoelectrochemical properties of the film. It has been speculated that thickness can have a strong influence on the optical absorption because of potential strain induced by the interaction of film and substrate.115 Single crystalline hematite thin films obtained using the flux technique have been used for photoelectrochemical water splitting with a photon collection efficiency of 20% at +0.5 V.116 The positive bias was applied because there is insufficient band bending with no applied potential. These single crystalline hematite electrodes were stable at pH 6.3 and −0.4 V.
Dip coated pristine hematite for PEC application
We present now a method for the deposition of hematite films using precursor materials derived from non-aqueous processing of iron(III) salts and oleic acid. Films are deposited by dip coating of FTO coated glass in the precursor solution followed by sintering at 500 °C for 2 h (Fig. 5).31a
 Fig. 5  Synthesis procedure for hematite film by dip coating.30 
The as-synthesized films were studied with XRD (Fig. 6); the major diffraction peaks arise from the dense SnO2 coating of the glass substrate (0.4 μm cassiterite), and only one strong peak due to hematite is observed (the (110) reflection in hexagonal coordinates), in addition to weaker Bragg reflections corresponding to the (012), (104), (113), (024) and (300) planes.
 Fig. 6  Top – X-ray diffractogram of a hematite film dip-coated on FTO glass with 500 °C heat treatment for 30 minutes in air. Solid vertical lines indicate bold Bragg indices from α-Fe2O3; dashed lines point to Bragg peaks from the FTO substrate. Bottom – FESEM images of α-Fe2O3 grown by dip-coating on FTO glass, and current–voltage characteristics in the dark and under 1.5AM simulated light at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The dashed line at the bottom is dark current, the dashed line at the top is light current, and the solid thick line is the photocurrent (= light current − dark current). 
A representative image of the morphology of the hematite films as obtained by FESEM is shown in Fig. 6 (inset in the bottom image) and consists of larvae shaped nanostructures. The average diameter of the primary particles was 80 nm. Each nanostructure was the result of the incorporation and agglomeration of individual particles. Individual particles are fused to each other forming an interconnected 3D network with electronic conducting paths facilitating charge transport.
The i–V curve of such a modified electrode in the dark and under irradiation is presented in Fig. 6 (bottom). A photocurrent density of 250 μA cm−2 is achieved at 1.23 V vs. RHE for FTO functionalised with one dip-coated hematite layer, while no dark current is observed up to about 1.6 V where oxygen evolution begins.
The dip coated films have a very rough surface. Films obtained by spin coating from the same precursor and the same heat treatment procedure are much smoother and glossy, but they exhibit virtually no photocurrent. While we have not made a systematic analysis of this discrepancy, it is possible that the highly reflective appearance of the film is connected with poor absorption of light, and that the film has a low porosity, a small internal surface area and thus a smaller solid–electrolyte interface area.
In a recent quantitative study, we have found that the concentration of the precursor and the weight of the dip-coated or spin-coated film influence the final photocurrent performance of the films.117
Doping-enhanced photoactivity of pristine hematite films
Because of the low efficiency of pristine hematite films for water photo-oxidation, significant effort has been devoted towards the development of doped hematite films, and Si doping is an effective strategy for increasing the efficiency. For instance, Kennedy118 prepared Si-doped hematite films by the pressing and sintering of hematite and SiO2 powders. Sintering was carried out at 1250 °C to 1350 °C for 4 hours followed by quenching at room temperature. The photocurrent varied consistently with the silicon content, and at 2 atom% Si the photocurrent density was 140 μA cm−2. The photoresponse of the electrode was improved by the treatment with 1 M KI solution, leading to an improvement in photocurrent by a factor of three. This photocurrent was stable for at least 2 months but disappeared on heating to 130 °C.
The Grätzel group used atmospheric chemical vapour deposition on SnO2-coated glass using Fe(CO)5 and TEOS precursors to prepare Si-doped hematite photoelectrodes with an IPCE of 42%.119 An HRSEM study demonstrated highly dendritic nanostructures of 500 nm with surface features of 10–20 nm. It was suggested that the high photocurrent obtained (2.2 mA cm−2) was because of the dendritic nanostructure which minimizes the hole diffusion length and optimises light absorption. From a mechanistic investigation of water photo oxidation chemistry using these photoelectrodes, it was shown that two vicinal iron atoms accumulated 4 holes during the reaction. Subsequently, optimised Si-doped hematite films were prepared giving rise to a current density of 4 mA cm−2 at 0.5 sun and a 2.1% solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency based on the hydrogen combustion value of −280 kJ mol−1.120 The photoanode performance can be varied by the process parameters.121 For example, the morphology can depend strongly on the temperature and the silicon precursor. XPS studies confirmed that Si is incorporated into the hematite lattice as Si4+ in APCVD-deposited Si-doped films.122 The optical band gap increased with the increasing TEOS flow rate as a result of decreasing size of the nanocrystallite and quantum size confinement effects. From a study conducted on reactive ballistic deposited Si-doped hematite films, it was found that Si aggregated on the hematite surface, passivating it and aiding charge transfer to the solution.123 Spray pyrolysis using [Fe(acac)3] has also been used for the deposition of Si-doped hematite films that exhibit a photocurrent density of 370 μA cm−2 under 80 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 solar illuminations with 0.2% Si doping.124
Other elements such as Zr, Cr, Mo, Zn, Cd, Ni, Pt and Ge have been investigated as dopants for increasing the efficiency of hematite films. Ti-doped films were fabricated by deposition-annealing using titanium butoxide and iron(III) chloride as precursors.125 The film had a photocurrent density of 1.83 mA cm−2vs. RHE before titanium doping. The Ti-doping increased the photocurrent density up to 3 mA cm−2. The donor density also increased along with a consequent reduction in electron hole recombination at a timescale beyond a few picoseconds. It was proposed that this led to the high photocurrent density. Sol–gel deposited Ti-doped films exhibit an IPCE of 32.6% at 400 nm.126 By comparing hematite films doped with Si and Ti, it was demonstrated that Si-doping led to lower photocurrent densities than Ti-doping.127 This is believed to be due to high grain boundary recombination as well as a highly disordered surface with smaller size of the crystallites. The Ti-doped film showed good electrical conductivity. In another study, co-doping of Ti and Si resulted in an IPCE of 34% at 365 nm.128 Spray pyrolysis has also been used for Ti-doping of hematite, giving material with a photocurrent density of 340 μA cm−2 at zero bias and 1.98 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V vs. SCE.129 The system showed a good solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 1.38% at 0.5 V vs. SCE with a total hydrogen collection of 2.44 ml per hour. A combinatorial technique has also been utilized for the deposition of libraries of doped electrodes. Iron salts and Ti-, Si- or Al-doping precursors were ink jet printed on conducting glass substrates using a quantitative printing technique with subsequent annealing, yielding a library of Ti-, Si- or Al-doped hematite photoanodes.130 The electrodes were screened by immersing in electrolyte followed by laser scanning to measure the photocurrent. It was found that Ti-doping enhanced the photocurrent better than Si- and Al-doping. In electrodeposited Zr-doped films, a photocurrent yield of 2.1 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. SCE was obtained.131
Moving to other transition metal dopants, enhanced efficiencies for photoelectrochemical water splitting were observed with Cr- or Mo-doped films.132 At doping levels of 5 atom% Cr or 15 atom% Mo, IPCEs of 6% and 12% at 400 nm and an applied potential of 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl were observed with the increased efficiency attributed to enhanced charge transfer.
Cadmium has been incorporated as a dopant into hematite by co-electrodeposition of aqueous Fe(III) and Cd(II) at varying Cd:Fe ratios.133 The 1 atom% Cd-doped films showed a 4-fold increase in the photocurrent density over pristine hematite. Electrodeposition has also been used for the preparation of Ni-doped hematite films with improved charge transport and increased recombination lifetimes, and the highest photocurrents obtained were 1.5 mA cm−2 at 0.65 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.1 M NaOH.134 Pt-doped hematite films have also been prepared by electrodeposition with an IPCE efficiency 4-fold higher than pristine hematite (12% vs. 3%) at 400 nm.135 The overall energy efficiency of the Pt-doped hematite was around 3% at 400 nm at 0.46 V in a two-electrode system. Finally, Ge-doped hematite gave a short circuit current of 1.2 mA cm−2 with a power conversion efficiency of 0.06% in the presence of additional redox-active species.136
Surface treatment of hematite photoanodes
In addition to doping, other strategies have been adopted for improving the photocurrent of hematite films and increasing the efficiency for water splitting. One approach is the overlayer treatment of ultrathin hematite films with group 13 oxides. A Ga2O3 surface treatment lowered (= improved) the photocurrent of the onset potential for water oxidation by up to 200 mV.137 The photocurrent was sustainable for at least one day. Water splitting with zero bias has been observed for Ti-doped hematite films treated with an aqueous solution of CoF3 to negative shift the flat band potential and allow direct reduction of water into hydrogen by the photogenerated electrons.138 Addition of glucose by-passed the slow oxygen evolution and provided electrons to consume the photo-generated holes. Ti-doped hematite films have also been modified with electrodeposited NiFe binary oxides to boost the water photooxidation reaction.139 The electrocatalyst deposited from Ni(II) and Fe(II) precursors increased the IPCE of the photoelectrode by as much as a factor of 5.
Treatment of 12.5 nm thin hematite films with TEOS resulted in a drastic improvement of the photoresponse, with a water splitting photocurrent of 630 μA cm−2 and an onset potential of 1.1 V vs. RHE.140 No photoresponse was observed for the TEOS untreated FTO substrate, and the increase in photocurrent was attributed to the good crystallinity of the hematite film and the reduction of the number of carrier trapping sites. In order to decouple the morphological and functional modification, a simple solution-based strategy has been developed in which electrodes are encapsulated in an SiO2 confinement scaffold before heat treatment.141 This approach led to an increase in the photocurrent density from 1.57 mA cm−2 to 2.34 mA cm−2 under standard illumination conditions in 1 M NaOH. The improved quantum efficiency with longer wavelength photons is due to the small size of the crystallite. Modification of hematite with a co-catalyst such as IrO2 resulted in an enhanced photocurrent density of 3 mA cm−2 at an applied potential of +1.23 V vs. RHE.142 During this investigation it was proposed that parallel tuning of both the catalysis and nanostructure could lead to hematite electrodes with a fully exploited potential for water splitting. In a different approach, the photocurrent densities of hematite films were increased using hole scavengers such as H2O2,143 allowing for the separation of surface and bulk recombination effects. It was found that below the water splitting potential, electrolyte oxidation limits the performance of the hematite electrode, whereas above 1.23 V, bulk recombination played a leading role in limiting the photo-oxidation process.
In related studies, photoelectrode bilayers based on tungsten oxide and hematite were prepared by sol–gel methods using PEG-300 polymer as a structure directing agent.144 To circumvent the effects of poor light absorption and small hole diffusion length, a host guest approach was used in which a high surface area tungsten oxide host film made by APCVD supports a thin layer of hematite.145 This forms photo-generated holes very close to the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. The increase in the photocurrent density was around 20% compared to a control film deposited without the host scaffold, and the APCE was believed to be responsible for the enhanced photocurrent density. An 8% improvement in APCE was observed as compared to 5.7% for control films.
Hematite based 1D, 2D and 3D nanostructures for PEC application
Hematite nanostructures with different dimensionality and levels of complexity have been investigated for PEC applications. One recent review on nanostructured hematite appeared in this journal.146a The hopes behind nanostructuring are to increase the efficiency of conventional particulate-based hematite films. This approach helps in optimizing factors such as the hole diffusion length or high recombination rates.
Hematite nanowires have been synthesized by solution growth and post-annealing of hydrated fluoride nanowires.146b Optimized hematite nanowire electrodes gave a photocurrent density of 540 μA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE. Due to the ease of synthesis, this method can be used for large scale production of hematite based nanowires. Hydrothermal methods have also been utilized for the synthesis of Sn-doped hematite nanowires and nanocorals for use as photoanodes.147 As-synthesized nanowire films were sintered at higher temperatures to provoke interdiffusion of Sn from the FTO substrate into the hematite leading to Sn-doping. Sn-doped hematite nanocorals were obtained by adding tin(IV) chloride during the hydrothermal deposition process. The Sn-doped hematite nanowires sintered at 800 °C showed a photocurrent density of 1.24 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE. In the case of the nanocorals, a 1.5 times higher photocurrent density of 1.86 mA cm−2 was obtained under similar operating conditions. Ultrafast optical absorption spectroscopy showed that Sn-doping and morphology did not influence electron–hole recombination in the picosecond regime; XPS studies confirmed that Sn substituted an Fe3+ site in the lattice. It is believed that the enhanced photocurrents for Sn-doped nanowires and nanocorals are a result of both improved electrical conductivity and increased surface area. Ti- and Sn-doped nanowires with the crystallographically preferred direction [110] were obtained by annealing the [211] oriented FeOOH nanowire arrays obtained from solvothermal deposition on an FTO substrate.148 The materials showed good photocurrent densities of 1.3 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5 illumination and had an effective pathway for charge transport which further increased the photocurrent. The length of the nanowire can be controlled by adjusting the reaction temperature as well as the solution pH. At low pH of the precursor solution, longer nanowires were obtained due to the acid catalyzed hydrolysis of acetonitrile. A recently reported 2D hematite nanostructure exhibits the highest reported incident photon to current conversion efficiency of 46% at 400 nm, even higher than the benchmark hematite electrode presented recently.149a The necessary heteronanostructures were fabricated by depositing a thin layer of hematite on TiSi2 nanonets149b by atomic layer deposition techniques. The precursors used for the deposition of hematite films were Fe2(tBuO)6 and water. A water splitting photocurrent of 1.6 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE was reported. Thermal oxidation of iron foil in an oxygen rich atmosphere gave rise to hematite nanorods which showed a photocurrent density of 0.9 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V vs. RHE.150 In an oxygen-lean environment, hematite nanocorals were obtained with a best photocurrent density of 2.6 mA cm−2. Hematite nanotubes prepared by sonoelectrochemical anodization of an Fe metal foil have also been investigated for solar water splitting.151 The thickness of the resulting film was 5–7 nm with smooth arrays of nanotubes having lengths of 3–4 μm. The hematite nanotube film showed a photocurrent density of 1.41 mA cm−2 with a 50% contribution from the visible portion of the solar spectrum.
We have recently developed a method for increasing the efficiency of a pristine hematite film by a factor of 2 by hydrothermal after-treatment.152 The treatment yields a 3-D flower-like nanostructure superimposed on a bed of hematite nanorods. This modification process involves the hydrothermal treatment of a pristine dip-coated hematite film with amino acids such as L-arginine in the presence of iron(III) chloride. In a typical experiment, the hydrothermal treatment is carried out in a closed glass vial containing 5 mmol each of FeCl3·6H2O and L-arginine at 95 °C for 48 hours. The result of the transformation of the nanoparticulate morphology into a flower-like morphology is presented in the SEM images in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Hydrothermal treatment of a pristine hematite film (see SEM inset in Fig. 6) causes substantial microstructure transformation (left) with formation of stellate nanostructures (right). 
The optical assessment of the nanoflower structures indicates that the nanoflower films have lower scattering coefficients than the pristine film due to the roughening of the film in the hydrothermal process. The band gap appears to be unaffected by hydrothermal treatment and remained in the same range as determined for pristine hematite (1.9–2.2 eV). X-ray diffractometry revealed that the structure of the pristine film transformed to the flower-like morphology with preferential orientation and a distinct texture. Close inspection of the nanoflower film (Fig. 8) with scanning electron microscopy revealed that the nanoflowers are hexapods resembling 3-dimensional wind roses with an absolute orthogonality with branches faceted parallel to the long axis. The TEM micrograph of the hexapod (or nanoflower) in the upper left part of Fig. 8 can be directly overlaid with the symbol of the wind rose in the lower left part and shows a surprisingly accurate match of both. The wind rose, such as in the NATO symbol, is built up from wings with inclined facettes, and our hexapod has such inclined facettes, which are convincingly seen in the splitting of Bragg reflections in the electron diffraction image in the lower right part in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  TEM micrographs showing stellate (upper left) matching the well-known wind rose structure (left top and bottom), wings with inclined faces and their nanometer sized sub-units (top right). The inclined face wind rose structure is confirmed by the splitting of Bragg reflections in the crystallographically indexed selected area electron diffractogram (bottom right). 
The photocurrent of the modified hematite film was studied in 1 M KOH under bias and AM 1.5 solar light illumination. The photocurrent density increased from 148 μA cm−2 to 218 μA cm−2 after 48 hours of hydrothermal treatment (Fig. 9) with the increase being attributed to the larger surface area of the nanoflower, as determined from BET surface area measurements.
 Fig. 9  Photocurrent density of the pristine and nanoflower hematite film at 450 mV vs. Ag/AgCl. The dark currents have been subtracted. 
Bioconjugates
Conjugates of iron oxide nanoparticles with biological motifs are of significant interest in the biomedical sector. For instance, to study the interaction of iron oxide nanoparticles with proteins, maghemite nanoparticles were conjugated to bovine serum albumin protein via a fatty acid binding domain.153 Numerous reports concern the application of iron oxide bioconjugates for targeted drug delivery, MRI contrast agents or for sensing applications.154–158 Integration of biological photosynthetic functionalities on the semiconductor photoelectrode surface could give new ways to improve the performance of solar cells. It might also be possible to mimic the photosynthetic machinery of nature or to demonstrate artificial photosynthesis processes.159 Systems with a biomolecule modified photoanode and photocathode are called bio-photoelectrochemical cells, which we have naively sketched in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation of bio-photoelectrochemical cell. The photoanode on the left, such as hematite, is functionalized with phycocyanin. The photocathode on the right, such as copper oxide, is functionalized with a hydrogenase. A proton conducting NAFION® membrane warrants ionic conductivity and prevents mixing of evolving O2 and H2. 
To date, little effort has been devoted to the development of bioconjugated photoanodes for solar energy applications. Our focus is primarily on the development of electrodes conjugated with biological molecules giving biomimetic synthetic analogues of biological light harvesting molecules, the active site of the water oxidation catalyst or the hydrogen evolution catalyst.
Bioconjugated hybrid photocatalysts
In addition to the fabrication of bioconjugated semiconductor photoelectrodes, hybrid photocatalysts have been developed for solar fuel production. Tran et al. recently provided an interesting overview of how to functionalize the surface of photocatalyst particles with H2 evolution catalysts, water oxidation catalysts and carbon dioxide reduction catalysts, and also synthetic molecular organic catalysts.160
As an example, a hybrid system was fabricated which consisted of TiO2 nanoparticles and enzymes such as [NiFeSe]-hydrogenase with co-attached Ru based photosensitizers. This system showed promising results in producing hydrogen gas in an aerobic environment.161,162 To establish the per site performance of the hydrogenase in producing hydrogen, a similar system has been developed using [NiFeSe]-hydrogenase from Desulfomicrobium baculatum (Db) attached to Ru-dye sensitized TiO2. For that study, triethanolamine was used as a sacrificial electron donor and the system produced H2 with a turnover frequency of 50 (mol H2) s−1 (mol total hydrogenase)−1 at pH 7 and 25 °C, even under the typical solar irradiation of a northern European sky. The system shows promising stability even after extended exposure to air, making it promising as a robust catalyst for water splitting applications.
Recently, a hydrogen evolving hybrid photocatalyst was fabricated by the non-covalent interaction of photosystem I with Pt nanoparticles.163 The photocatalytic rate obtained for the PSI/Pt biohybrid system was 244 μmol H2 per mg chlorophyll per hour using cytochrome c6 as the soluble mediator and ascorbate as the sacrificial electron donor. The EPR characterization of the biohybrid complex has elucidated the electron transfer reaction between PSI and Pt metallic nanoparticle.
Bioconjugated photoelectrodes based on metal and metal oxide substrates
In order to make the transition from bio-conjugated particulate systems to films and assemblies, we need to look back to 1971 when Tributsch and Calvin pioneered a hybrid semiconductor-biological electrode for the study of photoelectrochemical reactions of excited chlorophyll molecules at the semiconductor surface.164 As electrodes they took single crystals of wide band gap ZnO and showed that the optically excited chlorophyll injected electrons into the CB of ZnO, thus giving an anodic photocurrent. The presence of various electron donors such as hydroquinone or phenylhydrazine in the electrolyte helped the chlorophyll molecules in mediating the transfer of electrons from the levels of the reducing agents into the CB of the semiconductor which acts as an electron acceptor. When an appropriate electrochemical gradient was provided, the electron capture by the semiconductor electrode was irreversible. The excited chlorophyll at the semiconductor showed a similarity in properties such as unidirectional charge transfer and efficient charge separation to chlorophyll in the photosynthetic reaction center. However this prototype system has no galvanic separation.
The organic–inorganic photogalvanic effect was first observed by Rabinowitch in 1940 in the thionine–iron system.165 The photogalvanic effect of chlorophyll was studied by attachment to a metal electrode such as Pt in series with a quinhydrone half-cell.166 In this study it was found that on illumination, chlorophyll a aggregates underwent charge transfer with the subsequent formation of a p-type semiconductor film. This gave rise to a photocurrent with a positive potential at the Pt–Chl electrode. A reverse current was observed when the light was turned off. This reversible photogalvanic reaction was only observed upon irradiation. The effect was absent at the chlorophyll-free side of the electrode. The observed photocurrent at 700 nm matched well with that of chlorophyll, as is evident from the action spectrum. Recently, an artificial leaf device was fabricated based on the co-immobilization of a chlorophyll derivative and formate dehydrogenase on silica gel thin films for the reduction of carbon dioxide to formic acid.167
Not only photosynthetic components, but also living organisms and the entire photosynthetic machinery such as photosystem II and photosystem I have been utilized for the preparation of hybrid photoelectrodes. For this, animate blue green algae (mastigocladus laminosus) were immobilized on the surface of a SnO2 electrode.168 Such a living electrode was believed to be applicable as a long-lived photoconverter for converting sunlight into electrical energy.
Recently, Reisner developed a hybrid photoanode for water photooxidation made of cyanobacterial photosystem II and a mesoporous indium doped tin oxide electrode.169 Charge transfer at the interface occurred via two competing pathways to the metal oxide interface with the application of minimum bias +0.2 V vs. NHE during red light (635 nm) illumination. The photocurrent at pH 6.5 and +0.5 V was 1.6 ± 0.3 μA cm−2. These strategies are based on the chemical modification of the electrode surface by electrostatic adsorption. To overcome the stability issue of the biomolecule attached to the electrode, a covalent functionalization strategy is preferred over electrostatic adsorption.
Bioconjugated hematite photoelectrodes
To the best of our knowledge, bioconjugation of hematite photoelectrodes is relatively new in the solar energy sector, though an early study on the interaction between hematite and cytochrome c was presented by Eggleston in 2006.170 Recently we have developed a method for functionalizing the surface of hematite films with the light harvesting membrane protein C-phycocyanin.171 The primary goal of developing such conjugates is to increase the light-harvesting efficiency of hematite or alternative semiconductors. Eggleston studied the interaction of mitochondrial cytochrome c with hematite, which is important in studying the mechanism of iron reduction by bacteria. The cytochrome c was bound electrostatically to the hematite surface in the pH range 8.5–10. Cyclic voltammetric studies confirmed the presence of cytochrome c in its native conformation, and the protein adhered strongly to the hematite surface in the presence of phosphate buffer as confirmed by deformation of the AFM tip during atomic force microscopy scans.170 In related studies, the protein was co-adsorbed on the hematite in phosphate buffer in the pH range from 2 to 11. The protein aggregated with a conformational change when the pH approached the isoelectric point of cytochrome c.172 The interaction of hydroquinone with hematite surfaces has also been studied in order to elucidate the mechanism of charge transfer.173 The catalytic oxidation of hydroquinone on hematite involves an inner sphere 1-electron-transfer mechanism supported by the detection of semiquinone radicals.
Bioconjugation of the light harvesting protein C-phycocyanin171 on a pristine hematite film is a new approach for increasing the efficiency of the water photo-oxidation process. The light harvesting protein acts as a photon-energy relay system in the cyanobacterial membrane,174 and in our study the protein helped in the panchromatic harvesting of low energy photons in the red part of the visible spectrum giving an absorption threshold at 620 nm. We adopted a covalent functionalization strategy to increase the stability of the conjugate in the harsh operational environment of a PEC. The conjugation process involved hierarchical modification of the hematite surface with protein, followed by agarose and finally covalent modification of the agarose with a second layer of C-phycocyanin by CDI-cross-linking, as outlined in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Hierarchical functionalization of hematite with electrostatically adsorbed and covalently linked C-phycocyanin light-harvesting units. Hematite–phycocyanin conjugation scheme. 
The bioconjugated film was characterized by a wide-range of techniques. Optical spectroscopy revealed that the band gap of the original film of 1.9–2.2 eV was unchanged after the hierarchical surface modification. Within the resolution and sensitivity limits of XRD, we found no structural changes in the hematite after chemical modification. The morphology of the film was studied with tapping mode atomic force microscopy, revealing a fibre-like pattern on the surface after bioconjugation (Fig. 12). Raman spectromicroscopy exhibited a band at 1610 cm−1 confirming the presence of C-phycocyanin.
 Fig. 12  Large scan AFM images (50 μm × 50 μm) of C-phycocyanin conjugated film with a fiber-like pattern on the hematite surface. 
The enhanced efficiency of the bioconjugated film is evident from a photoelectrochemical study using a sweeping current-potential scan in 1 M KOH in dark and under AM 1.5 simulated solar irradiation. The photocurrent density at 600 mV increases from around 288 μA cm−2 for the pristine hematite to around 480 μA cm−2 for the protein adsorbed film and to around 570 μA cm−2 for the bioconjugated film (Fig. 13a). Only the photocurrents are shown, as the dark current densities have been subtracted.
 Fig. 13  (a) The photocurrent for pristine hematite (solid line), C-phycocyanin electrostatically adsorbed on hematite (dashed line), C-phycocyanin conjugated (dotted line) films in 1 M KOH (pH = 13.6) with a three electrode PEC cell at 600 mV bias under dark and simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination. (b) Top – the photocurrent action spectrum of pristine hematite (solid line), C-phycocyanin electrostatically adsorbed on hematite (dashed line), C-phycocyanin conjugated (dotted line) films in 1 M KOH (pH = 13.6) under monochromatic irradiation and with 0 mV bias. Bottom – IPCE of pristine hematite film (solid), phycocyanin absorbed hematite film (dashed), and conjugated film (dotted line), obtained with 0 mV bias. 
The increase in photocurrent by a factor of two was attributed to the enhanced panchromatic light harvesting of hematite film by the phycocyanin film which absorbs at 620 nm. IPCE measurements were carried out with 0 mV, i.e. no bias, and further validated the enhanced efficiency of the bioconjugated system at 620 nm (Fig. 13b). We have obtained 0.2% IPCE for pristine and protein adsorbed film which increases to 0.6% upon conjugating the protein by surface functionalization concomitant with the increase in photocurrent, as is evident by the photocurrent action spectrum (upper, Fig. 13b). The very low value of IPCE originated as a result of the application of zero bias in a two-electrode configuration.
C-Phycocyanin itself can also oxidize the water with the generation of hydroxyl radicals175 and we speculated that the protein might undergo additional reactions with the hematite surface or electrolyte under irradiation in the photoelectrochemical study.
In the energy level diagram in Fig. 14a, we want to present the charge transfer of an electron into the conduction band of hematite similar to the DSSC process. The valance band of the phycocyanin is more negative than the water oxidation reaction, which will prevent hole transfer from protein to water. The schematic is insofar questionable. From the literature, it is known that phycocyanin acts as a photo-oxidizer due to its photodynamic action, while the exact mechanism of hole transfer is still not established. It is stated that phycocyanin can interact with water molecules (solvent) or with hematite (substrate) by a so-called type-I mechanism, whereby it transfers charge to the solvent (electrolyte in this case) with the generation of radicals. This happens only when phycocyanin gets excited with light. Photosensitized oxidations are the basis for photodynamic action. The first step of this photodynamic action is the absorption of light by a sensitizer (sens) to produce an excited state (sens*). In the presence of oxygen, two competing reactions of the excited-state sensitizer can occur, which are, respectively, type-I and type-II mechanisms. Hydroxyl radicals (OH˙) can be generated by the following mechanism when C-phycocyanin is irradiated with visible light (470 nm). It is speculated that in our case, the sens* can either react with the hematite surface or with the electrolyte during photoelectrochemical operation (type I) or with oxygen (type II).
 Fig. 14  (a) Energy band diagram showing the charge transfer from excited state phycocyanin to the conduction band of hematite. (b) the photocurrent transient responses of pristine hematite (solid line), C-phycocyanin electrostatically adsorbed on hematite (dashed), C-phycocyanin conjugated (dotted line) films measured during chronoamperometric cycling. 
To better understand the charge transfer between the excited state C-phycocyanin and the conduction band of hematite as depicted in the energy level diagram (see Fig. 14a), we carried out a transient photocurrent study of the bioconjugated films (Fig. 14b). The falling transient obtained during the study suggested the photogeneration of a hydroxyl radical which can act as an electron acceptor.15 The putative hydroxyl radical is depleted on the hematite surface when the light is tuned off and scavenges the CB electrons forming a cathodic transient spike. The spike decays upon depletion of hydroxyl radicals. We observe that the magnitude of this cathodic transient spike was maximum in the case of phycocyanin conjugated hematite film, which led us to suggest that bioconjugated films generate more hydroxyl radicals due to photodynamic action of phycocyanin molecules. We believe that this is probably another factor for enhanced efficiency. But this needs to be verified in dedicated future studies.
To validate the effect of oxidation on the enhanced efficiency of the bioconjugated films, we have performed a long term chronoamperometry study at the oxidation potential of water [207 mV vs. Ag/AgCl and 1.23 V vs. a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)] as shown in Fig. 15a. The primary origin of the photocurrent is water oxidation by photogenerated holes, but with the bioconjugated film, the photocurrent can also involve the faradaic oxidation of protein. The chronoamperometry study indicated that the photocurrent was stable for bioconjugated hematite. These results lead us to believe that the extra current is not due to irreversible oxidation of protein. Fig. 15b displays the number of moles of electrons generated under dark conditions, and as is evident, the concentration of electrons generated during the dark oxidative process decreases for bioconjugated samples. This supports the idea that the observed extra current is not from the oxidation of the organic molecules on the hematite surface.
 Fig. 15  (a) Stability of photocurrent over time for pristine and protein functionalized film. (b) Number of moles of electrons obtained during a dark chronoamperometric scan after 10 min of operation for the three different treated samples. 
Influence of protein conjugation on optical absorption
Light-harvesting action of the protein molecules which absorb in the red part of the visible spectrum helps in the anticipated enhanced photocurrent obtained in the hematite–phycocyanin system. By integrating this protein on the hematite or photoactive layer, we can increase its light-absorbing properties by taking advantage of panchromatic light harvesting. Multiple factors affect the total number of photons absorbed by a solar cell active layer. These are: an optical absorption comparable to the solar spectrum, the absorptivity, and the broadening of the absorption-wavelength range. In this system, the generation of a photocurrent or efficiency will be enhanced only when the total number of photons absorbed by it increases. This could be possible once the absorption range and absorption peak value or the intensity increase for hematite. So, by anchoring the C-phycocyanin molecule on the hematite surface, the absorption peak value can be increased with a broadening of the spectral range. The absorption spectra shown in Fig. 3a in ref. 171 reveal that the pristine hematite film absorbed at 404 nm, 444 nm and 545 nm, corresponding to the usual band positions of bulk hematite. The band at 444 nm originated as a result of ligand field transition, and that at 545 nm appeared due to the absorption edge. Protein adsorption helps in spectral broadening along with a shift of the 444 nm band to longer wavelength, while there is no change to the band at 404 nm. It is found that the absorption edge peak intensity increases upon protein interaction. This change can be related to the change of the spectral weight, and the increase in the peak absorption value occurs due to the protein absorption edge at 620 nm. C-Phycocyanin absorbs at 620 nm, and this can be seen from the inset in Fig. 3a in ref. 171. The absorption maximum of phycocyanin changes upon interaction with the hematite nanoparticles constituting the film. It was due to the perturbation of the surface-charge density of the nanoparticle and the protein, which manifests in changing the absorption spectrum.
Hematite conjugates with synthetic biomimetic analogues
The attachment and covalent linking of redox-active and photo-active molecular motifs to semiconductors lies at the heart of the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC).176 Typically, semiconductors such as TiO2 or ZnO are associated with the concept of DSSC applications, but some examples have been reported in which hematite films have been covalently modified with synthetic molecules.
Is it possible, or even necessary, to improve the photo response of hematite by dye-sensitization permitting the harvesting of incident photons with higher efficiency? For example, electrodeposited hematite films have been further functionalized by physisorption of [(5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (TCPP)], and the efficiency of the TCPP modified electrode was 70% higher compared to the bare hematite electrode.177
The dye sensitization of hematite is a fairly new field. In the case of bare hematite, major current research efforts focus on the light absorbing properties, charge carrier generation and recombination losses. However, the performance is also dependent on the charge transfer and collection of a light generated electrical charge carrier. This latter property can be boosted with the help of external charge injection from a sensitizer into the conduction band of the semiconductor. Non-doped hematite has low efficiency because of the short average lifetime of the excitonic pair, i.e. the short hole diffusion length.178 This means most of the holes recombine before they can diffuse to the surface and do the water oxidation reaction, and consequently the efficiency becomes low. Here, surface states or Fe2+ ions from less-oxidized phases such as FeOOH at the surface179 can play an important role in the recombination process. To cover up these surface states, various strategies have been followed. Dye sensitization is one alternative technique in the sense that the OH group from the surface state provides room for the formation of molecular species which act as a bridge for charge transfer across semiconductor–molecule interfaces. Then, when we install a sensitizer on top of hematite, the HOMO of which lies higher above the VB of hematite, we can increase the efficiency to some extent. The sensitizer acts so-to-speak as a panchromatic light harvester which enhances the spectral selectivity and catalytic action of the electrode. Porphyrin is such a sensitizer mimicking the structure of the natural chlorophyll molecule. Herrara et al.177 used a derivative of porphyrin for the dye sensitization of the electrodeposited hematite film. The stability of biological materials like dyes and proteins is in general under scrutiny when they are considered in an ambient environment. From the stability perspective, we find that C-phycocyanin can work under harsh photoelectrochemical conditions, such as in pH ∼14 under 1.5 AM illumination and strong anodic bias. While we have investigated the mechanism of charge transfer between the semiconductor and the protein moiety, we are still away from a conclusive statement about the potential removal of surface states by phycocyanin. Our hybrid integrated system can work as a future DSSC system fabricated with affordable and environmentally benign components such as hematite and phycocyanin. In this case, we need to study the regeneration of chromophore of phycocyanin molecules, which is an important issue in DSSC application. It is noteworthy that nowadays the production of phycocyanin is an easily scalable process. In our system, we can enhance the efficiency in two approaches: adsorption and chemical cross functionalization. We have found that chemical cross functionalization stabilized the light harvester.
Conclusions and outlook
We have discussed the chemical and physical characteristics of hematite and its utility as a photoanode for the PEC water splitting reaction. The focus is on how various synthetic approaches can be used to modify the properties of hematite nanoparticles and thin films to increase the efficiency for solar water splitting. Approaches to PEC including microstructure refinement and bioconjugation of hematite with photosynthetic counterparts have been reviewed. We believe that these approaches may be generally applicable for further increasing the efficiency of well-performing PEC materials.
Dip-coating of hematite film and surface functionalization for bioconjugation paves new ways towards cost effective PEC cells for H2 production.
The two-fold increase observed in the photocurrent on bioconjugation is effective when we consider large area electrode fabrication, whereas the production of the prototype protein of choice, C-phycocyanin, could pose a cost issue which needs to be technologically addressed as well.
One can consider extending the strategy with other photosynthetic molecular units or dyes. A significant factor is the stability of these modified electrodes in the harsh PEC operation environment.
One generally heard concern is that biomaterials such as proteins are too sensitive for any practical application. This may hold if one keeps those motifs, or even dyes from standard DSSCs, in a liquid environment for analytical purposes. However, once attached and immobilized on surfaces, such seemingly sensitive materials may show more robustness than we actually expect. So there is hope that degradation issues may have been exaggerated, and that the handling of biological or biochemical components could become easier at the device level.
Finally, we are confident that hematite films obtained by dip coating, further refined by hydrothermal treatment and functionalized with phycocyanin, can be eventually produced as large PEC photoanode panels at an industrial scale.
Abbreviations

APCVDAtmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition
AMAir mass
APCEAbsorbed photon to current conversion efficiency
CBConduction band
CDI1,1′-Carbonyl diimidazole
CTCharge transfer
FTOFluorine doped tin oxide
IPCEIncident photon to current conversion efficiency
LMCTLigand-to-metal charge transfer
NEXAFSNear edge X-ray absorption fine structure
PECPhotoelectrochemical cell
TEOSTetra ethyl ortho silicate
VBValence band
XANESX-Ray absorption near edge structure
XRDX-Ray diffraction

Acknowledgements
This research was fully funded by the Swiss Federal Office of Energy project no. 153613-102809 and partially funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation project R'Equip # 121306. Electron micrographs were provided by Empa Electron Microscopy Center (Dr Rolf Erni) and the Argonne National Laboratory Center for Nanoscale Materials (Dr Elena Rozhkova and Dr E. Vitol). X-ray and electron spectroscopy data were obtained at the Advanced Light Source in Berkeley and at BESSY-II Berlin and at ESRF Grenoble. We are grateful to Dr Krisztina Schrantz (funded by the Swiss-Hungarian Sciex project 10.013) for assistance with the bio conjugation, and to M.Sc. student Pradeep Wyss (funded by the Hirschmann Foundation) and Prof. H. Piles, FHNW Basel. Graphic enhancement of the SEM images was carried out by A. Koster (Empa).
Notes and references
H. Gaffron and J. Rubin, J. Plant Physiol., 1942, 26, 219 Search PubMed .

          http://www1.eere.energy.gov/hydrogenandfuelcells/tech_validation/pdfs/fcm01r0.pdf
        .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lubitz, E. J. Reijerse and J. Messinger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 15 RSC .
H. J. Lewerenz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1997, 26, 239 RSC .
E. Becquerel, C. R. Acad. Sci., 1839, 9, 561 Search PubMed .
H. Gerischer, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1975, 58, 263 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CAS .
M. Calvin, Science, 1974, 184, 375 CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1978, 29, 189 CAS .

  (a) H. H. Kung, H. S. Jarrett, A. W. Sleight and A. Ferretti, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 2463 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35–54 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. E. Katz, X. Zhang, K. Attenkofer, K. W. Chapman, C. Frandsen, P. Zarzycki, K. M. Rosso, R. W. Falcone, G. A. Waychunas and B. Gilbert, Science, 2012, 337, 1200 Search PubMed .
M. Yellishetty, P. G. Ranjith and A. Tharumarajah, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2010, 54, 1084 Search PubMed .
S. Zhu, N. Huang, L. Xu, Y. Zhang, H. Liu, H. Sun and Y. Leng, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2009, 29, 1589 Search PubMed .
C. J. Sartoretti, B. D. Alexander, R. Solarska, I. A. Rutokowska, J. Augustynski and R. Cerny, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13685 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Hardee and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1024 CAS .
W. Gärtner, Phys. Rev., 1959, 116, 84 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Dare-Edwards, J. P. Goodenough, A. Hamnett and P. R. Trevellick, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 2027 RSC .

  (a) L. Pauling and S. B. Hendricks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1925, 47, 781 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            R. M. Cornel and U. Schwertmann, The Iron Oxides. Structure, Properties, Reactions and Uses, VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  1996 Search PubMed .

  (a) L. A. Marusak, R. Messier and W. B. White, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1980, 41, 981 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. B. Saito, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1965, 38, 2008 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) L. Tay, N. L. Rowell, D. J. Lockwood and R. Boukherroub, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2006, 24, 747 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kennedy and K. W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709 CAS .
Y. P. He, Y. M. Miao, C. R. Li, S. Q. Wang, L. Cao, S. S. Xie, G. Z. Yang and B. S. Zou, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 125411 CrossRef .
Y. Yamanoi, S. Nakashima and M. Katsura, Am. Mineral., 2009, 94, 90 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. V. Yanina and K. M. Rosso, Science, 2008, 320, 218 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. Hamann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7626 RSC .
Z. Y. Wu, S. Gota, F. Jollet, M. Pollak, M. Gautier-Soyer and C. R. Natoli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 2570 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, P. D. Johnson, N. Wassdahl, J. H. Guo, P. Skytt, J. Nordgren, S. D. Kevan, J. E. Rubensson, T. Beoske and W. Eberhardt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 2109 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Todd, D. M. Sherman and J. A. Purton, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67, 881 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wu, S. Gota, F. Jollet, M. Pollak, M. Gautier-Soyer and C. R. Natoli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 2570 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gilbert, C. Frandsen, E. R. Maxey and D. M. Sherman, Phys. Rev., 2009, 79, 035108 Search PubMed .
S. U. M. Khan and J. Akikusa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7184 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, C. Sathe, S. M. Butorin, D. K. Shuh, J. Nordgren and J. H. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17(19), 2320 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. K. Bora, A. Braun, S. Erat, A. K. Ariffin, R. Lohnert, K. Sivula, J. Topfer, M. Gratzel, R. Manzke, T. Graule and E. C. Constable, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5619 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Braun, K. Sivula, D. K. Bora, J. Zhu, L. Zhang, M. Gratzel, J. Guo and E. C. Constable, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16870 Search PubMed .

  (a) S. Mochizuki, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1977, 41, 591 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Gleitzer, J. Nowotny and M. Rekas, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1991, 19, 310 Search PubMed .
A. J. Bosman and H. J. Van Daal, Adv. Phys., 1970, 19, 2 Search PubMed .
F. G. Gardner, F. Sweet and D. W. Tanner, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1963, 24, 1183 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Bhowmik and A. Saravanan, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 053916 Search PubMed .
F. Bødker and S. Mørup, Europhys. Lett., 2000, 52, 217 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kennedy and K. W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709 CAS .
R. K. Quinn, R. D. Nasby and R. J. Baughman, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 1011 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, K. D. Sieber and G. A. Somorjai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1988, 252, 269 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Tahir, K. G. Upul Wijayantha, S. Saremi-Yarahmadi, M. Mazhar and V. McKee, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3763 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, K. C. Chang and B. Miller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 697 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, K. C. Chang and B. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 684 Search PubMed .
L. M. Peter, K. G. Upul Wijayantha and A. A. Tahir, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 309 RSC .
Q. Zhang and G. J. Adriaenssens, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 6795 Search PubMed .
M. Barroso, C. A. Mesa, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, T. Hisatomi, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109(39), 115640–115645 Search PubMed .
P. H. Borse, H. Jun, S. H. Choi, S. J. Hong and J. S. Leeb, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 173103 CrossRef .
T. H. Jeon, W. Choi and H. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7134 Search PubMed .
T. K. Townsend, E. M. Sabio, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4270 RSC .
L. Chen, G. Wang, G. N. Mathur and V. K. Varadan, Proc. SPIE, 2012, 8344, 83441J Search PubMed .
B. Sun, J. Horvat, H. S. Kim, W. Kim, J. Ahn and G. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18753 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prucek, M. Hermanek and R. Zboril, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 366, 325 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Wang, Z. Q. Liu, F. G. Liu, X. T. Zhang, Y. Cao, J. F. Yu, T. H. Wu, Y. B. Bai, T. J. Li and X. Y. Tang, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 1998, 65, 233 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Wang, H. L. Qi and K. S. Peng, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 23, 200 CrossRef CAS .
F. Herrera, A. Lopez, G. Mascolo, P. Albers and J. Kiwi, Appl. Catal., B, 2001, 29, 147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Du and Y. Xu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2895 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, R. Zboril, F. L. Formal, R. Robert, A. Weidenkaff, J. Tucek, J. Frydrych and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7436 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Crocombette, M. Pollak, F. Jollet, N. Thromat and M. Gautier-Soyer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, 3143 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Bora, A. Braun, S. Erat, O. Safonova, T. Graule and E. C. Constable, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12, 817 Search PubMed .
I. V. Chernyshova, M. F. Hochella Jr and A. S. Madden, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1736 RSC .
R. V. Morris, H. V. Lauer Jr, C. A. Lawson, E. K. Gibson Jr, G. A. Nace and C. Stewart, J. Geophys. Res., [Space Phys.], 1985, 90, 3126 Search PubMed .
A. Navrotsky, L. Mazeina and J. Majzlan, Science, 2008, 319, 1635 CrossRef CAS .
S. Morup, C. Frandsen, F. Bodker, S. N. Klausen, K. Lefmann, P. A. Lindgard and M. F. Hansen, Hyperfine Interact., 2003, 144, 347 Search PubMed .
D. Spagnoli, B. Gilbert, G. A. Waychunas and J. F. Banfield, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2009, 73, 4023 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Snow, C. R. Lee, Q. Shi, J. Boerio-Goates and B. F. Woodfield, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2010, 42, 1142 Search PubMed .
C. Carbone, F. Di Benedetto, C. Sangregorio, P. Marescotti, L. A. Pardi and L. Sorace, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9988 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. de Boer, T. A. T. Mullender and M. J. Dekkers, Geophys. J. Int., 2001, 146, 201 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Gee, Y. K. Hong, J. C. Sur, D. W. Erickson, M. H. Park and F. Jeffers, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2004, 40, 2691 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Hill, F. Jiao, P. G. Bruce, A. Harrison, W. Kockelmann and C. Ritter, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4891 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cromphaut, V. G. Resende, E. Grave and R. E. Vandenberghe, Hyperfine Interact., 2009, 191, 167 Search PubMed .
G. F. Goya, M. Veith, R. Rapalavicuite, H. Shen and S. Mathur, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 80, 1523 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Klausen, K. Lefmann, P. A. Lindgard, L. T. Kuhn, C. R. H. Bahl, C. Frandsen, S. Moerup, B. Roessli, N. Cavadini and C. Niedermayer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 214411 Search PubMed .
M. V. Mansilla, R. Zysler, D. Fiorani and L. Suber, Physica B, 2002, 320, 206 CrossRef .
R. D. Zysler, D. Fiorani, A. M. Testa, M. Godinho, E. Agostinelli and L. Suber, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2004, 272, 1575 Search PubMed .
R. D. Zysler, D. Fiorani, A. M. Testa, L. Suber, E. Agostinelli and M. Godinho, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 212408 Search PubMed .
U. M. Khan and J. Akikusa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7184 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujimori, M. Saeki, N. Kimizuka, M. Taniguchi and S. Suga, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 34, 7318 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Sherman, Phys. Chem. Miner., 1985, 12, 161 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Sherman, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69, 3249 Search PubMed .
B. Gilbert, C. Frandsen, E. R. Maxey and D. M. Sherman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 035108 CrossRef .
F. M. F. de Groot, M. Grioni, J. C. Fuggle, J. Ghijsen, G. A. Sawatzky and H. Petersen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 5715 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wu, S. Gota, F. Jollet, M. Pollak and M. Gautier-Soyer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 2570 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Mackrodt, F. Joliet and M. Gautier-Soyer, Philos. Mag. B, 1999, 79, 25 CrossRef CAS .
E. Guiot, Z. Y. Wu, S. Gota and M. Gautier-Soyer, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1999, 371, 101 Search PubMed .
C. F. Gilbert, E. R. Maxey and D. M. Sherman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 035108 CrossRef .
S. Dutta, S. K. Manik, M. Pal, S. K. Pradhan, P. Brahma and D. Chakravorty, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2005, 288, 301 Search PubMed .
L. C. Sanchez, J. D. Arboleda, C. Saragovi, R. D. Zysler and C. A. Barrero, Physica B, 2007, 389, 145 Search PubMed .
R. A. Borzi, S. J. Stewart, G. Punte, R. C. Mercader, M. Vasquez-Mansilla, R. D. Zysler and E. D. Cabanillas, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1999, 205, 234 CrossRef CAS .
R. Arbain, M. Othman and S. Palaniandy, Miner. Eng., 2011, 24, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Willard, L. K. Kurihara, E. E. Carpenter, S. Calvin and V. G. Harris, Int. Mater. Rev., 2004, 49, 125 Search PubMed .
Č. Jovalekić, M. Zdujić, A. Radaković and M. Mitrić, Mater. Lett., 1995, 24, 365 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, J. Y. Howe and B. Gu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9203 CrossRef CAS .
E. Darezereshki, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 642 Search PubMed .
H. Tamura and E. Matijevic, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1982, 90, 100 CAS .
P. Tartaj, M. D. Puerto Morales, S. Veintemillas-Verdaguer, T. González-Carreño and C. J. Serna, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2003, 36, R182 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rockenberger, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11595 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hyeon, S. S. Lee, J. Park, Y. Chung and H. B. Na, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12798 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, H. Zeng, D. B. Robinson, S. Raoux, P. M. Rice, S. X. Wang and G. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 273 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zou, K. Xiong, C. Jiang, H. Li, Y. Wang, S. Zhang and Y. Qian, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1584 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jing and S. Wu, Mater. Lett., 2004, 58, 3637 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vasquez Mansilla, R. Zysler, D. Fiorani and L. Suber, Phys. B, 2002, 320, 206 CrossRef .
R. Strobel and S. E. Pratsinis, Adv. Powder Technol., 2009, 20, 190 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Wei, P. Li, Y. Zhang and Y. Sun, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2007, 102, 1 Search PubMed .
R. C. Chikate, K. Jun and C. V. Rode, Polyhedron, 2008, 27, 933 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (a) D. Flak, A. Braun, K. A. Michalow, J. Wyrwa, M. Parlinska-Wojtan, T. Graule and M. Rekas, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 6401 Search PubMed .
P. Deb, A. Basumallick, D. Sen, S. Mazumder, B. K. Nath and D. Das, Philos. Mag. Lett., 2006, 86, 491 Search PubMed .
W. Shenton, T. Douglas, M. Young, G. Stubbs and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 253 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cao, G. Wang, J. H. Warner and A. A. R. Watt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013110 CrossRef .
J. Frydrych, L. Machala, M. Hermanek, I. Medrik, M. Mashlan, J. Tucek, J. Pechousek and V. K. Sharma, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 5916 Search PubMed .
M. B. Sahana, C. Sudakar, G. Setzler, A. Dixit, J. S. Thakur, G. Lawes, R. Naik, V. M. Naik and P. P. Vaishnava, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 231909 CrossRef .
J. Cao, T. Kako, N. Kikugawa and J. Ye, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 325101 CrossRef .
S. U. M. Khan and J. Akikusa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7184 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Hahn, H. Ye, D. W. Flaherty, A. J. Bard and C. Buddie Mullins, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1977 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Enache, Y. Q. Liang and R. Van de Krol, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520, 1034 Search PubMed .
F. L. Souza, K. P. Lopes, P. A. P. Nascente and E. R. Leite, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 362 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and K. Tu, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2011, 2012, 980595 Search PubMed .
F. L. Souza, K. P. Lopes, E. Longo and E. R. Leite, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 1215 RSC .
R. K. Quinn, R. D. Nasby and R. J. Baughman, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 1011 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Löhnart, Synthesis and characterization of hematite nanoparticles and films for photoelectrochemical applications, Bachelor thesis, University of Applied Sciences, Jena, Germany,  2010 .
J. H. Kennedy, R. Shinar and J. P. Ziegler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2307 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesar, A. Kay, J. A. Gonzalez Martinez and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4582 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesar, K. Sivula, A. Kay, R. Zboril and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 772–782 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saremi-Yarahmadi, K. G. Upul Wijayantha, A. A. Tahir and B. Vaidhyanathan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4768 CrossRef .
W. D. Chemelewski, N. T. Hahn and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5255–5261 Search PubMed .
Y. Liang, C. S. Enache and R. Van de Krol, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2008, 2008, 739864 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, Y. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lian, X. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Xu, C. Jiang, J. Chen and R. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 2307 Search PubMed .
J. A. Glasscock, P. R. F. Barnes, I. C. Plumb and N. Savvides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16477 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, W. Luo, Z. Li, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 042105 CrossRef .
S. Kumari, A. P. Singh, Sonal, D. Deva, R. Shrivastav, S. Dass and V. R. Satsangi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 35, 3985 Search PubMed .
J. He and B. A. Parkinson, ACS Comb. Sci., 2011, 13, 399 Search PubMed .
P. Kumar, P. Sharma, R. Shrivastav, S. Dass and V. R. Satsangi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 2777 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, Y. Hu, A. J. Forman, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15900 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bak, W. Choi and H. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 110, 207 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Yu and W. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59, 121 Search PubMed .
Y. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, D. Hazen, J. Park and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3803 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Sanchez, H. Steinfink and H. S. White, J. Solid State Chem., 1982, 41, 90 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, F. Le Formal, M. Cornuz, J. Brillet, N. Tetreault, K. Sivula and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2512 RSC .
Y. S. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2652 RSC .
A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, Y. Hu, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1150 CrossRef .
F. Le Formal, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1099 CrossRef .
J. Brillet, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4155 CrossRef CAS .
S. David Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1 .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958 RSC .
A. Memar, W. Ramli, W. Daud, S. Hosseini, E. Eftekhari and L. J. Minggu, Sol. Energy, 2010, 84, 1538 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. A. Wheeler, G. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6682 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Li, Y. Yu, F. Meng, Y. Tan, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 724–731 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qin, C. Tao, S. In, Z. Yang, T. E. Mallouk, N. Bao and C. A. Grimes, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 5257 .

  (a) Y. Lin, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2398 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Lin, G. Yuan, S. Sheehan, S. Zhou and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4862 RSC .
T. Vincent, M. Gross, H. Dotan and A. Rothschild, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8102 Search PubMed .
S. K. Mohapatra, S. E. John, S. Banerjee and M. Misra, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3048 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Bora, A. Braun, R. Erni, G. Fortunato, T. Graule and E. C. Constable, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2051 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Bora and P. Deb, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 138 Search PubMed .
M. Das, D. Mishra, T. K. Maiti, A. Basak and P. Pramanik, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 415101 CrossRef .
D. Liu, W. Wu, X. Chen, S. Wen, X. Zhang, Q. Ding, G. Teng and N. Gu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2306 RSC .
R. Narain, M. Gonzales, A. S. Hoffman, P. S. Stayton and K. M. Krishnan, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6299 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, H. Dietsch, P. Schurtenberger and M. Yan, Bioconjugate Chem., 2009, 20, 1349 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Wang, V. Bagalkot, C. C. Vasilliou, F. Gu, F. Alexis, L. Zhang, M. Shaikh, K. Yuet, M. J. Cima, R. Langer, P. W. Kantoff, N. H. Bander, S. Jon and O. C. Farokhzad, ChemMedChem, 2008, 3, 1311 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 9 RSC .
P. D. Tran, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. C. Loo, Energy. Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5902 RSC .
E. Reisner, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2009, 550 RSC .
E. Reisner, D. J. Powell, C. Cavazza, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18457 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Utschig, N. M. Dimitrijevic, O. G. Poluektov, S. D. Chemerisov, K. L. Mulfort and D. M. Tiede, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 236 Search PubMed .
H. Tributsch and M. Calvin, Photochem. Photobiol., 1971, 14, 95 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rabinowitch, J. Chem. Phys., 1940, 8, 560 CrossRef CAS .
F. K. Fong and N. Winograd, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1976, 98, 2287 Search PubMed .
Y. Amao, N. Shuto, K. Furuno, A. Obata, Y. Fuchino, K. Uemura, T. Kajino, T. Sekito, S. Iwai, Y. Miyamotod and M. Matsuda, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 289 RSC .
H. Ochiai, H. Shibata, Y. Sawa and T. Katoh, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1980, 77, 2442 Search PubMed .
M. Kato, T. Cardona, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8332 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Eggleston, N. Khare and D. M. Lovelace, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2006, 150, 220 Search PubMed .
D. K. Bora, E. A. Rozhkova, K. Schrantz, P. P. Wyss, A. Braun, T. Graule and E. C. Constable, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 490 Search PubMed .
N. Khare, C. M. Eggleston, D. M. Lovelace and S. W. Boese, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 303, 404 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Kung and M. B. Mcbride, Clays Clay Miner., 1988, 36, 303 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Berns and R. McColl, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 807 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Xie, J. Zhang, J. Zhao and L. Jiang, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1999, 205, 1426 Search PubMed .
K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Gratzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 77, 347 CrossRef CAS .
F. V. Herrera, P. Grez, R. Schrebler, L. A. Ballesteros, E. Muñoz, R. Córdova, H. Altamirano and E. A. Dalchiele, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, D302 Search PubMed .
Z. Huang, Y. Lin, X. Xiang, W. Rodriguez-Cordoba, K. J. McDonald, K. S. Hagen, K.-S. Choi, B. S. Brunschwig, D. G. Musaev, C. L. Hill, D. Wang and T. Lian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8923 RSC .
K. Gajda-Schrantz, S. Tymen, F. Boudoire, R. Toth, D. K. Bora, W. Calvet, M. Grätzel, E. C. Constable and A. Braun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013 10.1039/C2CP42597A .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Debajeet K. Bora	Dr Debajeet K. Bora obtained his M.Sc. in Nanoscience and Technology from Tezpur University, India in 2007. Dr Bora carried out his Ph.D. dissertation in “Artificial Photosynthesis and Nanotechnology” at the University of Basel with Prof. Edwin C. Constable, and at Empa, the Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology. Currently Dr Bora is working as a physicist post-doctoral fellow at the Advanced Light Source Division of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory at Berkeley, USA. His current interest is in the in situ investigation of electronic structure changes in artificial photosynthetic catalysts under dilute aqueous conditions.
Artur Braun	Dr Artur Braun is a surface physicist from RWTH Aachen and KFA Jülich (magnetic films) and holds a doctoral degree in electrochemistry from ETH Zürich and Paul Scherrer Institute (supercapacitors). Dr Braun was a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Elton Cairns and Prof. Stephen P. Cramer at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (lithium batteries and protein spectroscopy) and a postdoctoral scholar with Prof. Gerald P. Huffman at the University of Kentucky (fossil fuels) before he returned to Switzerland and became a Marie Curie Fellow and group leader at the Empa Laboratory for High Performance Ceramics (fuel cells). Artur has a prestigiously low Erdös number of 3, and he has authored over 100 publications. Due to his expertise in electrochemical energy materials and their electronic structure and transport properties, and in situ/operando synchrotron and neutron methods, he is a board member of Current Applied Physics, an Elsevier journal of the Korean Physical Society. Dr Braun considers artificial photosynthesis a chance, not a challenge.
Edwin C. Constable	Edwin Constable is a Professor of Chemistry at the University of Basel. His interests cover all aspects of transition metal chemistry, and he has published over 500 articles and book chapters in supramolecular and nanoscale chemistry. He is currently most involved in the design of materials for sustainable materials science technologies addressing the energy challenges of the 21st Century. He has recently been awarded the Sustainable Energy Award of the Royal Society of Chemistry, and an ERC Advanced Grant for the development of materials science strategies utilizing Earth-abundant metals. He is currently Vice Rector for research at the University of Basel.

Broader context
The components of photo-electrochemical cells (PECs) for solar hydrogen production by water splitting must be based on “no-cost” materials rather than on low-cost materials. Hematite is in many aspects an attractive photoanode alternative, but extensive materials engineering is required before hematite, “rust,” can compete with the performance of conventional systems. But there is encouraging progress going on in making hematite a high performance PEC photoanode. Meanwhile, functionalization of hematite with phycocyanin proteins from another potential low cost source, blue green algae, shows that nano-bio hybrid architectures are possible where hematite provides both a functional and a structural backbone for artificial photosynthesis. C-phycocyanin, a light harvesting antenna molecule found in cyanobacteria, has been taking part in water splitting reaction since 3 billion years ago. The purpose of this molecule is to funnel the light harvested energy into the reaction centre. Inspired by this function, we have utilized this molecule to build a hybrid integrated photoanode system from nanostructured hematite and C-phycocyanin. The functionality and stability of the resulting photoanode system make it possible to employ it for photoelectrochemical solar splitting. Since this approach is based on simple dip coating fabrication steps, scale-up could make it promising for large scale applications.


 	Fig. 1  Basic building principle of an electrochemical cell with a wired photoanode and photocathode in aqueous electrolyte and illuminated by sunlight.	 

 	Fig. 2  Top – oxygen K-edge NEXAFS spectra obtained at BESSY-II ex situ from 600 nm pristine hematite (dotted line) and 1500 nm hematite anodized at 600 mV (solid line), and their difference spectrum (middle panel). The third peak at 532.85 eV is the result of anodization in KOH and is not present in pristine hematite. Bottom – the NEXAFS spectrum recorded in situ in a liquid cell at the Advanced Light Source under 500 mV anodic bias in KOH electrolyte and 1.5 AM illumination.	 

 	Fig. 3  Left panel – Fe K-shell absorption spectra of hematite nanoparticles heated from 250 °C to 900 °C. Lower right panel – deconvoluted pre-edge peak of the XANES spectrum for 550 °C annealed iron oxide nanoparticles (size ∼100 nm). Upper right panel – relative spectral weight of the t2g peak versus annealing temperature.	 

 	Fig. 4  Evolution of particle size (top, from light scattering) and crystallite size (bottom, from XRD using Scherrer's equation) of iron oxide nanoparticles annealed from 250 °C to 900 °C.	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthesis procedure for hematite film by dip coating.30	 

 	Fig. 6  Top – X-ray diffractogram of a hematite film dip-coated on FTO glass with 500 °C heat treatment for 30 minutes in air. Solid vertical lines indicate bold Bragg indices from α-Fe2O3; dashed lines point to Bragg peaks from the FTO substrate. Bottom – FESEM images of α-Fe2O3 grown by dip-coating on FTO glass, and current–voltage characteristics in the dark and under 1.5AM simulated light at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The dashed line at the bottom is dark current, the dashed line at the top is light current, and the solid thick line is the photocurrent (= light current − dark current).	 

 	Fig. 7  Hydrothermal treatment of a pristine hematite film (see SEM inset in Fig. 6) causes substantial microstructure transformation (left) with formation of stellate nanostructures (right).	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM micrographs showing stellate (upper left) matching the well-known wind rose structure (left top and bottom), wings with inclined faces and their nanometer sized sub-units (top right). The inclined face wind rose structure is confirmed by the splitting of Bragg reflections in the crystallographically indexed selected area electron diffractogram (bottom right).	 

 	Fig. 9  Photocurrent density of the pristine and nanoflower hematite film at 450 mV vs. Ag/AgCl. The dark currents have been subtracted.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation of bio-photoelectrochemical cell. The photoanode on the left, such as hematite, is functionalized with phycocyanin. The photocathode on the right, such as copper oxide, is functionalized with a hydrogenase. A proton conducting NAFION® membrane warrants ionic conductivity and prevents mixing of evolving O2 and H2.	 

 	Fig. 11  Hierarchical functionalization of hematite with electrostatically adsorbed and covalently linked C-phycocyanin light-harvesting units. Hematite–phycocyanin conjugation scheme.	 

 	Fig. 12  Large scan AFM images (50 μm × 50 μm) of C-phycocyanin conjugated film with a fiber-like pattern on the hematite surface.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The photocurrent for pristine hematite (solid line), C-phycocyanin electrostatically adsorbed on hematite (dashed line), C-phycocyanin conjugated (dotted line) films in 1 M KOH (pH = 13.6) with a three electrode PEC cell at 600 mV bias under dark and simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination. (b) Top – the photocurrent action spectrum of pristine hematite (solid line), C-phycocyanin electrostatically adsorbed on hematite (dashed line), C-phycocyanin conjugated (dotted line) films in 1 M KOH (pH = 13.6) under monochromatic irradiation and with 0 mV bias. Bottom – IPCE of pristine hematite film (solid), phycocyanin absorbed hematite film (dashed), and conjugated film (dotted line), obtained with 0 mV bias.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Energy band diagram showing the charge transfer from excited state phycocyanin to the conduction band of hematite. (b) the photocurrent transient responses of pristine hematite (solid line), C-phycocyanin electrostatically adsorbed on hematite (dashed), C-phycocyanin conjugated (dotted line) films measured during chronoamperometric cycling.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Stability of photocurrent over time for pristine and protein functionalized film. (b) Number of moles of electrons obtained during a dark chronoamperometric scan after 10 min of operation for the three different treated samples.	 
APCVD	Atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition
AM	Air mass
APCE	Absorbed photon to current conversion efficiency
CB	Conduction band
CDI	1,1′-Carbonyl diimidazole
CT	Charge transfer
FTO	Fluorine doped tin oxide
IPCE	Incident photon to current conversion efficiency
LMCT	Ligand-to-metal charge transfer
NEXAFS	Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure
PEC	Photoelectrochemical cell
TEOS	Tetra ethyl ortho silicate
VB	Valence band
XANES	X-Ray absorption near edge structure
XRD	X-Ray diffraction

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
