Bio-inspired artificial light-harvesting antennas for enhancement of solar energy capture in dye -sensitized solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE24229C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE24229C
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2041-2052Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsBio-inspired artificial light-harvesting antennas for enhancement of solar energy capture in dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Fabrice 
            Odobel
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Yann 
            Pellegrin
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Julien 
            Warnan
          
          
        
      
Université UNAM, Université de Nantes, CNRS, Chimie et Interdisciplinarité: Synthèse, Analyse, Modélisation (CEISAM), UMR 6230, 2, rue de la Houssinière – BP 92208, 44322 Nantes Cedex 3, France. E-mail: Fabrice.Odobel@univ-nantes.fr;  Fax: +33 (0)2 51 12 54 02;   Tel: +33 (0)2 51 12 54 29
Received 
      29th November 2012
    , Accepted 1st February 2013First published on 1st February 2013AbstractLight absorption is the primary step in any photovoltaic device, therefore panchromatic light collection is a fundamental condition to maximize the efficiency of a solar cell. Indeed, the photocurrent density is directly proportional to the fraction of the light absorbed by the cell relative to the whole incoming solar flux. By mimicking the light harvesting antennas of natural photosynthetic systems it is possible to enhance the light capture of photoanodes in DSCs by using different absorbing units which funnel the incident light to the sensitizer by energy transfer. In this perspective article, bio-inspired strategies to improve the light collection efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) by the antenna effect are reviewed. We provide a summary of some of the most important and recent developments in the utilization of the antenna effect to improve the photocurrent density in DSCs. This article highlights how new and innovative multi-chromophoric sensitizers can effectively broaden and enhance the absorption cross-section which enables us to produce higher photocurrent density both in liquid and solid state solar cells. The potential for development, future challenges and opportunities of this strategy are discussed.Fabrice Odobel (1966) received his Ph.D. in 1994 at Strasbourg University under the supervision of Prof. Jean-Pierre Sauvage and then went to Columbia University (New York) for a postdoctoral research with Prof. Ronald Breslow. He is currently Research Director at CNRS and leads the group of the Photonic and Molecular Engineering in CEISAM laboratory at Nantes University. His research interests include the design, synthesis and characterization of new materials for photovoltaic, artificial photosynthesis and non-linear optics.Yann Pellegrin was born in 1976 and received his Ph.D. in 2004, at Orsay University. He was recruited as a CNRS research fellow in 2007 in Odobel's group, after a post-doctorate in Prof. R. Forster's group (Dublin City University).Julien Warnan was born in 1985. In 2009, he received a chemical engineering master degree specialised in Fine Organic Chemistry from the University of Nantes. He received his Ph.D. in 2012 at Nantes University under the supervision of Dr. F. Odobel. He currently works as a post-doctorate at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia).

Broader context
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are attractive photovoltaic devices because they offer significant photo-conversion efficiency with a potentially lower cost than the classical silicon-based technology. The operation principle of DSCs bears some analogies to natural photosynthetic processes because the light collection step (carried out by the sensitizer) is separated from the charge transportation process (performed by TiO2 for the electrons or by the electrolyte for the holes). Improving light absorption in DSCs constitutes one strategy to enhance the performances of such a technology, whose maximum reported efficiency is around 12%. To maximize sunlight collection, it is possible to extend the absorbance of the cells to the IR region by using a combination of different dyes with complementary absorption spectra. This is the strategy used by photosynthetic organisms, in which light harvesting antennas collect the incident photons with several different pigments and funnel them via efficient energy transfers to a single molecular unit (the special pair) which triggers a photo-induced electron transfer chain. With a similar approach, it is possible to increase the absorption cross-section of a sensitizer by associating antenna units, whose role is to collect and channel the incident light into the sensitizer by efficient energy transfers. Successes and opportunities to enhance the light absorption cross-section in DSCs by using the antenna effect are emphasized in this review.

Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are attractive photovoltaic devices because they offer significant photo-conversion efficiency with a potentially lower cost than the classical silicon-based technology.1,2 DSC technology has now reached over 12% photoconversion efficiencies with a porphyrin derivative and cobalt-based electrolyte.3 DSCs are generally composed of a monolayer of dyes adsorbed on a nanocrystalline TiO2 film deposited on a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) substrate, a redox mediator (generally I3−/I−) and a platinum counter electrode (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic structure and operation principle of a DSC. 
The sensitizer is usually the sole light collector of the system and after photon absorption, an electron is injected into the conduction band of TiO2. The neutral state of the sensitizer is regenerated by the redox mediator and the injected electron percolates within the network of nanoparticles until it reaches the TCO, passes into the external circuit and reduces back the electrolyte. The photocurrent density in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) is strongly dependent on the light harvesting efficiency (LHE) as the electron injection and the charge collection efficiencies approach 100% in many systems.1 Therefore, one key strategy to improve the efficiency of DSCs is to extend the spectral absorption to the low energy region of the solar spectrum (infrared: IR), while increasing the sensitizer extinction coefficient. In contrast to inorganic semiconductors, whose absorbance is continuous from the UV region until the bandgap threshold, molecular dyes display discrete absorption bands making it difficult to achieve panchromatic absorption with a single dye which should exhibit a high absorptivity across the whole solar spectrum. There are several strategies to enhance the LHE in DSCs. The deposition of micrometer sized particles above the layer of nanoparticles favors light scattering and increases the optical path inside the TiO2 film. Another more recent strategy is the co-adsorption on the TiO2 surface of different sensitizers with complementary absorption spectra, best known as co-sensitization or “cocktail dyes” approach.4,5 Other approaches for co-sensitization used the stepwise adsorption of the sensitizers on two separated layers or a site selective adsorption of the sensitizers on a single mesoporous electrode but they require complex manufacturing processes.6–8 In this account we focused and developed another strategy inspired by the Light Harvesting Complex (LHC) in photosystems I and II, namely the antenna effect. In photosynthetic organisms, Nature has developed an appealing strategy to optimize light capture via the use of special molecular units called light harvesting antennas (LHAs). These LHAs are composed of several pigments whose role is to collect the incident solar photons at different wavelengths and to funnel them via efficient energy transfer steps into a single molecular unit (the special pair) which in turn triggers the photoinduced electron transfer chain.9 This strategy is reminiscent of the classical antennas used for radio-communication enabling us to optimize the energy collected from a source and a receiver.
The term “antenna effect” was first reported by Balzani10,11 and Lehn12 and ever since beautiful multi-chromophoric systems were developed and performed amplified emission or light-frequency conversion.13 The concept of antenna effect was demonstrated with these artificial systems; however they were rarely used for practical applications. Although it was not a DSC, a very interesting example of a light-harvesting antenna was reported in 2005 by Kobuke and co-workers with surface-grafted supramolecular multi-porphyrin arrays showing a photocurrent amplification.14 The first implantation of the antenna effect in a hybrid photoelectrochemical device was reported by Scandola and co-workers as early as 1990,15 but it is only recently that different groups have taken up this concept again. In 2006, a theoretical study was reported by Meyer and co-workers to assess the LHE of multi-pigment arrays immobilized on a flat surface.16 In a broad sense, the antenna systems imply the use of single or multiple antenna dyes in association with a sensitizer. The antennas collect photons and, through energy transfer, redirect the incident energy to the sensitizer and therefore enhance its light capture by increasing the optical density of the cell (when the spectrum of the antenna and the sensitizer overlap) or by broadening its absorption window (when the antenna absorbs light where the sensitizer is transparent). The successful construction of a light harvesting system requires the proper choice of antenna (A) and sensitizer (S) which need to fulfill several criteria in order to be suitable for this purpose (Fig. 2). First, the lowest energy excited-state of the sensitizer must lie downhill to that of the antenna to ensure a significant driving force for the energy transfer process (Fig. 2). In other words, the energy gap (HOMO–LUMO spacing) should be greater for the antenna than for the sensitizer (Fig. 2b). Besides, the LUMO of the antenna should not lie below that of the sensitizer to avoid the quenching of the sensitizer excited-state by electron transfer, eventually competing with the energy transfer and the electron injection into TiO2 (Fig. 2a). On the other hand, if the HOMO of the antenna is positioned above that of the sensitizer, the hole (localized on S after electron injection) could shift on the antenna. The latter would play the dual role of a light collector and a secondary electron donor (see below the antenna playing the additional role of hole transporting material (HTM)).
 Fig. 2  Staircase graded energy structures of the sensitizer (S) and the antenna (A) to produce an efficient directional energy transfer process from the highest HOMO–LUMO gap (A) to the lowest (S). 
Energy transfer processes can occur according to two distinct mechanisms.17 The most frequent one is the Förster mechanism: a pure coulombic mechanism well-known as Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET). It is a relatively long range process (10–100 Å), but mainly restricted to singlet–singlet energy transfer. The second process is the Dexter mechanism, involving a double electron exchange between the donor and the acceptor.17 It requires strong orbital mixing or significant electronic coupling between the former and the latter and is therefore a short-range process (<10 Å) that diminishes exponentially with distance. However, it can promote both singlet–singlet and singlet to triplet excited-state energy transfers, a feature which can be useful to promote energy transfer from a fluorescent organic antenna to a transition metal complex sensitizer.18 Conversely, the Förster mechanism does not require significant electronic coupling between the chromophores and the two most important parameters which govern the efficiency are the overlap integral and the antenna luminescence lifetime (the shorter the better). The overlap integral represents the overlap between the donor emission spectrum and the acceptor absorption spectrum. It is instructive to determine the Förster radius (R0) for a set of two chromophores exchanging excitation energy. The Förster radius defines the distance at which the probability of energy transfer is 50% and it generally ranges from 2 to 10 nm.
Antennas tethered to the sensitizer
In 1990, Scandola and co-workers first described the photovoltaic performances of a multichromophoric ruthenium trimer, Ru3, composed of a ruthenium sensitizer bearing two 4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine (dcbpy) ligands bridged via cyano groups to two additional, identical ruthenium bis-bipyridine complexes as antennas (Fig. 3).15 In this case, the injecting complex absorbs light over the same, rather broader energy window than the coordinated antennas, and the latter therefore contributes to an overall increase of the relative extinction coefficient of the former, that turned into a 1.5-fold improvement of the IPCE (Incident Photon to Current Efficiency). This concept has remained practically unexplored for 15 years until Odobel and co-workers reported in 2005 two bichromophoric systems (ZnPc-Ru and BOD-Ru, Fig. 3) featuring the antenna effect to be incorporated in DSCs, but the photovoltaic performances were not investigated.19 Then, Siegers and co-workers chose to use 4-aminonaphtyl (AN) as an antenna for a ruthenium complex sensitizer AN-Ru(dcbpy)2 (Fig. 3).20,21 A complete photophysical study revealed that the energy accumulated by AN was transferred to AN-Ru(dcbpy)2 with 94% efficiency. Satisfyingly, the photovoltaic performances were improved, thanks to the presence of the antenna AN, whose signature was clearly observed in the IPCE. However, AN mainly absorbs in the near UV side of the solar spectrum. UV light accounts for only 4% of the entire solar light reaching the Earth's crust; the improvement of the photovoltaic performances is consequently rather small (0.2%), but nonetheless proved the relevance of the antenna effect in DSCs.
 Fig. 3  Structures of covalently linked antenna-sensitizer systems for the antenna effect in DSCs.15,19,20 
Ruthenium complexes specially designed for DSCs usually display broad absorption features in the visible region, without the aid of additional energy donors. Their main weakness, from the LHE point of view, is their weak extinction coefficient and feeble absorptivity in the near infrared region. On the other hand, organic dyes are naturally strong absorbers, offering intense π–π* transitions, widely tunable from the UV to near IR region, but limited to a narrow wavelength bandwidth. Hence, they are the most obvious candidates for the design of multi-chromophores for the antenna effect. Indeed, with multiple organic dyes featuring complementary absorption spectra, it should be possible to design a panchromatic system with a very high extinction coefficient over a large spectral range.
Amongst organic dyes, porphyrins have finally unveiled their amazing potentiality for DSCs, with the advent of the push–pull zinc porphyrins designed by Diau and co-workers.3,22 These sensitizers are commonly characterized by an absorption gap between the intense absorption Soret band (around 420 nm) and the Q bands (between 550 and 650 nm). With the idea to fill in the absorption shortage of porphyrins around 500 nm, Bodipys are very appealing chromophores. Thus, Hupp and co-workers covalently tethered a bodipy unit absorbing at 530 nm to a zinc porphyrin as the injecting dye, yielding a bichromophore BDPY-ZnP (Fig. 4).23 The energy transfer between the two chromophores is very efficient, and was probed both in solution and on TiO2 electrodes. Importantly, no competitive photo-induced process (such as electron or hole transfers) is thermodynamically possible, paving the way towards an efficient electron injection from BDPY-ZnP to the semi-conductor conduction band. The overall photoconversion yield was almost doubled when dye BDPY-ZnP was used (1.55%), compared to the porphyrin sensitizer ZnP taken alone (0.84%). The unmistakable fingerprint of Bodipy's absorption was observed in the IPCE (together with an overall increase of the external quantum efficiency over the ZnP's own contributions), corroborating that the overall rise of the photovoltaic performances can safely be assigned to an extended sensitization of the photoanode over a broader energy window (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Photoaction spectra of BDPY-ZnP (red) and ZnP (blue).23 
Aiming at collecting as many photons as possible over the broadest energy window, it is relevant to use an injecting dye that absorbs at the longest wavelength possible and to combine it with an antenna exhibiting higher energy absorption bands to cover the whole spectrum, in order to establish a driving force to drain the energy to the sensitizer. Squaraine dyes are very attractive in this respect, with their very intense π–π* transition peaking around 670 nm, and spreading further in the near IR domain. Moreover, these chromophores have demonstrated significant value as sensitizers for TiO2, with efficient injection and charge collection yields.24,25 Odobel and co-workers designed a trichromophore T where a squaraine was linked to a zinc porphyrin, itself connected to a Bodipy moiety (Fig. 5).26 The resulting panchromatic dye afforded black photoanodes after chemisorption. Very efficient energy transfer from the Bodipy and ZnP towards the squaraine moiety was assessed by steady-state fluorescence spectroscopy. An increase of Jsc was observed for corresponding DSCs, from the squaraine alone to T, in line with the improved overall quantum efficiency, increasing from 3.0 to 3.9%. This was assigned to an improved LHE, the IPCE showing that each chromophore contributes to the current photogeneration (Fig. 5). Nevertheless, the maximum IPCE values do not go much above 40% probably because the device preparation was certainly not optimized and the quantum yield of electron injection or electron collection of the sensitizer (SQ) is probably not quantitative in our conditions.
 Fig. 5  Photoaction spectra of SQI (blue), D (red) and T (black).26 
Toma and co-workers have designed a zinc porphyrin sensitizer, Zn-MCTPy, bearing three meso-substituted pyridyl rings, and each one can be coordinated to a [Ru(bpy)2Cl]+ antenna (Fig. 6).27 A complex like [Ru(bpy)2(py)Cl]+ is another well-fitted dye to fill in the porphyrin absorption gap. A remarkable property of the system is that the external quantum efficiency is dramatically raised over the whole sensitizing window (400–650 nm) compared to plain Zn-MCTPy. Interfacial photo-induced charge separation results in the appearance of a hole in the porphyrin core, which in this case may shift to one of the ruthenium centers, away from the semi-conductor surface, with a comfortable driving force of ca. 200 meV. Thus, the ruthenium antennas act as hole acceptors, and contribute for raising the charge collection efficiency of the photoelectrode by decreasing the geminate charge recombination.
 Fig. 6  Metallo-supramolecular assemblies performing the antenna effect in DSCs.27–29 
Self-assembly of the antennas with the sensitizer is a very elegant strategy too, allowing us to generate an intricate structure while saving precious benchwork synthesis time. Various inter-chromophores bonding can be envisioned to construct multichromophoric arrays and supramolecular interactions could also be used.
The affinity of nitrogen containing heterocycles for the zinc porphyrin28,30,31 or ruthenium phthalocyanine29 was used to assemble an antenna to a sensitizer (RuPc-N3, BDPY-D and DPP-D in Fig. 6). Bodipy and diketopyrrolopyrrole chromophores were derivatized with an imidazole ring to self-assemble on the zinc porphyrin fragment of D leading to the BDPY-D and DPP-D adducts (Fig. 6).28 The corresponding DSCs displayed much improved performances (up to η = 4.64%) compared to D alone (η = 3.64%) and even trichromophore T (η = 3.9%), showing the potential of supramolecular poly-chromophore arrays for the development of efficient DSCs, based on the antenna effect.28
Quantum dots (QDs) have received growing interest as sensitizers in DSCs.32,33 Some reports showed that QDs can also be used as energy donors to enhance light capture of a sensitizer by a Förster resonance energy transfer mechanism. For example, energy transfer from CdSe or CdTe quantum dots tethered via a thiol group to the chemisorbed sensitizer proved to be particularly efficient to enhance the short-circuit current.34,35 A more subtle antenna effect was introduced by Zaban and co-workers using core–shell–shell CdSe–CdS–ZnS nanoparticles embedded in an amorphous overlayer of TiO2, while a squaraine sensitizer (SQ02) was chemisorbed on top of this surface immersed in a liquid electrolyte (Fig. 7).36 The QDs collect high energy photons around 500 nm and the energy is transferred to SQ02 by FRET with an efficiency of about 44%. The limited IPCE (around 10%) of the DSC stems from the low charge injection efficiency of the sensitizer. Interestingly, the direct charge injection from QDs is poor as shown in the photoaction spectrum evidencing thus that electricity production is conditioned by the presence of SQ02 which acts as an energy acceptor and an electron injector.
 Fig. 7  Left: schematic representation of the structure of the DSC (left) using QDs as antennas (red circle) embedded in an amorphous layer of TiO2 (grey) sensitized by the squaraine dye SQ02 (blue circles) and a liquid iodide/triiodide electrolyte (yellow). Right: photoaction spectra of the cells consisting of QDs only (red); squaraine sensitizer alone (blue) and the complete cell including the QD and SQ02 (black).36 
The advantage of linking the antenna to the sensitizer over co-sensitization, where all dyes attach to the TiO2 surface, is the ability to combine multiple dyes with much lower restriction of dye loading imposed by the limited number of sites available on the TiO2 surface. Furthermore, the attachment of the antenna to the sensitizer imposes a good control of the interchromophoric distance and thus increases the efficiency of the energy transfer, which in turn is anticipated to favor the antenna effect to a great extent. To achieve significant efficiency, the IPCE of the cell should be around 80%, therefore energy transfer must be at least 80% efficient in order to be viable in a commercial system. Towards this goal a close distance between the antenna and the dye must be respected, therefore tethering the two represents a powerful strategy. With the Förster energy transfer mechanism, few constraints are imposed on the nature of the linker between energy donors and acceptors (other than allowing both protagonists to remain within Förster's influence sphere), allowing a great variety of chemical bonding. Finally, the antennas do not need to inject electrons in the SC and can therefore be poor sensitizers; this leaves a broader choice of the dyes that can be implemented for this function compared to those used for co-sensitization which must feature both efficient light absorption and charge injection abilities.
Antennas in electrolyte solution
A variation of the above concept to enhance light capture, first reported in 2009 by Grimes and co-workers, exploits the energy transfer between a dye, directly solubilized inside the electrolyte, to the sensitizer bound to TiO2.37 In this strategy, the antenna is not tethered to the sensitizer via any linkage but diffuses freely inside the liquid electrolyte. The critical Förster distance imposes that the concentration of the antenna in the electrolyte is sufficiently high and that the pore size of the semiconductor network is relatively narrow to have a short mean distance between the antenna and the sensitizer. Using zinc phthalocyanine as an antenna and a ruthenium complex such as the famous N719 or the black dye as sensitizer, Grimes and co-workers showed that the red-photons absorbed by the antenna can be efficiently transferred to the injecting dye by FRET and participate to a 10% enhancement of the IPCE around 670 nm.37 The same approach was reported by McGehee and co-workers with a zinc phthalocyanine sensitizer (TT1) and a perylene bisimide (PDI) antenna also solubilized in an iodide/triiodide electrolyte (Fig. 8).38 An increase of 26% of the power conversion efficiency was demonstrated using PDI as the antenna, thanks to an energy transfer efficiency of about 50% to TT1 which enhances Jsc from 6.88 mA cm−2 to 8.78 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 8  Chemical structures of TT1, PDI, RB, and DCM-pyran.38,39 
The same authors studied other antennas such as the highly fluorescent laser dyes DCM-pyran40 and rhodamine B methyl ester (RB)39 in association with the TT1 sensitizer (Fig. 7). These antennas display complementary absorption spectra to TT1 and are perfectly matched to achieve high FRET efficiency and broad absorption over the visible spectrum. Compared to the regular iodide/triiodide electrolyte without antenna, the photoconversion efficiency was raised by 12% with 22 mM of RB, 25% with 20 mM of DCM-pyran and by 35% with a mixture of RB + DCM-pyran. The increased Jsc is the main factor responsible for the improvement of the cell performances and results from an enhancement of the LHE around 500 nm by energy transfer from the antenna to TT1 as evidenced by the photoaction spectra, featuring the specific absorption band of DCM or RB (Fig. 9). These works showed that it is possible to place one or more antennas with absorption spectra complementary to the sensitizer inside the same electrolyte to enhance the photocurrent generation.
 Fig. 9  Photoaction spectra of liquid DSCs sensitized with TT1 and using an iodide/triiodide electrolyte with different antennas.39 IPCE = EQE = external quantum efficiency. 
Although the above examples demonstrate that it is possible to broaden the light collection of a DSC with an extra dye solubilized in the electrolyte, the antenna excited-state must not be quenched by electron transfer with the redox couple, nor by self-quenching at high concentration. The antenna should also display good solubility in the solvent electrolyte to achieve a significant concentration, in order to absorb the incoming light within a few micrometers and to reach a statistical distance with the sensitizer lying below the Förster radius.
Hole transporting material (HTM) used as an antenna in solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells
The substitution of the liquid electrolyte, generally composed of the iodide/triiodide redox couple solubilized in an organic solvent, by a solid state HTM to eliminate the sealing difficulties encountered with volatile and corrosive electrolytes is a very important step towards the commercialization of DSCs. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is a widely used HTM in DSCs, but its strong absorption band around 500 nm induces massive photon losses because a significant fraction of the incoming light is preferably absorbed by P3HT and it therefore competes with the sensitizer for electricity production. This drawback can become an advantage if the P3HT exciton can be delivered to the sensitizer by energy transfer. However, the quantum efficiency is limited by the short diffusion length of the singlet exciton of P3HT (around 10–20 nanometers) and the critical Förster radius. However, if the overlapping integral between the emission of highly fluorescent P3HT and the absorption of the sensitizer is large or the pore size of the TiO2 network is narrow, it is possible to collect a decent fraction of the light absorbed by P3HT and transfer it to the sensitizer to produce electricity. The first proof of concept was reported by McGehee and co-workers, using a flat and dense surface of TiO2 coated with a low bandgap conjugated polymer PTPTB (4 nm) playing the role of a sensitizer and covered with a layer (50 nm) of P3HT used as the HTM and antenna (Fig. 10).41 In that case, the HTM plays the double role of an antenna and a hole conducting material. The absorption spectrum of PTPTB has a large overlap with the emission of P3HT ensuring a large Förster radius and therefore an efficient energy migration from the P3HT to PTPTB polymer.
 Fig. 10  Chemical structures of P3HT and PTPTB (left) and photocurrent–photovoltage characteristics of TiO2/P3HT/Ag (solid) and TiO2/PTPTB/P3HT/Ag (dash) cells tested under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM 1.5 irradiance (right).41 
Indeed, the device made with PTPTB/P3HT afforded a three time higher short-circuit photocurrent (1.33 mA cm−2) than the control device without PTPTB (0.46 mA cm−2), which was attributed to resonance energy transfer from P3HT to PTPTB (Fig. 10). Two years later, Kudo and co-workers42 extended this concept to nanocrystalline TiO2 films using N3 (cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium) as a sensitizer and P3HT as HTM. Effectively, the cell sensitized with N3 dye gave twice as much photocurrent than that with a simple layer of P3HT supporting that the P3HT exciton can efficiently be transferred to the dyes bound to the TiO2 surface where electron injection efficiently occurs.
Houarner and co-workers showed in 2007 that the covalent wiring of the hole transporting material to the sensitizer (Ru-P3HT) improves by a factor of two the performances of the solid state DSC compared to the device in which the HTM and the sensitizer are unbound (Fig. 11).43 The higher photovoltaic performances can be attributed to the better diffusion-like propagation of the holes from the sensitizer to the counter electrode and most probably to an efficient energy transfer from P3HT to the ruthenium dye owing to the covalent linkage between the two components. The enhancement of light harvesting in mesoporous SDSCs was further demonstrated with organic sensitizers, which are even more suitable than ruthenium complexes to perform energy transfer by the Förster mechanism because the latter exhibit a triplet MLCT excited-state. For example, zinc phthalocyanine (TT1) was used as a sensitizer and P3HT or spiro-OMeTAD as HTMs44–46 (Fig. 11). It was demonstrated by ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy that an increase of Jsc was obtained with P3HT, relative to spiro-OMeTAD, thanks to a very fast and efficient FRET from P3HT to TT1.44 However, the cell made with spiro-OMeTAD performs better than that with P3HT because the TT1 sensitizer tends to aggregate on the TiO2 surface, which limits the efficiency of the energy transfer (less favorable towards the aggregates than towards the monomer) and the electron injection. Another interesting example was reported with a push–pull porphyrin sensitizer (YD2) and P3HT as HTM and a comparison with spiro-OMeTAD was made (Fig. 12).47 A significantly higher photoconversion efficiency was measured with the cell using P3HT (3.13%) relative to that with spiro-OMeTAD (1.64%), essentially due to an enhancement of the photocurrent, which passes from 2.56 mA cm−2 (with spiro-OMeTAD) to 10.62 mA cm−2 (with P3HT). Effective energy transfer from P3HT to YD2 is clearly evidenced on the photo-action spectrum, which shows photocurrent production on the absorption band of P3HT (around 550 nm), precisely where the porphyrin YD2 features a lower absorbance (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 11  Chemical structures of HTMs P3HT and spiro-OMeTAD and the sensitizers Ru-P3HT43 and AS02.44 
 Fig. 12  IPCE spectra of a YD2 sensitized solid-state solar cell with spiro-OMeTAD (black) and a TiO2/P3HT hybrid cell without dye (red) and with YD2 sensitization (blue).47 

Spiro-OMeTAD can be doped with a highly absorbing dye which can act as an antenna for the sensitizer in SDSCs. The first example was reported in 2009 by Yum and co-workers with a phosphorescent ruthenium tris[(diphenyl)phenanthroline] complex acting as an antenna for a squaraine sensitizer.48 It significantly improved the light collection efficiency since the η of the cell passed from 1.4% to 1.8% when the ruthenium complex was embedded in the spiro-OMeTAD film. Efficient energy transfer from the ruthenium dye to the squaraine is clearly evidenced on the photoaction spectrum which features the typical MLCT absorption band of the antenna. Other dyes such as spiro thienyl benzothiazol (spiro-TBT)46 or a push–pull dye DCM-pyran49 were used for the same purpose (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Chemical structures of spiro-TBT46 and DCM-pyran.39,49 
The combination of DCM-pyran and spiro-OMeTAD in SDSCs made with TiO2 nanotubes sensitized with squaraine SQ-1 led to 1.64% photoconversion efficiency.49 The antenna contributes to 25% to the IPCE on its maximum absorption band owing to an estimated 67.5% FRET efficiency to SQ-1. On the other hand, SDSCs fabricated with spiro-OMeTAD as HTM with TT1 as sensitizer give a 0.91% photoconversion efficiency, while the blend spiro-TBT + spiro-OMeTAD with the same sensitizer results in 1.06% efficiency, thanks to energy transfer from spiro-TBT to TT1 which enhances the Jsc by a factor of 40%.46 However, in the above examples, the antennas cannot transport a hole in SDSCs because their oxidation potentials are too high to donate an electron either to the oxidized sensitizer or to the oxidized spiro-OMeTAD.
More recently, Unger and co-workers developed a new triphenylamine-based hole transporting material (TVT), displaying a strong absorbance band around 435 nm (Fig. 14).50 A solar cell was fabricated with a squaraine dye having a complementary absorption spectrum and using TVT as a unique HTM. The cell displays a modest 0.19% photoconversion efficiency. However, it was shown that TVT contributes to the photocurrent probably by energy transfer to the squaraine because the photoaction spectrum of the cell features the absorption bands of both the squaraine (around 650 nm) and TVT (around 450 nm) (Fig. 14). The weak efficiency of the cell stems from an inefficient regeneration of the squaraine because its oxidation potential is very close to that of TVT, limiting the hole transfer driving force. The discovery of new small molecules, to facilitate their infiltration into the mesoporous network of TiO2, exhibiting high hole mobility, high absorbance in the high energy region of the visible spectrum and relatively accessible oxidation potential will most certainly be valuable to the development of SDSCs featuring a cascade of energy transfer from the HTM to the sensitizer.
 Fig. 14  Photoaction spectra (blue solid trace) and light harvesting efficiency spectrum (orange dashed trace) of solid state dye-sensitized solar cell devices comprising a mesoporous TiO2 layer sensitized with a squaraine and infiltrated with TVT as HTM.50 
The use of a supplementary light collector to the sensitizer in SDSCs is a particularly important strategy to improve the LHE of such devices, because it is well-accepted that the optimized thickness of SDSCs is lower (about 2 μm) than that of liquid DSCs (above 12 μm), which limits the light collection. Moreover, the filtering effect of a colored HTM can be compensated by the light harvesting effect if the energy of the absorbed photons can be funneled into the sensitizer. When the antenna is not attached to the sensitizer, or embedded in the HTM or solubilized in the electrolyte, a small pore size is required to minimize the average distance between the antenna in solution and the sensitizer, since the FRET decreases rapidly with the distance. This explains why nanotubes or small particles of semiconductors are preferable to large particles which lead to larger pore sizes.
Conclusions and perspectives
It was demonstrated in liquid and solid-state DSCs that photocurrents can be enhanced by combining efficient near-IR absorbing sensitizers (such as phthalocyanine and squaraine) with supplementary dyes acting as photon harvesters. Consequently, the antenna can broaden the spectral response and increase the optical density of the cell, thus raising the current while decreasing the electrode thickness. The first advantage of the antenna effect over the co-sensitization approach is the ability to use several dyes without affecting too much of the surface density of the loaded sensitizers. Secondly, the light harvesting function can be decoupled from the electron injection process, which can be optimized separately and thus relieving the constraint of panchromatic absorption by the sensitizer. The latter can be optimized to inject electrons in the semi-conductor conduction band leaving a wider range of dyes to be used as antennas to collect photons.
The antenna effect represents an effective strategy to enhance the light harvesting efficiency of a given sensitizer and is therefore valuable to improve the photovoltaic performances of a DSC according to two directions. The first advantage of the antenna effect is when the absorption spectrum of a sensitizer does not match well with the solar spectrum. It is admitted that an increase in efficiency of DSCs can be gained if the spectral coverage of the cell can be extended up to the IR region and if the molar absorptivity of the dyes can be enhanced. Additional dyes with complementary absorption spectra, playing the role of antennas, can contribute to the enhancement of the photon collection efficiency specifically where the sensitizer poorly absorbs. Consequently, the photocurrent density can be increased if the electron injection efficiency of the sensitizer is high and if the energy transfer from the antenna to the sensitizer is efficient. This aspect becomes particularly acute with sensitizers exhibiting a quite low-energy absorption band, because they usually do not continuously absorb from the UV region until the low energy absorption band. For example, phthalocyanine and squaraine sensitizers cover well the 550–700 nm region but they are much less active between 400 and 550 nm, where the sunlight is particularly intense. Near IR dyes are, indeed, extremely important sensitizers in view of exploiting a larger portion of the solar spectrum and extending the photocurrent density beyond 20 mA cm−2. The latter value being among the best Jsc recorded in DSCs, it can be certainly increased up to 30 mA cm−2 and perhaps beyond if sunlight can be absorbed until the 900 nm threshold. The second advantage of the antenna effect comes from the possibility to deal with thin TiO2 films. Taking advantage of the high extinction coefficient of a multichromophoric system, it will be possible to harvest the major part of the incident solar flux with a thin nanocrystalline film. Thinner electrodes are favorable when solid-state HTMs and new redox mediators with more positive oxidation potentials than iodide/triiodide are used because of the reduced interfacial current with the electrolyte leading to an increased photovoltage and photocurrent.
In the future, it can be envisioned to harvest sunlight on semiconductor surfaces with a low roughness factor, but this will require dyes with very large extinction coefficients, which can only be attained if multiple dyes are used together.
The present DSCs are based on single dye sensitizers, but the upcoming broadly absorbing systems could be multi-chromophoric arrays featuring the antenna effect. This emerging concept can have a significant influence on future-generation solar cells if we consider the vast number of possible dyes which can be combined to optimize photon management. Furthermore, it can most certainly be extended to organic solar cells since the latter technology bears several common features with DSCs.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the ANR-Habisol for financial support with the “Asyscol” program (AN-08- Habisol 002-04).
References
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Baxter, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 020801–020819 Search PubMed .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yum, S.-R. Jang, P. Walter, T. Geiger, F. Nueesch, S. Kim, J. Ko, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4680–4682 RSC .
Y. Chen, Z. Zeng, C. Li, W. Wang, X. Wang and B. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 773–776 RSC .
J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares, M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Thampi, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5670–5671 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, S. W. Park, M. J. Ko, K. Kim and N.-G. Park, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 665–671 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, S. Kim, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, M.-S. Kang, J. N. Clifford, A. Forneli, E. Palomares, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8259–8263 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pullerits and V. Sundström, Acc. Chem. Res., 1996, 29, 381–389 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, S. Campagna, G. Denti, A. Juris, S. Serroni and M. Venturi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 38, 159–173 CrossRef CAS .
B. Alpha, R. Ballardini, V. Balzani, J. M. Lehn, S. Perathoner and N. Sabbatini, Photochem. Photobiol., 1990, 52, 299–306 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jullien, J. Canceill, B. Valeur, E. Bardez, J.-P. Lefèvre, J.-M. Lehn, V. Marchi-Artzner and R. Pansu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5432–5442 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M.-C. Yoon, H. Yoo, P. Kim and D. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4808–4826 RSC .
M. Morisue, S. Yamatsu, N. Haruta and Y. Kobuke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 5563–5574 CrossRef CAS .
R. Amadelli, R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi and F. Scandola, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 7099–7103 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Hasselman, D. F. Watson, J. R. Stromberg, D. F. Bocian, D. Holten, J. S. Lindsey and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25430–25440 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Balzani and F. Scandola, in Supramolecular Photochemistry, Ellis Horwood, Chischester, U. K.,  1991 Search PubMed .
B. E. Hardin, A. Sellinger, T. Moehl, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-E. Moser, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10662–10667 CrossRef CAS .
F. Odobel and H. Zabri, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 5600–5611 CrossRef CAS .
C. Siegers, J. Hohl-Ebinger, B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel, R. Muelhaupt, A. Hinsch and R. Haag, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1548–1556 CrossRef CAS .
C. Siegers, U. Würfel, M. Zistler, H. Gores, J. Hohl-Ebinger, A. Hinsch and R. Haag, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 793–798 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Martinez-Diaz, G. de la Torre and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7090–7108 RSC .
L. Chang Yeon and T. H. Joseph, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3760–3765 CrossRef .
J.-H. Yum, P. Walter, S. Huber, D. Rentsch, T. Geiger, F. Nüesch, F. De Angelis, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10320–10321 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, R. B. M. Hill, J.-H. Yum, A. Dualeh, S. Barlow, M. Grätzel, S. R. Marder and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6619–6621 CrossRef CAS .
J. Warnan, F. Buchet, Y. Pellegrin, E. Blart and F. Odobel, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 3944–3947 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. A. Parussulo, B. A. Iglesias, H. E. Toma and K. Araki, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6939–6941 RSC .
J. Warnan, Y. Pellegrin, E. Blart and F. Odobel, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 675–677 RSC .
T. Rawling, C. Austin, F. Buchholz, S. B. Colbran and A. M. McDonagh, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 3215–3227 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Subbaiyan, J. P. Hill, K. Ariga, S. Fukuzumi and F. D'Souza, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6003–6005 RSC .
A. Nomoto and Y. Kobuke, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1104–1105 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1906–1915 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hetsch, X. Xu, H. Wang, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1879–1887 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5718–5726 CrossRef CAS .
L. Etgar, J. Park, C. Barolo, V. Lesnyak, S. K. Panda, P. Quagliotto, S. G. Hickey, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Eychmuller, G. Viscardi and M. Gratzel, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2748–2752 RSC .
S. Buhbut, S. Itzhakov, E. Tauber, M. Shalom, I. Hod, T. Geiger, Y. Garini, D. Oron and A. Zaban, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1293–1298 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, X. Feng and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 788–794 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Hardin, E. T. Hoke, P. B. Armstrong, J.-H. Yum, P. Comte, T. Torres, J. M. J. Frechet, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 406–411 CrossRef CAS  , S406/401-S406/411.
J.-H. Yum, B. E. Hardin, E. T. Hoke, E. Baranoff, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Torres, M. D. McGehee and M. Grätzel, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 657–661 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Hardin, J.-H. Yum, E. T. Hoke, Y. C. Jun, P. Pechy, T. Torres, M. L. Brongersma, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3077–3083 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. A. Summers, C. Edder, J. M. J. Fréchet and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2960–2964 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kudo, S. Honda, Y. Shimazaki, H. Ohkita, S. Ito and H. Benten, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 183513 CrossRef .
C. Houarner-Rassin, E. Blart, P. Buvat and F. Odobel, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2008, 7, 789–793 CAS .
N. Humphry-Baker, K. Driscoll, A. Rao, T. Torres, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 634–639 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, H. C. Leventis, S. A. Haque, T. Torres, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 596–599 CrossRef CAS .
K. Driscoll, J. Fang, N. Humphry-Baker, T. S. Torres, W. T. S. Huck, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4981–4988 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Moon, E. Baranoff, S. M. Zakeeruddin, C.-Y. Yeh, E. W.-G. Diau, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8244–8246 CAS .
J.-H. Yum, B. E. Hardin, S.-J. Moon, E. Baranoff, F. Nueesch, M. D. McGehee, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9277–9280 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, J. Basham, M. Paulose, S. Kim, O. K. Varghese, A. Vaish, S. Yoriya and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2387–2394 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Unger, A. Morandeira, M. Persson, B. Zietz, E. Ripaud, P. Leriche, J. Roncali, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 20172–20177 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
	Fabrice Odobel (1966) received his Ph.D. in 1994 at Strasbourg University under the supervision of Prof. Jean-Pierre Sauvage and then went to Columbia University (New York) for a postdoctoral research with Prof. Ronald Breslow. He is currently Research Director at CNRS and leads the group of the Photonic and Molecular Engineering in CEISAM laboratory at Nantes University. His research interests include the design, synthesis and characterization of new materials for photovoltaic, artificial photosynthesis and non-linear optics.
	Yann Pellegrin was born in 1976 and received his Ph.D. in 2004, at Orsay University. He was recruited as a CNRS research fellow in 2007 in Odobel's group, after a post-doctorate in Prof. R. Forster's group (Dublin City University).
	Julien Warnan was born in 1985. In 2009, he received a chemical engineering master degree specialised in Fine Organic Chemistry from the University of Nantes. He received his Ph.D. in 2012 at Nantes University under the supervision of Dr. F. Odobel. He currently works as a post-doctorate at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia).

Broader context
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are attractive photovoltaic devices because they offer significant photo-conversion efficiency with a potentially lower cost than the classical silicon-based technology. The operation principle of DSCs bears some analogies to natural photosynthetic processes because the light collection step (carried out by the sensitizer) is separated from the charge transportation process (performed by TiO2 for the electrons or by the electrolyte for the holes). Improving light absorption in DSCs constitutes one strategy to enhance the performances of such a technology, whose maximum reported efficiency is around 12%. To maximize sunlight collection, it is possible to extend the absorbance of the cells to the IR region by using a combination of different dyes with complementary absorption spectra. This is the strategy used by photosynthetic organisms, in which light harvesting antennas collect the incident photons with several different pigments and funnel them via efficient energy transfers to a single molecular unit (the special pair) which triggers a photo-induced electron transfer chain. With a similar approach, it is possible to increase the absorption cross-section of a sensitizer by associating antenna units, whose role is to collect and channel the incident light into the sensitizer by efficient energy transfers. Successes and opportunities to enhance the light absorption cross-section in DSCs by using the antenna effect are emphasized in this review.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic structure and operation principle of a DSC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Staircase graded energy structures of the sensitizer (S) and the antenna (A) to produce an efficient directional energy transfer process from the highest HOMO–LUMO gap (A) to the lowest (S).	 

 	Fig. 3  Structures of covalently linked antenna-sensitizer systems for the antenna effect in DSCs.15,19,20	 

 	Fig. 4  Photoaction spectra of BDPY-ZnP (red) and ZnP (blue).23	 

 	Fig. 5  Photoaction spectra of SQI (blue), D (red) and T (black).26	 

 	Fig. 6  Metallo-supramolecular assemblies performing the antenna effect in DSCs.27–29	 

 	Fig. 7  Left: schematic representation of the structure of the DSC (left) using QDs as antennas (red circle) embedded in an amorphous layer of TiO2 (grey) sensitized by the squaraine dye SQ02 (blue circles) and a liquid iodide/triiodide electrolyte (yellow). Right: photoaction spectra of the cells consisting of QDs only (red); squaraine sensitizer alone (blue) and the complete cell including the QD and SQ02 (black).36	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structures of TT1, PDI, RB, and DCM-pyran.38,39	 

 	Fig. 9  Photoaction spectra of liquid DSCs sensitized with TT1 and using an iodide/triiodide electrolyte with different antennas.39 IPCE = EQE = external quantum efficiency.	 

 	Fig. 10  Chemical structures of P3HT and PTPTB (left) and photocurrent–photovoltage characteristics of TiO2/P3HT/Ag (solid) and TiO2/PTPTB/P3HT/Ag (dash) cells tested under 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM 1.5 irradiance (right).41	 

 	Fig. 11  Chemical structures of HTMs P3HT and spiro-OMeTAD and the sensitizers Ru-P3HT43 and AS02.44	 

 	Fig. 12  IPCE spectra of a YD2 sensitized solid-state solar cell with spiro-OMeTAD (black) and a TiO2/P3HT hybrid cell without dye (red) and with YD2 sensitization (blue).47	 

 	Fig. 13  Chemical structures of spiro-TBT46 and DCM-pyran.39,49	 

 	Fig. 14  Photoaction spectra (blue solid trace) and light harvesting efficiency spectrum (orange dashed trace) of solid state dye-sensitized solar cell devices comprising a mesoporous TiO2 layer sensitized with a squaraine and infiltrated with TVT as HTM.50	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
