One-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures : properties, synthesis, modifications and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B927224K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B927224K
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5993-6008Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsOne-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures: properties, synthesis, modifications and applications

        
          
            Weijia 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Robert I. 
            Boughton
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Guojun 
            Du
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianjian 
            Lin
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jiyang 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Duo 
            Liu
          
        
      a
aState Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Center of Bio & Micro/nano Functional Materials, Shandong University, 27 Shandanan Road, Jinan, 250100, China. E-mail: hongliu@sdu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Green State University, Bowling Green, OH 43403, USA. E-mail: boughton@bgnet.bgsu.edu
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong Institute of Light Industry, Jinan, 250353, China
Received 
      4th January 2010
    , Accepted 4th March 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      16th April 2010
    AbstractRecent advances in the properties, synthesis, modifications and applications of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures (including nanotubes, nanobelts, nanowires, and nanorods) are reviewed. The physical and chemical properties of one-dimensional nanostructured titanates, such as adsorption, stability, ion-exchange, optical, and proton conductivity properties, are described in connection with a particular application. The experimental parameters, morphologies, and mechanism of formation of one-dimensional nanostructured titanates produced by the alkaline hydrothermal method are critically discussed. Current progress in the modifications of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures are discussed together with their improved performances. Examples of applications of one-dimensional nanostructured titanates in photocatalysis, lithium batteries, sensors, hydrogen production and storage, solar cells and biomedicine are presented.Weijia ZhouWeijia Zhou obtained his M.Sc. from Shandong Institute of Light Industry, China, in 2009. Currently he is pursuing his Ph.D. degree under the supervision of Prof. Hong Liu and Prof. Jiyang Wang in State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, China. His research interest in his Ph.D. study is mainly focused on the preparation and modifications of one-dimensional Ti–O based nanomaterials for photocatalysis applications.Hong LiuDr Hong Liu received his B.Sc degree from Shandong Institute of Light Industry in 1985, and his Ph.D. degree from Shandong University in 2001. He is a professor in State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, China. His research interests are related to synthesis of nanomaterials, the application of nanomaterials in gas and biosensors, environmental protection, and new energy sources.Robert I. BoughtonDr Robert I. Boughton is a Professor and Chair at Department of Physics and Astronomy at Bowling Green State University at Bowling Green. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in physics from Ohio State University in 1968. His current research involves low temperature electrical, magnetic and thermoelectric properties of pure metals and superconductors; numerical simulation of electron transport properties in metals; and physics education.Jiyang WangMr Jiyang Wang is a Professor, of State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, at Shandong University, China. His research interests focus on the research of functional single crystal growth, property and its application, especially for laser and nonlinear optical crystals. He has published more than 200 papers on international journals, and 30 patents.
1. Introduction
Much recent research has focused on controlling the size, shape, crystal structure and surface properties of semiconducting oxide nanomaterials in order to tailor them for a particular application. Their physical and chemical properties can often be significantly different from those of the corresponding bulk materials. Iijima discovered fullerene-related carbon nanotubes in 1991, which attracted wide attention to investigating one-dimensional nanomaterials.1 Over the past decade, one-dimensional (1D) semiconducting oxide nanostructures (ZnO, SnO2, In2O3, Ga2O3, V2O5), such as nanotubes (NTs),2,3 nanobelts (NBs),4–6 nanowires (NWs)7–9 and nanorods (NRs)10 have attracted extraordinary attention due largely to the unique physical and chemical properties associated with the 1D structural confinement at this scale. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is an exceptional material that has many promising applications in areas ranging from pigments and toothpaste,11,12 to photocatalysis,13,14 solar cells15,16 and sensors.17–19 Recently, titanate nanotubes,20 nanobelts,21 nanowires22 and nanorods,23 have received much attention because of the wide applications and relatively simple preparation procedures needed to fulfill the requirements of various applications. One-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomaterials have properties that compare with nanoparticle titania but possess a high surface-to-volume ratio as well. Among some of the unique properties, the movement of electrons and holes in TiO2 semiconductor nanomaterials is primarily governed by quantum confinement, and the transport properties related to electrons and photons are largely affected by their one-dimensional geometry.24
Over the past few years, many methods have been developed for the successful fabrication of one-dimensional TiO2 nanomaterials, including the hydrothermal method,25–29 the sol–gel method,30 template-based synthetic approaches31,32 and electrochemical synthesis.33,34 However, for one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures, hydrothermal synthesis appears to be the most effective method. Kasuga et al.35 first discovered the alkaline hydrothermal route for titanium oxide synthesis with a tubular shape, which caused a great deal of interest. Recently, many researchers have explored different approaches to modifying one-dimensional TiO2 semiconductors by assembling a variety of noble metals quantum dots and semiconductors nanostructures on the surface of the one-dimensional TiO2 nanomaterials.36–40 Investigators have measured more efficient electron diffusion in these single-crystalline nanomaterials. The properties of one-dimensional nanostructures, with their high specific surface area and novel semiconducting properties, make nanostructured titanates and TiO2 promising for many applications, including photocatalysis, lithium batteries, sensing applications, hydrogen production and storage, solar cells and biomedical applications.
In recent years, breakthroughs have continually been made in the preparation, modification, and applications of TiO2 nanomaterials and other one-dimensional semiconductor oxide nanostructures. Several excellent reviews of the subject exist in the literature.41–45 Nevertheless, we believe that a new and comprehensive review of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomaterials would further promote the corresponding research and development efforts to open a wider area for the applications. In this review, single-crystalline one-dimensional Ti–O based nanostructures are the focus. Comparison of structure, properties, preparation, modifications and applications of different one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based materials, including titanate, titanic hydroxide, and TiO2, are summarized. The hydrothermal experimental conditions and synthesis mechanisms for fabricating different one-dimensional titanate nanostructures are considered. Modifications of one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures to obtain specific physical excellent properties are discussed and examined. Analysis of the physical and chemical properties of single-crystalline Ti–O based titanates and recent progress in their applications allow for the identification of gaps in our knowledge and highlight the need for critical studies in the area of nanostructured titanates.
2. Structure and properties
2.1 Structure
Titania exists naturally in three crystalline polymorphs, namely rutile (3.05 eV), anatase (3.23 eV), and brookite (3.26 eV). Rutile is the most common and stable TiO2 polymorph. Both rutile and anatase have a tetragonal structure with a = 0.459 nm and c = 0.296 nm (rutile); a = 0.536 nm and c = 0.953 nm (anatase). Brookite has an orthorhombic structure with a = 0.915 nm, b = 0.544 nm, and c = 0.514 nm. TiO2 is known as an n-type semiconductor, which contains donor-type defects such as oxygen vacancies and titanium interstitials. Identification of the crystal structures of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomaterials has given rise to much debate in the recent literature.46,47 Ti–O based nanotubes are thought to be caused by scrolling of an exfoliated TiO2-derived nanosheet into a hollow multiwall nanotube with spiral cross section. Unlike carbon nanotubes produced by the catalytic pyrolysis of hydrocarbons, titania nanotubes produced via the alkaline hydrothermal method have never been observed in single layer form. All reports of TiO2 nanotubes describe the samples as multilayer-walled nanotubular structures. The number of layers varies from two to ten. They are open-ended with several wall layers on both sides. The layered TiO2 structures can be described as stacked polyanion sheets of interconnected MO6n− octahedra with intercalated cations in the interlayer region.48
Up to now, several possible crystal structures of nanotubular products from the alkaline hydrothermal treatment of TiO2 have been proposed, including hydrogen titanate H2Ti3O7,28,49 NaxH2−xTi3O7 (x = 0.75),50 orthorhombic titanates Na2Ti2O4(OH)251 and tetratitanates H2Ti4O9.52 Nanobelts, nanowires and nanorods structures tend to have good crystallinity and usually the relation between the length of the edges corresponding to each crystallographic axis is arranged in the order (001)≫(100)≫(010). The length of nanowires (001) can be several tens of micrometres, while the width (100 or 010) is typically in the range of 10–100 nm. Tafen and Lewis53 studied nanowires with a [001] growth direction having several perimeter and surface-facet configurations. For each nanowire, the atomic structure was carved out from the anatase phase of TiO2. The mutual transformation among the titanate nanotubes, nanobelts, nanowires and nanorods can be made under certain condition and the generalized scheme is shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Scheme of transformation of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures.54 
The precise crystal structures of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomatersials is still an open question because of several intrinsic difficulties posed by the specific nanostructures. First, both the small crystallite size of one-dimensional nanostructures and their wrapping along specific crystallographic axis results in a broadening of the diffraction lines. Second, there are a large number of crystal modifications not only for pure TiO2 (anatase, rutile, and brookite) but also for the protonated forms of polytitanic acids, H2mTinO2n+m. Through X-ray diffraction, Raman, X-ray absorption fine structure, and electron diffraction measurements, Ma et al.46 found that both nanotubes and nanobelts may have a layered titanate origin. Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analysis has demonstrated that the three-dimensional structure of “TiO2-type” nanotubular materials produced by the alkaline hydrothermal method can be interpreted as an arrangement of TiO6 octahedrons in corrugated layers.55 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the nanotubes/nanobelts show very similar peak positions and profiles to those exhibited by protonic lepidocrocite titanate.
2.2 Properties
A more recent approach has been in the synthesis of one-dimensional titanium oxide in the form of nanotubes, nanowires, nanobelts and nanorods with the view that dimensional confinement in combination with novel shapes will reveal interesting physical and electrical properties.56,57 Although the energy gap of these single-crystalline nanostructural titania shows little alteration compared with bulk TiO2, they do display an increase in photoactivity due to better charge transport in the crystallites, higher surface defect content, and an inherently higher aspect ratio.58–60 Moreover, the size and shape of nanocrystalline semiconductors are known to be important factors in influencing the nature of the bonding and packing density of sensitizing molecules and compounds. These features have a significant impact on the charge-transfer process from the sensitizer to the semiconductor. The exotic surface geometry that these nanostructural titania possess make them excellent candidates to explore such factors.

2.2.1 Adsorption properties. 
The one-dimensional titanium oxides have a large surface area (see Table 1), which facilitates reaction/interaction between the devices and interacting media,61–64 which mainly occurs on the surface or at the interface. One-dimensional titanium oxide with a large surface area can be used as catalytic carrier and be beneficial in absorbing degradation products. Umek65 reported that the active surface area for nanotubes (at 115 and 135 °C) ranges from 200 to 240 m2 g−1, while for nanoribbons (at 175 and 195 °C) it is only about 30 m2 g−1. Using the titania nanotubes and nanoribbons as adsorbents for NOx was investigated. When exposed to NO2 gas, NO2 molecules tend to physisorb onto the nanotube surface via the nonbonding π orbital of the oxygen atoms. The results show that the catalysis difference between nanotubes and nanoribbons can be attributed to their surface morphology and the amount of active surface area, which in certain cases allows for catalytic reactions of the NO2 molecules on the titania-based surface.
Table 1 The surface area SBET of one-dimensional titanium oxide with different morphologies




Synthetic conditions
Formula
Morphologies
BET/m2 g−1
Ref.




Hydrothermal treatment at 130 °C for 24 h
TiO2
Nanotubes: the tube size ranges between 10 and 30 nm
400

61



Hydrothermal treatment at 107 °C for 48 h and acidic treatment
H2Ti3O7
Nanotubes: scrolled up hollow structures with inner diameter of 4 nm, outer diameter of 12 nm, and lengths of about 100 nm
280

62



Hydrothermal treatment at 107 °C for 48 h
Na2Ti3O7
Nanowires: widths of about 50–100 nm and lengths up to micrometres
130

62



Hydrothermal treatment at 180 °C for 24 h and annealed at different temperatures
TiO2
Nanobelts: the mesoporous nanobelts with the average pore size of 9.07 nm and smooth surface
38.0 and 27.7

63



Hydrothermal treatment at 200 °C for 36 h and HNO3 post-treatment at 180 °C for 24 h, pH = 7
H2Ti3O7 and TiO2
H2Ti3O7 nanofibers: 40–300 nm in thickness, tens of micrometres in length; TiO2 nanorods: porous rod-like structure
34.1 and 47.0

64



Hydrothermal treatment at 200 °C for 48 h and hydrothermal post-treatment at 150 °C for 24 h.
H2Ti3O7 and TiO2
Belt-like structure for H2Ti3O7 and rod-like morphology for TiO2
18.3 and 61.6

66







2.2.2 Stability properties. 
Titanate nanotubes have poor stability in dilute inorganic acids even at room temperature, and slowly transform to rutile nanoparticles over several months. The rate of transformation depends on the nature of the inorganic acid and is correlated to the solubility of the titanates in the acid. Acidic hydrothermal treatment of titanate nanotubes at 175 °C67 or hydrothermal conditions even in the absence of acid68,69 results in the formation of polycrystalline nanostructured anatase structures, such as nanorods. Bavykin et al.70 reported the nanotubes were stable and minimal morphological changes occurred in pure water and basic (0.1 mol dm−3 NaOH) solutions. In 0.1 mol dm−3 H2SO4, suspended titanate nanotubes slowly transform to rutile nanoparticles of ca. 3 nm size, which agglomerated into ellipsoidal particles. In 0.1 mol dm−3 solutions of HCl and HNO3 the process of transformation is several times slower and the concentration of soluble Ti4+ is also several times lower than in 0.1 mol dm−3 H2SO4, confirming that the mechanism of acid-assisted transformation includes the dissolution of nanotubes, release of soluble forms of Ti4+ in solution, and crystallization of dissolved Ti4+ into rutile nanoparticles.
Physically, titanate nanotubes are relatively fragile and can be easily broken up by mechanical forces during ultrasonic treatment, resulting in shorter nanotubes.71 In addition, the nanotubes are not stable at high temperature. H2Ti3O7 nanotubes are susceptible to lattice oxygen depletion and transform above 397 °C into complete rod-like structures. Recent systematic thermal transformation studies of titanate nanotubes72,73 have revealed that annealing them in the temperature range 120–400 °C results in slow dehydration of the initial nanotubular H2Ti3O7 to form nanotubular TiO2(B) accompanied by a decrease in interlayer spacing of the nanotube walls. A further increase in temperature results in the transformation of nanotubular TiO2(B) to anatase nanorods, which is accompanied by a loss of tubular morphology. Nanofiber titanates can transform to nanofibrous TiO2(B) at 400 °C, followed by transformation to nanofibrous anatase at 700 °C and then completely transformed to submicron rod-like structure of rutile at 1000 °C.74 The formation of anatase nanofibers is also possible by using hydrothermal post-treatment of the titanate nanofibers in water at 150 °C.66 Compared with nanotubes, Riss et al.62 found that nanowires have higher thermal stability, and retain their structure and morphology over the entire temperature range of 197 to 597 °C.
The role of Na ions in titante nanotubes (TNTs) was investigated by Suetake et al.75 There exist two Na ion states in the TNTs, strongly and weakly interacting with the TNT system. The Na ions that are strongly bound in the TNT interlayer play an important role in stabilizing the tube structure. The thermal stability and nature of thermal transformations during annealing can be affected by the level of ion-exchanged sodium in nanotubular titanates.76,77 When fully saturated with sodium ions, titanate nanotubes lose their nanotubular morphology and convert to Na2Ti6O13 nanorods at 600 °C.78 On the other hand, Na ions that interact weakly with the TNT surface suppress photocatalytic activity but can easily be removed by a weak acid treatment to lead to optimum photocatalytic activity.75


2.2.3 Ion-exchange properties. 
In the structure of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures, protons occupy the cavities between the layers of the TiO6 octahedra. The open morphology of the nanotubes results in effective ion-exchange properties. Ion-exchange reactions were carried out in aqueous ammonia solution with alkaline ions (Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, Cs+)79 and some transition-metal ions (Co2+, Ni2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Cd2+)50 placed between the layers of multilayered nanotubes. However, they do not affect the interlayer distance, indicating that the rigidity of the titanate framework is maintained during ion exchange. The ions exchange with the titanate framework via electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged host lattice and the positively charged cations. It was found that when titanate is washed with dilute acid, sodium ions are substituted by protons and consequently reduce the electrostatic interaction between the titanate sheets. Sun and Li50 and Kim and Cho80 found that the specific surface area of nanotubes and nanowires can be increased by ion exchange. The BET surface area of the original nanotubes was 99 m2 g−1, while that of Co-substituted titanate nanotubes had increased to 243 m2 g−1. Kim and Cho80 reported that spinel Li4Ti5O12 nanowires prepared by firing a mixture of TiO2·1.25H2O nanowires and Li acetates at 800 °C for 3 h have a superior rate capability even at a 10 C rate, retaining over 93% of the original capacity. These results were associated with a more active surface in the nanowires which facilitates faster lithium diffusion on account of shorter pathways. TiO2 nanobelts can be doped with Co81 and Ni82 to obtain special magnetic properties. Zhang et al.82 reported that Ni-doped TiO2 samples exhibit complex magnetic properties including room-temperature ferromagnetic and paramagnetic behavior. With an increase of Ni2+ content, the magnetization also increases with the same applied field owing to the uniform distribution of Ni2+ ions in the TiO2 nanobelts.


2.2.4 Optical properties. 
Titanate nanotubes are wide-bandgap semiconductor materials. As with aqueous colloids of titanate nanotubes at room temperature, the bandgap has been estimated to be ca. 3.87 eV,83 which is very close to the bandgap of ca. 3.84 eV in 2D titanate nanosheets,84 but much higher than the value of ca. 3.2 eV in bulk TiO2. The absorption spectrum of titanate nanotubes coincides with luminescence transitions of single or multilayered titanate nanosheets demonstrating the apparent 2D behavior of the 1D tubes at room temperature. At the same time, changing the internal diameter of TiO2 nanotubes over the range of 2.5–5 nm does not change the position of absorption and emission bands, which also demonstrates that two-dimensional optical properties dominate in TiO2 nanotubes.83 Zhang et al.85 indicate that the optimal excitation wavelength for TiO2 nanowires is 473 nm. The photoluminescence (PL) intensity of TiO2 nanowires is higher than that of TiO2 nanocrystals under all circumstances, which indicates that the nanowires might have a higher activity than nanocrystals. So, one can conclude that TiO2 nanowires have a very strong photoluminescence band in the blue–green wavelength range.


2.2.5 Proton conductivity properties. 
Thorne et al.73 found that TiO2 nanotubes have high protonic conductivity. Conductivity measurements indicate that mainly protonic transport occurs at temperatures below 150 °C, and with increasing temperature, the progressive breakdown of nanotubes, and the formation of crystalline TiO2 phases, results in the loss of protonic conductivity, leaving only residual electronic defect conduction. The proton conductivity is ca. 5.5 × 10−6/S cm at 27 °C. The TNT electrode used in the dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) has a longer electron lifetime, which results in an increase in electron density, leading to a high open-circuit voltage.86 The Na2Ti6O13 nanobelt is verified to be a semiconducting ceramic by Zhen, which has a electrical resistivity of about 3.86 Vm.87

3. Synthesis
3.1 Hydrothermal method
For the synthesis of single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures, the hydrothermal method has merited much attention due to its simple procedure and low production cost. Ever since high-quality, high-purity titania-based nanotubes were produced by using a simple hydrothermal treatment of TiO2 powder in a NaOH aqueous solution by Kasuga et al.,35,88 many investigations have been carried out on the formation of one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures. Recently, a mass of Ti–O based nanotubes,17,89,90 nanobelts,91 nanowires92,93 and nanorods77,94 produced by the hydrothermal method were reported, as shown in Fig. 2. Oriented arrays of titanium oxide nanotubes were successfully fabricated on a Ti foil seeded with TiO2 nanoparticles in a hydrothermal procedure.95 The outer surfaces may be negatively charged due to Ti vacancies, the same as with nanotubes that are scrolled up from Ti0.91O2 unilamellar nanosheets.96 Li et al.97 synthesized layered hydrogen titanate nanowires with uniform morphology from TiO2via an alkali hydrothermal process. In contrast to the scroll structure of hydrogen titanate nanotubes, nanowires have a layer-by-layer stacking structure. The average diameter of the as-prepared nanowires is about 100 nm with a uniform interlayer spacing of 0.81 nm. At the same time, the experimental parameters and synthesis mechanisms have been extensively researched.
 Fig. 2  Different morphologies of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures: (A) TiO2 nanotubes,89 (B) Na2Ti3O7 nanotubes,90 (C) Na2Ti3O7 nanobelts,91 (D) K2Ti8O17 nanobelts,91 (E) H2Ti3O7 nanowires92 and (F) Na2Ti3O7 nanorods.94 

3.1.1 Experimental parameters. 
It has been found that the hydrothermal temperature,71 treatment duration,98 starting materials73,99 and base solution100 have strong effects on controlling the morphology of the resulting product. As for the effect of the hydrothermal temperature and duration period on morphologies, many experiments have been carried out. Until recently, it was commonly accepted that nanotubes are formed under milder reaction conditions (130–150 °C and a time period between 24 and 72 h) by the rolling up of exfoliated trititanate crystal sheets. At a lower treatment temperature (lower than 120 °C), a large amount of residual TiO2 particles can be found in the product. A higher temperature and longer duration (temperatures higher than 170 °C and 72 h to 1 week) promote unidirectional crystal growth, leading to nanowires, nanowhiskers or nanofibers.100 To some extent, the synthesis temperature can control the average diameter of the nanotubes, as was reported by Bavykin.71 Elsanousi et al.98 have discussed the effect of the duration of the hydrothermal treatment on the transformation of titanate nanotubes into nanoribbons at a specific hydrothermal temperature. At a fixed temperature of 180 °C, the morphology of the products transforms with a hydrothermal duration of 5 to 72 h. Hollow nanotubes with an outer diameter of about 10 nm were formed with a treatment duration of between 5 and 20 h at 180 °C. Bundles of nanoribbons with widths ranging from 50 to 500 nm and lengths of up to several tens of micrometres were produced with a duration of 72 h. Experimental results on samples treated at different temperatures (135–195 °C) for different durations reveal that the nanotubes transform into nanoribbons after a specific treatment duration at any temperature. At the same time, the synthesis time and temperature can be reduced or lowered by promoting one-dimensional titanate growth, with the use of microwave heating,101,102 ultrasonication,103 and a rotating autoclave92 on the reaction mixture during synthesis.
The choice of initial raw materials may affect the morphology of the resultant TiO2 nanostructure, which can include anatase,35 rutile,29,74,88 brookite,104 and amorphous TiO2,100 but no systematic data is available. Current reported research results are compiled in Table 2. Meng et al.104 reported that the structures of sodium titanate nanowires derived from brookite and anatase were similar, but the fraction of short Ti–O bonds in sodium titanate from brookite is larger than in sodium titanate from anatase. Yuan et al.100 used amorphous TiO2 as the starting material, and found that the particles re-crystallized to become non-tubular needle-shaped titania nanocrystals with no nanotubes in the product. Yao et al.105 also found that it is essential that the starting material be a crystalline structure to synthesize TiO2 nanotubes, which can be delaminated into single-layer sheets. Nian et al.67 have reported that single-crystalline anatase nanorods with a specific crystal-elongation direction can be obtained by hydrothermal treatment of titanate nanotube suspensions in an acidic environment. They found that the local shrinkage of the tube walls to form anatase crystallites and the subsequent oriented attachment of the crystallites are the key steps of the tube-to-rod structure transformation. Using titanate nanosheets as the initial raw material to form titanate nanotubes can decrease the hydrothermal synthesis temperature.106,107 The transformation even can be achieved at ambient temperature using a simple alkali and acid treatment.108,109 It was reported that the conditions during the post-treatment affect the formation, crystalline structure and chemical composition of the product. These steps include acid washing,61,64,110 post-calcination treatment,63 hydrothermal post-treatment,66 hydrogen peroxide treatment,89 and ultrasonic treatment.111 Khan et al.89 prepared TiO2 nanotubes with ultrahigh crystallinity by using titania nanotubes of poor crystallinity, that were treated by 2 wt % hydrogen peroxide aqueous solutions under refluxing conditions at 40 °C for 4 h. The ultrahigh crystalline TiO2 nanotubes have a length of 500–700 nm with quite clean tubular surfaces. They are hollow with an outside diameter of 8 nm and inside diameter of 5 nm.
Table 2 Synthesis of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures using different raw materials




Raw material
Synthesis conditions
Morphologies
Ref.




TiO2 nanotubes
Hydrothermal treatment at 175 °C for 48 h with pH values of 5.6
Nanorods: about 20 × 120 nm.

67



Natural rutile sand
Hydrothermal treatment at 150 °C for 72 h
Nanofibers: length of tens of mm to more than 100 mm

74



Amorphous TiO2
Hydrothermal treatment at 100–160 °C for 48 h
Nanofibers: non-tubular needle-shaped fibers, thickness of 5–30 nm and length of a few tens to several hundreds of micrometres

100



Brookite nanocrystallites
Hydrothermal treatment at 180 °C for more than 12 days
Nanowires: average diameter of 75 nm with lengths up to several micrometres

104



Titanate nanosheets
Colloidal hydrated Ti0.91O2 nanosheets are poured into NaOH aqueous solution for overnight under stirring.
Nanotubes: apparently with hollow core, straight or conical.

108





The concentration and type of base solution used in the hydrothermal process can affect the resultant morphology of one-dimensional titanate nanostructures. By varying the base concentration, nanowire arrays, flowers of nanosheets and nanotubes, and urchin-like nanostructures of nanowires and nanotubes can be sequentially fabricated.108 If the NaOH concentration is higher than 6 M, hydrated Na2Ti6O13 nanowire arrays with diameters of 20–90 nm and an aspect ratio of 1100–5000 are produced at suitable reaction temperatures. In 4 M NaOH solutions, micrometre-sized flowers of nanotubes and nanosheets were formed. Reactions in 2 M NaOH solutions induce the production of urchin-like structures with a size of ca. 10 μm that are composed of nanotubes and nanowires. The results show that the relation between growth speed and repulsion of neighboring particles, which greatly depends on base concentration, plays an important role in formation of the different morphologies. The high rate of crystallization will result in the formation of nanofibers rather than nanotubes. When KOH is used in place of NaOH, nanowires and nanorods can be easily formed instead of nanotubes. Bavykin et al.112 reported that by using a mixture of NaOH and KOH as a base, nanotubes can be synthesized at a lower temperature (about 100 °C).


3.1.2 Synthesis mechanisms. 
Since the discovery of the transformation of raw TiO2 into nanotubular titanates, several research groups have studied the mechanism of titanate nanotube formation by using both theoretical and experimental methods. Some researchers assumed that nanotubular morphology arises during post-hydrothermal acid washing,20,35 and the layered titanate is transformed into nanotubes with the gradual substitution of Na+ with H+ by being washed with HCl. But Zhang et al.113 demonstrated that nanotubular sodium titanates can be obtained by washing with ethanol or acetone. So they think that the titanium oxide nanotube arises from the reaction of TiO2 with NaOH aqueous solution. There is general agreement that the reaction proceeds through several stages and that during treatment with concentrated NaOH, some of the Ti–O–Ti bonds are broken, forming an intermediate product containing Ti–O–Na and Ti–OH, then leading to the formation of lamellar fragments that are the intermediate phase in the formation process of the nanotube materials.20,114 The trititanate lamellar fragments can be folded into tubular structures by certain driving force and grow along the axis during hydrothermal process. With exchange of sodium ions by protons during acid washing, sodium titanate nanotubes were transformed into titanic acid nanotubes. In summary, the transformation starts with scrolled up trititanate sheets and ends with the emergence of TiO2 anatase nanotubes driven by dehydration, and even annealing induced nanotubes to nanorods at a high temperature. The appearance of isolated nanosheets during hydrothermal process is crucial to the formation of nanotubes.
Zhang et al.114 and Wu et al.56 proposed schematic models for the formation mechanism of Ti–O nanotubes and nanowires, as shown in Fig. 3. The formation process for Ti–O nanostructures is simply described as follows. First, the three-dimensional raw anatase-phase TiO2, reacts with the NaOH aqueous solution and forms a lamellar product. The lamellar trititanate product possesses a two-dimensional layered structure. The edges of the lamellar products typically have many atoms with dangling bonds, and possess enough energy to destabilize the two-dimensional structure. Subsequently, the lamellar TiO2 bends to saturate these dangling bonds. The nanoscale tubular structure is then achieved by further rolling and one-dimensional nanotubes are formed. The driving force for the scrolling of the nanosheets into nanotubes is proposed to be either the asymmetrical chemical environment on the two opposite sides of the nanosheet or the internal stress arising in multilayered nanosheets from an imbalance in width occurring during crystallization. The driving force for the wrapping may be the asymmetry due to the preferential doping of these nanosheets with hydrogen together with asymmetric surface forces due to locally high surface energy. For this reason, the surface chemistry can induce sheet exfoliation upon formation of the two-dimensional solids.55,68 Zhang et al.114 considered that single surface layers experience an asymmetric chemical environment, due to the imbalance of H+ or Na+ ion concentration on the two opposite sides of a nanosheet, giving rise to excess surface energy and resulting in bending. Another reason for bending of the multilayered nanosheets is that mechanical tension arises during the process of dissolution/crystallization. The curving of multilayered nanosheets to nanotubes passes through a sequence of metastable states that are stabilized by the periodic potential in the nanosheet lattice. Under alkaline hydrothermal conditions, nanosheets can also be converted to nanobelts or nanowires instead of rolling into nanotubes at a higher temperature (above 180 °C) or when KOH is used in place of NaOH. As for nanobelts, due to the different growth habits of TiO2 along different axes (the fastest growth rate is along the b axis) and the faster crystallization rate at high hydrothermal temperatures, the thickness of the nanosheets will exceed a specific value, where they become too rigid to bend.
 Fig. 3  Schematic drawings depicting the formation process of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures: (A) schematic models showing the effect of the alkali environment and the cleavage of the surface layer due to hydrogen deficiency on the surface of H2Ti3O7. White balls: H; black balls: O; gray balls: Na.114 (B) schematic drawings depicting the formation process of H2Ti3O7 nanotubes and nanowires: (a) Lamellar structures grown on the edges of TiO2 particles. (b) Splitting of lamellar structures into nanosheets between (100) planes. (c) Wrapping of nanosheets into nanotubes; (d) Thick layers or wires formed after prolonged reaction at elevated temperature. (e) Splitting of these thick layers or wires between (100) and (010) planes. (d) Further splitting to form thin nanowires.56 

3.2 Other synthetic methods
The preparation of TiO2 nanotubes115–117 and nanorods118 by chemical templating usually involves the controlled sol–gel hydrolysis of solutions of titanium-containing compounds in the presence of templating agents, followed by the polymerization of TiO2 in the self-assembled template molecules or the deposition of TiO2 onto the surface of the template aggregates. However, these one-dimensional TiO2 structures are composed of small TiO2 nanoparticles and cannot produce single-crystalline Ti–O based nanocrystals. Few reports on producing one-dimensional single-crystalline TiO2 by other methods, such as the sol–gel method,30 the electrochemical method,119 the molten salt method88,120,121 or the microwave method,122 as represented in Table 3. Xu et al.120 describe a simple method to synthesize single crystalline sodium titanate and potassium hollandite nanowires from reactions of TiO2 nanoparticles with molten salt and NP-9 as a nonionic surfactant. The nanowires have a diameter of around 100 nm and a length of up to a few tens of microns. The synthesized sodium titanate and potassium hollandite nanowires were found to grow along the (010) and (001) crystal directions, respectively.
Table 3 Other synthetic methods for producing one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O nanomaterials




Synthetic methods
Synthetic conditions
Morphologies
Ref.




Sol–gel
an unconstrained solution growth route by hydrolyzing TiF4 under acidic conditions at 60 °C, anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) templates and Al2O3 nanoparticles as initial nucleation sites
TiO2 nanotubes: the diameters of the inner tubes are 2.5–5 nm, the diameters of the outer tubes are 20–40 nm; lengths of up to a few hundred nanometres

30



Electrochemical method
cathodically induced sol–gel within the pores of an anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) template
TiO2 nanowires: uniform diameter of about 40 nm; lengths of 2–10 μm

119



Molten salt method
one-step solid-state chemical reaction: KCl and TiO2 nanoparticles as starting materials; then mixture is annealed at 950 °C for 3 h
K2Ti6O13 nanobelts: 100–300 nm in diameter and 10–50 μm in length

121



Microwave method
KOH and TiO2 mixed with alkali solution in PTFE vessel, reacting for 6 h microwave oven
K2Ti6O13 nanowires: average diameter of about 10 nm and length ranging from hundreds of nanometres up to tens of micrometres

122





4. Modifications
As mentioned above, TiO2 is a semiconductor with a wide band gap, and optical absorption in the UV region (<400 nm). Any highly efficient use of TiO2 nanomaterials is sometimes prevented by the wide band gap. The band gap of bulk TiO2 lies in the UV range (3.0 eV for the rutile phase and 3.2 eV for the anatase phase). Although TiO2-based photocatalysts are very active in photocatalytic reactions, the major drawback delaying their widespread industrial use is the relatively short wavelength of light necessary for a photocatalytic reaction. Several approaches to sensitization of elongated titanate and TiO2 nanostructures have recently been explored to reduce the band gap of TiO2. Recently, assembling of quantum dots (Q-dots) on the TiO2 surfaces to form heterojunctions has been investigated because of the potential applications in different fields, such as optoelectronics,123 photocatalysis,124 and biomedicine.125 In addition to having a high surface-to-volume ratio, nanostructural TiO2 in the form of nanotubes, nanowires, and nanobelts has advantages because it is more single-crystalline in nature when compared with nanoparticle titania, but there are few results reported. The match between the electronic structure of the excited nanomaterials and the TiO2 basal body plays a large role in this process, as does the structure of the interface, including grain boundaries and bonding between the sensitizer and TiO2. Careful design is needed to improve charge transfer and charge separation to avoid charge trapping and recombination.126 There are several ways to achieve this goal. First, coupling the collective oscillations of the electrons in the conduction band of the metal nanoparticle surfaces to those in the conduction band of the TiO2 nanomaterial in metal–TiO2 nanocomposites can improve performance. Second, modification of the TiO2 nanomaterial surface with other semiconductors can alter the charge-transfer properties between TiO2 and the surrounding environment. As shown in Table 4, the nanomaterials used to modify one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomaterials include noble metals, such as Au,39 Ag,45 Pt,127 Pd,128 and semiconductors with narrow band gaps, such as ZnO,38 CdS,129,130 RuO2,131,132 V2O3.133
Table 4 Different noble metals and semiconductors attached to one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O nanomaterials




Formula
Synthetic method
Morphologies
Performance
Ref.




Au/TNTs
Deposition–precipitation method
TiO2 Nanotubes: uniform outer diameters of around 8–10 nm; inner diameter of around 6 nm; lengths range from several tens to several hundreds of nanometres.
much higher WGS activity by 15–20% than that of a conventional Au/Al2O3

39



Au: about 5 nm nanoparticles


Ag/TNTs
Photoreduction method
TiO2 Nanotubes: 250 nm long with a diameter of 20 nm
effective bactericidal activity at higher concentrations

45



Ag: about 20 nm nanoparticles


Pd/TNTs
Reduction method
TiO2 Nanotubes: outer diameter of about 15 nm and inner diameter of the nanotube of 10 nm
better activity for methanol oxidation than that of TiO2 nanoparticles and pure Pd

128



Pd: 3wt (%)


CdS/TNTs
Ion-exchange and precipitation method
TiO2 Nanotubes: 150–200 nm long, 8–10 nm wide; hollow inner pore with open tube ends
trititanate/CdS nanotube system active in photooxidation reaction

129



CdS: evenly distributed spherical CdS nanoparticles of about 6 nm


RuO2/TNTs
Precipitation method
TiO2 Nanotubes: outer diameter of 20–30 nm; inner diameter of 10–15 nm; length of about 1 μm.
good electrochemical capacitance performance (0–1.4V); high energy density of 12.5Wh/kg (150W kg−1); good cycling performance(90%, 1000 cycles).

131



RuO2: unobserved


VOx/titanate-CNRs
Mix-Hydrothermal method
VOx/titanate-CNRs nanorods: length of 10 to 20 μm; diameter of 100 to 300 nm
better electrochemical capacitance performance than pure V2O5

133



VOx: unobserved




4.1 Metal Q-dots
Noble metals deposited on titania are known to induce strong metal-support interactions, which significantly affect the chemisorptive properties and catalytic reactions. The semiconductor–metal system produces a Schottky barrier at the interface, which can serve as an efficient electron trap, preventing electron–cavity recombination.134 In the support role, a large surface area is the essential feature in order to disperse the active species. In addition, the microstructure or morphology of the support framework affects not only the dispersion but also the structure and chemical environment of the active species.63
Different metals have been attached to one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomaterials to form monodispersed metal nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 4. Chien et al.127 reported that immobilization of Pt and Au was carried out by a photochemical deposition method with TiO2-nanotubes suspended in an aqueous solution containing H2PtCl6·6H2O or HAuCl4·3H2O. In general, Pt/TiO2-nanotubes present a relatively higher activity than Au/TiO2-nanotubes, and the catalytic activities of TiO2 supported Pt and Au catalysts are significantly enhanced by the high surface area of the TiO2-nanotube. Ma et al.135 have reported that single crystalline Ag and Au nanoparticles with a narrow size distribution that correlates with the nanotubes have been obtained by treating the nanotubes with AgNO3 or HAuCl4 aqueous solution followed by chemical reduction. The noble metal nanoparticles exhibit a strong surface plasmon absorption band. Multilayer film construction of the noble metal loaded nanotubes in a sequential layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly with polycations has also been achieved.
 Fig. 4  Morphological properties of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures modified by metals Q-dots. (A) Ag/mesoporous TiO2 nanobelts and (B) Ag/H2Ti3O7 nanobelts,63 (C) Ag/TiO2 nanotubes and (D) Au/TiO2 nanotubes,135 (E) Pd/TiO2 nanotubes136 and (F) Pt/TiO2 nanotubes.137 
4.2 Semiconductor nanomaterials
The assembly of semiconductor Q-dots onto one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomaterials has been compiled in Fig. 5. Shen and co-workers138,139 found more efficient electron diffusion in these single-crystalline nanomaterials. Using transition semiconductor Q-dots as the heterojunction alters the base material surface energy band structure, an effect that can improve optical properties, photocatalysis efficiency, and sensor performance. Among the Q-dots, cadmium-based semiconductors have been widely studied on titania electrodes. Kukovecz et al.140 reported a novel synthetic route to prepare titanate nanotubes decorated with CdS nanoparticles via a complex-assisted process. With visible-light irradiation, the Q-dots inject electrons into the conduction band of TiO2, generating a photocurrent and enhancing the photonductivity of titania. Chong et al.141 reported that a nanocomposite consisting of 5 nm sized CdS0.7Se0.3 quantum dots hydrophobically attached to anatase TiO2 nanobelts has been successfully prepared, with resulting enhancement in the photocurrent and good reproducibility. The TiO2 nanobelts are able to accept electrons from the excited Q-dots and transport them to the TiO2 surface to generate an anodic photocurrent. Apart from the alteration of electronic states by creating interfacial regions (such as p-n junctions), the organization pattern and shape of each component in an integrated nanocomposite further determines its ultimate physical and chemical properties and thus its performance. Yang et al.38 reported that two important transition-metal-oxides, TiO2 and ZnO, were sequentially grown onto the surface of the as-prepared nanobelts in aqueous mediums. Novel oxide nanocomposites of TiO2 and ZnO with high structural complexity can be prepared in aqueous solutions. Currently, research on using anatase TiO2 nanoparticle-coated one-dimensional TiO2 nanocrystals has attracted a great deal of interest.142,143 Zhu et al.142 report on a delicate composite structure that consists of long titanate fibers of thickness 40–100 nm and length up to 30 μm long covered with anatase nanocrystals of 10–20 nm. It forms an interesting composite structure that possesses both the surface properties of the anatase nanocrystals and most of the morphological and mechanical properties of the titanate nanofibers. More importantly, this composite structure was achieved by the controlled reaction of titanate nanofibers with a dilute acid solution, and the titanate fibers were fabricated through a hydrothermal reaction of common inorganic titanium salt and a concentrated NaOH, rather than the conventional pyrolysis reaction above 827 °C.
 Fig. 5  Morphological properties of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructure modified by semiconductors with narrow band gaps. (A) CdS/TiO2 nanowires,129 (B) CdS/TiO2 nanotubes,140 (C) CdSSe/TiO2 nanobelts,141 (D) ZnO/H2Ti5O11·H2O nanobelts and (E) ZnO/TiO2 nanobelts38 and (F) TiO2/titanate nanorods.143 
5. Applications
Current and future applications of TiO2 nanomaterials include paint, toothpaste, UV protection, photocatalysis, photovoltaics, sensors, and electrochromics and photochromic decices. These applications can be roughly divided into “energy” and “environmental” categories. TiO2 nanomaterials normally have electronic band gaps larger than 3.0 eV and high absorption in the UV region. One-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures have a large surface area for the absorption of photons and provide channels for electron transfer. With these two characteristics, the performance of electronic devices, photocatalysts, and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) can be improved. Moreover, thin film nanoarrays composed of oriented nanotubes or nanowires can enhance the performance of current devices to expand the fields of application. From an energy or an environmental standpoint, one-dimensional Ti–O based nanomaterials has received attention due to its elongated morphology and its interesting physical and chemical properties, which lead to applications in photocatalysis,23,144,145 lithium batteries,146,147 sensors,148,149 hydrogen production and storage,150,151 solar cells152,153 and biomedicine.154
5.1 Photocatalysts
TiO2 is regarded as the most efficient and environmentally benign photocatalyst. The goal of research in this area is to look for efficient materials for photocatalytic processes, including the photocatalytic decomposition of various pollutants,155–159 and killing bacteria.40,160,161 The optical properties of one-dimensional titanates have been studied by various methods. During the last three decades, titanium dioxide has been comprehensively studied as a wide-band-gap photocatalyst. The principle of the semiconductor photocatalytic reaction is straightforward. Upon absorption of photons with energy larger than the band gap of TiO2, electrons are excited from the valence band to the conduction band, creating electron–hole pairs. These charge carriers migrate to the surface and react with the chemicals adsorbed on the surface to decompose them. The increase in photocatalytic activity is induced by increasing the specific surface area,109 the improvement of nanostructure crystallinity89 and modifications of the metal and semiconductor Q-dots,127,162etc. Additional increase of the charge separation in titanate nanofibers or nanotubes can be achieved by using the recently discovered synergetic effect in mixed-phase nanocomposites occurring between two crystal forms of TiO2 (anatase and rutile) due to the small difference in flat band potentials. This effect stimulates the spatial separation of carriers, reducing their recombination.143,163,164 Ou et al.165 reported that the photocatalytic activity of as-prepared titanate nanotubes was found to be smaller than the activity of the standard P25 catalyst in the oxidation of NH3, which is a major nitrogen-containing pollutant in wastewater. This effect can be attributed either to sodium impurities or to the moderate crystallinity of the as-prepared titanate nanotubes.166 A pure TNT phase presents no great ability to produce the photocatalytic reaction NH3/NH4+, whereas the photocatalytic efficiency can be enhanced by the presence of a rutile phase within the TNTs. Hafez110 found that nanorods obtained by acid treatment have a high BET surface of 85.06 m2 g−1, which causes higher photocatalytic activity for the degradation of FN-R dye, compared with the results for titania nanoparticles and titanate nanotubes. TiO2 nanotubes modified by RuO2132 and ruthenium(III) hydrated oxide167 nanoparticles used as an electrocatalyst have a high activity for the reduction of CO2 and the selective oxidation of alcohols. Dong et al.168 reported on a new hydrothermal method for the synthesis of Ti–O based long nanowire catalysts that have been directly cast into a thermostable, robust, and multifunctional FSM-based 2D membrane structure of nearly any macroscopic size or shape. An immediate application of the long organized catalytic nanowire membranes is to produce a write–erase–rewrite function with the help of UV irradiation.
5.2 Lithium batteries
There has been increasing interest in developing one-dimensional nanostructure titanate electrode materials for application in rechargeable lithium batteries. Owing to their mesoporous structure, efficient transport of lithium ions, and good ion-exchange ratio, they exhibit a high charge/discharge capacity, good kinetic characteristics, and very good robustness and safety. These properties arise because the distance that Li+ must diffuse is restricted to a value that is significantly smaller than that found in the typical powder fabricated electrode.169–171 Alkaline ions diffuse along the length of the titanate nanotubes and nanofibers, which exhibit pseudocapacitive characteristic during the Li+ insertion process. Moreover, the mixture of both the pseudocapacitive effect and the diffusion-limited reaction depends on different microstructures of the resulting samples.172 Nanotubes and nanowires have an open layered structure with a much larger interlayer spacing, a feature that may make them promising candidates for lithium storage.96 A notable change in the cathodic process between the first and second cycles displays large irreversible electrochemical discharge capacity of the as-prepared nanotubes calcined below 300 °C.
Recent studies173,174 on the use of TiO2 nanotubular anodes in a lithium battery demonstrate an initial 282 mA h g−1 discharge capacity at a specific current density of 0.24 mA g−1. It is found that nanotubes calcined at 300 and 400 °C have larger surface areas and thus exhibit relatively larger reversible capacity and good reversibility (level remains at 200 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles).172 Therefore, the fabrication of new materials with delicate 1D nanostructure is important for electrochemical lithium storage. Wang et al.175 reported a new hybrid supercapacitor fabricated using 1D nanomaterials that consists of a carbon nanotube (CNT) cathode and a TiO2(B) nanowire (TNW) anode. On the basis of the total weight of both active materials, the CNT–TNW supercapacitor delivers an energy density of 12.5 W h kg−1 at a rate of 10 C, double the value of the CNT–CNT supercapacitor, while maintaining desirable cycling stability. The anatase nanorods produced by calcination of TiNT are characterized by a lower discharge capacity, a characteristic plateau in the charge/discharge curve, and good reversibility.176,177 Nanofibrous titanate materials have been more extensively studied than nanotubular ones for lithium-battery applications.173,178 The cyclic V–I characteristic of titanate nanofibers shows several pairs of peaks in the voltage range from 1.5 to 2.0 V when compared to Li+/Li. Bruce and co-workers58 reported the formation of titanate nanowires and the conversion to TiO2(B) nanowires by subsequent annealing. The TiO2(B) electrode showed a very high specific charge storage capacity of 275 mA h/g and high rate capabilities for lithium intercalation by galvanostatic methods, which was much higher than that in normal TiO2(B) electrodes and in nanostructured anatase.173
5.3 Sensor applications
TiO2 nanomaterials have also been used as sensors for various gases and humidity by exploiting electrical or optical properties that change upon adsorption. Due to electrostatic effects between one-dimensional nanostructured TiO2 and the anode surface, a practical approach for controlled deposition of nanostructured titanates on the surface of the electrodes is electrophoretic deposition of nanosheets148 or nanorods149 from aqueous suspension. Bavykin et al.179 reported that TiO2 nanotubes carry a stronger negative surface charge, under neutral conditions, providing electrostatic binding sites for cations. Compared with TiO2 anatase nanoparticles, titanate nanotubes are excellent matrices for proteins to exhibit efficient direct reversible electron transfer and higher catalytic activity to hydrogen peroxide. The hydroxyl group, the surface charge and the tubular morphology of TNT play important roles in stabilizing the bound protein. Thus, TiO2 nanotubes are novel, inert substrates that can be used for both inorganic and biological electrocatalysts. Liu et al.180 reported that electrodes modified by a titanate-nanotube film provides a switch with an on/off function. The redox peak current of the Ti4+/Ti3+ pair for a titanate-nanotube film-covered basal plane pyrolytic graphite disk electrode (PGE) was found to be sensitive to varying nitrate concentration in an acetate buffer solution. The TNT/PGE shows a stable redox peak in 0.1M acetate buffer that disappears when the same buffer solution contains over 5.6 mM of nitrate. The electrochemical activity of titanium oxide on the electrode surface can be reversibly repeated between the 0.1M acetate buffer solution (pH 5.5) and nitrate, just as with a switch have an on/off function. Wang et al.160 prepared two-dimensional TiO2 nanopapers from TiO2 nanobelts using a paper-making process. The nanobelts are connected with hydrogen bonds and/or bridge oxygen atoms and packed together, forming a paperlike porous network structure. They demonstrated that sensitivity of the nanostructured sheets to gas was present down to sub-ppb levels.
5.4 Hydrogen production and storage
Hydrogen is a favourite candidate for energy consumption, having high calorific value and producing only water on oxidation. The key to a hydrogen economy is a means to generate hydrogen efficiently and inexpensively on a renewable basis. When a semiconductor of proper characteristics is immersed in an aqueous electrolyte and irradiated with sunlight, sufficient energy is generated to split water into hydrogen and oxygen.181 TiO2 nanomaterials have been widely studied for water splitting and hydrogen production due to their suitable electronic band structure given the redox potential of water.182–185 To maximize the hydrolytic efficiency of a TiO2 photoanode, one would like to have a narrower band gap to utilize visible-light energy, and a high contact area with the electrolyte to increase the splitting of the e−/h+ pairs. Xu et al.182 investigated the hydrolytic performance of carbon modified (CM)-n-TiO2 nanotube arrays, and found about an eight-fold increase in photocurrent density in a carbon modified (CM)-n-TiO2 nanotube film compared to that of an undoped n-TiO2 flat thin film. Both the nanotube structure and carbon doping contributed to the enhancement of the photoresponse in the n-TiO2. It was found that the bandgap of n-TiO2 is reduced to 2.84 eV and an additional band is introduced in the gap at 1.30 eV above the valence band, which extends the utilization of solar energy including the visible and infrared regions.
However, successful implementation of the hydrogen economy in industry raises the challenge of the proper storage and transportation of hydrogen. A number of materials with nanotubular morphology have been studied as hydrogen adsorbents, including carbon nanotubes,186 boron nitride187 and MoS2.188 One-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures are a good hydrogen adsorbent due to their high specific surface area and layered structure. Hydrogen can intercalate between layers in the walls of TiO2 nanotubes forming the host–guest compounds TiO2·xH2(x ≤ 1.5).150 It can occupy interstitial cavities without chemical bonding. The OH groups in the nanotube lattice stabilize the hydrogen molecules with the weak van der Waals interaction. Kinetic studies of the intercalation of molecular hydrogen support the hypothesis that diffusion of hydrogen molecules in the axial direction between the layers in the multilayered walls of TiO2 nanotubes is the rate-limiting step of the process of intercalation. From a proposed diffusion model, the rate of hydrogen intercalation depends on the inverse square of nanotube length. Bavykin150 and Lim151 found that temperature plays an important role in stored hydrogen capacity and steady-state. TiO2 nanotubes can reproducibly store up to approximately 2 wt % H2 at room temperature and at 6 MPa. This stored hydrogen is released when the pressure is lowered to ambient conditions due to physisorption.
5.5 Solar cells
When sensitized with organic dyes or inorganic narrow band gap semiconductors, TiO2 can absorb light into the visible region and convert solar energy into electrical energy for solar cell applications. One-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures have also been examined as excellent electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). One possible way to improve the diffusion coefficient and transport properties is to grow the electrode materials as one-dimensional nanostructures such as nanotubes and nanorods,15 nanowires189 and nanofibers.190 The electrons are conducted to the outer circuit to drive the load and make electric power. The voltage generated under illumination corresponds to the difference between the Fermi level of TiO2 and the redox potential of the electrolyte. An alternative way to achieve immobilization of one-dimensional titanates is to use direct alkaline hydrothermal synthesis on the surface of Ti metal.95,191,192
The potential advantage of titanate nanotubes as electrodes for DSSCs can be realized by utilizing the better adsorption of the positively charged dyes from aqueous solution on the surface of a negatively charged titanate nanotube, allowing a compact monolayer of dye to be deposited with a capacity of over 1000 molecules per nanotube. The second advantage of nanotubes is their one-dimensional morphology, which can provide a direct pathway for electron transfer from the point of injection to the electron sink with improved electron transport and a higher charge collection efficiency. Ohsaki et al.86 and Adachi et al.193 found that the higher efficiency of solar cells with single-crystalline TiO2 nanotube-based electrodes results from an increase in electron density in the nanotube electrodes compared to the P25 electrodes. They found that the highly ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays had superior electron lifetimes and provided excellent pathways for electron percolation by comparison to nanoparticulate systems. The use of TiO2 nanowires may provide channels for fast electron transfer. A photoconversion efficiency above 9.3% has been reported for DSSCs using single crystal like anatase nanowires.194 The TiO2 nanoarray film was transferred to a transparent conductive glass substrate and used as a photoanode for a dye-sensitized solar cell.195 A light-to-energy conversion efficiency of 6.58% for the DSSCs was obtained. Hence, Jsc and Z have been increased remarkably.
5.6 Biomedical applications
Because of the moderate electroconductivity, high surface area and affinity towards positively charged ions in aqueous solution, one-dimensional nanostructured titanates have recently been studied for possible applications to controlled drug delivery, labelling of biological objects and building of artificial tissues.196 It has been reported that the redox mediator Meldola blue181 and such oxygen transport metaloproteins as haemoglobin197 or myoglobin198 can be easily immobilized on the surface of TNTs, providing an efficient electron transfer facility between biological molecules and an artificial electrode. The main obstacle is the poor compatibility between inorganic materials and biomolecules. Titanium has a lower level of cell irritation than ceramic and gold, shows high biocompatibility and has been used in the fields of orthopedics and dentistry. There is significant interest in the development of technologies that modify the Ti surface for improving the interaction between bone cells and metal to improve bone cell materials and antimicrobial activities. The Ti surface can be modified by titania nanotubes199 and nanofibers154 to enhance bone–cell materials interactions, by providing rigidity and a large macroporous structure suitable for cell growth and nutrition. The in vitro endothelial response of primary bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAECs) was investigated on a flat Ti surface vs. a nanostructured TiO2 nanotube surface.199 The nanotopography provided nanoscale cues that facilitated cellular probing, cell sensing, and especially cell migration, where more organized actin cytoskeletal filaments formed lamellipodia and locomotive morphologies. Sasaki et al.200 implanted TiO2 nanotubes with high biocompatibility under the inguinal skin of a nude mouse to analyze the biocompatibility and O2 generation of TiO2 nanotubes via the photodecomposition of water into O2 and H2in vivo. Four weeks after the implantation, venous oxygen saturation (SvO2) of the inguinal skin in the groups with TiO2 nanotubes was 30–40% higher than that in the control group (54%). These findings indicate excellent biocompatibility and O2 generation by TiO2 nanotubes in vivo.
5.7 Other applications
There is a range of recent studies suggesting other possible applications of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O nanomaterials. Wide-band gap semiconductor nanotubes have potential use as components in electronic and optical devices because of their transparency and high carrier excitation energy.201,202 At the same time, TiO2 nanomaterials have been widely explored as electrochromic devices, such as in electrochromic windows and displays. The color change of titanate nanotubes is more striking than that of TiO2 nanoparticles. The significant electrochromism of the titanate nanotube is attributed to its layered nanostructure.203 Recent interest in room-temperature ferromagnetic semiconductors and magnetic nanosized materials having a high aspect ratio has stimulated research into the synthesis and characterization of one-dimensional titanates and TiO2 magnetic nanomaterials. Pure one-dimensional titanates have paramagnetic properties.204 However, through doping with Co2+,205 Fe3+206 and depositing nickel nanoparticles,207 ferromagnetism results, providing for the possibility of new applications.
6. Summary
Over recent decades, the tremendous effort invested in TiO2 nanomaterials has resulted in a large amount of data on their synthesis, properties, modifications and applications. One-dimensional single-crystalline titanates (nanotubes, nanobelts, nanowires and nanorods) due to their specific structure, possess a unique combination of physical and chemical properties (high specific surface area, efficient ion-exchange and electroconductivity) that provide a wide variety of possible applications. The one-dimensional single-crystalline titanates produced by the alkaline hydrothermal method have been thoroughly studied. However, the experimental parameters and the mechanism of transformation have prompted several unanswered questions: what is the effect of starting materials on nanostructure morphology? What is the precise structure of the nanotubes and the universal mechanism of transformation of layered nanosheets into nanotubes?. All of these issues need be systematically researched.
Modifications of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomaterials are targets for further investigation. There is currently a gap in our knowledge about how permanent their properties are for different applications. Continuing breakthroughs in the modification of one-dimensional TiO2 nanomaterials have revealed new properties and new applications with improved performance. The modifications include the addition of metal Q-dots and semiconductor nanomaterials to one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomaterials.
In this report, we have identified some of the promising applications of nanostructured titanate materials including photocatalysis, lithium batteries, sensor applications, hydrogen production and storage, etc. The applications of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomaterials have been extensively researched with regard to their specific structure and properties. Future growth of research interest in one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O nanomaterials is anticipated in the areas of (1) improving on a unified synthesis mechanism and guiding large-scale synthesis of one-dimensional single-crystals, (2) modification of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanomaterials with improved performance revealing new properties and new applications, (3) biomedical applications including biosensors, biocompatible coatings and nanotubular drug delivery systems, (4) formation of 2D and 3D nanodevices from 1D single-crystalline Ti–O nanomaterials.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NSFC (Nos: 50872070, NSFDYS: 50925205, IRG, 50721002), and the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities in China (111 program).
References
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5867–5874 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Chandrappa, N. Steunou, S. Cassaignon, C. Bauvais and J. Livage, Catal. Today, 2003, 78, 85–89 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Y. Su, S. Li, Y. Q. Chen, Q. T. Zhou and S. Y. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 760–766 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiang, C. Cao, Y. Guo and H. S. Zhu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 378, 660–664 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Yang and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1466–1467 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene and A. Radenovic, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22652–22663 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Zhao, G. J. Wang, Y. Huang, B. Wang, B. D. Yao and Y. P. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2612–2614 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Kim, I. S. Hwang and S. J. Kwon, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3041–3045 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Yan and D. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25850–25855 CrossRef CAS .
E. Reck and S. Seymour, Macromol. Symp., 2002, 187, 707–718 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Yuan, W. H. Chen and S. S. Hu, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2005, 25, 479–485 CrossRef .
M. Zlamal, J. M. Macak, P. Schmuki and J. Krýsa, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2822–2826 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Cozzoli, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14539–14548 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2011–2075 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 23–27 CAS .
I. A. Al-Homoudi, J. S. Thakur, R. Naik, G. W. Auner and G. Newaz, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 8607–8614 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wisitsoraat, A. Tuantranont, E. Comini, G. Sberveglieri and W. Wlodarski, IEEE Sens. 2005, [IEEE Conf. Sens.], 4th, 2005, 1184–1187 Search PubMed .
G. K. Mor, M. A. Carvalho, O. K. Varghese, M. V. Pishko and C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 628–634 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Tsai and H. Teng, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 367–373 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. N. Tafen, J. P. Lewis, Z. L. Hong, A. Manivannan, M. J. Zhi, M. Li and N. Q. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12290–12297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, G. S. Wu, X. Y. Yuan, T. Xie and L. D. Zhang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2003, 15, 2917–2922 CrossRef CAS .
J. Joo, S. G. Kwon, T. Yu and M. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15297–15302 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Seo, H. Kim and J. K. Lee, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 275, e2371–e2376 CrossRef .
G. H. Du, Q. Chen, P. D. Han, Y. Yu and L. M. Peng, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 035323 CrossRef .
R. Z. Ma, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 380, 577–582 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, W. Zhou, G. Du and L. M. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1208–1211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lan, X. Gao, H. Zhu, Z. Zheng, T. Yan, F. Wu, S. P. Ringer and D. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1310–1318 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Liu, L. M. Gan, L. H. Liu, W. D. Zhang and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1391–1397 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suzuki, Y. C. Tateishi, T. Sugimoto, S. Shinkai and K. Sada, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2006, 7, 605–608 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Li, W. M. Liu and H. L. Li, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 80, 317–320 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Taveira, J. M. Macak, H. L. Tsuchiya, F. P. Dick and P. Schmuki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, B405–410 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Albu, A. Ghicov, S. Aldabergenova, P. Drechsel, D. LeClere, G. E. Thompson, J. M. Macak and P. Schmuki, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4135–4139 CAS .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3160–3163 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Kim, J. Choi, Y. B. Lee, J. H. Hong, J. I. Lee, J. W. Yang, W. I. Lee and N. H. Hur, Chem. Commun., 2006, 5024–5026 RSC .
J. Qu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang and C. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3576–3580 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 270–278 CrossRef CAS .
V. Idakiev, Z. Y. Yuan, T. Tabakova and B. L. Su, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 281, 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guin, S. V. Manorama, J. N. L. Latha and S. Singh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13393–13397 CrossRef CAS .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, X. X. Zhang and D. A. Trykc, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Patzke, F. Krumeich and R. Nesper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2446–2461 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
R. Z. Ma, K. Fukuda, T. Sasaki, M. Osada and Y. Bando, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6210–6214 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kubo and A. Nakahira, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1658–1662 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1455–1471 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, G. H. Du, S. Zhang and L. M. Peng, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2002, 58, 587–593 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Sun and Y. D. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 2229–2238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Z. Jin, X. Wang, W. Li, J. Zhang, S. Zhang, X. Guo and J. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2003, 3898–3901 RSC .
A. Nakahira, W. Kato, M. Tamai, T. Isshiki, K. Nishio and H. Aritani, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 4239–4245 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Tafen and J. P. Lewis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 014104 CrossRef .
D.V. Bavykin, J. M. Friedrich and F. C. Walsh, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2807–2824 CrossRef CAS .
Z. V. Saponjic, N. M. Dimitrijevic, D. M. Tiede, A. J. Goshe, X. Zuo, L. X. Chen, A. S. Barnard, P. Zapol, L. Curtiss and T. Rajh, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 965–971 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, J. Liu, X. N. Zhao, A. D. Li, Y. F. Chen and N. B. Ming, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 547–553 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Q. Wang, W. Lu and J. H. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22029–22034 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2286–2288 CrossRef CAS .
R. Beranek, H. Tsuchiya, T. Sugishima, J. M. Macak, L. Taveira, S. Fujimoto, H. Kisch and P. Schmuki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 243114–243116 CrossRef .
C. W. Guo, Y. Cao, W. L. Dai and K. N. Fan, Chem. Lett., 2002, 588–589 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Tsai and H. Teng, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4352–4358 CrossRef CAS .
A. Riss, M. J. Elser, J. Bernardi and O. Diwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6198–6206 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Wang, F. Zhou, C. W. Wang and W. Liu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 116, 658–664 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu and D. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 73, 166–171 CrossRef CAS .
P. Umek, P. Cevc, A. Jesih, A. Gloter, C. P. Ewels and D. Arčon, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5945–5950 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yu, J. G. Yu, B. Cheng and M. H. Zhou, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 349–354 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Nian and H. Teng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4193–4198 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Mao and S. S. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8217–8226 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, H. Lin and J. B. Li, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 3564–3566 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, J. M. Friedrich, A. A. Lapkin and P. K. Plucinski, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1124–1129 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, V. N. Parmon, A. A. Lapkin and F. C. Walsh, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 3370–3377 RSC .
E. Morgado Jr, P. M. Jardim, B. A. Marinkovic, F. C. Rizzo, M. A. S. de Abreu, J. L. Zotin and A. S. Araújo, Nanotechnol., 2007, 18, 495710 CrossRef .
A. Thorne, A. Kruth, D. Tunstall, J. T. S. Irvine and W. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5439–5444 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pavasupree, Y. Suzuki, S. Yoshikawa and R. Kawahata, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 3110–3116 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suetake, A. Y. Nosaka, K. Hodouchi, H. Matsubara and Y. Nosaka, J. Phys. Chem. C,, 2008, 112, 18474–18482 CAS .
M. Qamar, C. R. Yoon, H. J. Oh, D. H. Kim, J. H. Jho, K. S. Lee, W. J. Lee, H. G. Lee and S. J. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5922–5929 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Koleńko, K. A. Kovnir, A. I. Gavrilov and A. V. Garshev, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4030–4038 CrossRef CAS .
O. P. Ferreira, A. G. Souza-Filho, J. Mendes-Filho and E. J. G. Santos, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2006, 17, 393–402 CAS .
R. Ma, T. Sasaki and Y. Bando, Chem. Commun., 2005, 948–950 RSC .
J. Kim and J. Cho, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A81–A84 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Q. Hoa, Z. Lee, S. H. Kang, V. Radmilovic and E. T. Kim1, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 122508 CrossRef .
H. Y. Zhang, T. H. Ji, L. L. Li, X. Y. Qi, Y. F. Liu and J. W. Cai, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2008, 24, 607–611 Search PubMed .
D. V. Bavykin, S. N. Gordeev, A. V. Moskalenko, A. A. Lapkin and F. C. Walsh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8565–8569 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sakai, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5851–5858 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhang, G. H. Li, Y. X. Jin, Y. Zhang and L. D. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 365, 300–304 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohsaki, N. Masaki, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and T. Okamoto, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 4157–4163 RSC .
L. Zhen, C. Y. Xu and W. S. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 4149–4152 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, M. Hirano and K. Oyamada, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1307–1311 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Khan, H. T. Jung and O. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6626–6630 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Weng, S. H. Song and S. Hodgson, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 26, 1405–1409 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Sun, X. Chen and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 4996–4998 CrossRef CAS .
E. Horváth, Á. Kukovecz, Z. Kónya and I. Kiricsi, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 927–931 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Zarate, S. Fuentes, A. L. Cabrera and V. M. Fuenzalida, J. Cryst. Growth, 2008, 310, 3630–3637 CrossRef CAS .
V. Stengl, S. Bakardjieva, J. Subrt, E. Vecernikova, L. Szatmary, M. Klementova and V. Balek, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 63, 20–30 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. Mckenzie and H. F. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12384–12385 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata and S. Yoshikawa, Chem. Lett., 2000, 942–943 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Li, Z. L. Tang and Z. T. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5848–5855 CrossRef CAS .
A. Elsanousi, E. M. Elssfah, J. Zhang, J. Lin, H. S. Song and C. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14353–14357 CrossRef CAS .
E. Morgado, M. A. S. de Abreu, G. T. Moure, B. A. Marinkovic, P. M. Jardim and A. S. Araujo, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 665–676 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yuan and B. L. Su, Colloids Surf., A, 2004, 241, 173–183 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Ou, S. L. Lo and Y. H. Liou, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 175702–175706 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Q. Z. Jiang, Z. F. Ma, M. Fu and W. F. Shangguan, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143, 343–347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. Lin and X. Xiao, Mater. Res. Bull., 2006, 41, 237–243 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Meng, D. Z. Wang, J. H. Liu and S. Y. Zhang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2004, 39, 2163–2170 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Yao, Y. F. Chan, X. Y. Zhang, W. F. Zhang, Z. Y. Yang and N. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 281–283 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Wei, Y. Konishi, H. S. Zhou, H. Sugihara, H. Arakawa and M. Ichihara, Solid State Commun., 2005, 133, 493–497 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Wen, H. Itoh, W. P. Tang and Q. Feng, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11782–11790 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2115–2119 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Tsai and H. Teng, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 3434–3438 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Hafez, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 1471–1474 CrossRef CAS .
N. Viriyaempikul, N. Sano, T. Charinpanitkul, T. Kikuchi and W. Tanthapanichakoon, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 35601–35606 CrossRef .
D. V. Bavykin, B. A. Cressey, M. E. Light and F. C. Walsh, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 275604–275605 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, Z. S. Jin, J. W. Zhang, X. Y. Guo, J. J. Yang, W. Li, X. D. Wang and Z. J. Zhang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 217, 203–210 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, L. M. Peng, Q. Chen, G. H. Du, G. Dawson and W. Z. Zhou, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 256103 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Sander, M. J. Cote, W. Gu, B. M. Kile and C. P. Tripp, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2052–2057 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Na, S. S. Kim, W. K. Hong, J. W. Park, J. Jo, Y. C. Nah, T. Lee and D. Y. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2560–2566 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Bando and K. Wada, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2001, 20, 167–170 CrossRef CAS .
L. Miao, S. Tanemura, S. Toh, K. Kaneko and M. Tanemura, J. Cryst. Growth, 2004, 264, 246–252 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Miao, D. S. Xu, J. H. Ouyang, G. Guo, X. Zhao and Y. Tang, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 717–720 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Xu, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Zhen, J. Tang and L. C. Qin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11584–11585 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Zhang, S. L. Tang, L. Zhai, J. Y. Yu, Y. G. Shi and Y. W. Du, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 887–889 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Zhang, Y. A. Wang, J. J. Yang, J. M. Chen and Z. J. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 3015–3017 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5645–5647 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tada, T. Ishida, A. Takao and S. Ito, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 7898–7900 CrossRef CAS .
V. Alt, T. Bechert, P. Steinrücke, M. Wagener, P. Seidel, E. Dingeldein, E. Domann and R. Schnettler, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 4383–4391 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6852–6864 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Chien, Y. C. Liou and M. Kuo, Synth. Met., 2005, 152, 333–336 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, D. J. Guo and H. L. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 1996–2000 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, J. Z. Sun, H. Y. Li, J. Hong and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1203–1206 RSC .
M. Hodos, E. Horvath, H. Haspel, Á. Kukovecz, Z. Kónya and I. Kiricsi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 399, 512–515 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wang, Z. D. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 5641–5646 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wang and X. G. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 1957–1962 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu and X. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2004, 87, 168–172 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chmielarz, P. trowski, M. Zbroja, A. Rafalskaasocha, B. Dudek and R. Dziembaj, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 45, 103–116 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, T. Sasaki and Y. Bando, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10382–10388 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Walsh, D. V. Bavykin, L. Torrente-Murciano, A. A. Lapkin and B. A. Cressey, Trans. Inst. Met.
Finish., 2006, 84, 293–299 Search PubMed .
D. V. Bavykin, A. A. Lapkin, P. K. Plucinski, L. Torrente-Murciano, J. M. Friedrich and F. C. Walsh, Top. Catal., 2006, 39, 151–160 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shen, K. Katayama, T. Q. S. Sawada, K. Katayama, T. Sawada, M. Yamaguchi and T. Toyoda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, 5569–5574 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shen, T. Sato, M. Hashimoto, C. Chen and T. Toyoda, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 499, 299–305 CrossRef CAS .
Á. Kukovecz, M. Hodos, Z. Kónya and I. Kiricsi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 411, 445–449 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Chong, N. Suresh, J. Xia, N. Al-Salim and H. Idriss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10389–10393 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Zhu, X. P. Gao, Y. Lan, D. Song, Y. Xi and J. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8380–8381 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yu, C. Bei and J. G. Yu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 253, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 191–195 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takabayashi, R. Nakamura and Y. Nakato, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 166, 107–113 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Sides and C. R. Martin, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 125–128 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zak, Y. Feldman, V. Lyakhovitskaya, G. Leitus, R. Popovitz-Biro, E. Wachtel, H. Cohen, S. Reich and R. Tenne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4747–4758 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sugimoto, O. Terabayashi, Y. Murakami and Y. Takasu, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 3814–3818 RSC .
G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19921–19931 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, A. A. Lapkin, P. K. Plucinski, J. M. Friedrich and F. C. Walsh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19422–19427 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lim, J. Z. Luo, Z. Y. Zhong, W. Ji and J. Y. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4124–4126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Granqvist, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1789–1803 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Dong, T. R. Zhang, J. Epstein, L. Cooney, H. Wang, Y. B. Li, Y. B. Jiang, A. Cogbill, V. Varadan and Z. R. Tian, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4454–4459 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Li, X. Z. Li and M. F. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 48, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, H. Yu, B. Cheng and C. Trapalis, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 249, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. J. Park and S. S. Wong, J. Mater. Res., 2006, 21, 2941–2947 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Zhang, J. H. Pan, A. J. Du, W. J. Fu, D. D. Sun and J. O. Leckie, Water Res., 2009, 43, 1179–1186 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Wang, G. J. Du, H. Liu, D. Liu, S. B. Qin, N. Wang, C. G. Hu, X. T. Tao, J. Jiao, J. Y. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1131–1137 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Mahmoodi, M. Arami, N. Y. Limaee and N. S. Tabrizi, Chem. Eng. J., 2005, 112, 191–196 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Jang, S. H. Choi, D. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, K. S. Lee and J. S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8990–8996 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yu, J. G. Yu, B. Cheng and J. Lin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 147, 581–587 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, S. Ciston, Z. V. Saponjic, L. Chen and N. M. Dimitrijevic, J. Catal., 2008, 253, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Ou, C. H. Liao, Y. H. Liou, J. H. Hong and S. L. Lo, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4507–4512 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, S. R. Castleberry, M. A. Nanny and E. C. Butler, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 3784–3791 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, A. A. Lapkin, P. K. Plucinski, J. M. Friedrich and F. C. Walsh, J. Catal., 2005, 235, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Dong, A. Cogbill, T. R. Zhang, S. Ghosh and Z. R. Tian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16819–16822 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Zhou, D. L. Li, M. Hibino and I. Honma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 797–802 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Xu, C. H. Jia, B. Cao and W. F. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 8044–8047 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 501–506 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. R. Li, L. P. An, T. Y. Yan, X. P. Gao and H. Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6143–6148 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales, R. Garcia and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 862–865 CrossRef .
X. Gao, H. Zhu, G. Pan, S. Ye, Y. Lan, F. Wu and D. Song, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2868–2872 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. H. Wen and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2141–2146 CrossRef CAS .
G. Armstrong, A. R. Armstrong, J. Canales and P. G. Bruce, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2454–2456 RSC .
J. Li, Z. Tang and Z. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 62–67 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, M. Kalbac, M. Zukalova, I. Exnar, V. Lorenzen, R. Nesper and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 477–485 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, E. V. Milsom, F. Marken, D. H. Kim, D. H. Marsh, D. J. Riley, F. C. Walsh, K. H. El-Abiary and A. A. Lapkin, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1050–1058 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Liu, H. S. Zhou, I. Honma and M. Ichihara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 253112 CrossRef .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Xu, Y. A. Shaban, W. B. Ingler and S. Khan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 938–943 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Tsai and H. Teng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 4912–4918 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Kuo, C. Y. Kuo, C. H. Liu, J. H. Chao and C. H. Lin, Catal. Lett., 2007, 113, 7–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jitputti, Y. Suzuki and S. Yoshikawa, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 1265–1271 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Dillon, K. M. Jones, T. A. Bekkedahl, C. H. Kiang, D. S. Bethune and M. J. Heben, Nature, 1997, 386, 377–379 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Y. Bando and H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7672–7673 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, S. L. Li and Z. L. Tao, J. Alloys Comput., 2003, 413, 356–357 Search PubMed .
M. Adachi, J. Jiu and S. Isoda, Curr. Nanosci., 2007, 3, 285–295 Search PubMed .
V. Thavasi, G. Singh and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 205–221 RSC .
J. E. Boercker and E. Enache-Pommer, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 095604 CrossRef  (10pp).
M. Wei, Y. Konishi, H. Zhou, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1232–1236 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata and I. Okada, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, G488–488 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata, J. Takao, J. T. Jiu, M. Sakamoto and F. M. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 126, 14943–14949 CAS .
W. L. Wang, H. Lin, J. B. Li and N. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 628–631 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Parak, D. Gerion, T. Pellegrino, Zanchet, C. Micheel, S. C. Williams, R. Boudreau, M. A. LeGros, C. A. Larabell and P. A. Alivisatos, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, R15–27 CAS .
W. Zheng, Y. F. Zheng, K. W. Jin and N. Wang, Talanta, 2008, 74, 1414–1419 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, M. Wei, I. Honma and H. S. Zhou, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 8068–8074 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Brammer, S. Oh, J. O. Gallagher and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 786–793 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sasaki, K. Asanuma, K. Johkura, T. Kasuga, Y. Okouchi, N. Ogiwara, S. Kubota, R. Teng, L. Cui and X. Zhao, Ann. Anat., 2006, 188, 137–142 Search PubMed .
J. Goldberger, R. He, Y. Zhang, S. Lee, H. Yan, H. J. Choi and P. Yang, Nature, 2003, 422, 599–602 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1294–1296 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tokudome and M. Miyauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1974–1977 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, X. Liu and L. Kong, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2007, 87, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Wang, X. P. Gao and G. R. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5384–5389 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Xu, X. Ding and Q. Chen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 165403–165405 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, Q. Gao and Z. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 3803–3808 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Weijia Zhou	Weijia Zhou obtained his M.Sc. from Shandong Institute of Light Industry, China, in 2009. Currently he is pursuing his Ph.D. degree under the supervision of Prof. Hong Liu and Prof. Jiyang Wang in State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, China. His research interest in his Ph.D. study is mainly focused on the preparation and modifications of one-dimensional Ti–O based nanomaterials for photocatalysis applications.
Hong Liu	Dr Hong Liu received his B.Sc degree from Shandong Institute of Light Industry in 1985, and his Ph.D. degree from Shandong University in 2001. He is a professor in State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, China. His research interests are related to synthesis of nanomaterials, the application of nanomaterials in gas and biosensors, environmental protection, and new energy sources.
Robert I. Boughton	Dr Robert I. Boughton is a Professor and Chair at Department of Physics and Astronomy at Bowling Green State University at Bowling Green. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in physics from Ohio State University in 1968. His current research involves low temperature electrical, magnetic and thermoelectric properties of pure metals and superconductors; numerical simulation of electron transport properties in metals; and physics education.
Jiyang Wang	Mr Jiyang Wang is a Professor, of State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, at Shandong University, China. His research interests focus on the research of functional single crystal growth, property and its application, especially for laser and nonlinear optical crystals. He has published more than 200 papers on international journals, and 30 patents.

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of transformation of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures.54	 

Hydrothermal treatment at 130 °C for 24 h	TiO2	Nanotubes: the tube size ranges between 10 and 30 nm	400	
61

Hydrothermal treatment at 107 °C for 48 h and acidic treatment	H2Ti3O7	Nanotubes: scrolled up hollow structures with inner diameter of 4 nm, outer diameter of 12 nm, and lengths of about 100 nm	280	
62

Hydrothermal treatment at 107 °C for 48 h	Na2Ti3O7	Nanowires: widths of about 50–100 nm and lengths up to micrometres	130	
62

Hydrothermal treatment at 180 °C for 24 h and annealed at different temperatures	TiO2	Nanobelts: the mesoporous nanobelts with the average pore size of 9.07 nm and smooth surface	38.0 and 27.7	
63

Hydrothermal treatment at 200 °C for 36 h and HNO3 post-treatment at 180 °C for 24 h, pH = 7	H2Ti3O7 and TiO2	H2Ti3O7 nanofibers: 40–300 nm in thickness, tens of micrometres in length; TiO2 nanorods: porous rod-like structure	34.1 and 47.0	
64

Hydrothermal treatment at 200 °C for 48 h and hydrothermal post-treatment at 150 °C for 24 h.	H2Ti3O7 and TiO2	Belt-like structure for H2Ti3O7 and rod-like morphology for TiO2	18.3 and 61.6	
66


 	Fig. 2  Different morphologies of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures: (A) TiO2 nanotubes,89 (B) Na2Ti3O7 nanotubes,90 (C) Na2Ti3O7 nanobelts,91 (D) K2Ti8O17 nanobelts,91 (E) H2Ti3O7 nanowires92 and (F) Na2Ti3O7 nanorods.94	 

TiO2 nanotubes	Hydrothermal treatment at 175 °C for 48 h with pH values of 5.6	Nanorods: about 20 × 120 nm.	
67

Natural rutile sand	Hydrothermal treatment at 150 °C for 72 h	Nanofibers: length of tens of mm to more than 100 mm	
74

Amorphous TiO2	Hydrothermal treatment at 100–160 °C for 48 h	Nanofibers: non-tubular needle-shaped fibers, thickness of 5–30 nm and length of a few tens to several hundreds of micrometres	
100

Brookite nanocrystallites	Hydrothermal treatment at 180 °C for more than 12 days	Nanowires: average diameter of 75 nm with lengths up to several micrometres	
104

Titanate nanosheets	Colloidal hydrated Ti0.91O2 nanosheets are poured into NaOH aqueous solution for overnight under stirring.	Nanotubes: apparently with hollow core, straight or conical.	
108


 	Fig. 3  Schematic drawings depicting the formation process of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures: (A) schematic models showing the effect of the alkali environment and the cleavage of the surface layer due to hydrogen deficiency on the surface of H2Ti3O7. White balls: H; black balls: O; gray balls: Na.114 (B) schematic drawings depicting the formation process of H2Ti3O7 nanotubes and nanowires: (a) Lamellar structures grown on the edges of TiO2 particles. (b) Splitting of lamellar structures into nanosheets between (100) planes. (c) Wrapping of nanosheets into nanotubes; (d) Thick layers or wires formed after prolonged reaction at elevated temperature. (e) Splitting of these thick layers or wires between (100) and (010) planes. (d) Further splitting to form thin nanowires.56	 

Sol–gel	an unconstrained solution growth route by hydrolyzing TiF4 under acidic conditions at 60 °C, anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) templates and Al2O3 nanoparticles as initial nucleation sites	TiO2 nanotubes: the diameters of the inner tubes are 2.5–5 nm, the diameters of the outer tubes are 20–40 nm; lengths of up to a few hundred nanometres	
30

Electrochemical method	cathodically induced sol–gel within the pores of an anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) template	TiO2 nanowires: uniform diameter of about 40 nm; lengths of 2–10 μm	
119

Molten salt method	one-step solid-state chemical reaction: KCl and TiO2 nanoparticles as starting materials; then mixture is annealed at 950 °C for 3 h	K2Ti6O13 nanobelts: 100–300 nm in diameter and 10–50 μm in length	
121

Microwave method	KOH and TiO2 mixed with alkali solution in PTFE vessel, reacting for 6 h microwave oven	K2Ti6O13 nanowires: average diameter of about 10 nm and length ranging from hundreds of nanometres up to tens of micrometres	
122


Au/TNTs	Deposition–precipitation method	TiO2 Nanotubes: uniform outer diameters of around 8–10 nm; inner diameter of around 6 nm; lengths range from several tens to several hundreds of nanometres.	much higher WGS activity by 15–20% than that of a conventional Au/Al2O3	
39

Au: about 5 nm nanoparticles
Ag/TNTs	Photoreduction method	TiO2 Nanotubes: 250 nm long with a diameter of 20 nm	effective bactericidal activity at higher concentrations	
45

Ag: about 20 nm nanoparticles
Pd/TNTs	Reduction method	TiO2 Nanotubes: outer diameter of about 15 nm and inner diameter of the nanotube of 10 nm	better activity for methanol oxidation than that of TiO2 nanoparticles and pure Pd	
128

Pd: 3wt (%)
CdS/TNTs	Ion-exchange and precipitation method	TiO2 Nanotubes: 150–200 nm long, 8–10 nm wide; hollow inner pore with open tube ends	trititanate/CdS nanotube system active in photooxidation reaction	
129

CdS: evenly distributed spherical CdS nanoparticles of about 6 nm
RuO2/TNTs	Precipitation method	TiO2 Nanotubes: outer diameter of 20–30 nm; inner diameter of 10–15 nm; length of about 1 μm.	good electrochemical capacitance performance (0–1.4V); high energy density of 12.5Wh/kg (150W kg−1); good cycling performance(90%, 1000 cycles).	
131

RuO2: unobserved
VOx/titanate-CNRs	Mix-Hydrothermal method	VOx/titanate-CNRs nanorods: length of 10 to 20 μm; diameter of 100 to 300 nm	better electrochemical capacitance performance than pure V2O5	
133

VOx: unobserved

 	Fig. 4  Morphological properties of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructures modified by metals Q-dots. (A) Ag/mesoporous TiO2 nanobelts and (B) Ag/H2Ti3O7 nanobelts,63 (C) Ag/TiO2 nanotubes and (D) Au/TiO2 nanotubes,135 (E) Pd/TiO2 nanotubes136 and (F) Pt/TiO2 nanotubes.137	 

 	Fig. 5  Morphological properties of one-dimensional single-crystalline Ti–O based nanostructure modified by semiconductors with narrow band gaps. (A) CdS/TiO2 nanowires,129 (B) CdS/TiO2 nanotubes,140 (C) CdSSe/TiO2 nanobelts,141 (D) ZnO/H2Ti5O11·H2O nanobelts and (E) ZnO/TiO2 nanobelts38 and (F) TiO2/titanate nanorods.143	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
