Towards environmentally benign approaches for the synthesis of CZTSSe nanocrystals by a hot injection method: a status review  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CC03176H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CC03176H
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11258-11273Towards environmentally benign approaches for the synthesis of CZTSSe nanocrystals by a hot injection method: a status review

        
          
            Uma 
            Ghorpade
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mahesh 
            Suryawanshi
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Seung Wook 
            Shin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kishor 
            Gurav
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pramod 
            Patil
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sambhaji 
            Pawar
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Chang Woo 
            Hong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jin Hyeok 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Sanjay 
            Kolekar
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, South Korea. E-mail: jinhyeok@chonnam.ac.kr
bAnalytical Chemistry and Material Science Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Shivaji University, Kolhapur 416-004, MH, India. E-mail: sskolekar@gmail.com
cThin Film Nanomaterials Laboratory, Department of Physics, Shivaji University, Kolhapur 416-004, MH, India
dDivision of Physics & Semiconductor Science, Dongguk University, Seoul, South Korea
Received 
      29th April 2014
    , Accepted 12th June 2014First published on 12th June 2014AbstractWith the earth's abundance of kesterite, recent progress in chalcogenide based Cu2ZnSn(Sx,Se1−x)4 (CZTSSe) thin films has drawn prime attention in thin film solar cells (TFSCs) research and development. This review is focused on the current developments in the synthesis of CZTS nanocrystals (NCs) using a hot injection (HI) technique and provides comprehensive discussions on the current status of CZTSSe TFSCs. This article begins with a description of the advantages of nanoparticulate based thin films, and then introduces the basics of this technique and the corresponding growth mechanism is also discussed. A brief overview further addresses a series of investigations on the developments in the HI based CZTSSe NCs using different solvents in terms of their high toxicity to environmentally benign materials. A variety of recipes and techniques for the NCs ink formulation and thereby the preparation of absorber layers using NC inks are outlined, respectively. The deposition of precursor thin films, post-deposition processes such as sulfurization or selenization treatments and the fabrication of CZTSSe NCs based solar cells and their performances are discussed. Finally, we discussed concluding remarks and the perspectives for further developments in the existing research on CZTSSe based nanoparticulate (NP) TFSCs towards future green technology.
Uma Ghorpade
Uma Ghorpade obtained her MSc degree in Inorganic Chemistry from Shivaji University, India (2010). She has been pursuing her PhD degree in Chemistry at Shivaji University under the guidance of Dr S. S. Kolekar since June 2012. Currently, she is working as an exchange student for her PhD degree at Chonnam National University, South Korea, under the supervision of Prof. Jin Hyeok Kim. She has been selected as a DST-INSPIRE research fellow, India. Her research interests include the solution-based synthesis of CZTS nanocrystals and thin films for solar cell applications.
Mahesh Suryawanshi
Mahesh Suryawanshi obtained his MSc degree from Shivaji University, India (2010). He has been pursuing his PhD degree in Physics at Shivaji University under the supervision of Dr A. V. Moholkar since 2011. Currently, he is working as an exchange student for his PhD degree at Chonnam National University, South Korea, under the supervision of Prof. Jin Hyeok Kim. His research interests include the synthesis of CZTS thin films by the chemical layer-by-layer technique as well as synthesis of CZTS nanocrystals using the hot-injection technique and their applications in thin film solar cells.
Seung Wook Shin
Dr Seung Wook received his MSc degree from Chonnam National University, South Korea. He received his PhD in 2014 under the supervision of Prof. J. Y. Lee from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). His research interests include electrodeposition and synthesis of NCs, thin film solar cell related materials (Cd-free buffer materials and wide band gap ZnO-based TCO materials), and their application in solar cells. He has been selected as a post doctorate in University of Minnesota under the supervision of Prof. E. Aydil.
Kishor Gurav
Kishor Gurav received his PhD in 2010 from Department of Physics, Shivaji University, India. He is currently working as a post-doctoral researcher in Chonnam National University, S. Korea. His research interests include synthesis of CZTS films by chemical methods for thin film solar cells, and synthesis of metal oxides for sensors and supercapacitors.
Jin Hyeok Kim
Prof. Jin Hyeok Kim received his PhD in 1996. He is currently a professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Chonnam National University, South Korea. He has been continuously engaged in the research field for more than last 20 years. His research interests include the fabrication and characterization of compound thin film solar cells, especially Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 thin films, using various methods, such as sputtering, electro-deposition, sol–gel, nanoparticles. He is also trying to study the synthesis of thin films of metal-chalcogenides and metal-oxides by physical, chemical, electrochemical methods and their applications in TCO, gas sensors, energy storage devices, etc.
Sanjay Kolekar
Sanjay Kolekar’s research interests include solid state and dye sensitized solar cells, designing and applications of ionic liquids in material sciences, nanomaterials and separation science. He has been honoured with the best teacher award at home university, and his research work is recognized by World Gold Council. His papers are cited as most read and downloaded articles. He is an investigator of many research schemes funded by national funding agencies in India. He is a member of the panel of referees of journals published by ACS, Elsevier, Springer, Wiley etc. He is a visiting Professor at Universities in South Korea.
1. Introduction
Thin film solar cells (TFSCs) technology based on the materials such as CdTe and Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) has achieved the highest power conversion efficiencies (PCE) beyond 16% and 20%, respectively, which has been transferred to industrial production.1,2 However, the scarcity of In and Ga and toxicity of Cd element hamper the mass production of these materials. Hence, there is a need to identify thin film materials that are composed of earth abundant and less toxic elements, while still providing reasonable device performance, in order to enable universal deployment of TFSCs technology to meet the ever-growing worldwide energy thirst.3
Cu2ZnSn(Sx,Se1−x)4 (CZTSSe) is an earth abundant and environmentally benign material with a high absorption coefficient of over 104 cm−1 and affords the direct and suitable band gap that ranges from 1.0–1.5 eV, which is the optimum value for TFSCs applications.4,5 Reportedly, numerous vacuum and non-vacuum based synthetic techniques have been employed for the preparation of CZTSSe thin films.6 The pioneering work on CZTS TFSCs by Katagiri et al. reported the PCE of 0.66% for the vacuum based evaporation technique.7 Furthermore, the systematic development in this process results in an improvement in the PCE up to 10.8% in the Solar Frontier Industry.8 Other notable results include the PCE of 8.4% using CZTS by thermal evaporation and 9.15% using CZTSe by co-evaporation,9,10 whereas the PCE of 4.13% using CZTS TFSCs was observed by sulfurization of pulsed laser deposited precursor thin films.11 However, these vacuum based techniques have some drawbacks such as high equipment cost, vacuum requirement, low throughput, complicated equipment structure, and most notably, the formation of secondary phases during the deposition processes.12–15
To overcome these drawbacks and to improve the PCE of the TFSCs, many groups have employed non-vacuum based techniques. Non-vacuum approaches offer high-throughput equipment, low wastage of raw materials, high uniformity of layer properties over large area and finally, potential deployment of large-scale production with low capital investment.16–19 The different solution based techniques, such as solvothermal,20–23 precipitation,24–26 hydrothermal27–29 and microwave assisted process (MW),30–32 have been reported for the synthesis of CZTS NCs. However, several issues, which need to be addressed, are associated with these techniques. The results have shown that the as-prepared CZTS NCs using the MW process have poor crystallinity and require further selenization or sulfurization to improve the crystallinity. The major shortcoming of hydrothermal and solvothermal methods is the lack of good control over particle size, morphology and monodispersity of the products, long processing time, requirement of high spontaneous pressure and low dispersibility. The synthesized CZTS NCs using these approaches have poor crystallinity, deviation from the composition and wide particle size distribution. With such wide particle size distribution of CZTS NCs, it is difficult to deposit the uniform and dense films without any voids or cracks using the NCs based ink. Among all these solution based approaches, nanoparticulate based methods were reported to achieve a maximum PCE of 10.2%.33 However, hydrazine based solution approaches have shown the highest PCE of 12.6% for CZTSSe TFSCs.34 The use of such hazardous, more reactive, unstable and explosive solvent requires extreme caution during handling and storage and the reaction must be performed under inert atmospheric conditions, which would not be easily adoptable for large-scale solar cell fabrication.
One approach to low-cost photovoltaic (PV) technology is to deposit the light absorbing semiconductor layer using a NCs ink. The ink can be formulated over a wide range of chemical compositions and tunable characteristics, and deposited onto large substrate areas using high throughput printing processes.35 The NPTFSCs using NCs ink have opened up a new option to acquire higher PCE, covering the broadband spectral range of solar radiation. Among the number of reviews, recently, Yang et al. described the different aspects and also synthetic methods, based on the CZTSSe NCs.36–39 With these considerations, it is highly anticipated to develop a robust, easily scalable and environmentally benign solution-based process for the fabrication of high quality CZTS NCs based absorber layers. A new method for scaling up the industrial production of NPTFSCs based on CZTSSe from NCs “ink” is a printable solution approach i.e. the hot injection (HI) technique. The synthesized NCs using this technique not only share the characteristics of the solution process but also colloidal NCs synthesis with better air and thermal stability. The device efficiencies have already reached up to 9.0% and 9.4% for CZTSSe and CZTGeSSe NCs based NPTFSCs, respectively.40,41
This review highlights recent progress towards the green synthetic media to reduce the use of toxic solvents in the development of CZTS TFSCs based NCs using the HI technique, along with their nucleation and growth mechanism. Following this we briefly review the synthetic path of CZTSSe NCs based on this method to study their structural, morphological and optical properties. Furthermore, we have discussed the fabrication of solar cells and their performance in terms of various solar cell parameters. Finally, we have presented the challenges and perspectives of CZTS NPTFSCs based on the HI approach.
2. General properties and crystal structures of CZTS/CZTSSe
The quaternary CZTS semiconductor compound has emerged as one of the promising candidates to further advance the future PV technology to its full potential. Consisting solely of earth abundant, non-toxic and inexpensive elements, it opens the door for both low cost and ecological green TFSCs fabrication without limitations from raw elements. It is found that the abundance of Zn and Sn in earth's crust is 1500 times and 45 times greater than that of In, respectively, and the price of In is almost two orders of magnitude higher than that of Zn and Sn. The earth contents of these elements have been shown in Fig. 1.42
 Fig. 1  Natural abundance of elements used in absorber layers for CdTe, CIGS, CIS and CZTS based TFSCs. 
2.1 Crystal structures
The bulk CZTSSe semiconductor has different crystal structures such as stannite, kesterite and wurtzite.43–45 The structure of the CZTS derived from the structure of CuInS2 (CIS) by replacing two In atoms with one Zn and one Sn. Kesterite CZTS has the space group I whereas stannite structure has I2m derived from the ternary chalcopyrite structure. In the kesterite structure, one of the Cu atoms occupies the 2a position; Zn and the remaining Cu are ordered at 2d and 2c with Madelung potentials of 15.04 V, 21.88 V and 15.21 V, respectively.
In the stannite structure both Cu atoms occupy the 4d position and Zn is at 2a and their corresponding Madelung potentials are 15.30 V and 21.62 V. Sn is located at 2b in both the structures The Madelung potentials are 35.04 V for kesterite and 34.95 V for stannite. The difference between kesterite CZTS and stannite CZTS crystals lies in a different order of the cation sub-lattice (Fig. 2). Thermodynamically, the kesterite structure has a lower energy and is more stable than the stannite structure, which was confirmed by the Madelung potentials.46
 Fig. 2  The schematic representation of kesterite and stannite structures. 
2.2 Optical properties
The CZTS semiconductor offers wide-range absorption with a high absorption coefficient and tunable band gap energy. NCs possess a variety of parameters that can regulate their electronic band gaps including size, shape and composition. The quantum confinement is the property which can shift the band gap energy of these semiconductors towards lower energy and gives an immense range of tuning, through size and shape for a single material composition.47 The band gap energy of materials can also tune through alloying e.g. CZTGeSSe. The linear change in the band gap occurs through S/(S + Se) and Ge/(Sn + Ge) tuning.74,83 Riha et al. have reported the composition dependence of the electrical conductivity which increases as a function of Se concentration.75 Se is a better vapor-transport agent than S, which causes a dramatic effect on grain growth forming densely packed grains. Large grains benefit device performance because of the less opportunity for recombination of photogenerated carriers at the grain boundaries. The grain boundaries are passivated by Se-rich surfaces, resulting in a lower band gap surface layer, hence removing potential barriers for grain-to-grain carrier transport. Se supply enhances not only the growth but also the crystallinity of nanocrystals with increased lattice parameters. Fe and Cr are also used to dope CZTS, which showed the suitable band gap energy for better solar performance.48,49 Alloying is nothing but the impurity doping which creates an extra energy level steering lower band gap which leads to the multiexciton generation and efficient charge carrier separation promoting better CZTSSe based PV applications.50
2.3 Electrical properties
Unlike silicon, where either atom of phosphorus or boron is intentionally doped to produce n-type and p-type semiconductors, respectively, CZTS is self-doped through the formation of intrinsic, interstitial and antisite defects.51 These defects could form during the growth of CZTS. The observed p-type conductivity of CZTS is due to the low, often negative formation energy of CuZn antisite defects. This produces a deep donor level in the band gap of CZTS and causes significant band gap energy decrease which explains why CZTS thin films must be Cu-poor and Zn-rich to successfully fabricate efficient CZTS TFSCs. According to Kodigala et al., the CZTS thin film shows different electrical properties on different substrates.52 On soda lime glass, it showed lower carrier concentration and Hall mobility, however, the same film on a highly resistive substrate showed higher values due to the addition of foreign atoms from the substrate to the film. Unlike the electrodeposited CZTS thin film, the E-beam technique showed higher carrier concentration and Hall mobility. Furthermore, Xinkun et al. reported that the CZTS thin films possess a carrier concentration, a resistivity and a mobility of 6.98 × 1016 cm3, 6.96 Ω cm, and 12.9 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, for the Cu/(Zn + Sn) and Zn/Sn ratios of 0.83 and 1.15.53 Along with these, various parameters including annealing time, dispersion mechanism as well as deficiency and enrichment of elements etc. strongly affect the electrical properties of the absorber layer.54–56
3. An overview of the hot injection technique
In 1993, Murray et al. for the first time reported a HI as a synthetic method for cadmium chalcogenide NCs.57 Immediately after this pioneering report, this technique was extended to the synthesis of a variety of NCs comprising different types of metal oxides, semiconductor NCs, etc.58–61 This synthesis route is a well-established technique for the synthesis of high quality NCs. It is a simple, rapid promising technique and can be used for a large scale synthesis. It exhibits size dependent properties and offers uniform, monodispersive NCs formation. It not only provides control over composition, phase formation and morphology, but also enables cheap and scalable fabrication of solar cells. It also offers ultrahigh throughput film fabrication on an appropriate substrate, which empowers this approach for terawatt capacity module production. Since the material properties can be finely tuned by varying the size and shape, high control over the synthesis using such systems is a key factor for the future high efficient NPTFSCs.
Moreover, other solution based techniques such as the hydrazine solution process, the molecular solution process and mixed solution/particle slurries require one or more solid state reactions to take place for the stable phase formation. The CZTS films could lead to the formation of a stable quaternary phase along with the binary and ternary phases due to the difficulty in diffusion during the solid state reaction. In contrast, the HI technique allows greater diffusion of precursor constituents as it occurs in the liquid phase in a carefully well-controlled atmosphere to reach the thermodynamically stable phase. More importantly, it is the only technique among the solution processed CZTS NCs approaches that enables stable phase formation to occur with well-controlled composition prior to film deposition. Thus, the HI organometallic synthesis method proved to be highly versatile and was adapted to prepare other NCs compounds of II–VI, IV–VI, and III–V semiconductors.62 Facilitated by the abovementioned characteristics of the HI technique, research on CZTS NCs has made tremendous progress since the first reported synthesis of CZTS NCs in 2009.
3.1 Formation mechanisms for NCs
The hypothesis behind the HI technique is described by the nucleation and growth mechanism. The theory based on this formation mechanism explains how the HI technique is useful for producing superior quality NCs.63 Different parameters including precursor concentration, the type of ligand, the molar ratio of the precursor to the capping ligand, reaction temperature and time as well as precursor reactivity affect the nucleation and growth process.64a The reaction and decomposition of the precursor during monomer formation directly affect the monomer concentration. The higher monomer concentration leads to fast nucleation, which results in the formation of a large amount of smaller nuclei, whereas low monomer concentration speeds up the nucleation process leading to larger nuclei which influences the large size distribution generating polydispersity in NCs. Shape controlled synthesis of semiconductor NCs is also affected by the monomer concentration.64b Hence, to form a supersaturated solution instantly after injection, the reactivity of the precursor plays an important role. Likewise, the ligand caps the surface of NCs and prevents them from aggregating and protects them from oxidation, which leads to higher dispersibility in different organic solvents and allows great adhesion of NCs ink on the substrate.
3.2 Nucleation
The formation of NCs by the HI method obeys the Oswald Ripening principle.65 According to this principle, dissolution of small crystals and the re-deposition of the dissolved species on the surfaces of larger crystals take place following the nucleation and growth. The smaller crystals act as fuel for the growth of bigger crystals. The synthesis begins with the rapid injection of cold reactive precursor solution into a hot coordinating organic solvent, causing the formation of nuclei. Due to the drop in the solvent temperature, the formation of new nuclei ceased and the system contains relatively monodispersive nuclei with a slow growth at a particular temperature.
HI leads to instantaneous nucleation, quenched by fast cooling of the reaction mixture and the nucleation burst causes the super-saturation of NCs.64c Furthermore the growth of nuclei into larger NCs occurs at a lower temperature, such that new nucleation events do not occur. The polydispersibility in the initial size of the seeds just after nucleation can be remarkably small during the growth process.66 It means that there are enough free precursors for the further growth of the nuclei into larger NCs in the second stage. The size and concentration of the nuclei and the growing NCs are usually estimated from optical absorption measurements.
3.3 Growth mechanism
The mechanism suggests that the concentration of nuclei increases rapidly after injection of a precursor, rising above the saturation concentration within a minimum time. The NCs grow rapidly with the burst of nucleation forming a large number of nuclei and lower the concentration below the nucleation level whilst allowing the NCs to grow further, thus separating the nucleation and growth in time. A number of theories such as surface energy theory, diffusion theory, adsorption layer theory, and screw dislocation theory have been proposed to analyse the concept of particle growth.67
Nucleation occurs over some time with constant monomer concentration. Eventually the surface growth of particles begins to occur which decreases the monomer concentration. When the monomer concentration falls below the critical level, the nucleation ends. Thus the solution is initially not in thermodynamic equilibrium, a mechanism that allows the formation of larger particles at the cost of smaller particles which reduces the surface energy and tends towards equilibrium which plays a key role in the growth of NCs. Shape control of the NCs can be achieved by the manipulation of the growth kinetics.64d The nucleation and growth mechanism has been graphically illustrated in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  The schematic representation of the nucleation and growth mechanism of synthesis of CZTS based NCs by the HI technique. 
To summarize, the sudden induction of high initial super-saturation provides the kinetic driving force required for burst nucleation and subsequent size focusing i.e. growth occurs in the hot-injection technique. Many groups in the literature reported elsewhere have explained important theoretical aspects of the nucleation and growth of NCs.64e–h
4. Development of CZTSSe NCs using the hot-injection technique
Organic solvents are used in huge amounts in many industrial and daily life applications but unfortunately the majority of them are often labelled as toxic or hazardous substances and many of them are not at all environmentally acceptable in the context of green synthesis. For this reason, it is necessary to develop a substantial route towards more benign solvents for the synthesis of CZTSSe TFSCs.
CZTSSe based NCs synthesis has developed along different approaches, including the direct single step synthesis of colloidal quaternary CZTS/CZTSe NCs, the synthesis of CZTSSe thin films using binary and ternary colloidal NCs and the synthesis of CZTSSe based NCs using alloying with Ge or defect passivation with Na. The general synthesis process of CZTSSe NCs involves the careful choice of Cu, Zn and Sn based compound precursors, being dissolved, and complexes with long chain coordinating solvents followed by the nucleation and controlled growth after injecting a sulfur or a selenium source at desired temperature.
The metal chloride, acetate and acetylacetonate precursor compounds are effective as reported previously for HI synthesis of CZTS based NCs. The most widely used coordinating solvent is oleylamine (OLA) with high boiling point (∼364 °C) and high coordinating capability, meanwhile oleic acid (OA), trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) and octadecene (ODE) are also used occasionally. The elemental sulfur dissolved in OLA is used as a sulfur source; while thiourea, dodecanethiol (1-DDT) and tert-dodecyl mercaptan (t-DDT) can also be used to provide sulfur species, which also controls the crystal growth as well. The detailed experimental conditions have been elucidated in Table 1.
Table 1 Summarized experimental conditions and results of reported CZTS-based NCs




Precursor/solvent
Injection temp. (°C)
Reaction temp. & time
Band gap (eV)
Size (nm)
Phase
Composition
Ref.




Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac)2, Sn bis(acac)2, S powder, OLA
225
225 °C for 30 min
1.5
15–25
Kesterite
Cu2.12Zn0.84Sn1.06S4

69



Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac2), Sn bis(acac)2, S powder, OLA
225
225 °C for 30 min
1.05
15–25
Kesterite
Cu1.31Zn0.91Sn0.95S4

70



Cu(OAc)2, ZnCl2, SnCl2, Se, OLA
150
240 °C for 2 h
1.52
17
Tetragonal
Cu2Zn0.84Sn1.24Se4.08

71



CuCl2·2H2O, ZnCl2, SnCl2·2H2O, thiourea, OLA
235
235 °C for 30 min
1.52
22.5 × 13.9
Kesterite
—

72



Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, SnCl2, S powder, OLA
130
240–280 °C
1.5
8–16
Kesterite & wurtzite
Cu2Zn1.02Sn1.12S3.66

73



CuCl2, SnCl4, ZnCl2, TOPO, OLA
CTS = 260 SnS = 220ZnS = 170
CTS = 260 °C for 2 min SnS = 220 °C for 5 minZnS = 320 °C for 75 min
1.1
CTS = 5 SnS = 10ZnS = 10
Tetragonal
Cu1.7Zn1.2SnS0.6Se5.0

90



Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc)2, S powder, TOPO, OLA
300
300 °C for 75 min
1.5
12.8
Tetragonal
Cu2ZnSnS4

74



Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc)2, S and Se powder, TOPO, OLA, NaBH4
325
325 °C for 45 min
1.54–1.47
7.8 to 11.0
Kesterite
For x = 1 Cu1.9:Zn1.1:Sn1.0:Se4.0

75



Cu(AcAc)2, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc)2, S powder, TPP, OLA
300
300 °C for 0.5 h
1.47
14.5 ± 4.6
Kesterite
Cu1.78Zn1.34Sn1S3.8

76



CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl2, DDT, OLA, OA
240
240 °C for 1 h
1.4

Nanoprism-28
Nanoplates-14

Wurtzite
Cu2ZnSnS4

78



Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc), S powder, TOPO, ODE, 1-DDT, t-DDT
150–160
240–260 °C for 15–30 min
1.43
Nanorods (11 × 35)
Wurtzite
Cu2ZnSnS4

79



CuCl, ZnCl2, SnCl4, HDA, TOPSe, ODE
295
295 °C for 5 min
∼1.0
20.0
Stannite
—




Cu stearate, Sn stearates, thiourea, Se powder, OLA, ODE
270
270 °C for 1 h
1.0 to 1.5
Diameter 11–13
Kesterite and stannite
Cu2.03Zn0.83Sn0.96S4.16 Cu2.28Zn1.13Sn0.91S4.10

80



CuCl2·2H2O, Zn(OAc)2H2O, SnCl2·2H2O, TEG, ODE, ODA
220
220 °C for 1 h
1.5
6.5
Kesterite
Cu2.73Zn0.6Sn1.14S3.86

82



Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac)2, GeCl4, Sn(acac)2, OLA
160
280 °C for 1 h
1.65
∼5–30
Kesterite
—

83



CuI, Zn(OAc)2, SnCl4, GeCl4, Se powder, OLA
290
—
1.33–1.63
∼15.4
Tetragonal
Cu2.02Zn1.12Sn1.03S3.91

84



Cu (acac)2, Zn(acac)2, Sn bis(acac)2Br2, GeCl4, S powder, OLA
225
225 °C for 30 min
1.09
5–15
Kesterite
Cu1.64Zn1.25Sn0.75Ge0.25S4

85



Cu (acac)2, Zn(acac)2, Sn bis(acac)Br2, GeI4, S powder, OLA
225
225 °C for 30 min
1.19
—
Kesterite
—

41



Cu(AcAc)2, Zn(AcAc)2, Sn(AcAc)2Cl2, S powder, OLA, sodium acetate, oleic acid
225
225 °C for 30 min
—
15–20
Kesterite
—

86





4.1 Oleylamine (OLA) as a coordinating solvent
OLA is long-chain primary alkyl-amine, which can act as an electron donor at elevated temperatures. Although OLA has been widely used as a common organic solvent for the synthesis of CZTS NCs, there are some concerns regarding the price and toxicity of OLA which need to be envisioned. However, care should be taken during handling, since OLA can be corrosive to the skin, as indicated in the corresponding material safety data sheet.68 OLA was used as both the reagent to activate the precursors as well as the capping agent for the NCs. The pioneering work on the synthesis of CZTS NCs was reported by Guo et al. in 2009 by injecting a solution of elemental sulfur in OLA into a solution of the metal precursor in OLA at 225 °C with 30 min as a reaction time.69 The as-synthesized CZTS NCs exhibiting a kesterite phase with the composition of Cu2.12Zn0.84Sn1.06S4 are slightly Cu-rich with a Zn/Sn ratio of 0.79, which causes a slight increase in band gap energy. Fig. 4(a) shows a transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the as-synthesized CZTS NCs. The as-synthesized CZTS NCs show mild polydispersity with size falling in the range of 15–25 nm.
 Fig. 4  TEM images of (a) CZTS, (b) CZTSe NCs and (c) spindle shaped CZTS NCs, respectively. [Reprinted from (a) Q. Guo, H. W. Hillhouse, and R. Agrawal, Synthesis of Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystal ink and its use for solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 131, 11673, Copyright (2009), with permission from American Chemical Society (b) H. Wei, W. Guo, Y. Sun, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Hot-injection synthesis and characterization of quaternary Cu2ZnSnSe4 nanocrystals, Mater. Lett., 64, 1424, Copyright (2010), with permission from Elsevier (c) M. Wei, Q. Du, D. Wang, W. Liu, G. Jiang, C. Zhu, Synthesis of spindle-like kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 nanoparticles using thiourea as sulfur source, Mater. Lett., 79, 177, Copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier.] 
After controlling the composition ratio to be Cu-poor and Zn-rich by adjusting the metal precursor ratio, high quality CZTS NCs were achieved based on a similar synthetic approach which resulted in a PCE of 7.2% in 2010,70 just a year after the first report on the synthesis of CZTS NCs. A considerably high efficiency was achieved which could be due to the non-stoichiometric metal precursor composition during synthesis dissimilar to the previous stoichiometric composition.
Based on the original synthesis recipe, however with the different injection mode, Wei et al. reported the first synthesis of CZTSe NCs in OLA at 240 °C for a prolonged reaction time of 2 h.71 The authors used the different reaction mode where metal precursor solution was injected into the selenium in OLA solution. This adaptive mode produced CZTSe NCs of the kesterite phase with tetragonal structure. Fig. 4(b) shows the TEM image of CZTSe NCs with an average size of 17 ± 2 nm which is a mixture of triangular, hexagonal and plate like NCs. The composition of the NCs was Cu2Zn0.84Sn1.24Se4.08, showing slightly Zn poor and Sn rich contents deviating from stoichiometric CZTSe, which may be due to the different reactivity of metal precursors. The novel synthesis of spindle shape, mono-dispersive CZTS NCs has been reported by Wei et al. using a similar synthesis recipe with thiourea as a sulfur precursor source.72 CZTS NCs were formed by injecting the solution of thiourea in OLA into the solution of the metal precursor at 235 °C. NCs with a pure phase and desired composition have an average length of 22.5 ± 2.0 nm and a width of 13.9 ± 1.5 nm. The novel spindle like morphology (as in Fig. 4(c)) of CZTS was obtained, which could be due to the use of thiourea as a sulfur source. Thiourea gradually releases sulfur into the metal precursor solution which initiates the reaction and leads to the formation of spindle like CZTS NCs. Furthermore, due to slow release of sulfur, nucleation of CZTS NCs becomes homogenous which contributed to uniformity of their shape and sizes. In colloidal NCs synthesis, the reaction temperature is known to strongly influence the crystallographic phase of the NCs. With this consideration, Zhou et al. reported the synthesis of CZTS NCs at various reaction temperatures in the range between 240 and 280 °C in OLA coordinating solvent.73 They have demonstrated that not only the crystal structure but also the morphology of CZTS NCs was prejudiced at the reaction temperatures. The phase transformation of synthesized NCs was observed at different reaction temperatures. The synthesized NCs were of the kesterite phase at lower reaction temperature, whereas phase transformation from kesterite to wurtzite was obtained at a higher reaction temperature of 275 °C. CZTS NCs of an average size of 8–16 nm with a band gap energy of 1.5 eV were obtained. Although the monodispersive CZTS NCs with controlled phase and morphology were obtained by the use of OLA as a solvent in the synthesis procedure, the control over the shape and size of CZTS NCs still needs to be resolved. Moreover, considering the toxicity of OLA, researchers move further towards the synthesis of mono-dispersive CZTS/CZTSe NCs with the aid of TOPO as a coordinating agent along with OLA.
4.2 Trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) along with OLA
TOPO provides better conditions for the growth and tunes the crystalline structure of the NCs and facilitated size control. It also increases the percent of coverage of the ligand on the NCs, when surface curvature increases due to the steric hindrance; hence it is called as an additional capping agent or a coordinating agent. Riha et al. for the first time reported the synthesis of CZTS NCs with a particular precursor injection mode using TOPO as a coordinating solvent.74 The synthesis process involved the simultaneous, rapid injection of a separate mixture of the metal precursor and sulfur into TOPO at 300 °C. The phase pure tetragonal CZTS with an average size around 12.8 ± 1.8 nm was obtained, which was consistent with the TEM results (as in Fig. 5(a)). Monodispersive CZTS NCs showed the formation of stoichiometric composition with a band gap energy of 1.5 eV. The literature reveals the two hypotheses that suggest that the inclusion of Se (i) creates CZTSSe alloys that can tune the optical and electrical properties and (ii) facilitates enhanced grain growth.
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of CZTS NCs, (b) XRD patterns of CZTSSe NCs and (c) band gap variation of CZTSSe NCs. [Reprinted from (a) S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, Solution-based synthesis and characterization of Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 131, Copyright (2009) with permission from American Chemical Society (b) and (c) S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, Compositionally tunable Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals: probing the effect of Se-inclusion in mixed chalcogenide thin films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 133, 15272, Copyright (2011) with permission from American Chemical Society.] 
Soon after their first report on CZTS NCs, a first step was carried out by Riha et al. to assess these hypotheses by developing the synthesis process for the phase-pure, compositionally controlled CZTSSe NCs.75
XRD patterns as shown in Fig. 5(b) reveal the expansion of the lattice parameters upon replacing a smaller sulfur with a bigger selenium atom. The Se incorporation also increases the electrical conductivity of the NCs. Upon varying the concentration of Se, the band gap energy varied from 1.54 eV to 1.47 eV which is shown in Fig. 5(c). This explores a new route for the fabrication of highly efficient CZTSSe NCs based TFSCs without the need for post deposition annealing.
4.3 Triphenylphosphate (TPP) as a coordinating solvent
As discussed above in the previous sections, the highly toxic OLA and TOPO are used as coordinating solvents and generally incorporated as capping molecules to stabilize the NCs surface because they offer stable passivation of the CZTS NCs and good dispersion stability in non-coordinating solvents. However, OLA and TOPO with long aliphatic carbon chains do not easily decompose and leave behind the carbon impurities during the heat treatment resulting in an adverse effect on the device performance. This difficulty can be overcome by replacing these long chain capping ligands with short-chain ligands with lower boiling points that can easily decompose at low temperatures. TPP is an economical and less toxic capping ligand, enables the surface passivation even in the absence of a long aliphatic chain, which further countenances to breed the development of CZTS NCs based TFSCs towards the greener approach. The first use of TPP as a capping ligand in the facile, highly concentrated, and scalable synthetic method to produce phase-pure CZTS NCs was reported by Kim et al.76 To clarify the critical effect of organic capping ligands, the comparative study was carried out between both TPP capped CZTS NCs and OLA capped CZTS NCs. By following the generalized synthetic approach, the reaction was carried out with TPP as a capping ligand at 300 °C, which resulted in the formation of phase-pure kesterite CZTS NCs. The size distribution was 14.5 ± 4.6 nm for TPP-capped CZTS and 13.4 ± 2.9 nm for OLA-capped CZTS. The synthetic methodology presented in this study unlocks the new possibilities for producing low toxic, cost-effective and sustainable CZTS NCs based TFSCs through a scalable chemical pathway.
4.4 Dodecanethiol (DDT) along with octadecene (ODE)
The choices of surfactant and reaction conditions are responsible for the phase and morphology control of CZTS NCs. The shape of NCs is dependent on the surfactants that are able to selectively bind on particular facets, allowing for anisotropic growth in certain directions. ODE is a low-cost, low-hazard and air-stable liquid, used as the solvent in different reaction synthesis. It is a non-coordinating solvent which provides tunable reactivity of the monomer, making a necessary balance between the nucleation and growth.77 The introduction of this non-coordinating solvent further boosts the possibility of implementing green-chemical ethics into the design of synthetic strategies for CZTS NCs, which may be significant for industrial production of this material.
The synthesis of novel wurtzite phase CZTS NCs with the assistance of DDT along with OLA and OA as coordinating solvents has been reported by Lu et al.78 DDT plays a main role in coordinating with metal cations exposed on the surface of NCs and hence assists in passivating the wurtzite CZTS. The additional capping agents (OLA and OA) co-operate with DDT to control the morphology of the NCs. Fig. 6(a) and (b) shows TEM images of CZTS nanoprisms (20 × 28 nm) with the use of OLA and CZTS nano-plates with a thickness of 14 nm with the use of OA, respectively. Furthermore, by varying the surfactant and coordinating solvent, wurtzite phase CZTS nano-rods (NRs) were synthesized by Singh et al.79 The CZTS NRs were formed by injecting a mixture of 1-DDT and t-DDT into the metal precursor solution in ODE containing TOPO as a coordinating solvent. DDT has been previously reported as a strong coordinating ligand by Lu et al., while a more detailed study of thiol effects (1-DDT and t-DDT) on the formation of wurtzite CZTS NCs revealed that the combination of the two is necessary for the formation of NRs. The reaction was carried out at 240–260 °C. The dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (DF-STEM) (as in Fig. 6(c)) shows that the monodispersive CZTS NRs are formed with an average length of 35 ± 3 nm and a diameter of 11 ± 0.5 nm. The polycrystalline SAED pattern (inserted in Fig. 6(c)) is indexed with rings to (002), (101) and (102) planes of the wurtzite CZTS phase. The high resolution (HR)-TEM image (as in Fig. 6(d)) of single individual bullet shaped NR showed the lattice fringes with a spacing value of d = 0.32 nm, which corresponds to the (002) plane of the wurtzite CZTS structure. The formation of a stable wurtzite phase rather than the kesterite phase is due to the use of DDT in the reaction, which acts as both a sulfur source and a ligand. The subsequent progress has led to the development of a novel recipe to synthesize stannite type CZTSe NCs, which was established by Shavel et al.80 More specifically, the synthesis was carried out by reacting amine complexes of the metal chlorides with a solution of selenium by injecting a solution of TOPSe into the metal precursor at 295 °C. The as-synthesized NCs were mono-dispersive with an average size of 20 nm. Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) analysis showed homogeneous distribution of the four elements Cu, Sn, Zn, and Se in crystals, which was confirmed by TEM and Z-contrast of STEM micrographs. The formation of stannite structure may be due to the combined effect of HDA (hexadecylamine), ODE and trioctylphosphine (TOP) solvents.
 Fig. 6  TEM images of (a) CZTS nano-prisms (b) CZTS nano-plates (c) CZTS NRs and (d) HR-TEM image of single bullet shaped CZTS NR. [Reprinted from (a) and (b) X. Lu, Z. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Wurtzite Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals: a novel quaternary semiconductor, Chem. Commun., 47, 3141, Copyright (2011) with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (c) and (d) A. Singh, H. Geaney, F. Laffir, K. M. Ryan, Colloidal synthesis of wurtzite Cu2ZnSnS4 nanorods and their perpendicular assembly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 134, 2910, Copyright (2012) with permission from American Chemical Society.] 
Ou et al. also demonstrated the synthesis of CZTSSe NCs in a non-coordinating solvent (ODE) along with OLA as a capping agent.81 The synthesis of NCs was carried out by injecting the metal stearates dissolved in OLA solvent into the anionic precursor as thiourea in 1-octadecene (ODE) at 270 °C. The composition of the CZTSSe NCs was adjusted across the X range from 0 to 1 by varying the S/Se ratio. XRD analysis showed that the lattice parameters increased linearly with increasing Se content which confirmed the formation of homogeneous CZTSSe NCs. The TEM image showed mono-dispersive, quasi-spherical NCs with diameters of 11–13 nm. The absorption spectra revealed that the band gaps of the NCs could be adjusted over the range 1.0–1.5 eV by decreasing the Se content.
4.5 Triethylene glycol (TEG) as a green solvent
In general, the synthesis of CZTS NCs using the HI technique is carried out by using extremely expensive, unstable and hazardous precursors. Also, a large amount of coordinating solvents such as organic amines or phosphine is utilized as ligands and solvents. Hence, before the practical use of these materials in commercial products or devices, the development of a robust, cost-effective and environmentally benign route that can be easily scalable is of immense importance. Wang et al. reported the green formulation of CZTS NCs via a modified two-phase method without the use of OLA as a solvent and opens up a new era towards the greener synthesis of CZTS NCs.82 In particular, the anionic precursor solution in ODE and octadecylamine (ODA) were rapidly injected into the solution of the metal precursor in TEG at 220 °C. After completion of the reaction, black ODE and transparent TEG layers are separated. Fig. 7(a) shows the TEM image of synthesized NCs which reveals the average size of NCs to be 6.5 ± 1 nm. The HR-TEM image (as in Fig. 7(b)) clearly shows the highly crystalline nature of the CZTS NCs. The lattice fringe possesses an interplanar spacing value of 0.31 nm, which agrees well with the inter-planar spacing value of the (112) plane. The elemental compositions of the NCs were 2.73:0.6:1.14:3.86 for Cu:Zn:Sn:S, respectively. Thus, by increasing the reaction temperature, the reactivity of each of the metal precursors can be increased by differing amounts which provides the necessary flexibility for obtaining a balanced reactivity to produce the desired CZTS NCs. Still, there is no any report on synthesis of CZTSSe by using TEG as a medium. The versatility of this synthesis strategy was demonstrated by extending it to the production of other polynary NCs such as binary (CuS), ternary (CuInS2) and pentanary ((Cu2−x,Agx)ZnSnS4) NCs. The use of non-coordinating solvent, shorter reaction time and a simple post-treatment made this route more eco-friendly and cost-effective.
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of CZTS NCs synthesized via a modified two-phase method and (b) HR-TEM image of single CZTS NCs. [Reprinted from X. Wang, Z. Sun, C. Shao, D. Boye and J. Zhao, A facile and general approach to polynary semiconductor nanocrystals via a modified two phase method, Nanotechnology, 22, 245605, Copyright (2011) with permission from IOP publishing.] 
4.6 Ge inclusion and defect passivation
Although such tremendous amount of work has been done on the CZTSSe NCs, there are several issues which cannot be solved by simply controlling the composition, phase and morphology and so on. Therefore, the researchers opted a new way of alloying CZTS with Ge substitution for Sn to synthesize the CZTGeSSe NCs and also defect passivation using CZTS:Na NCs. In 2011, Ford et al. for the first time reported the synthesis of Cu2ZnGeS4 (CZGS) and Cu2Zn(Sn1−x,Gex)S4 (CZTGS) NCs.83 The NCs were prepared by following a similar method as reported earlier.70 The main difference lies in the reaction precursors and injection temperature. The sizes of CZTGS NCs vary from 5 to 30 nm. It is found that the band gap increases with an increase in the Ge/(Ge + Sn) ratios. Furthermore, the film preparation and device performance have been explained in detail in the section (device fabrication and their performance). Considering the hypothesis of Se inclusion as stated in the previous section, Zong et al. reported the synthesis of CZTGSe NCs by tuning the Ge/(Ge + Sn) ratio of the precursor than the earlier method, which resulted in suitable band gap energy required for the device performance.84 XRD patterns of NCs showed the tetragonal structure with an increase in the 2θ value as the ratio of Ge/(Ge + Sn) increases. The optical absorption spectra showed a blue shift to a higher energy value as the ratio of Ge/(Ge + Sn) increased from 0.0 to 1.0. The band gap energy of NCs ranges from 1.33 eV for X = 0.0 to 1.63 eV for X = 1.0. At X = 0.7, the band gap energy value was around 1.52 eV, which approaches the optimum value for solar photoelectric conversion. Guo et al. in 2012 further reported the alloy formation of CZTSSe with Ge for the fabrication of highly efficient CZTGeSSe NPTFSCs using NCs prepared by the HI technique.85 During the synthesis of NCs, the composition of the CZTGeS NCs remained Cu-poor and Zn-rich and this promptly enhanced the device properties. The synthesized NCs became poly-dispersive with the crystal size in the range of 5–15 nm with a composition of Cu1.64Zn1.25Sn0.75Ge0.25S4. However, even though researchers tried to synthesis high quality NCs by Ge alloying, the efficiency was still lagging behind as compared to the highest reported CZTS based TFSCs. Recently, Hages et al. reported the highest efficiency of 9.4% from alloys of CZTS by the HI technique.41 The improved performance of a similar processed material compared to the previous one was due to the control of Ge loss from the absorber surface during the selenization process. The increased efficiency of this Ge alloying material was due to the increased charge carrier lifetime as well as reduced voltage-dependent charge carrier collection, which is the record highest efficiency for CZTS NPTFSCs.
To overcome the issues related to comparatively lower efficiency, Zhou et al. recently introduced a new strategy to improve the device performance by the passivation of CZTSSe absorber film by the use of solution-processed CZTS:Na NCs precursors.86 During the synthesis, an appropriate amount of CF3COONa in an oleic acid solution was injected into CZTS solution and allowed to react at the same reaction temperature with Na-free glasses as the substrates, film was formed by spin coating and then selenized at 560 °C for 20 min. The TEM image (as in Fig. 8(a)) of as-synthesized CZTS:Na NCs shows well dispersed, highly crystalline NCs with the particle size ranging from 15 to 20 nm. The HRTEM image of single CZTS:Na NC (as in Fig. 8(b)) shows the high crystallinity at the center of NC with a characteristic inter-planar distance of 0.32 nm from a (112) plane of the kesterite CZTS phase, whereas the surface of the NC is amorphous. Furthermore, the presence of sodium species around CZTS NC is also confirmed by EDS and STEM.
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of as-synthesized CZTS:Na NCs and (b) HR-TEM image of as-synthesized single CZTS:Na NCs showing that the centre of NC is highly crystalline whereas the surface is amorphous. [Reprinted from H. Zhou, T. B. Song, W. C. Hsu, S. Luo, S. Ye, H. S. Duan, C. J. Hsu, W. Yang and Y. Yang, Rational defect passivation of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 photovoltaics with solution-processed Cu2ZnSnS4:Na nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 15998, Copyright (2013) with permission from American Chemical Society.] 
5. Device fabrication based on CZTS NC absorber layers and their performance
To date, CZTSSe NPTFSCs made by the sulfurization/selenization of CZTS NCs have attained the cell efficiency over 9%. The evolution in the efficiencies of CZTS based NC solar cells is shown in Fig. 9 and also summarized in Table 2. It is found that systematic evolution in the efficiencies has been achieved as a result of optimized preparative parameters such as reaction temperature, composition, post-annealing conditions as well as by inclusion of different metals and surface passivation of CZTS NCs. In this section, we discuss the evaluation of the best performance solar cells based on CZTS NCs synthesized by this technique, and debate on their notable current–voltage (J–V) characteristics. Starting with the process of the ink preparation, subsequent processes in the absorber layer formation and thereby the device fabrication, we finally focused on the remaining challenges and possible future endeavours.
 Fig. 9  Evolution of conversion efficiencies of CZTS NCs based TFSCs using the HI technique. 
Table 2 Performance of reported CZTS-based NPTFSCs by the hot injection technique




Material
Film formation method
Device structure

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Fill factor (FF)
Efficiency (η)
Ref.




CZTSSe
Drop casting
SLG/Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al
0.210
11.5
33.1
0.80

69



CZTSSe
Knife coating
SLG/Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al
0.430
31.2
53.9
7.2

70



CZTGeS
Doctor blade
SLG/Mo/CZGSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al
0.640
21.5
49
6.8

83



CZTGeSSe
Doctor blade
SLG/Mo/CZTGeSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO
0.464
29.2
62
8.4

85



CZTSSe
Spin coating
SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO
0.451
29.0
64.9
8.5

90



CZTS:Na
Spin coating
Mo/CZTS:Na/CdS/Ag-nanowires-ITO
0.361
33.38
50.95
6.14

86



CZTS
Spin coating
SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO
0.431
23.28
35.78
3.6

76



CZTSSe
Doctor blade
SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO
0.404
35.1
63.7
9.0

40



CZTGeSSe
Doctor blade
SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO
0.460
31.9
63.8
9.4

41





5.1 Ink preparation
Habas et al. and Wang et al. explained the details about the process of ink formulation during the film evolution.35,87 During the ink formation, the stability of ink depends on the size of NCs, the type of solvent, additives as well as parameters such as temperature, pH of ink formation and deposition.
The solvent should have the functional group which forms a coordinate bond that can stabilize NCs and it needs to be volatile enough so that the film can dry rapidly, without any organic residue left behind. The non-volatile solvents such as some organics and polymers remain behind as residues or in the form of carbon containing impurities in the absorber layer. To date a number of solvents with low boiling point have been chosen for ink formation such as hexanethiol, pyridine, methanol, ethanol, toluene, hexylamine, butylamine, etc. Moreover, the additives are also required for the uniform and adherent coating over the surface area of the film. However, the incomplete removal of these additives leads to the formation of impurities, which affects the electronic properties of materials reducing the grain size of the crystal. Additionally, mild heating and ligand exchange were required to diminish the impurity. The molecular metal chalcogenide (MMC) species such as S2S64− ions that can exchange functional groups and stabilize the NCs were used.88,89 The films are usually deposited by sophisticated techniques such as spin coating, doctor blade, dip coating etc. followed by post-deposition heat treatment in the presence of sulfur or selenium vapor to enhance the grain size which is reasonable for photovoltaic application and further used for device fabrication. The schematic of thin film formation from NC ink is shown in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  The schematic representation of fabrication of CZTS based absorber layers using CZTS NCs inks. 
To obtain the desired thickness (∼1 to 2 μm), several coatings of NCs based ink/paste have to be done. To avoid the formation of organic residue layers at the interfaces of molybdenum and absorber layers, soft baking of the absorber at 300 °C was introduced between each coating. The as-coated nanocrystalline films are then subjected to annealing in a Se atmosphere at temperatures between 520 and 580 °C for a duration longer than 20 min. A typical device configuration for high performance CIGS devices is employed to fabricate CZTS NCs based devices with a typical device structure of glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/Al:ZnO/Ni–Al, as shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  The schematic representation of fabrication of CZTS NC based devices with a configuration of glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/Al:ZnO/Al. 
5.2 CZTS NCs based absorber layers
The performance of CZTSSe based NPTFSCs is in the developing stage with the pace unlike other vacuum based techniques. Although the performances of these NCs based TFSCs are limited by many factors, still they offer plenty of room for the improvement. The first solar cell device obtained from pure CZTS NCs fabricated by Kim et al.76 is presented in Fig. 12. The J–V characteristics of pure CZTS NCs based TFSCs exhibited an efficiency (η) of 3.6% with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.431 V, a short circuit current (Jsc) of 23.28 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 35.78%. The maximum quantum efficiency of 50% was observed at a photon wavelength of 550 nm. Although this is the highest efficiency for pure CZTS, it is still lagging behind compared with other CZTSSe NCs based devices. This low efficiency is attributed to the high series resistance and low shunt resistance, which arises from the holes or cracks in the NCs based absorber layers.
 Fig. 12  (a) Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of typical device structure and (b) J–V characteristics of CZTS TFSCs. [Reprinted from Y. Kim, K. Woo, I. Kim, Y. S. Cho, S. Jeong and J. Moon, Highly concentrated synthesis of copper–zinc–tin–sulfide nanocrystals with easily decomposable capping molecules for printed photovoltaic applications, Nanoscale, 5, 10183, Copyright (2013) with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.] 
5.3 CZTSSe NC based absorber layers
The pioneering work on CZTSSe NCs devices based on CZTS absorber layers was reported by Guo et al. in 2009.69 The CZTSSe absorber layers were prepared by the selenization of CZTS NCs thin films at 450 and 500 °C and then integrated into the device. The device based on CZTSSe absorber layers selenized at 450 °C showed an η of 0.74% with a Voc of 0.188 V, a Jsc of 10.5 mA cm−2 and a FF of 37.2%, whereas devices based on CZTSSe absorber layers selenized at 500 °C showed an η of 0.80% with a Voc of 0.210 V, a Jsc of 11.5 mA cm−2 and a FF of 33.1% which showed the slight modification than earlier and effect due to change in selenization temperature. These devices yield low PCE which could be attributed to the stoichiometric precursor composition. By overcoming this difficulty by fine tuning the composition to be Cu-poor and Zn-rich and introducing the robust film coating technology, the improved PCE of 7.2% was reported by the same group, a year after their first report.70 Recently, the same group further reported the best efficiency of 9.0% for CZTSSe NCs based solar cells with slight modification in their previous recipe for the synthesis of CZTS NCs.40 The improvements in device performance are attributed to the amendments in two key processing steps: nanoparticle synthesis and selenization. Although the NCs synthesized using the modified recipe have compositional uniformity, they have demonstrated that it is difficult to assign the device performance improvements to a specific change in the synthesis recipe.
With this report in the scientific community, many researchers turned out their way to fabricate devices and the research on the CZTS NCs based device formation increased rapidly. The novel facile approach to fabricate CZTSSe thin films with desired composition from binary and ternary NCs was reported by Cao et al.90 This synthetic approach based on binary and ternary NCs allows facile control over the film composition. Copper tin sulfide (CTS), ZnS and SnS used as binary and ternary NCs were synthesized by reacting metal salts with sulfur in OLA and TOPO. The composition of the final film was controlled by adjusting the ratio of binary and ternary NCs during the ink formation. CZTSSe thin films were prepared by combining an appropriate mixture of synthesized binary and ternary NCs to form an ink, followed by annealing in the presence of Se. Using these CZTSSe thin films solar cells were fabricated using a typical device configuration and the same is depicted in Fig. 13(A).
 Fig. 13  (a) Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of a typical device structure, (b) Auger depth profile of the finished device, (c) J–V characteristics and (d) EQE spectrum of CZTSSe TFSCs fabricated using binary and ternary NCs. [Reprinted from Y. Cao, M. S. Denny, Jr., J. V. Caspar, W. E. Farneth, Q. Guo, A. S. Ionkin, L. Johnson, M. Lu, I. Malajovich, D. Radu, H. D. Rosenfeld, K. R. Choudhury and W. Wu, High-efficiency solution-processed Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 thin-film solar cells prepared from binary and ternary nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 15644, Copyright (2012) with permission from American Chemical Society.] 
The SEM image revealed an internal microstructure of the same device. At the interface between Mo and the absorber, a layer of MoS2 formed. The CZTSSe layer is seen to encompass a fine-grained sub-layer in an absorber with an additional large grained layer. These NCs formed the dense and smooth precursor layer, which was then converted to CZTSSe via annealing in the presence of selenium at 560 °C for 20 min. However, the interfacial layer formed between CZTSSe and back contact remains in the device, resulting in the drop of the performance. Fig. 13(B) shows the Auger depth profile analysis for the better understanding of the specification within the different layers of the device. The quantitative analysis of large grained layers led to the elemental composition of Cu1.7Zn1.2SnS0.6Se0.5. The J–V characteristics and external quantum efficiency (EQE) response of a CZTSSe device from binary and ternary NCs are shown in Fig. 13(c) and (d). The device exhibited the highest total area η of 8.5%, which is one of the highest efficiencies for CZTSSe PV devices. The EQE response estimates the band gap energy of 1.1 eV for CZTSSe. The stoichiometric control over composition of binary and ternary NCs promotes the successful diffusion and phase formation during high temperature annealing, which leads to the prominent effect on device performance. However, the bilayer formation with back contact selenization is focused to improve the efficiency.
5.4 CZTGeS/CZTGeSSe and CZTSSe:Na based absorber layers
Recently, Zhou et al. fabricated solar cells based on CZTS:Na NCs with a typical configuration showing a PCE of 6.14% with a Voc of 0.361 V, a Jsc of 33.38 mA cm−2 and a FF of 50.95%, which showed 50% increment in the PCE than that of unpassivated CZTS.86 The superior performance of the CZTS:Na-based device indicated that the incorporation of Na has a positive effect on the CZTS PV device. The device performance revealed that the defect passivation in the solution state demonstrated defect passivation in the solid state which increases the charge carrier concentration and minority carrier lifetime. Na affects the electronic properties of the absorber layer with a decrease in resistivity and an increase in the carrier concentration. Furthermore, the elemental substitution of Sn by Ge is oftenly used for NCs approaches and in 2011, Ford et al. for the first time synthesized the alloy of CZTS with Ge83 with solar cell devices fabricated using a stoichiometric precursor ratio, which showed a PCE of 0.51% for CZGeS and 6.8% for CZTGeS and a Voc of 0.640 V, a Jsc of 21.5 and a FF of 49%. The report shows the highest Voc among all devices made using the NCs based approach. With higher Voc, the band gap also increased which has also been observed in the case of CZTGSSe synthesized using hydrazine based approaches. With a Ge/(Ge + Sn) ratio of 0.7, the device showed the higher efficiency, indicating that there may be higher deep levels with a number of free carriers at this ratio. The band gap tuning is achieved by simply replacing Sn with Ge without the control of the S/Se ratio similar to the Ga/In ratio in the case of CIGS. Furthermore, Guo et al. reported CZTGeSSe by selenization of CZTGeS for the fabrication of highly efficient CZTGeSSe NPTFSCs keeping copper-poor and zinc rich composition.85 The device fabricated showed a PCE of 8.4% with a Voc of 0.464 V, a Jsc of 29.2 mA cm−2, and a FF of 62%. These results showed a significant improvement in both Voc and FF as compared to their previously reported highly efficient NCs derived CZTSSe solar cells.
Following the previous report of their group, Hages et al. reported a PEC of 9.4% as the highest efficiency for the alloy of CZTS NCs.41 The cross-sectional SEM image for typical configured champion CZTSSe and CZTGeSSe devices is shown in Fig. 14(a) and (b), respectively. However, CZTGeSSe devices have an increased thickness of both “fine grain” and MoSe2 layers, which contributed to the increased series resistance. Overall, it is observed that optimized NCs ink based CZTGeSSe devices are found to show superior device performance compared to that of CZTSSe devices. Fig. 14(c) shows the J–V characteristics for the “champion” CZTSSe and CZTGeSSe devices, with total area PCE of 8.4% and 9.4%. The increased efficiency was due to inhibiting Ge loss and due to increased charge carrier lifetime as well as reduced voltage-dependent charge carrier collection. The lower band gap of the absorber layer promotes the recombination loss resulting in low Voc. Several other measurements have also been done to confirm the undesirable recombination rates of these devices. Time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) (as in Fig. 14(d)) shows the 2.5 times increase in minority carrier lifetime of CZTGeSSe devices as compared to that of CZTSSe devices.
 Fig. 14  Cross-sectional SEM images of “champion” (a) CZTSSe and (b) CZTGeSSe devices, (c) J–V characteristics of “champion” CZTSSe and CZTGeSSe devices (d) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of CZTSSe and CZTGeSSe devices (c), respectively. [Reprinted from C. J. Hages, S. Levcenco, C. K. Miskin, J. H. Alsmeier, D. A. Ras, R. G. Wilks, M. Bär, T. Unold and R. Agrawal, Improved performance of Ge-alloyed CZTGeSSe thin film solar cells through control of elemental losses, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., DOI: 10.1002/pip.2442, Copyright (2014) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.] 
Recent progress in this field has shown that the replacement of Sn by Ge allows conduction band minimum without moving valence band maximum which leads to the creation of back surface field and which causes the enhancements in device performance. This breakthrough has been achieved by Ge, which is one of the major improvements in CZTS NPTFSCs. With further more focused studies on the device characterization and by realizing the fundamental losses in the devices, the earth abundant and environmentally benign materials with a reasonably high PCE and lower manufacturing cost may be possible in the near future.
6. Challenges and future perspectives
One way to reduce the manufacturing costs of TFSCs is avoiding vacuum-based techniques, high processing temperatures, long processing time and the use of rigid, heavy, and expensive substrates. Recently, high boiling point solvents, OLA, ODE, DDT, and TOP, have been commonly used as reaction media during NCs synthesis. However including the toxicity, prices of these solvents are relatively much higher e.g. 100 ml of technical grade OLA costs about 50 US $. Hence according to our approach, the state of art to use the alternative reaction media for green and sustainable synthesis is the basic need.38 A number of challenges and perspectives including those from the synthetic process for the NPTFSCs devices are explained in detail as follows.
During the synthesis process, there must be control over volatile species in the NCs and suppressing the formation of secondary phases etc. To improve crystallization of CZTS, solution conditions such as pH, solution temperature, precursor species, and surfactant should have to be controlled. Another important view is to control the elemental chemical potential during crystal growth which affects the quality of NCs and avoids the formation of secondary phases during the synthesis.91 Along with these there must be a better understanding of nucleation, grain growth kinetics behind the formation of CZTS NCs and investigation of the reaction mechanism between an inorganic precursor and organic solvent. In addition, the impurities should be completely removed during the post synthesis washing treatments before the final ink is made. During the ink preparation, solvent must be compatible for the green chemical synthetic approach. The NCs ink to deposit the absorber layer should possess; the stable dispersion into the various solvents and must require the NCs with small sizes. Regulating the heat treatment during film drying and annealing controls the formation of voids and cracks during deposition.
The size quantization and surface chemistry affects together and resolute the optical properties of materials. The reliable control of the rate at which several metallic precursors are incorporated/passivated into the growing NCs and exchange of the long-chain ligand well stabilize the NCs to form a stable dispersion.
One of the challenge towards the efficient device becomes thin film after and before annealing step, which should be uniform and adherent.92 Among the diverse reasons for the low efficiencies, it is necessary to remove residual carbon impurities in the CZTS absorber layer which may play a detrimental role in the device. It is due to the decomposition of organic solvent and polymer binders are generally used in the preparation of paste or NC inks which decrease the crystallinity and optical transmission. It also acts as a high resistor, increasing the series resistance. Air annealing at 300 °C is used to avoid carbon residues in the final absorber layer.93a,b Also, the back contact selenization at the interface is ambiguous nowadays which affect the stability and hence efficiency of the device. However use of an alternative back contact will be helpful in the synthesis of future highly efficient NPTFSCs.94
Additionally, the efficiency of solar cells depends on the various deposition methods as they control the optical and electronic properties of the layers and interfaces in solar cells. Hence TFSCs performance should be analyzed in terms of their morphological and compositional properties, as well as interfacial layers at the front of the cell between TCO and CdS can improve module performance.95 However, an awareness of efficient devices is lacking due to poor electron transport properties of NCs thin films. There should be necessary requirements to study the defect properties to achieve the highest efficiency comparable to CdTe and CIGS solar cell devices. The minority carrier lifetime, inversely proportional to the defect concentration measured by photoluminescence (PL), is one of the main issues which has been shown to be a key factor for the efficiency of TFSCs.97–100
In the case of CZTS, the minority carrier lifetime is about two orders of magnitude lower than that of high-efficiency CIGS TFSCs. The quantum efficiency (QE) data also depend on the defects present in the device. In the case of CZTS based devices QE data exhibit a downward slope in contrast to the CIGS based devices, indicating the inability of more deeply generated photo carriers to reach the space charge region before recombining. The presence of volatile species creates the higher defect concentration which became higher in CZTSSe devices as compared to the CIGS. Such large defect concentration attributed to the loss in Voc and a modest loss in Jsc explains why CIGS based devices have higher Voc than CZTS based devices (as in Fig. 15). Photonic and plasmonic mesostructures can be incorporated into thin-film devices to increase the effective optical path lengths. Reducing ohmic losses must be achieved in many solution-processed devices to increase the efficiency. According to Wang, the CuZn intrinsic defect is not optimal for the material for solar cell application due to a relatively deep acceptor level, instead the Cu vacancy is favoured to obtain devices with desired properties.95 A number of key points including defect density, free carrier density, surfaces, grain boundaries and grain-to-grain uniformity largely affect the efficiency of TFSCs.96 The important issue to reduce defects in CZTS based devices is by supplying volatile species needed to react and excess is rejected. Hence, in future, it is necessary to minimize defect density, and understanding of and control over the free carrier density as well as surfaces and grain boundaries, grain-to-grain uniformity, and effective S incorporation should be studied.
 Fig. 15  Plot of band gap energy versus open circuit voltage of the CZTS based NPTFSCs. 
Investigations are still necessary to resolve the complexity in the synthetic chemistry, dissolution mechanisms, drying kinetics and phase formation of thin films and their relationship with various loss mechanisms in PV devices. The optical such as photoluminescence or deep level transition spectroscopy and other techniques containing capacitance and admittance spectroscopy become useful to study the defect transition (activation, ionization) energy levels in the band gap and defect or carrier concentration. Thus, by resolving or minimizing the abovementioned issue, a comparably higher efficiency for CZTS based NPTFSCs using NCs ink to that of well-established CIGS TFSCs can be achieved.
7. Conclusions
Here we reviewed the quintessence of the HI technique which is an ideal route for synthesis of monodispersive semiconductor NCs. The tremendous progress recently achieved in CZTSSe NCs has demonstrated the potential for fabricating high-performance and cost-effective PV devices with low environmental pollution. Non-vacuum-based techniques including solution based NCs methods are also promising because of their advantages mentioned earlier. To date, solar cells based on alloyed CZTSSe NCs synthesized by the HI technique have reached PCE near 10% at the laboratory scale using common organic solvents and precursors which becomes quite close to the record 12.6% efficiency obtained using highly unstable, toxic and explosive hydrazine based solution approaches. Hence, we have reviewed a reliable technique for the green synthesis of CZTS NCs, the fabrication of PV devices based on the CZTS NCs absorber layers and their PV performance thereof.
To further improve the performance of NCs based CZTSSe solar cells efforts should be devoted to the formation of phase pure CZTSSe and complete diminishing of the secondary phases. Also, the research efforts need to be focused on cadmium-free CZTSSe PV technologies. Further improvement can be expected in that, how CIGS PV technology and related nanotechnology are readily transferred to the research of CZTS PV technology due to great similarity between these two materials. An advanced CZTSSe PV technology is expected for the TFSCs family in the near future.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Human Resources Development (No. 20124010203180) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea Government Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy and partially supported by the University Grants Commission, Government of India (No. 41-249/2012 (SR)).
Notes and references
T. M. Razykov, C. S. Ferekides, D. Morel, E. Stefanakos, H. S. Ullal and H. M. Upadhyaya, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, S. Paetel, R. Wuerz, R. Menner, W. Wischmann and M. Powalla, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., 2011, 19, 894 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Park, S. J. Sung, D. H. Son, D. H. Kim, M. Gansukh, H. Cheong and J. K. Kang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 9118 RSC .
S. W. Shin, J. H. Han, Y. C. Park, G. L. Agawane, C. H. Jeong, J. H. Yun, A. V. Moholkar, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21727 RSC .
S. J. Ahn, S. Jung, J. Gwak, A. Cho, K. Shin, K. Yoon, D. Park, H. Cheong and J. H. Yun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 021905 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Suryawanshi, G. L. Agawane, S. M. Bhosale, S. W. Shin, P. S. Patil, J. H. Kim and A. V. Moholkar, Mater. Technol., 2013, 28, 98 CAS .
H. Katagiri, N. Sasaguchi, S. Hando, S. Hoshino, J. Ohashi and T. Yokota, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 49, 407 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Hiroi, N. Sakai, T. Kato and H. Sugimoto, in Proceedings of the IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference 39th: 16–21 June 2013. Tampa, FL.
B. Shin, O. Gunawan, Y. Zhu, N. A. Bojarczuk, S. J. Chey and S. Guha, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 21, 72 Search PubMed .
I. Repins, C. Beall, N. Voraa, C. DeHart, D. Kuciauskas, P. Dippoa, B. To, J. Mann, W. C. Hsu, A. Goodrich and R. Noufi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Moholkar, S. S. Shinde, G. L. Agawane, S. H. Jo, K. Y Rajpure, P. S. Patil, C. H. Bhosale and J. H. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 544, 145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Bjorkman, J. J. Scragg, H. Flammersberger, T. Kubart and M. Edoff, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 110 CrossRef PubMed .
S. W. Shin, S. M. Pawar, C. Y. Park, J. H. Yun, J. H. Moon, J. H. Kim and J. Y. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Grenet, S. Bernardi, D. Kohen, C. Lepoittevin, S. Noel, N. Karst, A. Brioude, S. Perraud and H. Mariette, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, J. He, H. Kong, F. Yue, P. Yang and J. Chu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cho, H. Song, J. Gwak, Y. Eo, J. Yun, K. Yoon and S. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5087 CAS .
M. P. Suryawanshi, P. S. Patil, S. W. Shin, K. V. Gurav, G. L. Agawane, M. G. Gang, J. H. Kim and A. V. Moholkar, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 18537 RSC .
K. V. Gurav, S. M. Pawar, S. W. Shin, M. P. Suryawanshi, G. L. Agawane, P. S. Patil, J. H. Moon, J. H. Yun and J. H. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 283, 74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cao, L. Li, B. L. Zhang, J. Huang, L. J. Wang, Y. Shen, Y. Sun, J. C. Jiang and G. J. Hu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zaberca, A. Gillorin, B. Durand and J. Y. Chane-Ching, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6483 RSC .
Y. L. Zhou, W. H. Zhou, M. Li, Y. F. Du and S. X. Wu, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 1535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yan, A. Wei, Y. Zhao, J. Liu and X. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2013, 111, 120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, C. Wang, B. Li, K. Zhang, X. Xu, J. Hu and X. Chen, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 50, 125001 Search PubMed .
D. Tang, Q. Wang, F. Liu, L. Zhao, Z. Han, K. Sun, Y. Lai, J. Li and Y. Liu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 232, 53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, C. Zhu and T. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 108, 62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, E. Ha, W. L. Wong, C. Li, K. P. Ho and K. Y. Wong, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 3201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, W. R. Bae, K. V. Gurav, M. G. Kang, G. L. Agawane, P. S. Patil, J. H. Yun, J. Y. Lee, A. V. Moholakar and J. H. Kim, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 1 DOI:10.1002/pssa.201330384 .
W. C. Liu, B. L. Guo, X. S. Wu, F. M. Zhang, C. L. Mak and K. H. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3182 CAS .
S. K. Verma, V. Agrawal, K. Jain, R. Pasricha and S. Chand, J. Nanopart., 2013, 1 DOI:10.1155/2013/685836 .
S. W. Shin, J. H. Han, C. Y. Park, S. R. Kim, Y. C. Park, G. L. Agawane, A. V. Moholkar, J. H. Yun, C. H. Jeong, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 541, 192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Shin, J. H. Han, C. Y. Park, A. V. Moholkar, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 516, 96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Wang, P. Chen and C. M. Tseng, CrystEngComm, 2013, 46, 9863 RSC .

          C. Leidholm, C. Hotz, A. Breeze, C. Sunderland and W. Ki, NREL Subcontract Report, 2012, NREL/SR-5200–56510.
W. Wang, M. T. Winkler, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Teodor, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301465 Search PubMed .
S. E. Habas, H. Platt, M. Hest and D. S. Ginley, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, W. C. Hsu, H. S. Duan, B. Bob, W. Yang, T. B. Song, C. J. Hsu and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2822 CAS .
K. Ramasamy, M. A. Malik and P. O'Brien, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5703 RSC .
F. J. Fan, L. Wu and S. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 190 CAS .

          M. Jiang and X. Yan, Solar Cells – Research and Application Perspectives,  2013, pp. 107–143,  DOI:10.5772/50702 .
C. K. Miskin, W. C. Yang, C. J. Hages, N. J. Carter, C. S. Joglekar, E. A. Stach and R. A. Agrawal, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., 2014 DOI:10.1002/pip.2472 .
C. J. Hages, S. Levcenco, C. K. Miskin, J. H. Alsmeier, D. A. Ras, R. G. Wilks, M. Bär, T. Unold and R. Agrawal, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., 2013 DOI:10.1002/pip.2442 .

          http://https://www.webelements.com/periodicity/abundance_crust/
        .
R. Nische, D. F. Sargent and P. Wild, J. Cryst. Growth, 1967, 1, 52 CrossRef .
X. Lu, Z. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3141 RSC .
J. Paier, R. Asahi, A. Nagoya and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 115 CrossRef .
A. Walsh, S. Chen, S. H. Wei and X. G. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 400 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khare, A. W. Wills, L. M. Ammerman, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11721 RSC .
C. Yan, C. Huang, J. Yang, F. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Lai, J. Li and Y. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2603 RSC .
C. Tablero, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23224 CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Siebentritt and S. Schorr, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., 2012, 20, 512 CrossRef CAS .

          S. R. Kodigala, Cu(In1−xGax)Se2 Based Thin Film Solar Cells, Academic Press,  2011, p. 35 Search PubMed .
W. Xinkun, L. Wei, C. Shuying, L. Yunfeng and J. Hongjie, J. Semicond., 2012, 33, 022002 CrossRef .
A. Javed, Turk. J. Phys., 2007, 31, 287 CAS .
F. Mesa, C. Calderón and G. Gordillo, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Patel, I. Mukhopadhyay and A. Ray, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 445103 CrossRef .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, S. Hinds, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6906 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, L. An, Z. Sun, W. Hou, Y. Yang, Z. Yang and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Kwon and T. Hyeon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Reiss, M. Protière and L. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Bucherl, K. R. Oleson and H. W. Hillhous, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2013, 2, 168 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) 
            Y. Masuda,  2011, vol. 494, ISBN 978-953-307-199-2,  DOI:10.5772/703 ; 
  (b) Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3343 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) X. Peng, L. Manna, W. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher and A. Kadavanich, Nature, 2000, 404, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) J. Y. Rempel, M. G. Bawendi and K. F. Jensen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4479 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) R. Xie, Z. Li and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15457 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) P. Skrdla, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 214 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) J. Anwar and D. Zahn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Kwon and T. Hyeon, Small, 2011, 7, 2685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Doneg, P. Liljeroth and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Small, 2005, 1, 1152 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. M. Rahman,  2011, vol. 346, ISBN 978-953-307-913-4,  DOI:10.5772/1371 .
S. Mourdikoudis and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1465 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, H. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, W. C. Yang, B. C. Walker, E. A. Stach, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, W. Guo, Y. Sun, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 1424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wei, Q. Du, D. Wang, W. Liu, G. Jiang and C. Zhu, Mater. Lett., 2012, 79, 177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, Y. Gong, J. Xu, G. Fang, Q. Xu and J. Dong, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 574, 272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, K. Woo, I. Kim, Y. S. Cho, S. Jeong and J. Moon, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10183 RSC .
W. Yu and X. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2368 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, Z. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3141 RSC .
A. Singh, H. Geaney, F. Laffir and K. M. Ryan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shavel, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Ou, J. C. Fan, J. K. Chen, C. C. Huang, L. Y. Chen, J. H. Ho and J. Y. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14667 RSC .
X. Wang, Z. Sun, C. Shao, D. Boye and J. Zhao, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245605 CrossRef PubMed .
G. M. Ford, Q. Guo, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2626 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zong, S. Lu, H. Wang, Y. Sun, H. Zheng, J. Liu and H. Yan, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 6942 RSC .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, W. C. Yang, C. J. Hages, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 105, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, T. B. Song, W. C. Hsu, S. Luo, S. Ye, H. S. Duan, C. J. Hsu, W. Yang and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Y. Han, S. J. Sung, D. H. Kim and C. H. Chang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11154 RSC .
A. Jiang, J. S. Lee and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5010 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Webber and R. L. Brutchey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1085 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cao, M. S. Denny, Jr., J. V. Caspar, W. E. Farneth, Q. Guo, A. S. Ionkin, L. Johnson, M. Lu, I. Malajovich, D. Radu, H. D. Rosenfeld, K. R. Choudhury and W. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Yang, X. Gong, A. Walsh and S. Wei, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 245204 CrossRef .
T. Todorov, M. Kita, J. Carda and P. Escribano, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) E. J. Lee, S. J. Park, J. W. Cho, J. Gwak, M. K. Oh and B. K. Min, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2928 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Yoon, S. H. Na, J. Y. Choi, M. W. Kim, H. Kim, H. S. An, B. K. Min, S. J. Ahn, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, K. H. Yun, S. S. Kolekar, M. Hest, S. S. Al-Deyab, M. T. Swihart and S. S. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Scragg, J. Watjen, M. Edoff, T. Ericson, T. Kubart and C. Björkman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Graetzel, R. Janssen, D. Mitzi and E. Sargent, Nature, 2012, 488, 304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2011 DOI:10.1155/2011/801292 .
I. Repins, M. Romero, J. Li, S. Wei, D. Kuciauskas, C. Jiang, C. Beall, C. DeHart, J. Mann, W. Hsu, G. Teeter, A. Goodrich and R. Noufi, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 439 CrossRef .
I. Repins, W. Metzger, C. Perkins, J. Li and M. Contreras, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2010, 57, 2957 CrossRef CAS .
W. Metzger, D. Albin, D. Levi, P. Sheldon, X. Li, B. Keyes and R. K. Ahrenkiel, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 3549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ohnesorge, R. Weigand, G. Bacher, A. Forchel, W. Riedl and F. Karg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Uma Ghorpade
	Uma Ghorpade obtained her MSc degree in Inorganic Chemistry from Shivaji University, India (2010). She has been pursuing her PhD degree in Chemistry at Shivaji University under the guidance of Dr S. S. Kolekar since June 2012. Currently, she is working as an exchange student for her PhD degree at Chonnam National University, South Korea, under the supervision of Prof. Jin Hyeok Kim. She has been selected as a DST-INSPIRE research fellow, India. Her research interests include the solution-based synthesis of CZTS nanocrystals and thin films for solar cell applications.

Mahesh Suryawanshi
	Mahesh Suryawanshi obtained his MSc degree from Shivaji University, India (2010). He has been pursuing his PhD degree in Physics at Shivaji University under the supervision of Dr A. V. Moholkar since 2011. Currently, he is working as an exchange student for his PhD degree at Chonnam National University, South Korea, under the supervision of Prof. Jin Hyeok Kim. His research interests include the synthesis of CZTS thin films by the chemical layer-by-layer technique as well as synthesis of CZTS nanocrystals using the hot-injection technique and their applications in thin film solar cells.

Seung Wook Shin
	Dr Seung Wook received his MSc degree from Chonnam National University, South Korea. He received his PhD in 2014 under the supervision of Prof. J. Y. Lee from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). His research interests include electrodeposition and synthesis of NCs, thin film solar cell related materials (Cd-free buffer materials and wide band gap ZnO-based TCO materials), and their application in solar cells. He has been selected as a post doctorate in University of Minnesota under the supervision of Prof. E. Aydil.

Kishor Gurav
	Kishor Gurav received his PhD in 2010 from Department of Physics, Shivaji University, India. He is currently working as a post-doctoral researcher in Chonnam National University, S. Korea. His research interests include synthesis of CZTS films by chemical methods for thin film solar cells, and synthesis of metal oxides for sensors and supercapacitors.

Jin Hyeok Kim
	Prof. Jin Hyeok Kim received his PhD in 1996. He is currently a professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Chonnam National University, South Korea. He has been continuously engaged in the research field for more than last 20 years. His research interests include the fabrication and characterization of compound thin film solar cells, especially Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 thin films, using various methods, such as sputtering, electro-deposition, sol–gel, nanoparticles. He is also trying to study the synthesis of thin films of metal-chalcogenides and metal-oxides by physical, chemical, electrochemical methods and their applications in TCO, gas sensors, energy storage devices, etc.

Sanjay Kolekar
	Sanjay Kolekar’s research interests include solid state and dye sensitized solar cells, designing and applications of ionic liquids in material sciences, nanomaterials and separation science. He has been honoured with the best teacher award at home university, and his research work is recognized by World Gold Council. His papers are cited as most read and downloaded articles. He is an investigator of many research schemes funded by national funding agencies in India. He is a member of the panel of referees of journals published by ACS, Elsevier, Springer, Wiley etc. He is a visiting Professor at Universities in South Korea.

 	Fig. 1  Natural abundance of elements used in absorber layers for CdTe, CIGS, CIS and CZTS based TFSCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  The schematic representation of kesterite and stannite structures.	 

 	Fig. 3  The schematic representation of the nucleation and growth mechanism of synthesis of CZTS based NCs by the HI technique.	 

Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac)2, Sn bis(acac)2, S powder, OLA	225	225 °C for 30 min	1.5	15–25	Kesterite	Cu2.12Zn0.84Sn1.06S4	
69

Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac2), Sn bis(acac)2, S powder, OLA	225	225 °C for 30 min	1.05	15–25	Kesterite	Cu1.31Zn0.91Sn0.95S4	
70

Cu(OAc)2, ZnCl2, SnCl2, Se, OLA	150	240 °C for 2 h	1.52	17	Tetragonal	Cu2Zn0.84Sn1.24Se4.08	
71

CuCl2·2H2O, ZnCl2, SnCl2·2H2O, thiourea, OLA	235	235 °C for 30 min	1.52	22.5 × 13.9	Kesterite	—	
72

Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, SnCl2, S powder, OLA	130	240–280 °C	1.5	8–16	Kesterite & wurtzite	Cu2Zn1.02Sn1.12S3.66	
73

CuCl2, SnCl4, ZnCl2, TOPO, OLA	CTS = 260 SnS = 220ZnS = 170	CTS = 260 °C for 2 min SnS = 220 °C for 5 minZnS = 320 °C for 75 min	1.1	CTS = 5 SnS = 10ZnS = 10	Tetragonal	Cu1.7Zn1.2SnS0.6Se5.0	
90

Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc)2, S powder, TOPO, OLA	300	300 °C for 75 min	1.5	12.8	Tetragonal	Cu2ZnSnS4	
74

Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc)2, S and Se powder, TOPO, OLA, NaBH4	325	325 °C for 45 min	1.54–1.47	7.8 to 11.0	Kesterite	For x = 1 Cu1.9:Zn1.1:Sn1.0:Se4.0	
75

Cu(AcAc)2, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc)2, S powder, TPP, OLA	300	300 °C for 0.5 h	1.47	14.5 ± 4.6	Kesterite	Cu1.78Zn1.34Sn1S3.8	
76

CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl2, DDT, OLA, OA	240	240 °C for 1 h	1.4	
Nanoprism-28
Nanoplates-14
	Wurtzite	Cu2ZnSnS4	
78

Cu(acac)2, Zn(OAc)2, Sn(OAc), S powder, TOPO, ODE, 1-DDT, t-DDT	150–160	240–260 °C for 15–30 min	1.43	Nanorods (11 × 35)	Wurtzite	Cu2ZnSnS4	
79

CuCl, ZnCl2, SnCl4, HDA, TOPSe, ODE	295	295 °C for 5 min	∼1.0	20.0	Stannite	—	

Cu stearate, Sn stearates, thiourea, Se powder, OLA, ODE	270	270 °C for 1 h	1.0 to 1.5	Diameter 11–13	Kesterite and stannite	Cu2.03Zn0.83Sn0.96S4.16 Cu2.28Zn1.13Sn0.91S4.10	
80

CuCl2·2H2O, Zn(OAc)2H2O, SnCl2·2H2O, TEG, ODE, ODA	220	220 °C for 1 h	1.5	6.5	Kesterite	Cu2.73Zn0.6Sn1.14S3.86	
82

Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac)2, GeCl4, Sn(acac)2, OLA	160	280 °C for 1 h	1.65	∼5–30	Kesterite	—	
83

CuI, Zn(OAc)2, SnCl4, GeCl4, Se powder, OLA	290	—	1.33–1.63	∼15.4	Tetragonal	Cu2.02Zn1.12Sn1.03S3.91	
84

Cu (acac)2, Zn(acac)2, Sn bis(acac)2Br2, GeCl4, S powder, OLA	225	225 °C for 30 min	1.09	5–15	Kesterite	Cu1.64Zn1.25Sn0.75Ge0.25S4	
85

Cu (acac)2, Zn(acac)2, Sn bis(acac)Br2, GeI4, S powder, OLA	225	225 °C for 30 min	1.19	—	Kesterite	—	
41

Cu(AcAc)2, Zn(AcAc)2, Sn(AcAc)2Cl2, S powder, OLA, sodium acetate, oleic acid	225	225 °C for 30 min	—	15–20	Kesterite	—	
86


 	Fig. 4  TEM images of (a) CZTS, (b) CZTSe NCs and (c) spindle shaped CZTS NCs, respectively. [Reprinted from (a) Q. Guo, H. W. Hillhouse, and R. Agrawal, Synthesis of Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystal ink and its use for solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 131, 11673, Copyright (2009), with permission from American Chemical Society (b) H. Wei, W. Guo, Y. Sun, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Hot-injection synthesis and characterization of quaternary Cu2ZnSnSe4 nanocrystals, Mater. Lett., 64, 1424, Copyright (2010), with permission from Elsevier (c) M. Wei, Q. Du, D. Wang, W. Liu, G. Jiang, C. Zhu, Synthesis of spindle-like kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 nanoparticles using thiourea as sulfur source, Mater. Lett., 79, 177, Copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier.]	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of CZTS NCs, (b) XRD patterns of CZTSSe NCs and (c) band gap variation of CZTSSe NCs. [Reprinted from (a) S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, Solution-based synthesis and characterization of Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 131, Copyright (2009) with permission from American Chemical Society (b) and (c) S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, Compositionally tunable Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals: probing the effect of Se-inclusion in mixed chalcogenide thin films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 133, 15272, Copyright (2011) with permission from American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of (a) CZTS nano-prisms (b) CZTS nano-plates (c) CZTS NRs and (d) HR-TEM image of single bullet shaped CZTS NR. [Reprinted from (a) and (b) X. Lu, Z. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Wurtzite Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals: a novel quaternary semiconductor, Chem. Commun., 47, 3141, Copyright (2011) with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (c) and (d) A. Singh, H. Geaney, F. Laffir, K. M. Ryan, Colloidal synthesis of wurtzite Cu2ZnSnS4 nanorods and their perpendicular assembly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 134, 2910, Copyright (2012) with permission from American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of CZTS NCs synthesized via a modified two-phase method and (b) HR-TEM image of single CZTS NCs. [Reprinted from X. Wang, Z. Sun, C. Shao, D. Boye and J. Zhao, A facile and general approach to polynary semiconductor nanocrystals via a modified two phase method, Nanotechnology, 22, 245605, Copyright (2011) with permission from IOP publishing.]	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of as-synthesized CZTS:Na NCs and (b) HR-TEM image of as-synthesized single CZTS:Na NCs showing that the centre of NC is highly crystalline whereas the surface is amorphous. [Reprinted from H. Zhou, T. B. Song, W. C. Hsu, S. Luo, S. Ye, H. S. Duan, C. J. Hsu, W. Yang and Y. Yang, Rational defect passivation of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 photovoltaics with solution-processed Cu2ZnSnS4:Na nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 15998, Copyright (2013) with permission from American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 9  Evolution of conversion efficiencies of CZTS NCs based TFSCs using the HI technique.	 

CZTSSe	Drop casting	SLG/Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al	0.210	11.5	33.1	0.80	
69

CZTSSe	Knife coating	SLG/Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al	0.430	31.2	53.9	7.2	
70

CZTGeS	Doctor blade	SLG/Mo/CZGSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al	0.640	21.5	49	6.8	
83

CZTGeSSe	Doctor blade	SLG/Mo/CZTGeSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO	0.464	29.2	62	8.4	
85

CZTSSe	Spin coating	SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO	0.451	29.0	64.9	8.5	
90

CZTS:Na	Spin coating	Mo/CZTS:Na/CdS/Ag-nanowires-ITO	0.361	33.38	50.95	6.14	
86

CZTS	Spin coating	SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO	0.431	23.28	35.78	3.6	
76

CZTSSe	Doctor blade	SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO	0.404	35.1	63.7	9.0	
40

CZTGeSSe	Doctor blade	SLG/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO	0.460	31.9	63.8	9.4	
41


 	Fig. 10  The schematic representation of fabrication of CZTS based absorber layers using CZTS NCs inks.	 

 	Fig. 11  The schematic representation of fabrication of CZTS NC based devices with a configuration of glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/Al:ZnO/Al.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of typical device structure and (b) J–V characteristics of CZTS TFSCs. [Reprinted from Y. Kim, K. Woo, I. Kim, Y. S. Cho, S. Jeong and J. Moon, Highly concentrated synthesis of copper–zinc–tin–sulfide nanocrystals with easily decomposable capping molecules for printed photovoltaic applications, Nanoscale, 5, 10183, Copyright (2013) with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.]	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of a typical device structure, (b) Auger depth profile of the finished device, (c) J–V characteristics and (d) EQE spectrum of CZTSSe TFSCs fabricated using binary and ternary NCs. [Reprinted from Y. Cao, M. S. Denny, Jr., J. V. Caspar, W. E. Farneth, Q. Guo, A. S. Ionkin, L. Johnson, M. Lu, I. Malajovich, D. Radu, H. D. Rosenfeld, K. R. Choudhury and W. Wu, High-efficiency solution-processed Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 thin-film solar cells prepared from binary and ternary nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 15644, Copyright (2012) with permission from American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 14  Cross-sectional SEM images of “champion” (a) CZTSSe and (b) CZTGeSSe devices, (c) J–V characteristics of “champion” CZTSSe and CZTGeSSe devices (d) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of CZTSSe and CZTGeSSe devices (c), respectively. [Reprinted from C. J. Hages, S. Levcenco, C. K. Miskin, J. H. Alsmeier, D. A. Ras, R. G. Wilks, M. Bär, T. Unold and R. Agrawal, Improved performance of Ge-alloyed CZTGeSSe thin film solar cells through control of elemental losses, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., DOI: 10.1002/pip.2442, Copyright (2014) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.]	 

 	Fig. 15  Plot of band gap energy versus open circuit voltage of the CZTS based NPTFSCs.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
