Electrospinning of multilevel structured functional micro-/nanofibers and their applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA10451F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA10451F
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7290-7305Electrospinning of multilevel structured functional micro-/nanofibers and their applicationsJing Wu, Nü Wang, Yong Zhao* and Lei JiangKey Laboratory of Bio-Inspired Smart Interfacial Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China. E-mail: zhaoyong@buaa.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 10-8262-7566Received 30th January 2013, Accepted 28th February 2013First published on 1st March 2013AbstractElectrospinning is a straightforward and versatile way to fabricate multilevel structured ultrafine fibers down to the micro-/nanometer scale. In this review, recent achievements in electrospun fibers with multilevel surfaces and inner structures are presented. The multilevel surface structures include branched structures, porous structures, necklace structures and non-cylinder deformed structures. The multilevel inner structures are classified as peapod structures, multiwalled tube structures, wire-in-tube structures and multichannel structures. Furthermore, the outstanding properties of multilevel structured fibrous materials are discussed and highlighted. These electrospun multilevel structured materials have wide applications in sensing, filtration and adsorption, catalysis, energy storage, bio-field, and many other fields.Jing WuJing Wu is currently a Ph.D. student at the School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University. She received her Bachelor's degree (2007) in polymer materials and engineering from Tianjin University of Science and Technology, and her Master's degree (2010) in materials science from Yunnan University of China. In 2010, she joined Prof. Lei Jiang's group at Beihang University. Her current scientific interests are focused on the electrospinning of multilevel structured and multifunctional materials.Nü WangNü Wang is currently an assistant professor at the School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University. She received her Bachelor's degree from Jilin University of China in 2004, and her Ph.D. from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS), China in 2009 (with Prof. Lei Jiang). Her current scientific interests are focused on functional micro/nanomaterials prepared by electrospinning and their properties.Yong ZhaoYong Zhao is currently a professor at the School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University. He received his Ph.D. from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS), China in 2007 (with Prof. Lei Jiang). From 2007 to 2009, he worked at ICCAS as an assistant professor and associate professor. In 2011, he joined the School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University as a professor. His current scientific interests are focused on the electrostatic force fabrication of multilevel structured one-dimensional micro/nanomaterials, photocatalysis, and smart multifunctional materials.Lei JiangLei Jiang is currently a professor at the School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University and ICCAS. He received his B.S. degree (1987), M.S. degree (1990), and Ph.D. degree (1994) from Jilin University (Tiejin Li's group). He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Akira Fujishima's group at Tokyo University. In 1996, he worked as a senior researcher at Kanagawa Academy of Sciences and Technology with Prof. Kazuhito Hashimoto. He joined ICCAS in 1999. In 2009, he was elected academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His scientific interests are focused on bio-inspired surfaces and interfacial materials.1 IntroductionNature’s creatures have been endowed with a tremendous number of excellent biological materials with fascinating structures, which exhibit numerous optimized functions. With deeper and deeper understanding of materials in nature, it has been found that the most special properties of these substances come from their chemical elemental composition, as well as their multilevel micro-/nanostructures. In recent years, considerable research has concentrated on hierarchically complex structured materials, especially on the micro-/nanometer scale, to find the benefits of these unique structure-related properties.1–9Among the family of micro-/nanomaterials, one-dimensional (1D) materials, like wires, tubes and fibers, are one of the most important and representative categories and have found broad applications in electronics, optics, sensors, catalysis, solar cells and many other cutting-edge domains.10–12 The simplest 1D nanostructure is a cylindrical object with nanoscale diameter. Most solid nanowires or nanofibers approximate to such a cylindrical shape because it is usually the lowest energy state for a cylindrical object. A good number of elegant approaches have been developed in order to acquire all kinds of 1D micro-/nanomaterials from shorter wires to longer fibers. Besides scale reduction, another notable achievement in the development of microscopic 1D materials is that scientists have found that multilevel structures also result in many fascinating variations in properties and functions. As shown in Scheme 1, the multilevel structures are classified into two categories: surface structures and inner structures. Surface multilevel structures mainly refer to the down-sized secondary structures of primary cylindrical 1D materials, such as pine-tree like branched structures, porous structures, necklace structures and some other deformed structures. Inner multilevel structures, which are variants of the tubular structure, mainly include the peapod structure, the wire-in-tube structure, the multiwalled tube structure and the multichannel structure. These multilevel structured 1D nanomaterials are attractive because they offer a larger specific area and additional heterogeneous interfaces, which play important roles in enhancing the nano-sized effect. Therefore, scientists have paid considerable attention to preparing these interesting 1D nanomaterials. For example, the nanopeapod structure, where spherical molecules or nanoparticles acting as “peas” are contained in nanotubes (“pods”), is a typical multisegmented structure that has been extensively studied. Smith et al. prepared carbon nanotubes in which C60 was encapsulated.13 Apart from carbon materials, metal or metal oxide pod components have been extensively studied.14–19 Yang and co-workers fabricated Pi/NiO hollow nanopeapods by regulating the oxidation of Ni in predesigned multi-segmented Ni/Pt nanowires.20 In addition, foam-like21 and bamboo-like22 structures can also been achieved due to the Rayleigh instability of the liquid column in the formation of pod chains that turn into an array of liquid columns. Xia and Sun reported coaxial layer nanotubes with more than two walls.23 First, Ag nanowires were obtained using a modified polyol process. Then a thin sheath of Ag was coated on nanowires by electroless plating. After repeating the galvanic replacement reactions, a new tubular wall with a slightly larger lateral diameter could be formed. Not only double walled but also multiwalled coaxial nanotubes could be synthesized by repeating the process. Yan and co-workers reported single-crystalline hematite tube-in-tube nanostructures, formed through a multisite dissolution process of the ellipsoid precursors by a facile one-step hydrothermal method.24 Scheme 1  Illustration of electrospun fibers with multilevel micro-/nanostructures and their applications. These materials are classified into two categories. One is surface multilevel structures, including branched, porous, necklace-like and non-cylinder structures. The other is inner multilevel structures, such as peapod, wire-in-tube, multiwalled and multichannel structures. Multilevel structures afford larger specific areas and additional heterogeneous interfaces, which play important roles in enhancing the nano-sized effect. Such multilevel structured materials exhibit superior properties to bulk or the same size counterparts, which give them broad applications in sensors, energy storage, catalysis, biomedicine, filtration and many other fields. In the diverse range of approaches, chemical methods and physical deposition methods tend to produce shorter rods or wires, but they are often incapable of making longer fibers. In recent years, a versatile and promising electrospinning method for generating micro-/nano structured materials with well controllable compositions, structures, properties and functionalities has been developed. Electrospinning is a simple technique that can stretch viscous liquids (often polymer solutions) into ultrafine fibers using electrostatic force. As far as we know, this is the only universal method that can be applied to produce nanofibers from a very broad range of materials, from polymers to hybrids to inorganics. Moreover, the prominent advantage of the electrospinning approach lies in that it has huge potential to tune the configuration of the spinning setup, as well as abundant post treatment methods for the electrospun products. It thereby leaves vast scope for researchers to tailor the structures and properties of electrospun fibers.In this review, we outline some representative progress in electrospun multilevel structured functional micro-/nanofibers, as shown in Scheme 1. Firstly, we introduce the fabrication of micro-/nanofibers with diverse surface and inner multilevel structures by electrospinning. Then we discuss the composition and structure related special properties of the electrospun fibers. In the third part, we present some applications of the multilevel structured electrospun nanofibers or films. Finally, we give some personal outlook in this area.2 Multilevel structured micro/nanofibers fabricated by electrospinningElectrospinning is a composite word composed of two words, i.e., electrostatic and spinning. Obviously, it is a technique that uses electrostatic force to spin fibers. This method was firstly proposed by Anton Formhals in 1934. However, it did not attract much attention until the 1990s. The neglect of this technique is probably due to two reasons. On the one hand, the high voltage electrostatic generation technique was not very mature in earlier years. On the other hand, researchers were not aware of the small size effect of electrospun nanofibers before the rise of nanotechnology. As we know, nanotechnology has become the hottest multi-disciplinary research area. Helped by nanotechnology, the electrospinning technique was recovered by Reneker et al. in 1994, because they found it is a simple and powerful method for generating ultrafine fibers down to the nanoscale. Since then, many researchers not only in academia but also in industry have focused their attention on this topic in the last two decades.Electrospinning is a very powerful method for creating diverse kinds of microstructures. For example, polystryrene can be easily electrospun from uniform smooth ultrafine fibers to a porous microspheres/nanofibers composite structure to deformed porous microparticles, simply by changing the concentration of the spinning solution.25 Cedar-like hierarchical nanostructured TiO2 film with anatase/rutile composite phase and ZnO/TiO2 hierarchical structures with high densities of secondary ZnO nanostructures grown on primary TiO2 were fabricated via a combination of electrospinning and hydrothermal techniques.26,27 Recently, ultrathin polystyrene fibers with porous structures on their surfaces have been successfully fabricated.28 The porous structure distributed on the fibrous surfaces is caused by the volatile solvent (Fig. 1a and b). Knotted fibers can be easily obtained by coaxial electrospinning (Fig. 1c and d).29 Polystyrene acts as supporting fiber on which balsam-pear-like poly(methyl methacrylate) knots are distributed for Rayleigh instability effect. Such spider-silk-like structures exhibited fog harvesting capacity. Different fiber topologies, like non-cylindrical fibers, can also be obtained when immiscible polymers are electrospun from the same solvent. During the process of solvent evaporation, phase separation and selective removal of a certain phase from the mixed polymers, bimodal or spinodal structures are acquired.30 Fig. 1  (a) SEM image of porous polystyrene fibers (b), blue dotted square: amplification of fibrous surface. (b) SEM image of knotted fibers. PS fibers wrapped with PMMA knots can be observed (orange dotted square: amplification of the fiber and knot). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28 and 29. Copyright American Chemical Society (2012) and John Wiley & Sons (2012). Thanks to two great advances in the evolution of electrospinning – coaxial electrospinning31–34 and side-by-side electrospinning31,35 – not only can multilevel structure surfaces be fabricated, but nanofibers with controllable inner multilevel structures can also be obtained. Compared with other methods, it is attractive for the fabrication of a number of core–shell or anisotropic materials, since it is a simple and efficient method. Notable examples include coaxial, microfluidic manifold, and triple-layer coaxial structures.36,37 Lahann and Bhaskar prepared multicompartmental fibers via co-jetting electrospinning using two or more poly(lactide-co-glycolide) polymers, which yielded biodegradable microfibers with multiple chemically distinct compartments.38 The individual compartments can differ with respect to their chemical compositions, which are controlled by the chemical composition of the initial jetting solutions (Fig. 2a). Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) demonstrated the extremely well-shaped multifibers and the clear boundaries between compartments in the fibers (Fig. 2b–e). Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the co-jetting process using a dual capillary assembly (red and blue). This approach can be extended to the fabrication of multicompartmental microfibers by incorporating additional outlet streams (grey). (b) CLSM image of bicompartmental microfibers. Scale bar in (b) represents 20 μm. (c–e) Tricompartmental microfiber isomers: (c) sRGB; (d) tetracompartmental microfiber scaffold showing alternating red and green compartments; (e) heptacompartmental microfiber scaffold resembling a flower. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright American Chemical Society (2009). Based on the routine coaxial electrospinning method, we reported an improved multifluidic coaxial electrospinning technique that could fabricate core–shell ultrathin fibers with a special nanowire-in-microtube structure.39 As shown in Fig. 3, a TiO2 nanowire was embedded in a TiO2 microtube. Three coaxial capillaries were assembled as the spinneret, and a chemically inert middle fluid was introduced to act as the spacer between the outer and inner fluids. Under the protection of a suitable middle fluid, various outer and inner fluid pairs, and even a couple of completely miscible fluids can be used to form a three-layered core–shell structure, and by removing the middle fluid a wire-in-tube structure can be prepared. Fig. 3  Cross-sectional SEM (a) and TEM (b) images of TiO2 fibers, which show the interesting wire-in-tube structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010). Such an electrospinning system can be used for the fabrication of a three-layered core–shell structure. However, it shows limitations in producing multicomponent materials, especially with miscible components. So we developed a novel multifluidic electrospinning technology to generate multichannel hollow fibers in one step. As shown in Fig. 4a, the experimental setup is characterized by the hierarchical compound nozzle which is assembled by embedding two or more metallic capillaries separately into a blunt metal needle. A certain viscous fluid was fed into the blunt metal needle as the shell fluid, and other fluids that were immiscible with the shell fluid were delivered into the compound hierarchical nozzle as the inner fluid. By taking advantage of the multifluidic compound-jet electrospinning technique, hierarchical multichannel microtubes can be fabricated in a facile and straightforward manner. It was obvious that the middle wall of the tubes in the vertical direction was straight, and divided the tube into two, three, or four (Fig. 4b, d and e).40 Such multichannel tubes were successfully used for the storage and release of thermal energy in a stepwise manner.41 Meanwhile, by controlling the voltage and electrospinning solution concentration during the electrospray process, particle spheres with several inner chambers corresponding to the design of the inner hierarchical compound nozzles could be prepared (Fig. 4c and f).42 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the multifluidic electrospinning setup. The immiscible inner and outer fluids are issued separately from individual capillaries. After electrospinning, a fibrous film is collected on the counter electrode. (b, d and e) SEM images of multichannel tubes with variable diameter and number of channels, corresponding to tubes with two, three and four channels. Scale bars are 100 nm. (c and f) Two- and four-chamber spheres could also be fabricated by this method. Scale bars are 500 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 and 42. Copyright American Chemical Society (2007, 2008). Recently, an emulsion electrospinning method has been developed to allow the encapsulation of functional materials into fibers to form hollow structures, multilevel structures, and many other special morphologies and shapes. But an emulsion is a metastable system that could demulsify when it is in storage for a long time or during the electrospinning process. We reported a versatile microemulsion electrospinning method to fabricate ultraporous inorganic oxide nanofibers with hierarchical inner structures (Fig. 5).43 The microemulsion is far more stable than an emulsion system. Therefore, it could be easily electrospun into nanofibers by using, for example, a metal alkoxide and paraffin oil system. After calcination, i.e., selective removal of the oil phase, the ultrathin hybrid nanofibers decomposed to form multilevel porous inorganic nanofibers. Fig. 5  (a and b) Cross-sectional SEM images of porous TiO2 nanofibers. (c) Confocal laser scanning microscopy image of fibers fabricated from a partially demulsified solution prepared with excess paraffin oil. (d) TEM image of nanofibers after calcination showing a discontinuous bamboo structure. Inset: magnification of a single segment showing the existence of mesopores on the wall. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright John Wiley & Sons (2011). 3 Unique properties of electrospun multilevel structured materials3.1 Fabrication of special structured materials inspired by natureElectrospinning is currently a facile method that allows the fabrication of fibers with complex secondary architectures such as pores, knots, cilium-like nanostructures, micrometer-scale papillae, etc. These hierarchical structures not only provide a huge specific area, abundant inner voids and many other advantageous properties superior to those of bulk materials or the same sized materials, but are also an advantageous way to fabricate competitive candidates for biomimetic materials that provide a model for the development of functional materials from nature. As we know, a tremendous number of fascinating materials and structured surfaces have been built by nature, such as the lotus leaf,10,44,45 silver ragwort leaves,46,47 water strider legs,11,48 and spider silk,49 as well as the anisotropic wetting of butterfly wings,50 and rice leaves.51 All the structures mentioned above have unique surface structures, either micro-, nano- or micro-/nano combined structures, which have been demonstrated to be obtainable by electrospinning (Fig. 6). Ding and co-workers demonstrated the fabrication of the silver ragwort leaf structure by electrospinning a polystyrene solution in the presence of silica nanoparticles. Numerous nano-protrusions and grooves were obtained.46 Inspired by water strider legs, the same group also successfully prepared “water strider's leg” by electrospinning a polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane–poly(methyl methacrylate) copolymer. Interestingly, the bead-free electrospun fibers showed a nano-fibrillated structure under electron microscopic observations and an ordered surface molecular arrangement under an atomic force microscope. These features have not been reported for any other electrospun fibres.52 Pan and co-workers reported the biomimetic fabrication of the water strider's leg structure by using specially designed nanofiber collectors, which contained a spiculate metal needle perpendicular to a rectilinear metal strip as the fiber collector instead of two parallel electrodes during electrospinning.53 Nair and co-workers reported that uniformly distributed rice grain shaped TiO2 mesostructures with high surface area could be produced by a simple and inexpensive electrospinning method.54,55 Meanwhile, inspired by spider silk which exhibits effective water collection properties, we fabricated knotted microfibers for fog harvesting by coaxial electrospinning.29,56 Fig. 6  (a, d, g and j) Photographs of a lotus leaf, silver ragwort leaf, a water strider, and spider silk. (b, e, h and k) SEM images of a lotus leaf, silver ragwort leaf, water strider's leg, and spider silk. (c, f, i and l) SEM images of biomimetic electrospun lotus leaf, silver ragwort leaf, water strider's leg, and spider silk structures, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10 and 11 and ref. 44–50. Copyright Springer (1997), Nature Publishing Group (2010), American Chemical Society (2005, 2007, 2009, 2010), and Royal Society of Chemistry (2006–2008, 2011). 3.2 Responsive features of multilevel structured fibersElectrospinning can generate fibers with sub-micrometer to nanometer diameters and a high specific surface area, which can demonstrate a fast response to external stimuli. In the following section, an up-to-date overview of the work done so far on stimuli-responsive capabilities, another important property of electrospun fibers, is given.3.2.1 pH sensitivity. pH sensitive polymer non-woven fabrics have attracted a lot of attention for their potential applications in sensory devices, or pH controlled release in drug delivery and release. As we know, by switching the pH between values above and below the known coil–globule transition, one can create sustained oscillations in the size of the polymeric material, which can be used to exert an external force or used as a sensor or actuator. Ryan and co-workers prepared poly(methyl methacrylate)-block-(methyl methacrylate)poly[2(diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate]-block-poly(PMMA273-b-PDEA688-b-PMMA273) triblock polymer nanofibers. Meanwhile, solvent annealing was used to obtain ordered structures of microdomains. A comparative study of the gel, fibrous, and annealed fiber material has been undertaken to monitor their respective behaviors in a pH-oscillating environment. The fibrous samples displayed much faster response times than the corresponding films because the diffusion rates were significantly increased (Fig. 7).57 Fig. 7  (a) Microscopic images of the hydrogel, the bundle of fibers and a fibril of the annealed fibers at pH 7.3 (left) and pH 3.5 (right). The scale bars represent 1 mm for each image. (b) pH versus time plot (solid line) for the permanganate pH-oscillatory system and the corresponding two-dimensional response results (discontinuous line) at each extreme of the pH-cycle of a 230 μm thick copolymer hydrogel. (c) pH versus time plot (solid line) for the permanganate pH-oscillatory system and the corresponding two-dimensional response results (discontinuous line) at each extreme of the pH-cycle of a rolled-up bundle of fibers. The quick response rate was due to the higher surface to volume ratio and the ultrathin diameters of the electrospun fibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright American Chemical Society (2007). Ionic polymer gels have been known to change in volume due to external stimuli. Much research has concentrated on electrospun hydrogels in order to fully combine the advantages of the sensitive response ability provided by hydrogels and the quick response rate resulting from the higher surface to volume ratio and ultrathin diameters of electrospun fibers. Hsieh and Jin et al. described the fabrication of pH-responsive swelling poly(vinyl alcohol)–poly(acrylic acid) bi-component fibrous hydrogel membranes by electrospinning. With increasing pH value, the equilibrium swelling of the fibrous films increased. Compared with monolithic films prepared by solvent casting, the electrospun film had significantly higher equilibrium swelling in the thickness than in the planar direction over the entire pH range, and distinguishes itself as having far stronger and faster re-absorption in the swollen state than the cast film due to the asymmetric distribution of the electrospun fibers.58 Whisman et al. reported sub-micron diameter polyacrylonitrile fibers made by electrospinning, in which the shape changes can be observed when placed in solutions with different pH values. Such results showed the potential for developing fast actuating polyacrylonitrile muscles and linear actuators.59 Furthermore, Yang and co-workers designed a two-nozzle electrospinning technique to fabricate a pH sensitive membrane which combined polyacrylonitrile and polyamide-66. Taking advantage of the use of polyamide-66, the mechanical properties of the membrane, especially its elastic and flexible behavior, improved significantly. The tensile strength was enhanced from 1.3 MPa to 6.90 MPa, which is beneficial for the practical use of the sensitive membrane.60 Other kinds of hydrogel nanofibers which show asymmetric or symmetric shape change, such as poly[styrene-co-(maleic sodium anhydride)], cellulose (SMA-Na/cellulose),61 and crosslinked poly[acrylamide-co-(maleic acid)]62 have also been prepared.Luminescent electrospun fibers could be attractive materials for potential sensory applications. Chen and co-workers prepared luminescent electrospun fibers for a pH-tunable colorimetric sensor. A 5 wt% poly(phenylquinoline)-block-polystyrene (PPQ-b-PS)–PS blend was used, and the PPQ-b-PS–PS fibers were prepared from dichloromethane (CH2Cl2), chloroform (CHCl3) and chlorobenzene (CB) solvents. The different solvents used in the electrospun systems played an important role in the PPQ aggregation size and excimer formation. The photoluminescence spectra of the PPQ-b-PS–PS blend fibers prepared from the above different solvents varied with the pH value. Compared with the other two samples, the emission maximum of the fibers prepared from CH2Cl2 shifted the most significantly, from 532 nm at pH = 7 to 560 nm at pH = 1, which is probably due to the smaller PPQ aggregation size and the porous fibrous structure.63 So far, these pH-sensitive electrospun fibers have been reported to have wide applications in drug delivery,64–66 enzyme encapsulation,35 tumors and so on.67,683.2.2 Temperature sensitivity. Over the past 30 years, the thermo-responsive poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAm), which undergoes a coil–globule conformation change in water as its polymer chains show reversible hydrogen bonding capability with water molecules caused by enthalpic and entropic contributions to the free energy, has been explored to a large extent for its temperature responsive properties.69 Lee and Jeong prepared three-dimensional poly(L-lactide-co-ε-caprolactone) (PLCL) nanofibrous mats, and NIPAAm was then grafted onto their surfaces by Co-γ irradiation. The equilibrium swelling and deswelling ratio of the PNIPAAm-g-PLCL nanofibers was higher. The phase-separation characteristics of PNIPAAm in aqueous conditions conferred a unique temperature-responsive swelling property to PNIPAAm-g-PLCL, which showed the ability to absorb a large amount of water at <32 °C and abrupt collapse when the temperature was increased to 40 °C. In accordance with the temperature-dependent changes in the swelling behavior, the drug delivery and release rate (indomethacin and fluorescein isothiocyanate were used as examples) could be regulated by the change in temperature.70 Chen and co-workers prepared poly[2,7-(9,9-dihexylfluorene)]-block-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PF-b-PNIPAAm)–PMMA blend nanofibers via two-capillary spinneret electrospinning systems, with the 25 wt% PF-b-PNIPAAm–75 wt% PMMA blend in THF as the core solution and pure THF solvent as the shell. This method can efficiently prevent phase separation, and can be used to easily obtain uniform electrospun fibers. Due to the extended/compact structural transformation of PNIPAAm which led to different PF aggregation sizes, the as-prepared nanofibers exhibited a reversible shift in their photoluminescence spectrum as the temperature was varied between 20 °C and 40 °C.71As well as thermal responsivity of morphology (swelling or deswelling) and photoluminescence spectra, controllable wettability can also be obtained, i.e., being hydrophobic in one condition and superhydrophilic in another condition. We firstly fabricated low-cost poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)–polystyrene (PNIPAAm–PS) composite films with thermoresponsive wettability by electrospinning. By altering the PS concentration in the electrospinning system, obvious wettability changes can be realized near the lower critical solution temperature (LCST). Using a raw electrospinning solution composed of PNIPAAm, PS and tetrahydrofuran (THF) in the ratio 2:10:90 (w/w/w), the wettability of the as-prepared fibrous mat could be switched between superhydrophilicity and superhydrophobicity with a change in temperature from 20 °C to 50 °C (Fig. 8).72 Accordingly, many similar studies have been concerned with such temperature-dependent wettability properties. As examples, Gu et al., Sigmund et al., and Linhardt et al. produced PNIPAAm–poly-L-lactide and PNIPAAm–PLLA composite fibrous films, PS–PNIPAAm blended crossliked PNIPAAm–PMA electrospun mats, and PNIPAAm–cellulose nanofibers, respectively, all of which demonstrate reversibly switchable surface wettability.73–75 Jeong and co-workers prepared core–sheath nanofibers containing colloidal arrays in the core by simple one-syringe needle electrospinning. Poly(ε-caprolactone) was chosen as the shell material, while monodisperse PNIPAAm microgels and cross-linked PMMA colloids were used as the colloids in the core. Hydrophilic drugs can be readily incorporated into the PNIPAAm colloids by taking advantage of their swelling/deswelling behavior in water on heating. This behavior can give rise to the encapsulation of multiple drugs in the nanofibers and the possibility of independently controlling their behaviors.76 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of PNIPAAm–PS composite film. (b) Blue dotted square: magnification of the PNIPAAm–PS composite film. (c) Photographs of a water droplet on the PNIPAAm–PS composite film. It shows thermoresponsive properties, with a switch between superhydrophilicity at low temperature (20 °C) and superhydrophobicity at high temperature (50 °C). (d) Reversibility of water CA transition of the PNIPAAm–PS composite film at two different temperatures. Half cycles: 20 °C, and integral cycles: 50 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright John Wiley & Sons (2008). Except for directly electrospun PNIPAAm or PNIPAAm copolymers, PNIPAAm can be grafted onto an electrospun polymer surface by click chemistry. By taking advantage of this method, the poor electrospinning of PNIPAAm can be mitigated, and PNIPAAm brushes can be grafted onto fibrous surfaces. Fu and co-workers prepared 4-vinylbenzyl chloride (VBC) and glycidylmethacrylate (GMA) (PVBC-b-PGMA) via reversible addition–fragmentation chain-transfer (RAFT) polymerization, and nanofibers were obtained by electrospinning. Furthermore, the PVBC-b-PGMA nanofibers were exposed to a solution of sodium azide to afford the surface with azide groups and a crosslinked structure. PNIPAAm brushes have been grafted onto these fibers to form a PVBC-b-PGMA-g-PNIPAM nanofibrous mat. The grafted fibrous mat shows reversible temperature-dependent wettability changes. What's more, after “click chemistry”, the preparation of solvent-resistant nanofibers with thermal sensitivity can be achieved.77 By taking advantage of the combined technology of electrospinning and two facile thiol–ene click chemistry processes (photo-initialized thiol–ene radical addition and thiol-Michael nucleophilic addition), poly((3-mercaptopropyl)methylsiloxane) (PMMS)-g-PNIPAM electrospun fibers could be fabricated, which show thermo-sensitive behavior to the environment.783.2.3 Photo and magnetic sensitivity. Among various kinds of materials with photo/optical responsive properties, in this review we focus our attention on conjugated polymers, semiconducting inorganic nanofibers/nanorods and photo responsive polymers, and examine their photo/optical responsive abilities.Samuelson et al. have reported conjugated polymer electrospun fibers with optical responsivity.79 Fluorescent poly(acrylic acid)–poly(pyrene methanol) (PAA–PM) mixed with crosslinked polyurethane latex was used as the electrospun polymer, in the presence of Fe3+, Hg2+ and 2,4-dinitrotoluene, which can serve as quenchers for a fluorophore. Due to the interactions of the electron-rich PM indicator (−) and the electron deficient quencher (+), the fluorescence was quenched efficiently, indicating superior sensitivity in the range of a few parts per billion. According to the Stern–Volmer equation, the sensitivity process can be tailored by controlling the quencher diffusion rate to the fluorophores via the microstructural properties of the sensing film. It is obvious that a higher surface area of the electrospun membranes leads to the increase of quencher diffusion rate. That is the main reason for the enhanced sensitivity. Recently, Liu and co-workers used tetrakis(4-methoxylphenyl) porphyrin as a model of small molecule fluorophores and polystyrene as a substrate to fabricate a fluorescent nanofiber film with secondary porous structure by electrospinning. The sensitivity capacity for four kinds of nitroamine explosives showed that the secondary porous structure largely improved the sensitivity, satisfactory reproducibility, reversibility and selectivity properties.80 As mentioned above, the advantage of electrospinning in the fabrication of photo/optical responsive films is its simplicity and its ability to create a large surface area.Currently, semiconducting nanomaterials such as nanowires and nanorods have also attracted interest for their unique photo/optical and electronic properties. Since electrospun nanofibers are continuous and easy to align and assemble, much research has concentrated on fabricating semiconducting nanofibers via electrospinning. Aligned ZnO nanofibers were prepared by the electrospinning of a solution containing zinc acetate and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) by Zhu and co-workers.81 Using the current at a voltage of 40 V as a function of time when nanosensors were alternately in the dark and exposed to the UV light, the PVP-coated ZnO nanofibers were more sensitive than the pristine ones. At a UV light intensity of 12 mW cm−2, the current of the PVP–ZnO nanofibers was approximately two times higher than that of the pristine ones, because the electrons trapped by PVP at the grain boundary and the surface of the nanofibers could recombine with the photon-generated holes, leaving the photo-generated free electrons for conduction.81 Deng and co-workers prepared hierarchically structured ZnO nanorods on ZnO nanofibers by using the electrospinning method combined with hydrothermal reaction (Fig. 9).82 Meanwhile, PVP–In(NO3)3·4.5H2O composite nanofibers,83 poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV)–CdSe sub-micron fibers,84 CdS–PEO nanofibers,85 Ga2O3 nanofibers86 and other kinds of semiconducting nanomaterials could also be obtained straightforwardly and easily. Fig. 9  (a–d) SEM images of (a) the electrospun ZnO nanofibers, and (b–d) ZnO nanorod-on-ZnO nanofiber composite structures. (e) Current–time curves with UV light on and off. The UV detection sensitivity increased with the concentration of the nutrient solution due to the increase of the nanorod density. (f) Reversibility of the ZnO nanorod-on-ZnO nanofiber composite used for UV detection, demonstrating the reversibility of the current under UV light irradiation for hierarchically structured ZnO nanorod-on-ZnO nanofiber obtained using 20 mM nutrient solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright Elsevier (2010). Intriguingly, smart molecules display sensitive and reversible responses to external photo-stimuli, such as spiropyrans, azobenzene and their derivatives. Dario and co-workers fabricated 1′,3′-dihydro-1′,3′,3′-trimethyl-6-nitrospiro (6-NO2-BIPS) nanofibers based on poly(methyl methacrylate). The photochromic molecule caused the color of the nanofibrous film to switch under light. Meanwhile, due to the photochromism coupled with light-controllable transformations of the molecular properties, the wettability of the fibrous surface changed before and after light irradiation.87 Chen and Besenbacher focused their attention on novel nanofibers of biodegradable polycaprolactone (PCL) modified with light responsive azobenzene prepared by electrospinning. Using a suitable azobenzene concentration, large reversible and light-responsive wettability changes of the fibrous surfaces could be realized due to the trans–cis isomerization of the azobenzene chromophores. The maximum water contact angle of the PCL-azo electrospun fibrous mat could change from 132.2 ± 2.8° to 53.1 ± 3.2° under UV/vis irradation, which demonstrated that the wettability changed from hydrophobic to hydrophilic.88 As mentioned previously, polymers modified with photo-responsive molecules may be attractive for their easy accessibility, and the photo-controlled on–off system is promising for wettability control.Greiner and co-workers dispersed cobalt nanoparticles in a methyl methacrylate (99.86 mol%) and 9-vinylanthracene (Anth, 0.14 mol%) (P(MMA-c-VA)) copolymer. Co-modified P(MMA-c-VA) fibers with diameters ranging from 1–3 μm and a porous structure were obtained. These fibers were cut to an average length of around 50–100 μm. When dispersed in water and placed on a microscope slide furnished with fixed embryonic hippocampal neurons, the fibers could move and rotate under an external magnet. The fibers also acted as “bridges” between two hippocampal neurons.89 They also fabricated pure cobalt and iron aligned fibers. Using superconducting quantum interference device measurements, a large difference in the hysteresis loops of the fibers orientated parallel and perpendicular could clearly be seen.90 Liu and co-workers reported Fe3O4 nanoparticle-decorated multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) for the preparation of electrically conductive and magnetic poly(lactide) (PLA) electrospun nanofibers.91 The Diels–Alder reaction was firstly applied for the Fe3O4 decoration on the MWCNTs. Then the resulting magnetic MWCNTs were functionalized with PLA through an ozone-mediated process (mCNT–PLA). mCNT–PLA fibers were obtained via electrospinning. Not only did the fibers show magnetic properties, but the toughness of mCNT–PLA also increased dramatically (Fig. 10). Fig. 10  (a) Photographs showing the magnetic properties of the ENF-mCNT-0.3 electrospun mat. (b) Under the application of a magnetic field, the nanofibrous mat moves near to the magnetic field. (c) High-resolution TEM micrograph of ENF-mCNT-0.3 electrospun nanofibers. (d) Stress–strain curves of electrospun neat PLA and ENF-mCNT-0.3 mats. The picture shows the elongation of the ENF-mCNT-0.3 mat in the test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2012). 3.2.4 Chemical sensitivity. Various kinds of materials have been used as chemical detectors. Here, we give three examples of the response of electrospun materials to chemical stimuli: gas (including humidity and chemical gas), protein and glucose.In general, many attempts have been made to prepare gas sensors using polymers, semiconductors, carbon graphites as well as organic–inorganic composites to detect vapors of moisture, NH3, H2S, CO, NO2, CO2 and volatile organic chemicals (VOCs). Accordingly, difference approaches such as impedance,92 capacity, optics,93 and quartz crystal microbalance (QCM)94–96 have been adopted to detect humidity and chemical gases. Since research in Ding's group with respect to electrospinning is mainly focused on the fabrication of sensors and a summary of gas sensors was reported in 2009,97 herein, we mainly focus our attention on humidity sensitivity.The main principle of polymer humidity sensitivity is based on the swelling of a thin film in correlation with the amount of water absorbed. A high surface to volume ratio benefits the absorption and swelling process. Taking the QCMs method as an example, Vogt and co-workers fabricated a poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)–poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) multilayer polymer film and coated it onto the electrode of QCMs. A stable detection system could be obtained, but it was inefficient.98 Ding and co-workers demonstrated that when the PAA–PVA multilayer film was replaced by an electrospun PAA–PVA film, the sensitivity was increased by more than two orders of magnitude.99Apart from polymers which can swell on adsorption of water, inorganic materials also show excellent humidity response capacity. The most popular inorganic humidity sensitive materials are TiO2 and ZnO. Wei and co-workers designed and fabricated LiCl doped TiO2 electrospun nanofibers.100 The as-prepared sample exhibited excellent sensing characteristics, including an ultrafast response time (≤3 s) and recovery time (<7 s) for measuring relative humidity over a wide range of 11–95%, with the impendence changing from 107 to 104 Ω. Zhang and co-workers reported that KCl doped TiO2 nanofibers could be synthesized by electrospinning and calcination. When KCl–TiO2 was used as working electrodes, an obvious improvement in humidity sensing properties was obtained, with the resistance varying by more than four orders of magnitude in the range of 11–95% relative humidity.101 Mg2+ and Na+ doped rutile TiO2 nanofibers have been prepared by Wang and co-workers through an in situ electrospinning technique and calcinations, with poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) nanofibers as sacrificial templates (Fig. 11).102 The product exhibited high-speed response (2s) and recovery (1s) for detecting moisture. Additionally, under UV irradiation, TiO2 was superhydrophilic, which endows the product with anti-fogging properties. Similarly excellent sensing properties can be also obtained for ZnO by doping with KCl,103 LiCl,104 Co,105 Na+,106etc. Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of the TiO2 nanofibers containing 5.56 wt% Mg2+ and 0.22 wt% Na+. (b) Humidity hysteresis of the product. (c) Response and recovery behavior of the product for one cycle. (d) Response and recovery behavior of the product for ten cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright Elsevier (2009). Glucose is a universal nutrient preferred by most organisms, and plays fundamental roles in energy supply, biosynthesis, carbon skeleton and cell wall formation in humans and animals. Presently, the development of amperometric glucose sensors is a hot research area due to its importance in diabetes mellitus. Fast, sensitive and selective glucose sensing is always in high demand because glucose detection is incredibly important to patients suffering from diabetes. Taking advantage of electrospun fibers or mats which show large surface areas, nonwoven porous and high surface to volume ratio electrospun mats can benefit fast transmission. Most recent works related to glucose responsive sensors have been based on the immobilization of an enzyme like glucose oxidase or dehydrogenase that catalyses the oxidation of glucose to gluconolactone on the electrode. The main principle is that by using an enzyme-immobilized surface as the electrode, electron transfer can be achieved and tested. Nanofibrous glucose electrodes were fabricated by the immobilization of glucose oxide onto an electrospun composite membrane consisting of PMMA dispersed with MWCNTs wrapped by a cationic polymer poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) by Lee and co-workers.107 Glucose could be amperometrically detected at +100 mV (vs. Ag/AgCl) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (PBS, pH 7). The linear response for glucose detection was in the range of 20 μM to 15 mM with a detection limit of 1 μM and a shorter response time of ∼4 s. However, due to the intrinsic features of enzymes, glucose-based sensing suffers from a stability problem. Therefore, non-enzymatic based sensing has been developed. Lee and co-workers prepared an electrospun nanofibrous membrane of poly(vinylidene fluoride) and poly(aminophenylboronic acid) (PVdF–PAPBA-NFM) composite. The PVdF–PAPBA-NFM displayed an excellent linear response for the detection of glucose in the concentration range of 1 to 15 mM with a response time of less than 6 s.108 Kobayashi and co-workers reported an enzyme-free glucose-responsive electrospun nanofibrous poly(styrene-co-acrylamide)–polystyrene sulfonic acid (PSA–PSSA) mat, on which 3-aminobenzene boronic acid (ABBA) self-assembled as a glucose-sensitive moiety. The as-prepared enzyme-free sensor exhibited a fast amperometric response, i.e. about 4 s, and linearity to glucose ranging from 0.75 to 14 mM with a sensitivity of 0.987 μA mM−1 cm−2.109 Besides using a polymer as the matrix, metal or metal oxides were applied to modify electrodes for non-enzymatic determination. Copper oxide nanofibers prepared by electrospinning and subsequent thermal treatment processes were demonstrated for the first time for non-enzymatic glucose determination.110 A high sensitivity (431.3 μA mM−1 cm−2), fast response (about 1 s), long-term stability and excellent resistance towards electrode fouling in glucose determination at +0.40 V were obtained. A renewable Ni nanoparticle-loaded carbon nanofiber paste composite electrode111 was prepared by the combination of an electrospinning technique with a thermal treatment method. A low detection limit of 1 μM with a wide linear range from 2 μM to 2.5 mM could be obtained. The current response of the proposed glucose sensor was highly sensitive and stable, attributed to the electrocatalytic performance of the firmly embedded Ni nanoparticles as well as the chemical inertness of the carbon-based electrode.Protein sensing can be understood as the ability to rapidly detect and identify the presence of certain kinds of biomarker protein and/or irregular protein concentrations like the “chemical nose/tongue”. Sensitive, convenient and precise protein sensing methods are crucial tools for the early diagnosis of diseases and the successful treatment of patients.112 Excellent selectivity as well as easy complex sample preparation are urgently required. Recently, Sukwattanasinitt and co-workers reported a novel fluorescent sensing material fabricated by electrospinning that has a high surface to volume ratio and can easily be regenerated for high throughput fingerprint analysis. Four kinds of dendritic fluorophores (AFD-3, AFD-6, CFD-3, and CFD-6) were mixed with the cellulose acetate host matrix as the electrospinning solution. Five metal and non-metal containing proteins, i.e., hemoglobin, myoglobin, cytochrome C, BSA, and avidin, were investigated, and the results showed that distinct fluorescent patterns can be formed upon the addition of protein samples to the array of solid nanofiber substrates, allowing their unambiguous identification.113,114 Kameoka and co-workers fabricated silica nanofiber membranes and different diameters, porosity and surface to volume ratios could be obtained by altering the electrospinning conditions. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was performed for quantitative protein detection. Compared with those obtained with conventional ELISA using polystyrene well plates, the minimum detectable concentration was determined to be 0.19 ng ml−1 (1.6 pM), which is 32 times lower than that of conventional ELISA. In addition, the detection time for all processes for the nanofiber membrane was reduced to 1 h, compared with 1 day for conventional ELISA. The increased sensitivity, faster reaction time and affordability were attributed to the increased surface to volume ratio.1154 ApplicationsElectrospun multilevel structured materials have a large number of prominent applications. They are more competitive in many areas than the bulk or the same sized materials without hierarchical structures. Herein, we present a few representative applications including the areas of sensing, filtration and adsorption, catalysis, energy storage, and bio-field applications.4.1 SensingAs detailed in the examples mentioned in the previous section, electrospun nano/microfibers and fibrous mats which exhibit responsivity to external stimuli can act as sensors, such as pH sensors, thermal sensors, photosensors, magnetic sensors and chemical sensors. In general, the examples above demonstrate that the multilevel structures fabricated by electrospinning play an important role in the sensitivity and improvement of the sensors.4.2 Filtration and adsorptionFiltration and adsorption are necessary and important in many areas. For example, in the fields of engineering and environmental protection, materials which exhibit the capacity for filtration or adsorption of oil from an oil–water system are highly desirable. Meanwhile, much attention has been focused on the fabrication of highly efficient filtration and adsorption materials.116,117 Fibrous materials used for filters have the advantages of high filtration efficiency and low air resistance. Because of the very high surface area to volume ratios and resulting high surface cohesion, as well as the possibility of recycling electrospun membranes, electrospinning is a promising candidate for the application of filtration and adsorption materials. Some superhydrophobic and oleophilic polymers, like polystyrene, have been chosen for the fabrication of membranes with filtration and adsorption functions.117 Recently, we reported the fabrication of ultrathin polystyrene fibers with nanoscale pores on the fibrous surfaces (Fig. 12).28 By controlling the composition of the solvent during the electrospinning process, a porous structure could be easily obtained. Due to the second-order porous structure of the polystyrene fibers, compared to smooth fibers without pores the as-prepared membranes exhibited excellent oil adsorption capacity and oil selective capacity in oil–water media. The weight of oil adsorbed was over one hundred times greater than that of the membrane itself. Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of porous polystyrene fibrous mat (inset: magnification of a PS fiber). (b) Magnification of the porous fiber surface. (c–e) Oil spill removal from water of the polystyrene sample (oil dyed with Oil Red, motor oil). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright American Chemical Society (2012). 4.3 CatalysisThe most straightforward and obvious demonstration of the advantages of electrospinning is its application in catalysis. The huge specific surface area and heterogeneous interfaces result in the celerity and high efficiency which are the most important key factors for the catalytic field. Here, we take TiO2 as an example because it has been considered as one of most effective photocatalysts because of its stability, low cost, non-toxicity and the strong oxidizing power of its photo-generated holes, with which most organic compounds can be oxidized to non-toxic carbon dioxide under ultraviolet irradiation. A typical example is provided by Okuyama et al.118 A suspension of brookite nanoparticles and polystyrene latex particles were prepared by spray drying. After removing the organic matrix by calcination, macroporous brookite titania particles with sub-micrometer diameters were obtained. For the degradation of rhodamine B, the macroporous particles had intermediate photocatalysis rates, and, in general, the particles with small pores (200 and 100 nm) showed faster photocatalysis rates than the particles with larger pores (300 and 410 nm). Xia and co-workers prepared anatase TiO2 nanofibers by electrospinning and further derivatized the fibers' surfaces with Pt nanoparticles and Pt nanowires by immersing the mats in an ethylene glycol solution containing H2PtCl and polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP).119 The Pt nanoparticles coated on the anatase nanofibers could also serve as seeds for the growth of Pt nanowires up to 125 nm in length. The resultant fiber membranes proved to have excellent catalytic activities for the hydrogenation of methyl red, and the efficiency kept improving as the coverage of Pt nanoparticles increased. Undoubtedly, compared with their conventional bulk counterparts, nano/microscaled materials have a larger surface area and stronger organic adsorption capacity, which are favorable for the photocatalytic reaction. However, the reduction in size of the materials results in a number of problems, such as that they aggregate easily and are hard to reuse. To overcome these drawbacks, we introduced nanostructured interior hollow channels into microsized TiO2 fibers (Fig. 13).120 Fig. 13  (a) SEM images of TiO2 fibers with different numbers of channels. (b) Plots of the decrease in acetaldehyde concentration and increase in CO2 product concentration vs. irradiation time during the photocatalytic degradation of acetaldehyde by TiO2 fibers with different numbers of channels. (c) Dependence of ln(C0/Ct) on irradiation time in the initial 2 h of the photocatalytic reaction. It indicates clearly that increasing the number of channels in the TiO2 fibers systematically enhances the degradation rate of gaseous acetaldehyde molecules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2010). The solid fibers and normal hollow fibers (i.e. one channel fibers) were prepared by traditional electrospinning and coaxial electrospinning according to our previous studies. The two channel fibers and three channel fibers were fabricated by a multifluidic compound-jet electrospinning method. The photocatalytic activity of the TiO2 fibers with different numbers of channels was evaluated by the degradation of gaseous acetaldehyde. The results shown in Fig. 13b indicate clearly that increasing the number of channels in the TiO2 fibers systematically enhanced the degradation rate of gaseous acetaldehyde molecules. TiO2 fibers with three channels showed the highest photocatalytic activity and reaction rate, degrading 82% of the initial acetaldehyde in 3 h of a typical photocatalytic reaction, and the initial rate constant (k) was 0.83 h−1 (Fig. 13c). Such multichannel fibrous structures not only showed high photocatalytic efficiencies, but could also be collected and reused easily.4.4 Energy storageFunctional nanostructured architectures assembled from nanowires, nanobelts, nanotubes etc., offer tremendous impact in solar cells and batteries. Much attention is currently focused on dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), which is a promising method for generating electricity from the sun at low cost and with high efficiency. A lot of work concerning the morphology dependence of both photoanodes and scattering layers has been done to improve the performance of DSSCs. Nair and co-workers used an electrospinning method combined with calcinations to form a thin film of rice grain- and nanofiber-shaped titanium dioxide nanostructures. As a scattering layer, the rice grain-like structures were found to be superior to the nanofibers in scattering light, with a 15.7% enhancement in efficiency compared to 9.63% for the nanofibers. This could be mainly due to the fact that such one-dimensional nanostructures could shorten the electron transport pathways and suppress recombination with their reduced grain boundaries. Additionally, the packing density of the rice grains network is higher than in other structures, which is beneficial for the light-scattering and charge transport.121 Multi-core cable-like TiO2 nanofibers were fabricated via the calcination of composite poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc)–titania nanofibers by S. Seimei and co-workers.122 The enhanced phase separation of PVAc-rich and TiO2-rich phases during the hot pressing process was the main reason for the formation of this structure. With a much higher BET, as electrode materials for DSSCs, photocurrent and conversion efficiency of the electrodes increased concurrently with increasing applied pressure. Recently, Joshi and co-workers prepared electrospun carbon nanofibers (ECNs) as a low cost alternative to platinum as an electrocatalyst for triiodide reduction in DSSCs.123 The fill factor could be substantially improved by using thinner and highly porous ECNs to reduce the thickness of the ECNs counter electrode.Another hot topic in energy storage research is lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). The important factors in the capacity and cycle life of LIBs are the length of the Li-ion insertion/extraction distance, facile strain relaxation on electrochemical cycling and a very large surface to volume ratio to contact with the electrolyte. Mai and co-workers reported ultra-long hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires with diameters of 100–200 nm and length up to several millimetres, synthesized from low-cost starting materials by electrospinning combined with annealing (Fig. 14).124 The initial and 50th discharge capacities of the ultra-long hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowire cathodes were as high as 390 and 201 mA h g−1 when the LIBs cycled between 1.75 and 4.0 V. When the battery was cycled between 2.0 and 4.0 V, the initial and 50th discharge capacities of the nanowire cathodes were 275 and 187 mA h g−1, which demonstrates that the ultra-long hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowire is one of the most favourable nanostructures for cathodes for the improved cycling performance of LIBs. Carbon–silicon composite nanofibers with porous structures were prepared via an electrospinning and carbonization process by Zhang and Ji.125 These porous composite nanofibers acted as anode materials with a large discharge capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 200 mA g−1 for rechargeable LIBs without the addition of any binding or conducting additive. However, most Si electrodes suffer from limited cycle lives, typically below a couple of hundred cycles, and thus their cycle life must be improved significantly to meet the requirements of the aforementioned future applications. Choi and co-workers solved this problem ingeniously by the fabrication of core–shell fibers by coaxial electrospinning.126 Commercially available nanoparticles as the core were wrapped by a carbon shell. Such core–shell structures provided the Si anode with a gravimetric capacity as high as 1384 mA h g−1, a 5 min discharge rate capability while retaining 721 mA h g−1, and a cycle life of 300 cycles with almost no capacity loss. Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of the ultra-long hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires during annealing. Dotted squares: NH4VO3–PVA composite nanowires before (green) and after (red) annealing. (b) Charge/discharge curves of hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires at voltages of 2–4 V. (c) Charge/discharge curves of hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires at voltages of 1.75–4 V. (d) Capacity vs. cycle number. (e) Coulombic efficiency vs. cycle number of the ultra-long hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires. The high performance can be attributed to the fact that self-aggregation of the ultra-long hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires can be effectively prevented. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010). 4.5 Bio-field applicationsBased on the unique functionality and inherent nanoscale hierarchical morphological characteristics of electrospun materials as well as the flexibility of its processing options, electrospun materials are applied in biological fields, with applications in drug delivery, cell adhesion, and tissue engineering, etc. The main factors influencing applications in drug delivery are the control of drug travelling length and modulating the affinity between matrix materials. Hollow fibers are excellent candidates for encapsulation of drugs due to the fact that drugs can be incorporated into a carrier polymer with bioactive alteration, and the small diameter of nanofibers provides a short diffusion length as well as a high surface area, which is helpful for mass transfer and drug release.127 Biodegradable or biocompatible fibrous mats exhibit excellent activity and high efficiency. Recently, Chen and co-workers prepared electrospun nanofibers of biodegradable poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid) encapsulating chitosan–siRNA nanoparticles (NPs).128 A triphasic release profile based on bulk erosion was obtained at pH 7.4, while a triphasic release profile involving both surface erosion and bulk erosion was obtained at pH 5.5. Furthermore, the interesting release profile was further investigated for siRNA transfection, where the encapsulated chitosan–siRNA NPs exhibited up to 50% EGFP gene silencing activity 48 h post-transfection on H1299 cells. A coaxial electrospinning technique was used to fabricate core–shell ultrafine fiber mats for drug delivery application by Huang and co-workers.129 Poly(L-lactic acid) (PLLA) and tetracycline hydrochloride (TCH) were employed as the shell and core materials, respectively. A reservoir-type drug release device and sustained TCH release from these fibrous mats could be conveniently achieved. Wang and co-workers reported that poly(D,L-lactic acid) (PDLLA) and poly(3-hydroxy butyrate) (PHB) were individually delivered to the inner and outer channel of a coaxial-tube spinneret for electrospinning to prepare core–shell fibers used for drug release applications.130 PDLLA–PHB fibers with a PHB shell of a similar crystallinity but with different thicknesses were readily obtained and used for the sustained release of dimethyloxalylglycine (DMOG) drug. After the burst release, DMOG was linearly released up to an amount of 70%, and the release rate could be feasibly controlled by the thickness of the PHB shell. Furthermore, by improving the electrospinning equipment, as demonstrated by Chung and co-workers who replaced the metal collector by a water-immersed collector, obtaining not only gelatin–polycarprolactone core–shell nanofibers but also phase separation in the water collector, control over pore formation in the core–shell fiber networks could be also realized; immunocytochemistry of these fibers showed that cells cultured for 3 days on the porous core–shell fiber networks were highly viable.131Another important application of electrospun materials in the bio-field is in tissue engineering. Tissue engineering is also called regenerative medicine. Electrospinning is an ideal method that used to fabricate loosely connected networks with high porosity and surface to volume ratio for use as scaffolds. These scaffolds provide support for cells to regenerate a new cellular matrix in order to replace those destroyed by injury or congenital defects. Many reports have shown that natural materials like collagen, silk fibronectin, and synthetic polymers such as PGA, PLLA, PCL, can be processed into non-woven fibrous mats for tissue engineering applications.132–137 Through in-depth investigation, scientists found that electrospun fabrics with special orientation or multilevel structures exhibit higher efficiency than non-woven ones. Ramakrishna and co-workers described the fabrication of aligned poly(L-lactic acid) (PLLA) nano/micro fibrous scaffolds by designing a collector using a rotating disk. Compared with random PLLA, the direction of neural stem cell elongation and its neurite outgrowth is parallel to the direction of the PLLA fibers in aligned scaffolds, which could be used as a potential cell carrier in neural tissue engineering.138 Jansen and co-workers used a coaxial electrospinning method to prepare poly(hydroxymethylglycolide-co-ε-caprolactone) (pHMGCL)–poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) as the shell and bovine serum albumin (BSA)–vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) as the core materials.139 The release of BSA from the core of the fibers was studied by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and it was shown that the coaxial scaffolds composed of blends of pHMGCL and PCL exhibited faster release than the PCL scaffolds. Aiming to develop a scaffold mimicking the morphological and mechanical properties of a blood vessel, Vaz and co-workers demonstrated that sequential multi-layering electrospinning performed on a rotating mandrel-type collector could be used to form a bi-layer tubular scaffold composed of a stiff and oriented PLA fibrous outer layer and a pliable and randomly oriented PCL fibrous inner layer (PLA–PCL).140 This demonstrated the feasibility of multi-layering electrospinning to design scaffolds with hierarchical organization through a layer-by-layer process and control over fiber orientation. The resulting scaffolds achieved the desired levels of pliability (elastic up to 10% strain) and proved to be capable of promoting the growth and proliferation of mouse fibroblasts and human myofibroblasts.5 Summary and outlookThe electrospinning technique, affording the fabrication of thin fibers from micrometers down to a few nanometers with well controllable structures and chemical compositions, allows us to combine a wide range of materials with different morphological structures to achieve superior properties to those of bulk materials or the same sized materials. The biggest advantages of electrospun materials are their very high surface to volume ratio, controllable porosity and easily accessibility for mass production and applications. Here, we have introduced multilevel structured micro-/nanomaterials fabricated by the facile electrospinning method. These materials are amazing, not only for their various morphologies but also for their multiple functions as well as a wide range of prospective and real applications, including targeted and controllable drug delivery and release, tissue engineering, sensing, etc. However, it should be pointed out that the electrospinning method still has some limitations which need to be overcome. Firstly, the productivity of the complex structured electrospun fibers is limited so far. Although there have been mass-production machines using multiple nozzles or even needleless rolling drums, they are only suitable for producing simple solid nanofibers. For creating multilevel structures, it often relies on specially designed multifluidic nozzles or multi-step post-treatment processes, which increases the complexity of mass production in reality. Secondly, electrospinning is an open or semi-open system because it must allow the evaporation of solvent in a gaseous atmosphere. This means that the electrospinning method usually cannot achieve very accurate experimental parameters, unlike traditional chemical or physical methods in a closed environment. The fabrication parameters are based on experience to some extent during the electrospinning process. Therefore, researchers need to further promote this technique in both scientific theory and real experimental equipment. Finally, electrospinning itself is a technique that has been explored for nearly twenty years. A good number of known substances have been electrospun into nanofibers, either directly or aided by other easily-spinnable polymers. The future of this technique should be that it works as a powerful tool to serve many related areas.Although many challenges still exist, electrospinning exhibits the ability and superior properties for the fabrication of multilevel structured micro-/nanofibers. We believe that continuous research, exploration and development of the electrospinning technique will have to take place, because it is permanently demanded not only in academia but also in industry. Such improvements will strongly drive the field forward in the fabrication of multilevel structures and introduce multi-functionalization. We hope that an exciting and flourishing future as well as tremendous potential applications will be brought out in this field.AcknowledgementsThe authors acknowledge the State Basic Research Program of China (2012CB933200, 2010CB934700, 2009CB930404, 2012AA030305), NSFC (21222309, 21134003, 21004002) and the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University for continuing financial support.Notes and referencesQ. Zhang and G. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91–109 CrossRef CAS .T. Sun, G. Qing, B. Su and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2909 RSC .Y. Liu, Z. Ji, Q. Tang, L. Jiang, H. Li, M. He, W. Hu, D. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Wang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2953–2957 CrossRef CAS .C. Guo, L. Feng, J. Zhai, G. Wang, Y. Song, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 750–753 CrossRef CAS .L. Feng, Z. Yang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, Y. Ma, Z. Yang, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., 2003, 115, 4349–4352 CrossRef .S. Wang, X. Feng, J. Yao and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1264–1267 CrossRef CAS .S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3621–3638 CrossRef CAS .S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature, 1993, 363, 603–605 CrossRef CAS .L. Feng, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS .X. Gao and L. Jiang, Nature, 2004, 432, 36 CrossRef CAS .Z. Guo and W. Liu, Plant Sci., 2007, 172, 1103–1112 CrossRef CAS .B. W. Smith, M. Monthioux and D. E. Luzzi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 315, 31–36 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen, M. Knez, A. Berger, K. Nielsch, U. Gösele and M. Steinhart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6829–6832 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Hsieh, L. J. Chou, G. R. Lin, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3081–3085 CrossRef CAS .F. M. Kolb, A. Berger, H. Hofmeister, E. Pippel, U. Gosele and M. Zacharias, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 173111–173113 CrossRef .Y. Qin, S. M. Lee, A. Pan, U. Gosele and M. Knez, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 114–118 CrossRef CAS .G. S. Park, H. Kwon, E. K. Lee, S. K. Kim, J. H. Lee, X. S. Li, J. G. Chung, S. Heo, I. Y. Song, J. H. Lee, B. L. Choi and J. M. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2421–2425 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, H. J. Zhang, L. Lu, L. P. Stubbs, C. C. Wong and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4753–4761 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yang, L. Liu, F. Güder, A. Berger, R. Scholz, O. Albrecht and M. Zacharias, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 11047–11050 CrossRef .A. Levesque, V. T. Binh, V. Semet, D. Guillot, R. Y. Fillit, M. D. Brookes and T. P. Nguyen, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 464–465, 308–314 CrossRef CAS .H. Cui, O. Zhou and B. R. Stoner, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 88, 6072–6074 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 264–268 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Jia, L. D. Sun, Z. G. Yan, Y. C. Pang, L.-P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13022–13027 CAS .L. Jiang, Y. Zhao and J. Zhai, Angew. Chem., 2004, 116, 4438–4441 CrossRef .N. Wang, C. Sun, Y. Zhao, S. Zhou, P. Chen and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3909–3911 RSC .C. Sun, N. Wang, S. Zhou, X. Hu, S. Zhou and P. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3293–3295 RSC .J. Wu, N. Wang, L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3207–3212 CAS .H. Dong, N. Wang, L. Wang, H. Bai, J. Wu, Y. Zheng, Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 1153–1156 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, G. Ouyang, J. T. McCann and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 913–916 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Yu, S. V. Fridrikh and G. C. Rutledge, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1562–1566 CrossRef CAS .I. G. Loscertales, A. Barrero, I. Guerrero, R. Cortijo, M. Marquez and A. M. Gañán-Calvo, Science, 2002, 295, 1695–1698 CrossRef CAS .D. Li and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 933–938 CrossRef CAS .Z. Sun, E. Zussman, A. L. Yarin, J. H. Wendorff and A. Greiner, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1929–1932 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Patel, S. Li, J.-M. Yuan and Y. Wei, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1042–1046 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, J. T. McCann and Y. Xia, Small, 2005, 1, 83–86 CrossRef CAS .J. T. McCann, D. Li and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 735–738 RSC .S. Bhaskar and J. Lahann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6650–6651 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, N. Wang, J. Di, Y. Zhao, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11291–11296 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao, X. Cao and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 764–765 CrossRef CAS .N. Wang, H. Chen, L. Lin, Y. Zhao, X. Cao, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1622–1627 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Song and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7800–7801 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, J. Di, N. Wang, H. Dong, J. Wu, Y. Zhao, J. Yu and L. Jiang, Small, 2011, 7, 1779–1783 CrossRef CAS .W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .K. Liu, X. Yao and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3240–3255 RSC .J. Lin, Y. Cai, X. Wang, B. Ding, J. Yu and M. Wang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1258–1262 RSC .M. Yasuhiro, D. Bin and S. Seimei, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5151 CrossRef .X. Q. Feng, X. Gao, Z. Wu, L. Jiang and Q. S. Zheng, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4892–4896 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zheng, H. Bai, Z. Huang, X. Tian, F.-Q. Nie, Y. Zhao, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Nature, 2010, 463, 640–643 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zheng, X. Gao and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 178–182 RSC .T. Sun, L. Feng, X. Gao and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 644–652 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xue, H. Wang, D. Yu, L. Feng, L. Dai, X. Wang and T. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6418–6420 RSC .H. Wu, R. Zhang, Y. Sun, D. Lin, Z. Sun, W. Pan and P. Downs, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 2429–2433 RSC .A. S. Nair, Y. Shengyuan, Z. Peining and S. Ramakrishna, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7421–7423 RSC .Y. Shengyuan, Z. Peining, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6541–6548 RSC .L. Wang, X.-Y. Ji, N. Wang, J. Wu, H. Dong, J. Du, Y. Zhao, X.-Q. Feng and L. Jiang, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e14 CrossRef .L. Wang, P. D. Topham, O. O. Mykhaylyk, J. R. Howse, W. Bras, R. A. L. Jones and A. J. Ryan, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3544–3548 CrossRef CAS .X. Jin and Y.-L. Hsieh, Polymer, 2005, 46, 5149–5160 CrossRef CAS .R. Samatham, I. S. Park, K. J. Kim, J. D. Nam, N. Whisman and J. Adams, Smart Mater. Struct., 2006, 15, N152 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Wang, N. Zhan, N. Xiao, S. Wang, Y. Li and Q. Yang, Eur. Polym. J., 2011, 47, 2228–2233 CrossRef CAS .S. Cao, B. Hu and H. Liu, Polym. Int., 2009, 58, 545–551 CrossRef CAS .H. Liu, M. Zhen and R. Wu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2007, 208, 874–880 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Kuo, Y. C. Tung and W. C. Chen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 65–70 CrossRef CAS .M. Qi, X. Li, Y. Yang and S. Zhou, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2008, 70, 445–452 CrossRef CAS .C. L. Lo, C. K. Huang, K. M. Lin and G. H. Hsiue, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 1225–1235 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Im, B. C. Bai and Y. S. Lee, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 1414–1419 CrossRef CAS .M. Oishi and Y. Nagasaki, Nanomedicine, 2010, 5, 451–468 CrossRef CAS .Z. S. Haidar, Polymers, 2010, 2, 323–352 CrossRef CAS .H. G. Schild, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1992, 17, 163–249 CrossRef CAS .S. Jeong, Y. Lee, J. Lee, Y. Shin, H. Shin, Y. Lim and Y. Nho, Macromol. Res., 2008, 16, 139–148 CrossRef CAS .P. Tzeng, C.-C. Kuo, S.-T. Lin, Y.-C. Chiu and W.-C. Chen, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 1408–1416 CrossRef CAS .N. Wang, Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 485–489 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Gu, Z. M. Wang, J. B. Li and J. Ren, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2010, 295, 32–36 CrossRef CAS .P. Muthiah, S. M. Hoppe, T. J. Boyle and W. Sigmund, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1716–1721 CrossRef CAS .M. Webster, J. Miao, B. Lynch, D. S. Green, R. Jones-Sawyer, R. J. Linhardt and J. Mendenhall, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2012 DOI:10.1002/mame.201200081 .E. Jo, S. Lee, K. T. Kim, Y. S. Won, H. S. Kim, E. C. Cho and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 968–972 CrossRef CAS .G. D. Fu, L. Q. Xu, F. Yao, K. Zhang, X. F. Wang, M. F. Zhu and S. Z. Nie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 239–243 CAS .H. Yang, Q. Zhang, B. Lin, G. Fu, X. Zhang and L. Guo, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 4182–4190 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, C. Drew, S. H. Lee, K. J. Senecal, J. Kumar and L. A. Samuelson, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1273–1275 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yang, H. Wang, K. Su, Y. Long, Z. Peng, N. Li and F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11895–11900 RSC .Z. Zhu, L. Zhang, J. Y. Howe, Y. Liao, J. T. Speidel, S. Smith and H. Fong, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2568–2570 RSC .Y. Li, J. Gong and Y. Deng, Sens. Actuators, A, 2010, 158, 176–182 CrossRef .W. Zheng, X. Lu, W. Wang, Z. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang and C. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 142, 61–65 CrossRef .Y. Xin, Z. Huang, Z. Jiang, D. Li, L. Peng, J. Zhai and D. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2316–2318 RSC .M. Bashouti, W. Salalha, M. Brumer, E. Zussman and E. Lifshitz, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 102–106 CrossRef CAS .H. Wu, Y. Sun, D. Lin, R. Zhang, C. Zhang and W. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 227–231 CrossRef CAS .F. Di Benedetto, E. Mele, A. Camposeo, A. Athanassiou, R. Cingolani and D. Pisignano, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 314–318 CrossRef CAS .M. Chen and F. Besenbacher, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1549–1555 CrossRef CAS .O. Kriha, M. Becker, M. Lehmann, D. Kriha, J. Krieglstein, M. Yosef, S. Schlecht, R. B. Wehrspohn, J. H. Wendorff and A. Greiner, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2483–2485 CrossRef CAS .M. Graeser, M. Bognitzki, W. Massa, C. Pietzonka, A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4244–4247 CrossRef CAS .H. Y. Li, C. M. Chang, K. Y. Hsu and Y. L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4855–4860 RSC .Y. Sakai, M. Matsuguchi and T. Hurukawa, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 66, 135–138 CrossRef .T. E. Brook, M. N. Taib and R. Narayanaswamy, Sens. Actuators, B, 1997, 39, 272–276 CrossRef .M. Neshkova, R. Petrova and V. Petrov, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1996, 332, 93–103 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhu and J. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 3168–3173 CrossRef CAS .B. Ding, J. Kim, Y. Miyazaki and S. Shiratori, Sens. Actuators, B, 2004, 101, 373–380 CrossRef .B. Ding, M. Wang, J. Yu and G. Sun, Sensors, 2009, 9, 1609–1624 CrossRef CAS .B. D. Vogt, C. L. Soles, H.-J. Lee, E. K. Lin and W. L. Wu, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 1453–1458 CrossRef CAS .W. Xianfeng, D. Bin, Y. Jianyong, W. Moran and P. Fukui, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 055502 CrossRef .Z. Li, H. Zhang, W. Zheng, W. Wang, H. Huang, C. Wang, A. G. MacDiarmid and Y. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5036–5037 CrossRef CAS .Q. Qi, T. Zhang and L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 023105-1–023105-3 Search PubMed .H. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Wei and A. G. MacDiarmid, Talanta, 2009, 79, 953–958 CrossRef CAS .Q. Qi, T. Zhang, S. Wang and X. Zheng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 137, 649–655 CrossRef .W. Wang, Z. Li, L. Liu, H. Zhang, W. Zheng, Y. Wang, H. Huang, Z. Wang and C. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 141, 404–409 CrossRef .L. Liu, S. Li, J. Zhuang, L. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Han, X. Jiang and P. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 155, 782–788 CrossRef .H. Zhang, Z. Li, W. Wang, C. Wang and L. Liu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 142–146 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Manesh, H. T. Kim, P. Santhosh, A. I. Gopalan and K. P. Lee, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 23, 771–779 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Manesh, P. Santhosh, A. Gopalan and K. P. Lee, Anal. Biochem., 2007, 360, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .A. Tiwari, D. Terada, C. Yoshikawa and H. Kobayashi, Talanta, 2010, 82, 1725–1732 CrossRef CAS .W. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Tong, X. Li and W. Song, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 708–714 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, H. Teng, H. Hou and T. You, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 3329–3334 CrossRef CAS .C. C. You, O. R. Miranda, B. Gider, P. S. Ghosh, I. B. Kim, B. Erdogan, S. A. Krovi, U. H. F. Bunz and V. M. Rotello, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 318–323 CrossRef CAS .B. W. Davis, N. Niamnont, R. Dillon, C. J. Bardeen, M. Sukwattanasinitt and Q. Cheng, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6401–6408 CrossRef CAS .B. W. Davis, N. Niamnont, C. D. Hare, M. Sukwattanasinitt and Q. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1798–1803 CAS .P. H. Tsou, C. K. Chou, S. M. Saldana, M. C. Hung and J. Kameoka, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 445714 CrossRef .P. P. Tsai, H. Schreuder-Gibson and P. Gibson, J. Electrost., 2002, 54, 333–341 CrossRef CAS .X. H. Qin and S. Y. Wang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2006, 102, 1285–1290 CrossRef CAS .F. Iskandar, A. B. D. Nandiyanto, K. M. Yun, C. J. Hogan, K. Okuyama and P. Biswas, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1408–1412 CrossRef CAS .E. Formo, E. Lee, D. Campbell and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 668–672 CrossRef CAS .T. Zhao, Z. Liu, K. Nakata, S. Nishimoto, T. Murakami, Y. Zhao, L. Jiang and A. Fujishima, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5095–5099 RSC .P. Zhu, A. S. Nair, S. Yang, S. Peng and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12210–12212 RSC .K. Hiroshi, D. Bin, N. Takayuki, T. Hiroki and S. Seimei, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 165604 CrossRef .P. Joshi, L. Zhang, Q. Chen, D. Galipeau, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3572–3577 CAS .L. Mai, L. Xu, C. Han, X. Xu, Y. Luo, S. Zhao and Y. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4750–4755 CrossRef CAS .L. Ji and X. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1146–1149 CrossRef CAS .T. H. Hwang, Y. M. Lee, B.-S. Kong, J.-S. Seo and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 802–807 CrossRef CAS .L. S. Nair, S. Bhattacharyya and C. T. Laurencin, Expert Opin. Biol. Ther., 2004, 4, 659–668 CrossRef CAS .M. Chen, S. Gao, M. Dong, J. Song, C. Yang, K. A. Howard, J. Kjems and F. Besenbacher, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4835–4844 CrossRef CAS .C. L. He, Z. M. Huang, X. J. Han, L. Liu, H. S. Zhang and L. S. Chen, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 2006, 45, 515–524 CrossRef CAS .C. Wang, K. W. Yan, Y. D. Lin and P. C. H. Hsieh, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6389–6397 CrossRef CAS .M. Gulfam, J. M. Lee, J.-e. Kim, D. W. Lim, E. K. Lee and B. G. Chung, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10993–10999 CrossRef CAS .H. Yoshimoto, Y. M. Shin, H. Terai and J. P. Vacanti, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 2077–2082 CrossRef CAS .G. E. Wnek, M. E. Carr, D. G. Simpson and G. L. Bowlin, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 213–216 CrossRef CAS .C. Li, C. Vepari, H.-J. Jin, H. J. Kim and D. L. Kaplan, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 3115–3124 CrossRef CAS .L. Huang, R. A. McMillan, R. P. Apkarian, B. Pourdeyhimi, V. P. Conticello and E. L. Chaikof, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 2989–2997 CrossRef CAS .Y. K. Luu, K. Kim, B. S. Hsiao, B. Chu and M. Hadjiargyrou, J. Controlled Release, 2003, 89, 341–353 CrossRef CAS .K. N. Chua, W. S. Lim, P. Zhang, H. Lu, J. Wen, S. Ramakrishna, K. W. Leong and H. Q. Mao, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 2537–2547 CrossRef CAS .F. Yang, R. Murugan, S. Wang and S. Ramakrishna, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 2603–2610 CrossRef CAS .H. Seyednejad, W. Ji, F. Yang, C. F. van Nostrum, T. Vermonden, J. J. J. P. van den Beucken, W. J. A. Dhert, W. E. Hennink and J. A. Jansen, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 3650–3660 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Vaz, S. van Tuijl, C. V. C. Bouten and F. P. T. Baaijens, Acta Biomater., 2005, 1, 575–582 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Jing Wu	Jing Wu is currently a Ph.D. student at the School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University. She received her Bachelor's degree (2007) in polymer materials and engineering from Tianjin University of Science and Technology, and her Master's degree (2010) in materials science from Yunnan University of China. In 2010, she joined Prof. Lei Jiang's group at Beihang University. Her current scientific interests are focused on the electrospinning of multilevel structured and multifunctional materials.
Nü Wang	Nü Wang is currently an assistant professor at the School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University. She received her Bachelor's degree from Jilin University of China in 2004, and her Ph.D. from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS), China in 2009 (with Prof. Lei Jiang). Her current scientific interests are focused on functional micro/nanomaterials prepared by electrospinning and their properties.
Yong Zhao	Yong Zhao is currently a professor at the School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University. He received his Ph.D. from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS), China in 2007 (with Prof. Lei Jiang). From 2007 to 2009, he worked at ICCAS as an assistant professor and associate professor. In 2011, he joined the School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University as a professor. His current scientific interests are focused on the electrostatic force fabrication of multilevel structured one-dimensional micro/nanomaterials, photocatalysis, and smart multifunctional materials.
Lei Jiang	Lei Jiang is currently a professor at the School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University and ICCAS. He received his B.S. degree (1987), M.S. degree (1990), and Ph.D. degree (1994) from Jilin University (Tiejin Li's group). He then worked as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Akira Fujishima's group at Tokyo University. In 1996, he worked as a senior researcher at Kanagawa Academy of Sciences and Technology with Prof. Kazuhito Hashimoto. He joined ICCAS in 1999. In 2009, he was elected academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His scientific interests are focused on bio-inspired surfaces and interfacial materials.

 	Scheme 1  Illustration of electrospun fibers with multilevel micro-/nanostructures and their applications. These materials are classified into two categories. One is surface multilevel structures, including branched, porous, necklace-like and non-cylinder structures. The other is inner multilevel structures, such as peapod, wire-in-tube, multiwalled and multichannel structures. Multilevel structures afford larger specific areas and additional heterogeneous interfaces, which play important roles in enhancing the nano-sized effect. Such multilevel structured materials exhibit superior properties to bulk or the same size counterparts, which give them broad applications in sensors, energy storage, catalysis, biomedicine, filtration and many other fields.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM image of porous polystyrene fibers (b), blue dotted square: amplification of fibrous surface. (b) SEM image of knotted fibers. PS fibers wrapped with PMMA knots can be observed (orange dotted square: amplification of the fiber and knot). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28 and 29. Copyright American Chemical Society (2012) and John Wiley & Sons (2012).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the co-jetting process using a dual capillary assembly (red and blue). This approach can be extended to the fabrication of multicompartmental microfibers by incorporating additional outlet streams (grey). (b) CLSM image of bicompartmental microfibers. Scale bar in (b) represents 20 μm. (c–e) Tricompartmental microfiber isomers: (c) sRGB; (d) tetracompartmental microfiber scaffold showing alternating red and green compartments; (e) heptacompartmental microfiber scaffold resembling a flower. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright American Chemical Society (2009).	 

 	Fig. 3  Cross-sectional SEM (a) and TEM (b) images of TiO2 fibers, which show the interesting wire-in-tube structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the multifluidic electrospinning setup. The immiscible inner and outer fluids are issued separately from individual capillaries. After electrospinning, a fibrous film is collected on the counter electrode. (b, d and e) SEM images of multichannel tubes with variable diameter and number of channels, corresponding to tubes with two, three and four channels. Scale bars are 100 nm. (c and f) Two- and four-chamber spheres could also be fabricated by this method. Scale bars are 500 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 and 42. Copyright American Chemical Society (2007, 2008).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) Cross-sectional SEM images of porous TiO2 nanofibers. (c) Confocal laser scanning microscopy image of fibers fabricated from a partially demulsified solution prepared with excess paraffin oil. (d) TEM image of nanofibers after calcination showing a discontinuous bamboo structure. Inset: magnification of a single segment showing the existence of mesopores on the wall. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright John Wiley & Sons (2011).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a, d, g and j) Photographs of a lotus leaf, silver ragwort leaf, a water strider, and spider silk. (b, e, h and k) SEM images of a lotus leaf, silver ragwort leaf, water strider's leg, and spider silk. (c, f, i and l) SEM images of biomimetic electrospun lotus leaf, silver ragwort leaf, water strider's leg, and spider silk structures, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10 and 11 and ref. 44–50. Copyright Springer (1997), Nature Publishing Group (2010), American Chemical Society (2005, 2007, 2009, 2010), and Royal Society of Chemistry (2006–2008, 2011).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Microscopic images of the hydrogel, the bundle of fibers and a fibril of the annealed fibers at pH 7.3 (left) and pH 3.5 (right). The scale bars represent 1 mm for each image. (b) pH versus time plot (solid line) for the permanganate pH-oscillatory system and the corresponding two-dimensional response results (discontinuous line) at each extreme of the pH-cycle of a 230 μm thick copolymer hydrogel. (c) pH versus time plot (solid line) for the permanganate pH-oscillatory system and the corresponding two-dimensional response results (discontinuous line) at each extreme of the pH-cycle of a rolled-up bundle of fibers. The quick response rate was due to the higher surface to volume ratio and the ultrathin diameters of the electrospun fibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright American Chemical Society (2007).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of PNIPAAm–PS composite film. (b) Blue dotted square: magnification of the PNIPAAm–PS composite film. (c) Photographs of a water droplet on the PNIPAAm–PS composite film. It shows thermoresponsive properties, with a switch between superhydrophilicity at low temperature (20 °C) and superhydrophobicity at high temperature (50 °C). (d) Reversibility of water CA transition of the PNIPAAm–PS composite film at two different temperatures. Half cycles: 20 °C, and integral cycles: 50 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright John Wiley & Sons (2008).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–d) SEM images of (a) the electrospun ZnO nanofibers, and (b–d) ZnO nanorod-on-ZnO nanofiber composite structures. (e) Current–time curves with UV light on and off. The UV detection sensitivity increased with the concentration of the nutrient solution due to the increase of the nanorod density. (f) Reversibility of the ZnO nanorod-on-ZnO nanofiber composite used for UV detection, demonstrating the reversibility of the current under UV light irradiation for hierarchically structured ZnO nanorod-on-ZnO nanofiber obtained using 20 mM nutrient solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright Elsevier (2010).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photographs showing the magnetic properties of the ENF-mCNT-0.3 electrospun mat. (b) Under the application of a magnetic field, the nanofibrous mat moves near to the magnetic field. (c) High-resolution TEM micrograph of ENF-mCNT-0.3 electrospun nanofibers. (d) Stress–strain curves of electrospun neat PLA and ENF-mCNT-0.3 mats. The picture shows the elongation of the ENF-mCNT-0.3 mat in the test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2012).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of the TiO2 nanofibers containing 5.56 wt% Mg2+ and 0.22 wt% Na+. (b) Humidity hysteresis of the product. (c) Response and recovery behavior of the product for one cycle. (d) Response and recovery behavior of the product for ten cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright Elsevier (2009).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of porous polystyrene fibrous mat (inset: magnification of a PS fiber). (b) Magnification of the porous fiber surface. (c–e) Oil spill removal from water of the polystyrene sample (oil dyed with Oil Red, motor oil). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright American Chemical Society (2012).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM images of TiO2 fibers with different numbers of channels. (b) Plots of the decrease in acetaldehyde concentration and increase in CO2 product concentration vs. irradiation time during the photocatalytic degradation of acetaldehyde by TiO2 fibers with different numbers of channels. (c) Dependence of ln(C0/Ct) on irradiation time in the initial 2 h of the photocatalytic reaction. It indicates clearly that increasing the number of channels in the TiO2 fibers systematically enhances the degradation rate of gaseous acetaldehyde molecules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry (2010).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of the ultra-long hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires during annealing. Dotted squares: NH4VO3–PVA composite nanowires before (green) and after (red) annealing. (b) Charge/discharge curves of hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires at voltages of 2–4 V. (c) Charge/discharge curves of hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires at voltages of 1.75–4 V. (d) Capacity vs. cycle number. (e) Coulombic efficiency vs. cycle number of the ultra-long hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires. The high performance can be attributed to the fact that self-aggregation of the ultra-long hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires can be effectively prevented. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright American Chemical Society (2010).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
