Topological materials and topologically engineered materials: properties, synthesis, and applications for energy conversion and storage  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA11072H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11072H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1297-1313Topological materials and topologically engineered materials: properties, synthesis, and applications for energy conversion and storage

        
          
            Zhigang 
            Li
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Bingqing 
            Wei
          
          
        
      b
aSchool of Pharmaceutical & Materials Engineering, Taizhou University, Taizhou 318000, China. E-mail: lizhigang@issp.ac.cn
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716, USA. E-mail: weib@udel.edu
Received 
      12th November 2020
    , Accepted 2nd December 2020First published on 7th December 2020AbstractTopological materials have attracted intense research interest due to their nontrivial topology of band structures and their promise in applications ranging from low-power electronics to high-performance optoelectronic devices. This review provides a summary of various energy-related topological materials and topologically engineered materials that have been developed thus far and explores the unique nontrivial topological properties and topological design toward their potential application in energy conversion and storage, such as solar cells, photocatalytic and photoelectronic devices, lithium-ion batteries, and hydrogen storage. In addition, advances and critically associated issues and challenges will be discussed to stimulate broader interests in developing topological energy materials toward improvement of their applications in energy fields.Zhigang LiDr Zhigang Li is a professor in the School of Pharmaceutical & Materials Engineering, Taizhou University, China. He received his PhD degree in 2008 from the Institute of Solid-State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and joined Taizhou University as a faculty member in the same year. From September 2018 to September 2019, he spent one year collaborating with Professor Bingqing Wei at the University of Delaware, USA as a visiting scholar. His interests focus on synthesis and electron transport properties of highly ordered two-dimensional nanomaterials.Bingqing WeiDr Bingqing Wei is a Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Delaware, USA. He received his PhD degree in 1992 from Tsinghua University in Beijing, China. Dr Wei was a faculty member at Louisiana State University from 2003 to 2007 and at Tsinghua University from 1992 to 2001. He was a Research Scientist at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute from 2000 to 2003 and a visiting scientist at the Max-Planck-Institut für Metallforschung, Stuttgart, Germany in 1998 and 1999. Dr Wei is among the Highly Cited Researchers of Clarivate for his research on nanomaterials that enable energy conversion and storage.
1. Introduction
With the development of science and technology, clean energy materials have been developed rapidly due to their renewable and environmentally friendly characteristics. Improving clean energy materials, including those for energy conversion and storage, has been one of the main focuses in the energy field.1–4 On the other hand, topological materials (TM), including topological insulators (TI), topological semimetals (TS), topological superconductors (TSC), and topological photonics (TP), are being discovered continuously particularly due to their topological order, resulting in a series of novel topological properties.5–10 TMs have been newly identified as quantum materials, and their properties are highlighted by the topology.11 For instance, TIs are insulating in the bulk but conducting at the surface. Some TMs have been explored and used in energy-related fields, from light-harvesting and photo-electric conversion to energy storage.
Aside from TMs, topologically engineered materials (TEMs), such as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and porous organic materials (POMs), demonstrate unique topological structures in the micromorphology and have garnered colossal interest in the fields of energy ranging from photocatalytic to energy storage.12–14 It is expected that both TMs and TEMs will play an essential role in improving topological energy materials' performance due to their topological features and properties.
It would be necessary to summarize how the topological features and properties of TMs and TEMs would affect their energy-related performance to improve their functions from topological perspectives. This review aims to stimulate broader interest in the development of topological energy materials, including TMs and TEMs, toward improving their applications in energy fields. The review will first discuss the unique nontrivial topological properties of TMs, followed by summarizing the fabrication methods and potential applications of TMs and TEMs in energy conversion and storage, including solar cells, photocatalytic and photoelectronic devices, lithium-ion batteries, and hydrogen storage.
1.1 Topological properties of topological materials

1.1.1 Linear dispersion relation. 
Different from ordinary conductors, in which the dispersion relation of an electron is non-linear, TMs are characterized by the linear dispersion relation between energy and momentum, similar to the propagation of a photon. This property can enhance electronic devices' performance resulting from the topological surface's high sensitivity to the external electric field. As is well-known, carrier mobility is the generated average drift velocity under unit electric field strength, representing the carrier conductivity. An ideal TM typically has high mobility and, therefore, excellent electronic conductivity.


1.1.2 Low power dissipation. 
In addition to high mobility, TMs have another excellent property—low power dissipation. The electrical resistance of materials is determined by their band gaps, and the resistance of metals comes from the collisions of electrons with phonons, impurities, and so on, resulting in relatively high power dissipation. TMs have Dirac electrons on the surface that can bypass impurities when encountering them and move in the original direction. When facing impurities, electrons move along clockwise and counterclockwise paths, and the spin directions are also reversed. The two scattering waves are coherently canceled, which is the principle of avoiding impurities. This feature dramatically reduces electrical resistance and enables TM-based devices to run at low power to reduce energy loss.


1.1.3 Topological band engineering. 
Topological concepts provide a different strategy in the design of TM electronic structures. For example, the topological phase of laterally confined, semiconducting strips of graphene is determined by its width, edge shape, and terminating crystallographic unit cell and is characterized by a Z2 invariant6 (i.e., an index of either 0 or 1, indicating two topological classes). Interfaces between topologically distinct graphene nanoribbons characterized by different values of Z2 are predicted to support half-filled, in-gap localized electronic states that could, in principle, be used as a tool for material engineering.15 This provides a promising way to enhance photo-electric conversion efficiency by band engineering in TMs based on the precise control of their electronic topology.

1.2 Topologically engineered materials
TEM is a broad concept with topologically engineered materials, including materials based on topotaxial reactions and materials with regular periodic structures. It is mainly through topology design that we can achieve special energy-related functions or applications, such as light absorption, photocatalysis, photo-electric conversion, and energy storage.
TEMs can be roughly divided into two main categories: (1) materials with a topological structure in micromorphology, such as periodic porous arrays and MOFs.13,14 A particular structure is designed to reduce light reflection16 or enlarge porosity to increase the energy storage density.17 (2) Topologically engineered materials with a topological phase, exemplified by graphene nanoribbons,18 where robust topological quantum phases are rationally engineered,19,20 and 1D π-conjugated polymers.21–23 The novel approach of on-surface synthesis has emerged as a new paradigm for engineering nanomaterials,24,25 while it also circumvents the solubility limitations associated with synthetic wet chemistry.
2. Preparation of TMs and TEMs
2.1 Preparation of TMs
The fabrication methods of TMs could be divided into two categories: one is constructing a topologically periodic structure at the atomic or molecular scale,26,27 such as thin films28–33 and single crystals,34–36 and the other is constructing a topologically periodic structure at the nano/microscale or a larger scale depending on the microstructural morphology and size. The former mainly engineers the band of the electron to control the typical properties or improve photo-electric conversion efficiency; the latter primarily tunes some of the longer physical feature lengths, such as the light wavelength, to explore new features of light, like photonic TIs.37,38 Various preparation methods can be applied to prepare TMs, such as molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and solvothermal synthesis. Each method has different advantages and disadvantages.

2.1.1 Thin-films. 
Thin-films, i.e., a 2D TM, has demonstrated superior conductivity due to their topologically protected and highly conductive surface channels, which can effectively suppress undesirable charge scattering.28–30 Usually, a thin-film can be prepared by MBE and pulsed laser deposition (PLD).31–33 Li et al.31 fabricated Bi2Te3 thin films by a layer-by-layer MBE method. As schematically shown in Fig. 1a, along the [111] crystallographic direction, the unit cell contains five atomic layers with a stacking sequence of Te(1)–Bi–Te(2)–Bi–Te(1), forming a unique quintuple layer (QL). Fig. 1b shows the reflection high-energy electron diffraction patterns of the Bi2Te3 film with a 4 QL thickness. A typical large-scale STM image of an 80 nm-thick film grown under the same condition is shown in Fig. 1c. Yao et al.32 constructed a Bi2Te3–Si heterostructure by preparing a Bi2Te3 film on an n-Si substrate by using PLD with the help of a shadow mask (Fig. 1d). The device demonstrated broad photodetection from ultraviolet (370.6 nm) to terahertz (118 μm) with good reproducibility at room temperature. They investigated dark and illuminated I–V characteristics of the Bi2Te3–Si heterojunction, and the results are summarized in Fig. 1e; a highly asymmetric I–V curve is observed, indicating excellent rectifying characteristics.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic sample preparation of ultra-flat stanene on Cu(111). (b) The reflection high-energy electron diffraction patterns of the Bi2Te3 film with a thickness of 4 QL. (c) High-resolution STM image of the 80 nm-thick film. The inset shows an atomically resolved STM image (2.5 nm × 2.5 nm). Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Wiley. (d) Schematic diagram of the Bi2Te3–Si heterojunction photodetector in a two-pole structure. The forward bias is defined as applying a positive bias on the Bi2Te3 side. (e) I–V characteristics in the dark (black) and under illumination (red). Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from the RSC. 


2.1.2 Single or quasi-single crystals. 
Unlike thin film preparation requiring much equipment, chemical methods provide a convenient way to synthesize topological single or quasi-single crystal samples.34–36 Huang et al.34 proposed hydrothermal preparation of Bi nanosheets by using a sonication method. In a typical procedure, Bi powders (approximately 74 μm) were added into a glass bottle with 300 mL pure N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP), followed by 6 h in an ice bath. The solution was treated by probe sonication for 24 h and another 6 h in an ice bath. After this, centrifugation for 30 min at a centrifugation speed of 7000 rpm was carried out, and the required Bi nanosheets were acquired. In this experiment, NMP was used as the solvent during all the exfoliation procedures. NMP is a suitable organic solvent for the exfoliation of 2D materials and can prevent bismuth atoms from being oxidized.


2.1.3 Periodic porous structures of TMs. 
Tuning the topological microstructure with a size comparable to the wavelength of light provides an effective way to engineer photon emission and scattering for modern photonic applications ranging from light-harvesting (LH) to quantum-information processing.10 Söllner et al.37 showed that the helicity of a quantum emitter's optical transition determines the direction of single-photon emission in a specially engineered photonic-crystal waveguide. The sample was grown by MBE on an undoped (100) GaAs substrate. A 160 nm thick GaAs membrane was grown on 1.42 μm thick Al0.75Ga0.25 as a sacrificial layer. The membrane contained a single layer of low-density self-assembled In(Ga)As QDs and emitted around 920 nm at 10 K. The photonic nanostructures were patterned by electron-beam lithography at 100 keV on a 500 nm thick electron beam resist and aligned to the [011] or [0−11] directions of the GaAs substrate. An inductively coupled plasma was applied to etch the photonic-crystal holes in BCl3/Cl2/Ar chemistry at 0 °C. The remaining photoresist was stripped using hot N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone. The membranes were subsequently released in a wet-etching step, and the AlGaAs sacrificial layer was removed using a hydrofluoric acid solution (10% w/w).
Similarly, Yang et al.38 fabricated a 3-D photonic TI using the printed circuit board technology by etching 5 mm-thick dielectric laminates with double-sided, 0.035 mm-thick copper cladding. Each printed layer is paired with a 0.65 mm-thick dielectric spacer. At the center of each unit cell, an air hole of radius 1.5 mm allows an electromagnetic probe to be inserted to measure the fields within the crystal. The sample consists of 40 identical layers stacked along the z-axis.

2.2 Preparation of TEMs
Many methods could be applied to fabricate TEMs. In general, any technique that can keep the structure of products related to the reactants' structure could be included in preparing TEMs, such as self-assembly,23,39–41 the template method,42–50 and so on. According to the product's morphological design, TEMs could be divided into nanotubes, periodic porous structures, MOFs, etc.

2.2.1 Self-assembly of nanotubes. 
A self-assembled structure is a kind of ordered structure spontaneously formed based on the principle of minimum energy. Self-assembly produces a morphology and structure that can be topologically engineered by controlling the chemical bond of polymer units23 or nanoparticle surface modification. Doria et al.39 described photo brightening and photodarkening processes in light-harvesting nanotubes (LHNs). The light-harvesting nanotubes self-assembled from amphiphilic C8S3 dye molecules. A stock solution of 2.9 × 10−3 M C8S3 in methanol was prepared. Then 260 μL of the stock solution and 1 mL of deionized water were mixed. LHNs were stored in the dark for over 24 h to aggregate and stabilize. To prevent oxidative photobleaching, the aqueous LHN solution was mixed in a 50/50 v/v ratio with a saturated solution of a 50% by weight mixture of sucrose and trehalose. Then 100 μL of the final solution was spread on a 0.2 mm path length cuvette (Starna cells) in order to obtain a thick film. The sample was stored under vacuum (0.5 atm) for 24 h. LHNs were embedded in a photostable amorphous dry glass sugar matrix.


2.2.2 Periodic porous structure of TEMs. 
Templates provide a simple method to fabricate diversiform periodic regular nanostructures. They also offer a simple way to make the product inherit the morphology and structure of the templates. For example, colloidal lithography, a low-cost and facile method based on a monolayer or multilayer polystyrene (PS) colloidal template, has proven to be a useful tool for fabricating diversiform periodic patterns with a large area.42–47 Yang et al.48 modified the counter electrode's porous structure based on the PS template to enhance the optical path length through plasmonic and reflection effects. With the introduction of the topological gold layer (Fig. 2a–d), the photocurrent and efficiency were increased by 16% and 18%, respectively, due to the increased light collection. This LH enhancement is effective at both high and low levels of solar irradiation.
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the structure of a dye-sensitized solar cell. (b) The Au layer coated on the counter electrode reflects the transmitted light to the photoanode. With typical electrodes (c), most of the transmitted light is lost through the transparent FTO, and light utilization is limited. (d) SEM image of the photoanode fabricated by colloidal lithography. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Wiley. (e) Multilayer PS templates fabricated by the layer-by-layer method.49,50 (f) SEM image of a double-layer FeGa array with a top/bottom diameter of 1000/1000 nm. (g) The absorption spectrum of the FeGa trilayer array with a top/middle/bottom diameter of 600/1000/1300 nm. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Wiley. 
Li et al.49,50 applied a simple layer-by-layer method to fabricate a multilayer PS template, as shown in Fig. 2e and f. Here, the size of each PS layer can be independently tuned if needed. Different sizes of the porously structured arrays can be combined to realize ultra-wide-range LH. Based on the layer-by-layer method, Li et al.49 designed a FeGa trilayer film with an ultra-broadband light absorption from ultraviolet to the near-infrared region. An ultra-broad band from 550 to 2400 nm with an absorbance higher than 88% was obtained in a tri-layer FeGa porous array, as shown in Fig. 2g.


2.2.3 MOFs. 
Metal–organic frameworks are constructed by joining metal-containing units with organic linkers, using strong bonds (reticular synthesis) to create open crystalline frameworks with permanent porosity.17 MOFs have garnered broad interest13 in the scientific fraternity due to their excellent gas absorption performances, catalytic abilities, energy storage capacities, and other intriguing applications.
General synthetic methods to embed metal nanoparticles (MNPs) in a porous solid matrix entail impregnation of a metal precursor in a porous solid, followed by reducing the metal precursor to metal(0) atoms, which aggregate into metal nanoparticles within the solid matrix.51 The precursor molecules most frequently used for the production of MNPs are chloride or nitrate salts of the corresponding transition metal ions. Metal precursors included in MOFs are reduced with hydrogen gas, hydrazine, or NaBH4 to generate MNPs, and the reduction process is often performed at high temperatures, followed by a washing step.52 The reaction conditions for fabricating MNPs in MOFs should be determined depending on the properties of the included precursors as well as the stability of the host matrices during the reduction process.
MOFs' topological consideration is fundamental to pore design because it describes the connectedness between the structural building units constituting the materials. The tactical/strategic design of porous structures is necessary to understand the porous media's topology. The concept of topology originated from the polyhedron formula53 by Euler is given as V − E + F = 2(1)where V, E, and F correspond to the number of vertices, edges, and faces, respectively, of a polyhedron. For instance, Fig. 3 shows a hollow cube (pore/void inside the cube represented by the blue sphere) that has V = 8, E = 12, and F = 6 and thereby complies with the above formula. Nevertheless, Euler's polyhedron formula does not hold for all topological surfaces (topological spaces). The expression on the left-hand side of eqn (1) is called the Euler number53 or Euler characteristic (χ) and is represented as χ = V − E + F(2)
 Fig. 3  Illustration of a pore (marked in blue) in a hollow cube. 
The Euler characteristic is an intrinsic attribute of each topological space. Examples of such invariants of topological space include connectedness, compactness, etc. The study of the topology of porous materials, i.e., MOFs, helps to understand the connectedness between the structural building units forming the materials and thereby to realize the pore structure of the materials.10


2.2.4 Perovskite films. 
The breakthrough discovery of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials for converting solar energy into electrical energy has revolutionized third-generation photovoltaic devices.37 Recently, many perovskite materials with TI phases, such as AIrO3, CsPbI3, and CsSnI3 hybrid perovskite films, have been fabricated, primarily through: (1) solution processing (one-step and two-step sequential deposition techniques), (2) vapor deposition, and (3) hybrid vapor–solution processing (or vapor assisted solution processing).54–61
2.2.4.1 Solution processing techniques. 
Perovskite film deposition by spin coating is the most prominent solution processing method since it is facile and cost-effective. Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 can be deposited on substrates via two routes: (i) spin coating a previously blended solution of CH3NH3I and PbI2, called the one-step coating technique; (ii) spin coating PbI2 and then subsequently depositing CH3NH3I, called two-step coating (Fig. 4a). One-step coating allows easy compositional engineering of perovskite components,55,56 while two-step coating can result in an optimal distribution of both materials to improve the photo-electric conversion efficiency of perovskite.56
 Fig. 4  The typical methods of perovskite layer formation: (a) one-step and two-step methods, (b) double source co-evaporation employing PbCl2 and MAI sources, and (c) the vapor-assisted solution process using organic vapors of MAI that react with already accumulated PbI2 films. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the ACS. 
2.2.4.2 Vapor deposition technique. 
The vapor deposition technique was developed by Liu et al.57 to construct CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite by co-evaporation of CH3NH3I and PbCl2 through dual sources (Fig. 4b). The dual-source evaporation method involves ceramic pots placed in a glove box filled with N2 gas. The perovskite films obtained by this technique are highly uniform without pinholes compared to solution-processed films and have higher photo-electric conversion efficiency.57 However, there is a limitation associated with this technique: thermal evaporation calls for evacuation of the chamber at higher vacuum levels, which involves high cost, and thus mass production is limited.60 To circumvent this issue, Chen et al.61 demonstrated a hybrid low-temperature based perovskite film deposition technique dubbed the vapor-assisted solution process (VASP), which builds up perovskite layers through a chemical reaction of the as-coated film of PbI2 with CH3NH3I vapor (Fig. 4c).

3. Photoelectric energy conversion
This section will summarize how the topological properties and features discussed above would be applied to improve photo-electric energy conversion efficiency. Solar energy is a vital renewable clean energy, and its effectiveness is mainly dependent on light-harvesting (LH) efficiency and quantum efficiency. Herein, we will mainly discuss LH and solar cells based on the recent developments of topological structures in this field.
3.1 Enhancing light-harvesting by topological microstructures
Solar energy is clean energy and has been applied in a variety of applications, such as photosynthetic organisms, photochemical reactions, solar fuels, photo-electric detection, etc. LH ability is one of the factors that determine their performance in these applications. Improving the LH ability is the key to enhancing the conversion efficiency of energy materials. This will effectively improve LH processing by tuning the topological microstructure with a similar size to the light wavelength.

3.1.1 Building a periodic structure to improve LH efficiency. 
Periodic honeycomb/hexagonal arrays, derived from biomimetic materials of insect compound eyes,62 are typical topological structures. Such biomimetic structures manifest broadband and omnidirectional antireflective performance and have applications in light absorption and light transmission.50,62–66 For example, Li et al.64 found size-dependent light absorption in Si honeycomb arrays, which were fabricated by using monolayer colloidal crystal templates (Fig. 5a and b). A quantitative relationship between the geometric size and light absorption is revealed in the Si arrays, namely double-quarter wavelength resonance (DQWR). Based on the DQWR model, one can quantitatively tune the absorption wavelength from 200 to 2400 nm. The absorbance can be enhanced from ∼80% to above 99% by nanostructuring the template's diameter and thickness. More interestingly, if SiO2 replaces the Si material while the structural features are maintained, the samples show excellent optical transmittance.50,64 Size-dependent antireflective performance with an ultra-low color difference, 98.75 ± 0.15%, covering the full visible spectrum (350–800 nm) was observed in a binary SiO2 array50 (Fig. 5c and d). The chromatic aberration is only 1/8 of the commercialized multilayer antireflective film, and the effect is even better at a large incident angle, as shown in Fig. 5d. These topological structures reduce the scattering between photons and microstructures, thus increasing light absorption or transmission.
 Fig. 5  Honeycomb/hexagonal arrays with perfect anti-reflection performance. (a) Si array with a diameter of 100 nm; (b) absorption spectra of Si arrays; reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Wiley. (c) Binary silica nanocap arrays with a diameter of 50/240 nm; (d) reflectance spectra of the fused silica with one side covered with the silica nanocaps vs. multilayer film at different incident angles.57 Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the ACS. 


3.1.2 MOF materials for LH applications. 
Molecular assemblies in porous materials, such as MOFs, can be a functional artificial LH system with features similar to those of the natural LH machinery. Photoexcited chromophores can transfer energy to neighboring chromophores via a Förster or Dexter process. The energy transfer cascade can be terminated by emission or charge separation, followed by thermal recombination chemical transformation (Scheme 1).67 Since MOFs can be considered an ensemble of molecular chromophores, like those in the natural LH complexes, a unique energy transfer (EnT) process can be expected in MOFs.68 Lin's group provided insight into LH and photocatalysis within MOFs and argued that MOFs should be considered scaffolds for EnT owing to their well-defined crystalline structures and controllable chromophoric distances. A few papers were then published to discuss the EnT process and where the exciton locates.69 Later, Shustova and coworkers emphasized the utilization of EnT within MOFs towards improved EnT and sensing capability.70
 Scheme 1  Energy diagram showing typical energy migration processes from photo-excited chromophore assemblies in MOFs (denoted as D) to the conversion site; reaction center (RC) module, consisting of an EnT (denoted as A) or CT quencher. Examples of corresponding linkers and complementary molecular species are noted. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from the ACS. 
A range of LH MOF systems based on distinct construction strategies have been reported, and their various properties well imply the potential of MOFs in this field. For instance, Lin, Meyer, and coworkers revealed the fabrication of Ru(II)/Os(II) (2,2′-bipyridine) 3-derived MOF-based devices showing intracrystal site-to-site energy migration dynamics through the luminescence quenching mechanism.71 Farha and coworkers demonstrated a series of porphyrin-based MOFs featuring exciton propagation capabilities as the LH platform for energy-transfer investigations.72 The main challenge in this field lies in the construction of MOFs with suitable photophysical properties and pore structures, which could facilitate the materials' performance in the perspectives mentioned above. Zhao et al.73 synthesized LH MOFs with 1,1,2,2-tetrakis(4-(pyridin-4-yl)phenyl)-ethene (tppe) as the ligand (Fig. 6) due to its highly emissive and rigid backbone. The tppe with a ring topological structure is conducive to electronic transmission and energy conversion efficiency. The MOFs exhibit strong tppe-originating photoluminescence emission, with a quantum yield as high as 47.6%. The fluorescence quantum yield and time-resolved fluorescence studies revealed that a remarkable energy-transfer efficiency (up to 96%) was achieved in this system.
 Fig. 6  (a) Fluorescence photographs of solid samples of Rho6G@MOF-3 with different loadings of Rho6G (a = 0.01 wt%, b = 0.02 wt%, c = 0.04 wt%, d = 0.1 wt%, e = 0.12 wt%, f = 0.18 wt%, and g = 0.2 wt%), excited at 370 nm. (b) The fluorescence emission spectra for Rho6G@MOF-3 with 0.01–0.20 wt% Rho6G upon excitation at 370 nm; (c) plot of relative fluorescence intensity of Rho6G to MOF-3, upon excitation of the MOF-3 framework at 370 nm. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the ACS. 


3.1.3 Nanotubes for LH improvement. 
There is a hexagonal topology network between the atoms in nanotubes that can force photons or electrons to bypass the defect (or impurity), reduce the power dissipation, and improve the photo-electric conversion efficiency. Doria et al.39 described photo brightening and photodarkening processes in LH nanotubes (LHNs). Fig. 7a presents how energetic disorder modulates excitonic dynamics in a simplified linear chain aggregate. When monomer molecular transition dipoles are assembled end-to-end, their lowest energy excitonic state has a larger net transition dipole. If their transition dipole moments maintain a consistent phase relationship, these dipoles interact coherently in phase with an electromagnetic field, leading to cooperative emission termed excitonic superradiance. The formation of these structures is shown in Fig. 7b. LHNs self-assemble in water from the amphiphilic dye 3,3′-bis(2-sulfopropyl)-5,5′,6,6′-tetrachloro-1,1′-dioctylbenzimida-carbocyanine (C8S3).40 C8S3 forms tubular structures, which consist of two nested cylinders with diameters of 6 ± 1 and 13 ± 1 nm, respectively (Fig. 7c).
 Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of a linear chain aggregate. (b) Chemical structure of the C8S3 monomer and 3D tubular structure of the LHNs. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from the ACS. (c) Cryo-TEM of the as-prepared LHN aggregates in a sucrose-trehalose solution. (d) Preparation and self-assembly processes of dandelion-like supramolecular polymers. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Wiley. 
Zhang et al.41 reported the first example of a dandelion-like supramolecular polymer (DSP) with a “sphere-star-parachute” structure through non-covalent coupling of β-cyclodextrin-endcapped HBPO-star-PEO (HBPO-star-PEO-CD, HBPO = hyperbranched poly (3-ethyl-3-oxetanemethanol); PEO = poly (ethyleneglycol)) and adamantane-1-3,4,5-tris (n-dodecan-1-yloxy) benzamide (AD-tC12) consisting of an adamantane head and three dodecyl tails through specific AD/CD host–guest interactions. Different from the many artificial LH systems in organic solvents, their work shows a chlorosome-like nanotube system with an unexpected high efficiency (above 90%) in water. This extends supramolecular polymers with more complex topological structures and new functions.

3.2 Perovskite solar cells with topological components
With about a decade of rigorous research and development in perovskite solar cells (PVSCs), the power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been boosted up from 3.8% to 25% (Fig. 8).74–82 In 2009, Kojima et al. put forward the first application of perovskite materials in quantum dots.74 A PCE of 3.8% in the visible range was obtained based on CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite materials with TiO2. Park and coworkers significantly enhanced the PCE to 6.5% in 2011.75 Then, MAPbI3−xClx perovskite deposited on a mesoporous Al2O3 film that was deposited on a compact TiO2 layer demonstrated a PCE of 10.9%, implying that perovskite materials could transport the electrons by itself without electron-transporting materials.76 Yang and coworkers further improved the PCE of PVSCs to 19.3%.77 The certified PCE of PVSCs with an active area of >1 cm2 was 15.0% in 2015,78 and a 1 cm2 device further achieved 19.6%.79 With continuous efforts, a certified record PCE of 22.1% was obtained in 2016.80 The efficiency was boosted up to 23.2% in 2018.81 And now, a higher PCE of 25% was shown on the National Renewable Energy Laboratory roadmap in 2019, see Fig. 8.82
 Fig. 8  PVSC power conversion efficiency chart from 2009 to 2019. 
Perovskite materials have demonstrated excellent photo-electric conversion efficiency.74–82 With novel properties from topological structures, multi-functional properties of PVSCs could be expected. Recently, some TI phases have been found in perovskite structures,83–91 which combine the unique topological properties with solar cells and provide the possibility for the preparation of multi-functional optoelectronic devices.

3.2.1 Orthorhombic perovskite iridates AIrO3. 
Since TIs were theoretically predicted and experimentally observed in semiconductors with strong spin–orbit coupling (SOC), increasing attention has been drawn to topological materials that host exotic surface states, which can be probed by photoemission and tunneling experiments. These surface excitations are stable against perturbations since they are protected by global or spatial/lattice symmetries. Chen et al.83 found that the orthorhombic perovskite iridates AIrO3, where A is an alkaline-earth metal with strong SOC and a Pbnm structure, can realize a new class of metal dubbed topological crystalline metal (TCM). TCM can be driven into other topological metallic phases with different topological properties and surface states by applying magnetic fields. This method is expected to regulate perovskite solar cells' conversion efficiency through an external magnetic field, which helps design new solar cell devices.83,84


3.2.2 Halide perovskite structures. 
Based on tight-binding (TB) analysis and density-functional theory (DFT) calculations, Jin et al.85 found several cubic halide perovskites as possible candidates for 3D TI materials. In ABX3 type perovskite structures, the A-site cation is chemically inert so that the states from cation B and anion X prevail near the Fermi level. The basic electronic structures of the CsPbI3 cubic phase without SOC are shown in Fig. 9a. The conduction bands mainly consist of Pb 6p-orbital states whose triple degeneracy is seen at the Γ and R points in the Brillouin zone. Most interestingly, at the valence band maximum, the wave function is expressed as a linear combination of Pb 6s- and I 5p-orbital states, following singlet s-orbital symmetry; in other words, orbital degrees of freedom are quenched.85 Anti-bonding between Pb 6s and I 5p with strong σ character raises this state close to the Fermi level (Fig. 9b). As shown in Fig. 9c, the parities of the basis set constructing the valence and conduction bands are even and odd, respectively, which make nontrivial band topology possible by inverting and exchanging their parities.86
 Fig. 9  (a) Electronic band structure, (b) projected density-of-states of CsPbI3, and the Bloch wavefunctions of (c) triply degenerate p-bands at the conduction band minimum and (d) nondegenerate s-like band at the valence band maximum. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from APS. 


3.2.3 Topological defects based on Berezinskii–Kosterlitz–Thouless transition. 
It was suggested that 2D systems maintain a quasi-ordered phase at low temperature if they can host pairs of topological defects, such as vortex or dislocation pairs, which maintain continuous symmetry with finite energy.87 The unpairing of these topological defect pairs can collapse the quasi-long-range order and introduce an unusual phase transition known as the Berezinskii–Kosterlitz–Thouless (BKT) transition, which was experimentally shown in a few systems.88–90 The 2D crystalline order is one of the 2D systems initially predicted to undergo the BKT transition by having edge dislocation pairs as the topological defects. Hong et al.91 found a 2D topological BKT transition in ultrathin membranes of SrTiO3, an archetypal perovskite oxide with isotropic (3D) bonding. Atomically controlled membranes are released after synthesis by dissolving an underlying epitaxial layer. Although all unreleased films are initially mono-crystalline, the SrTiO3 membrane lattice collapses below a critical thickness (5 unit cells). The transition is likely driven by chemical bond breaking at the 2D layer-3D bulk interface, defining an effective dimensional phase boundary for coherent crystalline lattices. Understanding this intrinsic phase diagram of 2D crystalline order will open new opportunities for 2D materials of arbitrary crystalline structures, with more energy conversion efficiency.
In summary, the topological components of perovskites provide significant benefits for their applications in solar cells: (1) there will inevitably be defects in perovskite films, based on TM low power dissipation (Section 1.2), and the current generated by photo-electric conversion can bypass defects or impurities in the conduction, avoid collisions of electrons with phonons and defects, and improve the photo-electric conversion efficiency. (2) Based on the Z2 invariant (Section 1.3), topological perovskites could enhance the efficiency of photo-electric conversion by band engineering based on precise control of their electronic topology. (3) TM perovskites' topological phases could be tuned by an external magnetic field conducive to the design of multi-functional solar devices.

3.3 Promoting photocatalysis via topological concepts
Photocatalysis has been regarded as one of the best solutions to using sunlight to produce hydrogen (H2) from water and to remove organic pollutants from the environment.92–97 Recently, many topological materials with excellent photocatalysis performance have been reported due to their nontrivial topologies.98–104

3.3.1 Special facet by the hydrothermal topological reaction. 
Wen et al.98 prepared regular orthorhombic Nb2O5 (O-Nb2O5) rectangular nanosheets with the (010) facet via a hydrothermal topological reaction, hydrothermal synthesis induced by a topological chemical reaction, with a precursor of K4Nb6O17·4.5H2O (KNbO). The results suggest that there are two topological reactions in this process. One is the acid-exchange reaction transforming KNbO rectangular nanosheets into H4Nb6O17·3H2O (HNbO) nanosheets, and the other is the dehydration reaction turning HNbO nanosheets into O-Nb2O5 rectangular nanosheets, as shown in Fig. 10a.
 Fig. 10  (a) Crystal structure evolution from the KNbO nanosheet crystal to the O-Nb2O5 nanosheet crystal. (b) Linear sweep voltammograms collected in the dark or under 30 W m−2 UV light illumination using a three electrode setup in 0.5 mol L−1 Na2SO4 electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Elsevier. 
And the {010} facets of the O-Nb2O5 crystal are transformed from the {010} facets of the HNbO crystal in the typical topological reaction. The obtained O-Nb2O5 nanosheets' photo-electric performance is evaluated by decomposing water to H2 under 370 nm UV light illumination and measuring the accompanying photocurrent. The photocurrent density is 680 nA cm−2 generated by splitting water with O-Nb2O5 nanosheets as a photocatalyst, and it is 4.3 times that with the Nb2O5 spherical sample (Fig. 10b).


3.3.2 Topological carbon nitride (TCN). 
Rahman et al.101 introduced a topological carbon nitride (TCN) with built-in topologically anchored complementary crystalline–amorphous phases, allowing localized photon absorption of different wavelengths and providing a twinned photocatalyst interface to facilitate geminate charge carrier pair separation. TCN was synthesized in a two-step synthesis procedure, as shown in Fig. 11a. Dicyandiamide (DCDA) was first heated at 550 °C for polymerization into graphitic carbon nitride (GCN). Then melamine was added before a second temperature treatment at 700 °C, followed by slow-cooling to obtain TCN.
 Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis of TCN. Here, T1 is 550 °C and T2 is 700 °C. (b) Hydrogen production rate. (c) The stability of cyclic hydrogen production over 3 runs with storage of the reaction systems in air for 1 month between consecutive runs. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the RSC. 
The performance of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution with TCN is shown in Fig. 11b in comparison with that of GCN. TCN produced 31 μmol hydrogen per hour under the irradiation of visible light (λ = 420 nm) in the absence of a precious metal cocatalyst (i.e., Pt). There was no hydrogen evolution on GCN and amorphous carbon nitride (ACN) unless Pt was used as a cocatalyst. 1 wt% Pt-assisted pristine GCN and ACN produce 27 and 18 μmol h−1 hydrogen, respectively. TCN shows a solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of 1.7%. The high hydrogen production with TCN without the support of a cocatalyst is a highly significant result from an economic point of view because precious metals have to be avoided for low-cost hydrogen production. Moreover, the cyclic hydrogen production with TCN is reproducible for a long duration of time (3 months), while GCN and ACN start degrading within a month (Fig. 11c).
Topologically anchored dual complementary phases allow localized photon absorption of different wavelengths and provide a twinned photocatalyst interface to facilitate charge carrier pair separation. These unique attributes, which are absent in widely used GCN and ACN photocatalysts, are highly desirable for precious metal (i.e., Pt) cocatalyst-free hydrogen production via water-splitting.


3.3.3 Topological engineering of catalysts. 
It has been demonstrated that topological nontrivial surface states favor heterogeneous catalysis processes, such as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). However, a further decrease in mass loading and an increase in activity are still highly challenging. The observation of massless chiral fermions associated with large topological charge and long Fermi arc (FA) surface states inspires the investigation of their relationship with the charge transfer and adsorption process in the HER process.
Yang et al.102 found that the HER efficiency of Pt-group metals can be boosted significantly by introducing topological order. A giant nontrivial topological energy window and a great topological surface FA are expected at the surface when forming chiral crystals in the space group of P213 (#198), as schematically shown in Fig. 12a and b. Although Pt itself contains a Z2 topological index, the topological band structure is far away from the Fermi level, and it is constructed by s and p orbitals instead of d orbitals. The bands around the Fermi level are mainly dominated by the 5-d orbitals,103 which are also believed to cause high Pt catalytic efficiency. In other catalysts with topological order, such as Weyl semimetals and TIs, the nontrivial energy window is tiny, and the enhancement of HER performance by topological band structures is sharply limited. On the other hand, if one can have a Pt-d orbital derived topological band structure along with a large nontrivial energy window (see the right panel of Fig. 12a), significant improvement in the efficiency is expected for the Pt-based catalysts.
 Fig. 12  Chiral crystal structure protected multifold Fermions and corresponding catalytic properties. (a) Illustration of the band inversion mechanism and topologically nontrivial energy window in pure Pt,104 nonchiral topological semimetals, and chiral B20 compounds. (b) Crystal structure of PtAl with the space group P213 (no. 198). The c2 screw rotation symmetry along the [001] direction is highlighted by arrows. (c) Bulk Brillouin zone (BZ), and its projection to the (001) surface. Doubly degenerated Weyl and fourfold degenerated Rarita–Schwinger–Weyl points locate at Γ points. A sixfold degenerated point locates at R points. The topological charges at Γ and R points are +4 and −4, respectively. The Fermi arcs connect high symmetry points of  and . (d) HER volcano plot of PtAl, PtGa, RhSi, PdGa, and the related metal catalysts (the experimental data of Rh, Pd, and Pt).104 The topological Weyl semimetals NbP, TaP, NbAs, and TaAs (the calculated data)105 are also presented for comparison. (e) Comparison of TOF values between the chiral crystal catalysts and state-of-the-art noble metal-based nanostructured electrocatalysts.106–112 Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Wiley. 
Owing to the chiral crystal symmetry, the band structures of this type of material present as multifold degenerated points with a large topological charge of Chern number 4 (Fig. 12b and c). Unlike TIs and Weyl semimetals, the sources of topological charges in this type of material are located at different high symmetry time-reversal invariant momenta, which guarantee giant nontrivial energy windows and long surface FAs, as presented in Fig. 12a and c. This type of TM contains Pt-related compounds, such as PtAl, PtMg, and PtGa, which provide the ideal platform to topologically enhance the catalytic efficiency based on the traditional catalyst of Pt.96 The directly calculated Gibbs-free energies of H adsorption |ΔGH*| for two experimentally verified Pt-contained multifold Fermi topological semimetals, PtAl and PtGa are shown in Fig. 12d.102,104 This makes the nontrivial topological features resistant to a substantial change in the applied overpotential. As HER catalysts, PtAl and PtGa chiral crystals show turnover frequencies (TOFs) as high as 5.6 and 17.1 s−1 and an overpotential as low as 14 and 13.3 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. These crystals outperform those of commercial Pt and nanostructured catalysts, as compared in Fig. 12e. This work opens a new avenue for the development of high-efficiency catalysts with the strategy of topological engineering of excellent traditional catalytic materials.

3.4 TMs as electrodes of photo-electric devices
Traditional noble metals such as platinum (Pt), gold (Au), and silver (Ag) are commonly used as electrodes. However, the devices using noble metal as electrodes usually suffer from many dangling bonds and irregular surfaces, leading to severe carrier scattering and impeded charge carrier transport. Indium tin oxide (ITO) and graphene are another class of electrode frequently employed in high-performance photodetectors, and the devices based on these two materials also have some drawbacks, e.g., insufficient flexibility and low near-infrared light (NIR) transmittance for ITO113 and complicated fabrication and transfer processes for graphene.114
Recently, 2D TM thin-films have been demonstrated to be a superior electrode due to their topologically protected and highly conductive surface channels, which can effectively suppress undesirable charge scattering.28–33 By using crystalline TI Bi2Se3 films as electrodes, Liang et al.115 fabricated a Bi2Se3-FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3–Bi2Se3 photodetector with MBE. The as-fabricated photodetector exhibits apparent sensitivity to 650 nm illumination with an on/off ratio of 0.8 × 105 and good reproducibility. The responsivity, external quantum efficiency, and specific detectivity are estimated to be 8.4 A W−1, 1604%, and 1.7 × 1013 Jones, respectively, which are better than those of the perovskite device using Au as the electrode, as well as those of the majority of other perovskite material-based devices. A schematic diagram of the TI-based perovskite photodetector is presented in Fig. 13a, in which a Cs-doped FAPbI3 thin film was coated directly on two parallel Bi2Se3 thin films. Fig. 13b shows a cross-sectional image of the as-fabricated device characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy. The TI-based perovskite photodetector displays obvious photoresponse to NIR radiation at 980 nm due to the contribution of the Bi2Se3 TI layer (Fig. 13c and d).
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the Bi2Se3–FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3–Bi2Se3 photodetector; the inset shows the crystal structure of the Bi2Se3 film and digital photograph of the device on a printed circuit board. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the device. (c) Normalized spectral response of the device in the range from 300–1000 nm. (d) Absorption curves of Bi2Se3, perovskite, and the Bi2Se3/perovskite hybrid.84 Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Wiley. 
In addition, Wang et al.116 fabricated a low-cost Bi2Te3 counter electrode in flexible perovskite solar cells by using a simple thermal evaporation process. The structure of a Bi2Te3-based flexible PVSC is schematically illustrated in Fig. 14a. The device was fabricated on an ITO/polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrate. As deposited, a NiOx nanocrystal film was used as the hole transporting layer based on the previous reports with some modifications.117,118Fig. 14b shows the energy levels of each layer in the device, indicating that Ag and Bi2Te3 match well with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital energy level of [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), which is used as an electron transport layer. The resultant device achieved an excellent PCE of 18.16%, which was among the highest reported efficiencies, much higher than that of the reference Ag PVSC (15.90%) (Fig. 14c and d). This improvement should be attributed to the intrinsic suppressed electron backscattering in the Bi2Te3 topological insulator.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the device configuration. (b) Energy-level diagram showing the similar work function of Bi2Te3 and Ag. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from the ACS. (c) J–V cures of the optimal Ag and Bi2Te3 perovskite solar cells. (d) Incident photon-to-current efficiency spectra and the corresponding integrated photocurrent of the Ag and Bi2Te3 devices. 
4. Energy storage
As discussed above, by tuning the topological structures of materials, one can significantly improve the energy conversion efficiency. This strategy can also be applied for the capacity enhancement of energy storage. Energy storage often refers to electricity or hydrogen that is stored for use at a later time. This section will exemplarily discuss the fabrication and application of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and hydrogen storage based on topological optimization.
4.1 Improving lithium-ion batteries via topological optimization
Lithium is the lightest of all metals, has a low electrochemical potential, and provides the most significant energy density per weight.119–124 The energy density of a LIB is typically twice that of the standard nickel–cadmium battery. Here, we will emphasize the improvement of battery energy density and discharge times via topological optimization.

4.1.1 Topological and network analysis of LIBs. 
Topological design for energy storage aims to obtain high energy storage density by obtaining an ultrahigh porosity.17 For example, preparing MOFs with a higher porosity requires an increase in storage space per weight of the materials. Longer organic linkers provide more storage space and many adsorption sites within a given material. However, the large space within the crystal framework makes it prone to forming interpenetrating structures. The most effective way to prevent interpenetration is to make MOFs whose topology inhibits interpenetration because it would require the second framework to have a different topology.125 Additionally, it is essential to keep the pore diameter in the micropore range (below 2 nm) by judicious selection of organic linkers to maximize the framework's Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area. It is known that BET surface areas obtained from isotherms are similar to the geometric surface areas derived from the crystal structure.126
The structure of LIB components, such as electrodes and separators, are commonly characterized in terms of their porosity and tortuosity. The ratio of these values gives the effective transport coefficient of lithium ions in the electrolyte-filled pore spaces, which can be used to determine the ionic resistivity and corresponding voltage losses. Lagadec et al.127 demonstrated that the extent to which lithium-ion concentration gradients are induced or smoothed by a separator structure is linked to pore space connectivity. This parameter can be determined by the topological or network-based analysis of the separator. In a commercial LIB (schematic is shown in Fig. 15a), active particles in an electrode are typically in the order of 1 to 40 μm in diameter. This implies that the electrode structure's pore space has typical features approximately one to two orders of magnitude larger than the separator's pore space. Direct contact between electrodes and separators can result in different lithium-ion concentrations in regions where the separator's pores are blocked by the electrode particles. An example of an interface between a graphite electrode and a separator is shown in Fig. 15b. Alternatively, a defect during separator manufacturing or battery assembly (e.g., agglomeration or contamination), as shown in Fig. 15c, may result in blocked areas and decreased performance.128 Pore-blocking defects can create ion-insulated regions, which may locally lead to high Li-ion concentrations and over-potentials at the distant separator interface. Local defects in separators could lead to non-uniform charging and plating around the defects.129
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the LIB setup with electrode particles touching the separator. (b) Rendering of the separator volume of 3 μm edge length with the separator electrode interface. The electrode particles are 3–6 μm in diameter (i.e., up to three orders of magnitude larger than the separator pores)130 and can thus block a significant number of separator pores. (c) Rendering of the separator volume of 3 mm edge length with blocked pores. (d) Concentration distribution from diffusion simulation across a separator volume of 3 μm edge length with a defect diameter of 3 μm on top (dashed circle) and at half depth (dashed line at 1.5 μm). (e) Concentration density maps for steady-state Fickian diffusion simulations across the through-plane directions of the reference datasets with pores in 1D, 2D, and 3D, and the imaged datasets of polyethylene and polypropylene (3 μm edge lengths). A circular defect structure of 3 μm was placed on top of the structures, and a concentration difference of ∼50 mM was applied between the top and bottom. (f) Ion concentration profiles at a 1.5 μm depth (corresponding to the white line in (d) and (e)) across sub-volumes of 3 μm edge length. The dashed circle represents the defect structure at a 0 μm depth. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from the RSC. 
To simulate these scenarios and understand how high connectivity in a structure can help compensate for concentration gradients, a 3 μm circular object (electrode particle or defect) was assumed to prevent the electrolyte from impinging on the separator, as shown in Fig. 16d. Fig. 16e and f show the concentration density maps and the ion concentration profile at a 1.5 μm depth for each sub-volume, respectively. These topological analysis findings enable people to propose how to design separator microstructures that are safer and accommodate fast charge and discharge.
 Fig. 16  Transmission electron microscopy images of (a) TS-SnO2@FeOx-C(MOF), (b) TS-SnO2@Fe2O3(MOF) and (c) TS-SnO2@Fe2O3 (particle). Cycling performances (d) and initial charge–discharge voltage profiles (e) of TS-SnO2 HoMS, TS-SnO2@FeOx-C(MOF), TS-SnO2@Fe2O3(MOF), and TS-SnO2@Fe2O3 (particle). Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley. 


4.1.2 Topological semimetals as LIB anode materials. 
The discoveries of fullerenes,131 nanotubes,132 and graphene133 ignited tremendous interest in recent years to explore additional carbon structures in all-sp2 bonding networks. Recent studies unveiled a new type of stable chiral framework structure comprising threefold, fourfold,134 and sixfold135 helical chains in all-sp2 bonding networks connected by ethene-type planar π conjugation. Inspired by the chain structure and based on ab initio calculations, Wang et al.136 identified a novel topological semimetal carbon phase in all-sp2 bonding networks with a 16-atom body-centered orthorhombic unit cell, termed bco-C16. Electronic band structure calculations revealed that bco-C16 is a topological node-line semimetal with a single nodal ring.
Liu et al.137 further revealed that the topological semimetal bco-C16 is a promising anode material with a higher specific capacity (Li-C4) than that of the commonly used graphite anode (Li-C6) based on density-functional theory and the cluster-expansion method. Li-ions in bco-C16 exhibit a remarkable one-dimensional migration feature, and the ion diffusion channels are robust against the compressive and tensile strains during charging/discharging. Moreover, the energy barrier decreases with increasing Li insertion and can reach 0.019 eV at high Li-ion concentration. The average voltage is as low as 0.23 V, and the volume change during operation is comparable to that of graphite.
The same group recently proposed a combined high-pressure synthesis method138 with global structure search to find a topological semimetal porous carbon as a desired anode. Crystal-structure searching showed that the ground state of an orthorhombic phase LiC6 with regular pores at 30 GPa could be obtained when the Li atoms are removed. The resulting carbon structure is an interlocked graphene network (IGN), a topological semimetal with an intrinsic high electronic conductivity. Based on the state-of-the-art first-principles calculations, the Li-ion migration energy barrier in the IGN is quite low. The estimated diffusion coefficient can reach a magnitude of 10−4 cm2 s−1 at both low and high Li concentrations, three orders of magnitude larger than that of the graphite anode. These intriguing theoretical findings would stimulate the experimental exploration of topological carbon materials.


4.1.3 Heterogeneous hollow multi-shelled structures (HoMSs). 
As discussed in Section 2.2.3, topological features of the MOF type structures would benefit energy conversion. They could contribute to energy storage as well. For instance, heterogeneous hollow multi-shelled structures (HoMSs) based on MOFs have attracted a lot of attention due to their excellent performance in energy density and capacity of LIBs. Zhang et al.139,140 presented HoMSs prepared by exploiting the MOFs' casing properties, as shown in Scheme 2. The number of internal shells and porosity can be controlled by the concentration of tin(IV) chloride solution and thermal processing. Considering the difference in absorption capacity of Sn2+ or Sn4+ and oxide-crystallization affected by the heating rate, one can easily obtain core-shelled SnO2 hollow spheres using Sn2+ ions instead of the Sn4+ ions in an ethanol solution mixture and increasing the speed of calcination.139 By accurately controlling the MOF layer's transformation into different heterogeneous casings, they precisely designed HoMSs of SnO2@Fe2O3(MOF) and SnO2@FeOx-C(MOF), which retained not only the properties of the original SnO2-HoMSs but also the structural information from the MOFs.
 Scheme 2  Synthesis procedure of HoMS with MOF-derived casings involving two calcination steps (Route 1) and the hydrothermal deposition method (Route 2). Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley. 
Then, a MIL-100(Fe) layer was coated on the triple-shelled SnO2 (TS-SnO2) to give TS-SnO2@MIL-100(Fe). After calcination in a nitrogen atmosphere, the TS-SnO2@FeOx-C(MOF) was collected. Subsequent heterogeneous structures of TS-SnO2@Fe2O3-(MOF) can be obtained through the calcination of TS-SnO2@FeOx-C(MOF) in air. As an anode material in LIBs, TS-SnO2@Fe2O3 (MOF) exhibits superior storage capacity and cycling performance compared to the original SnO2-HoMSs. This can be attributed to the topological MOF casing (Fig. 16a–c): (1) the outer MOF-derived Fe2O3 casing can protect the inner SnO2; (2) the MOF-derived Fe2O3 casing has a large surface area and provides more lithium-storage sites to maintain the high storage capacity. The capacity retention after 100 cycles for the SnO2@Fe2O3 (MOF)-HoMSs is about eight times higher than that of the SnO2@Fe2O3 (particle)-HoMS fabricated by the hydrothermal method, as shown in Fig. 16d and e.
Based on the MOFs' versatile topological architectures, bimetal–organic frameworks141 of Ni–Co-benzenetricarboxylate (BTC) solid microspheres with various Ni/Co ratios are readily prepared by the solvothermal method to induce the NixCo3−xO4 multi-shelled hollow microspheres through a morphology-inherited annealing treatment. As anode materials for lithium-ion batteries, the multi-shelled hollow microspheres deliver a high reversible capacity of 1109.8 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1 with an excellent high-rate capability. These prominent electrochemical properties give rise to the concept of synthesizing MOF-derived mixed metal oxides with multi-shelled hollow structures for advancing lithium-ion batteries.


4.1.4 Ultrathin nanosheets. 
2D nanosheets are considered excellent frameworks for fast charge transport and storage because of their large surface area, structural stability, and 2D fluidic diffusion path for Li+ ions.142,143 Zhang et al.144 developed a facile method to synthesize NiO nanosheets@carbon (with NO3−, CO32−, and OH−, denoted as NiO@C) and stacked 3 nm ultrathin NiO nanosheets@functionalized carbon (with NO3−, CO32−, OH−, and COOH−, marked as NiO@FC). Interestingly, the ultrathin nanosheets were successfully achieved via in situ topotactic conversion from the layered hydroxide precursor. The NiO@FC anodes exhibited excellent electrochemical performance: a high specific capacity of 1512 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1, which was maintained at 1133 mA h g−1 after 800 cycles.
Apart from TEM nanosheets, some TM nanosheets have been exploited for application in Li-ion batteries. Li et al.145 indicated the ultrahigh diffusivity of lithium on monolayer phosphorene along the zigzag direction with a shallow energy barrier of 0.08 eV.145 The lithium atoms were loaded on the phosphorene surface and then diffused along the armchair or zigzag paths. Meanwhile, Mortazavi's group146 and Akturk's group147 investigated lithium and sodium adsorption on stanene to reveal its potential application in lithium and sodium-ion batteries.

4.2 Hydrogen storage on TEMs
Hydrogen storage is a crucial technology for advancing hydrogen and fuel cell technologies in applications, including stationary power, portable power, and transportation.148–151 Hydrogen has the highest energy per mass of any fuel; however, its low ambient temperature density results in low energy per unit volume. Recently, some porous materials based on topological optimization provided a new strategy to improve the hydrogen storage capacity.
Ma et al.152 investigated Ca-decorated graphene with topological defects using the first-principles approach, specifically for the experimentally realizable single carbon vacancy (SCV), 585 double carbon vacancy (585 DCV), and 555-777 double carbon vacancy (555-777 DCV) defects (Fig. 17). They found that a Ca atom can be stabilized on the above defective graphenes since Ca's binding energy on vacancy defects is much larger than its cohesive energy. Up to six H2 molecules can stably bind to the Ca atom on defective graphene with average adsorption energies of 0.17–0.39 eV/H2. The hybridization of Ca-3d orbitals with H2-σ orbitals and the electrostatic interaction between the Ca cation and the induced H2 dipole contribute to H2 molecule binding. Double-sided Ca-decorated graphene with 585 DCV and 555-777 DCV defects can theoretically achieve a gravimetric capacity of 5.2 wt% hydrogen, indicating that Ca-decorated defective graphene can be used as a promising material for high-density hydrogen storage.
 Fig. 17  Optimized atomic geometries for Ca-decorated pristine (a), SCV (b), 585 DCV (c) and 555-777 DCV (d) defect graphene with their maximum H2 capacity; Ca adsorbed on both sides of 585DCV (e) and 555-777 DCV (f) defect graphene at their maximum H2 capacity. Green, blue, and white balls represent carbon, calcium, and hydrogen atoms, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Wiley. 
5. Conclusions and outlook
As summarized in this brief review, TMs and TEMs represent exciting sets of new materials that have attracted intense research interest owing to their promise in energy-related applications. Topological concepts provide a different strategy for designing electronic structures of materials to enhance the photo-electric conversion efficiency. Owing to their high mobility and ability to bypass impurities, TM electrodes can effectively suppress undesirable charge scattering and directly improve solar cells' power conversion efficiency and photodetectors' detectivity performance. Topological concepts also help improve the capabilities of light-harvesting, lithium-ion batteries, and hydrogen storage by the topological design of porous materials, such as MOFs, porous arrays, and so on. Besides, topological concepts provide a new approach to engineer TM electronic structures via tuning their width, edge shape, and terminating crystallographic unit cell. Thus, this would endow a promising way to enhance photo-electric conversion efficiency by band engineering in TMs based on the precise control of their electronic topology. Additionally, some topological phases have been found in perovskite structures, such as orthorhombic perovskite iridates and halide perovskites, which will enable perovskite cells to have topological properties, thus providing an opportunity to design multi-functional optoelectronic devices.
The goal of topological design for energy conversion is to improve the conversion efficiency. Although there have been many reports on improving the energy conversion efficiency using topological structures, the fundamental mechanism is still unclear. It is expected that more systematic theoretical simulations are needed to establish a clear relationship between the structures and properties in the near future. Moreover, due to near-zero power consumption characteristics, another set of TMs, e.g., TSCs, will have applications in ultra-low-power electronic devices and electromagnetic energy storage devices.
TEMs exhibit excellent energy conversion and storage performance; however, some TEMs such as MOFs are not stable under electrochemical conditions. For example, some TEMs can hold high lithium storage capacity only for a few hundred cycles,137–139 less than that for other materials in lithium-ion battery applications. However, for such materials the possibility of improving their stability should not be ruled out, especially at the initial stage of research for energy applications. It is believed that through creative topological design and experimental implementation, more and more TEMs will be found with topological phases, and such challenges will be overcome. Encouraged by a recent study by Tang et al.,11 thousands of TM candidates could be explored to boost the application of TMs in the field of energy.
In summary, both TMs and TEMs play an essential role in improving topological energy materials' performance due to their typical properties. They provide a new angle to explore their energy applications. This review aims to stimulate broader interests in developing topological energy materials, including TMs and TEMs, toward improving their energy field applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This project was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 51671139) and the program of China Scholarships Council (Grants No. 201808330227).
Notes and references
C. Choi, D. S. Ashby, D. M. Butts, R. H. DeBlock, Q. L. Wei, J. Lau and B. Dunn, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 5–19 CrossRef .
M. Delor, H. L. Weaver, Q. Q. Yu and N. S. Ginsberg, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 56–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Cao, X. X. Wang, M. Zhang, J. C. Shu, W. Q. Cao, H. J. Yang, X. Y. Fang and J. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807398 CrossRef .
W. W. Zhong, J. D. Huang, S. Q. Liang, J. Liu, Y. J. Li, G. M. Cai, Y. Jiang and J. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 31–38 CrossRef CAS .
J. Moore, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 378–380 Search PubMed .
D. J. Rizzo, G. Veber, T. Cao, C. Bronner, T. Chen, F. Z. Zhao, H. Rodriguez, S. G. Louie, M. F. Crommie and F. R. Fischer, Nature, 2018, 560, 204–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Qi, R. Li, J. Zang and S. C. Zhang, Science, 2009, 323, 1184–1187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Das, Y. Ronen, Y. Most, Y. Oreg, M. Heiblum and H. Shtrikman, Nat. Phys., 2012, 8, 887–895 Search PubMed .
S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, J. Li, H. Chen, S. Jeon, J. Seo, A. H. MacDonald, B. A. Bernevig and A. Yazdani, Science, 2014, 346, 602–607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ozawa, H. M. Price, A. Amo, N. Goldman, M. Hafezi, L. Lu, M. C. Rechtsman, D. Schuster, J. Simon, O. Zilberberg and I. Carusotto, Topological photonics, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2019, 91, 015006 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tang, H. C. Po, A. Vishwanath and X. Wan, Nature, 2019, 566, 486–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Ryu, S. Jee, P. C. Rao, J. Shin, C. Ko, M. Yoon, K. S. Park and K. M. Choi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 426, 213544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Moon, D.-W. Lim and M. P. Suh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1807–1824 RSC .
S. Das, P. Heasman, T. Ben and S. L. Qiu, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1515–1563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cao, F. Zhao and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 076401 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. G. Li, J. J. Lin, Z. Q. Liu, S. S. Feng, Y. P. Liu, C. F. Wang, Y. Liu and S. K. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40180–40188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Cai, P. Ruffieux, R. Jaafar, M. Bieri, T. Braun, S. Blankenburg, M. Muoth, A. P. Seitsonen, M. Saleh, X. L. Feng, K. Mullen and R. Fasel, Nature, 2010, 466, 470–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Rizzo, G. Veber, T. Cao, C. Bronner, T. Chen, F. Z. Zhao, H. Rodriguez, S. G. Louie, M. F. Crommie and F. R. Fischer, Nature, 2018, 560, 204–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Groning, S. Y. Wang, X. L. Yao, C. A. Pignedoli, G. B. Barin, C. Daniels, A. Cupo, V. Meunier, X. L. Feng, A. Narita, K. Mullen, P. Ruffieux and R. Fasel, Nature, 2018, 560, 209–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Moreno, M. Vilas-Varela, B. Kretz, A. Garcia-Lekue, M. V. Costache, M. Paradinas, M. Panighel, G. Ceballos, S. O. Valenzuela, D. Peña and A. Mugarza, Science, 2018, 360, 199–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. B. Barin, A. Fairbrother, L. Rotach, M. Bayle, M. Paillet, L. B. Liang, V. Meunier, R. Hauert, T. Dumslaff, A. Narita, K. Mullen, H. Sahabudeen, R. Berger, X. L. Feng, R. Fasel and P. Ruffieux, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2184–2192 CrossRef .
B. Cirera, A. Sanchez-Grande, B. de la Torre, J. Santos, S. Edalatmanesh, E. Rodriguez-Sanchez, K. Lauwaet, B. Mallada, R. Zboril, R. Miranda, O. Groning, P. Jelinek, N. Martin and D. Ecija, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 437–443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Talirz, P. Ruffieux and R. Fasel, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6222–6231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shen, H.-Y. Gao and H. Fuchs, Nano Today, 2017, 13, 77–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohuchi, J. Matsuno, N. Ogawa, Y. Kozuka, M. Uchida, Y. Tokura and M. Kawasaki, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 213 CrossRef PubMed .
X. X. Wu, S. S. Qin, Y. Liang, H. Fan and J. P. Hu, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 115129 CrossRef .
J. D. Yao, Z. Q. Zheng and G. W. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701823 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, G. Song, J. Sun, J. Leng, C. Zhang and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 12490–12496 RSC .
J. D. Yao and G. W. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1704524 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Li, G. Wang, X. G. Zhu, M. H. Liu, C. Ye, X. Chen, Y. Y. Wang, K. He, L. L. Wang, X. C. Ma, H. J. Zhang, X. Dai, Z. Fang, X. C. Xie, Y. Liu, X. L. Qi, J. F. Jia, S. C. Zhang and Q. K. Xue, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4002–4007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Yao, J. M. Shao, Y. X. Wang, Z. R. Zhao and G. W. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12535–12541 RSC .
M. H. Liao, Y. Y. Zang, Z. Y. Guan, H. W. Li, Y. Gong, K. J. Zhu, X. P. Hu, D. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. Y. Wang, K. He, X. C. Ma, S. C. Zhang and Q. K. Xue, Nat. Phys., 2018, 14, 344–348 Search PubMed .
H. Huang, X. H. Ren, Z. J. Li, H. D. Wang, Z. Y. Huang, H. Qiao, P. H. Tang, J. L. Zhao, W. Y. Liang, Y. Q. Ge, J. Liu, J. Q. Li, X. Qi and H. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 235201 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Han, Y. M. Zhu, L. J. Wu, T. Aoki, V. Volkov, X. Y. Wang, S. C. Chae, Y. S. Oh and S. W. Cheong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2415–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. H. Ansari, A. Qurashi and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2018, 35, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
I. Söllner, S. Mahmoodian, S. L. Hansen, L. Midolo, A. Javadi, G. Kiršanskė, T. Pregnolato, H. E. Ella, E. H. Lee, J. D. Song, S. Stobbe and P. Lodahl, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 775–778 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Yang, Z. Gao, H. R. Xue, L. Zhang, M. J. He, Z. J. Yang, R. J. Singh, Y. D. Chong, B. L. Zhang and H. S. Chen, Nature, 2019, 565, 622–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Doria, T. S. Sinclair, N. D. Klein, D. I. G. Bennett, C. Chuang, F. S. Freyria, C. P. Steiner, P. Foggi, K. A. Nelson, J. S. Cao, A. Aspuru-Guzik, S. Lloyd, J. R. Caram and M. G. Bawendi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4556–4564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Eisele, C. W. Cone, E. A. Bloemsma, S. M. Vlaming, C. G. F. van der Kwaak, R. J. Silbey, M. G. Bawendi, J. Knoester, J. P. Rabe and D. A. Vanden Bout, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 655–662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Zhang, Y. N. Liu, Y. J. Fan, C. Y. Yu, Y. L. Zheng, H. B. Jin, L. Fu, Y. F. Zhou and D. Y. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7652–7661 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Liu, S. S. Feng, Z. G. Li, L. Zhang, G. P. Wang, W. P. Chen, T. L. Wang and W. W. Zhong, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 57013–57018 RSC .
Y. Li, G. T. Duan, G. Q. Liu and W. P. Cai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3614–3627 RSC .
Z. G. Li, T. L. Wang, S. S. Feng, M. H. Fang, S. J. Shen, Z. R. Yang and B. Q. Wei, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 1381–1387 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, N. Sun, B. B. Stogin, J. Wang, Y. Huang and T. S. Wong, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1285 CrossRef PubMed .
S. F. Lou, X. Q. Cheng, Y. Zhao, A. Lushington, J. L. Gao, Q. Li, P. J. Zuo, B. Q. Wang, Y. Z. Gao, Y. L. Ma, C. Y. Du, G. P. Yin and X. L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 15–25 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Y. Q. Sun, L. F. Hang, H. L. Li, G. Q. Liu, X. M. Zhang, X. J. Lyu, W. P. Cai and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9792–9801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Yang, Q. Yuan, J. Zhai, T. X. Wei, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 572–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Li, Y. Gu, Y. P. Li, S. S. Feng, Z. R. Yang, Y. H. Zhang and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 931–936 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Li, J. J. Lin, Z. Q. Liu, S. S. Feng, Y. P. Liu, C. F. Wang, Y. Liu and S. K. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40180–40188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schröder and R. A. Fischer, Top. Curr. Chem., 2010, 293, 77–113 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Song, J. Li, J. Liu, T. Wu, P. Zhang and B. Han, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2078–2082 RSC .

          D. S. Richeson, Euler's Gem: The Polyhedron Formula and the Birth of Topology, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,  2008, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. Yang, T. B. Song, C. C. Chen, H. Zhao, Z. Hong, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 355–396 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. Johnston and H. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Chen, S. C. Zhang, Y. X. Zou, C. Zhang, B. Zheng, C. L. Huang, B. W. Zhang, C. Xing, Y. Xu and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 1106–1112 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gomeza, S. Sanchezb, M. Campoy-Quilesa and A. Abate, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 94–100 CrossRef .
J. Cui, H. Yuan, J. Li, X. Xu, Y. Shen, H. Lin and M. Wang, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2015, 16, 36004 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. P. Zhou, Z. R. Hong, S. Luo, H. S. Duan, H. H. Wang, Y. S. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Han, Z. B. Jiao, S. C. Niu and L. Q. Ren, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 103, 1–68 CrossRef .
J. G. Cai and L. M. Qi, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 37–53 RSC .
Z. G. Li, S. S. Feng, Y. P. Liu, J. L. Hu, C. F. Wang and B. Q. Wei, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900845 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Wang, M. Xu, T. Y. Peng, C. X. Zhang, T. Li, I. Hussain, J. Y. Wang and B. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Tang, T. Jiang, T. Zhou, H. Hao, K. Wei, H. Li, J. You, Z. Y. Wang, X. Zheng, Z. J. Xu and X. A. Cheng, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 325702 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Yu, X. L. Li and P. Deria, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 1841–1854 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Y. Yue, G. Qian and B. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1126–1162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. Wang, Z. Hu, G. Wang and K. Uvdal, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 284, 206–235 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Dolgopolova, A. M. Rice, C. R. Martin and N. B. Shustova, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4710–4728 RSC .
C. A. Kent, D. Liu, A. Ito, T. Zhang, M. K. Brennaman, T. J. Meyer and W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14982–14989 RSC .
M. C. So, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. E. Mondloch, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3501–3510 RSC .
X. Y. Zhao, X. Y. Song, Y. Li, Z. Chang and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5633–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. X. Fu, X. L. Tang, B. Huang, T. Hu, L. C. Tan, L. Chen and Y. W. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700387 CrossRef .
J. H. Tong, Z. N. Song, D. H. Kim, X. H. Chen, C. Chen, A. F. Palmstrom, P. F. Ndione, M. O. Reese, S. P. Dunfield, O. G. Reid, J. Liu, F. Zhang, S. P. Harvey, Z. Li, S. T. Christensen, G. Teeter, D. W. Zhao, M. M. Al-Jassim, M. F. A. M. van Hest, M. C. Beard, S. E. Shaheen, J. J. Berry, Y. F. Yan and K. Zhu, Science, 2019, 364, 475–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Chen, Y. M. Lu and H. Y. Kee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Matsuura, P.-Y. Chang, A. P. Schnyder and S. Ryu, New J. Phys., 2013, 15, 065001 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, J. Im and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 121102 CrossRef .
M. Afsari, A. Boochani, M. Hantezadeh and S. M. Elahi, Solid State Commun., 2017, 259, 10–15 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Strandburg, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1988, 60, 161–207 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hadzibabic, P. Krüger, M. Cheneau, B. Battelier and J. Dalibard, Nature, 2006, 441, 1118–1121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Resnick, J. C. Garland, J. T. Boyd, S. Shoemaker and R. S. Newrock, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1981, 47, 1542–1545 CrossRef CAS .
N. Reyren, S. Thiel, A. D. Caviglia, L. F. Kourkoutis, G. Hammerl, C. Richter, C. W. Schneider, T. Kopp, A.-S. Rüetschi, D. Jaccard, M. Gabay, D. A. Muller, J.-M. Triscone and J. Mannhart, Science, 2007, 317, 1196–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Hong, J. H. Yu, D. Lu, A. F. Marshall, Y. Hikita, Y. Cui and H. Y. Hwang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao5173 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Cui, L. C. Chen, J. P. Sheng, J. Y. Li, H. Wang, X. A. Dong, Y. Zhou, Y. J. Sun and F. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 262, 118251 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, X. J. Liu, Y. Liu, M. Cheng, Z. F. Liu, G. M. Zeng, B. B. Shao, Q. H. Liang, W. Zhang, Q. Y. He and W. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 403, 213097 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, Z. L. Wang, M. Q. Lyu, B. Luo, S. C. Wang, G. Liu, H. M. Cheng and L. Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801369 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Liu, S. J. Shen, J. T. Zhang, W. W. Zhong and X. H. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 478, 762–769 CrossRef CAS .
R. Q. Guo, J. B. Wu, A. J. Xu, X. H. Huang, H. Y. Zhu, R. Jiang, Y. Lin and F. Q. Guo, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 114818–114824 RSC .
Y. P. Wang, H. Yang, X. F. Sun, H. M. Zhang and T. Xian, Mater. Res.
Bull., 2020, 124, 110754 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Wen, L. L. Ai, T. T. Liu, D. W. Hu and F. Y. Yao, Mater. Des., 2017, 117, 346–352 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Mou, C. X. Song, Y. H. Zhou, B. Zhang and D. B. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 565–573 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Cushing, J. T. Li, F. K. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. J. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, J. Moffatt and N. Spooner, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 553–559 RSC .
Q. Yang, G. W. Li, K. Manna, F. R. Fan, C. Felser and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yan, B. Stadtmuller, N. Haag, S. Jakobs, J. Seidel, D. Jungkenn, S. Mathias, M. Cinchetti, M. Aeschlimann and C. Felser, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. Dusastre, Materials for Sustainable Energy: A Collection of Peer-Reviewed Research and Review Articles from Nature Publishing Group, World Scientific, London, UK 2011 Search PubMed .
C. R. Rajamathi, U. Gupta, N. Kumar, H. Yang, Y. Sun, V. Suss, C. Shekhar, M. Schmidt, H. Blumtritt, P. Werner, B. Yan, S. Parkin, C. Felser and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606202 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mahmood, M. A. R. Anjum, S. H. Shin, I. Ahmad, H. J. Noh, S. J. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, J. S. Lee and J. B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805606 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. Tiwari, S. Sultan, C. W. Myung, T. Yoon, N. N. Li, M. R. Ha, A. M. Harzandi, H. J. Park, D. Y. Kim, S. S. Chandrasekaran, W. G. Lee, V. Vij, H. J. Kang, T. J. Shin, H. S. Shin, G. Lee, Z. Lee and K. S. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 773–782 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kibsgaard, T. F. Jaramillo and F. Besenbacher, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16174–16181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mahmood, F. Li, S. M. Jung, M. S. Okyay, I. Ahmad, S. J. Kim, N. Park, H. Y. Jeong and J. B. Baek, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 441–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. A. Tahini, Z. Hu, J. Dai, Y. Chen, H. Sun, W. Zhou, M. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. Wang and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 149 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. T. Li, F. Q. Chu, Y. Liu, Y. Kong, Y. X. Tao, Y. X. Li and Y. Qin, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13076–13079 RSC .
Y. F. Guo, M. Aisijiang, K. Zhang, W. Jiang, Y. L. Chen, W. S. Zheng, Z. H. Song, J. Cao, Z. F. Liu and H. L. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5959–5964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mao, Y. Q. Yu, L. Wang, X. J. Zhang, Y. M. Wang, Z. B. Shao and J. S. Jie, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600018 CrossRef PubMed .
F. X. Liang, L. Liang, X. Y. Zhao, L. B. Luo, Y. H. Liu, X. W. Tong, Z. X. Zhang and J. C. A. Huang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801392 Search PubMed .
M. Wang, Q. Y. Fu, L. Yan, W. B. Pi, G. Wang, Z. P. Zheng and W. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47868–47877 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Tiwari, S. Sultan, C. W. Myung, T. Yoon, N. N. Li, M. R. Ha, A. M. Harzandi, H. J. Park, D. Y. Kim, S. S. Chandrasekaran, W. G. Lee, V. Vij, H. J. Kang, T. J. Shin, H. S. Shin, G. Lee, Z. Lee and K. S. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 773–782 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kibsgaard, T. F. Jaramillo and F. Besenbacher, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chae, S. H. Choi, N. Kim, J. Sung and J. Cho, Chem. Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 110–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Harper, R. Sommerville, E. Kendrick, L. Driscoll, P. Slater, R. Stolkin, A. Walton, P. Christensen, O. Heidrich, S. Lambert, A. Abbott, K. Ryder, L. Gaines and P. Anderson, Nature, 2019, 575, 75–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, S. Sahoo, E. Joanni, R. K. Singh, W. K. Tan, K. K. Kar and A. Matsuda, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2019, 75, 100786 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, X. S. Hou, L. C. Miao, L. Li, R. J. Shi, L. J. Liu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7020–7024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Q. Guo, X. H. Huang, J. B. Wu, W. W. Zhong, Y. Lin and Y. Q. Cao, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 19966–19972 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Huang, J. B. Wu, Y. Q. Cao, P. Zhang, Y. Lin and R. Q. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 203, 213–220 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Chae, D. Y. Siberio-Perez, J. Kim, Y. Go, M. Eddaoudi, A. J Matzger, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 2004, 427, 523–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Walton and R. Q. Snurr, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8552–8556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Lagadec, R. Zahn, S. Müller and V. Wood, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3194–3200 RSC .
D. Mohanty, E. Hockaday, J. Li, D. K. Hensley, C. Daniel and D. L. Wood III, J. Power Sources, 2016, 312, 70–79 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cannarella and C. B. Arnold, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A1365–A1373 CrossRef CAS .
S. Müller, J. Eller, M. Ebner, C. Burns, J. Dahn and V. Wood, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A339–A344 CrossRef .
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. Obrien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smaliey, Nature, 1985, 318, 162–164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Wang, C. F. Chen and Y. Kawazoe, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 03077 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Wang, C. F. Chen, E. G. Wang and Y. Kawazoe, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 04339 CrossRef .
J. T. Wang, H. M. Weng, S. M. Nie, Z. Fang, Y. Kawazoe and C. F. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 195501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Liu, S. Wang and Q. Sun, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 651–656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Liu, S. Wang, Y. Qie, C. Z. Zhang and Q. Sun, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 025403 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Ren, J. Wang, J. Qi, R. Yu, D. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17673–17677 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. W. Wan, J. Y. Wang, H. Ren, R. B. Yu, L. Gu, Y. L. Liu, S. H. Feng and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5266–5271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Wu, Z. Wang, Y. Long, J. Li, Y. Liu, Q. S. Wang, X. Wang, S. Y. Song, X. G. Liu and H. J. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1604270 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Pan, F. Zheng, Y. Wu, X. Ou, C. Yang, X. Xiong and M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 592–598 RSC .
J. Ni, Y. Zhao, L. Li and L. Mai, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 129–135 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Luo, T. Xiong, R. Yu, P. Wu, J. Zhu, Y. Dai and L. Mai, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7588–7594 RSC .
W. Li, Y. Yang, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1691–1697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mortazavi, A. Dianat, G. Cuniberti and T. Rabczuk, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 865–870 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kadioglu, F. Ersan, G. Gökoglu, O. Ü. Aktürk and E. Aktürk, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 180, 326–331 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Abe, A. P. I. Popoola, E. Ajenifuja and O. M. Popoola, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 15072–15086 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Yahya and M. Ismail, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 28, 46–53 CrossRef .
A. Schneemann, J. L. White, S. Kang, S. Jeong, L. W. F. Wan, E. S. Cho, T. W. Heo, D. Prendergast, J. J. Urban, B. C. Wood, M. D. Allendorf and V. Stavila, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 10775–10839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, G. D. Li, A. Pei, Y. Z. Li, L. Liao, H. X. Wang, J. Y. Wan, Z. Liang, G. X. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Y. Wang and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 428–435 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, J. M. Zhang, K. W. Xu and V. Ji, Phys. E, 2014, 63, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Zhigang Li	Dr Zhigang Li is a professor in the School of Pharmaceutical & Materials Engineering, Taizhou University, China. He received his PhD degree in 2008 from the Institute of Solid-State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and joined Taizhou University as a faculty member in the same year. From September 2018 to September 2019, he spent one year collaborating with Professor Bingqing Wei at the University of Delaware, USA as a visiting scholar. His interests focus on synthesis and electron transport properties of highly ordered two-dimensional nanomaterials.
Bingqing Wei	Dr Bingqing Wei is a Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Delaware, USA. He received his PhD degree in 1992 from Tsinghua University in Beijing, China. Dr Wei was a faculty member at Louisiana State University from 2003 to 2007 and at Tsinghua University from 1992 to 2001. He was a Research Scientist at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute from 2000 to 2003 and a visiting scientist at the Max-Planck-Institut für Metallforschung, Stuttgart, Germany in 1998 and 1999. Dr Wei is among the Highly Cited Researchers of Clarivate for his research on nanomaterials that enable energy conversion and storage.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic sample preparation of ultra-flat stanene on Cu(111). (b) The reflection high-energy electron diffraction patterns of the Bi2Te3 film with a thickness of 4 QL. (c) High-resolution STM image of the 80 nm-thick film. The inset shows an atomically resolved STM image (2.5 nm × 2.5 nm). Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Wiley. (d) Schematic diagram of the Bi2Te3–Si heterojunction photodetector in a two-pole structure. The forward bias is defined as applying a positive bias on the Bi2Te3 side. (e) I–V characteristics in the dark (black) and under illumination (red). Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from the RSC.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the structure of a dye-sensitized solar cell. (b) The Au layer coated on the counter electrode reflects the transmitted light to the photoanode. With typical electrodes (c), most of the transmitted light is lost through the transparent FTO, and light utilization is limited. (d) SEM image of the photoanode fabricated by colloidal lithography. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Wiley. (e) Multilayer PS templates fabricated by the layer-by-layer method.49,50 (f) SEM image of a double-layer FeGa array with a top/bottom diameter of 1000/1000 nm. (g) The absorption spectrum of the FeGa trilayer array with a top/middle/bottom diameter of 600/1000/1300 nm. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Wiley.	 
V − E + F = 2	(1)
χ = V − E + F	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Illustration of a pore (marked in blue) in a hollow cube.	 

 	Fig. 4  The typical methods of perovskite layer formation: (a) one-step and two-step methods, (b) double source co-evaporation employing PbCl2 and MAI sources, and (c) the vapor-assisted solution process using organic vapors of MAI that react with already accumulated PbI2 films. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the ACS.	 

 	Fig. 5  Honeycomb/hexagonal arrays with perfect anti-reflection performance. (a) Si array with a diameter of 100 nm; (b) absorption spectra of Si arrays; reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Wiley. (c) Binary silica nanocap arrays with a diameter of 50/240 nm; (d) reflectance spectra of the fused silica with one side covered with the silica nanocaps vs. multilayer film at different incident angles.57 Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the ACS.	 

 	Scheme 1  Energy diagram showing typical energy migration processes from photo-excited chromophore assemblies in MOFs (denoted as D) to the conversion site; reaction center (RC) module, consisting of an EnT (denoted as A) or CT quencher. Examples of corresponding linkers and complementary molecular species are noted. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from the ACS.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Fluorescence photographs of solid samples of Rho6G@MOF-3 with different loadings of Rho6G (a = 0.01 wt%, b = 0.02 wt%, c = 0.04 wt%, d = 0.1 wt%, e = 0.12 wt%, f = 0.18 wt%, and g = 0.2 wt%), excited at 370 nm. (b) The fluorescence emission spectra for Rho6G@MOF-3 with 0.01–0.20 wt% Rho6G upon excitation at 370 nm; (c) plot of relative fluorescence intensity of Rho6G to MOF-3, upon excitation of the MOF-3 framework at 370 nm. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the ACS.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of a linear chain aggregate. (b) Chemical structure of the C8S3 monomer and 3D tubular structure of the LHNs. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from the ACS. (c) Cryo-TEM of the as-prepared LHN aggregates in a sucrose-trehalose solution. (d) Preparation and self-assembly processes of dandelion-like supramolecular polymers. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  PVSC power conversion efficiency chart from 2009 to 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Electronic band structure, (b) projected density-of-states of CsPbI3, and the Bloch wavefunctions of (c) triply degenerate p-bands at the conduction band minimum and (d) nondegenerate s-like band at the valence band maximum. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from APS.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Crystal structure evolution from the KNbO nanosheet crystal to the O-Nb2O5 nanosheet crystal. (b) Linear sweep voltammograms collected in the dark or under 30 W m−2 UV light illumination using a three electrode setup in 0.5 mol L−1 Na2SO4 electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis of TCN. Here, T1 is 550 °C and T2 is 700 °C. (b) Hydrogen production rate. (c) The stability of cyclic hydrogen production over 3 runs with storage of the reaction systems in air for 1 month between consecutive runs. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the RSC.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chiral crystal structure protected multifold Fermions and corresponding catalytic properties. (a) Illustration of the band inversion mechanism and topologically nontrivial energy window in pure Pt,104 nonchiral topological semimetals, and chiral B20 compounds. (b) Crystal structure of PtAl with the space group P213 (no. 198). The c2 screw rotation symmetry along the [001] direction is highlighted by arrows. (c) Bulk Brillouin zone (BZ), and its projection to the (001) surface. Doubly degenerated Weyl and fourfold degenerated Rarita–Schwinger–Weyl points locate at Γ points. A sixfold degenerated point locates at R points. The topological charges at Γ and R points are +4 and −4, respectively. The Fermi arcs connect high symmetry points of  and . (d) HER volcano plot of PtAl, PtGa, RhSi, PdGa, and the related metal catalysts (the experimental data of Rh, Pd, and Pt).104 The topological Weyl semimetals NbP, TaP, NbAs, and TaAs (the calculated data)105 are also presented for comparison. (e) Comparison of TOF values between the chiral crystal catalysts and state-of-the-art noble metal-based nanostructured electrocatalysts.106–112 Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the Bi2Se3–FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3–Bi2Se3 photodetector; the inset shows the crystal structure of the Bi2Se3 film and digital photograph of the device on a printed circuit board. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the device. (c) Normalized spectral response of the device in the range from 300–1000 nm. (d) Absorption curves of Bi2Se3, perovskite, and the Bi2Se3/perovskite hybrid.84 Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the device configuration. (b) Energy-level diagram showing the similar work function of Bi2Te3 and Ag. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from the ACS. (c) J–V cures of the optimal Ag and Bi2Te3 perovskite solar cells. (d) Incident photon-to-current efficiency spectra and the corresponding integrated photocurrent of the Ag and Bi2Te3 devices.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the LIB setup with electrode particles touching the separator. (b) Rendering of the separator volume of 3 μm edge length with the separator electrode interface. The electrode particles are 3–6 μm in diameter (i.e., up to three orders of magnitude larger than the separator pores)130 and can thus block a significant number of separator pores. (c) Rendering of the separator volume of 3 mm edge length with blocked pores. (d) Concentration distribution from diffusion simulation across a separator volume of 3 μm edge length with a defect diameter of 3 μm on top (dashed circle) and at half depth (dashed line at 1.5 μm). (e) Concentration density maps for steady-state Fickian diffusion simulations across the through-plane directions of the reference datasets with pores in 1D, 2D, and 3D, and the imaged datasets of polyethylene and polypropylene (3 μm edge lengths). A circular defect structure of 3 μm was placed on top of the structures, and a concentration difference of ∼50 mM was applied between the top and bottom. (f) Ion concentration profiles at a 1.5 μm depth (corresponding to the white line in (d) and (e)) across sub-volumes of 3 μm edge length. The dashed circle represents the defect structure at a 0 μm depth. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from the RSC.	 

 	Fig. 16  Transmission electron microscopy images of (a) TS-SnO2@FeOx-C(MOF), (b) TS-SnO2@Fe2O3(MOF) and (c) TS-SnO2@Fe2O3 (particle). Cycling performances (d) and initial charge–discharge voltage profiles (e) of TS-SnO2 HoMS, TS-SnO2@FeOx-C(MOF), TS-SnO2@Fe2O3(MOF), and TS-SnO2@Fe2O3 (particle). Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis procedure of HoMS with MOF-derived casings involving two calcination steps (Route 1) and the hydrothermal deposition method (Route 2). Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 17  Optimized atomic geometries for Ca-decorated pristine (a), SCV (b), 585 DCV (c) and 555-777 DCV (d) defect graphene with their maximum H2 capacity; Ca adsorbed on both sides of 585DCV (e) and 555-777 DCV (f) defect graphene at their maximum H2 capacity. Green, blue, and white balls represent carbon, calcium, and hydrogen atoms, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Wiley.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
