Recent advances in conductive hydrogels: classifications, properties, and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00173J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00173J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 473-509Recent advances in conductive hydrogels: classifications, properties, and applications

        
          
            Tianxue 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yimeng 
            Ni
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gill M. 
            Biesold
          
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Cheng
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Mingzheng 
            Ge
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Huaqiong 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jianying 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhiqun 
            Lin
          
          
        
      *f and 

        
          
            Yuekun 
            Lai
          
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Chemical Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, P. R. China. E-mail: jyhuang@fzu.edu.cn; yklai@fzu.edu.cn
bQingyuan Innovation Laboratory, Quanzhou 362801, P. R. China
cZhejiang Engineering Research Center for Tissue Repair Materials, Joint Centre of Translational Medicine, Wenzhou Institute, University of Chinese Academy of Science, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, P. R. China
dSchool of Textile and Clothing, Nantong University, Nantong 226019, P. R. China
eSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
fDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117585, Singapore. E-mail: z.lin@nus.edu.sg
Received 
      14th July 2022
    First published on 9th December 2022AbstractHydrogel-based conductive materials for smart wearable devices have attracted increasing attention due to their excellent flexibility, versatility, and outstanding biocompatibility. This review presents the recent advances in multifunctional conductive hydrogels for electronic devices. First, conductive hydrogels with different components are discussed, including pure single network hydrogels based on conductive polymers, single network hydrogels with additional conductive additives (i.e., nanoparticles, nanowires, and nanosheets), double network hydrogels based on conductive polymers, and double network hydrogels with additional conductive additives. Second, conductive hydrogels with a variety of functionalities, including self-healing, super toughness, self-growing, adhesive, anti-swelling, antibacterial, structural color, hydrophobic, anti-freezing, shape memory and external stimulus responsiveness are introduced in detail. Third, the applications of hydrogels in flexible devices are illustrated (i.e., strain sensors, supercapacitors, touch panels, triboelectric nanogenerator, bioelectronic devices, and robot). Next, the current challenges facing hydrogels are summarized. Finally, an imaginative but reasonable outlook is given, which aims to drive further development in the future.
Tianxue Zhu
Tianxue Zhu is currently a postdoctoral research fellow in the College of Chemical Engineering at the Fuzhou University, China. He received his PhD degree from the college of Textile and Clothing Engineering at Soochow University in 2020, under the supervision of Prof. Yuekun Lai. During 2019–2020, he was a visiting student at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interest focuses on hydrogel-based wearable devices and functional materials with special wettability.
Yimeng Ni
Yimeng Ni is a PhD candidate in the College of Chemical Engineering at the Fuzhou University, China. She received her master's degree from the College of Chemical Engineering at the Fuzhou University in 2021, under the supervision of Prof. Yuekun Lai. Her research interests focus on the development of flexible wearable electronic devices based on conductive hydrogels and conductive composites with superhydrophobicity.
Gill M. Biesold
Dr Gill M. Biesold received his Bachelor of Science in Materials Science and Engineering at Clemson University in 2017, and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology in 2022. His research interests include exploring the luminescent properties of semiconductor nanocrystals in a variety of environments.
Jianying Huang
Jianying Huang received PhD degree in 2007 from College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University. During 2007–2011, she is an assistant professor at Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter. Later, she acted as visiting scholar at Muenster University. From 2013 to 2018, she was an associate professor at School of Textile and Clothing Engineering in Soochow University. Currently, she is a full professor at College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University, and selected as the 2019–2022 Highly Cited Researchers. Her research interests focus on bio-inspired surfaces with special wettability, advanced materials for energy and environmental applications.
Zhiqun Lin
Prof. Zhiqun Lin is a professor in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at the National University of Singapore. His research interests include electrocatalysis, batteries, solar energy conversion, photocatalysis, semiconductor organic–inorganic nanocomposites, multifunctional nanocrystals, conjugated polymers, block copolymers, hierarchical structure formation and assembly, and surface and interfacial properties.
Yuekun Lai
Dr Yuekun Lai is a Fujian province “Minjiang Scholar” Chair Professor at the College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University, and served as Editor of Chemical Engineering Journal. He received his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Xiamen University. He is selected as the 2018–2022 Highly Cited Researchers (Clarivate Analytics) and the recipient of the 2016 Journal of Materials Chemistry A (JMCA, RSC) Emerging Investigators and 2019 Advanced Materials Interfaces (AMI, Wiley) Hall of Fame award. His current research topics are bioinspired intelligent materials with special wettability, multifunctional fabrics, conductive hydrogels and functional nanostructures for energy and environmental applications.
1. Introduction
Increasingly, smart wearable devices are widely used in human's daily life for purposes such as human motion detection,1,2 health indicators,3,4 human-machine interfaces,5 supercapacitors6,7 and soft touch panels.8,9 The wearability of smart devices has raised the requirements for mechanical deformation, such as bending, stretching, folding and twisting.10 Conventional rigid sensors are generally composed of elastic substrates and conductive fillers, which can cause inaccurate and untimely signal transmission due to the limited stretchability, slow deformation recovery speed, and low deformation recovery rate. Hydrogels stand as an attractive alternative due to their similarity with biological tissue, including water-rich, three-dimensional (3D) network structure, adaptive modulation and adjustable elastic modulus.11,12 The softness and flexibility of hydrogels can minimize the mechanical mismatch with biological tissue, which is highly desirable for wearable electronic devices.13–15 From a materials perspective, hydrogels are a viscoelastic material composed of hydrophilic polymers with 3D networks that can be divided into chemically and physically cross-linked according to the different bonding manners.16,17 Hydrogels could adsorb and retain a large amount of water, which has been extensively studied in various fields, such as biomedicine,18–20 electrical engineering,21–23 the food industry24,25 and environmental fields.26–29 However, pure hydrogels (stiffness of ∼10 kPa and toughness of <10 J m−2) are often too soft and fragile for use in soft actuation, wearable electronic devices and tissue engineering.30 To solve these shortcomings, continuous efforts have been made to endow hydrogels with enhanced mechanical properties by constructing double networks or introducing nanomaterials.31
Conductive hydrogels are usually constructed via the incorporation of conductive polymers,32,33 metal/carbon-based materials (to achieve electrochromic conduction),34,35 or ionic side groups or salts into elastic 3D hydrogel networks.36,37 However, phase separation between the conductive additive and the polymer network usually causes a reduction of mechanical and conductive stability. Therefore, in order to endow conductive hybrid hydrogels with good performance, it is necessary to ensure a stable and strong combination between the polymer network and conductive additive. Stretchability and wearability are essential for practical conductive hydrogel-based devices. In order to precisely transform human motion into electrical signals, hydrogels must exhibit good conformability and adhesion onto human skin or biological tissue.38,39 Additionally, to cope with harsh environments, such as extreme cold or hot conditions, and extend their service period, it is necessary to endow hydrogels with anti-drying, anti-freezing, and self-healing properties.40,41 Moreover, because they are wearable devices that contact the skin, the biocompatibility of the hydrogels needs to be considered. Currently, diverse problems still exist in preparing hydrogels integrated with multiple functions. Therefore, further advances in conductive hydrogels with excellent mechanical properties and tissue adhesion are urgently needed.
In this review, we present the latest developments on the construction of multifunctional conductive hydrogels for flexible devices (Fig. 1). First, we summarize some representative conductive hydrogels, including SN hydrogels based on conductive polymers, SN hydrogels with conductive additives (i.e., nanoparticles/nanowires/nanosheets) (NPs/NWs/NSs), double-network (DN) hydrogels, and DN hydrogels with conductive additives. Second, conductive hydrogels which are endowed with various functions, such as self-healing, super toughness, self-growing, adhesive, anti-swelling, antibacterial, structural color, hydrophobic, anti-freezing, shape memory and responsive hydrogels are discussed. Third, the typical applications of conductive hydrogels in electronic fields are discussed, including strain sensors, supercapacitors, batteries, touch panels, triboelectric nanogenerators, bioelectronic devices, and robot. Finally, the future challenges and prospects of flexible electronic devices based on conductive hydrogels are discussed.
 Fig. 1  The introduction of recent advances on conductive hydrogel from classifications, properties and applications. 
2. Classifications of conductive hydrogels
Generally, a conductive hydrogel is composed of a conductive material and a cross-linked hydrogel polymer network. At present, conductive hydrogels have been successfully prepared based on various methods, such as in situ polymerization, ion chelation, and physical mixing. We roughly divide these conductive hydrogels into the following four types: (i) SN hydrogel based on conductive polymers, (ii) SN hydrogel with conductive additives, and (iii) DN hydrogel composed of a conductive and a non-conductive polymer network and (iv) DN hydrogel with conductive additive. In this section, we will describe the design, construction, and potential applications of the above four types of conductive hydrogels.
2.1. Single network hydrogels based on conductive polymers
Conductive polymer-based single network hydrogels, also known as conductive hydrogels, refer to the direct cross-linking of conductive chains to form a 3D network structure by chemical bonding, ionic cross-linking, or physical penetration methods.42 Hydrogels formed directly from conductive polymers usually exhibit high conductivity. However, such hydrogels generally exhibit lower stretchability and poor mechanical properties. Polypyrrole (PPy) is an intrinsically conductive polymer with a highly π-conjugated polymer chain that exhibits controllable conductivity and thermal and environmental stability.43,44 A new type of PPy hydrogel-based piezoresistive strain sensors with the sensitivity up to 2.83 MPa−1 and repeatable sensing performance were successfully fabricated by Bao et al.45 The active layer was composed of elastic conductive PPy with an interconnected hollow sphere structure through a heterogeneous synthesis method (Fig. 2a). The novel spherical shell geometry could be manufactured to exhibit adjustable elasticity, which enabled the normally rigid polypyridine conjugated ring skeleton to withstand greater effective strain and stress. As PPy continued to polymerize, the solution transformed into a hydrogel (Fig. 2b), forming a 3D porous structure (Fig. 2c). The thickness of the PPy hollow sphere was about 50 nm (Fig. 2d), and it showed a conductivity as high as 0.5 S cm−1. Piezoresistive sensors based on special inner-structure PPy hydrogel were found to exhibit ultra-high sensitivity and a quick response to a wide range of strains. The hollow sphere microstructure using PPy induced elasticity was shown to play a vital role in endowing the device with stable and temperature resistant sensing performance. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is another common conductive polymer compound with high conductivity, high light transmittance, and high flexibility which is widely used in organic electrodes, solar cells and flexible devices. At present, researchers have successfully adopted cross-linked PEDOT:PSS directly46 to design a pure PEDOT:PSS hydrogel through the interconnection of PEDOT:PSS nanofibrils by adding dimethyl sulfoxide into a PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution and then subsequently dry-annealing (Fig. 2e). The fabricated PEDOT:PSS hydrogel (Fig. 2f) showed a superior electrical conductivity of 20S cm−1 in phosphate-buffered saline and 40S cm−1 in deionized water, and high stretchability up to 35%. Additionally, the performance of this sample was observed to remain stable in humid physiological environments due to the optimized amount of dimethyl sulfoxide and annealing conditions. The successful preparation of SN hydrogels based on conductive polymers lays a foundation for the design of hydrogels with high conductivity and stable operation in the human-computer user interface, electronic industry, flexible electrode and other fields.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the interfacial phase synthesis mechanism of hollow-sphere microstructure PPy hydrogels, (b) optical photo of PPy hydrogel, (c and d) SEM and TEM image of the PPy thin film. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (e) Isotropic dehydration and water absorption processes of PEDOT:PSS and (f) the free-standing pure PEDOT:PSS hydrogel pattern. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. 
2.2. Single network hydrogel with additional conductive additives
Single-network hydrogels with additional conductive additives are also called conductive composited hydrogels. As mentioned above, conductive hydrogels formed by direct cross-linking of conductive polymers usually exhibit high conductivity but possess poor mechanical properties. To improve the mechanical properties, the conductive additive is usually introduced into the polymer network to prepare conductive hydrogels.47 The hybrid hydrogels simultaneously exhibit superb elasticity, possess a high toughness, and maintain high electrical conductivity.48 Conductive additives are generally pre-dispersed in the polymer precursors for further cross-linking and polymerization. The conductivity and mechanical properties of the hydrogels can be regulated by adjusting the type and content of the additive. For example, a macromolecularly interlocked composite hydrogel was developed by the self-assembly of polymer hydrogels and graphene oxide (GO) macroflakes.49 As illustrated in Fig. 3a, a viscous paste with a uniform phase was formed upon the mixing of a certain percentage of GO with a polyaniline (PANI) dispersion. The strong intermolecular forces between GO and PANI played a key role in the process of self-assembly, leading to a large number of PANI particles being uniformly distributed on the surface of GO without serious agglomeration. The obtained nanostructured 3D hybrid can sustain 40% of the large strain and can even be knotted or twisted without fracture. Additionally, an ionic nanocomposite hydrogel with good reliability and excellent durability was proposed.50 Fe3O4 NPs modified with poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) were chosen to achieve a relative homogeneous integration and the gelation process began with the mixing of monomer, cross-linker, thermal initiator, and PAA@Fe3O4 NPs via a one-pot method at 60 °C (Fig. 3b). The fabricated hydrogel exhibited self-healing efficiency of more than 95% in the range of −20–60 °C, which was attributed to the integration of dynamic metal coordination bonds inside a loosely cross-linked network. Zhang et al.51 reported an ultra-stretchable asymmetric hydrogel by introducing liquid metals (which served as conductive additives) in hydrophilic polymer networks, (Fig. 3c). Liquid metal gallium was uniformly dispersed into a monomer solution with additional sonication treatment to form a stable and homogeneous colloidal solution. The gelation was complete within 20 s after the adding of radical initiator (Fig. 3d), and the liquid metal acted as a redox catalyst for persulfate to generate free radicals. The catalytic and surface anchoring effects played a vital role in both the rapid formation of gel and the prevention of the accumulation of liquid metal droplets. Interestingly, the intrinsic liquid nature of the liquid metal additive was also found to toughen the hydrogel matrix remarkably and provide superb ductility. Because of all these outlined advantages, liquid metal deserves more attention in the future as an additive in conductive hydrogels. The above three representative conductive hydrogels exhibit strong mechanical properties with tensile strain up to 1500% while maintaining high electrical conductivity. They open up new horizons for the preparation of new flexible and stretchable electronic devices.
 Fig. 3  (a) Scheme of the formation and additional shaping/reducing process of PANI/GO composite hydrogels. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (b) Preparation process of the nanocomposite hydrogel and the chemical structures of the corresponding reagents. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (c) Schematic illustration of the rapid synthesis of the liquid metal-contained hydrogels and (d) digital photograph of the hydrogel forming process from flowing solution with liquid metal. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. 
2.3. Double network hydrogel
DN hydrogels are composed of two interpenetrating polymer networks, and they usually exhibit extraordinary mechanical performance due to the strong interpenetrating network entanglement and efficient energy dissipation.52 As a soft and tough material, DN hydrogels are widely used in flexible electronics53 and tissue engineering.54 DN hydrogels are composed of two polymers via various kinds of physical and chemical crosslinking, such as hydrogen bonds,55 π–π stacking,56 ionic bonds,57etc. Because of the interpenetration of two networks, DN hydrogels usually show extremely high mechanical strength and tensile properties. Compared with SN hydrogels, DN hydrogels are synthesized by replacing the conductive filler with a conductive network.58,59 For example, a novel microsphere-structured DN hydrogel was synthesized by in situ polymerization of aniline and acrylamide in expanded colloidal chitosan microspheres. The chitosan microspheres were immersed into the pre-polymerization solution of acrylamide/acetic acid and aniline/phytic acid in sequence for in situ polymerization of the two corresponding hydrogels (Fig. 4a). The novel hydrogel had a two-phase composited structure: the dispersed tough microsphere phase and the continuous PAAm/PANI loose architecture phase. The introduction of the unique microsphere phases in the DN hydrogel reinforced the strength and enhanced energy dissipation dramatically, the hydrogel showed a high strength of 0.879 MPa, a super stretchability property of 626%, and excellent mechanical stability. In another study, thermally responsive composite hydrogels were reported via a simple in situ synthesis of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) matrix crosslinked by phytic acid.60 As revealed in Fig. 4b, the de-swelled hydrogel was immersed into a mixture of conductive polymer, phytic acid, and an oxidative initiator, causing in situ crosslinking and polymerization of polymer chains.61 The interpenetrating continuous network provided a facile transmission path for electrons. Both the highly porous microstructure and strong interactions between the two hydrogel networks are essential in providing the composite hydrogels with enhanced mechanical properties and high electrical conductivity of 0.8 S m−1. Hybrid hydrogels usually exhibit enhanced mechanical properties and represent huge potential in the field of stimuli-responsive electronic devices and flexible bioelectronic devices.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of preparation process of DN hydrogel. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process of hybrid hydrogel. Reproduced from the ref. 61 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. (c) Structures of the alginate chains before (left) and after (right) Al3+ crosslinking, (d) chemical structures of the two crosslinking modes, and (e) mechanism of hydrogel energy dissipation. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2019. 
2.4. Double network hydrogel with additional conductive additive
As illustrated in the previous section, the fabrication of DN hydrogels is an effective strategy to strengthen the mechanical properties of hydrogels. DN hydrogels are composed of two interpenetrating hydrophilic polymers with contrasting architectures and mechanical properties: one is brittle and sparse and the other is stretchable and dense. In some cases, neither polymer is conductive, and in these cases conductive additives are necessary to endow the DN hydrogel with conductivity. For example, Zhi et al.62 reported a super-tough DN conductive hydrogel with highly efficient energy dissipation by using Al3+ as a conductive additive. The hydrogel matrix was composed of two crosslinked polymers: Al3+ ionically crosslinked alginate and covalently crosslinked PAAm (Fig. 4c–e). The ionic crosslinks would break and dissipate energy from the externally loaded stress, while the covalent crosslinks could exist intact, ensuring that the mechanical properties of the hydrogel were not affected. Meanwhile, the broken ionic bonds were observed to re-form instantly upon unloading, promoting the hydrogel recovery to its original shape. The ultra-tough hydrogel was highly flexible and withstood various severe deformations for several times, such as compression, folding, and extrusion, with no performance degradation. The mentioned novel design of two-phase mixing in the hydrogel matrix plays an important role in determining the performance of the hybrid hydrogel and provides an idea for the subsequent design of dual-network hydrogels with high mechanical properties.
2.5. Other conductive hydrogels
Conductive hydrogels can also be classified into ionic hydrogels by adding different ions.63,64 Ionic hydrogels are generally divided into ionic polymer networks, ionic liquids and metal salts. In recent years, ionic–electronic composite conductive hydrogel65 has become a research hotspot, which shows the advantages of both two conductive fillers and the advantages and disadvantages of different conductive components as summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Advantages and disadvantages of different conductive components




Type
Materials
Optical property
Advantage
Type
Ref.




Abbreviations: GO, graphene oxide; CNTs, carbon nanotubes; CB, carbon black; PANI, polyaniline; Ppy, polypyrrole; CNFs, cellulose nanofibers; PPDP, poly(propylsulfonate dimethylammonium propylmethacrylamide); Li-TFSI, bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt; EMIM-TFSI, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide; EMIM-TCM, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tricyanomethanide; EMIM-ES, 1-,1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium ethyl sulfate; EMIM-BF4, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate; EMIM-Cl, 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride.




Carbon-based materials
GO
Black
Excellent mechanical properties, chemical stability, low cost
Carbon based materials

36 and 66–70



CNTs


CB


Conductive polymer
PANI
Green, black
Excellent mechanical properties, high conductivity, low cost
Conductive polymer

71–75



Ppy


PEDOT:PSS


Metal-based materials
Ag/Au/Cu nanoparticles
Grayish white, faint yellow, brown
High conductivity, ductility
Metal based materials

76–79



Ag/Au/Cu nanowires


Ion polymer network
CNFs/PPDP/sulfobetaines
White, colorless
High water retention ability, high conductivity, good solubility
Ion polymer network

80–82



Metallic salts
Na+/Li+/Al3+/Fe3+
Colorless, yellow green
Low cost, high conductivity, reversible ion migration
Metallic salts

83–85



Ionic liquids
Li-TFSI/EMIM-TFSI/EMIM-TCM/EMIM-ES/EMIM-BF4/EMIM-Cl
Colorless
High sensitivity, high conductivity, high thermal stability, low volatility
Ionic liquids

63, 64 and 86



Hybrid
Li-TFSI/EMIM-TFSI/EMIM-TCM/EMIM-ES/EMIM-BF4/EMIM-Cl + PEDOT:PSS, LiCl + rGO, GO-Ca2+
Black
High conductivity
Hybrid

65, 87 and 88





Additionally, the conductivity and mechanical properties of pure conductive single network hydrogel and double network conductive hydrogel are compared and summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Comparison of conduction range and mechanical properties of single and double network conductive hydrogels




Network structure
Materials
Elongation (%)
Conductivity (S m−1)
Ref.




SN: single-network; DN: double-network; HSAH, (R)-12-hydroxystearic acid hydrazide; PHEAA, poly(N-hydroxyethylacrylamide).




SN
PEDOT:PSS/ionic liquid
31
1 × 104

88



SN
PEDOT:PSS
35
4 × 104

46



SN
PAA/BaFe12O19
40
12.2

48



SN
PEDOT:PSS/alginate
30
87

89



SN
PPy/agarose
35
350

90



DN
PEDOT:PSS/PVA
150
1 × 104

91



DN
MXene-cellulose nanocrystals-tamarind gum-PAAm
2000
2.93

92



DN
HSAH/PHEAA
4000
0.194

93



DN
carrageenan/PAAm/LiCl
632.5
8.7

94



DN
PAA/PANI
1160
5.12

95





3. Properties of conductive hydrogel
3.1. Self-healing
Owing to their unique mechanical properties, self-healing hydrogels are increasingly used in electrical and biomedical fields.96,97 Self-healing indicates the ability of damaged material to recover its original appearance and performance under external stimulus. Materials with self-healing properties exhibit the merits of stable and reliable performance and longer service life.98 Based on the mechanisms, self-healing can be realized through metal coordination bond, hydrogen bond, reversible ionic crosslinking, dynamic covalent bonding or supramolecular interactions.99–102 For example, Suo et al.50 developed a new type of nanocomposite strain sensor based on a healing efficiency of more than 95%, adhesive and highly stretchable hydrogel. Both the optimal mechanical properties and conductivity can be achieved by adjusting the composition of the hydrogel. When the hydrogel was cut in a cruciform shape, it was observed to quickly heal at room temperature (Fig. 5a). Even after being subjected to 1300% strain, no air leakage was observed after self-healing. According to the optical microscope image, the damaged sample was able to heal completely in 4 h with no additional auxiliary means (Fig. 5b). The effect of healing time and healing temperature on the strength and healing efficiency was also investigated. When the healing time and healing temperature increased, the healing efficiency was also improved to a certain degree. Low glass transition temperature and high thermal stability enabled the components of the compound hydrogel to be rearranged and diffused freely at low temperatures, while its stability was maintained at high temperature, ranging from −20 to 60 °C (Fig. 5c and d). The superb self-healing ability could be attributed to the dynamic and reversible nature of the Fe(III)–Ocarboxyl bond, allowing polymer chains to recombine at the interface of the fractured site (Fig. 5e). Similarly, a unique strategy was proposed to co-polymerize 2,3-dimercapto-1-propanol and meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid under the influence of hydrogen bonds, high-density dynamic disulfide bonds, and multi-physical crosslinks to form a self-healing hydrogel.103 As shown in Fig. 5f and g, the cut hydrogel exhibited fast and completely autonomous self-healing in only 5 s in various environments (including in air and underwater). The broken disulfide bonds produced free radicals on the cut surface, which can be rapidly reformed or exchanged with other disulfide bonds. The softness of the hydrogel facilitated good contact of cut hydrogel in air and underwater, while the dynamic and reversible chemical bonds enabled the hydrogel to heal quickly in different environments. These two vital factors complemented each other and worked together. In another study, Dong et al.104 adopted a self-healing hydrogel as a building block and demonstrated a healable and stretchable polyvinyl alcohol–polyacrylic acid hydrogel with excellent low temperature tolerance. The completely ruptured binary-network hydrogel was found to reach 550% of the original tensile strength under gentle pressure, and the ultimate tensile strength increased approximately linearly with self-healing time and showed negligible changes after three times self-repairing (Fig. 5h and i). The self-repaired sample could be stretched to 449% after healing for 6 h, exhibiting a high self-healing efficiency of 90.4%. The self-healing efficiency showed a decreasing trend after repeated destructive deformation. The healing process of the new wound was characterized by a microscope (Fig. 5j). Initially, an 82 μm wide incision was made on the surface, which was reduced generally after a period of healing, and the crack almost completely closed after 6 h, indicating the fast-healing rate under environmental conditions. Additionally, crushed hydrogel pieces could be fused into a complete hydrogel sheet, with a negligible decline in mechanical properties, indicating excellent malleable and remolding properties (Fig. 5k).
 Fig. 5  (a) Inflation experiments of a self-healed hydrogel balloon, (b) microscopic image of the nanocomposite hydrogel before and after self-heal, (c and d) the effect of healing time and healing temperature on the strength and healing efficiency, (e) mechanism of the stretched PAA networks and self-healing process based on the reversible coordination bonds of Fe–O. (a–e) Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (f and g) Self-healing behavior of hydrogel in air and underwater, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2020. (h) Mechanical performance of the original hydrogel and after cut for different time range, (i) strain–stress curves of the self-healed hydrogel after different times of fracture, (j) the microscope images of the gap on cut hydrogel healed for different time periods and (k) remolding property of the double-network hydrogel. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. 
3.2. Toughness
Hydrogels with tensile stress in the range of 0.1–1.0 MPa and fracture energy of 102–103 J m−2 can be considered as tough hydrogels. High-toughness hydrogels play a vital role in various environments,105,106 such as in animal and plant tissues and various engineering applications. Most traditional hydrogels lack effective energy dissipation mechanisms and exhibit poor mechanical strength and low stretchability. The development of hydrogels with excellent mechanical properties is still a significant challenge.107 To overcome the above problems, many methods for constructing high-toughness gels have been proposed.108 The general principle for the design of tough hydrogel is to implement mechanisms into hydrogels to dissipate a great amount of mechanical energy under large deformation and to maintain the original configurations after deformation, and the tough hydrogel could be achieved through the establishment of double networks, topological networks, slip ring structures, hydrophobic associations, physical enhancement, and ion addition.109–113 They are usually formed by interpenetrating brittle and ductile networks, which can effectively dissipate energy and improve the mechanical properties of the gel.114 At present, researchers have developed many high-strength hydrogels with enhanced fracture toughness, including polyvinyl alcohol hydrogels with crystalline domains, and hydrogels with mixed chemical and physical crosslinking agents.115,116 For example, Zhi et al.62 proposed super-tough energy-dissipative double cross-linked hydrogel-based supercapacitors. Compared with PAAm and alginate/PAAm hydrogel, the tensile modulus of Al-alginate/PAAm hydrogel could reach 429.8 kPa, about 200 times higher than the previous two, showing that the mechanical strength was greatly enhanced under the synergistic contribution of the two cross-linked networks. The fracture energy of Al3+ crosslinked alginate/PAAm hydrogel was up to 9661 J m−2, while it was only 409 J m−2 and 457 J m−2 for pure PAAm and alginate/PAAm hydrogel, respectively (Fig. 6a–c). The hydrogel can be restored to its original shape after cutting with a blade, with no obvious damage (Fig. 6d), exhibiting effective energy dissipation. After cutting, the stress concentration points were extended to a wider range with the rupture of dynamic ionic crosslinking, alleviating the concentrated stress on the nearby PAAm network. As a result, energy was dispersed and dissipated, the covalent bond was not broken, and a complete hydrogel structure was maintained. Similarly, a nanocomposite hydrogel with unprecedented toughness was synthesized via a simple in situ polymerization of acrylamide using exfoliated montmorillonite layers as noncovalent crosslinking agent.117 The hydrogel did not break even in a knotted shape and was highly stretched at the joint due to the excellent softness and flexibility (Fig. 6e). Compared with the hydrogel with no nano clay (montmorillonite) (Fig. 6f–h), the nanocomposite hydrogel exhibited extremely high strength and toughness, with a fracture strain and fracture energy that can reach 11800% and 10.1 MJ m−3, respectively. A polyelectrolyte method was presented for fabricating tough and non-solvent double-network elastomers, which were composed of a brittle polyelectrolyte network and a stretchable low-polar polyacrylic network.118 The obtained dual-network hydrogel exhibited a moderate elastic modulus, distinct yielding, high strength, and large elongation accompanied by strain-hardening and high fracture toughness. The effect of concentration on tensile properties and strength was further discussed (Fig. 6i and j). As the volume ratio of the two networks (ϕfirst/ϕsecond) increased, the elongation at break decreased (λb), especially when the concentration ratio was greater than 0.06. In addition, when ϕfirst/ϕsecond was higher than 0.1, λb was significantly reduced without yielding. Samples with ϕfirst/ϕsecond ≈ 0.08 exhibited obvious yielding and the highest strain-free hardening strength (Fig. 6k). This non-solvent method provided more options for the development of robust elastomers. These super tough hydrogels are expected to accelerate the commercialization progress for artificial muscles, actuators, and functional membranes.
 Fig. 6  (a–c) Tensile modulus, force-length and fracture energy of hydrogels with different content, (d) optical photograph of cutting the super-tough hydrogel from top to bottom. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2019. (e) Image of a highly-stretched hydrogel in the shape of bow-tie, (f) stress–strain curves of the prepared hydrogels with different parameters, (g and h) fracture strain (εb), fracture energy (U), fracture stress (σb) and initial modulus (E) of hydrogels with different clay content. (e–h) Reproduced with permission. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (i–k) The discussion on elongation at break λb, (j) stresses at yield σy and break σb, (k) fracture energies of the DN elastomers are based on the volume ratio of two networks. (i–k) Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
3.3. Self-growing
Hydrogels exhibit a tendency of hysteresis and break down after persistent mechanical strain due to the prolonged recovery of the polymer structure.119–121 Though great efforts have been focused on increasing hydrogel durability, most of the strategies aim to rebuild the original broken network rather than restore their initial mechanical strength.122–124 Though vital for certain applications, converting most hydrogels back to their initial weak state after strain toughening has proven to be difficult. Hydrogels could even self-grow their mechanical performance via the force-triggered chemical polymerization of the preexisted monomers.125–127 Zhen et al.119 designed a facile strategy, which can realize the reversible tuning of mechanical performance between tough and weak based on metal-coordination bonds. Highly weak and swollen poly(acrylamide-co-2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid) [P(AAm-co-AMPSA)] hydrogel could be reversibly converted into tough hydrogels through the addition of Zr4+, which could form Zr4+-sulfonate coordination complexes (Fig. 7a). The hydrogels were fabricated via polymerization of a solution of AAm, AMPS, and a crosslinker under UV irradiation. The swollen hydrogel was easy to break with a small strain (Fig. 7b), but the tough ones incubated in a ZrOCl2 solution exhibited excellent mechanical performances. Corresponding to macroscopic mechanical properties, the micro-pores of the hydrogel in the tough state were much smaller and denser than those in the swollen one (Fig. 7c). The strain–stress curves indicated that the yield stress increased dramatically from 2.5 kPa to 6.3 MPa after being toughened, which is about 2500 times of the swollen state (Fig. 7d). The formed sulfonate-Zr4+ coordination complexes remain stable in acidic and neutral environments, but the coordination complex will break up if immersed in an alkaline solution. This breaks up converts the toughened hydrogel to a swollen state and thus yields a fully reversible brittle-tough transformation (Fig. 7e). The proposed strategy is universal and could be applied in diverse natural and synthetic polymers via the formation of metal-coordination bonds.
 Fig. 7  (a) Illustration for preparing of P(AAm-co-AMPS) hydrogels, (b) optical photos of swollen and toughened hydrogel, (c) SEM images of the nanostructure of hydrogels before and after freeze-drying process, (d) strain–stress curves of the hydrogel in toughened state, the inset is the strain–stress curve of the hydrogel in swollen state (e) cyclic variation of Young's modulus E, swelling ratio in length S, and water content q under the reversible brittle-tough transition of the hydrogels. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (f) Schematic illustration of the composite slip ring hydrogel during stretching and releasing, (g) stretching–releasing curves of SR hydrogel, (h) WAXS patterns of SR-0.18 during a loading-unloading cycle, (i) triclinic crystal and monoclinic crystal of PEG in different structures. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2021. (j) Schematic diagram of the “self-growing” hydrogel process by mechanical induction, (k) Fenton color reaction induced by mechanoradicals and optical images of gel before, during and 30 min after the stretching, (l) the repetitive stretching of gels in terms of length and the required force. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2019. 
Most tough hydrogels strengthen their mechanical performance via the introduction of a sacrificial network that can dissipate input energy upon stretching or pressing. A drawback to this strategy, however, is that the mechanically properties of these hydrogels will drop substantially after cyclic loading-unloading due to the inability to fully recover in time. Liu et al.128 reported a strategy to synthesize mechanical-reinforced hydrogels via strain-induced crystallization (SIC). As strain was applied on the hydrogel the inner polymer network crystallized, which enhanced the mechanical performances of the hydrogel. The composite slide-ring (SR) hydrogel was prepared by crosslinking PEG chains by slidable hydroxypropyl-α-cyclodextrin (CD) rings (Fig. 7f). This strategy proved to be superior to fixed covalent crosslinking polymer chains because the CD rings can slide on PEG chains to release the stress in the hydrogel. Compared to fixed cross-link hydrogels, the most attractive feature of the fabricated SR hydrogel was its rapid recovery of the strength from stretching. Little mechanical hysteresis was observed for SR-0.38, and the loading and unloading curves almost perfectly overlapped for SR-0.18 and SR-0.3 (Fig. 7g). To understand the principle of SIC, the structural transition under stretching was recorded by wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) (Fig. 7h). The diffraction spots in the WAXS patterns demonstrated the occurrence of SIC on the PEG chains, and the diffraction peaks denoted triclinic and monoclinic unit cells (Fig. 7i). Reversible SIC in hydrogel systems for rapid mechanical enhancement provides an insightful perspective of multifunctional hydrogels.
Inspired by the autonomous growth of living tissue through metabolic processes, Gong et al.129 prepared a “self-growing” DN hydrogel which can respond to mechanical stress via mechanochemical transduction. Skeletal muscles fibers undergo a repeated breaking-growth process during the exercise, which results in a strengthening of the muscle (Fig. 7j). To build an artificial muscle with self-enhanced properties, the proposed chemically cross-linked hydrogel should enable the permeation of small molecules and the occurrence of efficient chemical reactions. The rigid but brittle polymer network will break under stress, and the soft and stretchable polymer could keep the integrity of the DN gel. Mechanoradicals could then trigger the polymerization of monomers at a fracture position, forming an enhanced polymer network. A visible color-change reaction was performed to verify this conjecture, and the formed mechanoradicals from the rupture of the covalent bonds were found to react with H2O from the environment to generate H2O2. This H2O2 then oxidized Fe2+ to Fe3+ (Fig. 7k), which resulted in a color-change phenomenon in the “necking” region as the hydrogel was stretched, thereby confirming the hypothesized mechanisms. The proposed composite hydrogel could exhibit continuous enhancement under repeated stretching–releasing in the proper conditions: (1) sufficient monomers remain in the system, and (2) the newly formed network plays as the brittle network (Fig. 7l). The samples were stretched to 6 times their initial length for four cycles, and the toughness of the hydrogel in an open system (which allowed continuous supply of monomers) exhibited an obvious increase in toughness compared to both the reference hydrogel and the one incubated in closed system. By mimicking a dynamic biological environment, hydrogels incubated in the open system could realize self-strengthening through a structural destruction-reconstruction process. In summary, hydrogels with mechanical self-reinforcement property could be applied in specific conditions and was an important step forward performance-integrated smart hydrogel.
3.4. Adhesive property
The adhesion properties of hydrogels are widely used in basic medical and engineering applications,130,131 including drug delivery, wound repair,132 biomedical equipment, and tissue engineering.133,134 These synthetic or natural hydrogels must be permanently bonded or reversibly attached to other hard and soft surfaces.135 However, hydrogels generally exhibit poor adhesion in a completely expanded state.136 To achieve rapid, permanent, and reversible underwater adhesion of hydrogels, it is necessary to consider multiple factors, involving multiple disciplines such as fluid mechanics, micro-structure of the surface, mechanical properties of the surface, and surface chemistry.137,138 The common mechanism include the covalent anchoring the hydrogels on the substrate, the combination of dynamic bonds and bio-inspired surface drainage architecture, topological entanglement of polymer chains, and the introduction of an individual adhesive layer.139–141 Zhou et al.134 reported a self-healing, stretchable, highly adhesive and conductive hydrogels by mixing PVA, borax and PEDOT:PSS. The simple preparation and excellent performances make the resulting hydrogels highly promising in bioelectronics and wearable electronics. Inspired by clingfish, Gong et al.142 presented a rapid and reversible underwater adhesion hydrogel via the novel design of bio-inspired surface micro-structure and dynamic bonds. There were many grooves with regular width in clingfish’ disc (Fig. 8a and b), which could speed up water drainage between the substrate and disc. A flat polyampholyte gel was taken as a counter substrate to evaluate the effect of the pattern of the hydrogel on adhesion, the result demonstrated that sample with a larger hexagonal facet length showed a high adhesion strength of 25 kPa, while the sample with no pattern showed the weakest adhesion among the three samples (Fig. 8c). Compared with flat glass substrate, both the deformation and the debonding force exhibited a tendency of getting higher on soft polyampholyte gel, indicating larger bulk deformation and interfacial bulk bridging strength than the rigid one, which was essential in delaying the debonding. Only a small deformation of the unpatterned hydrogel was observed in contact with the soft substrate, while the hydrogel with hexagonal facets pattern kept in good contact with the substrate (Fig. 8d). In summary, the successful development of hydrogels with rapid and strong underwater adhesion can be attributed to the synergetic effects of macro-surface structure and dynamic bonds of the tough hydrogels. Regular and uniform surface grooves play a crucial role in two aspects: accelerating water drainage, and delaying the propagation of cracks in the separation process. Zhao et al.143 reported a tough transparent and adhesive hydrogel that could bond to non-porous surfaces of diverse substrates. The core strategy of the bonding was to anchor the long polymer chain of tough hydrogels on non-porous solid surfaces through covalent bonds. The chemical anchorage exhibited a superior advantage of the intrinsic adhesion and effective energy dissipation during the detachment of bonding. The peeling process demonstrated that the tough hydrogel was chemically anchored on the glass through its long-chain network (Fig. 8e). As the peeling force increased, the hydrogel became highly deformed and unstable. The measured interfacial toughness was much higher than muscles and tendons on bones, up to 1500 J m−2 (Fig. 8f). Two glass plates bonded with the fabricated hydrogel were observed to bear a weight of 25 kg (Fig. 8g). Suo et al.144 reported a facile method to achieve strong adhesion via using biocompatible polymer chains and no functional groups from the wet materials are required (adhesion was achieved through physical entanglement, but not chemical crosslinking). The polymer chains could form a newly generated network with wet materials in topological entanglement under external stimulation, stitching them together like a molecular scale suture (1000 J m−2). To illustrate the effect of the preparing procedure, the chitosan solution was chosen to spread between two pieces of PAAm hydrogel, and the two hydrogels were compressed with a gentle force (Fig. 8h). Four different stitching polymers were adopted to bond PAAM hydrogels with different pH values (Fig. 8i), and the adhesion was established only when the pH was in the responsive range of each stitching polymers. The process of bonding-debonding was reversible, dependent on the pH value of the stitching polymer solution. As displayed in Fig. 8j, no changes were observed in the bonding region after dipping in deionized water several times. This controllable bonding-debonding could greatly promote the development of smart adhesives. In a word, considering the excellent performance for reversible and controllable adhesion, the proposed novel strategy for tough bonding can be potentially used as biocompatible superglues for tissue engineering, which could relieve the suffering of patients.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of clingfish’ discs, (b) the prepared hydrogel with regular hexagonal facets on the surface, (c) force-time curves and displacement of extension test on the flat PA gel, (d) photograph of the deformation of the P1 sample on PA gel and glass, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (e) Photo of the peeling process of the adhesive hydrogel from glass substrate, (f) curves of the peeling force for chemical and physical cross-linked hydrogel–solid bonding, (g) two glass plates bonded by the transparent hydrogel superglue. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (h) Schematics of the bonding procedure, two pieces of PAAm hydrogel glued by chitosan solution, (i) the pH ranges at which four polymer solutions converted into the hydrogel, (j) the bonding front can resist deionized water. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. 
3.5. Anti-swelling
A majority of hydrogels are composed of hydrophilic polymers which tend to swell under high humidity. That swelling leads to both a volume increase and degradation of mechanical properties, which seriously hinders the service stability of the functional hydrogel.145–147 Therefore, the intrinsic swelling properties restrict the biomedical applications of hydrogel in the physiological environments.148–150 At present, anti-swelling hydrogels are mainly constructed by the introduction of rigid polymer meshwork to “lock” the hydrophilic groups, the protonation of zwitterionic polymer to induce the electrostatic repulsion-driven elimination of water molecules, and the introduction of nonswelling polymer and superhydrophobic modification of the hydrogel surface.151–153 Inspired by natural extracellular matrix (ECM), Wu et al.154 reported a series of anti-swelling hydrogels, which can be applied in dynamic and wet environments, like the oral cavity. A malleable long-chain polymer network was permeated into a sturdy macromolecular framework which was prepared in advance (chitosan). Then, in situ polymerization was conducted to form robust hydrogels with adjustable swelling behavior. Here the prefabricated framework functioned as the backbone and strictly limited the swelling of the infiltrated long-chain hydrogel network. In other words, chitosan could “lock” the hydrogel and limit its swelling, as indicated in Fig. 9a (due to the covalent bond between the water insoluble G-CS (chitosan cross-linked by genipin) chain and long chain polymer network (PAAm)). As a result, the prepared anti-swelling hydrogel exhibited very little swelling after immersion in a PBS solution, while the original PAAm hydrogel absorbed significant amounts of water, leading to a severe volume expansion (Fig. 9b). Additionally, the anti-swelling ability of G-CS with different content of crosslinkers were quantitatively analyzed (Fig. 9c). The swelling ratio of unmodified PAAm hydrogel reaches 500%, and it decreased to a range of 150% to 20%. As more crosslinker was added, a denser “chain” was formed, providing a greater restraint effect.
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of constrained swelling mechanism, (b) volume change of the two kinds of hydrogel soaked in PBS in different time, (c) swelling ratio of different EMHs immersed in PBS. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2022. (d) Schematic illustration of the HEMA hydrogel. (e) the images and (f) swelling behavior of the three kinds of hydrogels after swelling in water and artificial seawater, respectively, (g) swelling ratio of the fabricated hydrogel swelling at different pH for 30 days. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (h) The mechanism of hydrophobic aggregation after soaking treatment, (i) swelling behavior of various Pt-BuA-[BMIm]TFSI ionogels after soaking, (j) ionic conductivity change of the ionogel after soaking for 10 days. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. 
Taking full advantage of the switchable osmotic pressure of hydrogel, Ren et al.155 fabricated a DN anti-swellable hydrogel composed of PVA, SBMA and 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) (Fig. 9d). SMBA could facilely switch from neutral to positively charged in acid environments, which results in suppression of swelling and reduced osmotic pressure driven by electrostatic repulsion. Three hydrogels, DN, DN-FT, DN-FT-HCl (which means the pure hydrogel with no additional treatment, hydrogel treated by freezing and thawing, hydrogel treated by freezing and thawing and HCl) were prepared to compare the actual anti-swelling performances. The optical pictures of the three hydrogels after immersion in water and artificial seawater were shown in Fig. 9e. Compared with the other two, DN-FT-HCl exhibited a restricted swelling behavior. The swelling kinetics of three hydrogels were compared via calculation of their weight change (Fig. 9f). The equilibrium of DN and DN-FT reached to 114% and 65%, respectively, while it only about 10% for DN-FT-HCl. The higher swelling ratio of hydrogels in seawater could be attributed to the screen of surface charge on the hydrogel by electrolyte salt, causing a greater hydration of zwitterion and promotion of osmotic swelling. Moreover, it's interesting that the swelling equilibrium was positively related to pH value of solution (Fig. 9g). In particular, the hydrogel could maintain swelling resistance under acidic conditions, and when the pH increased further to 9, the equilibrium swelling ratio was about 40%. The introduced basic ions could raise an anti-polyelectrolyte effect and collapse the PSBMA, causing to a higher swelling ratio. The presented smart anti-swelling hydrogel induced by pH stands as an intriguing development for next generation versatile hydrogels.
Restraining the diffusion and loss of ions in the solvent remains a challenge for hydrogels in real applications. Chen et al.156 designed an anti-swelling hydrogel through a simple polymerization of acrylate monomers in a hydrophobic (ionic liquid) IL solvent. The mechanism of inhibiting diffusion is shown in Fig. 9h. In the early stage of diffusion, it can’t prevent the diffusion of water into the hydrogel as the hydrophobic functional groups on the surface of hydrogel are relatively few. Then, because of the intrinsic repulsion of the hydrophobic polymer chains and the water, the hydrophobic polymers began to aggregate on the surface, leading to a superhydrophobic surface. The swelling ratio reached the equilibrium value, 3.8% after 24 hours (Fig. 9i). The tiny fluctuation can be attributed to the dynamic transformation of the hydrophobic surface. The conductivity of hydrogel was measured to evaluate the ion diffusion, and the conductivity exhibited a minor increase from 1.6 mS cm−1 to 2.5 mS cm−1 during the initial period and then remained stable during the additional continuous immersion (Fig. 9j). This demonstrated that the pre-soaking treatment for the hydrophobic hydrogel could remain its long-term stability in humidity environment. Hydrogels endowed with anti-swelling performance could greatly expand its service range, due to the negligible influence of both mechanical strength and the volume (structure).
3.6. Antibacterial
Hydrogels with antibacterial performances are widely used in biomedical fields as they exhibit adjustable mechanical properties, which enable them to quickly match the movement of moving parts (joints and neck), and could effectively avoid secondary dressing fixation.20,157–162 According to the corresponding literature, the method of preparing antibacterial hydrogels can be mainly divided into the introduction of antibacterial metal ions and metallic oxide nanoparticles which could cause damage to the bacterial cell, nanozyme which could endow the hydrogel with antibacterial activity through synergistic effects of the reactive oxygen species generated via catalytic reaction, and polymers with positive/negative charge.163–165 Guo et al. prepared a series of polysaccharide based conductive, antibacterial hydrogel with multi-functions, such as antioxidant, self-healing, adhesion, and photothermal responsive performances. The obtained multifunctional hydrogel showed great potential in biomedical field, such as wound healing, drug releasing and tissue engineering.131,161,162,166 Chu et al.167 designed an adhesive and antibacterial MoS2-PDA nanozyme composite hydrogel (MPH) via the copolymerization of acrylamide, N-isopropylacrylamide, acryloyl Pluronic 127, and MoS2-PDA (Fig. 10a). Here, the synthesized MP nanosheets exhibit admirable photothermal responsive performance, and the MP nanosheets can endow the composite polymer hydrogel adhesion. Here four kinds of hydrogels, H, MH, PH, and MPH, were prepared, representative hydrogels with no functional materials, hydrogels with the addition of MoS2, hydrogels with the addition of PDA and hydrogels with the addition of MoS2-PDA, respectively. The antibacterial performance of the four hydrogels for E. coli and S. aureus with and without NIR were assessed quantitatively (Fig. 10b and c). All of the four samples exhibit a relatively weak bacteriostacic ability both against E. coli and S. aureus with no NIR, while under the treatment of NIR for 900 s, the antibacterial performance of MPH improved dramatically, reaching 93.93% and 99.1% for E. coli and S. aureus respectively, the difference of killing ratio between S. aureus and E. coli could be attributed to the own heat tolerance of these two bacteria. Apart from this, the integrity and morphology of bacteria after the treatment were shown in Fig. 10d. Consistent with the above conclusion, little changes were observed on the bacteria's morphologies without the treatment of NIR, and after irradiation by NIR the structures of S. aureus are destroyed completely. The morphologies of E. coli also deformed seriously after treatment by MPH. All these results demonstrate that the fabricated MPH exhibit strong damaging effect on both E. coli and S. aureus.
 Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of the antibacterial MPH hydrogel, (b and c) antibacterial properties of hydrogels against S. aureus and E. coli with and without NIR conditions, (d) SEM images of S. aureus and E. coli treated by hydrogel with or without NIR. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (e) Schematic diagram and antibacterial mechanism of antibacterial hydrogel, (f) agar plates mixed with the prepared hydrogel present the antibacterial performance for B. subtilis, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa, (g) bacterial killing efficiency and log inactivation of CS, CCS, and ABH for B. subtilis, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa cells, within 60 min. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. 
In addition to medical applications, antibacterial hydrogel could also be applied in water disinfection. Yu et al.168 designed an anti-bacterial hydrogels (ABHs), which was composed of a catechol-functional chitosan (CCS) networks and activated carbon particles modified by quinone (Fig. 10e), and the two components played synergistic roles in bactericidal effect. H2O2 was produced through the spontaneous oxidation of catechol groups and O2, acting as the disinfecting agent while the modified activated carbon could promote reactivity with a variety of biological sulfhydryl groups in proteins and metabolites, further enhanced the bactericidal effect. The water disinfection performance of the prepared sample was examined via directly immersing in bacteria-containing water and then the bacteria killing efficiency was calculated. The agar plates exhibited the inactivation results of three common bacteria cells (Fig. 10f and g), revealing the high efficiency of water disinfection of the ABH. Additionally, the ABH exhibited quick water disinfection with 5 log B. subtilis and E. coli inactivation, which means no bacteria could be detected. To P. aeruginosa, a 99.99% efficiency was achieved with 60 min. In a word, the overall disinfection property of prepared ABH, which can be used in against a variety of bacteria, lists them as a high-performance antibacterial material with no external energy input.
3.7. Structural color
Structural color, which is caused by the interaction of light and specific nanostructures, has attracted great attention in the field of optical devices. When the structural color hydrogel is stimulated by external force, the photonic band gap will be changed, leading to the change of its surface color. The change of the shape can be transformed into real-time visual color changes, which has important practical value in sensor visualization. The structural color hydrogel can be obtained by the introduction of liquid crystalline materials (perovskite nanosheets, hydroxypropyl cellulose, etc.) or modifying hydrogel with specific surface structure (inverse opal scaffold)169–172 Considering the superb mechanical properties, biocompatibility, and abundant sources of silk fibroin, Zhang et al.173 fabricated an original silk based composited structural color hydrogel with superior self-reporting ability, and high stretchability. The homogeneous mixture of PAAm and silk fibroin was used to negatively replicate the colloidal crystal template, and then a vivid structural color hydrogel film with periodic nanostructure was obtained (Fig. 11a). To evaluate the mechanical response of the resultant hydrogel, typical strain-sensitivity tests was conducted. The color varied from red to blue-green as the obtained hydrogel was stretched from 0% to 150% (Fig. 11b), the corresponding reflection spectra also exhibited an obvious blue shift from 653 to 507 nm, as can be observed from the corresponding reflection spectra due to the decrease of the distance between the diffraction planes (Fig. 11c). In addition to stretching deformation, the response to bending was assessed by attaching the hydrogel to a finger, and the results demonstrated that the color shifted from orange to blue-green as the bending angle increased from 0° to 90° (Fig. 11d). Structural color silk-based hydrogel fabricated by the simple template replication exhibited unique optical properties, meanwhile, with no influence on flexibility and stretchability.
 Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of stretchable structural color hydrogel films with structure, (b) pictures of the PAAM/SF hydrogel film applied with different strains, (c and d) the corresponding reflection peaks of hydrogel films with different strains and different bending angles. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (e) HPC molecular nanostructure along the helix axis of cholesteric liquid crystal, (f) picture of conductive hydrogels with different concentration of HPC, (g) the characteristic reflection spectra of the hydrogel with different content of HPC, (h) schematic diagram and optical image of the hydrogel attached when the finger is bent. Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from The National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2021. (i) UV-Vis reflection spectra and optical photos at different concentrations of nanosheets, (j) optical photos of gel impacted by substances, (k) color gel can display the color change of the letter “FIT” symbol. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. 
Inspired by chameleons and cholesteric liquid-crystal photonic structures based on hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC), Zhao et al.174 reported a structural color hydrogel based on HPC, CNTs and poly(Acrylamide-co-Acrylic acid) (PACA) via simple polymerization. Large amounts of hydrogen bonds could be formed between hydroxyl groups on HPC and water molecules, making HPC soluble in water, and when the concentration reaches 50–70%, HPC molecules were found to arrange in layers and assemble parallel to each other. The two adjacent molecular layers were slightly rotated, periodically stacking into a spiral structure. When the rotation angle is up to 360°, the distance between the corresponding two layers is called the pitch of the cholesteric liquid crystal (Fig. 11e). The corresponding color and characteristic reflection spectra of hydrogels with the concentration of HPC from 50% to 70% were demonstrated in Fig. 11f and g, and they were found to vary from red to blue owing to the reduction of the helical pitch between liquid crystal as the concentration increased. To further explore the potential application, the author attached the prepared hydrogel to a finger and recorded the real-time response to bending. It was found that the color changed obviously upon bending the finger (Fig. 11h). The surprising sensing ability of hydrogels fabricated by conductive HPC are expected to open a new chapter in both design and fabrication of multifunction hydrogel.
As a new kind of structural color materials, perovskite nanosheets, were successfully synthesized by Yang et al.175 and then introduced into poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAm) via one-step photopolymerization. The visible absorption spectroscopy showed that the nanosheets are parallel to the hydrogel surface, making the structural color adjustable in the full color range. The structural color of the perovskite nanosheet was tunable by adjusting the concentration (Fig. 11i), and the color varied from translucent to opaque and from colorless to a pearly luster as the concentration increased from 0.1% to 3%. From the UV-Vis reflectance spectrum, the strong absorption around 360 nm (3 wt%) could be attributed to the band gap absorption of the semiconducting perovskite nanosheets. The maximum reflection wavelength, λmax, shifted from 600 nm to 760 nm as the concentration decreased from 2 wt% to 1 wt%. To demonstrate the quick response of the proposed mechanochromic hydrogel for external forces, a 10 g mass was used to hit the gel from a height of 5 cm. The obvious color change of the contact point happened upon contact with the mass. Then, due to the transfer of stress in the hydrogel, a variety of structural color patterns with concentric shapes appeared within 5 ms and diffused on the hydrogel (Fig. 11j). The transmission and distribution of stress on the hydrogel could be observed in real time, making it a promising candidate for the visualization of stress fields. The structural color hydrogel was pressured by a rubber stamp with the letter “FIT” (Fig. 11k), as the pressure was applied, “FIT” appeared and the color changed from green to blue gradually. In a word, the fabricated structural color gel exhibited superior mechanochromic behaviors quickly and sensitively, which could be applied as smart displays. Structural color hydrogels exhibited superior mechanochromic behaviors and could realize real-time visual monitoring with self-reporting ability, which could be used as smart mechano-sensors and displays.
3.8. Hydrophobicity
Conventional hydrogels are susceptible to contamination from ambient factors, such as raindrops, drink and sweat, which may degrade their mechanical performance. Notably, hydrogels endowed with superhydrophobicity, possess broad applications in oil–water separation, anti-biofouling surfaces, and underwater application environments.156 Hydrogels can be rendered with hydrophobicity by surface modification, decorating with an additional superhydrophobic coating, and selecting polymer chains with superhydrophobicity.176–178 To extend the hydrogel's use in practical application in varied environments, Fan et al.179 proposed a strategy to adhere a superhydrophobic film (Ecoflex film uniformly deposited with SiO2 microparticles) on the surface of P(AAmco-HEMA) hydrogel via covalent cross-linking. The resulting conductive hydrogel was stable and superhydrophobic even under stretching or bending (Fig. 12a). As shown in Fig. 12b, the deposited SiO2 formed a microscale roughness on the surface of Ecoflex successfully, and when combined with its intrinsic low surface energy, it played a vital role in bestowing the hydrogel with superhydrophobicity. As a result, the water contact angle of the obtained sample could reach to 152.7° (Fig. 12c). Apart from this, the stability of the superhydrophobic performance under varying degrees of stretching was also invested. The CA varied from 152.7° to 150.5° with the strain ranging from 0–100% (Fig. 12d). The process of a water droplet easily sliding down from an inclination of 13° in 100 ms was recorded in Fig. 12e, which demonstrated low droplet adhesion of the fabricated superhydrophobic hydrogel. Different from Fan's work, Xie et al.180 proposed a novel category of superhydrophobic hydrogels through introducing graphene and carbon nanotubes, which are inherently hydrophobic, into the polymer skeleton. The formation mechanism of poly(acrylic acid-co-acrylamide) (P(AA-co-AAm))/graphene hydrogel can be found in Fig. 12f. The CoCl2 and graphene served as chemical and physical cross-linker respectively, playing a synergistic role in endowing the hydrogel with superb stretchability and elastic modulus. Additionally, the graphene partially exposed to the surface of the hydrogel could also increase the surface roughness of the hydrogel. The stability of superhydrophobicity under different strains and different strain cycles was evaluated. No significant decrease in hydrophobic property was observed even when the hydrogel was stretched up to 1000%, with the CA kept above 150° and the RA remained under 10° (Fig. 12g). Thus, we can reasonable speculate that the hierarchical structure was retained under large deformation. Similarly, the fabricated sample could also keep superhydrophobicity after stretching for 1000 cycles, indicating excellent fatigue resistance (Fig. 12i). Apart from this, a tape peeling test was applied to evaluate the physical stability of the superhydrophobic surface. After 60 peeling cycles, negligible changes of CA (decrease from 162° to 152°) and RA (increase from 4° to 8°) were observed (Fig. 12h), the unexpected mechanical robustness could be attributed to the admirable adhesion of the hydrogel to the graphene. Considering the influence of water impact on superhydrophobic surface, both water droplet impact and dynamic, sustained water jet impact were investigated with a high-speed camera (Fig. 12j). The droplet could bounce off the superhydrophobic surface rapidly and maintain a spherical shape. Additionally, the hydrogel could sustain a persistent 0.2 MPa water jet shocking for 50 s, and this could be ascribed to the softness of the hydrogel, which acted as a buffer against the pressure, causing less impact on the surface.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of hydrophobic hydrogels, (b) SEM image, (c) optical photo of water contact angle and (d) water droplet contact angle at different strains from 0% to 100% of superhydrophobic surface, (e) the water droplet sliding down the inclined superhydrophobic surface with an angle of 13°. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. (f) Formation mechanism of P(AA-co-AAm)/graphene hydrogels, contact and roll-off angles of hydrogels (g) under different strains, (h) after tape peeling and (i) after various stretching–releasing cycles, (j) time-lapse optical picture of water droplet hitting the surface with velocity 1 m s−1. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (k) Preparation of hydrophobic hydrogels using P4BrMS as anchor monomer, (l) laser scanning confocal microscopic of hydrogels at different grafting times, (m) the thickness of modified layer with modification time, (n) the hydrophobic hydrogel forms as impenetrable layer and thus prevent wetting by water, (o) superhydrophobic gel mesh prevents water diffusion through oil/water interface. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. 
Inspired by biological material interface diffusion and exchange, and considering the current dilemma that homogeneous increasing in hydrophobicity usually leads to the inability to precisely control the substance diffusion, Liu et al.181 innovatively prepared a heterogeneous wettability from the surface to inner network to superhydrophobize the surface of the hydrogel. To realize superhydrophobic on the surface of hydrogels, a large number of hydrophobic monomers are required, but the hydrophilic nature of the network will be reduced. To improve the modification efficiency, poly(4-bromomethyl styrene) (P4BrMs) was selected as the anchor monomers (Fig. 12k), and as a result, the intrinsic performance of the inner network of the hydrogel was achieved. As indicated in Fig. 12l and m, the thickness of the modified layer increased with the modification time, and reached a plateau after 3 h. The modifiers could diffuse in and graft onto the hydrogel in the diffusion layer, and as the modification proceeded, the increasing oleophilic surface would promote the penetration of dichloromethane into the hydrogel. Therefore, the thickness of the obtained hydrophobic region varies from hundreds of nanometers to over 1 μm. The diffusion behavior on copper meshes modified by the superhydrophobic hydrogel are shown in Fig. 12n and o The spherical water droplet could remain stable on the hydrogel-coated mesh for 60 s, demonstrating the successful prevention of the superhydrophobic hydrogel for water diffusion through the oil/water interface. In summary, the proposed concept to functionalize hydrogels with seemingly contradictory properties, may also be applied in various areas, such as substance diffusion and transport in physiological environments.
3.9. Anti-freezing
Traditional hydrogels contain a large amount of water and sometimes need to work long-term or in extreme environments. However, the water will evaporate rapidly in hot and freeze in cold environments, which causes the hydrogel to lose conductivity and elasticity, severely limiting its wide applications.182,183 As is well known, water usually exists in hydrogels in three states, including free a state, intermediate water, as well as unfrozen bound water. Most of the free water can be exchanged rapidly by organic solvent and the others can turn into intermediate water or unfrozen bound water via forming hydrogen bonds.184 The intermediate water is loosely bound to the polymer chains and will freeze at temperatures below the normal freezing point. The unfrozen chemical bond water combines with polymers or solvents with multiple hydrogen bonds.185 Both the intermediate water and unfrozen bond water are difficult to replace. Therefore, the freezing point of organic hydrogels is greatly reduced due to the significant reduction in free water. By logical extension of this theory, organic solvent replacement is the most conventionally used method to prepare anti-freezing hydrogels. Apart from this, the introduction of ionic salts to reduce the freezing point of the hydrogel is also widely used.186–188 For example, Liu et al.189 proposed a new solvent replacement strategy to prepare ethylene glycerol/glycerol (Eg/Gl)–water binary anti-freezing and anti-drying organic hydrogels (Fig. 13a) which exhibited ultra-stretchable and sensitive strain sensing in a wide temperature range due to a large number of hydrogen bonds between the organic solvent and H2O molecules. The pre-synthesized water-based DN hydrogel was first immersed in an Eg/Gl solution, and then the molecules were exchanged quickly until equilibrium was driven by the concentration difference. To explore the effects of solvent with different ingredients on anti-icing performance, five different solutions were selected as solvent exchange sources marked as 1 to 5, respectively. After being placed at −18 °C for 1 h, the water-based hydrogel froze completely, while the other four organic hydrogel samples still maintained good tensile properties (Fig. 13b and c). Furthermore, after 5 additional h, a freeze resistance test was added to the organic hydrogel at −18 °C (Fig. 13d). It was found that only the sample immersed in pure organic solvent could avoid freezing and maintained stretchability up to 500% and 900% (soaked in Eg and Gl), respectively, which demonstrated that the concentration of Eg/Gl played a vital role in determining anti-freezing performance. Human motions can be monitored by the obtained stable hydrogel-based strain sensor in temperatures ranging from −18 to 25 °C. Inspired by frost/heat resistance properties from nature, Lu et al.190 reported an adhesive and conductive hydrogel, formed in a binary solvent system composed of glycerin and water (GW), with the long-lasting water-locking ability and extreme temperature resistance (−20 or 60 °C). Meanwhile, the mechanical properties of GW hydrogels in a harsh environment were investigated. GW hydrogels exhibited high flexibility and even can return to their original shape with large deformation quickly after being stored at −20 °C or 60 °C for 24 h (Fig. 13e). As a comparison, w-hydrogels froze at −20 °C and completely dried at 60 °C, causing cracks to occur during twisting. Furthermore, an organic hydrogel prepared with a water/ethylene glycol binary solvent as a dispersion medium was also reported.191 Owing to the frost resistance of binary solvents, the organic hydrogels exhibited relatively stable flexibility in extremely cold temperature, as low as −55 °C. As the temperature dropped from 0 °C to −20 °C, the storage modulus (G′) of the prepared hydrogel increased by about 3 × 103 times (Fig. 13f). Under this condition, the hydrogel was frozen into an ice-like solid, and its performance would be destroyed when compressed or bent (Fig. 13g). In a word, the mechanical strength and elasticity of antifreeze organic hydrogels are more stable at low temperatures. High-strength conductive hydrogels with frost resistance showed great potential as flexible sensors, which can enable biological signals of the users to be collected under extreme cold or hot climate.
 Fig. 13  (a) Mechanism of the introduced anti-freezing DN organohydrogels, (b) photograph of the samples obtained by soaking in different solutions, (c) digital images of samples stretched at different lengths, respectively, (d) photograph of five samples after cooling at -18 °C for 6 h. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (e) Optical photos of GW-hydrogel after cooling at −20 °C for 24 h, (1) twisted, (2) compressed and (3) pulled. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (f) The storage moduli (G′) and loss moduli (G′′) of the conductive hydrogels before and after the solvent exchange, (g) test of compress and bending for organohydrogel and hydrogel. Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. 
3.10. Shape memory
Shape memory hydrogels, which are integrated with functional materials, can exhibit a volumetric phase transition from the current temporary shape to a specific shape and return to their original shape in response to external stimulus such as heat, magnetic, light, and ions,192–194 so they are widely used in the fields of bio-medicine, textile, and aerospace.195 Typically, the temporary shape formed by external forces is relatively stable and could transform into a permanent shape upon the triggering of reversible interactions. For shape memory hydrogels, a large amount of water inside the hydrogel promotes the movement of macromolecular chains, leading to the instability of temporary shapes. Restoration from the temporary shape to the original (permanent) shape is accomplished by some external stimuli, which is expected to make shape memory hydrogels applicable as soft actuators. Liang et al.196 designed a new type of hydrogel with superior shape memory properties, which exhibited a reversible response to moisture with obvious volume changes. The volume of the hydrogel was observed to increase up to five times after being swollen with water (Fig. 14a). Application of the shape memory hydrogel as an actuator was demonstrated by assembling with a PDMS film. The deformation mode varies with the degree of dehydration until the hydrogel is separated completely from PDMS sheet (Fig. 14b). Once rehydrated, the deformation was fully recovered to its original shape. As shown in Fig. 14c, PDMS strips and hydrogel were chosen to make petals and flower buds, respectively and a series of samples were designed to display the outstanding shape memory performance. The curvature of the petals was controlled precisely by changing driving factors such as contact area, geometric shape, and relative arrangement. A photo-patterned and self-folding microgripper consisting with a swellable soft hydrogel and non-swelling rigid segmented polymer was fabricated.197 The composite structures exhibited thermally responsive properties and could be folded in both vertical and horizontal directions (Fig. 14d). When temperature was above 36 °C, the temperature responsive hydrogel was hydrophobic, causing the gripper to contact the rigid segment polymer on the outside of a closed gripper, while when the temperature drops below 36 °C, the opened clamp with the rigid polymer section on the outside folded back, forming a closed clamp with rigid polymer on the inside. As shown in Fig. 14e, the self-folding process was under the combined effects of the mass ratio of dry to swollen hydrogel weight (φ) and the temperature: the ratio φ increased with increasing temperature as water was expelled. Chen et al.198 proposed an original shape memory hydrogel, which demonstrated stable self-deformation behavior under pH stimulation. In this study, the automatically formed shape could be fixed through the coordination of carboxylic groups and Fe3+ (Fig. 14f). Once placed into an alkaline solution, the closed flower slowly opened its petals, a phenomenon that was attributed to the repulsion between deprotonated carboxyl groups. After being immersed into FeCl3 solution, the dropped flower could keep stable because of the formation of AAc-Fe3+ coordinate bonds. Moreover, the transient morphology gradually returned to permanent form as the pH value of the solution decreased. The neoteric design strategy may promote a new approach for the manufacture of smart hydrogel.
 Fig. 14  (a) Optical image of reversible dehydration-swelling of hydrogel, (b) reversible deformation of hydrogel-PDMS composite between rehydration and dehydration, (c) diverse patterns of “plastic flowers”. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (d) The rigid segments move from outside to inside during the opening and folding back process of the gripper as the temperature changes, (e) simulation snapshots of gripper folding. Reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (f) The photograph of hydrogel flower's response to solutions with different pH value, scale bar: 1 cm. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. 
3.11. Responsive property
Responsive smart hydrogels with unique physical and chemical properties are widely used in various fields such as bioengineering, drug release, smart coatings, and soft robots. The monomer material with stimulus response is polymerized to realize the multiple stimulus responsive characteristics of the hydrogel.199 In recent years, stimulus-responsive hydrogels based on different response conditions have been developed that can produce structural and performance changes to external stimuli including moisture,200,201 pH,202,203 temperature,204,205 and light, etc.206,207 Conventional polymer materials exhibit soft properties or even flow upon the temperature rising above their glass transition temperature, which seriously limits their applications at high temperature. In contrast, many proteins can form stable structures at high temperature, but that transition is unfortunately irreversible. Poly(acrylic acid) (PAAc) hydrogels were prepared by free radical polymerization from different concentrations of AAc solution and then treated in calcium acetate (CaAc) solutions.208 PAAc/CaAc exhibited soft and transparent properties at room temperature and quickly became opaque and stiff as temperature increased, a phenomenon is known as rapid and reversible thermal hardening (Fig. 15a–d). After heating to 60 °C, the gel sheet with a thickness of 1.1 mm could bear a weight of 10 kg, which is drastically better mechanical properties than at room temperature. The transition from soft rubber state to hard glass state was observed in uniaxial tensile tests at different temperatures. The stress–strain curve revealed that hysteresis increased significantly during the load-unload tests and the thermal hardening of the storage modulus (G′), exhibited reversible multiple repeatability (Fig. 15c–d). With the development of luminescent sensors and optical materials, smart luminescence systems with reversible emission have attracted much attention. Organic dyes are currently one of the most widely used luminescent materials because of the easy synthesis and chemical modification. In order to realize an intelligent luminescent system with reversible luminescent properties, variable peptide sequences were used to prepare a pH-responsive hydrogel with reversible luminescent emission.209 The hydrogel could achieve stable fluorescence repetitive conversion under the pH value from 10.0 and 6.0 (Fig. 15e–g). The hydrogel was composed of tetraphenylethylene (TPE) as the fluorescence center and the pH-responsive peptide MAX (NH2-KRKRGSVKVKVKVKVDPPTVKVKVKVK-Am) as the responsive component.210 When the pH value of the TPE-MAX solution is 10.0, obvious fluorescence can be observed, but no fluorescence was observed when the value of pH is 6.0. With the continuous adjustment of the pH value of the solution in the range of 6–10, the fluorescence intensity can achieve adjustable cyclic changes, due to a conformational change between the fluorescence change and TPE-MAX. Swee et al. prepared a dehumidifying gel composed of zinc acetate mixed with glycol ether, amino alcohol and water.211 Environmental humidity was used as the response condition to achieve the transformation of the physicochemical properties of the hydrogel. The hydrogel exists in two states of hydrated and dehydrated, and can be repeatedly switched between the two states. The hydrogel could be transferred from an opaque state to a transparent state with a decrease in humidity (Fig. 15h and i), which can be used to develop a coating of smart wet-chromic windows.
 Fig. 15  (a and b) The obvious changes in color and flexibility of gel at 25 °C and 60 °C, (c) modulus of the gels at different temperatures, (d) cyclic tests demonstrating reversible thermal harden performance. Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (e) The reversible fluorescence conversion was observed as the pH of a TPE-MAX solution adjusted from 6 to 10, (f and g) fluorescence spectra and cyclical change in fluorescence intensity as the pH was adjusted from 6 to 10. Reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (h) The color of the gel converted between transparent and opaque as the humidity changes (i) digital photographs of the gel in H and DH states. Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from RSC Publishing, copyright 2018. 
Inspired by the response of living organisms to the surrounding environments, responsive hydrogels exhibit reversible changes under different external stimuli, including temperature,212,213 pH,214,215 ions,216,217 forces,218 and electrical field,219,220 which have been widely used in intelligent electronic equipment, human-computer interaction, biomedicine and soft robots.221 For example, Yang et al.222 used 3D printing to create a magnetic hydrogel octopus (Fig. 16a). The hydrogel exhibited the characteristics of softness, elasticity, high hydration, biocompatibility, and the ability to simulate marine animals. The entire structure was printed directly without any post-processing of structure. The tentacles on the bottom of the hydrogel octopus were printed with magnetic hydrogel ink, and the octopus head on the top was printed with transparent AAm-carbomer ink. (Fig. 16b). It could be driven by programming the magnetic field according to the specified direction (Fig. 16c and d), and in the magnetic field, the hydrogel octopus showed a fast response and high fidelity. In another study, Jeon et al. reported a hydrogel with high-density dynamic covalent bonds (disulfide bonds), which was demonstrated to possess rapid degradation properties.103 As shown in Fig. 16e, the hydrogel was completely degraded after 5 h in the glutathione solution, forming a clear solution. Interestingly, Chen et al.223 manufactured a hydrogel with dual color sensitivity to temperature and ionic strength through magnetic assembly. As the temperature ranged from 15 °C to 30 °C, the color of the hydrogel changed from yellow-green to red-purple due to the swelling behavior of the PNIPAM hydrogel matrix. The reflection peak blue-shifted with increased temperature, and the color changes were consistent with the shift of the diffraction peak, indicating that the hydrogel was beneficial for temperature detection through spectral analysis or colorimetric signals (Fig. 16f and g). The sensitivity of the photonic hydrogel to ionic strength was further studied. Similar to the temperature response, the color of the hydrogel changed from yellow-green to purple as the concentration of NaCl increased due to the diffraction peak gradually shifting to a short wavelength. As the concentration of NaCl increased, the diffraction peak of the hydrogel shifted from 534 nm to 450 nm, which demonstrated the precise response to ion concentration (Fig. 16h and i). The proposed method shows a potential application as a reusable test paper for dual temperature/ion measurement. Smart external stimulus responsive hydrogels are expected to be applied to targeted medical treatment, and can be widely used in the fields of in vivo drug delivery and wound excipient in the future.
 Fig. 16  (a) A soft octopus-shaped hydrogel prepared via 3D printing, (b) the octopus was fabricated by two parts: AAm-carbomer ink with and without Fe3O4 for the tentacles and the transparent head, respectively, (c) the octopus moving under a magnetic field, (d) optical images of the octopus moved from left to right. Reproduced from ref. 222 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (e) Degradability of 0.2 g P(BAL-co-DMSA)/Ca2+ (1.5–1.5)/x hydrogels in a glutathione solution. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2020. Digital photograph and the reflection spectra of RPH taken (f and g) as the temperature rising from 15 to 32 °C, (h and i) under different concentrations of NaCl solution. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. 
4. Applications of conductive hydrogel
Flexible electronic hydrogel-based devices exhibit good resistance to deformations such as tension, bending, or compression, and judicious engineering of the hydrogel can enable the conversion of the deformation into recognizable electrical signals according to changes in resistance or capacitance.224–226 Flexible devices based on rubber-like substrates coated with conductive nanomaterials are often not biocompatible, which may cause skin inflammation when contacting skin directly. What's worse, the conductive nanomaterials may fall off from the substrate during usage, potentially causing device failure and more serious health damage.227 Conductive hydrogels could avoid the above problems via in situ polymerization and their intrinsically excellent biocompatibility.228–230 Thus, conductive hydrogels stand as an ideal candidate for flexible electronic devices (i.e., strain sensor, supercapacitor, touch panel, triboelectric nanogenerator, bioelectronic devices) that can accurately and efficiently concert physical-electrical signals due to their adjustable flexibility, conductivity, and conformability to skin.231–233
4.1. Strain sensor
Strain sensors convert physical deformation into a change of the electronic signal, which can be classified into four classes based on the perspective of sensing mechanism: resistive, capacitive, piezoelectric234,235 and triboelectric.236,237 Due to the need for intricate testing instruments and the poor dynamic performance of capacitive, piezoelectric and triboelectric strain sensor, resistive-type strain sensors are the more widely used. Resistive type strain sensors are mainly discussed in this section. When applying an external force on a resistive-type strain sensor, the internal conductive network changes, resulting in the changes of resistance. The sensitivity, response time, and working range of the hydrogel sensor are important indicators to evaluate the performance.238 At present, diverse conductive hydrogels have been widely used in human health monitoring, including breathing, heartbeat, expression changes, joint bending, etc.239,240 For example, Alshareef et al.241 successfully constructed a MXene-based hydrogel, which exhibited high ductility, instantaneous self-healing, and excellent integration and adhesion to human skin. Due to the presence of MXene nanosheets (NSs), the strain sensitivity of the hydrogel was significantly improved. Fig. 17a and b depict the electrochemical response of the hydrogel under tensile deformation and compression deformation. The relative resistance change increased obviously with the increase of strain. In addition, when the mass percentage of MXene increased from 0 to 4.1%, the sensitivity increased from 2 to 25 (Fig. 17a, inset). Interestingly, the obtained MXene-based hydrogels exhibited greater sensitivity under compression (Fig. 17b). The obvious difference in the electrochemical performance of MXene NSs under tension and compression deformation can be attributed to the 3D network structure of the MXene NSs embedded in the hydrogel matrix. It can be observed that a high concentration of MXene NSs on the surface of the hydrogel was owed to the randomly oriented 3D network structure of the m-hydrogel. When the hydrogel was stretched in the transverse direction, the number of protruding nanoflakes would be significantly reduced, causing an increase in resistance (Fig. 17c and d). As shown in Fig. 17e and f, compression not only led to geometric changes and increases in connection points, but it also made the interconnection from opposite edges change into a face-to-face interconnection. The hydrogel could be attached to complex positions (hands, necks, faces, etc.) of the human body with various complex 3D geometric shapes without additional adhesives. When a finger was bent, the hydrogel on the index finger would immediately reflect a 20% change in resistance, which could remain stable under both fast and slow bending motion (Fig. 12g). Facial expressions, such as smiling and frowning, could also be detected by attaching the hydrogel to the middle of the forehead (Fig. 17h and i). Thus, the extraordinary ability of hydrogels to sense the speed and direction of motion made certain special sensing applications possible. The m-based image could be used as a sensor film for signature recognition and even the simple word “OK” would show completely different signals when written by different people (Fig. 17j–l). In addition, the pronunciation process could be detected with an M-hydrogel detector. When vocalizing, the throat protrusion would vibrate, which stimulated the hydrogel at that location to produce a stable and special pattern. As shown in Fig. 17n and o, single sounds, such as “D” and “E”, showed patterns with recognizable degrees. Therefore, such hydrogels with special sensing capabilities can be extended to other sensing applications involving 3D motion, including touch sensing and biological signal monitoring.
 Fig. 17  (a and b) Relative resistance change of M-hydrogel under stretching and compression, SEM images of M-hydrogel before (c) and after (d) after stretching, (e and f) mechanism of the electro-mechanical responses of M-hydrogel. Relative resistance change in response to (g) finger bending and (h) and (i) facial expressions, (j and m) schematic for signature sensing and vocal sensing, (k, l and n, o) electro-mechanical response to OK written by different volunteers, to similarly sounding “D” and “E”. Reproduced from ref. 241 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2018. 
4.2. Supercapacitor
Supercapacitors, also known as electrochemical capacitors, are attractive because of their fast charging and discharging, long lifetime, and high safety.242,243 They have been widely used in many digital products, backup power systems, electric vehicles.244 Flexible supercapacitors are designed to operate under various strain conditions without degrading performance, such as bending, folding, or even twisting, which are especially suitable for wearable electronic products.245,246 Conductive hydrogels combine the electrical properties of conductive materials with the unique characteristics of hydrogels, which is an ideal framework for the design and construction of flexible supercapacitors. For example, Yu et al.49 prepared a macromolecularly interconnected 3D graphene/nano-structured hydrogel-based supercapacitor via the strong molecular interaction between PANI and graphene. The 3D structure of the composite hydrogel brought excellent flexibility and plasticity, as well as superior electrochemical performance. Fig. 18a and b reveal the typical redox peak of PANI and the galvanostatic charge–discharge profile (GCD). Although the capacitance gradually decreased at a high current density, the capacitance was maintained at about 60 F g−1 at a high current density of 1.26 A g−1. In addition, the electrochemical stability of the supercapacitor was evaluated by a long-term GCD test, and there was a significant increase in the initial stage due to the gradual exposure of PANI, causing the decrease of the conductivity. The sample exhibited stable electrochemical performance with only a 14% capacitance loss after 17000 cycles (Fig. 18c). At the same time, the CV curve of the full cell (Fig. 18d) exhibited negligible changes in current density regardless of the deformation of the sample (normal, knotted, or twisted), which proved their good anti-mechanical deformation properties. In addition, only small changes in capacitance were observed during the stretching process (Fig. 18e and f), which indicated the excellent cyclic stability of the device. What's more, it can be found that a higher working voltage can be obtained by connecting multiple devices in series (Fig. 18g), which accelerated the possibility for practical applications. As shown in Fig. 18h, the sample in series could power two LEDs both in normal and bent states. The successful preparation of the supercapacitor provides ideas for the development of next-generation wearable and portable electronic products.
 Fig. 18  (a) CV and (b) GCD curves of the all-hydrogel symmetric supercapacitor, (c) electrochemical stability of the fabricated supercapacitor after 16000 charge–discharge cycles, (d) CV curves in normal, curved, and twisted state, (e and f) capacitance retention after different tensile strain and 1000 strain cycles, (g) GCD curves of several supercapacitor connected in series and (h) a demonstration of the fabricated yarn-shaped supercapacitor lighting up two LEDs. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission form Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. 
4.3. Touch panel
The flexible touch panel can provide a simple and intuitive display interface. At present, touch panels have multiple sensing types including resistance, capacitance, surface acoustic wave and infrared touch.247,248 The most critical part of the sensing system is to endow conductive materials with flexibility and high sensitivity. Most conventional touch panel take indium tin oxide (ITO) as the conductive materials to fabricate transparent conductive films. However, ITO-based touch panels are notably brittle and fragile.249 From a materials perspective, conductive hydrogels are promising for next-generation touch panels because of their softness, stretchability, transparency, electrical conductivity, and good biocompatibility.250 For example, Sun et al.251 prepared a highly stretchable transparent ionic conductivity touch panel made of PAAm hydrogel containing LiCl (Fig. 19a). When a finger was connected to the aluminum strip, the current flowed from the two ends of the aluminum strip to the contact point. The ammeter in every corner detected the signal (Fig. 19b). As shown in Fig. 19c, a rectangular hydrogel membrane was connected to each corner of the Pt electrode, and the four corners of the ammeter were used to detect current. When the panel was in contact with the optical fiber, it could be divided into four resistance parts by the contact (Fig. 19e). Concentric squares were drawn on the hydrogel panel to test the deformation of the figure (Fig. 19f), and the outer square at the edge showed more distortion than the inner square due to the incorrect perception of the counter position. The parallel resistor circuit was connected in series to the capacitor through a finger. To enhance the communication between the ionic touch panel and a computer, a controller board was designed (Fig. 19d), the driving voltage signal generated by the circuit board was applied to the corner of the panel, and the current in each corner can be measured through the circuit board. After that, the ionic touch panel was attached to monitor #1, and an input pattern was displayed (Fig. 19g and h). When the finger traced the pattern on the panel, the control panel detected the picture and transmitted it to the computer. Thus, the output graph was displayed on the monitor #2. The flexible touch panel can be attached to the curved skin surface, and write, play the piano, or play chess on the surface.
 Fig. 19  (a and b) Scheme and an equivalent electrical circuit diagram of a 1D ionic touch panel, (c) a schematic illustration of a 2D ionic touch panel, (d) a block diagram of a controller board between a computer and the ionic touch panel, (e) an electrical circuit of the panel during touching, (f) the optical image showed distortion near the edge of the ionic hydrogel-based touch panel, (g and h) operation of the ionic touch panel was demonstrated with a dashed-man drawing. Reproduced from ref. 251 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2016. 
4.4. Triboelectric nanogenerator
Conductive hydrogels have attracted great attention in the field of energy conversion materials due to their adjustable electrical and mechanical properties.252–255 Wu et al.256 fabricated a stretchable and anti-freezing triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) based on the ionic conductive composite NaCl/gelatin hydrogel via a simple solvent exchange process. The gelatin was placed at 4 °C for 30 min to form enough chain entanglement, and then the obtained sample was immersed in a water/glycerol binary solvent to partly exchange the water in the hydrogel with the glycerol molecules (Fig. 20a). In this step the anti-freezing and anti-drying performances were endowed, and in addition the interaction between hydrophobic inter-chains (salting-out effect) and ionic interaction (amino ions of gelatin and citrate ions) occurred, making the fabricated hydrogel a potential candidate for energy harvesting devices. The corresponding working principle and basic electrical output performance are illustrated in Fig. 20b. Electrification happens at the contact position and an equal amount of negative and positive charges were distributed on the silicone rubber and human skin, respectively, upon contact between the finger and the silicone rubber. It should be noted that the potential difference is infinitely close to 0 at the current moment, and when the finger is separated the rubber, negative charges will move the electrolyte ions to promote the charge balance, leading to an accumulation of excess ions. At the same time, the electric double layer is formed at the interface of the Cu wire and the hydrogel with the aid of external current. When human skin close back to the rubber, the electrons will move back, from the ground to Cu wire, regenerating an electrical signal with opposite direction. The continuous current will be generated if the process of contacting-separation is repeated. To evaluate the current output performance (Fig. 20c), the achieved voltage reached to 420 V, and the current peak value and charge transfer amount were 12 μA and 180 nC, respectively. The charging ability for a commercial 10 μF capacitor under diverse contacting-separation frequencies is shown in Fig. 20d. The capacitor can be charged by the TENG successfully and the charging speed shows a positive relationship to the contact-separate frequencies. Based on the reliable electrical performance, a self-powered calculator based on the fabricated TENG was designed, which is composed of calculator touch panel, an analog conditioning circuit with an amplifier, a comparator to convert analog signals into digital signal, a microcontroller for further data processing, and an LCD screen to display the result (Fig. 20e). Fig. 20f indicates the snapshot of real-time calculation process, when executing the division routine, the formula, “69/3 = 23” would be displayed in LCD screen and the real-time calculated result can be achieved successfully. Therefore, the high-performance TENG based on the transparent, anti-freezing gel are expected to play vital role in future self-powered electronics, such as AI, big data, soft robotics and other fields.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of GNOH synthesized by a simple solvent replacement method, (b) working principal diagram of the AG-TENG, (c) open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current, and transferred charge amount of the AG-TENG, (d) AG-TENG used to charge a 10 μF capacitors under diverse frequencies, (e) component of the smart self-powered calculator, (f) real-time calculation of the fabricated calculator based on array AG-TENG. Reproduced from ref. 256 with permission form Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2022. 
4.5. Bioelectronic devices
Bioelectronic devices with reliable performances require a stable and conformal adhesion on biological tissues.257–261 Strategies, like surgical suturing and physical attachment are usually taken to integrate bioelectronic devices with tissue, however, the widespread deficiencies,262 like failure of conformal contact, leakage of body fluid, bacterial infection, and even tissue damage, seriously hinders its development.91,263–266 Recently, Zhao et al.267 proposed graphene hydrogel-based electro-bioadhesive interface for fast and firm adhesion to various dynamic tissues (additionally, the integration was on-demand detachable). To evaluate the in vivo stimulation functionalities of the e-bioadhesive devices, the electrical stimulation of the sciatic nerve was recorded by integrating a commercial electrode with the e-bioadhesive interface (Fig. 21a). The conformal integration was robust enough to withstand gentle pulling (Fig. 21b). If applied with pulses stimulus voltage (0.75–1.2 V at 1 Hz), periodic ankle joint movement could be observed and the bending angle could reach to 25° (Fig. 21c), demonstrating the stable electrical stimulation response of the nerve by connecting the e-bioadhesive interface. The prepared novel e-bioadhesive interfaces not only offer a credible method for the perennial bonding problems of tissue-device, but it also offers a great example for human-machine interaction, which may raise great efforts and pave the field of smart device forward.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic and optical image of the sciatic nerve stimulation device, (b) integration of stimulation electrodes on a sciatic nerve with the e-bioadhesive interface and images of the ankle joint movement in response to electrical stimulation, (c) movement angle of ankle joint under different electrical stimulation. Reproduced from ref. 267 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. (d) Schematic diagram of bioadhesive ultrasoft BMI, (e) mechanism of soft tissue adhesion by bioadhesive ultrasoft BMI, (f) the representative ECoG signals recorded by hydrogel-integrated BMI, (g) the surgery and positioning of bioadhesive ultrasoft BMI and commercial screw electrodes, (h) power spectra and corresponding SNR values of the ECoG signals collected by a screw electrode and hydrogel-integrated BMI. Reproduced from ref. 271 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2022. 
Brain-machine interfaces (BMI) could enable the integration between human brain and external machines.268–270 Nonetheless, matters like the biocompatibility of the machine, the mismatches of mechanical performance, and weak adhesion-induced imprecise signal transmission between rigid electronic devices and soft brain tissue generally lead to bacterial infection, and reduce the service time of BMI in practical application (Fig. 21d). Lu et al.271 reported a bioadhesive, immune-evasive and modulus-matchable BMI based on the integration of bioelectronics and dopamine modified PEDOT hydrogel. Due to the diverse non-covalent and covalent bonds between the tissue and catechol groups in hydrogel (Fig. 21e), the BMI strong adhered on the tissue could be used to record electrocorticography (ECoG). To achieve the in vivo ECoG signal, the bioadhesive BMI was conformally attached on the left hemisphere of a rat brain (Fig. 21g), as shown in Fig. 21f. An obvious improvement of correlation coefficient could be observed by using the optimal hydrogel-integrated BMI, and the corresponding correlation coefficient was up to 0.9, demonstrating very competitive performance to commercial screw electrode, which can be attributed conformal contact between brain and the BMI, and as a result, the environmental noise could be reduce to the minimum. Apart from this, the BMI was used to record steady state visual-evoked potential (SSVEP) signals to demonstrate the performance in practical brain research. The purpose of the SSVEP experiment is to collect and analyze the dynamic response caused by a fixed frequency of visual stimulus. SSVEP experiments are designed to collect and analyze dynamic responses elicited by fixed-frequency visual stimuli. As the signal-to-noise ratio (SNRs) of ECoG signal could determine the quality of SSVEP signal, SNRs of the corresponding signal collected from the two samples were calculated. It was found that the value of BMI (10.19 dB) was higher than the data collected by the screw electrodes (8.74 dB) (Fig. 21h), indicating the promising improvement of the quality of SSVEP under adequate adhesion. These results support the promising application of the functional hydrogel-integrated BMI in many practical scenarios, and it also could be used to collect biochemical formation on human skin without external-aided fixation in the future.
4.6. Robot
The tongue is one of the most sensitive, soft and flexible body parts that possesses many kinds of receptors, like mechanical receptors, taste receptors.228,272–275 Secreted saliva, which consists of 99% water and a small number of electrolytes and proteins, can keep the surface of the tongue moist.276 Saliva plays the role of dissolving tastants and accelerate their passage through ion channels. Tastants can be perceived through specific functional cells or ion channels and then electrical signals generated from depolarization of the functional cells or by the flow of sodium ions passed though the ion channels. By mimicking the sensing mechanism of the tongue, Yeom et al.277 reported an ionic conductive PAAm hydrogel-based artificial tongue, with the necessary mucin protein contained in the hydrogel (Fig. 22a). As a specific type of tannin, TA can form mucin-TA complexes with mucin protein through the combination between the aromatic rings on TA and hydrophobic amino acid of mucin. Moreover, a large number of hydrophobic aggregates would associate by spontaneously induced hydrogen bonding. During the process of complexation, great tension is applied to the micro-pores, causing the initial pore walls tearing off. The hydrophobic aggregates rebuild nanoscale pore structure inside the partly damaged microporous hydrogel, forming a hierarchical micro-, nano-porous structure, facilitating efficient transporting of ions (Fig. 22b). The working mechanism of the proposed artificial tongue under external stimuli was illustrated in Fig. 22c. In the normal state, the hydrogel exhibits moderate conductivity due to the free mobility of the ions in the hierarchical structure. Due to the existence of ample amide groups both in the polymer skeleton and mucin, the flow of the electrolytes was limited, and the directional transport of ions was poor due to the electrostatic interaction between the pore walls and the ions. Once exposed to TA, hydrophobic complexes were formed instantly and the balance of electrostatic interactions was broken. Because of the anti-liquid effect of hydrophobic nano-pores and the reduced electrostatic interactions, Li+ and Cl− could flow frictionless through the 3D structure. Human can perceive different tastes by licking the liquid residue of the food (Fig. 22d), and the artificial tongue could analyze the chemical component directly via a simple wipe-and-detection method. To evaluate the performance in detecting astringency, TA solution was dipped on 5 different spots in a 3 × 3 array, as exhibited in Fig. 22e, the sensor could identify the spots precisely. Similarly, TA solution with different concentration (0.1 and 1.0 wt%) were also used to treat the array, different current change was shown in the mapping, proving the accurate identification ability of the prepared hydrogel. The satisfactory performance of the astringent sensor accelerated the development of soft artificial taste sensor, shows great potential to be applied into robot fields.
 Fig. 22  (a) Optical photos of artificial tongue and schematic diagram of astringency sensing mechanism, (b) SEM image of the astringency detectable hydrogel before and after exposure to TA, (c) the working mechanism of the astringency sensor before and after TA treatment, (d) schematic representation of taste perceived by licking food (e) different concentrations of TA as array artificial tongue and corresponding taste mapping data. Reproduced from ref. 277 with the permission from AAAS, copyright 2020. 
In summary, the network structure, mechanical properties, electrical properties and applications of representative conductive hydrogels are compared and summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Summary of the properties and applications of conductive hydrogels




Materials
Network structure
Elongation (%)
Toughness (J/m3)
Conductivity (S m−1)
Adhesion
Property
Application
Ref.




Abbreviations: PEGDA, poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate; SBMA, sulfobetaine methacrylate; PDA, polydopamine; AG, agar; CS, chitosan; TA, tannic acid; PAA, poly(acrylic acid); PANI, polyaniline; PAAm, poly(acrylamide); PVA, polyvinyl alcohol; DMAPS, 3-[dimethyl-[2-(2-methylprop-2-enoyloxy)ethyl]azaniumyl]propane-1-sulfonate; CMCS, carboxymethyl chitosan; PAAS, sodium polyacrylate; PMA, polymethyl acrylate; LS, sodium lignosulfonate; MTAC, 2-methacryloyloxy ethyl trimethylammonium chloride; AEAM, 2-aminoethyl acrylamide hydrochloride; CA, citric acid; NIPAM, N-isopropylacrylamide; GO, graphene oxide; SA, sodium alginate; CNFs, cellulose nanofibrils; TFEA, 2,2,2-trifluoroethyl acrylate; [EMIM][TFSI], 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide; poly(SBVI), poly(sulfobetaine vinylimidazolium); DMAA, N,N-dimethylacrylamide; PAMPS, poly(1-acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonic acid).




PEGDA/SBMA/PDA hydrogel
SN
350


0.03
20.4 kPa
Adhesive, thermal response
Pressure/strain sensor

278



AG/PAAm/LiCl hydrogel
DN
2185
4.4 × 106
1.3


Adhesive, self-healing
Supercapacitor

279



CS/TA/PAA
DN
1400
1.22 × 106


20.21 kPa
Self-healing, adhesive
Strain sensor

1



PANI nanofibers/PAA hydrogel
DN
991






Self-healing (90.8%)
Strain/temperature sensor

280



Hydroxypropyl cellulose/PVA/NaCl hydrogel
SN
975
6.7 × 106
3.4




Pressure/strain sensor

58



CS-P(AM-co-AA) hydrogel
DN
700
4.9 × 106
4.8


Anti-freezing
Supercapacitor, strain sensor

281



TiO2-PDA-perfluorosilica carbon dot/CS/PVA/TA hydrogel
DN
278


0.1096
0.57 N
Hydrophilic-hydrophobic conversion adhesive
Supercapacitor, strain sensor

282



DMAPS/PAA/ionic liquids hydrogel
SN
1500


0.14 ± 0.01
418 ± 38 J m−2
Self-healing Adhesive
Touch panel

283



PEDOT:PSS/PVA hydrogel
DN
150


1000
600 J m−2
Adhesive
Biological electrode

91



PAAm/CMCS-g-PANI/Ag
DN
1100


0.045
22.6 kPa
Adhesive anti-bacterial
Strain sensor

284



ZnCl2/CaCl2 cellulose hydrogels
SN
120


7.49


Thermal reversibility anti-freezing



285



PAAS/PMA hydrogel
SN
1200
45.0×106
2


Anti-freezing
Strain sensor

286



LS/PVA/Ag NPs hydrogel
DN
1285
50.7 × 106
7.1


Anti-bacterial



287



PAAm/Agar/TA-borax hydrogel
DN
400


0.002
5.93 kPa
Anti-bacterial
Strain sensor

288



P(AM-co-MTAC-AEAM)/MWCNT/LiCl hydrogel
DN
4075
12.8 × 106
0.85


Self-healing
Strain sensor, handwritten screen

289



Ag-lignin NPs/CA/AA/P(AAm-co-AA)
DN
12400
281.6 × 106


6.13 kPa
Antibacterial activity, adhesive
Masks filter

290



Ag flakes/NIPAM hydrogel
SN
535


1231


Thermal response anti-bacterial
Strain sensor soft, actuation

291



Ag NP/PAAm hydrogel
SN
2921






Self-healing
Mechanical actuator

199



Starch/PAAm/borax/glycerol ionohydrogel
DN
514


21.1 × 10−3


Anti-freezing, moisturizing
Strain/humidity/temperature sensor, nanotriboelectric generator

292



PAAm/Ag flakes-alginate hydrogel
DN
250


37400




Soft robot

293



TFEA/AAm/[EMIM][TFSI] hydrogel
DN
2066


0.292
1700 N m−1
Anti-freezing, anti-swelling hydrophobic, self-healing adhesive
Pressure/strain/temperature sensor

294



Graphene/poly(SBVI) hydrogel
SN




4.9 × 10−3
0.36 MPa
Anti-swelling, adhesive
Supercapacitor, neuromodulation electrodes

295



DMAA/PAMPS microspheres ionic hydrogel
SN
3300
19 × 106
1.340


Thermostability, adhesive, anti-freezing, self-healing
Strain sensor

296





5. Summary and outlook
Conductive hydrogels with specific functions are experiencing a booming development and will be widely used in the field of intelligent electronic devices in the foreseeable future. In this review, the recent advances of conductive hydrogel were reviewed comprehensively from three aspects: classification, properties, and applications. This review presents the classification of conductive hydrogels based on the composition, including SN hydrogels based on conductive polymers, SN hydrogels with conductive additives (NPs/NWs/NSs), DN hydrogels, and DN hydrogels with conductive additives. Next, the properties, such as self-healing, toughness, self-growing, adhesive, anti-swelling, antibacterial, structural color, hydrophobic, anti-freezing, shape memory and external stimulus responsiveness, were discussed in-depth. At last, the typical applications of conductive hydrogels were introduced from the mechanism to performance characterization. Though considerable progress has been made in the aspects of materials synthesis and performance optimization, conductive hydrogels are still far away from practical applications.
5.1. Multifunctional integrated applications
Almost all reported hydrogel sensors can only detect human motions, but in some cases, sweat monitoring and temperature monitoring are also necessary to reveal physical health conditions. This functionality will likely require the doping of multiple functional nanomaterials into hydrogels. Hydrogels with a single extraordinary performance, such as stretchability and toughness, have been widely developed. Unfortunately, hydrogels that simultaneously exhibit favorable mechanical performance and electrical properties remain elusive, and further efforts should be paid to achieve this balance. Additionally, although substantial effort has been dedicated to the design and investigation of hydrogels in different fields, most of the present systems are restricted to proof-of-concept studies because the performance of hydrogels fails to meet the requirements of real applications, as well as the improvement of low cost and large-scale fabrication, then could pave the way to the real application.
5.2. Physical performance
Water uptake caused by unequal osmotic pressure when immersed in an aqueous medium or a high humidity environment decreases the mechanical properties of hydrogels, which severely limits their lifetime and the application scenarios. Future efforts should be devoted to optimizing hydrogel materials to prevent the volatilization of water in the hydrogel when placed in extremely hot or dry conditions. One reliable method is to choose high-performance water-retaining agents. Absorption and volatilization of water may also cause changes in the shape and size of the hydrogel, which severely restricts the development of micro hydrogel devices. Apart from this, the understanding of the fundamental mechanism of gelling is still a challenge that needs to be further explored in order to fabricate hydrogels with a controllable sol–gel transition and fine-tunable mechanical properties. The stability and durability of the hydrogel in severe conditions also need to be improved by endowing the hydrogel with anti-biofouling, self-cleaning property. Further, it's inevitable for hydrogels to face the problem of fatigue fracture during multiple-cycle mechanical loads, therefore, and thus long-term instability has substantially hampered the practical utility of hydrogel-based devices. Endowing hydrogels with self-strengthening properties, similar to muscle, may be the ultimate way to solve this problem.
5.3. Bio-related performance
More development of bio-electronic devices that can be implanted into the body due to hydrogels’ excellent biocompatibility is urgently needed. The devices implanted in the body can adhere to the specified organ firmly, be self-powered, and transmit data such as the rate and intensity of the heartbeat outside in real-time via Bluetooth. One challenge for this application is the fact that a considerable portion of conductive hydrogels is ionically conductive, and the salt concentration is much higher than the electrolyte in the organs. Thus, the salt may diffuse from the hydrogel to the human body, causing electrolyte disorder and the loss of the hydrogel's conductivity. Finding truly bio-compatible hydrogels remains a meaningful research direction. Endowing the hydrogel with new functional properties such as biodegradability in vivo can is also an area of untapped opportunity. After a hydrogel device is implanted in the body, it may only be required to work for a certain period. If it could be degraded and absorbed by the tissue, the risks associated with a second operation can be avoided and the patient's pain can be alleviated. The reliable interfacial assembly of hydrogel with target tissue can be a possible direction for future developments. Currently, due to the lack of spontaneously formed stable and instant interface bonding, most of the attachments between implantable hydrogel devices and highly dynamic and deforming wet tissues (e.g., heart, muscle, and spinal cord) typically rely on sub-optimal tissue adhesives or suturing.
5.4. Conductivity
Hydrogels with high and stable conductivity will be the focus of future research. The conductive mechanism of conductive hydrogels can be divided into electronic conduction and ionic conduction. For electronic conductive hydrogels, two methods are usually used to impart their conductivity: (1) conductive hydrogels formed from conductive polymers directly; and (2) introducing conductive micro/nano-materials. Excessive addition may lead to negative effect on the mechanical properties, so the challenge for this kind of conductive hydrogels is to balance the competition between conductivity and mechanical properties. For hydrogels based on ionic conduction, the conductivity is dependent primarily on the free movement of ions in hydrogel. The water retention of hydrogels will affect the conductivity greatly, especially in extreme dry and hot/cold climate. As such, retaining the stability of the conductivity of hydrogels in harsh environment still needs more attention.
The huge demand for high-performance hydrogel-based flexible electronic devices will drive further research and innovation. During future development, arduous challenges and tasks are inevitable, but at the same time, great opportunities and exciting inventions will appear continuously. We believe this comprehensive review could give researchers insight and understanding into conductive hydrogels and push this thriving field forward.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholar of Fujian Province (2020J06038), National Natural Science Foundation of China (22075046, 51972063, 21501127 and 51502185), National Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFE0111200), Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (2019J01256), 111 Project (No. D17005). T. Zhu, Y. Ni and G. M. Biesold contributed equally to this work.
References
J. Y. Yin, S. X. Pan, L. L. Wu, L. Y. N. Tan, D. Chen, S. Huang, Y. H. Zhang and P. X. He, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 17349–17364 RSC .
S. T. Lin, H. Yuk, T. Zhang, G. A. Parada, H. Koo, C. J. Yu and X. H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4497–4505 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. F. Yang, R. K. Huang, B. N. Zheng, W. T. Guo, C. K. Li, W. Y. He, Y. G. Wei, Y. Du, H. M. Wang, D. C. Wu and H. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mandal, J. R. Clegg, A. C. Anselmo and S. Mitragotri, Bioeng. Trans. Med., 2020, 5, e10158 CAS .
G. H. Su, J. Cao, X. Q. Zhang, Y. L. Zhang, S. Y. Yin, L. Y. Jia, Q. Q. Guo, X. X. Zhang, J. H. Zhang and T. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2074–2082 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D. H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
W. Raza, F. Z. Ali, N. Raza, Y. W. Luo, K. H. Kim, J. H. Yang, S. Kumar, A. Mehmood and E. E. Kwon, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 441–473 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ji, J. Jang, E. Cho, S. H. Kim, E. S. Kang, J. Kim, H. K. Kim, H. Kong, S. K. Kim, J. Y. Kim and J. U. Park, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700538 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Kim, I. Ha, P. Won, D. G. Seo, K. J. Cho and S. H. Ko, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2582 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ni, J. Huang, S. Li, X. Wang, L. Liu, M. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Li and Y. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 4740–4749 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhang and A. Khademhosseini, Science, 2017, 356, eaaf3627 CrossRef .
B. Kessel, M. Lee, A. Bonato, Y. Tinguely, E. Tosoratti and M. Zenobi-Wong, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu, Y. Cheng, C. Cao, J. Mao, L. Li, J. Huang, S. Gao, X. Dong, Z. Chen and Y. Lai, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 385, 123912 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Liu, G. D. Nian, C. H. Yang, S. X. Qu and Z. G. Suo, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 846 CrossRef .
G. F. Cai, J. X. Wang, K. Qian, J. W. Chen, S. H. Li and P. S. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600190 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, J. C. Huang, Y. Zhong, K. Li, L. N. Zhang and J. Cai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6279–6287 CrossRef .
K. I. Jang, H. U. Chung, S. Xu, C. H. Lee, H. Luan, J. Jeong, H. Cheng, G. T. Kim, S. Y. Han, J. W. Lee, J. Kim, M. Cho, F. Miao, Y. Yang, H. N. Jung, M. Flavin, H. Liu, G. W. Kong, K. J. Yu, S. I. Rhee, J. Chung, B. Kim, J. W. Kwak, M. H. Yun, J. Y. Kim, Y. M. Song, U. Paik, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6566 CrossRef .
H. Yuk, B. Y. Lu and X. H. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1642–1667 RSC .
M. Qiu, A. Singh, D. Wang, J. L. Qu, M. Swihart, H. Zhang and P. N. Prasad, Nano Today, 2019, 25, 135–155 CrossRef .
C. Y. Cao, N. Yang, Y. Zhao, D. P. Yang, Y. L. Hu, D. L. Yang, X. J. Song, W. J. Wang and X. C. Dong, Nano Today, 2021, 39, 101165 CrossRef .
Y. L. Fang, H. L. Cheng, H. He, S. Wang, J. M. Li, S. Z. Yue, L. Zhang, Z. L. Du and J. Y. Ouyang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004699 CrossRef .
X. M. Fu, J. X. Li, C. Q. Tang, S. L. Xie, X. M. Sun, B. J. Wang and H. S. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2008355 CrossRef .
B. R. B. Yiming, X. Guo, N. Ali, N. Zhang, X. N. Zhang, Z. L. Han, Y. C. Lu, Z. L. Wu, X. L. Fan, Z. Jia and S. X. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102773 CrossRef .
X. Wang, S. S. Chen, D. B. Wu, Q. Wu, Q. C. Wei, B. He, Q. H. Lu and Q. G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705668 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Galie, C. Garcia-Gutierrez, E. M. Miguelez, C. J. Villar and F. Lombo, Front. Microbiol., 2018, 9, 898 CrossRef .
M. Liu, X. Song, Y. T. Wen, J. L. Zhu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35673–35682 CrossRef .
M. J. Yin, Z. G. Yin, Y. X. Zhang, Q. D. Zheng and A. P. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 96–104 CrossRef .
X. Y. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. H. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
Y. H. Guo, J. Bae, Z. W. Fang, P. P. Li, F. Zhao and G. H. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7642–7707 CrossRef .
H. Kamata, K. Kushiro, M. Takai, U. Chung and T. Sakai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9282–9286 CrossRef .
B. Kong, Y. Chen, R. Liu, X. Liu, C. Y. Liu, Z. W. Shao, L. M. Xiong, X. N. Liu, W. Sun and S. L. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1435 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Mun, G. J. N. Wang, J. Y. Oh, T. Katsumata, F. L. Lee, J. Kang, H. C. Wu, F. Lissel, S. Rondeau-Gagne, J. B. H. Tok and Z. A. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804222 CrossRef .
Z. T. Zhang, W. C. Wang, Y. W. Jiang, Y. X. Wang, Y. L. Wu, J. C. Lai, S. M. Niu, C. Y. Xu, C. C. Shih, C. Wang, H. P. Yan, L. Galuska, N. Prine, H. C. Wu, D. L. Zhong, G. Chen, N. Matsuhisa, Y. Zheng, Z. A. Yu, Y. Wang, R. Dauskardt, X. D. Gu, J. B. H. Tok and Z. N. Bao, Nature, 2022, 603, 624–630 CrossRef PubMed .
H. P. Cong, J. F. Chen and S. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7295–7325 RSC .
H. Wu, G. Yu, L. Pan, N. Liu, M. T. McDowell, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1943 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Wang, K. L. Xia, H. M. Wang, X. P. Liang, Z. Yin and Y. Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801072 CrossRef .
X. Sun, Z. H. Qin, L. Ye, H. T. Zhang, Q. Y. Yu, X. J. Wu, J. J. Li and F. L. Yao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122832 CrossRef .
C. Cui, Q. J. Fu, L. Meng, S. W. Hao, R. G. Dai and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 4, 85–121 CrossRef PubMed .
L. R. Wang, T. L. Xu and X. J. Zhang, Trends Analyt. Chem., 2021, 134, 116130 CrossRef .
X. X. Le, W. Lu, J. W. Zhang and T. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801584 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, H. Yuk, G. A. Parada, Y. Wu, X. Y. Liu, C. S. Nabzdyk, K. Youcef-Toumi, J. F. Zang and X. H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807101 CrossRef PubMed .
P. A. Korevaar, C. N. Kaplan, A. Grinthal, R. M. Rust and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 386 CrossRef .
J. Q. Qin, J. M. Gao, X. Y. Shi, J. Y. Chang, Y. F. Dong, S. H. Zheng, X. Wang, L. Feng and Z. S. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909756 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Wan, N. Qin, Y. F. Wang, Q. B. Zhao, Q. Wang, P. C. Yuan, Q. Wen, H. Wei, X. Y. Zhang and N. Ma, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123103 CrossRef .
L. J. Pan, A. Chortos, G. H. Yu, Y. Q. Wang, S. Isaacson, R. Allen, Y. Shi, R. Dauskardt and Z. N. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3002 CrossRef .
B. Y. Lu, H. Yuk, S. T. Lin, N. N. Jian, K. Qu, J. K. Xu and X. H. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1043 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Park, J. H. Choi, S. Kim, I. Jang, S. Jeong and J. Y. Lee, Acta
Biomater., 2019, 97, 141–153 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Gu, H. Y. Zhang, C. Ma, H. L. Sun, C. T. Liu, K. Dai, J. X. Zhang, R. B. Wei, T. Ding and Z. H. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2353–2360 RSC .
P. P. Li, Z. Y. Jin, L. L. Peng, F. Zhao, D. Xiao, Y. Jin and G. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800124 CrossRef .
L. M. Zhang, Y. He, S. B. Cheng, H. Sheng, K. R. Dai, W. J. Zheng, M. X. Wang, Z. S. Chen, Y. M. Chen and Z. G. Suo, Small, 2019, 15, 1804651 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Peng, Y. M. Xin, J. Xu, H. Z. Liu and J. Y. Zhang, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 618–625 RSC .
X. W. Xu, V. V. Jerca and R. Hoogenboom, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 1173–1188 RSC .
C. N. Gu, X. Q. Xie, Y. J. Liang, J. J. Li, H. Wang, K. F. Wang, J. P. Liu, M. K. Wang, Y. F. Zhang, M. X. Li, H. J. Kong and C. S. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4451–4462 RSC .
W. W. Peng, L. Han, H. L. Huang, X. Y. Xuan, G. D. Pan, L. J. Wan, T. Lu, M. Xu and L. K. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 26109–26118 RSC .
X. Zhao, Y. P. Liang, Y. Huang, J. H. He, Y. Han and B. L. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910748 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Zhuang, Y. Wang, P. F. Cui, L. Xing, J. Lee, D. Kim, H. L. Jiang and Y. K. Oh, J. Controlled Release, 2019, 294, 311–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, J. H. Huang, Y. C. Zhang, T. Wang, W. X. Sun and Z. Tong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11866–11873 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. J. Wan, Y. S. Yang, H. Yang, S. C. Wang, Z. D. Dai, K. J. Ji, H. Jiang, X. D. Chen and Y. Long, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806220 CrossRef .
C. Tondera, T. F. Akbar, A. K. Thomas, W. L. Lin, C. Werner, V. Busskamp, Y. X. Zhang and I. R. Minev, Small, 2019, 15, 1901406 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Duan, X. C. Liang, J. H. Guo, K. K. Zhu and L. N. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8037–8044 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shi, C. B. Ma, L. L. Peng and G. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1219–1225 CrossRef .
Z. X. Liu, G. J. Liang, Y. X. Zhan, H. F. Li, Z. F. Wang, L. T. Ma, Y. K. Wang, X. R. Niu and C. Y. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 732–742 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. B. Yiming, Y. Han, Z. L. Han, X. N. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Z. Lian, M. Q. Zhang, J. Yin, T. L. Sun, Z. L. Wu, T. F. Li, J. Z. Fu, Z. Jia and S. X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Y. Ren, G. Q. Jin, C. C. Zhang, W. Chen and F. Yan, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 919–927 RSC .
J. X. Xu, T. X. Li, T. S. Yan, S. Wu, M. Q. Wu, J. W. Chao, X. Y. Huo, P. F. Wang and R. Z. Wang, Energ. Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5979–5994 RSC .
Y. J. Ma and L. J. Zhi, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800199 CrossRef .
D. A. Ilatovskii, E. P. Gilshtein, O. E. Glukhova and A. G. Nasibulin, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2201673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. O. Mercadillo, K. C. Chan, M. Caironi, A. Athanassiou, I. A. Kinloch, M. Bissett and P. Cataldi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2204772 CrossRef .
T. Xu, Z. P. Zhang and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1901979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Wu, X. W. Zhao, Y. Y. Shang, S. L. Chang, L. X. Dai and A. Y. Cao, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7946–7974 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, S. I. Han, D. Kim, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1566–1595 RSC .
X.-X. Wang, G.-F. Yu, J. Zhang, M. Yu, S. Ramakrishna and Y.-Z. Long, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2021, 115, 100704 CrossRef .
Y. M. Wang, A. P. Liu, Y. Q. Han and T. X. Li, Polym. Int., 2020, 69, 7–17 CrossRef .
H. Luo, Y. V. Kaneti, Y. Ai, Y. Wu, F. C. Wei, J. W. Fu, J. G. Cheng, C. B. Jing, B. Yuliarto, M. Eguchi, J. Na, Y. Yamauchi and S. H. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007318 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Liang, A. Offenhausser, S. Ingebrandt and D. Mayer, Adv. Healthc. Mater., 2021, 10, 2100061 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tavakoli, P. A. Lopes, A. Hajalilou, A. F. Silva, M. R. Carneiro, J. Carvalheiro, J. M. Pereira and A. T. de Almeida, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 220326 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Joo, D. Jung, S. H. Sunwoo, J. H. Koo and D. H. Kim, Small, 2020, 16, 1906270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, H. Ota, D. Kiriya, K. Takei and A. Javey, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 523–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Daeneke, K. Khoshmanesh, N. Mahmood, I. A. de Castro, D. Esrafilzadeh, S. J. Barrow, M. D. Dickey and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4073–4111 RSC .
W. Q. Kong, C. W. Wang, C. Jia, Y. D. Kuang, G. Pastel, C. J. Chen, G. G. Chen, S. M. He, H. Huang, J. H. Zhang, S. Wang and L. B. Hu, Adv.
Mater., 2018, 30, 1801934 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Peng, H. L. Liu, Q. Yin, J. C. Wu, P. Z. Chen, G. Z. Zhang, G. M. Liu, C. Z. Wu and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11782 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Yang, Z. Xu, J. J. Wang, L. G. Gai, X. X. Ji, H. H. Jiang and L. B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009438 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Sui, H. S. Guo, C. C. Cai, Q. S. Li, C. Y. Wen, X. Y. Zhang, X. D. Wang, J. Yang and L. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 419, 129478 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang, X. Y. Wang, M. H. Pi and R. Ran, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131172 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Pan, Q. H. Wang, R. S. Guo, Y. H. Ni, K. Liu, X. H. Ouyang, L. H. Chen, L. L. Huang, S. L. Cao and M. Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4525–4535 RSC .
Y. Z. Liu, W. Q. Wang, K. Gu, J. R. Yao, Z. Z. Shao and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 29008–29020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Wang, Q. Chang, R. X. Zhan, K. G. Xu, Y. Wang, X. Y. Zhang, B. Y. Li, G. X. Luo, M. Xing and W. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24814–24829 RSC .
J. Wang, Q. Li, K. C. Li, X. Sun, Y. Z. Wang, T. T. Zhuang, J. J. Yan and H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2109904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Babeli, G. Ruano, J. Casanovas, M. P. Ginebra, J. Garcia-Torres and C. Aleman, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8654–8667 RSC .
J. Hur, K. Im, S. W. Kim, J. Kim, D. Y. Chung, T. H. Kim, K. H. Jo, J. H. Hahn, Z. A. Bao, S. Hwang and N. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10066–10076 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, K. X. Huang, J. Deng, M. X. Guo, M. K. Cai, Y. Zhang and C. F. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200261 CrossRef PubMed .
P. He, R. S. Guo, K. Hu, K. Liu, S. Lin, H. Wu, L. L. Huang, L. H. Chen and Y. H. Ni, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 414, 128726 CrossRef .
Y. J. Liang, K. F. Wang, J. J. Li, H. Wang, X. Q. Xie, Y. H. Cui, Y. F. Zhang, M. K. Wang and C. S. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104963 CrossRef .
S. Wu, D. Y. Lou, H. Y. Wang, D. Q. Jiang, X. Fang, J. Q. Meng, X. Y. Sun and J. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 435, 135057 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Wang, H. W. Zhou, J. L. Lai, B. Yan, H. B. Liu, X. L. Jin, A. J. Ma, G. Zhang, W. F. Zhao and W. X. Chen, J. Mater.
Chem. C, 2018, 6, 9200–9207 RSC .
Y. Miao, M. D. Xu and L. D. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Shao, M. Wang, L. Meng, H. L. Chang, B. Wang, F. Xu, J. Yang and P. B. Wan, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3110–3121 CrossRef CAS .
M. Caprioli, I. Roppolo, A. Chiappone, L. Larush, C. F. Pirri and S. Magdassi, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Xi, F. Tian, G. Wei, X. He, Y. H. Shang, Y. Ju, W. J. Li, Q. H. Lu and Q. G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2103174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, Z. L. Li, G. Y. Pan and B. L. Guo, Sci. China: Chem., 2022, 65, 2238–2251 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Feng and Z. K. Wang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2022, 294, 119824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Liang, H. R. Xu, Z. L. Li, A. D. Zhangji and B. L. Guo, Nano-Micro Lett., 2022, 14, 185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. T. Tran, M. T. I. Mredha, J. Y. Na, J. K. Seon, J. X. Cui and I. Jeon, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124941 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ge, W. Yuan, W. Zhao, Y. Lu, Y. Z. Zhang, W. J. Wang, P. Chen, W. Huang, W. L. Si and X. C. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5949–5956 RSC .
W. L. Zhang, Y. W. Zhang, Y. C. Zhang, Y. Dai, F. Xia and X. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 5954–5966 RSC .
V. R. Feig, H. Tran, M. Lee and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2740 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, Z. S. Du, X. L. Deng, T. Wang, Z. H. Yang, W. Y. Zhou and C. Y. Wang, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 5660–5668 CrossRef .
L. Han, L. W. Yan, K. F. Wang, L. M. Fang, H. P. Zhang, Y. H. Tang, Y. H. Ding, L. T. Weng, J. L. Xu, J. Weng, Y. J. Liu, F. Z. Ren and X. Lu, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e372 CrossRef .
K. P. Cui, T. L. Sun, X. B. Liang, K. Nakajima, Y. N. Ye, L. Chen, T. Kurokawa and J. P. Gong, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 121, 185501 CrossRef PubMed .
X. H. Wang, F. Song, D. Qian, Y. D. He, W. C. Nie, X. L. Wang and Y. Z. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 588–594 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, H. Chen, L. Zhu and J. Zheng, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 217, 1022–1036 CrossRef .
X. J. Zhang, J. X. Xiang, Y. L. Hong and L. Shen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2022, 43, 2200075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fuchs, K. Shariati and M. L. Ma, Adv. Healthc. Mater., 2020, 9, 1901396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Shao, H. L. Chang, M. Wang, F. Xu and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28305–28318 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Lin, X. Y. Liu, J. Liu, H. Yuk, H. C. Loh, G. A. Parada, C. Settens, J. Song, A. Masic, G. H. McKinley and X. H. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau8528 CrossRef .
T. Chen, Y. J. Chen, H. U. Rehman, Z. Chen, Z. Yang, M. Wang, H. Li and H. Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33523–33531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Gao, G. L. Du, Y. N. Sun and J. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5029–5037 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsuda, T. Nakajima and J. P. Gong, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3766–3776 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Yu, S. Y. Zheng, L. Fang, Z. Ying, M. Du, J. Wang, K. F. Ren, Z. L. Wu and Q. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2005171 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Zhang, Q. Q. Hu, S. R. Yang, T. Wang, W. X. Sun and Z. Tong, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 5218–5228 CrossRef .
Z. C. Yu and P. Y. Wu, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 2057–2064 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. J. Zheng, T. Ouchi, T. B. Kouznetsova, H. K. Beech, S. Av-Ron, T. Matsuda, B. H. Bowser, S. Wang, J. A. Johnson, J. A. Kalow, B. D. Olsen, J. P. Gong, M. Rubinstein and S. L. Craig, Science, 2021, 374, 193–196 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Han, P. Wang, Y. C. Lu, Z. Jia, S. X. Qu and W. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabl5066 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tang and C. F. Ke, Matter, 2021, 4, 2664–2665 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Liu, L. Li, Z. Z. Xu, J. Chen and C. L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2021, 125, 9870–9878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Antinori, M. Contardi, G. Suarato, A. Armirotti, R. Bertorelli, G. Mancini, D. Debellis and A. Athanassiou, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 12630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Lu, Z. Y. Xing, M. Hossain and Y.-Q. Fu, Compos. Part B-Eng., 2019, 179, 107528 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, N. Morimoto, L. Jiang, S. Kawahara, T. Noritomi, H. Yokoyama, K. Mayumi and K. Ito, Science, 2021, 372, 1078–1081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Matsuda, R. Kawakami, R. Namba, T. Nakajima and J. P. Gong, Science, 2019, 363, 504–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Zhang, C. Q. Zhao, T. Y. Zhao, M. J. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, M. Li, Z. L. Li, G. Y. Pan, Y. Q. Liang and B. L. Guo, Adv. Healthc. Mater., 2022, 11, 2102749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Han, X. Lu, K. Z. Liu, K. F. Wang, L. M. Fang, L. T. Weng, H. P. Zhang, Y. H. Tang, F. Z. Ren, C. C. Zhao, G. X. Sun, R. Liang and Z. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2561–2574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Fan, S. B. Wang, Y. Fang, P. Y. Li, W. K. Zhou, Z. C. Wang, M. F. Chen and H. Q. Liu, Mat. Sci. Eng. C-Mater., 2020, 109, 110649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, A. Rajeev, A. Subramanian, Y. Li, N. Rossetti, G. Natale, G. A. A. Lodygensky and F. Cicoira, Acta Biomater., 2022, 139, 296–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Freedman, O. Uzun, N. M. M. Luna, A. Rock, C. Clifford, E. Stoler, G. Ostlund-Sholars, C. Johnson and D. J. Mooney, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Inoue, H. Yuk, B. Y. Lu and X. H. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay5394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Q. Zhang, Y. C. Qiao, L. J. Duan and G. H. Gao, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 4535–4542 RSC .
M. C. Arno, M. Inam, A. C. Weems, Z. Li, A. L. A. Binch, C. I. Platt, S. M. Richardson, J. A. Hoyland, A. P. Dove and R. K. O'Reilly, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Cui, T. L. Wu, X. Y. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Y. Xu, C. C. Fan and W. G. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005689 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, S. L. Song, X. Z. Ren, J. M. Zhang, Q. Lin and Y. L. Zhao, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 5604–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jung, M. K. Kim, J. Y. Lee, S. W. Choi and J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004407 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rao, T. L. Sun, L. Chen, R. Takahashi, G. Shinohara, H. Guo, D. R. King, T. Kurokawa and J. P. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801884 CrossRef .
H. Yuk, T. Zhang, S. T. Lin, G. A. Parada and X. H. Zhao, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 190 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Yang, R. B. Bai and Z. G. Suo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800671 CrossRef .
J. F. Louf, N. B. Lu, M. G. O'Connell, H. J. Cho and S. S. Datta, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabd2711 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wu, Y. Pang and J. Y. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4502 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Kuang and Y. S. Zhang, Matter, 2021, 4, 2676–2678 CrossRef .
Z. B. Wang, H. H. Zhou, D. Liu, X. Chen, D. Wang, S. Dai, F. Chen and B. B. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2201396 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Cai, B. Niu, X. Y. Ma, S. H. Wan and X. R. He, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132957 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Bian, N. Pan, Z. H. Luan, X. Sui, W. X. Fan, Y. Z. Xia, K. Y. Sui and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 20294–20300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Belal, F. Stoffelbach, J. Lyskawa, M. Fumagalli, D. Hourdet, A. Marcellan, L. De Smet, V. R. de la Rosa, G. Cooke, R. Hoogenboom and P. Woisel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13974–13978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Louf, N. B. Lu, M. G. O'Connell, H. J. Cho and S. S. Datta, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabd2711 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. F. Liang, F. Gao, Z. W. Zeng, J. R. Yang, M. M. Wu, C. J. Gao, D. L. Cheng, H. B. Pan, W. G. Liu and C. S. Ruan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001485 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Z. Pan, Z. Y. Zhao, M. H. Wang, L. Dong, H. L. Gao, C. Y. Liu, P. Zhou, L. Chen, C. J. Shi, Z. Y. Zhang, C. Yang, S. H. Yu and D. H. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200115 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Ren, Y. H. Liu, Z. Q. Wang, S. Q. Chen, Y. F. Ma, H. Wei and S. Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2107404 CrossRef .
J. J. Wei, Y. Zheng and T. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 2761–2770 RSC .
Y. T. Yang, Y. P. Liang, J. Y. Chen, X. L. Duan and B. L. Guo, Bioact. Mater., 2022, 8, 341–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Li, S. J. Dong, W. G. Xu, S. C. Tu, L. S. Yan, C. W. Zhao, J. X. Ding and X. S. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700527 CrossRef .
C. Y. Zou, X. X. Lei, J. J. Hu, Y. L. Jiang, Q. J. Li, Y. T. Song, Q. Y. Zhang, J. Li-Ling and H. Q. Xie, Bioact. Mater., 2022, 16, 388–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Zhou, J. W. Xiao, S. W. Guan, Z. J. Geng, R. F. Zhao and B. T. Gao, Carbohydr. Polym., 2022, 285, 119235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Liang, M. Li, Y. T. Yang, L. P. Qiao, H. R. Xu and B. L. Guo, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 3194–3207 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Deng, Y. Guo, X. Zhao, P. X. Ma and B. L. Guo, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1729–1742 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Mao, R. Y. Cheng, H. B. Zhang, J. H. Bae, L. Y. Cheng, L. Zhang, L. F. Deng, W. G. Cui, Y. G. Zhang, H. A. Santos and X. M. Sun, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801555 CrossRef .
W. C. Huang, R. Ying, W. Wang, Y. N. Guo, Y. J. He, X. Y. Mo, C. H. Xue and X. Z. Mao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000644 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lei, K. Q. Wang, Y. L. Sun, Z. Zheng and X. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2008010 CrossRef .
Z. X. Deng, R. Yu and B. L. Guo, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 2092–2123 RSC .
Y. Y. Li, P. Yu, J. Wen, H. Sun, D. Q. Wang, J. M. Liu, J. S. Li and H. T. Chu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2110720 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, C. M. Dundas, X. Zhou, K. P. Johnston and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102994 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. H. Zhang, H. X. Chen, H. Zhang, H. Zhang and Y. J. Zhao, Sci. Bull., 2022, 67, 512–519 CrossRef .
B. Ding, P. Zeng, Z. Huang, L. Dai, T. Lan, H. Xu, Y. Pan, Y. Luo, Q. Yu, H. M. Cheng and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1212 CrossRef PubMed .
F. F. Fu, L. R. Shang, Z. Y. Chen, Y. R. Yu and Y. J. Zhao, Sci. Robot., 2018, 3, eaar8580 CrossRef PubMed .
L. R. Shang, Z. Z. Gu and Y. J. Zhao, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 420–421 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, J. H. Guo, Y. Wang, L. Y. Sun and Y. J. Zhao, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2102156 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Zhang, Z. Y. Chen, Y. Wang and Y. J. Zhao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 18310–18316 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Q. Yang, S. Yamamoto, K. Sueyoshi, T. Inadomi, R. Kato and N. Miyamoto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 8466–8471 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. I. Mredha, H. H. Le, J. X. Cui and I. Jeon, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903145 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Guo, T. Nakajima, D. Hourdet, A. Marcellan, C. Creton, W. Hong, T. Kurokawa and J. P. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900702 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen, Z. D. Gu, L. Li, W. W. Lei, Q. F. Rong, C. Q. Zhao, Q. S. Wu, Z. Gu, X. Jin, L. Jiang and M. J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15147–15153 RSC .
Z. C. Wang, X. Zhang, T. Cao, T. Wang, L. X. Sun, K. Y. Wang and X. D. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 46022–46032 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, T. Chen, X. S. Zhang, W. Duan, C. Y. Zhang, H. L. Han and Q. Xie, Chin. J. Chem., 2021, 39, 3393–3398 CrossRef .
X. Yao, L. Chen, J. Ju, C. H. Li, Y. Tian, L. Jiang and M. J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7383–7389 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Tu, Q. Chen, S. M. Liang, Q. H. Zhao, X. C. Zhou, W. Huang, X. H. Huang and L. D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18746–18754 CrossRef PubMed .
C. X. Hu, Y. L. Zhang, X. D. Wang, L. Xing, L. Y. Shi and R. Ran, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44000–44010 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. He, C. Y. Wu, M. T. Hua, S. W. Wu, D. Wu, X. Y. Zhu, J. J. Wang and X. M. He, Matter, 2020, 2, 723–734 CrossRef .
X. W. Xu, V. V. Jerca and R. Hoogenboom, Chem, 2020, 6, 820–822 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Chen, Y. Chen, H. U. Rehman, Y. Guo, H. Li and H. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101464 CrossRef .
S. W. Huang, L. Hou, T. Y. Li, Y. C. Jiao and P. Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2110140 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Liu, Q. Y. Liu, L. Zhong, C. C. Chen and Z. Y. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 452, 139314 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Z. X. Wu, X. Lu, S. J. Han, B. R. Yang, X. C. Gui, K. Tao, J. M. Miao and C. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9405–9414 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Han, K. Z. Liu, M. H. Wang, K. F. Wang, L. M. Fang, H. T. Chen, J. Zhou and X. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704195 CrossRef .
Q. F. Rong, W. W. Lei, L. Chen, Y. A. Yin, J. J. Zhou and M. J. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14159–14163 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. D. Cui, D. Li, C. Gong and C. Y. Chang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 13712–13720 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. W. Hu, W. W. Guo, J. S. Kahn, M. A. Aleman-Garcia and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4210–4214 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Lu, B. Y. Wu, X. X. Yang, J. W. Zhang, Y. K. Jian, H. Z. Yan, D. C. Zhang, Q. J. Xue and T. Chen, Small, 2020, 16, 2005461 CrossRef .
C. H. Lu, W. W. Guo, Y. W. Hu, X. J. Qi and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15723–15731 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, L. G. Xiong, Y. J. Ai, Z. Liang and Q. L. Liang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800450 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Breger, C. Yoon, R. Xiao, H. R. Kwag, M. O. Wang, J. P. Fisher, T. D. Nguyen and D. H. Gracias, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3398–3405 CrossRef .
X. X. Le, Y. C. Zhang, W. Lu, L. Wang, J. Zheng, I. Ali, J. W. Zhang, Y. J. Huang, M. J. Serpe, X. T. Yang, X. D. Fan and T. Chen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1800019 CrossRef .
H. L. Qin, T. Zhang, N. Li, H. P. Cong and S. H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2202 CrossRef .
Q. Chang, M. A. Darabi, Y. Q. Liu, Y. F. He, W. Zhong, K. Mequanin, B. Y. Li, F. Lu and M. M. Q. Xing, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24626–24640 RSC .
A. V. Salvekar, W. M. Huang, R. Xiao, Y. S. Wong, S. S. Venkatraman, K. H. Tay and Z. X. Shen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 141–150 CrossRef .
C. X. Ma, W. Lu, X. X. Yang, J. He, X. X. Le, L. Wang, J. W. Zhang, M. J. Serpe, Y. J. Huang and T. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704568 CrossRef .
G. S. Weng, S. Thanneeru and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706526 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Ke, C. Z. Zhou, Y. Zhou, S. C. Wang, S. H. Chan and Y. Long, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800113 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Zhang, H. J. Gao, H. Wang, Z. Y. Xu, X. W. Chen, B. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Lu, L. F. Wen, Y. Li, Z. S. Li, Y. F. Men, X. Q. Feng and W. G. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705962 CrossRef .
J. V. Accardo and J. A. Kalow, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5987–5993 RSC .
C. Li, A. Iscen, L. C. Palmer, G. C. Schatz and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8447–8453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nonoyama, Y. W. Lee, K. Ota, K. Fujioka, W. Hong and J. P. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905878 CrossRef CAS .
C. Q. Zhang, Y. W. Li, X. D. Xue, P. F. Chu, C. Liu, K. N. Yang, Y. G. Jiang, W. Q. Chen, G. Z. Zou and X. J. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4168–4171 RSC .
J. P. Schneider, D. J. Pochan, B. Ozbas, K. Rajagopal, L. Pakstis and J. Kretsinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 15030–15037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Nandakumar, S. K. Ravi, Y. X. Zhang, N. Guo, C. Zhang and S. C. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2179–2187 RSC .
Z. X. Zhou, C. H. Qian and W. Z. Yuan, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2021, 203, 108608 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, J. Liu, Y. J. Chen, X. Zheng, H. Z. Liu and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 1353–1366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, Z. J. He, X. L. Peng, J. L. Xie, F. F. Su, D. X. Wei, Y. P. Zheng and D. D. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 53541–53552 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shit, S. G. Kim, I. In and S. Y. Park, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131846 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Zheng, H. P. Wang, L. X. Dong, Q. Shi, J. N. Li, T. Sun, Q. Huang and T. Fukuda, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 411 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Lin, Y. Chen, Y. P. Song, W. P. Lu and Y. C. Guo, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 2238–2248 RSC .
Q. D. Zhu, N. Van Vliet, N. Holten-Andersen and A. Miserez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808191 CrossRef .
S. X. Wei, H. Y. Qiu, H. H. Shi, W. Lu, H. Liu, H. Z. Yan, D. C. Zhang, J. W. Zhang, P. Theato, Y. Wei and T. Chen, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 10415–10427 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Park, J. H. Kang, H. S. Kim, J. Y. Hwang and U. S. Shin, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 2367–2382 RSC .
S. R. Goudu, I. C. Yasa, X. H. Hu, H. Ceylan, W. Q. Hu and M. Sitti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004975 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, D. H. Zhao, B. H. Liu, G. D. Nian, X. K. Li, J. Yin, S. X. Qu and W. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900971 CrossRef .
X. Q. Wang, S. Y. Yang, C. F. Wang, L. Chen and S. Chen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 759–768 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liao, X. L. Guo, P. B. Wan and G. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904507 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, Z. Li, S. L. Song, K. R. Yang, H. Liu, Z. Yang, J. C. Wang, B. Yang and Q. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901474 CrossRef .
H. Q. Wei, M. Lei, P. Zhang, J. S. Leng, Z. J. Zheng and Y. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ge, Q. Wang, Y. Z. Zhang, H. N. Alshareef and X. C. Dong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2107437 CrossRef .
Z. Q. Shen, X. Y. Zhu, C. Majidi and G. Y. Gu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102069 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Talebian, M. Mehrali, N. Taebnia, C. P. Pennisi, F. B. Kadumudi, J. Foroughi, M. Hasany, M. Nikkhah, M. Akbari, G. Orive and A. Dolatshahi-Pirouz, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801664 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yuk, B. Y. Lu, S. Lin, K. Qu, J. K. Xu, J. H. Luo and X. H. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1604 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Baumgartner, F. Hartmann, M. Drack, D. Preninger, D. Wirthl, R. Gerstmayr, L. Lehner, G. Y. Mao, R. Pruckner, S. Demchyshyn, L. Reiter, M. Strobel, T. Stockinger, D. Schiller, S. Kimeswenger, F. Greibich, G. Buchberger, E. Bradt, S. Hild, S. Bauer and M. Kaltenbrunner, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1102–1109 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhu, B. R. Xu, Y. Wang, X. X. Pan, Z. H. Qu and Y. F. Mei, Sci. Robot., 2021, 6, eabe7925 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Heiden, D. Preninger, L. Lehner, M. Baumgartner, M. Drack, E. Woritzka, D. Schiller, R. Gerstmayr, F. Hartmann and M. Kaltenbrunner, Sci. Robot., 2022, 7, eabk2119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Scarpa, V. M. Mastronardi, F. Guido, L. Algieri, A. Qualtieri, R. Fiammengo, F. Rizzi and M. De Vittorio, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 10854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. R. Liu, G. R. Zhao, Z. C. Zhang, X. Y. Zhao, X. Y. Wan, Y. L. Zhang, Z. L. Wang and L. L. Li, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1661–1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Yang and W. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1465–1491 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Chen, L. W. Lin, H. Wang, X. W. Huang, H. G. Xue and J. F. Gao, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 362, 89–98 CrossRef .
Y. L. Wang, J. Hao, Z. Q. Huang, G. Q. Zheng, K. Dai, C. T. Liu and C. Y. Shen, Carbon, 2018, 126, 360–371 CrossRef .
G. H. Su, S. Y. Yin, Y. H. Guo, F. Zhao, Q. Q. Guo, X. X. Zhang, T. Zhou and G. H. Yu, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 1795–1804 RSC .
Z. W. Wang, Y. Cong and J. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 3437–3459 RSC .
Y. Z. Zhang, K. H. Lee, D. H. Anjum, R. Sougrat, Q. Jiang, H. Kim and H. N. Alshareefit, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0098 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Cao, H. L. Dong, F. H. Liang, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, H. L. Wang, H. Y. Shao, H. C. Liu, K. Dong, Y. X. Tang, Y. K. Lai and M. Z. Ge, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 416, 129094 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Ge, C. Y. Cao, G. M. Biesold, C. D. Sewell, S. M. Hao, J. Y. Huang, W. Zhang, Y. K. Lai and Z. Q. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2004577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, J. Bae, X. Y. Zhou, Y. H. Guo and G. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801796 CrossRef PubMed .
K. G. Cho, H. S. Kim, S. S. Jang, H. Kyung, M. S. Kang, K. H. Lee and W. C. Yoo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002053 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Lee, A. Erwin, M. L. Buxton, M. Kim, A. V. Stryutsky, V. V. Shevchenko, A. P. Sokolov and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103083 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Aguilar and G. C. M. Meijer, Proc. IEEE Sens., 2002, 2, 1360–1363 Search PubMed .
D. Langley, G. Giusti, C. Mayousse, C. Celle, D. Bellet and J. P. Simonato, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 452001 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Lagrange, T. Sannicolo, D. Munoz-Rojas, B. G. Lohan, A. Khan, M. Anikin, C. Jimenez, F. Bruckert, Y. Brechet and D. Bellet, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 055709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Rong, W. W. Lei and M. J. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 16930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Kim, H. H. Lee, K. H. Oh and J. Y. Sun, Science, 2016, 353, 682–687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Wang, D. Z. Zhang, Y. Yang, Q. Mi, J. H. Zhang and L. D. Yu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 2911–2919 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, S. H. Cha, Y. W. Kim, D. Choi and J. Y. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1804 CrossRef .
Q. B. Guan, G. H. Lin, Y. Z. Gong, J. F. Wang, W. Y. Tan, D. Q. Bao, Y. N. Liu, Z. W. You, X. H. Sun, Z. Wen and Y. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13948–13955 RSC .
X. Pu, M. M. Liu, X. Y. Chen, J. M. Sun, C. H. Du, Y. Zhang, J. Y. Zhai, W. G. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700015 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wu, X. Wang, Y. F. Xia, Y. Zhu, S. L. Zhu, C. Y. Jia, W. Y. Guo, Q. Q. Li and Z. G. Yan, Nano Energy, 2022, 95, 106967 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Sunwoo, S. I. Han, H. Joo, G. D. Cha, D. Kim, S. H. Choi, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Matter, 2021, 3, 1923–1947 CrossRef .
D. L. Gan, Z. Q. Huang, X. Wang, L. L. Jiang, C. M. Wang, M. Y. Zhu, F. Z. Ren, L. M. Fang, K. F. Wang, C. M. Xie and X. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1907678 CrossRef .
L. Guan, H. Liu, X. J. Ren, T. J. Wang, W. H. Zhu, Y. Zhao, Y. B. Feng, C. Shen, A. V. Zvyagin, L. N. Fang, B. Yang and Q. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2112281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, P. A. Patsis, S. Hauser, D. Voigt, R. Rothe, M. Gunther, M. Cui, X. Yang, R. Wieduwild, K. Eckert, C. Neinhuis, T. F. Akbar, I. R. Minev, J. Pietzsch and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802077 CrossRef PubMed .
L. W. Yan, T. Zhou, L. Han, M. Y. Zhu, Z. Cheng, D. Li, F. Z. Ren, K. F. Wang and X. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010465 CrossRef .
K. Krukiewicz, T. Jarosz, J. K. Zak, M. Lapkowski, P. Ruszkowski, T. Bobkiewicz-Kozlowska and B. Bednarczyk-Cwynar, Acta Biomater., 2015, 19, 158–165 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, R. Rothe, D. Voigt, S. Hauser, M. Y. Cui, T. Miyagawa, M. P. Gaillez, T. Kurth, M. Bornhauser, J. Pietzsch and Y. X. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2407 CrossRef .
F. F. Fu, J. L. Wang, H. B. Zeng and J. Yu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 1287–1301 CrossRef .
J. H. Guo, Y. Wang, H. Zhang and Y. J. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2110024 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Mousa, D. Bliman, L. Hiram Betancourt, K. Hellman, P. Ekstrom, M. Savvakis, X. Strakosas, G. Marko-Varga, M. Berggren, M. Hjort, F. Ek and R. Olsson, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 2752–2763 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Yuk, J. Wu, C. E. Varela, X. Chen, E. T. Roche, C. F. Guo and X. Zhao, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 229–236 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Nam, H. K. Lim, N. H. Kim, J. K. Park, E. S. Kang, Y. T. Kim, C. Heo, O. S. Lee, S. G. Kim, W. S. Yun, M. Suh and Y. H. Kim, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 664–675 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Goding, A. Gilmour, P. Martens, L. Poole-Warren and R. Green, Adv. Healthc. Mater., 2017, 6, 1601177 CrossRef PubMed .
D. O. Adewole, L. A. Struzyna, J. C. Burrell, J. P. Harris, A. D. Nemes, D. Petrov, R. H. Kraft, H. I. Chen, M. D. Serruya, J. A. Wolf and D. K. Cullen, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eaay5347 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, X. T. Sun, D. L. Gan, M. N. Soubrier, H. Y. Chiang, L. W. Yan, Y. Q. Li, J. J. Li, S. Yu, Y. Xia, K. F. Wang, Q. Z. Qin, X. X. Jiang, L. Han, T. S. Pan, C. M. Xie and X. Lu, Matter, 2022, 5, 1204–1223 CrossRef .
L. Garcia-Del Rio, P. Diaz-Rodriguez, G. K. Pedersen, D. Christensen and M. Landin, Adv. Healthc. Mater., 2022, 11, 2102508 CrossRef .
A. Khan, S. Ahmed, B. Y. Sun, Y. C. Chen, W. T. Chuang, Y. H. Chan, D. Gupta, P. W. Wu and H. C. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2022, 198, 113811 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Lee, A. N. Cho, Y. Jin, J. Kim, S. Kim and S. W. Cho, Biomaterials, 2018, 151, 24–37 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Khoshmanesh, P. Thurgood, E. Pirogova, S. Nahavandi and S. Baratchi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 176, 112946 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Matsuo, Crit. Rev. Oral Biol. Med., 2000, 11, 216–229 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yeom, A. Choe, S. Lim, Y. Lee, S. Na and H. Ko, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba5785 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhou, H. J. Han, H. X. Zheng, W. H. Xu and Z. K. Wang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 1785–1794 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Y. Fang, Z. F. Cai, Z. Q. Ding, T. Y. Chen, J. C. Zhang, F. B. Chen, J. Y. Shen, F. Chen, R. Li, X. C. Zhou and Z. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21895–21903 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ge, Y. Lu, X. Y. Qu, W. Zhao, Y. F. Ren, W. J. Wang, Q. Wang, W. Huang and X. C. Dong, ACS Nano, 2019, 14, 218–228 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. B. Peng, M. H. Zhou, Y. F. Gao, J. F. Wang, Y. X. Cao, W. J. Wang, D. C. Wu and Y. Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 25073–25085 RSC .
B. Ryplida, K. D. Lee, I. In and S. Y. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903209 CrossRef .
G. R. Gao, F. J. Yang, F. H. Zhou, J. He, W. Lu, P. Xiao, H. Z. Yan, C. F. Pan, T. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004290 CrossRef PubMed .
H. D. Zhang, H. Shen, J. A. Lan, H. Wu, L. J. Wang and J. P. Zhou, Carbohydr. Polym., 2022, 295, 119848 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Zhang, X. F. Ma, T. Hou, K. C. Guo, J. Y. Yin, Z. G. Wang, L. Shu, M. He and J. F. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7366–7370 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, F. Chen, Y. H. Li, H. Lu, N. Zhang and M. M. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3579 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. F. Liu, J. Q. Cai, J. H. Huang and X. Q. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26917–26926 RSC .
H. Lei, J. Zhao, X. X. Ma, H. Li and D. D. Fan, Adv. Healthc. Mater., 2021, 10, 2101089 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wu, M. F. Pan, C. Y. Qiao, Y. H. Ma, B. Yan, W. S. Yang, Q. Y. Peng, L. B. Han and H. B. Zeng, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 450, 138212 CrossRef .
X. He, Z. K. Li, J. Li, D. Mishra, Y. X. Ren, I. Gates, J. G. Hu and Q. Y. Lu, Small, 2021, 17, 2103521 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, X. Y. Jia, R. N. Liu, K. Chen, Z. Y. Wang, T. Lyu, X. Y. Cui, Y. Zhao and Y. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 21874–21883 RSC .
W. J. Si, Y. P. Liang, Y. K. Chen and S. D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 17464–17476 RSC .
Y. Ohm, C. F. Pan, M. J. Ford, X. N. Huang, J. H. Liao and C. Majidi, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 185–192 CrossRef .
L. G. Xu, Z. K. Huang, Z. S. Deng, Z. K. Du, T. L. Sun, Z. H. Guo and K. Yue, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2105306 CrossRef PubMed .
I. K. Han, K. I. Song, S. M. Jung, Y. Jo, J. Kwon, T. Chung, S. Yoo, J. Jang, Y. T. Kim, D. S. Hwang and Y. S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2203431 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Z. Li, L. L. Li, S. J. Zheng, Z. Y. Liu, X. Y. Zou, Z. Sun, J. N. Guo and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2203049 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Tianxue Zhu
	Tianxue Zhu is currently a postdoctoral research fellow in the College of Chemical Engineering at the Fuzhou University, China. He received his PhD degree from the college of Textile and Clothing Engineering at Soochow University in 2020, under the supervision of Prof. Yuekun Lai. During 2019–2020, he was a visiting student at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interest focuses on hydrogel-based wearable devices and functional materials with special wettability.

Yimeng Ni
	Yimeng Ni is a PhD candidate in the College of Chemical Engineering at the Fuzhou University, China. She received her master's degree from the College of Chemical Engineering at the Fuzhou University in 2021, under the supervision of Prof. Yuekun Lai. Her research interests focus on the development of flexible wearable electronic devices based on conductive hydrogels and conductive composites with superhydrophobicity.

Gill M. Biesold
	Dr Gill M. Biesold received his Bachelor of Science in Materials Science and Engineering at Clemson University in 2017, and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology in 2022. His research interests include exploring the luminescent properties of semiconductor nanocrystals in a variety of environments.

Jianying Huang
	Jianying Huang received PhD degree in 2007 from College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University. During 2007–2011, she is an assistant professor at Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter. Later, she acted as visiting scholar at Muenster University. From 2013 to 2018, she was an associate professor at School of Textile and Clothing Engineering in Soochow University. Currently, she is a full professor at College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University, and selected as the 2019–2022 Highly Cited Researchers. Her research interests focus on bio-inspired surfaces with special wettability, advanced materials for energy and environmental applications.

Zhiqun Lin
	Prof. Zhiqun Lin is a professor in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at the National University of Singapore. His research interests include electrocatalysis, batteries, solar energy conversion, photocatalysis, semiconductor organic–inorganic nanocomposites, multifunctional nanocrystals, conjugated polymers, block copolymers, hierarchical structure formation and assembly, and surface and interfacial properties.

Yuekun Lai
	Dr Yuekun Lai is a Fujian province “Minjiang Scholar” Chair Professor at the College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University, and served as Editor of Chemical Engineering Journal. He received his PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Xiamen University. He is selected as the 2018–2022 Highly Cited Researchers (Clarivate Analytics) and the recipient of the 2016 Journal of Materials Chemistry A (JMCA, RSC) Emerging Investigators and 2019 Advanced Materials Interfaces (AMI, Wiley) Hall of Fame award. His current research topics are bioinspired intelligent materials with special wettability, multifunctional fabrics, conductive hydrogels and functional nanostructures for energy and environmental applications.

 	Fig. 1  The introduction of recent advances on conductive hydrogel from classifications, properties and applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the interfacial phase synthesis mechanism of hollow-sphere microstructure PPy hydrogels, (b) optical photo of PPy hydrogel, (c and d) SEM and TEM image of the PPy thin film. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (e) Isotropic dehydration and water absorption processes of PEDOT:PSS and (f) the free-standing pure PEDOT:PSS hydrogel pattern. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Scheme of the formation and additional shaping/reducing process of PANI/GO composite hydrogels. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (b) Preparation process of the nanocomposite hydrogel and the chemical structures of the corresponding reagents. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (c) Schematic illustration of the rapid synthesis of the liquid metal-contained hydrogels and (d) digital photograph of the hydrogel forming process from flowing solution with liquid metal. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of preparation process of DN hydrogel. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process of hybrid hydrogel. Reproduced from the ref. 61 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. (c) Structures of the alginate chains before (left) and after (right) Al3+ crosslinking, (d) chemical structures of the two crosslinking modes, and (e) mechanism of hydrogel energy dissipation. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2019.	 


Carbon-based materials	GO	Black	Excellent mechanical properties, chemical stability, low cost	Carbon based materials	
36 and 66–70

CNTs
CB
Conductive polymer	PANI	Green, black	Excellent mechanical properties, high conductivity, low cost	Conductive polymer	
71–75

Ppy
PEDOT:PSS
Metal-based materials	Ag/Au/Cu nanoparticles	Grayish white, faint yellow, brown	High conductivity, ductility	Metal based materials	
76–79

Ag/Au/Cu nanowires
Ion polymer network	CNFs/PPDP/sulfobetaines	White, colorless	High water retention ability, high conductivity, good solubility	Ion polymer network	
80–82

Metallic salts	Na+/Li+/Al3+/Fe3+	Colorless, yellow green	Low cost, high conductivity, reversible ion migration	Metallic salts	
83–85

Ionic liquids	Li-TFSI/EMIM-TFSI/EMIM-TCM/EMIM-ES/EMIM-BF4/EMIM-Cl	Colorless	High sensitivity, high conductivity, high thermal stability, low volatility	Ionic liquids	
63, 64 and 86

Hybrid	Li-TFSI/EMIM-TFSI/EMIM-TCM/EMIM-ES/EMIM-BF4/EMIM-Cl + PEDOT:PSS, LiCl + rGO, GO-Ca2+	Black	High conductivity	Hybrid	
65, 87 and 88



SN	PEDOT:PSS/ionic liquid	31	1 × 104	
88

SN	PEDOT:PSS	35	4 × 104	
46

SN	PAA/BaFe12O19	40	12.2	
48

SN	PEDOT:PSS/alginate	30	87	
89

SN	PPy/agarose	35	350	
90

DN	PEDOT:PSS/PVA	150	1 × 104	
91

DN	MXene-cellulose nanocrystals-tamarind gum-PAAm	2000	2.93	
92

DN	HSAH/PHEAA	4000	0.194	
93

DN	carrageenan/PAAm/LiCl	632.5	8.7	
94

DN	PAA/PANI	1160	5.12	
95


 	Fig. 5  (a) Inflation experiments of a self-healed hydrogel balloon, (b) microscopic image of the nanocomposite hydrogel before and after self-heal, (c and d) the effect of healing time and healing temperature on the strength and healing efficiency, (e) mechanism of the stretched PAA networks and self-healing process based on the reversible coordination bonds of Fe–O. (a–e) Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (f and g) Self-healing behavior of hydrogel in air and underwater, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2020. (h) Mechanical performance of the original hydrogel and after cut for different time range, (i) strain–stress curves of the self-healed hydrogel after different times of fracture, (j) the microscope images of the gap on cut hydrogel healed for different time periods and (k) remolding property of the double-network hydrogel. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–c) Tensile modulus, force-length and fracture energy of hydrogels with different content, (d) optical photograph of cutting the super-tough hydrogel from top to bottom. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2019. (e) Image of a highly-stretched hydrogel in the shape of bow-tie, (f) stress–strain curves of the prepared hydrogels with different parameters, (g and h) fracture strain (εb), fracture energy (U), fracture stress (σb) and initial modulus (E) of hydrogels with different clay content. (e–h) Reproduced with permission. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (i–k) The discussion on elongation at break λb, (j) stresses at yield σy and break σb, (k) fracture energies of the DN elastomers are based on the volume ratio of two networks. (i–k) Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Illustration for preparing of P(AAm-co-AMPS) hydrogels, (b) optical photos of swollen and toughened hydrogel, (c) SEM images of the nanostructure of hydrogels before and after freeze-drying process, (d) strain–stress curves of the hydrogel in toughened state, the inset is the strain–stress curve of the hydrogel in swollen state (e) cyclic variation of Young's modulus E, swelling ratio in length S, and water content q under the reversible brittle-tough transition of the hydrogels. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (f) Schematic illustration of the composite slip ring hydrogel during stretching and releasing, (g) stretching–releasing curves of SR hydrogel, (h) WAXS patterns of SR-0.18 during a loading-unloading cycle, (i) triclinic crystal and monoclinic crystal of PEG in different structures. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2021. (j) Schematic diagram of the “self-growing” hydrogel process by mechanical induction, (k) Fenton color reaction induced by mechanoradicals and optical images of gel before, during and 30 min after the stretching, (l) the repetitive stretching of gels in terms of length and the required force. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of clingfish’ discs, (b) the prepared hydrogel with regular hexagonal facets on the surface, (c) force-time curves and displacement of extension test on the flat PA gel, (d) photograph of the deformation of the P1 sample on PA gel and glass, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (e) Photo of the peeling process of the adhesive hydrogel from glass substrate, (f) curves of the peeling force for chemical and physical cross-linked hydrogel–solid bonding, (g) two glass plates bonded by the transparent hydrogel superglue. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (h) Schematics of the bonding procedure, two pieces of PAAm hydrogel glued by chitosan solution, (i) the pH ranges at which four polymer solutions converted into the hydrogel, (j) the bonding front can resist deionized water. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of constrained swelling mechanism, (b) volume change of the two kinds of hydrogel soaked in PBS in different time, (c) swelling ratio of different EMHs immersed in PBS. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2022. (d) Schematic illustration of the HEMA hydrogel. (e) the images and (f) swelling behavior of the three kinds of hydrogels after swelling in water and artificial seawater, respectively, (g) swelling ratio of the fabricated hydrogel swelling at different pH for 30 days. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (h) The mechanism of hydrophobic aggregation after soaking treatment, (i) swelling behavior of various Pt-BuA-[BMIm]TFSI ionogels after soaking, (j) ionic conductivity change of the ionogel after soaking for 10 days. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of the antibacterial MPH hydrogel, (b and c) antibacterial properties of hydrogels against S. aureus and E. coli with and without NIR conditions, (d) SEM images of S. aureus and E. coli treated by hydrogel with or without NIR. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (e) Schematic diagram and antibacterial mechanism of antibacterial hydrogel, (f) agar plates mixed with the prepared hydrogel present the antibacterial performance for B. subtilis, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa, (g) bacterial killing efficiency and log inactivation of CS, CCS, and ABH for B. subtilis, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa cells, within 60 min. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of stretchable structural color hydrogel films with structure, (b) pictures of the PAAM/SF hydrogel film applied with different strains, (c and d) the corresponding reflection peaks of hydrogel films with different strains and different bending angles. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (e) HPC molecular nanostructure along the helix axis of cholesteric liquid crystal, (f) picture of conductive hydrogels with different concentration of HPC, (g) the characteristic reflection spectra of the hydrogel with different content of HPC, (h) schematic diagram and optical image of the hydrogel attached when the finger is bent. Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from The National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2021. (i) UV-Vis reflection spectra and optical photos at different concentrations of nanosheets, (j) optical photos of gel impacted by substances, (k) color gel can display the color change of the letter “FIT” symbol. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of hydrophobic hydrogels, (b) SEM image, (c) optical photo of water contact angle and (d) water droplet contact angle at different strains from 0% to 100% of superhydrophobic surface, (e) the water droplet sliding down the inclined superhydrophobic surface with an angle of 13°. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. (f) Formation mechanism of P(AA-co-AAm)/graphene hydrogels, contact and roll-off angles of hydrogels (g) under different strains, (h) after tape peeling and (i) after various stretching–releasing cycles, (j) time-lapse optical picture of water droplet hitting the surface with velocity 1 m s−1. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2021. (k) Preparation of hydrophobic hydrogels using P4BrMS as anchor monomer, (l) laser scanning confocal microscopic of hydrogels at different grafting times, (m) the thickness of modified layer with modification time, (n) the hydrophobic hydrogel forms as impenetrable layer and thus prevent wetting by water, (o) superhydrophobic gel mesh prevents water diffusion through oil/water interface. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Mechanism of the introduced anti-freezing DN organohydrogels, (b) photograph of the samples obtained by soaking in different solutions, (c) digital images of samples stretched at different lengths, respectively, (d) photograph of five samples after cooling at -18 °C for 6 h. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (e) Optical photos of GW-hydrogel after cooling at −20 °C for 24 h, (1) twisted, (2) compressed and (3) pulled. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (f) The storage moduli (G′) and loss moduli (G′′) of the conductive hydrogels before and after the solvent exchange, (g) test of compress and bending for organohydrogel and hydrogel. Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Optical image of reversible dehydration-swelling of hydrogel, (b) reversible deformation of hydrogel-PDMS composite between rehydration and dehydration, (c) diverse patterns of “plastic flowers”. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (d) The rigid segments move from outside to inside during the opening and folding back process of the gripper as the temperature changes, (e) simulation snapshots of gripper folding. Reproduced from ref. 197 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (f) The photograph of hydrogel flower's response to solutions with different pH value, scale bar: 1 cm. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) The obvious changes in color and flexibility of gel at 25 °C and 60 °C, (c) modulus of the gels at different temperatures, (d) cyclic tests demonstrating reversible thermal harden performance. Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (e) The reversible fluorescence conversion was observed as the pH of a TPE-MAX solution adjusted from 6 to 10, (f and g) fluorescence spectra and cyclical change in fluorescence intensity as the pH was adjusted from 6 to 10. Reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (h) The color of the gel converted between transparent and opaque as the humidity changes (i) digital photographs of the gel in H and DH states. Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from RSC Publishing, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) A soft octopus-shaped hydrogel prepared via 3D printing, (b) the octopus was fabricated by two parts: AAm-carbomer ink with and without Fe3O4 for the tentacles and the transparent head, respectively, (c) the octopus moving under a magnetic field, (d) optical images of the octopus moved from left to right. Reproduced from ref. 222 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (e) Degradability of 0.2 g P(BAL-co-DMSA)/Ca2+ (1.5–1.5)/x hydrogels in a glutathione solution. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2020. Digital photograph and the reflection spectra of RPH taken (f and g) as the temperature rising from 15 to 32 °C, (h and i) under different concentrations of NaCl solution. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a and b) Relative resistance change of M-hydrogel under stretching and compression, SEM images of M-hydrogel before (c) and after (d) after stretching, (e and f) mechanism of the electro-mechanical responses of M-hydrogel. Relative resistance change in response to (g) finger bending and (h) and (i) facial expressions, (j and m) schematic for signature sensing and vocal sensing, (k, l and n, o) electro-mechanical response to OK written by different volunteers, to similarly sounding “D” and “E”. Reproduced from ref. 241 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) CV and (b) GCD curves of the all-hydrogel symmetric supercapacitor, (c) electrochemical stability of the fabricated supercapacitor after 16000 charge–discharge cycles, (d) CV curves in normal, curved, and twisted state, (e and f) capacitance retention after different tensile strain and 1000 strain cycles, (g) GCD curves of several supercapacitor connected in series and (h) a demonstration of the fabricated yarn-shaped supercapacitor lighting up two LEDs. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission form Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a and b) Scheme and an equivalent electrical circuit diagram of a 1D ionic touch panel, (c) a schematic illustration of a 2D ionic touch panel, (d) a block diagram of a controller board between a computer and the ionic touch panel, (e) an electrical circuit of the panel during touching, (f) the optical image showed distortion near the edge of the ionic hydrogel-based touch panel, (g and h) operation of the ionic touch panel was demonstrated with a dashed-man drawing. Reproduced from ref. 251 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of GNOH synthesized by a simple solvent replacement method, (b) working principal diagram of the AG-TENG, (c) open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current, and transferred charge amount of the AG-TENG, (d) AG-TENG used to charge a 10 μF capacitors under diverse frequencies, (e) component of the smart self-powered calculator, (f) real-time calculation of the fabricated calculator based on array AG-TENG. Reproduced from ref. 256 with permission form Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic and optical image of the sciatic nerve stimulation device, (b) integration of stimulation electrodes on a sciatic nerve with the e-bioadhesive interface and images of the ankle joint movement in response to electrical stimulation, (c) movement angle of ankle joint under different electrical stimulation. Reproduced from ref. 267 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. (d) Schematic diagram of bioadhesive ultrasoft BMI, (e) mechanism of soft tissue adhesion by bioadhesive ultrasoft BMI, (f) the representative ECoG signals recorded by hydrogel-integrated BMI, (g) the surgery and positioning of bioadhesive ultrasoft BMI and commercial screw electrodes, (h) power spectra and corresponding SNR values of the ECoG signals collected by a screw electrode and hydrogel-integrated BMI. Reproduced from ref. 271 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Optical photos of artificial tongue and schematic diagram of astringency sensing mechanism, (b) SEM image of the astringency detectable hydrogel before and after exposure to TA, (c) the working mechanism of the astringency sensor before and after TA treatment, (d) schematic representation of taste perceived by licking food (e) different concentrations of TA as array artificial tongue and corresponding taste mapping data. Reproduced from ref. 277 with the permission from AAAS, copyright 2020.	 


PEGDA/SBMA/PDA hydrogel	SN	350	
	0.03	20.4 kPa	Adhesive, thermal response	Pressure/strain sensor	
278

AG/PAAm/LiCl hydrogel	DN	2185	4.4 × 106	1.3	
	Adhesive, self-healing	Supercapacitor	
279

CS/TA/PAA	DN	1400	1.22 × 106	
	20.21 kPa	Self-healing, adhesive	Strain sensor	
1

PANI nanofibers/PAA hydrogel	DN	991	
	
	
	Self-healing (90.8%)	Strain/temperature sensor	
280

Hydroxypropyl cellulose/PVA/NaCl hydrogel	SN	975	6.7 × 106	3.4	
	
	Pressure/strain sensor	
58

CS-P(AM-co-AA) hydrogel	DN	700	4.9 × 106	4.8	
	Anti-freezing	Supercapacitor, strain sensor	
281

TiO2-PDA-perfluorosilica carbon dot/CS/PVA/TA hydrogel	DN	278	
	0.1096	0.57 N	Hydrophilic-hydrophobic conversion adhesive	Supercapacitor, strain sensor	
282

DMAPS/PAA/ionic liquids hydrogel	SN	1500	
	0.14 ± 0.01	418 ± 38 J m−2	Self-healing Adhesive	Touch panel	
283

PEDOT:PSS/PVA hydrogel	DN	150	
	1000	600 J m−2	Adhesive	Biological electrode	
91

PAAm/CMCS-g-PANI/Ag	DN	1100	
	0.045	22.6 kPa	Adhesive anti-bacterial	Strain sensor	
284

ZnCl2/CaCl2 cellulose hydrogels	SN	120	
	7.49	
	Thermal reversibility anti-freezing	
	
285

PAAS/PMA hydrogel	SN	1200	45.0×106	2	
	Anti-freezing	Strain sensor	
286

LS/PVA/Ag NPs hydrogel	DN	1285	50.7 × 106	7.1	
	Anti-bacterial	
	
287

PAAm/Agar/TA-borax hydrogel	DN	400	
	0.002	5.93 kPa	Anti-bacterial	Strain sensor	
288

P(AM-co-MTAC-AEAM)/MWCNT/LiCl hydrogel	DN	4075	12.8 × 106	0.85	
	Self-healing	Strain sensor, handwritten screen	
289

Ag-lignin NPs/CA/AA/P(AAm-co-AA)	DN	12400	281.6 × 106	
	6.13 kPa	Antibacterial activity, adhesive	Masks filter	
290

Ag flakes/NIPAM hydrogel	SN	535	
	1231	
	Thermal response anti-bacterial	Strain sensor soft, actuation	
291

Ag NP/PAAm hydrogel	SN	2921	
	
	
	Self-healing	Mechanical actuator	
199

Starch/PAAm/borax/glycerol ionohydrogel	DN	514	
	21.1 × 10−3	
	Anti-freezing, moisturizing	Strain/humidity/temperature sensor, nanotriboelectric generator	
292

PAAm/Ag flakes-alginate hydrogel	DN	250	
	37400	
	
	Soft robot	
293

TFEA/AAm/[EMIM][TFSI] hydrogel	DN	2066	
	0.292	1700 N m−1	Anti-freezing, anti-swelling hydrophobic, self-healing adhesive	Pressure/strain/temperature sensor	
294

Graphene/poly(SBVI) hydrogel	SN	
	
	4.9 × 10−3	0.36 MPa	Anti-swelling, adhesive	Supercapacitor, neuromodulation electrodes	
295

DMAA/PAMPS microspheres ionic hydrogel	SN	3300	19 × 106	1.340	
	Thermostability, adhesive, anti-freezing, self-healing	Strain sensor	
296


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
