The role of organic cations as additives in photovoltaic perovskites   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CP01079A View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3CP01079A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, Advance Article The role of organic cations as additives in photovoltaic perovskites†
Alejandra T. Cadillo-Martíneza, 
Alejandra Vargas-Calderona, 
Arián Espinosa-Roab and 
Andrés M. Garay-Tapia*a
aLaboratorio de Termodinámica Computacional y Metalurgia Física (TC&MF), CIMAV, S.C. Unidad Monterrey, Apodaca, Nuevo León, Mexico. E-mail: andres.garay@cimav.edu.mx
bCONACyT-Centro de Investigación en Química Aplicada, Unidad Monterrey, Alianza Sur, No. 204, Parque de Innovación e Investigación Tecnológica (PIIT), 66628, Apodaca, Nuevo León, Mexico
Received 
8th March 2023
, Accepted 28th June 2023First published on 29th June 2023AbstractThe design of additives for perovskite-based solar cells seeks to improve the balance between stability and power conversion efficiency. Organic molecules such as theophylline, theobromine and caffeine (xanthines) have proved to be a good engineering solution. As an alternative, we present a first-principles study of the use of organic cations as additives. These cations are obtained when the free nitrogen of the imidazole unit of the aforementioned molecules is quaternized. We have found that the interaction between the organic cations and the MAPbI3 perovskite surface is stronger compared to the organic molecules. The Pb–O and I–H bonds of the interface dominated these interactions. In addition, organic cations showed higher charge transfer through the interface and shallow states that are harmless and could improve the charge carrier mobility. These characteristics show that quaternized xanthines should be a promising additive for perovskite materials in photovoltaic applications.
1 Introduction
Hybrid halide perovskites are emerging semiconductor materials with outstanding photophysical properties and proved high-performance in optoelectronic devices.1 Recently, the efficiency of perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) has steadily increased from 3.8% to a certified efficiency of more than 25%.2,3 Perovskites have a general chemical structure of ABX3 (A, usually a monovalent organic cation; B, a divalent cation; and X, a halide anion). The most popular material is CH3NH3PbI3 (or MAPbI3). This perovskite has a suitable bandgap, high optical absorption, long diffusion length, and high carrier mobilities of photogenerated holes and electrons.4–6
Despite the growing interest in hybrid perovskite solar cells, their commercialization is still hampered by serious stability problems that limit the useful life of the devices.7 Many attempts have been made to mitigate these challenges. It has been proven that the introduction of additives has a favorable effect on the stability of the halide perovskites. Generally, these additives possess a functional group such as ammonium or carbonyl, which can coordinate with perovskites to passivate the material, improving the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.8–10
An easily accessible group of additives are xanthines, and they are found in natural products such as tea, chocolate and coffee. This set of small molecules share the same functional groups. Among these, theophylline, theobromine and caffeine have been systematically investigated as additives, due to their conjugated structure such as dipole induced by hetero-atoms that tend to increase intermolecular interactions.
A theoretical study on the FAPbI3 (FA = formamidinium, CH5N2) perovskite explored the placement of the N–H and CO units in the molecule. For a particular optimal position and orientation, the formation of hydrogen bonds between N–H and a surface assisted the CO binding with an antisite Pb defect.11,12 The authors developed a photovoltaic device based on a theophylline treated perovskite with an energy conversion efficiency of 22.6% and long-term stability.12 Furthermore, they found that photovoltaic properties and thermal stability are related to the adsorption energy. For example in such a study, theophylline was the most favorable additive and showed the lowest adsorption energy, for more details see the ESI.†
In the metal halide perovskites, the electronic properties are regulated by the inorganic B–X framework because the edges of the bands are dominated by the orbitals of such sites. Meanwhile, cations at site A are believed to stabilize the lattice and do not play any role near the edge states.13
In a recent study, J. Xue et al.14 found that A cations containing π-conjugated pyrene contribute electronically to the edges of the surface band and influence the dynamics of the carriers. Ethyl ammonium pyrene improved hole mobility, energy conversion efficiency (relative to a reference perovskite) and the stability of the device. These findings showed that organic cations are a new option to boost the performance of optoelectronic devices, opening the landscape of possibilities in the design of additives.
Here, using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we explore the interaction of organic additives (theophylline, theobromine and caffeine) with the (001)-PbI2 of the MAPbI3 pseudocubic perovskite surface. The choice of this surface is based on the results of previous DFT studies where its stability has been tested against others, proving to be energetically preferable.15,16 Additionally, it has the advantage of being resistant to water degradation according to Car–Parrinello investigations.17 A detailed study of organo-cationic additives, formed by adding an ammonium group to the molecular structure of the xanthines, is presented. The formation of the organic cation is obtained when the free nitrogen of the imidazole unit is quaternized. We have focused our attention on comparing the energetic stability and electronic properties of cationic versus molecular additives. We have found that the interaction of the organic cations with the surface is stronger in comparison with other organic molecules. A higher charge transference at the interface was observed, indicating greater separation of electron–hole pairs favorable for photovoltaic applications.
2 Computational methods
The calculations were performed using density functional theory (DFT), as implemented in the VASP package.18 All calculations were optimized with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBESol) generalized gradient approximation (GGA) for the exchange and correlation functional, and the interaction of core electrons and valence electrons is treated by the Projected Augmented Wave method (PAW), including the van der Waals (vdW) correction using Grimme's DFT-D3 scheme.19,20 The functional PBEsol has been introduced to improve the balancing properties of solids and surfaces.21 Geometry optimization calculations involve relaxing the top four layers and the adsorbates, until the forces on atoms were less than 0.01 eV Å−1. For the optimization, a cutoff energy of 500 eV was used. A 3× 3 × 1 Monkhorst–Pack22 k-point grid was used for the relaxation, while a finer grid was used as needed for the density of states calculations. During geometrical relaxations, the bottom two layers of Pb atoms were fixed. For the relaxation and charge of the organic cations, we add an H atom; however for the alignment of the Fermi level in the density of states calculation, we use the NELECT flag and remove an electron for these systems. The molecular graphics viewer VESTA was used to plot the atomic structure and charge densities.23
2.1 Slab model
The model consists of four layers of 2 × 2 × 1 perovskite (001) PbI2 units forming an overall 156 atoms slab, plus an additional absorbate layer. After optimization, additives were introduced on each slab model with a vacuum of about 15 Å between slabs.
The chemical structure of organic molecules is shown in Fig. 2(a), where theophylline is obtained when R1 = H, R2 = CH3, theobromine when R1 = CH3, R2 = H and caffeine when R1 = R2 = CH3. While the organic cations, which are obtained when the free nitrogen of the imidazolium unit is quaternized, are shown in Fig. 2(b). To denote organic cations, the ‘+’ sign will be used after additive names.
To investigate the energetic favorability of the placement of the additive regarding the slab, two configurations were considered, corresponding to the additive placed horizontally and vertically with respect to the perovskite surface (Fig. 1). Also, since a horizontal placement of the additive translates in higher interactions of the functional groups with the surface, a more detailed study of horizontal arrangements was performed. The molecule's ring centers α and β (Fig. 2(a)) were taken as reference points and placed in two configurations with respect to the surface, above the Pb atom and in the hollow MA position (Fig. 2(c)). From now on, we will label as H1 the configuration where the β additive ring is set in the hollow MA surface site, H2 for the α ring in the same position, and H3 and H4 for the β and α rings above the Pb atom, respectively.
 Fig. 1  (a) Horizontal and (b) vertical configuration of the model slab. The H, C, N, O, I, and Pb atoms are depicted as white, brown, light blue, red, purple, and gray spheres, respectively. 
 Fig. 2  Additive chemical structure: (a) organic molecules, theophylline is obtained when R1 = H, R2 = CH3, theobromine when R1 = CH3, R2 = H and caffeine when R1 = R2 = CH3, (b) organic cations and (c) top view perovskite surface sites. 
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Adsorption energy
To understand the interaction energy of the perovskite surface with the additive, we have calculated the average adsorption energy of the additive/perovskite surface system that is expressed as 
Eads = Esystem − (Esurface + Eadditive)
(1)
Results for Eads the most energetically favorable configurations are shown in Fig. 3. The adsorption energies for all configurations can be found in the ESI.† On average the Eads of the organic cations is about ∼0.6 eV lower compared to the organic molecules, this indicates stronger interactions between the organic cations and the surface. The range of energies obtained with these additives corresponds to chemisorption phenomena. In operational conditions, a photovoltaic device must be prepared to counteract the possible degradation of the perovskite by the presence of water. Previous studies have shown that the adsorption energy of water molecules over similar surfaces indicates a minor interaction with the surface (Eads = −0.54 eV),17 meaning that organic additives (Eads < −2 eV) might serve as a protective agent against perovskite degradation.
 Fig. 3  Adsorption energy (Eads) for the additives of the lower energy configurations. 
Additionally, the different contributions to the adsorption energy are analyzed in Fig. 3. The pink color represents the van der Waals energy (EvdW), blue depicts the energy related to the surface relaxation (Erelax), and green symbolizes the interaction between the additive and the surface (Eint). Details of how these energies were obtained are found in the ESI.† Indeed, according to Fig. 3, the van der Waals energy EvdW plays an important role in the description of the interactions within the perovskite/additive material. Although, interestingly, it is not the most prominent contribution. The dominating interaction corresponds to the energy related to the formation of bonds among the additive and the perovskite surface (Eint). Also, for all additives, the energy related to the atomic relaxation, Erelax, is the smallest one.
As a means to measure the inter-atomic interactions in the additive/perovskite system, we have calculated the minimum inter-atomic distances between the perovskite surface and the additives. The inter-atomic distances of the lowest energy configurations are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Minimum perovskite/additive inter-atomic distances in Å of the lowest energy configurations




Surface PbI2
Pb–O1
Pb–O2
I–HR1
I–HR2
I–H3
I–HCH3
I–Himi




Theophylline
2.56
2.57
2.61
3.00
3.22
2.86
—


Theophylline+
2.61
4.60
2.39
3.46
2.80
3.13
2.41


Theobromine
2.70
2.56
3.05
2.67
3.28
3.46
—


Theobromine+
5.20
2.55
3.20
3.02
3.25
3.06
2.62


Caffeine
5.77
2.55
3.42
2.91
3.18
2.83
—


Caffeine+
5.71
2.61
3.12
2.88
3.46
2.96
2.62




Theophylline is the lowest energy additive for organic molecules, the energy difference compared to theobromine and caffeine is 0.51 eV and 0.53 eV, respectively. In this case, the interaction of the carbonyl groups with the Pb atoms on the surface is maximized when O occupies a vacant I-site (that is, that O coordinates with Pb, see Fig. 4) and two octahedra are formed. The Pb–O distances of the two carbonyl groups (see Table 1) are smaller than the Pb–O distances in the Prewitt (SP) ionic radius model (2.69 Å).24 Therefore, according to our calculations, the Pb–O is an ionic interaction that dominates the binding among the organic molecules and the perovskite surface.
 Fig. 4  Pb octahedral coordination. 
In similar systems like the perovskite–water molecule, the existence of hydrogen bond interaction has been established.17 In this study, we have obtained I–H distances (Table 1), close to the values reported by such authors. In comparison to the other organic molecules, the I–H hydrogen bondings are stronger in theophylline as well. The average I–H distance is 2.91 Å, compared to 3.10 Å and 3.0 Å for theobromine and caffeine, respectively. The hydrogen interaction in hybrid perovskites plays a fundamental role in determining their structural stability, electronic and photophysical properties. These H–I interactions are mediated by hydrogen bonding. These hydrogen bonds are weaker than the covalent bonds, but still play a crucial role in the properties of hybrid perovskites.25–27
The introduction of organic cations as additives significantly increases the interactions with the surface (Eads < −3.0 eV), due to the “new” I–Himi bonds caused by the quaternization of the imidazole unit (see Fig. 2(b)), so there are more I–H bonds. This is a prominent feature of the organic cations, the I–Himi interactions are shorter (<2.62 Å) relative to the average bond distance I–H in all additives (∼2.98 Å). However, the Pb–O interactions are still relevant because an octahedron is formed for the three organic cations. These additives show similar adsorption energies, caffeine+ being the cation with the lowest energy, with a difference of 0.06 eV and 0.08 eV compared to theophylline+ and theobromine+.
Although we have observed that the adsorption energy is affected by the site where the additive is located, it depends decisively on the Pb–O and I–H bondings. The adsorption energy of the additive/perovskite system is increased when such interactions are maximized.
3.2 Charge transfer
These additives perform relatively strong chemisorption with the perovskite surface; adsorption may lead to transfer across the interface. We performed a charge analysis to further investigate the interaction and transfer of charge across the interface.
To visualize the charge transfer and locate charge accumulation and depletion sites of the system, we have calculated the charge density difference between the additive and the surface model as follows: 
Δρ = ρsystem − (ρsurface + ρadditive)
(2)where ρsystem, ρsurface and ρadditive represent the charge density of the perovskite/additive system, the surface and the additive, respectively. The yellow regions depict excess charge and the blue region depicts a charge depletion. The difference in charge density for all the additives is shown in the left-superior corner of Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Side views of the electronic charge density difference (CDD), a planar average of charge density difference (Δq, red curve) and CDC (ΔQ, blue curve) at the interfaces models with the additive on the perovskite surfaces. The electron density accumulation and depletion regions are indicated in yellow and blue, respectively. The isosurface value for the CDD is 0.001. 
Here, we can visualize an excess charge and a depletion region throughout the interfacial region of the additive/perovskite system, responsible for the significant increase in adsorption energy of the organic cations (Fig. 5(d)–(f)) compared to the system when organic molecules are used as additives for which the excess charge regions are smaller Fig. 5(a)–(c). In the regions surrounding the Pb–O and I–H bonds, an attractive interaction can be seen as alternating regions of excess and depletion of charge.
A more detailed analysis of the charge transfer in the interfacial region was performed by calculating the plane-averaged charge density difference Δq. This parameter is defined as the integral of the 3D-charge density difference Δρ on the xy plane.28,29 The formula is as follows: 
(3)
Positive and negative values of Δq indicate accumulation or depletion of electrons, respectively. Additionally, the charge displacement curve (CDC) is given by integrating Δq along the z-direction as follows: 
(4)
Hence, the maximum of ΔQ is the total number of electrons transferred between the perovskite and the additive. A positive value of ΔQ corresponds to electrons flowing in the direction of decreasing z (electrons transferred from the right to the left along the z-axis) and vice versa for a negative value.
The plane-averaged charge difference and the CDC curve for the perovskite/additives interfaces are shown in Fig. 5. In all cases, electrons accumulate on the perovskite surface and are depleted near the additives. The CDC gives positive values in the vicinity of the interface (marked by the yellow bar). ΔQ is always positive in the interface region, suggesting a transfer of electrons from the additive side to the perovskite surface. The maximum value of CDC for the perovskite/organic molecule interfaces was obtained for theophylline, which transfers 0.13 electrons. While among the perovskite/organic cation interfaces, caffeine+ showed the maximum charge transfer with 0.26 electrons, twice as much charge as with theophylline. This is the reason why organic cations have a greater magnitude of adsorption energy. All charge transfer values are given in the ESI.† A higher transference of electrons across the interface is also a sign of greater transfer and separation of photoinduced electron–hole pairs, favorable for photovoltaic applications.30
3.3 Density of states
Electronic states are responsible for the transport of electrons across the interface. In photovoltaic devices, it is expected that the deposition of additives would not affect the semi-conductive properties of the perovskite governed by the electronic states at the interface. We have studied the electronic structure of the interface and evaluated the effect of the deposition of the additives by calculating the density of states (DOS) of the perovskite surface and the additive separately. For the surface, only states belonging to atoms exposed in the surface were considered. In Fig. 6, we compare the DOS of the perovskite surface model PbI2 (black dotted line) to the additive/perovskite system (solid lines). For this last, only states relevant to the interface are shown (atoms exposed in the surface and the additive). It should be noted that we have taken the vacuum level as the reference point (zero energy).
 Fig. 6  Electronic DOS on the interface. The zero on the horizontal axis represents the vacuum level. The gray solid line represents the Fermi level for the additive/perovskite system and the black solid line represents the Fermi level for the surface perovksite model PbI2. 
When organic molecules are added (Fig. 6(a)–(c)), the valence states are still dominated by the I-surface and the conduction states are dominated by the Pb-surface, the same behavior as in the bulk material. Regarding the edge states, it is observed that the valence band maximum (VBM) is slightly displaced compared to the reference perovskite (∼0.29 eV, ∼0.42 eV and ∼0.33 eV, for theophylline, theobromine and caffeine, respectively), while the conduction band minimum (CBM) remains unchanged.
Similarly, when organic cations are used as additives (Fig. 6(d)–(f)), the VBM continues to be dominated by the contribution of the I-surface and the CBM by the Pb-surface. Furthermore, it is observed that the VBM is displaced towards deeper states (∼0.98 eV for theophylline+, ∼1.07 eV for theobromine+ and ∼0.97 eV for caffeine+), while the CBM shows contributions from states near the edge.
Previous studies have reported that certain surface defects in perovskites can lead to the formation of electronic defect states near the edges of the band (shallow states) or in the middle of the gap (deep states). Typically, shallow traps will only restrict the efficient movement of free charges through trapping and detrapping processes, while deep traps hinder the detrapping and can facilitate non-radiative recombination pathways.31,32
In the present work, the partial density of states of organic molecules does not reveal contributions neither from shallow nor deep states. This is a favorable indication that the presence of the additives does not modify the electronic properties of the perovskite. For theophylline+ and caffeine+ organic cations (Fig. 6(d) and (f)), there are contributions from shallow states near the CBM. If the density of the shallow states is high, then they can participate in the transport of photogenerated carriers. Also if the carriers reside in these states, they are more likely to be thermally excited, unlike deep states which act as centers of recombination and are not favorable for photovoltaic applications. Among the organic cations, theobromine+ H4 (Fig. 6(e)) is the least suitable for use as an absorber material in solar cells, since deep states are observed that can favor a non-radiative recombination.
So far, we have focused our analysis on the lower adsorption energy configurations, but an analysis of all the configurations reveals similar trends. Fig. 7 shows the partial states diagrams and adsorption energies for all configurations. Organic molecules Fig. 7(a), (c) and (e) in horizontal positions (Hi) do not contribute to states near the edge as discussed previously. Compared with the horizontal configurations, vertical configurations (V) have considerably more positive adsorption energy and show deep states favorable to non-radiative recombination.
 Fig. 7  Partial state diagrams, blue lines represent the contribution of the I-surface in the VBM, green lines represent the contribution of the Pb-surface in the CBM and red lines represent the contribution of the additives. Adsorption energy for each configuration is shown at the top of each diagram. 
Theophylline V is an exception, this molecule was placed initially in a vertical position. Nevertheless, after relaxation, the system energy was minimized with the molecule placed horizontally. In this case, the adsorption energy is the same in other horizontal configurations (Eads∼ 2 eV). In this way, theophylline has a lower average energy and does not form deep states in any configurations. This could be the reason for its better performance compared to the other xanthines as reported by R. Wang et al.12
In organic cations (Fig. 7(b), (d) and (f)), the energetic favorability of horizontal configurations over the vertical one was corroborated. In general, horizontal cations do not exhibit deep states. Theobromine+ (H4) seems to deviate from this behavior, probably because when H is placed at the R2 position, O2 is more reactive and the Pb–O interaction is stronger. Therefore, we can see localized states in the middle of the band gap belonging to Pb and O of theobromine+ (H4). Vertical configurations do not present deep states and, like the vertical configurations of organic molecules, the adsorption energy is more positive.
Among the five configurations of organic cations, theophylline+ has the lowest average adsorption energy. Three such configurations showed shallow states, which are favorable to the performance of perovskites in photovoltaic devices.
Following this trend, caffeine+ has average adsorption energy almost equal to that of theophylline+, but only two configurations with shallow states. In contrast, for theobromine+ the most energetically favorable configuration has deep states, and configurations with shallow states are farther away in energy compared to its homologous molecule. For this reason, we do not recommend its use as an organo-cationic additive.
4 Conclusions
In summary, using DFT calculations, a comparison of molecular versus cationic additive interactions with the perovskite/organic additive system was presented. The atomic structure and electronic properties of both the xanthines and the cationic counterpart were investigated as well.
We have found that for perovskite surface (001)-PbI2, the additives containing the ammonium group have more negative adsorption energies, meaning that energetically cations are favored compared to organic molecules, and they interact strongly with the surface.
The inter-atomic distances were calculated as a measure of the inter-atomic interactions. The interaction is maximized when the Pb–O bond is present. While for organic cations, the dominant interaction is the I–H bond, followed in importance by the Pb–O interaction, which also plays an important role. A charge transfer analysis has also confirmed that the interaction with the surface is stronger for organic cations compared to organic molecules. For all minimum energy configurations, when the Pb–O or the I–H bonds are present, an attractive interaction is observed in alternating regions of excess and depletion of charge.
Organic cations showed several characteristics that are beneficial when considering these additives as possible photovoltaic materials.
Compared to organic molecules, the CDC curves of organic cations showed a higher electronic transference across the interface that can enhance the separation of electron–hole pairs in photovoltaic devices.
Finally, the electronic state analysis showed that the organo-cationic additives have harmless shallow states that can improve the mobility of the carriers in perovskites. Therefore, we propose that cationic theophylline and caffeine are promising candidates for the design of organic additives.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
AcknowledgementsThe authors gratefully acknowledge the computing time granted by Centro de Análisis de Datos y Supercomputo (CADS), a member of the Universidad de Guadalajara. The authors acknowledge the financial support from CONACYT-Fondo Sectorial de Investigación para la Educación 2017-2018/A1-S-13267.
Notes and referencesN. Suresh Kumar and K. Chandra Babu Naidu, J. Materiomics, 2021, 7, 940–956 CrossRef .P. Gao, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448–2463 RSC .https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. Hwang, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao and Y. Yan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17042 CrossRef .E. Mosconi, C. Quarti, T. Ivanovska, G. Ruani and F. De Angelis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16137–16144 RSC .M. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 822–830 CrossRef CAS .P. Zhao, B. J. Kim and H. Jung, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 7, 267–286 CrossRef .F. Zhang and K. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902579 CrossRef CAS .S. Liu, Y. Guan, Y. Sheng, Y. Hu, Y. Rong, A. Mei and H. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902492 CrossRef .R. Wang, J. Xue, L. Meng, J.-W. Lee, Z. Zhao, P. Sun, L. Cai, T. Huang, Z. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Duan, J. L. Yang, S. Tan, Y. Yuan, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1464–1477 CrossRef CAS .R. Wang, J. Xue, K.-L. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Luo, D. Fenning, G. Xu, S. Nuryyeva, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, J. Yang, J. Zhu, M. Wang, S. Tan, I. Yavuz, K. Houk and Y. Yang, Science, 2019, 366, 1509–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926–8942 RSC .J. Xue, R. Wang, X. Chen, C. Yao, X. Jin, K.-L. Wang, W. Huang, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhai, D. Meng, S. Tan, R. Liu, Z.-K. Wang, C. Zhu, K. Zhu, M. Beard, Y. Yan and Y. Yang, Science, 2021, 371, 636–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wang, B. G. Sumpter, J. Huang, H. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Yang and H. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1136–1145 CrossRef CAS .A. Torres and L. G. C. Rego, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26947–26954 CrossRef CAS .N. Z. Koocher, D. Saldana-Greco, F. Wang, S. Liu and A. M. Rappe, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4371–4378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef PubMed .S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132(15), 154104 CrossRef PubMed .S. Ehrlich, J. Moellmann, W. Reckien, T. Bredow and S. Grimme, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 3414–3420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. V. Terentjev, L. A. Constantin and J. M. Pitarke, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 214108 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1976, 13, 5188–5192 CrossRef .K. Momma and F. Izumi, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2011, 44, 1272–1276 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kuroiwa, S. Aoyagi, A. Sawada, J. Harada, E. Nishibori, M. Takata and M. Sakata, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 217601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. L. Svane, A. C. Forse, C. P. Grey, G. Kieslich, A. K. Cheetham, A. Walsh and K. T. Butler, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 6154–6159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Li, G. Peng, Z. Li, Y. Xu, T. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Liu, G. Wang, L. Ding and Z. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202218349 CAS .P. Varadwaj, A. Varadwaj, H. Marques and K. Yamashita, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1 CrossRef PubMed .H. Qin, L. Xu and D. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 5167–5173 CrossRef CAS .N. Sai, R. Gearba, A. Dolocan, J. R. Tritsch, W.-L. Chan, J. R. Chelikowsky, K. Leung and X. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2173–2177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H.-J. Feng, W. Deng, K. Yang, J. Huang and X. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4471–4480 CrossRef CAS .H. Jin, E. Debroye, M. Keshavarz, I. G. Scheblykin, M. B. J. Roeffaers, J. Hofkens and J. A. Steele, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 397–410 RSC .A. Buin, P. Pietsch, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, A. H. Ip, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6281–6286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp01079aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Horizontal and (b) vertical configuration of the model slab. The H, C, N, O, I, and Pb atoms are depicted as white, brown, light blue, red, purple, and gray spheres, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Additive chemical structure: (a) organic molecules, theophylline is obtained when R1 = H, R2 = CH3, theobromine when R1 = CH3, R2 = H and caffeine when R1 = R2 = CH3, (b) organic cations and (c) top view perovskite surface sites.	 

Eads = Esystem − (Esurface + Eadditive)
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Adsorption energy (Eads) for the additives of the lower energy configurations.	 

Theophylline	2.56	2.57	2.61	3.00	3.22	2.86	—
Theophylline+	2.61	4.60	2.39	3.46	2.80	3.13	2.41
Theobromine	2.70	2.56	3.05	2.67	3.28	3.46	—
Theobromine+	5.20	2.55	3.20	3.02	3.25	3.06	2.62
Caffeine	5.77	2.55	3.42	2.91	3.18	2.83	—
Caffeine+	5.71	2.61	3.12	2.88	3.46	2.96	2.62

 	Fig. 4  Pb octahedral coordination.	 

Δρ = ρsystem − (ρsurface + ρadditive)
	(2)

 	Fig. 5  Side views of the electronic charge density difference (CDD), a planar average of charge density difference (Δq, red curve) and CDC (ΔQ, blue curve) at the interfaces models with the additive on the perovskite surfaces. The electron density accumulation and depletion regions are indicated in yellow and blue, respectively. The isosurface value for the CDD is 0.001.	 

	(3)

	(4)

 	Fig. 6  Electronic DOS on the interface. The zero on the horizontal axis represents the vacuum level. The gray solid line represents the Fermi level for the additive/perovskite system and the black solid line represents the Fermi level for the surface perovksite model PbI2.	 

 	Fig. 7  Partial state diagrams, blue lines represent the contribution of the I-surface in the VBM, green lines represent the contribution of the Pb-surface in the CBM and red lines represent the contribution of the additives. Adsorption energy for each configuration is shown at the top of each diagram.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp01079a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
