Upgrading the chemistry of π-conjugated polymers toward more sustainable materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC01645D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC01645D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9792-9810Upgrading the chemistry of π-conjugated polymers toward more sustainable materials

        
          
            Lauriane 
            Giraud
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Stéphane 
            Grelier
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Etienne 
            Grau
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Georges 
            Hadziioannou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Cyril 
            Brochon
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Henri 
            Cramail
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Eric 
            Cloutet
          
        
      *
      Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, LCPO, UMR5629, F-33600 Pessac, France. E-mail: cyril.brochon@u-bordeaux.fr; henri.cramail@u-bordeaux.fr; eric.cloutet@u-bordeaux.fr
Received 
      1st April 2020
    , Accepted 20th May 2020First published on 17th June 2020AbstractWhile organic electronics are ubiquitous in our daily lives, studies dealing with their environmental impact or their sustainability are scarce. Indeed, their preparation often requires hazardous conditions along with multi-step synthesis and purification reactions in order for them to be appropriately fabricated from refined petroleum products. Nevertheless, in the past decade, there have been numerous alternative synthesis pathways trying to take into account the amount of residual transition metals, side products and the number of steps required for the preparation of π-conjugated polymers. This review manuscript not only provides such alternative routes to π-conjugated polymers but also puts emphasis on the extraordinary wealth of monomers that can be extracted or converted from biomass and used in the formation of sp2-carbon based (co)polymers.
1. Introduction
There are a lot of concerns today not only about oil as a limited resource but also because many products arising from petroleum engineering cause severe and somehow irreversible pollution together with the associated negative consequences. Although Chemistry has a ‘negative image’ for most people, it is important to demonstrate that it can come up with original alternatives in order to build environment-friendly materials taking into account sustainability and ‘greener’ processes. This is particularly the case for organic electronics that are ubiquitous in our daily lives and that can take great benefit from the search for alternative synthesis pathways. Indeed, most polymers dedicated to organic electronics (e.g. π-conjugated polymers) are currently synthesized using transition-metal catalyzed coupling reactions, such as Stille and Suzuki coupling reactions.1,2 Despite their efficiency and reliability, these coupling reactions have some issues such as the use of hazardous monomers, toxic solvents, or transition metal catalysts (e.g. Pd, Ni, Fe, etc.) that end up as residual impurities in the final devices, thus acting as failure agents.3 While efforts have been made to reduce metal impurities or to use less toxic solvents, there is room for improvement.4 Herein, we will notably report on ‘Direct Heteroarylation Polymerization (DHAP)’, enabling the use of less hazardous monomers, and also on coupling reactions involving less or no transition-metal catalysts. In the second part of this manuscript, we discuss entering a new era where π-conjugated polymers could be made from bio-sourced monomers. Indeed, an alternative to petroleum resources is biomass. Biomass is a “material produced by the growth of micro-organisms, plants or animals”.5 Therefore, there is not “one” biomass, but rather multiple biomasses, each with its own characteristics. One promising biomass is lignocellulose, which has a rather short production cycle (from 1 to 50 years) and does not compete with food production, as opposed to crop biomass, for example. Lignocellulosic biomass can be used for energy production and has the potential to provide a large palette of molecules.6–8
2. Synthesis of π-conjugated polymers via more sustainable pathways
2.1. Direct heteroarylation polymerization
Despite their reliability and efficiency, common methodologies used to synthesize π-conjugated polymers have several drawbacks. One of them is the use of hazardous monomers and subsequently the production of hazardous by-products, as discussed in the introduction. For instance, the Stille reaction requires trialkylstannane monomers and leads to the production of stoichiometric amounts of tin-based by-products.2 Direct Hetero Arylation Polymerization, or DHAP, is a relatively recent method that enables the synthesis of π-conjugated polymers while generating less waste and using “simpler” and less hazardous monomers.9 Indeed, DHAP is a metal-catalyzed coupling reaction between an arene and an aryl halide (see Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  General reaction scheme of DHAP (X = halogen). 
DHAP was first investigated by Lemaire and coll. to synthesize poly(alkylthiophenes).10 This reaction has since then been used to synthesize various π-conjugated polymers. Indeed, DHAP has multiple advantages, the main one being that it is performed on easily accessible monomers: arenes and aryl halides. DHAP also allows the use of monomers bearing various substituents.11 The latter coupling reaction is performed with a metal-based catalyst such as rhodium(III/IV) or palladium-based catalysts that are more frequently investigated. Palladium acetate is the most employed, as it was reported to improve the deprotonation of arenes.12 Two other reagents are used to perform DHAP: a Brønsted base that neutralizes hydrogen halides formed during the reaction and a phosphine ligand. The latter's role is still being investigated, and the phosphine ligand is chosen on a case-by-case basis. Some phosphine-free systems were reported to reduce the amount of impurities in the final polymers.13,14 Despite its various applications and promising results, DHAP also has issues originating from the catalytic system used. Indeed, DHAP leads to the formation of impurities in the final polymers, affecting their properties.3 DHAP also has the disadvantages of not controlling the regioselectivity and of enabling homo-coupling, which can induce structural defects in the final polymers leading to poor opto-electronic performance. Homo-coupling can be avoided by a careful choice of experimental conditions, such as the use of a suitable phosphine ligand or relatively low temperature.15 The lack of regioselectivity and branching reactions can be avoided by tuning the experimental conditions (choice of solvents and catalysts), and also by blocking the other positions. Kanbara and coll. investigated the latter strategy, as presented in Scheme 2. DHAP allows the synthesis of polymers that cannot or can hardly be synthesized by “traditional” coupling. DHAP also enables synthesis of polymers with similar or even better properties than polymers synthesized with Stille or Suzuki coupling reactions for example. For instance, Kanbara et al. synthesized a polymer through various experimental protocols, as summed up in Fig. 1.
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of polymers via DHAP using monomers with blocked positions (top: adapted with permission from ref. 22 Copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society. Bottom: Adapted with permission from ref. 14 Copyright ©2012 American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 1  Structure of PEDOTF, synthesized via various methods: DHAP and Suzuki coupling.16 
DHAP using conventional heating yielded the highest average molar mass values (147000 g mol−1) with a dispersity of around 3 (H-PEDOTF). Comparatively, S-PEDOTF (obtained by Suzuki coupling) has a Mn value of 47500 g mol−1 and a lower dispersity (2). The authors investigated the remaining quantities of palladium in the final polymers: this value was 1590 and 2300 ppm for H-PEDOTF and L-PEDOTF, respectively, and 4390 ppm for S-PEDOTF. This doubled value for S-PEDOTF can be explained by a higher quantity of catalyst required for Suzuki coupling (5%mol, as opposed to 1%mol for DHAP). The aforementioned polymers were then integrated in OFETs and photovoltaic devices: in both cases, H-PEDOTF gave the best results. Indeed, the H-PEDOTF OFET exhibited a field-effect hole mobility of 1.2 ± 0.1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, and the H-PEDOTF-based photovoltaic device exhibited a PCE of 4.08%, whereas the S-PEDOTF-based one exhibited a mobility of 3.2 ± 0.2 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a PCE of 0.48. According to the authors, the high molar masses and good purity of H-PEDOTF explained the improved properties of the OFET and solar cells.16 Kanbara's team has extensively worked on DHAP, aiming at testing new monomers or experimental conditions (e.g. the use of a microwave reaction to reduce reaction time16). Leclerc and coll. have also worked extensively on DHAP.17–19 The authors notably synthesized a polymer by DHAP in batch and also in a continuous flow process, which would lower the price of the synthesis – the reaction scheme is given in Scheme 3. The obtained polymer has a Mn value of around 30000 g mol−1, and the synthesis is quite reproducible; however, the dispersity is rather high under continuous flow (∼2 in batch, but ∼3 under continuous flow). The obtained isoindigo-based polymer has promising properties for OFETs and solar cells, as the authors integrated it in devices with a PCE of up to 3% for the polymer synthesized in batch, and 1.80% for the polymer obtained under continuous flow. This lower value can be explained by the polymer's lower molar mass. (NB: isoindigo, while being an isomer of indigo, is not bio-based.20)
 Scheme 3  Synthesis of PiEDOT by DHAP (adapted with permission from ref. 23 Copyright ©2015 American Chemical Society). 
2.2. One step further: transition-metal free syntheses
Usluer et al. showed that poly(3-hexylthiophene)'s properties were greatly improved after removing metal traces.3 Indeed, the latter act as charge traps and extensive purification is needed to remove them. The best OFET and OPV performances were obtained for a polymer purified with Soxhlet apparatus and metal complexing agents. These purification techniques require time, energy and solvents. Kanbara and coll. investigated the role of terminal halogen atoms on the polymers’ properties and concluded that the presence of terminal bromide had a bigger impact on the opto-electronic properties than residual palladium.21 Indeed, even though they can affect the final optoelectronic properties (especially for low molar mass polymers), few studies have deeply investigated the nature of the chain termini of π-conjugated polymers. Thus, limiting the use of not only transition metals but also halogens is crucial to avoiding not only long and tedious purification but also additional steps to remove the final halogen and improving the polymers’ properties. The next section first lists reactions leading to π-conjugated polymers without the use of transition metals but with halogen atoms. Then, reactions with neither halogen atoms nor transition metals are exemplified. The aim of this section is not only to provide an exhaustive list of transition-metal free syntheses, but also to identify key reactions leading to promising polymers for organic electronic applications and/or reactions that could be applied to bio-based monomers (the latter being studied in part 3 of this manuscript).

2.2.1. π-Conjugated polymers synthesized with halogens. 
2.2.1.1. Bromine-catalyzed reaction. 
Patra et al. investigated the synthesis of PEDOT and PEDOS using bromine as a catalyst, as presented in Scheme 4.
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of PEDOT (left) and PEDOS (right) derivatives (adapted with permission from ref. 24 Copyright ©2015 American Chemical Society). 
The authors hypothesized that the polymerization starts with the oxidation of the monomers by Br2 to form a radical cation. The latter then attacks the monomer, resulting in the formation of a dimer and elimination of bromine. The dimer species is more reactive than the monomer and subsequently reacts with the latter, leading to the polymer growth. This process works well to synthesize PEDOS, a type of polymer hardly synthesized by other methods. Yet these experimental conditions are poorly adapted to the synthesis of PEDOT, even with an excess of bromine. Indeed, neither soluble PEDOT nor PEDOT's analogues were obtained using the bromine-catalyzed coupling. Moreover, the insoluble recovered polymer had a low conductivity. However, this coupling is well-adapted for the synthesis of PEDOS, yielding polymers with Mn values of 4000–5000 g mol−1 with a dispersity of 2.1–2.3, and promising properties for applications as hole transport layers.24 Nevertheless the authors do not comment on the regioregularity of the obtained PEDOS. Heeney et al. reported the synthesis of regioregular PEDOS but using a transition metal catalyzed coupling.25 To remove the remaining bromine at the end of the reaction, Patra and coll. reported the use of hydrazine hydrate and extraction with a Soxhlet system to “de-dope” the polymers after synthesis; a rather long and tedious purification – the authors also did not comment on the amount of bromine left after purification.
2.2.1.2. Synthesis of π-conjugated polymers by oxidative homo-coupling of bis-Grignard reagents. 
A Nitroxide-Mediated Radical Polymerization (NMRP) approach was successfully applied to the synthesis of π-conjugated polymers. This homo-coupling of Grignard reagents does not require any transition metal, but halogen, magnesium and lithium-bearing species are needed to perform this polymerization. The use of the latter metals is also questionable as it could create possible residual metal impurities in the final polymers, which will not be discussed in this manuscript. Studer et al. investigated the synthesis of polyfluorene using this approach, with TEMPO as a catalyst (Scheme 5).26 The latter can be regenerated after treatment with air, which is interesting both from economical and sustainable viewpoints. Polyfluorene was obtained in good yield (more than 90%) with average molar mass lower than the ones obtained by GRIM synthesis (9000 g mol−1vs. 62000 g mol−1) but higher dispersity (2.0–2.2 vs. 1.5).27 The homo-coupling of Grignard reagents also leads to fewer residual transition metals in the final impurities: 1–15 ppm nickel was detected in polyfluorene synthesized using this method, compared to 840–1560 ppm for a polyfluorene synthesized with GRIM polymerization. Studer and coll. also investigated the synthesis of other fluorene-based π-conjugated polymers using the NMRP approach, as presented in Fig. 2.
 Scheme 5  Synthesis of polyfluorene by oxidative homo-coupling of Grignard reagents (adapted from ref. 26 with permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc.). 
 Fig. 2  Structure of fluorene-based polymers obtained by oxidative homo-coupling of Grignard reagents.26 
The fluorene-based polyvinylene could be integrated in OLEDs for example, as it has a strong fluorescence (quantum yield of 0.5).28 However, the oxidative homocoupling of Grignard reagents also has some drawbacks such as the presence of bromine atoms at chain ends affecting the final features. In addition, the synthesis of the bis-Grignard monomer is long and tedious. Indeed, it has to be obtained with high purity in order to ensure the good progress of the polymerization afterwards.26


2.2.2. Synthesis of π-conjugated polymers without halogens via the condensation reaction. 
2.2.2.1. Synthesis of polyazomethines. 
Polyazomethines have been widely investigated, as they have multiple applications in opto-electronics.29–31 Their main advantage is their easy synthesis and recovery as they can be obtained from the condensation of a diamine and a dialdehyde, without any catalyst, releasing water as a by-product. This straightforward method enables the formation of polymers without extensive purification. Subsequently, a wide range of polymers can be obtained with various properties by changing the monomers.32,33 Polyazomethines may exhibit some stability issues, which is not true in the case of poly(arene imine)s. Skene and coll. investigated extensively the synthesis of fluorene-based polyazomethines; the authors successfully synthesized all fluorene-based polyazomethines, as presented in Fig. 3. The polyazomethine noted 1 has promising properties, such as fluorescence (quantum yield (QY) at 0.19) and electrochromism. High Mn values could be obtained, up to 145800 g mol−1, after a few days of polymerization (performed in a pressure tube).34 Polyazomethine 2 was obtained by self-condensation of a monomer bearing both amine and aldehyde functions. However, the reaction required an additional metallic catalyst (TiCl4). Additionally, the Mn value is low, only 2180 g mol−1, after one week of reaction. Yet this polyazomethine has promising properties, as it is highly fluorescent (QY of 0.48); the authors also investigated its use as a detector for explosives.35
 Fig. 3  Fluorene-based polyazomethines.34,35 
2.2.2.2. Knoevenagel reaction. 
The Knoevenagel reaction can yield π-conjugated polymers bearing a pendant cyano group. The group can improve electron affinity, therefore leading to specific properties of the final materials. Greenham et al. investigated the synthesis of a PPV-like polymer, as presented in Scheme 6. The polymer obtained was successfully integrated into OLEDs showing promising properties.36 However, the Knoevenagel reaction does not allow good control of the final polymer's regioselectivity, leading to structural defects with adverse effects on opto-electronic properties.37 Another type of PPV-like polymer was obtained by the Knoevenagel reaction by Cao et al., as presented in Scheme 7.
 Scheme 6  Synthesis of a π-conjugated polymer via the Knoevenagel reaction (adapted from ref. 36). 
 Scheme 7  Synthesis of a PPV-like polymer via the Knoevenagel reaction (reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The obtained polymer showed promising applications for hydrogen production, but a low quantum yield (0.03). This could be due to self-quenching, a phenomenon frequently reported for aggregates.38 Moreover, the polymer is poorly soluble, which makes it harder to process.39
2.2.2.3. Horner–Wadsworth–Emmons reaction. 
The Horner–Wadsworth–Emmons (HWE) reaction is an alternative to the Wittig reaction and enables well-controlled polymerization. Indeed, the HWE reaction allows for better control of regioselectivity, as it leads primarily to double bonds with the trans configuration – this is not the case for the Wittig reaction, which also leads to the cis configuration. The general scheme of the HWE reaction is given in Scheme 8. Liao and coll. synthesized various polymers and a model compound mimicking their backbone using the HWE reaction (Fig. 4). Only the polymer bearing an n-hexyl group was characterized by SEC and NMR, suggesting that the others were not soluble in common solvents. The soluble polymer has a Mn value of 4000 g mol−1 and a dispersity of 2.1. All polymers showed intense fluorescence (QY from 0.4 to 0.55), while the corresponding model compound has a quantum yield of 0.68.40 This increased quantum yield is most likely due to self-quenching of the polymers, a phenomenon that does not affect the smaller model compound.38 The polymers were integrated in OLEDs emitting in the blue range. Van de Wetering and coll. used the HWE reaction to synthesize poly(thienylenevinylene). It corresponded to one block of a low bandgap polymer, with the objective of using the latter for photovoltaic application.41
 Scheme 8  General scheme of the Horner–Wadsworth–Emmons reaction. 
 Fig. 4  Polymer and model compound mimicking its backbone, all synthesized with the HWE reaction.40,42 
The HWE reaction was also used for a monomer bearing both an aldehyde function and a phosphonic acid function. The authors tried to avoid self-condensation to control the polymerization and achieve chain-growth polymerization (Scheme 9). Crown ethers were used to capture the potassium cation, leading to higher Mn values of up to 7600 g mol−1 with a dispersity of 1.2. When targeting Mn values higher than 10000 g mol−1, precipitation was observed, most likely due to strong π–π interactions leading to aggregation, as suggested by the authors.43 The main drawback of the HWE reaction is the production of phosphorus-based waste.
 Scheme 9  Synthesis of a thiophene-based π-conjugated polymer via the HWE reaction (adapted from ref. 43 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
2.2.2.4. Condensation of squaric acid. 
Polysquaraines are characterized by a low band gap and absorption in the near infrared range. The latter can be obtained by reacting squaric acid and an electron rich moiety,44 which can be aromatic or heterocyclic, as presented in Scheme 10. The polymer obtained in Scheme 10 was successfully integrated in OFETs with promising properties (5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for an unoptimized device) and in solar cells with high power conversion efficiency (0.86%).45 The polysquaraines presented in Fig. 5 were synthesized by Stille/Suzuki coupling and by condensation of squaric acid. Interestingly, the metal-free approach led to higher Mn values. These two polysquaraines exhibited a low band gap (1.6–1.7 eV) and promising properties for their future integration in bulk heterojunction solar cells.46 By changing the comonomer, various polysquaraines can be obtained, as illustrated in Fig. 6. Polymer 3 was used as a sensor for humidity for breath monitoring, with a short response time (less than a second). This polymer is most likely poorly soluble and was used to decorate silver particules.47 In contrast, polymer 4 is water-soluble, a promising property for bio-imaging.48 Various derivatives of polymer 5 were synthesized, as the solvent (1,3-propane diol) can be integrated in the polymer chains, allowing tuning of the optical properties. This type of polymer was integrated in OLEDs giving promising properties (almost white emission). However, such polymers show quite low Mn values (e.g. 3700 g mol−1 at most) and absorbance in the visible range. In addition, polysquaraines were also obtained after chlorination of the squaric acid monomer through the alcohol functions in order to evidence the ratio of 1,3 vs. 1,2 squaraine subunit linkages.49
 Scheme 10  Synthesis of polysquaraines (adapted from ref. 45 with permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc.). 
 Fig. 5  Structure of polysquaraines synthesized by either Stille/Suzuki coupling or condensation of squaric acid.46 
 Fig. 6  Structure of various polysquaraines.47–49 
2.2.2.5. Aldol condensation. 
Zhang and coll. investigated the synthesis of an isoindigo-based polymer using aldol condensation,50 as presented in Scheme 11. Aldol condensation is primarily used to synthesize small dyes51 – the authors claimed that they were the first to use this route to prepare π-conjugated polymers. This method allows the synthesis of polymer 6 without the use of any metallic catalyst with no branching defects. This polymer has been extensively studied and was also synthesized by transition-metal based coupling, such as Stille coupling (noted polymer 6-S).52–54 Polymer 6 and polymer 6-S have similar absorbance properties. Surprisingly, an OFET-based on polymer 6 showed worse properties than the one with polymer 6-S. The opposite was expected, as polymer 6 is supposed to contain less transition-metal impurities than polymer 6-S. Yet polymer 6 is not completely metal-free as a palladium-based catalyst was used to obtain the monomers by DHAP, as illustrated in Scheme 12. Zhang et al. claimed that the worse properties of polymer 6-based OFETs are due to the low Mn values, or because of device optimization. Still, polymer 6 showed promising properties and was integrated in an OFET that exhibited a mobility of 0.16 cm2 V−1 s−1, and polymer 6-S was successfully integrated in solar cells with a high PCE (up to 6.3%).52 Aldol condensation is a promising reaction pathway that could be used to obtain various donor–acceptor π-conjugated polymers and possibly thieno-isoindigo-based polymers (Fig. 7). Indeed, the link between the two halves of the thieno-isoindigo moiety is obtained by aldol condensation – then the polymer is obtained by Stille coupling. Thieno-isoindigo-based polymers exhibit a low band gap, absorbance in the near infrared region and promising properties for photovoltaics or OFETs (mobility up to 5.3 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1).55,56
 Scheme 11  Aldol condensation of an isoindigo-based polymer (reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Scheme 12  Synthesis of an isoindigo-based monomer via DHAP (reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 7  Thieno-isoindigo-based polymers.55,56 

2.3. Transition metal-free syntheses: conclusion
To avoid the use of transition-metal catalysts in the fabrication of p-conjugated polymers, various coupling strategies are available, with and without halogen atoms. The above-mentioned alternative coupling reactions are not as developed as Stille or Suzuki reactions – but they allow the syntheses of various original polymer structures sometimes not available by other coupling reactions. Another way to avoid the use of transition metal catalysts, which was not discussed herein, could be for instance to perform polymerization via electropolymerization57,58 or vapor phase deposition59 of appropriate monomers. Nevertheless, such routes cannot offer a comparable palette of well-defined π-conjugated structures. In the coming section, we would like to discuss a new way of thinking about the design of π-conjugated polymers through the use of biomass derivatives.
3. Bio-based building blocks and ensuing π-conjugated polymers
3.1. General description of lignocellulose
Lignocellulose biomass corresponds to forestry biomass, crops and crop residues. This biomass is mainly composed of lignin, cellulose and hemicelluloses, with various percentages depending on the vegetal species (Fig. 8).6 Cellulose is the most abundant biopolymer in Nature, and it is composed of cellobiose repeating units.60 Cellulose has a crystalline structure, which enables maintaining the structure of the plant. In contrast, hemicelluloses are branched polysaccharides with an amorphous morphology, the composition of which depends on the vegetal species.61 Finally, lignin is an aromatic polymer with a complex structure that also depends on the plant species. Hemicelluloses act as a glue that binds cellulose and lignin together and the hydrophobicity of lignin and its phenolic structure protect the wood against external aggressions.62 Cellulose and hemicelluloses have various applications, mostly in the paper industry (500 million tons of paper estimated to be produced in 202063), and they can also be used as biofuels. However, the latter industry still has many challenges to overcome as it is facing higher prices than anticipated for the raw materials, and a lowering of investment. Many biofuel start-ups have either failed or are actually using lignocellulosic biomass to synthesize specialty molecules.64 Apart from these two main applications, cellulose and hemicellulose can also be used in opto-electronic devices.
 Fig. 8  Weight percentages of cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin in various plants (reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Karakawa et al. grafted fluorescent units on the available hydroxyl functions of cellulose, leading to a compound that was successfully integrated into an OLED. This grafted cellulose acts as a host material for the emissive layer of the device.66 Cellulose was also used as a substrate for various opto-electronic applications, to replace plastic. Thanks to its flexibility and transmittance in the visible range, cellulose was integrated as a substrate for flexible OLEDs leading to efficient and promising devices with high brightness and efficiency.67,68 Qian et al. reported the fabrication of an OFET using cellulose as a flexible and biodegradable substrate, coated with chitosan, another bio-based polymer that can be obtained from shrimp shells.69 Chitosan acted as a smoothing layer, as the roughness of cellulosic paper can be an impediment to the use of paper as a substrate for opto-electronic applications.70 As for lignin, it is mainly burnt to produce energy for the paper plant. However, it is estimated that 30–75 million tons of lignin per day could be produced by kraft pulp plants without affecting their energy needs (estimated for a plant that produces 0.5 billion kg of oven-dried wood pulp (odw) annually71). When not burnt, lignin can be used as a cement dispersant, optimizing the cement properties.72,73 Lignin can also be depolymerized and used to produce various organic molecules, as will be exemplified in the next section.
3.2. Aromatic molecules from lignin

3.2.1. General description. 
Two main industrial processes are used to produce lignin: (i) the Kraft process and (ii) bisulfite process. The Kraft process is used by the paper industry to obtain pulp but also resins and terpenes.74 As mentioned previously, the lignin obtained as a black liquor is most of the time burnt to produce energy. In the bisulfite process, cellulose of higher purity can be obtained, and lignin is once more a by-product obtained as lignosulfonates. Borregaard Lignotech (Norway) and Rayonier (USA) are the main producers of lignosulfonates. Both of these chemical processes break chemical bonds of lignin, but they also create new ones. Subsequently, other methods were tested to depolymerize lignin in a more controlled way and to avoid unwanted bond formations or impurities. Amongst them, the Organosolv process is the most industrially advanced,75 but others have also been tested, like the enzymatic way.76,77 Once the lignin is isolated, it can be decomposed to obtain aromatic synthons. Two routes can be followed: (i) oxidation or (ii) reduction pathways. The reduction pathway can lead to a benzene, toluene and xylene platform,78 while the oxidation route can lead to various other aromatic compounds,79 as presented in Fig. 9. To consider such molecules as potential monomers, they have to be at least bi-functional. One way to enable this bifunctionality is to produce dimers by C–C coupling. Caillol et al. recently reviewed the various ways to create such bonds.7 Following an enzymatic coupling strategy, Grelier and coll. developed a platform of vanillin dimers as promising building blocks for opto-electronic applications.80–83 The dimerization of vanillin is given in Scheme 13. This procedure requires nonhazardous solvents (water/acetone) and is done at room temperature. Divanillin is produced as the only product in high yield, and this reaction can be performed on a multi-gram scale.80,84 Vanillin is naturally synthesized in Nature by a climbing orchid and can be recovered after curing the pods. However, this process is long, slow and tedious, with a very low yield: 500 kg of vanilla pods are required to produce 1 kg of vanillin.85 Therefore natural vanillin is expensive and in 2019, its cost was around 500$ per kg.86 Another way to obtain vanillin is to derivatize petroleum-based guaiacol,87 but more environment-friendly and bio-sourced ways are available. Indeed, vanillin can be obtained from eugenol88 but also from lignosulfonates. The main producer of vanillin starting from lignosulfonates is Borregaard (Norway). Solvay also produces vanillin by bioconversion of ferulic acid from rice bran (Rhovanil89). In both cases, the obtained vanillin is used as a flavoring agent for the food industry. But vanillin has also been widely developed as a polymer precursor.90,91 Llevot et al. notably demonstrated that dimers of vanillin can easily undergo polymerization, leading to polyesters,84 epoxide networks,92etc. Vanillin can also be used in the synthesis of π-conjugated polymers, as is described in the next section.
 Fig. 9  Structures of aromatic molecules that can be obtained from lignin.79,95–97 
 Scheme 13  Laccase-catalyzed vanillin dimerization.98 


3.2.2. Conjugated polymers from vanillin. 
As stated previously, vanillin can easily be dimerized via enzymatic coupling.80 The team of Arndtsen investigated the synthesis of cross-conjugated polymers via multi-component synthesis, and applied it with divanillin as a starting monomer. They improved the synthetic protocol, from palladium-catalyzed93 to transition-metal free,82 as illustrated in Scheme 14. First, divanillin was reacted with an amine and integrated in a one-pot synthesis with aromatic acid chloride and catechyl (PPh). Then, a substituted alkene was added to finally yield the polymer. This multi-component synthesis enables high step-economy; its drawback is the use of an acyl chloride moiety. By modulating the acyl chloride moiety and the various substituents (R1, R2, R3, and R4), a whole range of cross-conjugated polymers were obtained, with tunable optical properties. The most promising polymers are presented in Fig. 10. Their absorbance maxima are rather low (in the near-UV range), but both polymers exhibited a strong fluorescence with a high quantum yield, heralding promising properties for ensuing OLEDs.94
 Scheme 14  Multi-component synthesis of divanillin-based polypyrrole. (i) Dichloromethane, 45 °C, 24 h, (ii) DBU, RT, 15 minutes, (iii) (RT, 18 hours) (adapted with permission from ref. 82 Copyright ©2016, American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 10  Structure and characteristics of divanillin-based cross-conjugated polymers (molar masses determined by SEC in THF, and optical properties determined in chloroform, QY determined versus an anthracene standard) (adapted with permission from ref. 82 Copyright ©2016, American Chemical Society). 
Notably, polymer O (see Fig. 10) was synthesized using furan-2,5-dicarboxylic acid (FDCA), which can be obtained from 5-HMF (see Section 3.3.1.), paving the way towards fully biobased π-conjugated polymers. Other reactions are possible, for example by transposing the synthesis of vanillin-based small dyes to the synthesis of divanillin-based polymers, as illustrated in Scheme 15 with a Knoevenagel condensation. The obtained dyes were used as sensors for volatile amines.99 Another type of coupling using vanillin is the formation of a Schiff base.100,101 These compounds have been intensively studied, but mostly for their antibacterial properties102 or as complexes.103
 Scheme 15  Synthesis of vanillin-based dyes via Knoevenagel condensation (adapted from ref. 99). 

3.3. Furan and its derivatives

3.3.1. General description. 
Furan and its derivatives have also gained massive interest as bio-based compounds. Indeed, the furan moiety is reported to yield polymers with high thermal stability104 and has promising properties for opto-electronic applications. It is structurally close to thiophene, one of the main building blocks for organic electronics.105 The furan moiety is believed to have superior properties over thiophene, as its oxygen atom is smaller than the sulfur one of thiophene. This size difference is expected to cause higher planarity and therefore more efficient π-stacking and charge transport; the furan moiety also enables strong fluorescence.106 Furfural can be obtained by dehydration of xylose, which can be derivatized from hemicellulose. 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural (5-HMF) is another furan-based compound that can be obtained by dehydration of sugars – it is also easily found in food products,107 and can be derivatized into 2,5-dimethylfuran, a promising biofuel.108 By dehydrating 5-carbon sugars or derivatizing furfural or 5-HMF, various compounds are accessible: some are presented in Fig. 11. These compounds can be used as monomers: 2,5-bishydroxymethylfuran was used as such in the course of polymerization, leading to self-healing polymers.109 Furan-based polymers can also be obtained by polymerizing a methacrylate furan-based compound, leading to polymers with furan as a pendant group.110 5-HMF can be derivatized as a dicarboxylic furan (furan-2,5-dicarboxylic acid, FDCA, in Fig. 12);111 this led to various polyesters with promising properties that rival those of petroleum-based plastics.112–114 However, in these examples, the π-conjugated structure of furan is not fully exploited. Furan-based monomers that could lead to π-conjugated polymers are presented in Fig. 12. Furan-2,5-diacyl chloride can easily be obtained by derivatization of FDCA, in a single and solvent-free step.115 2,5-Diformylfuran can be obtained by selective oxidation of 5-HMF, but also in one step by derivatizing fructose.116,117 Finally, difurfural can be obtained by dimerization of bromofurfural under photoirradiation. The latter experimental protocol was improved by using bromofurfural as a photosensitive initiator, and furfural as the main reagent. The dimerization takes place between furfural molecules, leading to difurfural in good yield – subsequently, this process was scaled-up. A reaction mechanism was proposed by the authors and is presented in Scheme 16.118 This experimental protocol was published in 2000 and surprisingly no development could be found afterwards. Nowadays, reports on difurfural synthesis actually describe a longer experimental protocol, with a protection/deprotection step and also the use of a palladium-based catalyst,119,120 as shown in Scheme 17. Furan-based compounds are promising building blocks and could be comparable to thiophene and may even be better than it, thanks to their efficient π-stacking and strong fluorescence. In Fig. 13, the simulation of the HOMO and LUMO of difurfural shows how planar it can be, heralding promising opto-electronic properties.121
 Fig. 11  Examples of furan-based compounds that can be obtained from bio-based resources.6 
 Fig. 12  Structure of difunctional furan-based monomers. 
 Scheme 16  Synthesis of difurfural via photochemistry (adapted from ref. 118 with permission from Elsevier). 
 Scheme 17  Experimental protocol to obtain difurfural from furfural (adapted from ref. 119). 
 Fig. 13  Optimized structure of electronic orbitals of difurfural ((a) HOMO and (b) LUMO).119 


3.3.2. Furan-based π-conjugated polymers. 
As mentioned previously, furan is a promising building block for the synthesis of π-conjugated polymers.122,123 Indeed, furan can exhibit similar and even superior properties to thiophene.106 One promising furan-based monomer is presented in Scheme 18, along with its ensuing polymer. This monomer can be obtained from cyano furan and the polymer is synthesized via Stille coupling. The polymer has a low band gap and was integrated in efficient OFETs124,125 and solar cells.126,127 Ma and coll. also synthesized a furan-based polymer,128 starting from biobased 5-HMF, as presented in Scheme 19. Interestingly, a benzoxazole-based monomer could be obtained from 3,4-AHBA. The polymer has a relatively low Mn value (3900 g mol−1, i.e. 6 units) but it has a strong blue fluorescence, with a quantum yield of 0.57.128 Even if efforts were made to make the polymer's integration in devices125 or the monomer's synthesis more sustainable,128 the coupling reactions still induce the presence of transition-metal impurities in the polymer, as well as the production of hazardous waste. To avoid these issues, another way to obtain furan-based conjugated polymers is to synthesize polyazomethines.129 Xiang and coll. synthesized various furan-based polyazomethines, by using aromatic and aliphatic diamines, as presented in Scheme 20. The polymerization was performed at room temperature without any catalysts. The polymer presented in Scheme 20 precipitated during polymerization, while the cyclic species 7 remained in solution. The structure of the latter was confirmed by mass spectroscopy. Solubility was an issue for the various polymers synthesized and subsequently the molar masses were determined by mass spectroscopy. The masses are rather low (6 repeating units), as the polymerization reaction is limited due to the precipitation of the polymers and the formation of cyclic species. A polyazomethine with aromatic diamines also exhibited low Mn values and its optical properties were not extensively studied. Moreover, it is not fully π-conjugated – yet it has an absorbance maximum close to the visible range, heralding promising properties for a fully π-conjugated polyazomethine (Fig. 14).130
 Scheme 18  Synthesis of furan-based monomer and ensuing polymerization via Stille coupling (adapted with permission from ref. 126 Copyright ©2010, American Chemical Society). 
 Scheme 19  Synthesis of a furan-based monomer and polymer thereof via Suzuki coupling (adapted from ref. 128 with permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc.). 
 Scheme 20  Synthesis of furan-based polyazomethines and cyclic species obtained during polymerization (adapted from ref. 130 with permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc.). 
 Fig. 14  Absorbance spectra of dialdehyde furan and furan-based polyazomethines (in m-cresol) (adapted from ref. 130 with permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc.). 
Tachibana et al. investigated the synthesis of difurfural-based polyazomethines. The authors synthesized difurfural through a palladium-based coupling reaction (Scheme 17) and then reacted it with various diamines, as presented in Fig. 15. The polymerization was performed in m-cresol or in bulk but in both cases without any catalysts.
 Fig. 15  General structure of difurfural-based polyazomethines.119 
While not clearly measured, the Mn values of the polymers range from 1000 to 10000 g mol−1 depending on the diamine. Interestingly, the formation of cyclic compounds was also observed in this polymerization. Polymer 13 has an absorbance maximum at 442 nm – the authors did not optically characterize further these polyazomethines, as they were interested in their mechanical properties.119

3.4. 3-Amino-4-hydroxybenzoic acid, a renewable monomer produced by a microorganism
3-Amino-4-hydroxybenzoic acid, noted as 3,4-AHBA, can be easily obtained by Streptomyces griseus, a microorganism found in sandy grounds.131 By implementing the correct DNA sequence, other microorganisms can also carry out the synthesis of 3,4-AHBA.132 It is a versatile monomer that can be easily polymerized through electropolymerization (Scheme 21). This method relies on a potential difference between two electrodes – the polymerization can occur either on the anode or the cathode, depending on the monomer.58,133 The polymer obtained bears strong similitudes with polyaniline (PANi), an intensively studied conducting polymer. The latter exhibits strong conductivity and stability and can be easily doped/de-doped under acidic/basic conditions. For example, PANi can be used for biomedical applications,134 but also as nanofibers.135,136 However, PANi is poorly soluble in common solvents, which makes it harder to process. In contrast, poly(3,4-AHBA) is more soluble and its Mn value was determined by SEC in THF (5500 g mol−1, dispersity ∼1). Poly(3,4-AHBA) showed a behavior similar to that of PANi, with not only halochromism but also solvatochromism.137 Another team synthesized poly(3,4-AHBA) via electropolymerization and obtained nanoparticles by using different experimental conditions. The nanoparticles exhibit good pH sensitivity, even better than that of PANi, thanks to the two additional pH-sensitive functions on the monomer units: hydroxy and carboxylic acid. These nanoparticles could be used for electrochemical sensing and biosensing.138
 Scheme 21  Electropolymerization of 3,4-AHBA (adapted from ref. 137). 
3,4-AHBA can also be polymerized to form polybenzoxazoles. These polymers are mostly used for their high tensile strength, Young's modulus and excellent thermal stability. Zylon (poly(p-phenylene-2,6-benzobisoxazole)) was used as a ballistic vest for example.139 The synthesis of polybenzoxazoles from 3,4-AHBA was patented with the objective to use the polymer for its mechanical properties.140 Yet polybenzoxazoles are also promising conjugated polymers. Indeed, the polymer presented in Fig. 16 was successfully used for fluorescence imaging and fluorescence patterning (synthesis performed via Suzuki coupling).141 Moreover, benzoxazoles are well-known dyes, with bright fluorescence even in the solid state.142,143 An example of their synthesis is given in Scheme 22. 3,4-AHBA could also be used to synthesize other types of p-conjugated polymers such as polybenzobisthiazoles and polythiazolothiazoles. It is noteworthy that the hydroxy groups can further be alkylated in order to tune the solubility of the ensuing polymers.
 Fig. 16  Polybenzoxazole used for fluorescence imaging and patterning.141 
 Scheme 22  Synthesis of benzoxazole dye (reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
3.5. Bio-based building blocks and ensuing polymers: conclusion
Lignocellulosic biomass can provide a wide range of molecules, from phenol- to furan-based compounds, but many others, mainly arenes or heteroarenes.144 Such biobased molecules can then undergo polymerization, leading to various polymers with promising optoelectronic features. We chose to focus on the compounds that could be used for organic electronics, namely with moieties that could enable π-conjugation: aromatic and furan-based molecules. Vanillin is an interesting compound, as it can be easily dimerized by an environment friendly reaction.80 Another type of promising molecules for organic electronics is based on furan derivatives that could be comparable to thiophene, showing even stronger fluorescence. In Fig. 13, the simulation of the HOMO and LUMO of difurfural shows how planar it can be, heralding promising opto-electronic properties.121 A molecule produced from a microorganism, 3,4-AHBA, also shows good promise in the field.
4. General conclusion
The synthesis of π-conjugated polymers for organic electronics mainly relies on conventional coupling reactions, which implies the pollution of the final materials with residual transition metals. Other coupling reactions are accessible to avoid such impurities, and some were discussed in this review. Firstly, it is possible to avoid hazardous monomers via DHAP. This coupling, based on palladium catalysts, allows the formation of a C–C bond between aryl moieties through halogen derivatives. Some transition metal-free coupling reactions can be performed to synthesize π-conjugated polymers, such as bromine-catalyzed coupling24 and the NMRP-mediated approach.26 Amongst others, the formation of azomethine bonds31 and the Knoevenagel reaction39 enable the synthesis of π-conjugated polymers without either transition-metal or halogen impurities. In the present review article, we also selected bio-based substrates having good potential in the field of organic electronics, i.e. vanillin as well as furan and its derivatives. Indeed, both were used as promising monomers for the synthesis of various polymers (e.g. vanillin-based92,145 and furan-based polyesters112) and are also promising building blocks for organic electronics.106 It is obvious and promising that lignocellulosic biomass can be a source of a wide platform of substrates with various structures (aromatic, heterocyclic, linear, etc.) and functionalities (aldehyde, hydroxy and methoxy for example). To sum up, while efforts have been made in parallel to design bio-based π-conjugated polymers or to develop alternative environment-friendly routes to semiconducting polymers, there is a great deal of room for development and progress in combining these two methodologies targeting more sustainable yet still efficient materials for organic electronics.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Solvay and the Région Nouvelle Aquitaine for the funding. The authors also thank ELORPrintTec (ANR-10-EQPX-28-01) and LCPO/Arkema/ANR Industrial Chair ‘HOMERIC’ (ANR-13-CHIN-0002-01).
Notes and references
B. S. Nehls, 
            et al., Semiconducting polymers via microwave-assisted Suzuki and Stille cross-coupling reactions, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 352–356 CrossRef CAS .
D. Milstein and J. K. Stille, A General, Selective, and Facile Method for Ketone Synthesis from Acid Chlorides and Organotin Compounds Catalyzed by Palladium, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 3636–3638 CrossRef CAS .
Ö. Usluer, 
            et al., Metal residues in semiconducting polymers: Impact on the performance of organic electronic devices, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 1134–1138 CrossRef .
A. Marrocchi, A. Facchetti, D. Lanari, C. Petrucci and L. Vaccaro, Current methodologies for a sustainable approach to π-conjugated organic semiconductors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 763–786 RSC .
B. Nagel, H. Dellweg and L. M. Gierasch, Glossary for chemists of terms used in biotechnology, Pure Appl. Chem., 1992, 64, 143–168 CAS .
F. H. Isikgor and C. R. Becer, Lignocellulosic biomass: a sustainable platform for the production of bio-based chemicals and polymers, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 4497–4559 RSC .
M. Decostanzi, R. Auvergne, B. Boutevin and S. Caillol, Biobased phenol and furan derivative coupling for the synthesis of functional monomers, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 724–747 RSC .
J. J. Bozell and G. R. Petersen, Technology development for the production of biobased products from biorefinery carbohydrates – The US Department of Energy's ‘top 10’ revisited, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 539–554 RSC .
L. G. Mercier and M. Leclerc, Direct (hetero)arylation: A new tool for polymer chemists, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1597–1605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sévignon, J. Papillon, E. Schulz and M. Lemaire, New synthetic method for the polymerization of alkylthiophenes, Tetrahedron Lett., 1999, 40, 5873–5876 CrossRef .
E. Iizuka, M. Wakioka and F. Ozawa, Mixed-ligand approach to palladium-catalyzed direct arylation polymerization: Synthesis of donor-acceptor polymers with dithienosilole (DTS) and thienopyrroledione (TPD) units, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2989–2993 CrossRef CAS .
B. Biswas, M. Sugimoto and S. Sakaki, C-H Bond Activation of Benzene and Methane by M(η2-O2CH)2 (M) (Pd or Pt). A Theoretical Study, Organometallics, 2000, 19, 3895–3908 CrossRef CAS .
P. O. Morin, 
            et al., Conjugated polymers à la carte from time-controlled direct (hetero)arylation polymerization, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fujinami, J. Kuwabara, W. Lu, H. Hayashi and T. Kanbara, Synthesis of thiophene- and bithiophene-based alternating copolymers via Pd-catalyzed direct C-H arylation, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 67–70 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lombeck, H. Komber, S. I. Gorelsky and M. Sommer, Identifying homocouplings as critical side reactions in direct arylation polycondensation, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 819–823 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kuwabara, 
            et al., Direct arylation polycondensation: A promising method for the synthesis of highly pure, high-molecular-weight conjugated polymers needed for improving the performance of organic photovoltaics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3226–3233 CrossRef CAS .
A. Robitaille, S. A. Jenekhe and M. Leclerc, Poly(naphthalene diimide- alt-bithiophene) Prepared by Direct (Hetero)arylation Polymerization for Efficient All-Polymer Solar Cells, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5353–5361 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leclerc, S. Brassard and S. Beaupré, Direct (hetero)arylation polymerization: toward defect-free conjugated polymers, Polym. J., 2020, 52, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bura, 
            et al., Direct heteroarylation polymerization: Guidelines for defect-free conjugated polymers, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3913–3925 RSC .
J. Mei, K. R. Graham, R. Stalder and J. R. Reynolds, Synthesis of isoindigo-based oligothiophenes for molecular bulk heterojunction solar cells, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 660–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kuwabara, T. Yasuda, N. Takase and T. Kanbara, Effects of the Terminal Structure, Purity, and Molecular Weight of an Amorphous Conjugated Polymer on Its Photovoltaic
Characteristics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1752–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, J. Kuwabara and T. Kanbara, Polycondensation of dibromofluorene analogues with tetrafluorobenzene via direct arylation, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 1252–1255 CrossRef CAS .
F. Grenier, 
            et al., Electroactive and photoactive poly[isoindigo-alt-EDOT] synthesized using direct (hetero)arylation polymerization in batch and in continuous flow, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2137–2143 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, 
            et al., Metal Free Conducting PEDOS, PEDOT, and Their Analogues via an Unusual Bromine-Catalyzed Polymerization, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 8760–8764 CrossRef CAS .
M. Heeney, 
            et al., Regioregular poly(3-hexyl)selenophene: A low band gap organic hole transporting polymer, Chem. Commun., 2007, 5061–5063,  10.1039/b712398a .
M. S. Maji, T. Pfeifer and A. Studer, Transition-metal-free synthesis of conjugated polymers from bis-Grignard reagents by using TEMPO as Oxidant, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 5872–5875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, S. Wu, Y. Qu, Y. Geng and F. Wang, Grignard Metathesis Chain-Growth Polymerization for Polyfluorene, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8944–8947 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mallet, A. Bolduc, S. Bishop, Y. Gautier and W. G. Skene, Unusually high fluorescence quantum yield of a homopolyfluorenylazomethine-towards a universal fluorophore, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 24382–24390 RSC .
S. Grankowska Ciechanowicz, 
            et al., Toward Better Efficiency of Air-Stable Polyazomethine-Based Organic Solar Cells Using Time-Resolved Photoluminescence and Light-Induced Electron Spin Resonance as Verification Methods, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11415–11425 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gawlinska, 
            et al., Searching of new, cheap, air- and thermally stable hole transporting materials for perovskite solar cells, Opto-Electron. Rev., 2017, 25, 274–284 CrossRef .
A. Bolduc, C. Mallet and W. G. Skene, Survey of recent advances of in the field of π-conjugated heterocyclic azomethines as materials with tuneable properties, Sci. China: Chem., 2013, 56, 3–23 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Yang and S. A. Jenekhe, Conjugated Aromatic Poly(azomethines). 1. Characterization of Structure, Electronic Spectra, and Processing of Thin Films from Soluble Complexes, Chem. Mater., 1991, 3, 878–887 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barik, T. Bletzacker and W. G. Skene, π-Conjugated fluorescent azomethine copolymers: Opto-electronic, halochromic, and doping properties, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1165–1173 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barik and W. G. Skene, A fluorescent all-fluorene polyazomethine—towards soluble conjugated polymers exhibiting high fluorescence and electrochromic properties, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1091–1097 RSC .
C. Mallet, M. Le Borgne, M. Starck and W. G. Skene, Unparalleled fluorescence of a polyazomethine prepared from the self-condensation of an automer and its potential use as a fluorimetric sensor for explosive detection, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 250–254 RSC .
N. C. Greenham, S. C. Moratti, D. D. C. Bradley, R. H. Friend and A. B. Holmes, Efficient light-emitting diodes based on polymers with high electron affinities, Nature, 1993, 365, 628–630 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Pang, Design and Synthesis of Conjugated, Polymers, Wiley-VCH,  2010, ch. 4 Search PubMed .
R. Jakubiak, C. J. Collison, W. A. Chou, L. J. Rothberg and B. R. Hsieh, Aggregation quenching of luminescence in electroluminescent conjugated polymers, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 2394–2398 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, 
            et al., A fluorescent conjugated polymer photocatalyst based on Knoevenagel polycondensation for hydrogen production, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 7093–7098 RSC .
L. Liao, Y. Pang, L. Ding and F. E. Karasz, Blue-emitting soluble poly(m-phenylenevinylene) derivatives, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 7300–7305 CrossRef CAS .
K. Van De Wetering, C. Brochon, C. Ngov and G. Hadziioannou, Design and synthesis of a low band gap conjugated macroinitiator: Toward rod-coil donor-acceptor block copolymers, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4289–4297 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liao, 
            et al., Synthesis and luminescence of yellow/orange-emitting
poly[tris(2,5-dihexyloxy-1,4-phenylenevinylene)-alt-(1,3-phenylenevinylene)]s, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42, 5853–5862 CrossRef CAS .
E. Goto, Y. Ochiai, M. Ueda and T. Higashihara, Transition-metal-free and halogen-free controlled synthesis of poly(3-alkylthienylene vinylene): Via the Horner-Wadsworth-Emmons condensation reaction, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1996–2001 RSC .
A. Ajayaghosh, Chemistry of squaraine-derived materials: Near-IR dyes, low band gap systems, and cation sensors, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 449–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Broggi, 
            et al., Squaraine-Based Polymers: Toward Optimized Structures for Optoelectronic Devices, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2017, 218, 1–9 CrossRef .
J. Oriou, 
            et al., Synthesis of squaraine-based alternated π-conjugated copolymers: From conventional cross-coupling reactions to metal-free polycondensation, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 7100–7108 RSC .
J. Zhou, 
            et al., Surface modification of polysquaraines to sense humidity within a second for breath monitoring, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 271, 137–146 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Havinga, A. Pomp, W. ten Hoeve and H. Wynberg, Water-soluble polysquaraines and polycroconaines, Synth. Met., 1995, 69, 581–582 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garbay, 
            et al., Triaryl-1,4-diamine-based polysquaraines: Effect of co-solvent and monomer insertion on optoelectronic properties, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1288–1292 RSC .
G. Zhang, 
            et al., Facile green synthesis of isoindigo-based conjugated polymers using aldol polycondensation, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 3448–3456 RSC .
J. Mei, K. R. Graham, R. Stalder and J. R. Reynolds, Synthesis of isoindigo-based oligothiophenes for molecular bulk heterojunction solar cells, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 660–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Wang, 
            et al., An Easily Accessible Isoindigo-Based Polymer for High-Performance Polymer Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14244–14247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Stalder, J. Mei, K. R. Graham, L. A. Estrada and J. R. Reynolds, Isoindigo, a versatile electron-deficient unit for high-performance organic electronics, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 664–678 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, B. Sun, J. Quinn, Z. Yan and Y. Li, Synthesis and properties of indigo based donor–acceptor conjugated polymers, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4289–4296 RSC .
Y. Koizumi, 
            et al., Thienoisoindigo-based low-band gap polymers for organic electronic devices, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 484 RSC .
M. Ide, 
            et al., Near-infrared absorbing thienoisoindigo-based copolymers for organic photovoltaics, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26859–26870 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Konkol, R. L. Schwiderski and S. C. Rasmussen, Synthesis, characterization, and electropolymerization of extended fused-ring thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine-based terthienyls, Materials, 2016, 9(6), 404 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Sayyah, M. M. El-Rabiey, S. S. Abd El-Rehim and R. E. Azooz, Electropolymerization kinetics of o-aminophenol and characterization of the obtained polymer films, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2006, 99, 3093–3109 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bilger, S. Z. Homayounfar and T. L. Andrew, A critical review of reactive vapor deposition for conjugated polymer synthesis, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7159–7174 RSC .
A. C. O’Sullivan, Cellulose: the structure slowly unravels, Cellulose, 1997, 4, 173–207 CrossRef .
J. Puls, Chemistry and biochemistry of hemicelluloses: Relationship between hemicellulose structure and enzymes required for hydrolysis, Macromol. Symp., 1997, 120, 183–196 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ithal, 
            et al., Developmental transcript profiling of cyst nematode feeding cells in soybean roots, Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact., 2007, 20, 510–525 CrossRef CAS .

          P. M. Gopal, N. M. Sivaram and D. Barik, Paper Industry Wastes and Energy Generation From Wastes, Energy from Toxic Organic Waste for Heat and Power Generation, Elsevier Ltd.,  2019 DOI:10.1016/b978-0-08-102528-4.00007-9 .
L. R. Lynd, The grand challenge of cellulosic biofuels, Nat. Biotechnol., 2017, 35, 912–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Zhou, X. Xia, C.
X. Lin, D. S. Tong and J. Beltramini, Catalytic conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to fine chemicals and fuels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5588–5617 RSC .
M. Karakawa, 
            et al., Organic light-emitting diode application of fluorescent cellulose as a natural polymer, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2007, 208, 2000–2006 CrossRef CAS .
S. Purandare, E. F. Gomez and A. J. Steckl, High brightness phosphorescent organic light emitting diodes on transparent and flexible cellulose films, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25(9), 094012 CrossRef .
S. H. Min, C. K. Kim, H. N. Lee and D. G. Moon, An OLED using cellulose paper as a flexible substrate, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2012, 563, 159–165 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qian, J. Sun, J. Yang and Y. Gao, Flexible organic field-effect transistors on biodegradable cellulose paper with efficient reusable ion gel dielectrics, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 14567–14574 RSC .
N. Kurra, D. Dutta and G. U. Kulkarni, Field effect transistors and RC filters from pencil-trace on paper, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8367–8372 RSC .

          A. Berlin and M. Balakshin, Industrial Lignins: Analysis, Properties, and Applications. Bioenergy Research: Advances and Applications, Elsevier,  2014 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-444-59561-4.00018-8 .

          A. K. Sengupta, J. Gargulak, L. Bushar and V. Zajakowski, Low retarding, high fluidity producing lignin dispersant for concrete, WO2001036344A2,  2001 Search PubMed .

          S. Otani, K. Fukuoka, Y. Fukuoka, B. Igarashi and T. Sasaki, Method for Producing Carbonized Lignin Fiber,  1969 Search PubMed .
F. S. Chakar and A. J. Ragauskas, Review of current and future softwood kraft lignin process chemistry, Ind. Crops Prod., 2004, 20, 131–141 CrossRef CAS .

          E. S. A. Muurinen, Organosolv Pulping A review and distillation study related to peroxyacid pulping, University of Oulu,  2000 Search PubMed .

          A. Rakotovelo, Fragmentation enzymatique de la lignine pour l’obtention de synthons phénoliques, Université de Bordeaux,  2016 Search PubMed .
V. Hämäläinen, 
            et al., Enzymatic processes to unlock the lignin value, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2018, 6, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Synthesis of transportation fuels from biomass: Chemistry, catalysts, and engineering, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lange, S. Decina and C. Crestini, Oxidative upgrade of lignin-Recent routes reviewed, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 1151–1173 CrossRef CAS .
A. Llevot, E. Grau, S. Carlotti, S. Grelier and H. Cramail, Selective laccase-catalyzed dimerization of phenolic compounds derived from lignin: Towards original symmetrical bio-based (bis) aromatic monomers, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2016, 125, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chithambarathanu, K. Vanaja and J. D. Magdaline, Molecular structure, spectroscopic studies, HOMO-LUMO profile and NBO analysis of 3-Ethoxy-4-hydroxy benzaldehyde, Rasayan J. Chem., 2015, 8, 490–508 CAS .
L. V. Kayser, E. M. Hartigan and B. A. Arndtsen, Multicomponent Coupling Approach to Cross-Conjugated Polymers from Vanillin-Based Monomers, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4(12), 6263–6267 CrossRef CAS .
C. Andraud, 
            et al., Theoretical and experimental investigations of the nonlinear optical properties of vanillin, polyenovanillin, and bisvanillin derivatives, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 2094–2102 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Llevot, Resinic acid and lignin derivative dimers: new precursors for the synthesis of biobased polymers, Université de Bordeaux,  2014 Search PubMed .
N. J. Gallage, 
            et al., Vanillin formation from ferulic acid in Vanilla planifolia is catalysed by a single enzyme, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gelski, Vanilla prices slowly drop as crop quality improves, Food Business News, 2019, 1, 27–28 Search PubMed .
K. Reimer, Ueber eine neue Bildungsweise aromatischer Aldehyde, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1876, 9, 423–424 CrossRef .
M. B. Hocking, Vanillin: Synthetic flavoring from spent sulfite liquor, J. Chem. Educ., 1997, 74, 1055–1059 CrossRef CAS .
Solvay. Rhovanil® Natural CW|Solvay.
M. Fache, 
            et al., Vanillin, a promising biobased building-block for monomer synthesis, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 1987–1998 RSC .
M. Fache, B. Boutevin and S. Caillol, Vanillin, a key-intermediate of biobased polymers, Eur. Polym. J., 2015, 68, 488–502 CrossRef CAS .
E. Savonnet, E. Grau, S. Grelier, B. Defoort and H. Cramail, Divanillin-Based Epoxy Precursors as DGEBA Substitutes for Biobased Epoxy Thermosets, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11008–11017 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Leitch, 
            et al., A palladium-catalysed multicomponent coupling approach to conjugated poly(1,3-dipoles) and polyheterocycles, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
P. Camurlu, Polypyrrole derivatives for electrochromic applications, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 55832–55845 RSC .
J. van Haveren, E. L. Scott and J. Sanders, Bulk chemicals from biomass, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2008, 2, 41–57 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rahimi, A. Ulbrich, J. J. Coon and S. S. Stahl, Formic-acid-induced depolymerization of oxidized lignin to aromatics, Nature, 2014, 515, 249–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Arevalo-Gallegos, Z. Ahmad, M. Asgher, R. Parra-Saldivar and H. M. N. Iqbal, Lignocellulose: A sustainable material to produce value-added products with a zero waste approach—A review, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2017, 99, 308–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Antoniotti, L. Santhanam, D. Ahuja, M. G. Hogg and J. S. Dordick, Structural diversity of peroxidase-catalyzed oxidation products of o-methoxyphenols, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 1975–1978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Asiri, G. Baghaffar, A. Al-Harby and M.-A. Zayed, Synthesis of Some Vanillin Derivatives and their Use as an Optical Sensor for the Detection of Volatile Organic Compounds, J. King Abdulaziz Univ., 2009, 21, 117–128 CrossRef .
E. A. Dikusar, V. I. Potkin, N. G. Kozlov and A. P. Yuvchenko, Synthesis of N,N′-bis-[3-alkoxy-4-(hydroxy, alkoxy, acyloxy)-phenylmethylene- and -Phenylmethyl]-1,3-phenylenediamines, J. Pept. Sci., 2001, 60, 58–60 Search PubMed .
E. A. Dikusar, N. G. Kozlov, V. I. Potkin, V. A. Azarko and A. P. Yuvchenko, Synthesis, film-forming properties, and thermal and light sensitivity of N,N′-bis[4-hydroxy(alkoxy, acyloxy)-3-alkoxyphenylmethylidene]benzene-1,4- diamines, Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 2008, 78, 281–285 CrossRef CAS .
Z. D. Petrović, J. Orović, D. Simijonović, V. P. Petrović and Z. Marković, Experimental and theoretical study of antioxidative properties of some salicylaldehyde and vanillic Schiff bases, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 24094–24100 RSC .
R. H. Laye, Syntheses and photophysical properties of a series of [2:2] silver(I) metallocycles, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2007, 360, 439–447 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Vasiliou, M. R. Nimlos, J. W. Daily and G. B. Ellison, Thermal decomposition of furan generates propargyl radicals, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 8540–8547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. F. Perepichka, D. F. Perepichka and H. Meng, Handbook of Thiophene-Based Materials: Applications in Organic Electronics and Photonics,  2009 DOI:10.1002/9780470745533.ch19 .
Z. Zhao, 
            et al., Furan Is Superior to Thiophene: A Furan-Cored AIEgen with Remarkable Chromism and OLED Performance, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
U. M. Shapla, M. Solayman, N. Alam, M. I. Khalil and S. H. Gan, 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) levels in honey and other food products: effects on bees and human health, Chem. Cent. J., 2018, 12, 1–18 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Eldeeb and B. Akih-Kumgeh, Recent trends in the production, combustion and modeling of furan-based fuels, Energies, 2018, 11, 1–47 CrossRef .
C. Zeng, H. Seino, J. Ren, K. Hatanaka and N. Yoshie, Bio-based furan polymers with self-healing ability, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 1794–1802 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Y. Zhang and E. Y. X. Chen, Anionic polymerization of biomass-derived furfuryl methacrylate: Controlling polymer tacticity and thermoreversibility, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2013, 51, 2793–2803 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sajid, X. Zhao and D. Liu, Production of 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) from 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF): Recent progress focusing on the chemical-catalytic routes, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 5427–5453 RSC .
A. F. Sousa, 
            et al., Biobased polyesters and other polymers from 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid: A tribute to furan excellency, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 5961–5983 RSC .
E. De Jong, M. A. Dam, L. Sipos and G. J. M. Gruter, Furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA), A versatile building block for a very interesting class of polyesters, ACS Symp. Ser., 2012, 1105, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
E4tech (UK) for LBNet. UK Top Bio-based Chemicals Opportunities, 2017.
S. Dutta, L. Wu and M. Mascal, Production of 5-(chloromethyl)furan-2-carbonyl chloride and furan-2,5-dicarbonyl chloride from biomass-derived 5-(chloromethyl)furfural (CMF), Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3737–3739 RSC .
C. Zhou, 
            et al., One-Step Approach to 2,5-Diformylfuran from Fructose over Molybdenum Oxides Supported on Carbon Spheres, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 315–323 CrossRef CAS .
27. Furan dialdehyde, Sugar Ser., 2000, 13, 210–213 Search PubMed .
20., Difurfural (5,5′-diformyl-2,2′-difuran), Sugar Ser., 2000, 13, 164–169 Search PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, S. Hayashi and K. I. Kasuya, Biobased Poly(Schiff-Base) Composed of Bifurfural, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 5336–5345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Masui, H. Ikegami and A. Mori, Palladium-Catalyzed C–H Homocoupling of Thiophenes: Facile Construction of Bithiophene Structure, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5074–5075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. G. Bloom and S. E. Wheeler, Benchmark torsional potentials of building blocks for conjugated materials: Bifuran, bithiophene, and biselenophene, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10, 3647–3655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Pyo, 
            et al., Synthesis and characterization of a new blue-light-emitting polyimide, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 4777–4781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Park and M. Ree, Blue-light-emitting polymers prepared from a new monomer having a well-defined conjugation length, Synth. Met., 2001, 117, 197–198 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sonar, T. R. B. Foong, S. P. Singh, Y. Li and A. Dodabalapur, A furan-containing conjugated polymer for high mobility ambipolar organic thin film transistors, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8383–8385 RSC .
S. M. Lee, 
            et al., High-Performance Furan-Containing Conjugated Polymer for Environmentally Benign Solution Processing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15652–15661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge, T. W. Holcombe, O. P. Lee and J. M. J. Fréchet, Incorporation of furan into low band-gap polymers for efficient solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15547–15549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Yiu, 
            et al., Side-chain tunability of furan-containing low-band-gap polymers provides control of structural order in efficient solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2180–2185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, Z. Du, J. Xu, Q. Chu and Y. Pang, Efficient aerobic oxidation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural to 2,5-diformylfuran, and synthesis of a fluorescent material, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 51–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hui and A. Gandini, Polymeric Schiff Bases Bearing Furan Moieties, Eur. Polym. J., 1992, 28, 1461–1469 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xiang, 
            et al., Schiff base polymers derived from 2,5-diformylfuran, Polym. Int., 2013, 62, 1517–1523 CrossRef CAS .
S. Antony-Babu and M. Goodfellow, Biosystematics of alkaliphilic streptomycetes isolated from seven locations across a beach and dune sand system, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, 2008, 94, 581–591 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Suzuki, Y. Ohnishi, Y. Furusho, S. Sakuda and S. Horinouchi, Novel benzene ring biosynthesis from C3 and C4 primary metabolites by two enzymes, J. Biol. Chem., 2006, 281, 36944–36951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. P. Utley and J. Gruber, Electrochemical synthesis of poly(p-xylylenes) (PPXs) and poly(p-phenylenevinylenes) (PPVs) and the study of xylylene (quinodimethane) intermediates; an underrated approach, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1613–1624 RSC .
E. N. Zare, 
            et al., Progress in Conductive Polyaniline-Based Nanocomposites for Biomedical Applications: A Review, J. Med. Chem., 2020, 63(1), 1–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. I. Dan, J. Huang and R. B. Kaner, Polyaniline nanofibers: a unique polymer nanostructure for versatile applications, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 135–145 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Huang, Syntheses and applications of conducting polymer polyaniline nanofibers, Pure Appl. Chem., 2006, 78, 15–27 CAS .
K. Kan, H. Yamamoto, D. Kaneko, S. Tateyama and T. Kaneko, Novel π-conjugated bio-based polymer, poly(3-amino-4-hydroxybenzoic acid), and its solvatochromism, Pure Appl. Chem., 2014, 86, 685–690 CAS .
C. Chen, X. Hong and Y. Gao, Electrosynthesis of poly(3-amino-4-hydroxybenzoic acid) nanoparticles with electroactivity even in highly alkaline solutions, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 1–10 Search PubMed .
D. Tompkins, Body Armor Safety Initiative, NIJ J., 2006, 254, 2–6 Search PubMed .

          M. Suzuki, K. Yokoyama and Y. Kikuchu, Method for producing an aminohydroxybenzoic acid-type compound,  2012, vol. 75 Search PubMed .
J. K. Lee, 
            et al., A new synthetic approach for polybenzoxazole and light-induced fluorescent patterning on its film, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 9427–9433 CrossRef CAS .
C. Carayon and S. Fery-Forgues, 2-Phenylbenzoxazole derivatives: A family of robust emitters of solid-state fluorescence, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2017, 16, 1020–1035 RSC .
R. F. Affeldt, A. C. De Amorim Borges, D. Russowsky and F. Severo Rodembusch, Synthesis and fluorescence properties of benzoxazole-1,4-dihydropyridine dyads achieved by a multicomponent reaction, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 4607–4614 RSC .
F. H. Isikgor and C. R. Becer, Lignocellulosic Biomass: A Sustainable Platform for Production of Bio-Based Chemicals and Polymers, Polym. Chem., 2015, 34–50,  DOI:10.1016/B978-1-84569-741-9.50002-1 .
A. Llevot, E. Grau, S. Carlotti, S. Grelier and H. Cramail, Renewable (semi)aromatic polyesters from symmetrical vanillin-based dimers, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 6058–6066 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  General reaction scheme of DHAP (X = halogen).	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of polymers via DHAP using monomers with blocked positions (top: adapted with permission from ref. 22 Copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society. Bottom: Adapted with permission from ref. 14 Copyright ©2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 1  Structure of PEDOTF, synthesized via various methods: DHAP and Suzuki coupling.16	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis of PiEDOT by DHAP (adapted with permission from ref. 23 Copyright ©2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of PEDOT (left) and PEDOS (right) derivatives (adapted with permission from ref. 24 Copyright ©2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthesis of polyfluorene by oxidative homo-coupling of Grignard reagents (adapted from ref. 26 with permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 2  Structure of fluorene-based polymers obtained by oxidative homo-coupling of Grignard reagents.26	 

 	Fig. 3  Fluorene-based polyazomethines.34,35	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthesis of a π-conjugated polymer via the Knoevenagel reaction (adapted from ref. 36).	 

 	Scheme 7  Synthesis of a PPV-like polymer via the Knoevenagel reaction (reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 8  General scheme of the Horner–Wadsworth–Emmons reaction.	 

 	Fig. 4  Polymer and model compound mimicking its backbone, all synthesized with the HWE reaction.40,42	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthesis of a thiophene-based π-conjugated polymer via the HWE reaction (adapted from ref. 43 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 10  Synthesis of polysquaraines (adapted from ref. 45 with permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 5  Structure of polysquaraines synthesized by either Stille/Suzuki coupling or condensation of squaric acid.46	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of various polysquaraines.47–49	 

 	Scheme 11  Aldol condensation of an isoindigo-based polymer (reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthesis of an isoindigo-based monomer via DHAP (reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 7  Thieno-isoindigo-based polymers.55,56	 

 	Fig. 8  Weight percentages of cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin in various plants (reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 9  Structures of aromatic molecules that can be obtained from lignin.79,95–97	 

 	Scheme 13  Laccase-catalyzed vanillin dimerization.98	 

 	Scheme 14  Multi-component synthesis of divanillin-based polypyrrole. (i) Dichloromethane, 45 °C, 24 h, (ii) DBU, RT, 15 minutes, (iii) (RT, 18 hours) (adapted with permission from ref. 82 Copyright ©2016, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  Structure and characteristics of divanillin-based cross-conjugated polymers (molar masses determined by SEC in THF, and optical properties determined in chloroform, QY determined versus an anthracene standard) (adapted with permission from ref. 82 Copyright ©2016, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 15  Synthesis of vanillin-based dyes via Knoevenagel condensation (adapted from ref. 99).	 

 	Fig. 11  Examples of furan-based compounds that can be obtained from bio-based resources.6	 

 	Fig. 12  Structure of difunctional furan-based monomers.	 

 	Scheme 16  Synthesis of difurfural via photochemistry (adapted from ref. 118 with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Scheme 17  Experimental protocol to obtain difurfural from furfural (adapted from ref. 119).	 

 	Fig. 13  Optimized structure of electronic orbitals of difurfural ((a) HOMO and (b) LUMO).119	 

 	Scheme 18  Synthesis of furan-based monomer and ensuing polymerization via Stille coupling (adapted with permission from ref. 126 Copyright ©2010, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 19  Synthesis of a furan-based monomer and polymer thereof via Suzuki coupling (adapted from ref. 128 with permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc.).	 

 	Scheme 20  Synthesis of furan-based polyazomethines and cyclic species obtained during polymerization (adapted from ref. 130 with permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 14  Absorbance spectra of dialdehyde furan and furan-based polyazomethines (in m-cresol) (adapted from ref. 130 with permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 15  General structure of difurfural-based polyazomethines.119	 

 	Scheme 21  Electropolymerization of 3,4-AHBA (adapted from ref. 137).	 

 	Fig. 16  Polybenzoxazole used for fluorescence imaging and patterning.141	 

 	Scheme 22  Synthesis of benzoxazole dye (reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
