Small organic single-crystalline one-dimensional micro- and nanostructures for miniaturized devices   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC30143E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC30143E
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3633-3645Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSmall organic single-crystalline one-dimensional micro- and nanostructures for miniaturized devices†

        
          
            Eva M. 
            Garcia-Frutos
          
          
        
      *
      Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid (ICMM), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (C.S.I.C.), C/Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz 3, 28049, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: emgfrutos@icmm.csic.es
Received 
      22nd January 2013
    , Accepted 30th March 2013First published on 2nd April 2013Abstract1D π-conjugated organic micro- or nanostructures keep all the advantages found in organic single crystals, e.g. high crystallinity, but without the tricky growth associated with large-sized crystals. They also present low-cost processing, solution processable materials, and large-area fabrication, and are compatible with flexible substrates. Electronic and optical properties of 1D π-conjugated organic micro- and nanomaterials can be tuned by changing their size at the central core or chemical modification of the aromatic substituents, among other alternatives. Current challenges are to find and develop an accurate control of the morphology, size, degree of uniformity, and alignment of the micro- and nanometer-sized organic single crystals, for future applications in miniaturized devices.Eva M. Garcia-FrutosEva M. García-Frutos obtained her PhD degree (PhD advisor Prof. T. Torres) at the University Autonoma of Madrid (Spain) in 2002. After that, she started a postdoctoral research in Colorado State University (USA) with Prof. L. S. Hegedus (2003-2005), and then in the Institute of Materials Science of Madrid (ICMM, CSIC; Spain) with Dr. B. Gómez-Lor (2006-2009). In 2009, she got a Tenured Scientist position of CSIC, working first in the Institute of Materials Science of Aragon (ICMA, Spain), and since 2012 in the ICMM. Her current research is in the synthesis of small organic systems with electronic and photonic properties.
Introduction
In the last decade, much attention has been paid to the development of crystalline one-dimensional (1D) π-conjugated organic micro- or nanostructures for their promising applications in electronic and optoelectronic devices.1–7
Previously, micro- and nanocrystals were based mainly on polymers and inorganic compounds, possessing excellent size control and solid-state properties. In the last few years, micro- and nanomaterials based on small π-conjugated organic materials8 have been of interest, due to different electronic and optical intrinsic properties from their polymers and inorganic counterparts. Moreover, organic micro- and nanocrystals present chemical design at the molecular level, low cost and easy large-area fabrication. 1D π-conjugated organic micro- and nanocrystals keep all the advantages of organic bulk crystals such as high crystallinity and remove the disadvantages such as fragility and weakness. Therefore, single crystals of micro- and nanometer size due to their mechanical properties exhibit good flexibility. Also, organic single crystals are ideal charge-transport materials, with fewer structural defects and grain boundaries, and better electronic performance than their thin film counterparts.
Therefore, they present good molecular and electronic versatility, processability, compatibility with flexible and lightweight substrates, low-cost and large-area fabrication. Furthermore, due to their tiny size, 1D π-conjugated organic micro- or nanostructures are optimal for their integration in electronic and optoelectronic miniaturized devices.
The growth of organic micro- and nanocrystals is controlled by both internal and external factors which can affect their crystal morphology.
Self-assembly helps the preparation of micro- and nanostructures,9,10 providing a strong and directional interaction, which favours a certain growing direction, allowing unidirectional charge carriers' a pathway through overlapped π-electron clouds of the molecules. The final supramolecular structure will feature interesting properties different to those characterizing the individual components. The aggregate illustrates distinct intrinsic optical and electrical properties contrasted with the individual components.
The change of the crystallinity of 1D π-conjugated organic semiconductors can be tuned through chemical design at the molecular level to control molecular noncovalent interactions. A precise self-assembly of π-conjugated molecules is a key point to improve the quality of single-crystalline micro- and nanostructures. 1D single micro- and nanocrystals are free of grain boundaries and possess surface homogeneity, molecular packing, and crystallinity, which are the essential characteristics for the high performance of devices.
1D π-conjugated organic micro- and nanomaterials10 are able to control the self-assembly around the π-extended aromatic core. Self-assembly of conjugated molecules can be made up by weak attractive forces, such as π–π stacking between aromatic cores, hydrogen bonding, CH–π interactions,11,12 solvophobic forces, and van der Waals forces, among others, yielding supramolecular aggregates.13,14 Additionally, a possibility exists to establish important secondary interactions regulating the self-assembly of 1D motifs, e.g. intermolecular disulfide bridges, which renders the aggregates of 1D micro- and nanostructures high stability.15,16
Other 1D π-conjugated organic materials present a strong π–π interaction and can be easily controlled, i.e. liquid crystals, in particular discotic liquid crystals,17–19 usually composed of a rigid aromatic disk-like core with a π-overlap between adjacent molecules and flexible alkyl chains, which can be easily aligned by solution/melt processing, possessing the ability of self-repairing air defects that act as traps for charge carriers. Zone-casting is a method which has been developed to fabricate long-range oriented arrays of discotic liquid crystalline molecules.
The fabrication of organic micro- and nanocrystals is mainly based on two methods: physical vapour deposition and solution processing.20 Trivial changes, such as solvent composition, deposition method, the substrate nature, temperature, and vacuum level in these methods can have an enormous influence on the final control of the morphology, uniformity, and alignment of 1D organic micro- and nanostructures.
1D π-conjugated organic micro- and nanostructures can present diverse morphology, such as wires, rods, tubes, ribbons, belts, etc., prepared via self-assembly (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  One-dimensional (1D) π-conjugated organic micro- and nanostructures. 
On the other hand, the ability to control the position and orientation of the deposition of the crystals is essential for practical application of organic crystals to the devices, which affect the final electronic and photonic properties and the performance of the miniaturized devices.
This review has been focused on the most significant advances that have occurred in organic micro- and nanocrystals in the area of electronic and optoelectronic miniaturized devices. The current challenges are finding and developing an accurate control of the morphology, size, degree of uniformity, and alignment of the micro- and nanometer sized organic single crystals.
Micro- and nanowires/rods
In the last few decades, some of the 1D small organic nanocrystals most studied have been the micro- and nanowires. 1D organic semiconductor micro- and nanowires,21 formed mainly via either self-assembly through strong π–π interactions, are considered as promising classes of micro- and nanomaterials for their use in solution-processable organic field-effect transistors, for instance.22
In contrast to organic thin films, single crystals possess a perfect molecular ordering and are free of grain boundaries. Also, organic single crystals have been described to possess high mobility and intrinsic charge transport properties. However, these single organic crystals are fragile and hard to process for their integration in different devices, due to the fact that each single crystal requires a manual selection and the introduction of each individual crystal with careful control.
The principal benefits of integrating the crystalline 1D π-conjugated organic micro- and nanostructures in the devices are flexibility, processability, and their possible miniaturization.
The flexibility of the nanowires has been demonstrated by Wenping Hu, Thomas Bjørnholm and coworkers,23 where CuPc nanowires were prepared by a physical vapour transport technique. The nanocrystals can be twisted or bent without breaking, thus demonstrating mechanical flexibility and elasticity of the CuPc nanowire crystals. They prepared devices with the bent and straight nanowires, observing lower mobility in the straight rather than the bent CuPc nanowires.
Zhenan Bao's group have also studied the maintenance of the intrinsic properties and characteristics of the organic micro- and nanowires on flexible substrates for flexible organic thin-film transistors.24,25 Briseno et al. studied the mechanical flexibility of field-effect transistors containing a single nanowire and networks of nanowires of p-type hexathiapentace (HTP).25
They have demonstrated that mechanical deformation on the device does not affect the device performance. In this case, the preparation of the organic single-crystal nanowires of HTP was carried out by a solution-based method. Also, the carrier mobility in the transistors based on single nanowires or on nanowire networks changed from 0.27 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 0.057 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. When they were deposited on a flexible substrate, the mobility changed to 0.19 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.032 cm2 V−1 s−1, but no change was found in the performance of the device after mechanical flexibility was introduced (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  (A) Transfer characteristics of a device fabricated from a network of HTP nanowires on a flexible substrate. (B) Photograph of an array of bottom-contact nanowire network devices where the source–drain electrodes were deposited through a shadow mask. The inset shows a typical device covered with a network of HTP nanowires spray-coated from a suspension in a mixture of chloroform and ethanol (1:1). A 1.5 μm thick PVP dielectric layer was used for these devices, and its capacitance was 1.9 nF cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25, Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Fully flexible OFETs self-assembled on a plastic substrate array by the solution process afford a mobility of 0.016 cm2 V−1 s−1, however a high performance single crystal OFET C8-BTBT is obtained by solvent vapour annealing, which is a really interesting method, due to the fact that the crystal is fabricated directly on the substrate.26
Therefore, the device performance in an FET depends on the quality and quantity of the one-dimensional micro- and nanowire(s). The quality and quantity of the organic single micro- and nanowires can depend on the growth method among other things. The vapour growth process produces high-quality crystals. However, for this technique, a high temperature is required, which can be a problem for the majority of organic compounds. The solution growth process is the most used method, where the organic single micro- and nanostructures are obtained from the solution of vapour diffusion, fast injection or binary phase transfer of a good solvent and a poor solvent.
Not only with these different methods can we obtain better nanowires, but also through molecular design and functionalization of the aromatic core of the intermolecular interactions which can be tuned and consequently self-assembled. Wakayama et al. described the self-assembled nanowires of 6,13-bis(methylthio)pentacene (BMTP), as being prepared by thermal evaporation under vacuum. The chalcogen atoms like SCH3 in the acene skeleton help the S–S interactions to exist, leading to face-to-face packing and helping the π-orbital overlap.27 The pentacene possesses an edge-to-face herringbone structure, where the charge transport is less efficient than the face-to-face structure.28 However, the incorporation of substituents not only facilitates the close face-to-face packing arrangements, but also the solubility in different organic solvents. For these reasons the incorporation of different substituents is quite interesting, as it can help the solubility of the compounds and the control of the final morphology.
Recently, Hoang et al.29 applied a simple slow diffusion of porphyrin (TP) in toluene over hexane to obtain micro-single crystals. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of H2TP and ZnTP microcrystals, together with selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns, demonstrated the single-crystalline nature of the needles. The OFETs of the one-dimensional microwire ZnTP afford 2.90 cm2 V−1 s−1, being the highest charge mobility among these materials, presumably due to the co-facial packing in the adjacent molecules, favouring intermolecular carrier charge transport.
The formation of highly ordered and highly crystalline organic arrays on surfaces is desirable in organic electronics for the controlled, predictable assembly of devices and circuits.
The coating techniques selected for OFET-desirable organic semiconductor thin films, performing an uniaxially oriented deposition, are solution-shearing, zone-casting, and dip-coating, as a lower crystalline difference along the charge transport direction area found.
Self-organized organic single crystal arrays with controlled crystal orientation and control over the alignment and density of organic semiconductors based on micro- and nanowires30–34 are extremely important for the fabrication of large-scale integrated devices. Salbeck and coworkers35 described the charge carrier mobilities of eleven transistor devices of perylene diimide micro- and nanowires, between 0.06 × 10−4 and 9.5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. The micro- and nanowires were fabricated from solutions of chloroform/acetone, on the basis of using two different “good” solvents, instead of the classical “good/poor” solvent, where the micro- and nanowires presented a high uniformity in width.
Bao and co-workers36 have prepared N,N-bis(2-phenylethyl)-perylene-3,4:9,10-tetracarboxylic diimide (BPE-PTCDI) microwires by solution-processing, with a non-solvent nucleation method. The self-assembly of the microwires is carried out by adding a small amount of a poor solvent, i.e. ethyl alcohol. The BPE-PTCDI microwires were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Thus, it was observed that the length of the microwires changed from a few millimeters to tens of micrometers. BPE-PTCDI molecules were studied by selected area electron diffraction (SAED), displaying a little slid π-stacking structure along the long axis (the a axis) of the microwire (Fig. 3). The control over the alignment and the density of BPE-PTCDI network microwires was performed by using the FAT method, obtaining good control for their applications as transistors. The carrier mobilities either on single microwires or on microwire networks change from 1.4 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 0.24 cm2 V−1 s−1.
 Fig. 3  Characterization of BPE-PTCDI MWs. (A) A SEM image of BPE-PTCDI MWs synthesized by the nonsolvent nucleation method. (Inset) The chemical structure of BPE-PTCDI. (B) A TEM image of BPE-PTCDI MWs. (C) Photographs displaying BPE-PTCDI MW dispersion in ethyl alcohol. (D) A TEM bright-field image with a selected area aperture of a single BPE-PTCDI MW. (Inset) The corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern and the molecular packing motif of a BPE-PTCDI MW, where BPE-PTCDI molecules have a slipped-stacking structure along the long axis (the a axis) of the MW. The shortest vertical distance between the aromatic rings stacked along the a axis is 3.4 Å. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright ©2009 by the National Academy of Sciences. 
However, scalable patterning techniques to fabricate aligned arrays and devices in situ are rarely reported for organic micro- and nanowires. Jian Pei and coworkers37 have achieved aligned organic nanowires of benzothiophene derivatives via low-cost dip coating. However, although they get to grow parallel organic nanowires by controlling different parameters like concentration solution, slipping distances or heating temperature, with the dip-coating method, the mobility of organic nanowires in the field-effect transistor devices is low.
Jang et al.38 said that self-aligning, highly crystalline, uniform soluble acene crystal arrays are easily grown via an optimized one-step dip-coating process, and the average width and thickness of the crystals decreased with increasing lift rate. The solvent therefore plays an important role in the self-organization process during dip-coating, where dichloromethane and chloroform are fast evaporating-solvents for quantitative control over the drying speed.
Accordingly, fast-evaporating solvents, such as dichloromethane or chloroform, were appropriate for the crystal growth of the soluble acenes during the dip-coating process. The AFM topograph and height profile showed uniform thickness (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  (a) An AFM image of the optimally grown TIPS-PEN crystals (in dichloromethane at 150 μm s−1) (top) and a height profile of the three adjacent crystals (bottom). (b) Simplified schematic illustration of fast evaporation-induced crystal growth, and magnification of the contact line. Adapted with permission from ref. 38, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Kumatani, Tsukagoshi and coworkers39,40 fabricated single crystals of dioctylbenzothienobenzothiophene (C8-BTBT) by simple solvent-vapour annealing on a polymer dielectric surface. This advanced method allows oriented growth of organic crystals and work under an ambient atmosphere at room temperature.
Dip-coating plus inkjet printing processes to align and extend the oligoarene nanowires obtained a mobility of 1.26 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the organic nanowire transistor arrays.41 However, when the same oligoarene nanowires were dropped on the substrate the organic transistors afforded a mobility of 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1.42
In summary, growing control of the 1D self-assembly process, molecular ordering, crystallinity degree, grain size, film morphology, or the orientation of crystalline domains, and uniform large-area highly crystalline organic semiconductor thin films are critical to integrate micro- and nanowires into the devices, being highly crucial for good performance.
In parallel to the recent progress in this area, the 1D organic semiconductor micro- and nanowires have received increasing attention to photonic devices.7 On the other hand, highly ordered π–π interactions on the 1D organic micro- and nanowires can not only improve charge mobility, but also the photon-crystal lattice interactions, affording different luminescent properties, with interesting applications in photonic devices. In addition, 1D organic micro- and nanowires have low propagation loss and quantum confinement effect.
One-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials, especially nanowires, are ultimately suitable for the transport of photons, electrons, and excitons and have been demonstrated as building blocks of optical circuits due to their chemically tunable optical and electronic properties.43–45
A slight structural modification of the π–π electronic interaction of the molecules can affect its molecular packing on arrangement behavior, i.e. the introduction of different substitution can have a dramatic effect on the morphology and fluorescent properties. Therefore, the optoelectronic performance can be further improved by finely controlling the synthesis and modification of the structures such as the size and shape.
1D organic micro- and nanowires are able to manipulate and propagate light efficiently on the sub-wavelength scale.
Kian Ping Loh and co-workers46 describe the first optical waveguide of the 1D microwire of perylene diimide (PDI). The perylene derivatives present a high stability and a high fluorescence quantum yield. The 1D PDI microwires were grown by template-assisted assembly of PDI on the surface, using dimethyl fluoride as a single phase solvent with graphene oxide as a seeding agent instead of a mixture of binary solvents. It is possible to get highly crystalline and smooth surface microwires with this method, thus reducing the scattering loss during the light propagation. The high-quality and uniformity of the microwires is very important to increase the highly efficient waveguide.
In the last few years, spectacular advances in the optoelectronic area have been realized by Y. S. Zhao, J. N. Yao and co-workers. In 2006,47,48 they developed absorbent-assisted physical vapour deposition (PVD), with incorporation of silica gel or aluminium oxide to control the degree of saturation, in order to gain control of the morphology, density, and dispersity of single-crystalline nanowires. 2,4,5-Triphenylimidazole (TPI) demonstrated that there was an increasing interest in the development of a method to improve the uniformity of organic nanowires. Stable nanowires were prepared by the PVD method, resulting in nanowires of different length and diameter, by changing deposition time and temperature in the vapour deposition process.47,49
The TPI nanowires are characterized by FE-SEM, where it was observed that they had a smooth surface and uniform diameter, it was checked by TEM, which showed that the TPI nanowire was a solid wire. SAED demonstrated that the TPI nanowire was grown along the b axis. The XRD pattern of TPI nanowires showed the dominance of (010) lattice planes (Fig. 5). The TPI nanowires were deposited on quartz and a photoluminescence emission was observed. When a single TPI nanowire was excited with a pulse laser, it afforded high luminescence efficiency, with bright luminescence spots at the tips and weak emission from the bodies, typical of strong optical waveguide properties, also observing an emitting light from one wire to another (Fig. 6). The TPI nanowires were demonstrated to be single nanowire active optical waveguides and ultraviolet lasers.49
 Fig. 5  (A and B) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of as-prepared 2,4,5-triphenylimidazole (TPI) nanowires. The inset shows the chemical structure of TPI. (C) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of TPI nanowires. The inset shows the SAED pattern of one TPI nanowire with the main diffraction spots being indexed and the arrow indicating the direction of the wire. (D) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of TPI powder (bottom) and nanowires (top). Reproduced with permission from ref. 49, Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
 Fig. 6  PL microscopy image of TPI nanowires deposited on a quartz wafer. Scale bar is 10 mm. Adapted with permission from ref 49, Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
At the same time, they prepared similar studies with tris(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminum (Alq3), where single-crystalline nanowires were obtained by the absorbent-assisted physical-vapour deposition method. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) showed that the incorporation of absorbents decreased the sublimation temperature of Alq3 nanowires. The nanowires presented strong electroluminescence. The size of the nanowires was important, observing a blue-shift as the diameter decreased. The 1D nanowires were characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and TEM, indicating smooth surfaces and uniformity in these nanowires. The growth along the (101) direction was analyzed by SAED and XRD. The incorporation of absorbents into the formation of Alq3 was important for the preparation of uniform nanowires. The nanowires were incorporated into EL and field-emission devices with excellent properties where the high performance of the devices was size-dependent of the nanowire.48
However, Wong and co-workers50 have recently prepared long Alq3 microwires without surfactant assistance, by using a solution process of the anti-solvent diffusion method. This method demonstrated huge control in the degree of the saturation of the compound, without necessity of sublimation of Alq3. Several factors, like concentration and different antisolvents, could allow a greater control of the diameter length on nanowires, and the change in their respective photoluminescence emissions. The morphology was studied by SEM and TEM, observing purity, very uniform diameter, and smooth surface along the nanowire. Photoluminescence microscopy images demonstrated a strong green emission (510 nm) typically much brighter on the tips and intersection of crossed nanowires than in the body of the nanowire and typical for optical waveguide materials.
In the last few years, spectacular increases have been developed and realized on the luminescent properties of organic composite micro- and nanomaterials.51 These are composed of two or more different materials, where the combined individual properties generate a new functionality. The major objective for the preparation of the organic composite micro- and nanomaterials was to realize new functionalities due to an energy transfer from molecule to molecule that could hardly be achieved in individual materials building two different fluorescent dyes into composite organic nanocrystals making a tunable light generator.
The doping technique can significantly change the charge-mobility and their emission color to improve their luminescence efficiency, due to an exchange and energy–matter interaction between them.51
Recently, increasing attention has been paid to the study of luminescent properties and applications of organic composite micro- and nanowires such as tunable white light emitters, functional optical waveguides, chemical vapour sensors, etc.51
The white-light emission of the micro- and nanocrystal should have a good overlap between fluorescence and absorption spectra between both compounds’ donor and acceptor, resulting in an efficient energy transfer. The typical energy-transfer mechanism is known as intermolecular Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), where energy is absorbed by one fluorescent dye and due to the high electronic coupling between a second fluorescent chromophore the energy is transferred. This refers to the nonradiative transfer of an electronic excitation from a donor molecule to an acceptor molecule.
Zhao's group has been working on the blue-emitting 1,3,5-triphenyl-2-pyrazoline (TPP) with orange-emitting rubrene. The micro- and nanocrystals have been prepared by PVD methods. The white-light emission was obtained by the doping of both components and the emission color of the micro- and nanocrystals could be tuned with a change in the molar ratio of TPP/rubrene.52
The intermolecular energy transfer can not only be produced between the singlet donor to singlet acceptor as in the Förster mechanism, but can involve a triplet state as denominated by the Dexter mechanism. Triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET) and the triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) (upconverted emission) are some of the intermolecular interactions that have been described in micro- and nanowires. Yong Sheng Zhao, Jiannian Yao and coworkers described the successful fabrication of TTET–TTA with binary organic nanowires. 9,10-Diphenylanthracene (DPA) nanowires were dispersed with different doping contents of tris(2,20-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) (Ru(bpy)32+), having an efficient energy transfer between them. Electrogenerated upconverted emission was effectively detected from the (Ru(bpy)32+)–DPA wires. The molar ratio did not seem to modulate the morphology and surface topography of the samples.53
On the other hand, uniformly doped nanowires are very essential to show excellent waveguide properties with low optical loss between the connection donor and acceptor. For this reason, Zheng et al.54 developed organic nanowire heterojunctions (NWHJs) using only organic dyes. Alq3 microwires as trunks and 1,5-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ) nanowires as branches are prepared via epitaxial growth. One of the first requirements is satisfied due to the absorption spectrum of DAAQ overlaps which are perfect with the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum of Alq3. By controlling the growth, Alq3–DAAQ NWHJs were prepared. Firstly Alq3 microwires were completed by liquid-phase self-assembly and secondly by physical vapour deposition site-specific nucleation and epitaxial growth of vertical DAAQ nanowires on the surface of Alq3. SEM and TEM images have demonstrated the formation of NWHJs (Fig. 7). When the NWHJs are excited with UV (330–380 nm) the nanowires, green-emitting trunks of Alq3 and red-emitting branches of DAAQ were observed, exhibiting typical characteristics of active optical waveguides.
 Fig. 7  Characterization of the organic heterojunctions. (A and B) SEM images of the Alq3–DAAQ dendritic heterostructures. Scale bars: (A) 5 μm; (B) 1 μm. (C) TEM image of a single NWHJ. Scale bar is 5 μm. Insets: SAED patterns of the Alq3 trunk and DAAQ branch. Alq3 and DAAQ have single-crystal structures; Alq3 grew in the [011] direction, while [100] was the preferential growth direction for the branch component of DAAQ. (D) PL microscopy images of the NWHJs excited with the UV band (330–380 nm) of a mercury lamp. Scale bar is 100 μm. The green emission is from the Alq3 trunks and the red emission is from the DAAQ branches. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, the design of heterostructures, by interacting various components, has emerged as the highest impact innovation in this area. Triblock one-dimensional heterostructures of organic microrods for white-light emission were prepared using 1,3-diphenyl-2-pyroline (DP, a blue-emissive molecule) microrods doped with an orange dye of 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(p-dimethyl-aminostyryl)-4H-pyran (DCM) selectively at both ends, induced by cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) micelles that were prepared by a self-induced template method and the morphology of the heterostructures of organic microrods was studied by SEM and TEM. The photoluminescence was observed by fluorescence microscopy images, where one middle stripe exhibited blue photoluminescence, while the two ends presented orange PL (Fig. 8).55
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of triblock microrods. (c and d) Fluorescence microscopy images of the same microrods excited with unfocused UV (330–380 nm) and blue light (460–490 nm), respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
The fluorescence image in the background shows the well-defined morphology and high monodispersity of the samples.
Therefore, a huge effort has been made to develop and control the size, growth location, density, uniformity, and aligned orientation of micro- and nanowires, to enhance field emission and waveguide properties, helping the integration of these nanowires into different photonic devices.
The main parameter to evaluate the performance of optical waveguides is the optical loss in the light guiding process. The moderately high optical loss is one main drawback in subwavelength waveguides based on crystalline organic micro/nanostructures. To get over this trouble in organic molecular waveguiding, many efforts to decrease the optical loss and improve the waveguide performance have been made. Vertical nanowire arrays have lower optical loss than the horizontal ones, for this reason they have been studied by several groups.
Huang and co-workers56,57 have generated an interest in vertically aligned organic nanowires from 1,5-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ). The DAAQ nanowires were prepared by a physical vapour method and the length and diameter can be directed by the growth time and evaporation temperature conditions, respectively.
The DAAQ nanowire field was observed vertically by SEM (Fig. 9), the smooth surface and the uniform width were characterized by TEM, and the crystal structure and growth direction were determined by electron diffraction patterns (SAED) and confirmed by XRD. The preferred nanowire orientation was the (100) plane. In the top view, the vertical nanowires presented good alignment on Si wafers, due to the fact that they had small emitting dots corresponding to the tips of the nanowires. The vertically aligned nanowires had much lower optical losses than the horizontal ones.
 Fig. 9  SEM images (top: 40° tilted view; bottom: cross-sectional view) showing the vertically aligned DAAQ nanowire arrays prepared at (A) 160 °C, for 5 min and (B) 180 °C, for 5 min. All scale bars are 1 μm. The inset shows the molecular structure of the DAAQ molecule. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56, Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Other similar types of vertical 1D structures are the micro- and nanorods. In the last few years, there has been an increasing interest in organic solar cells based on controlled micro- and nanorods. They are solid micro- and nanostructures morphologically similar to wires.
Although 1D micro- and nanowires have been exploited mainly in the field-effect transistors, or photonic applications, other similar derivatives such as 1D micro- and nanorods have found huge progress as organic photovoltaics (OPVs). The advantages of incorporating these tiny micro- and nanocrystals in organic thin film solar cells are lightweight, flexible, and low-cost for both materials and fabrication processes. An important goal of the PV device is based on the organic π-conjugated nanorods to obtain a higher power conversion efficiency. However, it is still lower than that of the inorganic solar cells.
The exciton (electron–hole pairs) diffusion is one of the parameters most essential to obtaining good operation of the organic cells and/or good power conversion efficiency.58 Excitons, generated by light absorption, show photocurrent when they are not connected to free charges. The quantity of excitons contributing to the photocurrent, thus to the device efficiency, is determined by the diffusion length, i.e. the distance that excitons can diffuse. The diffusion length dramatically modulates the solar cell efficiency. In organic semiconductors, excitons are to be dissociated under optical excitation for a decent photoconversion. Such dissociation of tightly bound excitons is accomplished by charge transfer at the interface between electron-donating (D) and accepting (A) materials.
This interface between the donor–acceptor heterojunction (HJ) has a planar or bulk configuration (Fig. 10). In the planar HJ devices exist limited power conversion efficiency due to a large degree of photogeneration which is lost by the limited exciton diffusion length. The bulk heterojunctions have a large D–A interface. However the non-uniform phase separation could give charge trapping and poor charge carrier transport, due to the existence of bottlenecks and cul-de-sacs, affording low power efficiency conversions. To avoid exciton diffusion bottlenecks and to achieve highly efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport it is necessary that the fabrication of micro- and nanoscale bulk heterojunction configurations is ordered and controlled. Nanorods vertically aligned on the substrate can offer excellent directional charge transport paths to the electrodes (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  (a) Donor–acceptor heterojunction (HJ) with a planar, bulk or nanorod configuration; (b) schematic diagram of the types of organic donor–acceptor HJs. 
Recently, vertically aligned copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) nanorods have been described as being a donor layer in organic photovoltaic devices, with fullerene C60 as acceptor material. Badrabadi et al.59 have demonstrated the influence of interface morphology, where the power conversion efficiency of CuPc-nanorodos/C60 is twice compared to regular planar CuPc(C60). The vertical orientation and crystalline nature of the 1D nanorods allow the effective interfacial separation of electron–hole pairs and charge carrier transport to the electrodes, improving the charge collection efficiency. The well-aligned nanorods were characterized by SEM. This good result was also demonstrated by Zheng et al.60 The growth of vertically aligned nanorods of CuPc was carried out with the high vacuum oblique angle deposition technique in a high vacuum. They prepared CuPc nanorods with [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) for the photovoltaic cells, resulting in a maximum power conversion efficiency doubling to the bilayer CuPc/PCBM.
It still remains a challenging concept to keep good connection between different compounds in each single junction. The preparation of p–n junction micro- and nanostructures with good connection is really important for the integration of high-quality micro- and nanodevices. Yong Sheng Zhao, Wenping Hu, Jiannian Yao et al.61 prepared single-crystal coaxial p–n junction nanowire arrays of p-type copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) and n-type 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-pyridyl)-porphyrin (H2TPyP) through a one-step physical vapour transport (PVT) technique. The growth mechanism and morphology evolution were examined by SEM images (Fig. 11). The CuPc–H2TPyP junction nanowire showed a much better photodependent result than individual components, thus demonstrating good collaboration between them.
 Fig. 11  SEM images of the nanostructures grown for different lengths of time after the temperature increased to 460 °C. (A) 20 s; (B) 1 min; (C) 3 min, inset: top view SEM image of a single typical open-ended H2TPyP nanostructure with the CuPc nucleus; (D) 10 min; (E) 35 min. The cooling rate is 2 °C min−1. All scale bars are 1 μm. (F) Schematic illustration of the growth process of the CuPc–H2TPyP nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
The development of ordered vertical arrays with p–n junction components could constitute the future photovoltaic photodependent diodes, and photoswitch devices.
Micro- and nanotubes
Other types of micro- and nanocrystals that have been studied in this area are micro- and nanotubes. The micro- and nanotube organic single crystals have been the object of less attention than the micro- and nanowires as organic semiconductors, but it is interesting to point out the high field-effect mobility of 1.73 cm2 V−1 s−1. Kilwon Cho and co-workers62 described for the 1D single-crystal microtubes, based on triisopropylsilylethynyl pentacene (TIPS-PEN). At first, the interaction of TIPS-PEN molecules mediated π–π stacking, via the solvent exchange of concentrate toluene solution injected into acetonitrile to create a solid rectangular microstructure. Later, the self-etching of the TIPS-PEN solid microstructure by a small amount of toluene solvent was considered to be the most important step for the formation of the one-dimensional single-crystalline microtubes (Fig. 12). TIPS-PEN microtubes were characterized by SEM and TEM and their growing habit by the SAED pattern, where the sharp and well-defined spots in the pattern revealed that the microtube was a single-crystalline, in the (001) crystal plane. The TIPS-PEN nanotubes were formed by the self-assembly of molecules and subsequently the beginning of the dissolution of this solid from end (Fig. 12). The bottom-gate/top contact configuration was used with the 1D single-crystal microtubes placed on a substrate, affording an exceptional high field-effect mobility.
 Fig. 12  FE-TEM images of TIPS-PEN microstructures prepared on silicon nitride windows, showing the temporal evolution of the morphology after solution aging for (a) 0 min, (b) 10 min, and (c) 30 min. (d) Schematic diagram of the proposed mechanism for the formation of TIPS-PEN microtubular architectures via self-assembly, self-etching, and recrystallization. The SEM images in the inset in part (d) show the morphologies representative of each step. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The micro- and nanotubes have also been studied as optical waveguides. Jiannian Yao and co-workers63 described the mechanism of the formation of one-dimensional 9,10-bis(phenylethynyl)anthracene (BPEA) microtubes from single-crystalline microrods. BPEA microtubes were obtained when a solution of BPEA in ethanol was added under boiling water under vigorous agitation. The BPEA molecules induce 1D growth and the subsequent dissolution of solid from the end and later on self-etching contributes to the formation of tubular structures The length and the diameter of the 1D BPEA microtubes can be modulated by changes in conditions of the self-assembly process. The 1D microtubes and their mechanism of formation were characterized by SEM, TEM, SAED, AFM, and XRD, detecting a huge monodispersity and uniform size (Fig. 13). The photoluminescence study of microstructures demonstrated active optical waveguides with weaker emission from the bodies of the 1D tubes, and very bright luminescence spots at both tips.
 Fig. 13  (A) SEM image of the BPEA microtubes, scale bar: 10 mm. Inset: the chemical structure of a single BPEA molecule. (B) TEM image of some typical BPEA microtubes, scale bar: 2 mm. Inset: SAED pattern, the arrow indicates the direction of the tube. (C) AFM image of a single microtube, scale bars: 2 mm. (D) Cross-section along the gray line in (C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 63, Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
The optical loss in the microrods was higher during the light propagation than in the tubular structures, the air inside the tubes could change the waveguide behaviour and helps to reduce the optical loss.
Finally, one dimensional heterostructures formed by triblock blue/orange and multiblock blue/green organic microtubes were prepared via a liquid-phase co-assembly method and described for possible future photonic applications.64
Micro- and nanoribbons/belts
As a final point, 1D micro- and nanostructure denominated ribbons have been less studied, their cross-sections are rectangular. Their advantages can be flexibility and large-area fabrication, among others, as those described for other micro- and nanostructures previously reviewed. The micro- and nanoribbons have been extensively developed as organic field-effect transistors and optical waveguides.
In the case of micro- and nanowires, the 1D single micro- and nanoribbons have high mobility, because they are free of grain boundaries and molecular order, helping directional exciton diffusion and charge transport.
Kilwon Cho and co-workers65 prepared single-crystalline microribbons of triisopropylsilyethynyl pentacenes (TIPS-PEN) (Fig. 14) with the solvent-exchange method in the solution-phase, with a hole mobility of 1.42 cm2 V−1 s−1.
 Fig. 14  Morphological features and structure characterization of 1D single-crystalline TIPS-PEN microribbons. The SEM image of a TIPS-PEN microribbon formed on a silicon substrate showing a rectangular cross-section of the microribbon with well-defined facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 65, Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Similar TIPS derivatives have been described by Wang et al. Soluble, stable and high-performance n-type semiconductor 6,13-bis((triisopropylsilyl)ethynyl)-5,7,12,14-tetraazapentacene (TIPS-TAP) microribbons were prepared by the solution-processed technique. The microribbons afford diverse field effect mobility with different electrodes and solvents, but one of the highest values (1.77 cm2 V−1 s−1) was gained by the Ag source–drain and toluene–acetonitrile solution process.66
Aifeng Lv et al.67 synthesized tetrachlorinated diperylene bisimide (C12-4CldiPBI) micro- and nanoribbons by using solvent vapour diffusion of toluene–methanol. OFETs based on individual single crystal micro- or nanoribbons of C12-4CldiPBI were fabricated with octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS)-treated SiO2/Si substrates as an insulator/gate electrode and a new technique named the “Au stripe mask” method.
The technique named “Au stripe mask” has been used to fabricate transistors based on the small crystals of a single C12-4CldiPBI nanoribbon (Fig. 15). Every device offers an electron mobility over 1.0 cm2 V−1 s−1 with the highest mobility of 4.65 cm2 V−1 s−1. Moreover, the devices C12-4CldiPBI exhibit excellent air stability. No obvious degradation was observed even keeping the devices in air for over one and half months.
 Fig. 15  (A–C) Scheme of the device fabrication process. (D) AFM image of a finished transistor based on an individual nanoribbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Hu and co-workers synthesized OFETs of PcCu68 and F16CuPc69 nanoribbons by physical vapour transport with a hole mobility and electron mobility of 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1. Most of the research in micro- and nanoribbons has been carried out with thiophene derivatives, such as a fused-ring thienoacene and acenethiophenes, among other examples. They combine high mobility, due to intermolecular π–π interactions of the pentacene, and high stability through S–S. The well-defined single-crystal microribbons composed of self-organized thienoacene molecules present a high thermal and chemical stability, grown directly on a SiO2 surface.
Recently, Wang et al. have fabricated single microribbons of dithieno[2,3-d;2′,3′-d′]benzo[1,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophene (DTBDT), using cyclohexane as a solvent and saturating with THF vapour. The great advantage of this method, solvent vapour diffusion, is that it allows the control of the length of the microribbons by tuning the concentration of the compound. The 1D microribbons presented high molecular order and uniform orientation within the ribbon. Also, no change in the SAED pattern was observed, demonstrating the single-crystallinity of the nanoribbon which was positive for the carrier transport along the ribbon axis. The mobilities were as high as 3.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 16).70
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the molecular arrangement in the ribbon OFET of 1, (b) optical microscopy image of the individual ribbon OFET (white arrow indicates the crystal a axis) and the crystal structure in top view within the microribbon (black arrow indicates the ribbon axis). Adapted with permission from ref. 70, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Li et al.71 prepared OFETs based on a single bis(benzo[4,5]-thieno)[2,3-b:3′,2′-d]thiophene (BBTT) nanoribbon by an “organic ribbon mask” exhibiting an electron mobility of 0.6 cm2 V−1 s−1. The growth of the nanoribbon was independent of the substrate and solvent, the most important being the internal molecular interaction of the solvents. It is truly remarkable that the long-term stability of the devices lasted over 3 weeks.
Moreover, S⋯S intermolecular contacts could help the highly ordered packing of the π–π stacking. Jian Pei and co-workers16 described a high-performance 1D single-crystalline dithioperylene nanoribbon transistor with a mobility of 2.13 cm2 V−1 s−1. Single-crystalline nanoribbons were prepared by solution processing. To elucidate their growing habits, SAED pattern was used to observe the primary growth direction of the nanoribbons in the (010) plane, which coincided with the π–π stacking (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  (A) The SEM image of the individual ribbon OFET by a plastic microfiber mask. (B) The TEM image of an individual ribbon, showing preferential growth along the [010] direction. (C) Its corresponding SAED pattern. (D) Theoretically predicted growth morphology of a single crystal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Wei et al.72 developed a study of the structure–property relationship of 6H-pyrrolo[3,2-b:4,5-b′]bis[1,4] benzothiazine and its 6-substituted derivatives (PBBTZ). The change in the central pyrrolic N-atom has a strong influence, not only on the growth direction of the single-crystalline ribbons but also on the charge carrier mobility. The highest mobility (3.6 cm2 V−1 s−1) was reached with no substitution of the N-atom. The important secondary interactions included the interstacking of the S–S and hydrogen bonds, thus increasing the stability of the final ribbon and favoring large electronic coupling along the π–π stacking direction. Thin film transistors based on the same derivatives afforded worst charge carrier mobility in OFETs.73 The performance of OFET devices powerfully depended upon their thin-film morphology.
Therefore, it is not only the important secondary interactions of S–S that can help or modify the self-assembly of the molecules, but also the incorporation/change of the substituent of the skeleton of the molecule. The incorporation of flexible alkyl chains, together with the rigidity of the core, makes the molecules easily self-assemble.
Zhang et al.74 obtained a one-dimensional fused-nine-ring thienoacene nanoribbon by a direct solution. The nanoribbons were obtained by diluting CHCl3 solution into ethanol. As in previous cases, the morphology was observed by SEM and TEM, and the crystallinity of nanoribbons was analysed by XRD and SAED, indicating good crystallinity in the whole nanoribbon. This group developed a technique denominated “organic ribbon mask”,75 the incorporation of a single nanoribbon into an organic field transistor device afforded a mobility of 0.42 cm2 V−1 s−1. The performance of this device was much lower than the nanoribbon based on the oligoarene counterpart, containing 6S atoms, where the mobility of 2.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 was obtained.76
The capability to control the position and orientation of the deposited crystals is essential for practical application of organic crystals to the devices.
One of the biggest challenges is the preparation of large-area solution-grown aligned micro- and nanocrystals. To gain an alignment of organic semiconductors with large grains over large areas several methods have been developed such as zone casting, dip coating, etc. Zhenan Bao and coworkers77 reported well-aligned high-quality C60 single crystal needles and nanoribbons by the droplet-pinned crystallization (DPC) method.
DPC presents (Fig. 18) several advantages over the previous methods. DPC is easily scalable, allows in situ growth of single crystals on the device substrate and can be used to define the location of the aligned crystals, which are important toward the manufacture of difficult circuits. The electron mobility of the well-aligned C60 single-crystal ribbon is on average 3.0 ± 0.87 cm2 V−1 s−1. This group78 have realized similar studies with an inverter FET prepared with TIPS pentacene single-crystals as the p-channel and C60 single-crystals as the n-channel, being the first aligned single-crystal inverter.
 Fig. 18  Schematic representations of the DPC method. An organic semiconductor droplet pinned by a silicon wafer. As the solvent evaporates slowly, the crystals of the organic semiconductors nucleate near the contact line of the droplet. Subsequently, the nuclei grow along the receding direction (toward the center) of the droplet. Adapted with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Wang et al. have prepared high-quality, well-aligned microribbons of 6,13-dichloropentacene by physical vapour transport with a high mobility of 9 cm2 V−1 s−1.79 Another class of micro- and nanostructures similar to micro- and nanoribbons are micro- and nanobelts. The principal group who have studied these tiny crystals has been Ling Zang and co-workers. They studied the fabrication of 1D nanobelts of PTCDI for their future applications in this area.80–82
Ling Zang and co-workers83 prepared well-defined perylene-carboxylic diimide (PTCDI) nanobelts, through self-assembly by the phase-transfer process, between a “poor” solvent (ethanol) and a “good” solvent (chloroform). SEM and TEM images showed the nanobelt formation, which demonstrated the belt-like geometry of the cross-section. Nanobelts had a flip-flop stacking mode, improving the fluorescence emission. When the nanobelt was bent, the optical waveguide remained, which means an interesting profile for its incorporation as a flexible material in optical and optoelectronic nanodevices.
One interesting application of this type of 1D micro- and nanostructure was the optical waveguide. Luis Sanchez and co-workers84 prepared 4-aryl-4H-1,2,4-triazole ribbons through self-assembly by using the slow diffusion technique, between a good solvent like CHCl3 and a bad solvent like acetonitrile. A hypsochromic shift was observed in the photoluminescence when the aggregate was formed in acetonitrile. When the ribbon was irradiated with a laser beam, efficient propagation of the light was produced, with the typical radiant spot at the end of the ribbon.
Yong Sheng Zhao, Jiannian Yao and coworkers85 described binary organic systems like nanobelts of DPA doped with a very small amount of Nile red with energy transfer between the donor and acceptor where the emission color can be tuned by changing the molar ratio between the blue and red light emitting dye. The photoluminescence of the nanobelt film changed when it was exposed to saturated HCl and NH3 vapours. Therefore, the binary systems can be used as optical sensing devices.85
Conclusions
In the last decade, the development of organic compound-based 1D π-conjugated micro- and nanostructures has suffered a high-impact advance, as deeper studies on their electronic and optoelectronic properties have been reported.
For the preparation of most of the π-conjugated micro- and nanostructures, the solution-phase process has been positioned as the common method, due to higher stability in organic compounds, better processability, and versatility. For this reason, solution-processable single crystals are promising candidates for future large-area electronics. The development of consistent methods to control diameter, length, morphology, and chemical composition still remains a great challenge. On the other hand, the incorporation of 1D organic π-conjugated micro- and nanostructures in flexible substrates does not lead to a loss of both electric and optoelectronic properties. Moreover, due to their very small size, their incorporation into flexible miniaturized devices has been successful.
The disordered oriented 1D micro- and nanostructures were important issues for a long time, when used in large-scale device application. However, during the last few years, useful results have been found in the control and well-alignment of 1D organic π-conjugated micro- and nanostructures. One of the biggest objectives has been the development of new facile methods for patterning and aligning 1D micro- and nanostructures, which is a prerequisite for high-performance low-cost and large-scale devices. Vertically aligned 1D organic π-conjugated micro- and nanostructures have been fabricated and have been shown to be beneficial for many photonic and electronic devices.
The one-dimensional (1D) organic p–n heterojunction keeps a perfect connection between different organic materials. This fact, together with the vertical alignment of micro- and nanostructures, has been demonstrated to be beneficial for high quality and performance in the integration of the devices.
In the photonic area, 1D organic composite nanomaterials have shown great interest. These composites have attracted increasing attention because of their unique properties emerged from the combination of different compounds. The binary organic system combines intermolecular interactions with efficient energy transfer between individual organic and/or inorganic materials, affording novel and tunable luminescent behavior.
In the future, a good choice for photonic applications will be the micro- and nanocrystal composites, due to their low-cost, ease of preparation, flexibility and multi-functionality. The potential applications of the resultant composite nanomaterials would be in biomedicine, sensors, automation, opto-electronics, etc.
The preparation of viable organic micro- and nanocrystal technologies is still in its infancy. For this reason, it is necessary to continue working together on reproducibility, uniformity, special substrate/organic material requirements, controllable morphology and size, and/or crystalline quality. Future progress and development of organic micro- and nanocrystals in these different areas will afford extremely thin, tiny, lightweight, flexible, printable, and cheap electronic and photonic devices.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the MEC CTQ2010-18813 and the CAM (Project S2009/MAT-1756/CAM) is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references

          K. Müllen and U. Scherf, Organic Light Emitting Devices: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .
R. Li, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 529–540 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Klauk, Organic Electronic, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .

          C. Brabec, V. Dyakonov and U. Scherf, Organic Photovoltaics, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9060–9073 RSC .
Q. H. Cui, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4136–4140 RSC .

          W. Hu, F. Bai, X. Gong, X. Zhan, H. Fu and T. Bjornholm, Organic Optoelectronics, Wiley & Sons, Weinheim,  2013 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Zhao, H. Fu, A. Peng, Y. Ma, D. Xiao and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2859–2876 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamamoto, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2012, 13, 033001 CrossRef .
L. Zang, Y. Che and J. S. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1596–1608 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Garcia-Frutos and B. Gomez-Lor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9173–9177 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Garcia-Frutos, G. Hennrich, E. Gutierrez, A. Monge and B. Gomez-Lor, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 1070–1076 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Lehn, Science, 2002, 295, 2400–2403 CrossRef CAS .

          J. W. Steed and J. L. Atwood, Supramolecular Chemistry, Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  2000 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, L. Tan, S. Jiang, H. Qian, Z. Wang, D. Yan, C. Di, Y. Wang, W. Wu, G. Yu, S. Yan, C. Wang, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1882–1883 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, Y. Zhou, H. Geng, S. Jiang, S. Yan, W. Hu, Z. Wang, Z. Shuai and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1–3 CrossRef CAS .
M. Talarico, R. Termine, E. M. Garcia-Frutos, A. Omenat, J. L. Serrano, B. Gomez-Lor and A. Golemme, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6589–6591 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. García-Frutos, U. K. Pandey, R. Termine, A. Omenat, J. Barberá, J. L. Serrano, A. Golemme and B. Gómez-Lor, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7399–7402 CrossRef .
A. Benito-Hernández, U. K. Pandey, E. Cavero, R. Termine, E. M. García-Frutos, J. L. Serrano, A. Golemme and B. Gómez-Lor, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 117–121 CrossRef .
T. Lei and J. Pei, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 785–798 RSC .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, S. A. Jenekhe, Z. Bao and Y. Xia, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 38–47 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, L. Jiang, Y. Tong, H. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2947–2951 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, Y. Tong, Y. Zheng, Y. He, Y. Zhang, H. Dong, W. Hu, T. Hassenkam and T. Bjørnholm, Small, 2011, 7, 189–193 CrossRef .
A. L. Briseno, R. J. Tseng, M. M. Ling, E. H. L. Falcao, Y. Yang, F. Wudl and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2320–2324 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, X. Lu, Y. Xiong, S. A. Jenekhe, Z. Bao and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 668–675 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minari, C. Liu, M. Kano and K. Tsukagoshi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 299–306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wakayama, R. Hayakawa, T. Chikyow, S. Machida, T. Nakayama, S. Egger, D. G. de Oteyza, H. Dosch and K. Kobayashi, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3273–3277 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lim, H. S. Lee, W. H. Lee and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1515–1525 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Hoang, Y. Kim, M. Kim, K. H. Kim, T. W. Lee, D. N. Nguyen, S.-J. Kim, K. Lee, S. J. Lee and D. H. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5363–5367 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, H. Dong and W. Hu, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1615–1630 RSC .
C. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Fan, J. Jie, J. C. Chang, C.-S. Lee, W. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1716–1720 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Ou, W. Zhang, J. Jie, J. C. Chang, C.-S. Lee and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4172–4175 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bao, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Ou, C.-S. Lee, J. Jie and X. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 975–980 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, Q. Tang, H. T. Lemke, K. Moth-Poulsen, F. Westerlund, P. Hammershøj, K. Bechgaard, W. Hu and T. Bjørnholm, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1130–1136 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lambrecht, T. P. I. Saragi and J. Salbeck, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18266–18270 RSC .
J. H. Oh, H. W. Lee, S. Mannsfeld, R. M. Stoltenberg, E. Jung, Y. W. Jin, J. M. Kim, J.-B. Yoo and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 6065–6070 CAS .
N. Liu, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, J. Peng, J. Wang, J. Pei and Y. Cao, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 665–671 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jang, S. Nam, K. Im, J. Hur, S. N. Cha, J. Kim, H. B. Son, H. Suh, M. A. Loth, J. E. Anthony, J.-J. Park, C. E. Park, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1005–1014 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, T. Minari, X. Lu, A. Kumatani, K. Takimiya and K. Tsukagoshi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 523–526 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumatani, C. Liu, Y. Li, P. Darmawan, K. Takimiya, T. Minari and K. Tsukagoshi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2(393), 1 Search PubMed .
N. Liu, Y. Zhou, N. Ai, C. Luo, J. Peng, J. Wang, J. Pei and Y. Cao, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14710–14715 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, W.-J. Liu, Y. Ma, H. Wang, L. Qi, Y. Cao, J. Wang and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12386–12387 CrossRef CAS .
B.-K. An, S. H. Gihm, J. W. Chung, C. R. Park, S.-K. Kwon and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3950–3957 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, Y. Fu, H. Li and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3937–3941 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Wang, D. Zhang, H. You and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9177–9183 CAS .
Q. Bao, B. M. Goh, B. Yan, T. Yu, Z. Shen and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3661–3666 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, D. Xiao, W. Yang, A. Peng and J. Yao, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2302–2306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, C. Di, W. Yang, G. Yu, Y. Liu and J. Yao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1985–1991 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, A. Peng, H. Fu, Y. Ma and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1661–1665 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, Y.-B. Tang, C.-H. Tsang, J.-A. Zapien, C.-S. Lee and N.-B. Wong, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3006–3010 RSC .
C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 973–978 RSC .
Y. S. Zhao, H. B. Fu, F. Q. Hu, A. D. Peng, W. S. Yang and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 79–83 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 85–87 RSC .
J. Y. Zheng, Y. Yan, X. Wang, Y. S. Zhao, J. Huang and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2880–2883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, Q. Liao, H. Fu and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1742–1743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, J. Wu and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3158–3159 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, P. Zhan, J. Kim, C. Sun and J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1630–1636 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Mikhnenko, H. Azimi, M. Scharber, M. Morana, P. W. M. Blom and M. A. Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6960–6965 CAS .
M. Nakhaee Badrabadi, R. Ajeian, S. Saleh Ardestani and M. Tavakkoli, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2682–2687 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, R. Bekele, J. Ouyang and J. Xue, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1621–1625 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Cui, L. Jiang, C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao, W. Hu and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2332–2336 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, D. Y. Lee, S. G. Lee and K. Cho, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2752–2756 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, J. Xu, A. Peng, H. Fu, Y. Ma, L. Jiang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7301–7305 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Yan, Y.-Y. Jing, Q. Shi, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1703–1708 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, D. Y. Lee, H. S. Lee, W. H. Lee, Y. H. Kim, J. I. Han and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 678–682 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Liang, Y. Liu, X. Wang, N. Zhao, Q. Miao, W. Hu and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15201–15204 RSC .
A. Lv, S. R. Puniredd, J. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Zhu, W. Jiang, H. Dong, Y. He, L. Jiang, Y. Li, W. Pisula, Q. Meng, W. Hu and Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2626–2630 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, H. Li, M. He, W. Hu, C. Liu, K. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, H. Li, Y. Liu and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14634–14639 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, P. Gao, I. Liebewirth, K. Kirchhoff, S. Pang, X. Feng, W. Pisula and K. Muüllen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4960–4964 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, H. Dong, X. Zhan, Y. He, H. Li and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6014–6018 RSC .
Z. Wei, W. Hong, H. Geng, C. Wang, Y. Liu, R. Li, W. Xu, Z. Shuai, W. Hu, Q. Wang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2458–2462 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hong, Z. Wei, H. Xi, W. Xu, W. Hu, Q. Wang and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4814–4820 RSC .
S. Zhang, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, R. Liu, Q. Li, X. Zhan, Y. Liu and W. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2841–2843 RSC .
L. Jiang, J. Gao, E. Wang, H. Li, Z. Wang, W. Hu and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2735–2740 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, T. Lei, L. Wang, J. Pei, Y. Cao and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1484–1487 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, B. C. K. Tee, J. J. Cha, Y. Cui, J. W. Chung, S. Y. Lee and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2760–2765 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, B. C. K. Tee, G. Giri, J. W. Chung, S. Y. Lee and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2588–2591 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, J. Li, G. Zhao, Q. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Hu, X. Gao, H. Li and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2229–2233 CrossRef CAS .
K. Balakrishnan, A. Datar, R. Oitker, H. Chen, J. Zuo and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10496–10497 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Che, A. Datar, K. Balakrishnan and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7234–7235 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Che, A. Datar, X. Yang, T. Naddo, J. Zhao and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6354–6355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Che, X. Yang, K. Balakrishnan, J. Zuo and L. Zang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2930–2934 CrossRef CAS .
D. Caceres, C. Cebrian, A. M. Rodriguez, J. R. Carrillo, A. Diaz-Ortiz, P. Prieto, F. Aparicio, F. Garcia and L. Sanchez, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 621–623 RSC .
J. Y. Zheng, C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 12935–12938 RSC .

Footnote† In memoriam of Prof. Christian G. Claessens.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Eva M. Garcia-Frutos	Eva M. García-Frutos obtained her PhD degree (PhD advisor Prof. T. Torres) at the University Autonoma of Madrid (Spain) in 2002. After that, she started a postdoctoral research in Colorado State University (USA) with Prof. L. S. Hegedus (2003-2005), and then in the Institute of Materials Science of Madrid (ICMM, CSIC; Spain) with Dr. B. Gómez-Lor (2006-2009). In 2009, she got a Tenured Scientist position of CSIC, working first in the Institute of Materials Science of Aragon (ICMA, Spain), and since 2012 in the ICMM. Her current research is in the synthesis of small organic systems with electronic and photonic properties.

 	Fig. 1  One-dimensional (1D) π-conjugated organic micro- and nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Transfer characteristics of a device fabricated from a network of HTP nanowires on a flexible substrate. (B) Photograph of an array of bottom-contact nanowire network devices where the source–drain electrodes were deposited through a shadow mask. The inset shows a typical device covered with a network of HTP nanowires spray-coated from a suspension in a mixture of chloroform and ethanol (1:1). A 1.5 μm thick PVP dielectric layer was used for these devices, and its capacitance was 1.9 nF cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25, Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Characterization of BPE-PTCDI MWs. (A) A SEM image of BPE-PTCDI MWs synthesized by the nonsolvent nucleation method. (Inset) The chemical structure of BPE-PTCDI. (B) A TEM image of BPE-PTCDI MWs. (C) Photographs displaying BPE-PTCDI MW dispersion in ethyl alcohol. (D) A TEM bright-field image with a selected area aperture of a single BPE-PTCDI MW. (Inset) The corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern and the molecular packing motif of a BPE-PTCDI MW, where BPE-PTCDI molecules have a slipped-stacking structure along the long axis (the a axis) of the MW. The shortest vertical distance between the aromatic rings stacked along the a axis is 3.4 Å. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright ©2009 by the National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) An AFM image of the optimally grown TIPS-PEN crystals (in dichloromethane at 150 μm s−1) (top) and a height profile of the three adjacent crystals (bottom). (b) Simplified schematic illustration of fast evaporation-induced crystal growth, and magnification of the contact line. Adapted with permission from ref. 38, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A and B) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of as-prepared 2,4,5-triphenylimidazole (TPI) nanowires. The inset shows the chemical structure of TPI. (C) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of TPI nanowires. The inset shows the SAED pattern of one TPI nanowire with the main diffraction spots being indexed and the arrow indicating the direction of the wire. (D) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of TPI powder (bottom) and nanowires (top). Reproduced with permission from ref. 49, Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 6  PL microscopy image of TPI nanowires deposited on a quartz wafer. Scale bar is 10 mm. Adapted with permission from ref 49, Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 7  Characterization of the organic heterojunctions. (A and B) SEM images of the Alq3–DAAQ dendritic heterostructures. Scale bars: (A) 5 μm; (B) 1 μm. (C) TEM image of a single NWHJ. Scale bar is 5 μm. Insets: SAED patterns of the Alq3 trunk and DAAQ branch. Alq3 and DAAQ have single-crystal structures; Alq3 grew in the [011] direction, while [100] was the preferential growth direction for the branch component of DAAQ. (D) PL microscopy images of the NWHJs excited with the UV band (330–380 nm) of a mercury lamp. Scale bar is 100 μm. The green emission is from the Alq3 trunks and the red emission is from the DAAQ branches. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of triblock microrods. (c and d) Fluorescence microscopy images of the same microrods excited with unfocused UV (330–380 nm) and blue light (460–490 nm), respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images (top: 40° tilted view; bottom: cross-sectional view) showing the vertically aligned DAAQ nanowire arrays prepared at (A) 160 °C, for 5 min and (B) 180 °C, for 5 min. All scale bars are 1 μm. The inset shows the molecular structure of the DAAQ molecule. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56, Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Donor–acceptor heterojunction (HJ) with a planar, bulk or nanorod configuration; (b) schematic diagram of the types of organic donor–acceptor HJs.	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM images of the nanostructures grown for different lengths of time after the temperature increased to 460 °C. (A) 20 s; (B) 1 min; (C) 3 min, inset: top view SEM image of a single typical open-ended H2TPyP nanostructure with the CuPc nucleus; (D) 10 min; (E) 35 min. The cooling rate is 2 °C min−1. All scale bars are 1 μm. (F) Schematic illustration of the growth process of the CuPc–H2TPyP nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 12  FE-TEM images of TIPS-PEN microstructures prepared on silicon nitride windows, showing the temporal evolution of the morphology after solution aging for (a) 0 min, (b) 10 min, and (c) 30 min. (d) Schematic diagram of the proposed mechanism for the formation of TIPS-PEN microtubular architectures via self-assembly, self-etching, and recrystallization. The SEM images in the inset in part (d) show the morphologies representative of each step. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) SEM image of the BPEA microtubes, scale bar: 10 mm. Inset: the chemical structure of a single BPEA molecule. (B) TEM image of some typical BPEA microtubes, scale bar: 2 mm. Inset: SAED pattern, the arrow indicates the direction of the tube. (C) AFM image of a single microtube, scale bars: 2 mm. (D) Cross-section along the gray line in (C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 63, Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 14  Morphological features and structure characterization of 1D single-crystalline TIPS-PEN microribbons. The SEM image of a TIPS-PEN microribbon formed on a silicon substrate showing a rectangular cross-section of the microribbon with well-defined facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 65, Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A–C) Scheme of the device fabrication process. (D) AFM image of a finished transistor based on an individual nanoribbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the molecular arrangement in the ribbon OFET of 1, (b) optical microscopy image of the individual ribbon OFET (white arrow indicates the crystal a axis) and the crystal structure in top view within the microribbon (black arrow indicates the ribbon axis). Adapted with permission from ref. 70, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) The SEM image of the individual ribbon OFET by a plastic microfiber mask. (B) The TEM image of an individual ribbon, showing preferential growth along the [010] direction. (C) Its corresponding SAED pattern. (D) Theoretically predicted growth morphology of a single crystal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic representations of the DPC method. An organic semiconductor droplet pinned by a silicon wafer. As the solvent evaporates slowly, the crystals of the organic semiconductors nucleate near the contact line of the droplet. Subsequently, the nuclei grow along the receding direction (toward the center) of the droplet. Adapted with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† In memoriam of Prof. Christian G. Claessens.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
