Recent progress in hybrid perovskite solar cells based on n-type materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA02376F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02376F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10092-10109Recent progress in hybrid perovskite solar cells based on n-type materials

        
          
            Wu-Qiang 
            Wu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dehong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Rachel A. 
            Caruso
          
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Yi-Bing 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *be
aParticulate Fluids Processing Centre, School of Chemistry, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. E-mail: rcaruso@unimelb.edu.au
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia. E-mail: yibing.cheng@monash.edu
cCSIRO Manufacturing, Private Bag 10, Clayton South, Victoria 3169, Australia
dResearch School of Chemistry, The Australian National University, Acton 2601, Australia
eState Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China
Received 
      17th March 2017
    , Accepted 6th May 2017First published on 8th May 2017AbstractOver the past several years, thin film organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have rapidly improved with their power conversion efficiency (PCE) reaching over 22%, nearing that of polycrystalline silicon solar cells. This emerging photovoltaic technology has shown great potential for large-scale application owing to its high efficiency, low material cost and facile fabrication process. Electron-selective contacts, n-type materials that favor the charge transport and collection from the perovskite light absorbers to the front electrode, are important and seen as critical to fabricate high-performance PSCs. In this review, recent progress in such n-type materials is overviewed, with the emphasis on the most explored inorganic semiconducting metal oxides (including TiO2, SnO2, ZnO and Zn2SnO4). The impact of the structure of the n-type materials on the morphology of the perovskite films, the charge extraction and recombination, as well as device performance is highlighted. Optimization of n-type materials and their application in different device architectures are also summarized. An understanding of the intricate function of the n-type materials in PSC devices will assist in the design of materials to give precise control over the light harvesting and charge collection within PSC devices leading to high-performance.Wu-Qiang WuWu-Qiang Wu received his PhD from the University of Melbourne in March 2017. He received his Bachelor and Master degrees at Sun Yat-sen University in 2011 and 2013, respectively. He is presently a research fellow at the Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln. His current research interests lie in the fabrication of functional inorganic and organic hybrid materials and their applications in thin-film optoelectronic devices.Dehong ChenDehong Chen received his PhD in chemistry from Fudan University, China in 2006. He currently has interests in the design and synthesis of functional inorganic materials for energy conversion and storage applications. He is currently working in the Research School of Chemistry, the Australian National University as a research fellow.Rachel A. CarusoRachel A. Caruso is the Director of the Advanced Materials Enabling Capability Platform and a Professor in Chemistry at RMIT University in Melbourne, Australia. Her expertise is in the fabrication of advanced porous functional materials with potential applications in a range of areas including solar energy, water purification, and energy storage devices.Yi-Bing ChengYi-Bing Cheng is a Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Monash University, Australia and the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, China. He was a graduate of Wuhan University of Technology, China and received his PhD from the University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, U.K. He joined Monash University in 1991. He specialises in inorganic materials and composites and his research interest is currently in solution processed solar cells.
1. Introduction
The predicted future global energy needs and increasing concerns of environmental pollution in the 21st century have motivated a great deal of effort into the reduction of fossil fuels consumption and exploration of clean, renewable and environmentally friendly energy sources. Solar energy is commonly recognized as one of the most promising choices to meet the stringent energy demands of human society.1,2 Photovoltaic technologies that directly convert sunlight into electricity are regarded as an excellent means to provide a sustainable source of electric power. To date, many kinds of photovoltaic devices have been developed, including silicon solar cells, CuInxGa1−xSe2 thin film solar cells, organic photovoltaic cells, dye-sensitized solar cells and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells.3–5 Recently, the emerging perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have stimulated worldwide attention and inspired much research interest due to their low-cost, ease of fabrication and high solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency. This low-cost solution-processed solar energy technology has great potential to be a leading next-generation photovoltaic alternative to the conventional silicon solar cells.6,7
PSCs use the halide perovskites of the form ABX3 (A is an organic ammonium ion (such as CH3NH3+ (MA+) or NH2CHNH2+ (FA+)), B is Pb2+ or Sn2+, X is the halogen ion: Cl−, Br− or I−) as the efficient light harvester.8–11 These perovskite materials possess some fascinating properties, such as tunable bandgap,12 high absorption coefficients,13 long charge carrier (electron–hole) diffusion length,14 and low-temperature solution processability.15 Over the past few years, numerous efforts and extensive investigations into the morphology control of each functional layer,16,17 device structure design,6,7,18–20 crystallization modulation of perovskites21–24 and interfacial engineering25,26 have boosted the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of PSC devices from 3.8% to 22.0%.27–30
It is known that the hybrid perovskite itself exhibits ambipolar characteristics, being capable of transporting electrons and holes, making diverse PSC architectures feasible. Typically, two device architectures are usually constructed, namely, mesoscopic structures7 and planar structures.31 Efficient charge separation, transport and collection improve the PCE. PSCs generally make use of a n-type material (i.e. inorganic semiconducting metal oxide or organic fullerene) that serve as the electron transporting layer (ETL) to selectively and efficiently extract the photogenerated electrons from the perovskite, which are transported to and then collected by a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) substrate.13,14 In the case of mesoscopic PSCs, the mesoporous n-type ETLs serve as the nanostructured scaffold for loading perovskite precursors, and act as the charge extraction, transport and collection medium. The morphology, thickness and crystallinity of this mesoporous layer play a crucial role in the overall PCE of the devices. In a planar PSC configuration, a mesoporous oxide film is not necessary. Instead, a thin compact layer between the perovskite and TCO is required, which serves as a hole-blocking layer (HBL) to prevent direct contact between the TCO and hole-transporting layer (HTL).31 Apart from the aforementioned mesoscopic or planar PSC configuration, there is a pillared structure that produces a dual light active layer that combines both mesoscopic and planar characteristics. This structure features a perovskite-infiltrated mesoporous oxide film topped with a perovskite capping layer that contacts the HTL, and is effective in light harvesting and charge collection within the PSC devices.21
An ideal ETL requires an energy level that is well-matched to that of the perovskite material to facilitate photogenerated electron injection and reduce energy loss, and a high electron mobility to ensure rapid electron transport. In addition, the mesoporous ETL should be porous and interconnected to achieve sufficient perovskite infiltration and efficient charge diffusion and transport. As it is also the HBL it should have a layer that is dense, thin and free of pinholes and defects to guarantee excellent hole-blocking and suppress charge recombination owing to the shunting and current leakage.
In this review, recent studies on n-type materials used in PSCs, including inorganic semiconducting metal oxide (i.e. TiO2, SnO2, ZnO, Zn2SnO4, and WO3) and organic carbon materials (i.e., C60, fullerene and fullerene derivatives) are reviewed. The ability to control the inorganic n-type materials morphology and the impact the n-type ETL nanostructure has on the perovskite film formation, as well as the optical and photoelectric properties are discussed. Optimization and modification of the ETLs via doping, composite formation, surface treatment, and interfacial engineering (between the ETL and the perovskite layer) are summarized. The application of n-type ETLs in different device architectures (such as those incorporating flexible substrates or introducing bilayered hybrid ETLs) or constructing a bulk heterojunction are highlighted. To conclude, an outlook for PSCs containing n-type materials is provided.
2. Inorganic n-type semiconducting metal oxide ETLs
The wide bandgap n-type semiconducting metal oxide materials, such as TiO2, ZnO,32 SnO2,33 Zn2SnO4,34 WO3,35 SrTiO3,36 and BaSnO3,37 have been widely employed as ETLs in PSCs because of their properties: matched energy levels, good electron mobility and good transparency. The n-type metal oxide ETLs should exhibit lower conduction and valence band energy levels than the perovskite material, thus ensuring efficient charge injection from the perovskite light absorber to the ETL through direct contact while simultaneously ensuring effective hole-blocking. The morphology, thickness and crystallinity of the n-type metal oxide ETLs also play a crucial role in determining the cell performance. In the next section, the morphological control of n-type semiconducting metal oxide ETLs and the impact this has on device performance are discussed.
2.1 Morphological control

2.1.1 Compact layer. 
The PSCs fabrication process normally starts with the deposition of a compact semiconducting metal oxide layer on the TCO substrate. This acts as a HBL to prevent charge recombination at the interface between the perovskite layer and the TCO, thus avoiding short-circuit. A thin (10–100 nm) and uniform compact layer with few defects and pinholes is important to achieve high PCE.
TiO2 films have been widely used in PSCs owing to their favorable energy levels as well as promising optical and electrical properties.38 Various strategies have been developed to deposit such compact TiO2 layers, including aerosol spray pyrolysis,39 spin-coating,21 sol–gel chemistry,40 thermal oxidation,41 atomic layer deposition (ALD),42 magnetron sputtering43 and e-beam evaporation.44 Among these methods, spray pyrolysis, spin-coating and ALD have been exploited frequently. The solution-processed methods enable easy and low-cost fabrication. Typically, the spray pyrolysis was performed using an ethanolic solution of titania precursor such as titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (TiAcAc). In this case, the compact TiO2 film was generated in situ on a heated TCO substrate by decomposition and oxidization of the titania precursor. The titania precursor can also be deposited onto the TCO substrate via spin-coating, where the thickness of the resultant compact layer can be controlled by altering the precursor concentration, spin rate and acceleration speed. In comparison, spray pyrolysis leads to better coverage and hole-blocking properties. However, spin-coating yields a compact TiO2 layer that may still contain a relatively high density of nano-scale pinholes.45 In addition, the post high-temperature (>450 °C) annealing can also lead to the appearance of a few pinholes, cracks and gaps between the TiO2 and TCO owing to the thermal stress and further crystallization. Hence, low-temperature solution-processed compact TiO2 ETLs are highly desired, using strategies such as deposition of as-prepared highly crystalline TiO2 or improving the interconnectedness of networks by introducing TiAcAc as an “electronic glue”.46 These techniques enable low temperature annealing while still obtaining the desired electronic properties of ETLs. For the physical approaches, the ALD method that uses the Ultratech Savannah 100 apparatus enables the deposition of high-quality compact thin films having a much lower pinhole density as it exploits the chemical reaction of volatile, metal and oxidizing precursors at two separate stages. And no sintering is carried out after the deposition of the compact layer which otherwise can break the conformality and lead to the creation of pinholes.45
However, the low electron mobility of TiO2 (0.1–10 cm2 V−1 s−1)38 compared to other oxides limits the electron transport and thus increases the possibility of charge recombination. Some other compact metal oxide thin films like ZnO or SnO2 with a wide band-gap (3.2 eV for ZnO and 3.8 eV for SnO2), high transparency and higher electron mobility (bulk mobility is 200–300 cm2 V−1 s−1 for ZnO and 100–200 cm2 V−1 s−1 for SnO2) than TiO2, have been investigated and are regarded as better alternative ETLs for PSCs.38,47 Compared to TiO2, ZnO and SnO2 are better suited to low-temperature preparation. However, the chemical instability of ZnO and thermally induced degradation that occurs at the ZnO/perovskite interface may hinder its application as an ETL in PSCs.48 Ke et al. fabricated a solution-processed SnO2 with excellent optical and electrical properties via a facile sol–gel method followed by low temperature annealing at 180 °C, to achieve an average PCE of 16.02%.33 Hagfeldt and co-workers deposited a 15 nm thick SnO2 layer via a low-temperature ALD technique. This achieved a barrier-free band alignment between the SnO2 and the mixed perovskite ((FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbI3)0.15) materials (Fig. 1a and b), leading to a highly efficient, hysteresis-free planar PSCs with a high voltage of 1.19 V and PCEs over 18%.49 Very recently, the same group further developed the low-temperature solution-based method to deposit the SnO2 layer by combining spin-coating (Fig. 1c) and a chemical bath deposition post-treatment (Fig. 1d). The subsequent chemical bath deposition helped to improve the roughness and uniformity and thus achieve better blocking capabilities of the SnO2 layer (Fig. 1e and f). PSCs based on optimized SnO2 yielded efficiencies close to 21%.50
 Fig. 1  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of an ALD-SnO2 ETL based photovoltaic device. (b) Schematic electron injection characteristics of mixed perovskite ((FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbI3)0.15) materials and different ETLs (TiO2 and SnO2).49 Schematic illustrations of (c) spin-coating (SC) and (d) chemical bath deposition (CBD) for the fabrication of SnO2 thin film. Both steps are followed by post-annealing at 180 °C. Top-view SEM images of SnO2 layers deposited by (e) spin coating and (f) spin coating and chemical bath deposition. Scale bars are 200 nm in (e) and (f).50 Adapted with permission from ref. 49 and 50. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Other metal oxide compact layers, such as WOx,51 Nb2O552 and Zn2SnO4,34 have also been employed to construct efficient planar PSCs with improved photovoltaic performance. In-depth studies on new alternative ETLs would broaden the range of choice for the construction of high-performance planar PSCs.


2.1.2 Mesoporous layer. 
In mesoscopic PSCs, an additional layer of mesoporous metal oxide film is deposited on top of the compact metal oxide layer. The mesoporous metal oxide films serve as a scaffold for perovskite infiltration that assists in perovskite nucleation and crystallization and increases the interfacial contact area between perovskite and ETL to facilitate extraction, transport and collection of photogenerated electrons.53 To date, most of the state-of-the-art high-performance mesoscopic PSCs have employed a mesoporous TiO2 layer as the ETL. In general, the mesoporous TiO2 layer is prepared by screen-printing or spin-coating a diluted TiO2 nanoparticle suspension.7,54 The film thickness, particle size, pore size, crystal phase as well as surface roughness of the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold are crucial in determining the PSC performances.
It should be noted that the high absorption coefficients and long charge carrier diffusion lengths characteristic of perovskite materials allow for a significant reduction in film thickness for the mesoporous ETL (normally <1 μm). Kim et al. demonstrated that increasing the mesoporous TiO2 film thickness from 600 nm to 1400 nm reduced the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF), owing to increased dark current and electron transport resistance, but maintained a similar short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc). After incorporation of the solid-state hole conductor (spiro-MeOTAD), a PCE of 9.7% (Jsc = 17.6 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.888 V and FF = 0.62) was achieved for PSCs based on optimized ∼600 nm thick CH3NH3PbI3-sensitized TiO2 film (Fig. 2a and b), and the unencapsulated devices exhibited long-term stability for over 500 h at ambient temperature.19
 Fig. 2  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a complete PSC based on a ∼600 nm CH3NH3PbI3-infiltrated TiO2 film. (b) Enlarged SEM image showing the efficient infiltration of CH3NH3PbI3 into the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold.19 Sketches showing the perovskite film formation and electron transfer behavior on (c) a rough TiO2 film and (d) a smoother TiO2 film.63 Adapted with permission from ref. 19 and 63. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group, 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Controlling the particle size of the TiO2 not only affects the perovskite infiltration and intimate contact between the TiO2 nanoparticles and perovskite crystals, but also influences the charge transfer dynamics at the TiO2/perovskite interface. Han and co-workers investigated the size effect of anatase TiO2 nanoparticles (with different particle sizes ranging from 15 to 30 nm) on the device performance of fully printable hole-conductor-free mesoscopic PSCs based on a ZrO2 insulating layer and carbon electrode. Both Rs (series resistance) and Rrec (charge recombination resistance) decrease with the increase in TiO2 nanoparticle size. The PSC based on TiO2 nanoparticles with a diameter of 25 nm attained the best PCE of 13.41%.55 Sung et al. demonstrated that the PSC based on spherical TiO2 nanoparticles with a diameter of 50 nm obtained a PCE of 17.19% while yielding an inferior electron injection but prolonged electron lifetime as compared to a PSC with smaller TiO2 nanoparticles.56
For ETLs based on conventional porous films of TiO2 nanoparticles, the pore size and volume are adjusted by the particle size. There are numerous defect-rich grain boundaries within such a random nanoparticulate network that significantly hamper charge transport within the device.57 To remedy this issue, a wide range of ordered TiO2 films with tunable pore sizes and periodic mesospaces, such as well-organized mesoporous TiO258,59 or inverse opal-like TiO2,60 have been utilized as ETLs for PSCs. Block copolymers58 or amphiphilic graft copolymers59 have been used as sacrificial templates, enabling the formation of well-organized mesoporous TiO2 films with pore diameters controlled within 10–70 nm. The cell fabricated using mesoporous TiO2 with a large-pore (>15 nm) is superior to that with a small pore,58 indicating the importance of pore size modulation in mesoscopic PSCs. The preparation of ordered inverse opal-like TiO2 porous frameworks with tunable pore size can be obtained by using polystylene spheres as a sacrificial template. The PSC based on an inverse opal-like TiO2 yielded a PCE of 13.11% owing to enhanced light harvesting and suppressed charge recombination.60
The effect of the crystal phase of the TiO2 layer on the performance of PSCs was also investigated.61,62 Rutile TiO2 is better than the anatase TiO2 film for infiltration of the perovskite material into the TiO2 network, for increasing interfacial contact between the perovskite and rutile TiO2, and producing a smooth perovskite capping layer. This leads to the formation of an intimate junction at the rutile TiO2/perovskite interface for facilitated charge extraction, suppressed charge recombination and thus improved photovoltaic performance.61
The roughness of the mesoporous TiO2 layer also influences the perovskite film formation and thus photovoltaic performance. A facile hydrothermal technique was used to fabricate TiO2 nanoparticle thin films with control of the particle size and roughness on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates. This affected the perovskite crystal growth and film formation. The smoother TiO2 film (with a root-mean-square (RMS) of 55 nm compared to 34 nm) leads to smoother CH3NH3PbI3 films with reduced pin-holes and improved surface coverage (Fig. 2c and d). A shorter charge carrier transport distance between perovskite crystals or from perovskite to TiO2 can be expected in PSCs containing compact and smooth perovskite films when compared with those possessing a porous and rough perovskite structure, leading to enhanced photovoltaic performance.63
Usually, a sintering process is required subsequent to the deposition of mesoporous TiO2 to increase the crystallinity and enhance the electronic connectivity. In contrast, mesoporous SnO2 films can be prepared via either low temperature or high temperature annealing. Ke et al. investigated the effect of the annealing temperature of solution-processed SnO2 ETLs on the PSC device performance. Interestingly, the PSCs based on low-temperature annealed SnO2 ETLs (LT-SnO2) outperform the high-temperature annealed SnO2 (HT-SnO2) counterpart, exhibiting higher Voc and FF. The LT-SnO2 has better film coverage, a wider band gap, and a lower electron density than the HT-SnO2, resulting in more efficient electron transport, effective hole blocking and retarded recombination at the interface.64 Apart from TiO2 and SnO2, other mesoporous metal oxide films of ZnO,65 WO3,35 Zn2SnO4,66 SrTiO3,36 and BaSnO3,37 have been applied as the ETLs for PSCs providing many other options for construction of PSCs.


2.1.3 1D nanostructured layers. 
In the mesoscopic PSCs, the transfer of photoinduced electrons from perovskite to the ETL, the pore-filling with the perovskite and the HTM infiltration play crucial roles in determining the cell performance. The commonly used mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticle based ETLs suffer from some shortcomings, such as numerous grain boundaries, surface defects and trap states within the random nanoparticulate network that hinder electron transport in the nanocrystalline films, thus leading to charge recombination.67,68 1D TiO2 nanostructures, including nanorods,67 nanowires,69,70 nanocones,71 and nanotubes,72 have been applied and considered promising ETLs owing to their unique advantages, such as direct pathways for facilitated electron transport and enhanced light harvesting by light scattering.
Rutile TiO2 nanorods/nanowires prepared via a hydrothermal process under strongly acidic or acid-free conditions have been widely used as ETLs in PSCs.67,69,73 Park et al. reported a PCE of 9.7% for a PSC containing a submicrometer rutile TiO2 nanorod (∼600 nm) film sensitized with CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite nanodots (Fig. 3a).67 Investigation of the effect of TiO2 nanorod length on the device performance showed that Jsc, Voc and PCE decrease with increased nanorod length owing to disorder in the longer nanorod array and reduced pore-filling (Fig. 3b). Charge transfer dynamic studies revealed that the electron mobility in rutile TiO2 nanorods is two orders of magnitude higher than that in nanoparticulate TiO2.67 Jiang et al. demonstrated a PSC based on 900 nm rutile TiO2 nanowires, with spaces between the wires for efficient perovskite and HTM filling, which exhibited a PCE of 11.7%.69 By manipulating the hydrothermal conditions, rutile TiO2 nanocones with fused nanorods at the bottom and open top space can be obtained. A PCE of ∼11% was achieved for such rutile TiO2 nanocone-based PSC devices. Electron transfer from the perovskite to TiO2 nanocones was significantly faster than to rectangular TiO2 nanorods, which is thus beneficial to suppress the charge recombination and improve device performance.71
 Fig. 3  (a) A cross-sectional SEM image of a complete PSC based on 1D rutile TiO2 nanorod arrays.67 (b) J–V curves of PSCs based on rutile TiO2 nanorods with different length as labelled.67 (c) Cross-section and (d) Fast Fourier transform patterns of TEM images of 1D well-defined single-crystalline TiO2 thin film on a FTO substrate.77 (e) Sketch of a heterojunction device structure: TiO2 nanosheets/ZrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C.84 Adapted with permission from ref. 67, 77 and 84. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, 2016 American Chemical Society, 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Compared with the well-developed 1D rutile TiO2 nanostructures, the 1D anatase TiO2 nanostructures are still rarely applied in PSCs. Restricted by the synthesis method, it is still challenging to obtain 1D anatase TiO2 nanostructured thin films (<1 μm). Very recently, we developed a simple and facile hydrothermal approach to fabricate anatase TiO2 nanowires on FTO substrates. A PCE exceeding 16% was achieved for PSCs constructed using an optimized ETL consisting of a self-assembled thin TiO2 blocking layer (∼20 nm) and then a uniform anatase TiO2 nanowire layer (∼150 nm).
It is generally recognized that highly crystalline TiO2 requires high-temperature (>450 °C) sintering to achieve suitably high charge carrier mobility for good charge transport properties.46 This high temperature annealing leads to high energy consumption, high production cost and a slow fabrication rate, and therefore will be an obstruction to roll-to-roll processing of PSCs on flexible substrates. PSCs based on amorphous TiOx have been shown to function even in the absence of a high-temperature annealing step, as long as the TiOx ETL is thin enough (<50 nm) to ensure sufficient electrical conductivity for charge extraction and transport.74,75 We fabricated amorphous titania nanowire thin films that were used as ETLs without high temperature treatment yielding PCEs up to 14.67%; comparable to its high-temperature sintered TiO2 counterpart. The 1D nanowire structures contain spaces between the wires, which is excellent for perovskite infiltration, while the unique 1D geometry and excellent coverage of the substrate are beneficial for efficient electron transport, effective hole-blocking and suppressed electron/hole recombination compared to nanoparticulate films when applied in PSCs.76
Although 1D nanostructures could provide a direct path for electron transport, the intrinsic morphological defects of the materials themselves were inevitable and thus limit the charge transport properties through the PSC devices. To mitigate this issue, a nanostructure that has single crystal properties that provides good electronic properties is highly desired. Choi et al. produced a well-defined 1D nanostructured TiO2 thin film ETL with good transmittance, single-crystalline properties and defect-free physical contact with the FTO substrates via a combined sputtering and anodization protocol (Fig. 3c and d). A 22% increase in PCE has been observed for PSCs based on such single crystalline 1D TiO2 thin films owing to the outstanding charge extraction and hole blocking, as compared to a solution-processed counterpart.77 Yang and co-workers have reported on PSCs based on 1D SnO2 mesoporous single crystals (SnO2 MSC) achieving a PCE of 8.54%. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) revealed that the SnO2 MSC based PSC had a lower transport resistance than the titania nanocrystal PSCs as the single crystal provides high electron mobility and fewer bulk defects and impurities.78 Similarly, other 1D oxide nanostructures, for instance, ZnO nanorods32 or WO3 nanowires,35 were also employed as efficient ETLs in PSCs with enhanced photovoltaic performance.
In addition to nanorods or nanowires, 1D TiO2 nanotube arrays can be used as ETLs in PSCs. TiO2 nanotube arrays have been prepared either via an anodization of Ti foil that is transferred to a thin TiO2 blocking layer covering FTO substrates,79 or via a direct anodization of sputtered Ti-film-coated on a glass substrate.80 Several demonstrations have revealed the improved light absorption and reduced charge recombination rate for these 1D TiO2 nanotube arrays in devices as compared to TiO2 nanoparticle-based systems. The highest PCE reported so far is 14.8% for PSCs based on a submicrometer-sized 1D TiO2 nanotube array infiltrated with CH3NH3PbI3. The unsealed TiO2 nanotube-based devices are remarkably stable owing to the self-sealing property of nanotubes. This is because the highly ordered 1D nanotube architecture can remarkably protect the perovskite from the moisture except from the top, and the “sealed” perovskite does not come directly in contact with the FTO even without using an additional compact layer of TiO2.72 In addition, the fabrication of aligned TiO2 nanotube arrays on Ti foil demonstrated the potential to construct flexible devices if a conductive, transparent top electrode is added. Wong et al. used TiO2 nanotubes as the ETL and carbon nanotubes as the counter electrode to produce flexible PSCs, yielding a PCE of 8.3% when front illuminated. This device showed good durability with little performance deterioration after 100 mechanical bending cycles, suggesting its potential application in wearable photovoltaic devices.80


2.1.4 2D nanostructured layers. 
2D nanostructures, such as nanosheets or nanoplates, which possess high surface area and excellent electrical properties can also be used as ETLs in PSCs. Anatase TiO2 nanosheets with exposed high energy (001) facets have improved the light absorption and facilitated charge extraction owing to the favorable attachment of the light absorbers to the TiO2 nanosheet surface due to the higher ionic charge of the exposed (001) facets.81,82 In 2012, Etgar et al. first fabricated the hole-conductor-free CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 heterojunction PSC based on the ∼400 nm (001) facet-exposed anatase TiO2 nanosheets that achieved a PCE of 5.5%.83 Based on this concept, Han and co-workers further developed the fully printable hole-conductor-free mesoscopic PSC. This device employed a double layer of mesoporous TiO2 and ZrO2 as a scaffold that was infiltrated by perovskite, and a printable carbon layer as the back contact (Fig. 3e). It was demonstrated that the high reactivity of the (001) facets in the anatase nanosheets improved the interfacial properties between the perovskite and the ETL. As a result, a PCE up to 10.64% was achieved.84 These well-functioning hole-conductor-free PSC devices profit from the anatase TiO2 nanosheets with high levels of exposed (001) facets that improve charge separation and extraction at the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface.
We recently fabricated 2D petal-like anatase TiO2 nanosheets directly on FTO glass via a solvent-mediated solvothermal approach. The highly porous 2D nanosheet networks improved perovskite infiltration and increased interfacial contact between the TiO2 and perovskite, and provided a more direct electron pathway for faster electron transport, when compared with PSCs based on TiO2 nanoparticles.70 The advantages of good perovskite absorber infiltration in the porous nanosheet scaffold and more rapid carrier transport have also been elucidated in WO3 nanosheet array-based PSCs with significantly enhanced photovoltaic performance as compared to WO3 nanoparticle devices.35


2.1.5 3D nanostructured layers. 
The 1D array structures could be engineered to arrays of 3D branched structures with nanowire/nanorod branches decorated on the surface of the 1D array scaffold. The 3D branched array architectures exhibit several advantages in terms of higher surface area and porosity for efficient perovskite infiltration, superior light scattering for enhanced light harvesting, as well as a 3D interconnected network for improved electron transport, suppressed charge recombination and thus efficient charge collection. In particular, the trunks in the 3D array architecture serve as rapid charge-conducting channels to facilitate electron transport to the front electrode, while the branches provide a much higher volume density of nucleation sites during the perovskite deposition and thus allow more efficient charge separation and extraction. All aforementioned advantages make 3D branched arrays superior ETL candidates for PSCs.85–87
Wang and co-workers fabricated a mixed phase (anatase and rutile) 3D branched TiO2 nanowire architecture (Fig. 4a) via a ZnO nanowire template-assisted surface-reaction-limited pulsed chemical vapor deposition technique. By optimizing the film thickness, the highest PCE of 9.0% was achieved using a ∼600 nm long 3D branched TiO2 nanowire architecture and the J–V hysteresis effect was largely suppressed.86 Mahmood et al. introduced a 3D hyperbranched anatase TiO2 nanorod-nanofiber array (Fig. 4b) prepared via a multistage electrospinning and hydrothermal route. Mesostructured PSCs based on these hyperbranched TiO2 arrays with optimal electron transport and carrier lifetimes obtained a maximum PCE of 15.50%.85 We fabricated dendritic anatase TiO2 nanowire thin films with a controllable film thickness (∼120 nm to 4 μm) on FTO glass substrates via a facile one-step solvothermal process. It was demonstrated that a dendritic TiO2 nanowire thin film with a film thickness of around 200 nm could serve as an effective ETL in PSC, only if it is sufficiently dense with good surface coverage on the FTO substrate. The multifunctionality of this dendritic TiO2 thin film can be embodied in: (a) the thin film characteristic and 3D interconnected network structure for efficient electron transport; (b) the porosity of the nanowire film enabling good perovskite infiltration and thus the formation of an intimate TiO2/perovskite interface; (c) the 3D branched configuration could efficiently capture and confine the incident light for improved light harvesting efficiency; and (d) the branched nanowire film could serve as a good HBL due to the varied orientation of the wires that prevent direct contact between the perovskite or HTL and FTO or between the back electrode and FTO (even in the absence of a dense TiO2 blocking layer). PSCs constructed using the optimized dendritic TiO2 thin films yield PCEs up to 14.2% with a Jsc of 20.32 mA cm−2, Voc of 993 mV and FF of 0.70.87
 Fig. 4  SEM images of (a) 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanowire architecture (inset is an enlarged SEM image showing the tree-like branched nanowire structure),86 and (b) 3D hyperbranched nanofiber-nanorod TiO2 array.85 (c) Schematic of the PSC consisting of TiO2 helices, and cross-sectional SEM images of three different TiO2 helices grown on a silicon wafer.88 Adapted with permission from ref. 85, 86 and 88. Copyright 2015 Wiley, 2015 American Chemical Society, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Park and co-workers prepared 3D well-aligned helical arrays (Fig. 4c) by the oblique-angle electron beam evaporation method. FAPbI3-based PSCs using this nanohelical TiO2 scaffold obtained a PCE of 12.03% without observable hysteresis, since capacitive charges are likely to be quickly dissipated by charge separation in the presence of the nanohelices.88 Lee and co-workers reported on the monodisperse hierarchical TiO2 beads with a diameter of 100 nm (SP100) having a highly porous structure, an ideal building block for the mesoporous TiO2 layer for PSCs. Devices based on SP100 TiO2 beads exhibit reproducible PCEs of 18.41% and little hysteresis in their J–V curves. The high PCE can be attributed to the extensive contact between the perovskite and porous TiO2 beads, thus boosting charge extraction and suppressing charge recombination.89

2.2 Morphological influence
The regular architecture of a PSC is TCO/n-type ETL/perovskite/HTL/metal electrode. As the perovskite thin films are deposited on the ETL scaffolds to fabricate the device, the ETL morphology (pore size, surface area and roughness) affects the perovskite crystal growth and film formation. In addition, the morphological characteristics of the n-type ETLs would affect the optical and photoelectric properties at the ETL/perovskite interfaces.

2.2.1 Effect on perovskite film formation. 
In planar n–i–p PSC devices, the compact and dense HBL prevents infiltration of the perovskite precursor into this layer. Instead, a compact perovskite layer forms and is sandwiched between the ETL and HTL. In contrast, a lot of work has suggested that morphological variation of the n-type ETL is crucial in determining the crystal growth and film formation of perovskite materials in mesoscopic PSC devices. Controlling the pore sizes of the mesoporous metal oxide film is essential for manipulating the growth of the perovskite layer. Typically, the perovskite precursor solution will infiltrate the small voids and cavities of the mesoporous ETL film, while at the same time perovskite crystals will form on top. This leads to a bilayer structure comprising of a perovskite-infiltrated ETL bottom layer and a perovskite capping layer.
For this bilayer structure we proposed a heterogeneous nucleation and induced growth mechanism. Deposition of the perovskite solution onto the mesoporous scaffold results in simultaneous nucleation within voids and on top of the ETL thin films. The mesoporous framework of the ETL is accessible to the perovskite precursor solution, and the crystal growth is confined to this mesoporous scaffold. The remaining perovskite precursor and nuclei on top form the perovskite capping layer. The perovskite grain morphology (size and roughness) and thickness depend on the nuclei density. In general, the ETL with higher porosity and thicker film would allow for more perovskite infiltration, inducing more nuclei within the film, resulting in a thinner perovskite capping layer with smaller grains and less textured surface. Whereas a thinner ETL with comparatively less porosity would suppress heterogeneous nucleation within the voids and cavities of the film, which allows for a greater fraction of perovskite solute to precipitate on top of the ETL, leading to the formation of perovskite films with comparatively large grains and flat surface.63,87 The morphology and grain structure of the perovskite film might also be related to the wettability and crystal orientation of the underlying ETL films.90 A textured CH3NH3PbI3 morphology (Fig. 5a and b) formed on a very thin mesoporous TiO2 layer using a gas-assisted crystallization method. The textured morphology comprises a multitiered nanostructure, which improves the light harvesting (Fig. 5c), charge extraction (Fig. 5d) and performance of the solar cells. PSCs based on such a textured perovskite morphology obtained a PCE as high as 16.3% with high Jsc exceeding 22 mA cm−2.90
 Fig. 5  SEM images of (a) textured CH3NH3PbI3 film and (b) completed textured cell. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of four planar CH3NH3PbI3 films (dashed grey curves) and four separate textured CH3NH3PbI3 films (solid black curves) on FTO glass substrates, indicating the highly reproducible absorbance data for the planar films and differences in the absorbance of the textured films owing to variations in the surface morphology from device to device. The inset plot shows the fraction of diffusely scattered radiation excluding the direct reflection of light perpendicular to the perovskite film. (d) PL spectra for a compact-TiO2 + planar perovskite sample (dashed grey curve) and a mesoporous-TiO2 + textured perovskite sample (solid black curve).90 SEM images of (e) porous TiO2 with honeycomb structure and (f) this TiO2 scaffold after filling with a 20 wt% perovskite precursor solution. (g) Sketch of the device architecture with oxide honeycomb scaffold. (h) Colour enhanced cross-section SEM image of a complete device fabricated from the oxide honeycomb with 20 wt% perovskite precursor solution.91 (i) Schematic showing the different electron transfer pathways and charge collection at the TiO2 nanoparticle (TNP)–, TiO2 nanosheet (TNS)–, and TiO2 nanowire (TNW)–CH3NH3PbI3 interfaces.70 Adapted with permission from ref. 70, 90 and 91. Copyright 2016 Wiley, 2016 Wiley, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
On the other hand, using a macroporous ETL scaffold with large pores is a more direct method to template the microstructural growth of the perovskite film. Snaith and co-workers demonstrated a scalable technique for fabricating highly ordered metal oxide scaffolds with a honeycomb structure (Fig. 5e) that can be used to pattern the perovskite thin films on a photonic length scale. The perovskite material fills the large pores of the honeycomb well (Fig. 5f) and hence the domain size and film thickness of the perovskite can be controlled and tuned by varying the honeycomb structure as well as perovskite precursor concentration. PSC devices fabricated from the periodic ETL honeycomb and 20 wt% perovskite precursor solution (Fig. 5g and h) exhibit semi-transparent characteristics with increased Voc and FF, yielding PCEs up to 9.5% with an average visible transmittance through the active layer of around 37%.91


2.2.2 Effect on optical and photoelectrical properties. 
The morphology of the n-type ETL would also affect the optical and photoelectrical properties of the ETL and the ETL/perovskite interface, which is important for device performance. In thin film PSCs, the ETL thin film is required to possess good transmittance. Porous nanostructured thin films (nanoparticles, nanowires, nanosheets or dendritic nanowires) coated on a FTO glass substrate can improve optical transmittance and thus good antireflection properties are observed as compared to FTO glass. This allows an increased portion of incident light to be transmitted through the ETL to reach the perovskite photon absorbing layer. In addition, the superior light scattering, along with an increased light trapping and light interaction at the ETL/perovskite interfaces are also beneficial to improve the light harvesting efficiency and thus enhance the Jsc and PCE of the devices.
The morphology of the ETL plays a significant role in the extraction and transport of photogenerated electrons from the perovskite layer. Typically, a nanostructured ETL in contact with perovskite would significantly accelerate the charge extraction. Photoluminescence quenching and charge extraction was more efficient at 1D TNW/CH3NH3PbI3 and 2D TNS/CH3NH3PbI3 interfaces as compared to a TNP/CH3NH3PbI3 interface. This is largely driven by the intrinsic morphological and dimensional differences. The high porosity of the 1D TNW and 2D TNS structures would facilitate the infiltration of perovskite, leading to improved contact between the perovskite and TiO2. This is beneficial for accelerating charge separation at the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface, and would thus boost the charge collection within the TNS or TNW structured ETL. In addition, the 1D TNW and 2D TNS films provide simpler and more direct pathways for facilitated electron transport and charge extraction, leading to improved charge collection within the devices. However, the electron transfer pathways are highly tortuous in TNP films due to the numerous grain boundaries and defects (Fig. 5i).70

3. Organic n-type materials
Organic n-type materials, such as fullerene and its derivatives (i.e. [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) or C60), are widely used as ETLs in inverted PSCs, because of their suitable energy level alignment, decent electron mobility and easy low-temperature solution-processed or vacuum-processed fabrication.92,93 Normally, some buffer layers or interlayers (i.e. C60, bathocuproine (BCP) or bathophenanthroline (Bphen)) would be introduced at the fullerene/electrode interface to tune the work function of the electrodes to build a better energy level alignment with a decreased charge extraction barrier.94,95 Among the various solution-processed organic fullerene derivatives, PCBM with its high electrical conductivity (∼10−7 S cm−1) has been most commonly used as the ETL in PSCs.96 It is reported that PCBM can effectively extract electrons from a PCBM/CH3NH3PbI3 interface owing to the suitable surface work function of PCBM, and this results in a favorable band alignment and high electron affinity with the perovskite. A ∼0.4 eV energy level offset is achieved between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbit (LUMO) of CH3NH3PbI3 (−3.9 eV) and that of PCBM (−4.3 eV).97,98 The presence of a large density of charge traps on the surface of the perovskite layer has been regarded as one of the origins of the notorious photocurrent hysteresis in the planar heterojunction PSCs. Huang and co-workers demonstrated that the fullerene layers deposited on the perovskite layers could passivate these traps effectively (Fig. 6a), which eliminates photocurrent hysteresis and improves device performance.99 The same research group correlated the structural order of the PCBM layers with the device performance (Fig. 6b). They found that energy disorder in the fullerene ETL could be reduced by a simple solvent annealing process. As a result, the PCE of the CH3NH3PbI3 planar heterojunction PSCs increases from 17.1% to 19.4%, along with the Voc from 1.04 to 1.13 V without sacrificing the Jsc and FF.100 We believe that the performance of inverted PSC devices could be improved by further optimization of the organic fullerene ETLs, the fullerene/perovskite and fullerene/electrode interfaces, in conjunction with improving the quality of the perovskite morphology. All these factors would simultaneously contribute to facilitated charge extraction, reduced hysteresis and improved device stability. Apart from fullerene derivative-based ETLs, other n-type non-fullerene organic ETLs, such as an amino-functionalized conjugated polymer, coronene, hexaazatrinaphthylene derivatives or amino-substituted perylene diimide derivatives have been designed and applied for realizing efficient PSCs with improved PCE, reduced hysteresis and/or improved ambient stability.101–105 These non-fullerene ETLs have been regarded as promising alternatives to replace the conventionally used PCBM in p–i–n inverted PSCs101,103,104 and frequently used TiO2 in conventional n–i–p PSCs.102,105 In addition, they can be fabricated through a low-temperature solution process, enabling their compatibility in constructing the flexible PSCs devices.102
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the surface recombination reduction by passivating the trap states in the presence of the PCBM layer.99 The PEDOT:PSS is poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate). (b) Schematic illustration of how energy disorder of the PCBM layer influences the Voc of device: a wide distributed electronic density of states reduces the quasi-Fermi level of the photogenerated electrons (EFn) and thus reduces the device Voc. EFp is the quasi-Fermi level of the photogenerated holes. Blue and purple dashed lines represent the quasi-Fermi level of devices with disordered and ordered PCBM, respectively.100 Adapted with permission from ref. 99 and 100. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group, 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
4. Strategies for optimizing n-type materials
Efficient charge separation, injection, collection and effective carrier recombination suppression are key to improving the PCE in PSCs, which requires the optimization of the n-type ETL and the ETL/perovskite interface. Roughly, the strategies to achieve these goals can be divided into four categories: elemental doping, surface treatment (TiCl4 treatment; UV-ozone treatment; surface insulation/passivation coating; heterostructured core–shell assembly), nanocomposite assembly and interfacial engineering.
4.1 Elemental doping
The electronic properties of n-type inorganic ETL materials can be modified by elemental doping. TiO2 has been the dominant ETL for PSCs. However, the low innate electron mobility of TiO2 (0.1–10 cm2 V−1 s−1)38 prevents it from becoming an ultimate ETL material. Doping TiO2 with Li+,106 Nb5+,107 Sn4+,108 Al3+,109 Y3+,25 Mg2+,110 Nd3+,111 or Zr4+,112 has been demonstrated and found to be an efficient way to improve the device performance of PSCs. Specifically, Nb-doped TiO2 is believed to decrease the Rs and increase the Rrec, as well as improve electron injection and transport in the devices, leading to a higher Jsc and FF.107 A low level of Al, Nd and Li doping could passivate the oxygen defects and decrease the number of deep traps on the surface of the TiO2. This could induce fast electron transport and reduce charge recombination within the TiO2, improving the Voc and FF, and thus significantly enhance the performance and stability of PSCs.106,109,111 Grätzel and co-workers reported PSCs prepared using Li-doped mesoporous TiO2 films as the scaffold to host the CH3NH3PbI3, improving the PCE from 17% (un-doped TiO2) to over 19% with negligible hysteresis.106 Roose et al. found that an optimized doping concentration of 0.3% Nd enables the preparation of PSCs with stabilized PCE over 18%.111 Mg or Y doped TiO2 could not only modify the morphology of the perovskite layer, but also form a better energy level alignment with perovskite owing to an upward shift of the Fermi level. This indicates an increased charge carrier concentration in response to the enhanced conductivity, thus achieving significant increase in Jsc and Voc.25,110 A high-performance PSC with a PCE of 19% has been realized by using a Y-doped TiO2 compact layer.25 Recent work demonstrated that doping TiO2 with Zr4+ could also help to enhance the device performance and decrease hysteresis.112
Elemental doping could also be used in other metal oxide materials, such as ZnO and SnO2. For instance, N-doped high-aspect ratio ZnO nanorods have been employed as ETLs for PSCs. In combination with the introduction of a dipole layer between the ETL and perovskite layer, increased charge carrier concentration, improved perovskite infiltration and reduced electrode work functions have been achieved. This contributes to facilitated electron transport and suppressed charge recombination, leading to a PCE above 16%.113 Very recently, a low-temperature solution processed Sb-doped SnO2 nanocrystalline thin film has been employed in PSCs. The Sb-doped SnO2 ETL exhibits an enhanced electrical conductivity with upward shift of the Fermi level, leading to reduced charge recombination, and thus longer electron recombination lifetime and improved Voc. As a result, a PCE of 17.9% has been obtained, with reduced hysteresis.114 Y(III) or Mg(II) doped SnO2 films have been demonstrated to be promising ETLs producing efficient and hysteresis-less PSCs owing to the improved energy level alignment with perovskite and enhanced electron mobility.115,116
4.2 Surface treatment

4.2.1 TiCl4 treatment. 
TiCl4 treatment has frequently been used to modify the surface and improve the electronic properties of TiO2. Enhanced photovoltaic performance has been observed for PSCs based on TiCl4-treated mesoporous TiO2 thin films.117 The effectiveness of TiCl4 treatment in inhibiting charge recombination is more obvious for other heterogeneous metal oxide ETLs (i.e. SnO2) that have more negative conduction bands relative to TiO2.118 For instance, the conduction band of SnO2 is about 0.5 eV more negative than that of TiO2.119 The electron injection from perovskite to SnO2 is faster, but at the same time, the electron–hole recombination is easier between the conduction band of SnO2 and the valance band of perovskite.118 Rao et al. found that TiCl4-treated SnO2 could not only enhance the wettability for improved surface coverage of the perovskite film, but also induce a better energy level band alignment for impeded charge recombination at the SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface. This leads to improved device performance of the PSCs based on a SnO2 ETL treated twice with TiCl4 with PCEs up to 14.69%, which is significantly higher than the pristine SnO2 counterpart (6.52%).118


4.2.2 UV-ozone treatment. 
UV-ozone treatment is widely used as a cleaning process to remove residual organic species on substrates and increase the wettability of the metal oxide film.120,121 In PSCs, this would help to fabricate smoother perovskite films with improved surface coverage. It has also been reported that UV-ozone treatment could affect the electrical and thus photovoltaic properties of metal oxides. In particular, the work functions of metal oxides could be increased under UV-ozone treatment owing to the reduction in oxygen vacancy concentration imparting a downward shift of the Fermi level. Such an effect allows for the construction of well-functioning high performance PSCs with PCEs up to 16% and a high Voc of 1.06 V, even without an ETL.120 Surface UV-ozone treatment on rutile TiO2 nanorods improved the interfacial properties between the TiO2 nanorods and perovskite, which strengthen the interaction between the nanorod array and the perovskite layer and thus facilitate faster electron injection from the perovskite layer to TiO2. Thus, a PSC based on optimized UV-ozone-treated TiO2 nanorods exhibited a PCE of 18.22%, which is the highest efficiency reported so far on 1D metal oxide nanostructured PSC devices.121


4.2.3 Surface insulation/passivation coating. 
Introducing some wide band gap semiconductors, such as Al2O3,6 ZrO2,54 SiO2,122 MgO123 and Y2O3,124 as insulators onto the surface of n-type semiconductors is an effective way to suppress the charge recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface and thus improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. In 2012, Snaith et al. put forward a new meso-superstructured PSC configuration, which employed an insulating mesoporous Al2O3 layer on top of the compact TiO2 layer as a scaffold for perovskite infiltration.6 The Al2O3 does not take part in the electron extraction due to its large bandgap (7–9 eV), and the electrons must be transported through the continuous perovskite until they are collected at the TiO2-coated FTO electrode. This meso-superstructured PSC still yielded a high PCE along with a high Voc.6 It is well-known that the relatively high density of electronic traps in aged TiO2-based solar cells (originating from UV light illumination-induced desorption of surface-absorbed oxygen) would influence the device stability. In contrast, the stability of the device using an Al2O3 scaffold is much better, since there is no electron trapping behavior in these devices.125 Similar to Al2O3, ZrO2 is widely used in typical mesoscopic PSCs, showing its great potential in constructing fully printable hole-conductor-free PSCs with a TiO2/ZrO2/C triple layered device architecture.54,55 SiO2 nanoparticles with optimized diameters,126 SiO2 nanorods with tailored shape,122 and Au@SiO2 nanoparticles127 have been demonstrated to be useful in designing high-performance PSCs.
Surface passivation with an ultrathin HTL on the surface of the mesoporous TiO2 layer is an effective way to suppress the charge recombination. A sub-nanometer conformal TiO2 (1–4 nm) thin layer was deposited on a mesoporous TiO2 film by ALD. This leads to an effective reduction in the passivation layer capacitance and suppression of charge recombination, resulting in a 50% enhancement in PCE along with a higher Voc.128 An ultrathin TiO2 passivation layer was deposited on the surface of 1D TiO2 nanorods by ALD, which boosted the light absorption, and decreased the recombination rate, leading to enhanced photovoltaic performance (PCE of 13.45%) with decent Jsc, Voc and FF.129


4.2.4 Heterostructured core–shell assembly. 
A recombination phenomenon (known as back reaction) is very common in PSCs, where the injected electrons may recombine with holes at the interface between the ETL and the perovskite layer, which could reduce the device performance. The recombination can be effectively controlled by changing the electrical characteristics of the metal oxide ETL by forming a heterostructured core–shell assembly (via coating a thin layer of another metal oxide on the ETL surface). The construction of core–shell heterostructured ETLs can interface one metal oxide with the perovskite (e.g., TiO2) while utilizing the other metal oxide (e.g., ZnO or SnO2) for rapid electron transport and collection to the cathode.130,131 Mahmood et al. reported that PSCs based on ZnO@TiO2 core–shell heterostructured ETLs exhibited excellent performance enhancement (with a PCE of 15.3%) and minimal hysteresis owing to the superior light harvesting capability, larger surface area, prolonged charge-transport pathways and lower recombination rate.130 Another successful demonstration of heterostructured core–shell arrays with single-crystalline SnO2 nanowires as cores and epitaxial TiO2 nanolayers as shells has been successfully applied in PSCs (Fig. 7a), exhibiting boosted electron transport and excellent pore-filling with the perovskite material.131
 Fig. 7  (a) Sketch showing the SnO2 nanowire@TiO2 core–shell heterostructure and an energy level diagram showing the conduction band of SnO2, TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3.131 (b) Schematic diagram of the device structure (ITO/TiOx–Au-NPs/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/HTM/Ag); Au-nanoparticles (NPs) are sandwiched between two TiOx layers.74 (c) Sketch of the PSC device structure with self-assembled monolayers (SAM) that induce permanent dipole formation, and involvement of the SAM in directing the crystal evolution of the perovskite crystals.136 Adapted with permission from ref. 74, 131 and 136. Copyright 2015 Wiley, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2015 American Chemical Society. 

4.3 Nanocomposite assembly
The electronic properties of the ETL can also be improved by manipulating the ETL composition. For example, graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites have been used as the ETLs in PSCs.15 The graphene, acting as an electron collector, exhibits high charge mobility, and could reduce the contact resistance and increase Rrec, and consequently enhance PCE with improved Jsc, Voc and FF.15,132 Moreover, the incorporation of graphene exemplifies the potential of low-temperature ETL fabrication while maintaining favorable conductivity for fast electron transport and collection.15 To date, PSCs using only WOx as the ETL display inferior performance than the devices based on other metal oxide ETLs. Ma and co-workers developed a facile solution route to fabricate amorphous WOx–TiOx nanocomposite based ETLs via the spin-coating of WCl6–TiAcAc mixed precursor solution followed by drying at a comparably low temperature of 70 °C (or even at room temperature) for efficient planar PSCs. The WOx–TiOx composite ETLs enabled good light transmittance, efficient charge transport, as well as effective suppression of the charge recombination, which gave rise to a notable increase in the photovoltaic performance. A high PCE of 13.45% was achieved when the fabrication temperature of the WOx–TiOx composite ETLs was decreased from 150 °C to 70 °C.133 Yuan et al. developed a sandwiched TiOx–Au–TiOx composite ETL for PSCs (Fig. 7b), which showed a 20–30% performance enhancement as compared to the pristine TiOx perovskite device. The improved device performance can be attributed to enhanced conductivity of the TiOx film, which better matched the hole transporting capability of the device and thus decreased space limited charges and increased the built-in potential in the device, leading to an improved Voc. These effects can be attributed to the plasmon-mediated hot carrier injection from Au-NPs into TiOx.74 The incorporation of highly conductive materials into the ETL provides a simple and low-temperature processed route to fabricate high-quality ETLs for high-performance PSCs.
4.4 Functional layer-interfacial engineering
Modification of the ETL/perovskite interface with a functional self-assembled monolayer (SAM), such as C60-SAM, 3-aminopropanoic acid (C3-SAM), silane SAM and other mixed fullerene functionalized SAMs is an effective method to improve the device performance.134–137 To address the inherent slow electron transfer from the perovskite to the TiO2 in the standard planar PSC junction, Snaith and co-workers incorporated a C60-SAM between the compact TiO2 and perovskite to modify both the n-type and p-type heterojunctions with the perovskite. As a result, a PCE as high as 17.3% with significantly reduced hysteresis was obtained. The remarkable PCE may be attributed to the effective passivation of trap states formed at the TiO2/perovskite interface.135 Such SAMs modification could also be used in combination with other functional metal oxides, such as ZnO136 and WOx,137 in order to further optimize the interfacial properties. Zuo et al. modified a compact ZnO ETL with C3-SAM, which directs the perovskite crystal evolution and achieves a highly crystalline CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film with reduced pin-holes and trap states. In addition, a permanent dipole moment forms to decrease the work function of the cathode (from 4.17 to 3.52 eV) and thus improves the energy level alignment with the perovskite for efficient charge extraction and electronic coupling (Fig. 7c).136 Other materials, such as graphene quantum dots138 or polyoxyethylene,139 were used to modify the TiO2 ETL surface, which facilitates the charge extraction at the ETL/perovskite interface, resulting in an enhanced charge collection efficiency and improved PCE of the modified device.
An ideal interfacial material should assist in (a) the formation of uniform perovskite films and passivate the surface traps at the ETL/perovskite interface; (b) tuning the work function of the electrode and result in a better energy level alignment between the perovskite and ETL; and (c) promoting the electron injection and suppressing the charge recombination at the perovskite/ETL interface.
5. Smart PSC designs based on the n-type ETL
Owing to the various preparation methods for ETLs the fabrication of high-performance PSC devices with smart designs, including the use of flexible substrates, the introduction of bilayered hybrid ETLs or construction of bulk heterojunctions are possible.
5.1 Flexible devices
The low-temperature processability of n-type ETLs has made them promising candidates for the development of low-cost and large area PSCs with lightweight, flexible designs and long-term stability. Different kinds of low-temperature processed ETLs, such as TiO2, ZnO and Zn2SnO4, have been reported for fully flexible PSCs based on various flexible substrates.34,65,140,141
Typically, TiO2 films are sintered at a high-temperature (>450 °C) to enhance their crystallinity and thus ensure electrical conductivity and good electron transport capability.46 Recently, PSCs have been shown to work by using amorphous TiOx without high-temperature annealing, only if the TiOx ETL is thin enough (<50 nm) to ensure sufficient electrical conductivity for charge extraction and transport.74,75 Flexible PSCs produced using non-annealed amorphous TiOx ETL prepared by magnetron sputtering141 or ALD142 on a plastic ITO/polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrate at room temperature show good performance (>12%), which can be attributed to the faster electron transport, reduced transfer resistance and efficient electron extraction from the perovskite absorber layer. We fabricated a TiO2 ETL thin film on an indium doped zinc oxide coated polyethylene terephthalate (IZO/PET) substrate via spin-coating of a highly crystalline anatase TiO2 nanoparticle suspension, and achieved PCEs up to 12.3% for flexible PSCs. The entire device fabrication process was conducted at 150 °C or below, which offers great promise for further development of a low-cost and highly efficient photovoltaic technology.140
ZnO or Zn2SnO4 thin films with superior electron mobility, good optical transmittance, suitable energy levels, and low-temperature processability are regarded as promising ETL candidates for high-efficiency flexible PSC applications.34,65 For instance, Kelly and co-workers reported the use of a solution-processed thin and compact ZnO nanoparticle ETL in flexible planar PSC with PCEs in excess of 10%.34,65 Recently, Seok and co-workers introduced Zn2SnO4 nanoparticles prepared at low temperature (<100 °C) into the development of flexible PSCs (Fig. 8a) with a maximum PCE of 15.3%.34
 Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image and photograph of the Zn2SnO4-based flexible PSC (scale bar, 500 nm).34 (b) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication process of a fiber-shaped PSC based on the aligned ZnO nano-obelisks. (c) Photograph of a PSC fiber under twisting. (d) SEM image of the ZnO nano-obelisk array grown on a stainless steel fabric. (e) Photograph of the PSC fabric.145 Adapted with permission from ref. 34 and 145. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagrams of band alignment and charge recombination in the cells with the TiO2/ZnO bilayer as the compact layers, where pero represents the perovskite layer.146 (b) Device structure, consisting of all metal oxide transport layers. (c) Normalized PCE as a function of storage time in an ambient environment (30–50% humidity, T = 25 °C) based on different device structures: ITO/NiOx/perovskite/ZnO/Al (red) and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/Al (black).152 Adapted with permission from ref. 146 and 152. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 10  (a) Device architecture of the inverted PSCs with a perovskite–PCBM bulk heterojunction. (b) Sketch showing the formation of perovskite with large grains and reduced pinholes in the presence of PCBM. (c) J–V curves of PSCs with BHJ structure scanned under two different directions.98 (d) Schematic of the inverted device with a graded heterojunction (GHJ); EEL = electron-extracting layer; HEL = hole-extracting layer. The interlayer is composed of perovskite with a gradient distribution of PCBM. (e) Schematic of the band shift of perovskite and PCBM in the GHJ structure with a mixed and graded interlayer. The negative and positive circles represent electrons and holes, respectively, and the arrows indicate their direction of flow.156 Adapted with permission from ref. 98 and 156. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group, 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
Although the aforementioned flexible PSCs were constructed with plastic conductive substrates, their flexibility was still limited by their planar layered stacking structure, which can only be bent along one direction but cannot be twisted in three dimensions. Hence, developing lightweight and 3D flexible PSCs with a fiber shape is a different approach that can be effectively integrated into wearable and micro-electronic devices.143–145 Peng and co-workers developed a novel fiber-shaped PSC through sequential dip-coating of steel-wire with compact TiO2, mesoporous TiO2, perovskite layer and HTL, followed by wrapping with an aligned carbon nanotube sheet. A PCE of 3.3% has been achieved and remained stable upon bending.143 Later, they developed the Ti wire-based coaxial flexible PSC fiber, with anodized 1D TiO2 nanotube arrays as the ETL and transparent aligned carbon nanotubes as the counter electrode. A PCE of 7.1% was achieved with a high Voc of 0.85 V.144 After that, the same group developed the flexible PSCs in both fiber and fabric formats based on the mild-solution processed obelisk-like ZnO nanoarrays, which can be twisted in three dimensions without obvious damage to the structure and performance (Fig. 8b–e).145
5.2 Bilayered hybrid ETLs
In conventional PSCs, some novel bilayered metal oxide ETLs, such as ZnO/TiO2146 or SnO2/brookite TiO2,147 have been applied in order to improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. These bilayered metal oxide ETLs are normally comprised of an under layer of metal oxide with high electron mobility and a top layer of another metal oxide with better energy level alignment to the perovskite. Together, they exhibit the synergistic advantages of cascade electron transfer and a better hole-blocking effect for high electron extraction, and low interfacial recombination (Fig. 9a).146,147 In addition, the bilayered inorganic/organic ETLs are also employed in conventional planar PSCs. The devices using bilayered TiO2/PCBM or TiO2/C60 ETLs showed improved photovoltaic performance with suppressed hysteresis, which might result from facilitated electron extraction from the photoexcited perovskite to the PCBM or C60.75,148 For instance, a regular planar PSC based on a low-temperature solution processed bilayered TiOx/PCBM ETL delivered a stabilized PCE of 17.6% with negligible hysteresis. The largely suppressed hysteresis can be explained by the facilitated charge extraction from the perovskite into the ETL owing to the suitable surface work function and high electrical conductivity of PCBM, which results in a favorable band alignment and high electron affinity with the perovskite.75
In inverted PSCs, the barrier at the Fermi levels of the metal electrodes (i.e. Au, Ag, Al) and the LUMO of the organic materials (i.e. PCBM) leads to poor electron injection and extraction at the organic ETL/metal interface. Hence, inorganic metal oxides, such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2 and Zn2SnO4, have been introduced as the n-type interlayers between the metal electrode and organic ETLs to improve the performances of inverted PSCs.93,149–151 Very recently, the highly crystalline SnO2 nanocrystal ETL has been inserted between a C60 and Ag electrode, enabling the fabrication of inverted PSCs with a PCE as high as 18.8%, which is among the highest efficiencies reported in the inverted PSCs employing inorganic ETLs. More importantly, the compact SnO2 could also serve as a stable protecting layer that enhanced the ambient stability of the device at >70% relative humidity.150 Yang and co-workers reported a PSC based on inorganic metal oxide transport layers, which showed improved air stability against water and oxygen degradation when compared with devices with organic charge transport layers. Their cells only use a ZnO layer to isolate the perovskite and Al layers, but could prevent the degradation very effectively. After 60 days storage in air at room temperature, their all-metal-oxide ETL- and HTL-based devices retain about 90% of their original efficiency, which provide a useful approach to construct efficient and stable PSCs for practical applications (Fig. 9b and c).152
5.3 Heterojunction engineering
The regular PSC has the perovskite layer deposited between an n-type ETL and p-type HTL. However, the interfacial extraction of charge-carriers is still largely inhibited as a result of unbalanced electron–hole diffusion lengths within the perovskite film.153,154 Hence, tailoring of the electron extraction heterojunction is believed to be critical for promoting charge separation/extraction as well as reducing charge recombination and thus further enhancement of the PSC performance. To improve the electron collection, several groups have demonstrated the concept of a CH3NH3PbI3–PCBM bulk heterojunction (BHJ) with a certain amount of PCBM mixed in the perovskite precursor (Fig. 10a) in regular or inverted structures, giving PCEs of 15–16%.98,155 The blended fullerene in perovskite materials enhances the photoelectron collection owing to the high conductivity and electron mobility of PCBM, and improves the quality of the perovskite layer by filling pinholes and vacancies between perovskite grains (Fig. 10b), thus improving the device performance and reducing hysteresis (Fig. 10c) with respect to the planar heterojunction (PHJ) reference cells.98
However, it is still very difficult to control the fullerene distribution in the perovskite layer, which can lead to unfavorable contact between electron- and hole selecting layers. Very recently, Han and co-workers developed an inverted PSC architecture with a graded heterojunction (GHJ) structure, in which a gradient distribution of PCBM in the perovskite layer has been controlled in the vertical direction (Fig. 10d). This GHJ structure benefits the interfacial charge collection because it assists the electrons and holes flowing to the opposite side along with the built band slope, and thus improving the interfacial charge separation and collection efficiency (Fig. 10e). In combination with a mixed perovskite composition (FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3), the photovoltaic performance based on a centimeter-scale (1.022 cm2) inverted PSC using the engineered GHJ structure shows a remarkable certified PCE of 18.21% with small hysteresis and good stability.156
6. Conclusion and outlook
An overview of recent progress of the n-type materials used in the fabrication of high efficiency PSCs has been given. Various n-type materials, including inorganic semiconducting metal oxides and organic fullerene and its derivatives (i.e., PCBM, C60) have been discussed. Morphological control of n-type metal oxide ETLs, spanning from 0D nanoparticles, 1D nanostructures (nanowires, nanorods, nanotubes), 2D nanosheets to 3D branched arrays, show great capacity for enhancing the device performance in view of their unique nanostructures and promising properties. The size, film thickness, crystal phase, crystallinity, porosity and roughness of the ETLs play key roles in affecting the perovskite film formation as well as the optical and electrical properties at the ETL/perovskite interface. In addition, optimization of the materials and device architectures via elemental doping, surface treatment, interfacial engineering and heterojunction modification are beneficial to enhancing the light harvesting and boosting charge collection, and thus improving the efficiency and stability of the resulting PSC devices.
The development of n-type materials has matured and been well investigated in many successful state-of-the-art PSC devices. It is often the case that an advance of an emerging photovoltaic technology is accompanied by an innovation in materials. Looking towards the future, there are still substantial opportunities in several areas. (1) Developing new n-type materials with precise control over the morphology, geometry and components. This will allow further fine-tuning of the energy level alignment and improve the interfacial charge transport characteristics for better photovoltaic performance. Additionally, multifunctionality such as good antireflection, self-cleaning and waterproof properties will result in PSC devices with better stability under photochemical and thermal stress (i.e. UV illumination, humid environment). (2) Having more effective interfacial materials engineering (i.e. surface coating, physical and chemical treatments) through insightful understanding of the charge separation, injection, transportation and collection dynamics and mechanisms at the ETL/perovskite interface within PSCs. (3) Developing new synthetic methods and effective optimization strategies that enable the low-temperature processing of n-type ETLs, which is a necessary step on the path to simplifying the fabrication process and reducing the fabrication cost of PSC device for mass production. (4) Constructing fully flexible PSC devices based on carefully selected multifunctional n-type materials, which are promising candidates to power various portable and wearable electronic devices.
In the near future, efforts to optimize the n-type materials should lead to the development of large-scale PSC devices with high efficiency, low cost and long lifespan.
Acknowledgements
W. Q. W. acknowledges the Albert Shimmins Fund for a writing up award. R. A. C. acknowledges the Australian Research Council for a Future Fellowship (FT0990583). Y. B. C. acknowledges the support of the Australian Renewable Energy Agency, the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics and the ARC Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science.
References
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef PubMed .
L. El Chaar, L. A. lamont and N. El Zein, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 2165–2175 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, Phys. E, 2002, 14, 65–70 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Numata and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1443–1464 CAS .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Y. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. W. Wang, J. M. Ball, E. M. Barea, A. Abate, J. A. Alexander-Webber, J. Huang, M. Saliba, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 724–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Tao, P. Qin, W. Ke and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3970–3990 CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Huang, S. Wei, L. Zheng, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6209–6221 RSC .
H. S. Kim, S. H. Im and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5615–5625 CAS .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seol, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. Huang, M. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Jiang, Y. Zhou, A. Gray-Weale, J. Etheridge, C. R. McNeill, R. A. Caruso, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Xiao, F. Z. Huang, W. C. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, I.-H. Jang, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 927–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. R. Hong, J. B. You, Y. S. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Pang, Z. Liu, H. Xu and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19205–19217 CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 Search PubMed .
M. Z. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Son, J. H. Im, H. S. Kim and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16567–16573 CAS .
W. J. Ke, G. J. Fang, Q. Liu, L. B. Xiong, P. L. Qin, H. Tao, J. Wang, H. W. Lei, B. R. Li, J. W. Wan, G. Yang and Y. F. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, J. H. Suk, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Park, J. S. Kim, W. M. Seong and S. I. Seok, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain, A. R. Kirmani and A. Amassian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9051–9057 CAS .
A. Bera, K. W. Wu, A. Sheikh, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed and T. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28494–28501 CAS .
L. Zhu, Z. Shao, J. Ye, X. Zhang, X. Pan and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 970–973 RSC .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. B. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J. P. Wolf and V. Sundstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kavan, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16408–16418 CAS .
J. N. Hart, D. Menzies, Y. B. Cheng, G. P. Simon and L. Spiccia, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 622–626 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, N. Masaki, K. Jiang and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25222–25228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Chandiran, A. Yella, M. Stefik, L.-P. Heiniger, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3487–3493 CAS .
Q. Q. Gao, S. W. Yang, L. Lei, S. D. Zhang, Q. P. Cao, J. J. Xie, J. Q. Li and Y. Liu, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 624–626 CrossRef CAS .
T. Meng, C. Liu, K. Wang, T. He, Y. Zhu, A. Al-Enizi, A. Elzatahry and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1876–1883 CAS .
Y. Wu, X. Yang, H. Chen, K. Zhang, C. Qin, J. Liu, W. Peng, A. Islam, E. Bi, F. Ye, M. Yin, P. Zhang and L. Han, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 052301 CrossRef .
K. Wojciechowski, M. Saliba, T. Leijtens, A. Abate and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1142–1147 CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Y. Zhou and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087–4108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dkhissi, S. Meyer, D. Chen, H. C. Weerasinghe, L. Spiccia, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 687–695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Correa Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. Srimath Kandada, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Petrozza, A. Abate, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928–2934 CAS .
E. H. Anaraki, A. Kermanpur, L. Steier, K. Domanski, T. Matsui, W. Tress, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3128–3134 CAS .
K. Wang, Y. Shi, Q. Dong, Y. Li, S. Wang, X. Yu, M. Wu and T. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 755–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Fernandes, A. C. Véron, N. F. A. Neto, F. A. Nüesch, J. H. Dias da Silva, M. A. Zaghete and C. F. d. O. Graeff, Mater. Lett., 2016, 181, 103–107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shi, Y. Li, X. Li and H. Wang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 378–405 RSC .
A. Y. Mei, X. Li, L. F. Liu, Z. L. Ku, T. F. Liu, Y. G. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Z. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. W. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, K. Ri, A. Y. Mei, L. F. Liu, M. Hu, T. F. Liu, X. Li and H. W. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9103–9107 CAS .
S. D. Sung, D. P. Ojha, J. S. You, J. Lee, J. Kim and W. I. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8898–8906 RSC .
C. Yi, X. Li, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2964–2970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sarkar, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16688–16693 CAS .
C.-C. Chung, C. S. Lee, E. Jokar, J. H. Kim and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9619–9627 CAS .
X. Chen, S. Yang, Y. C. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Hou, X. H. Yang and H. G. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500105 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Lee, T. Y. Lee, P. J. Yoo, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and N. G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9251–9259 CAS .
A. Yella, L. P. Heiniger, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2591–2596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Q. Wu, D. Chen, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12463–12470 CAS .
W. Ke, D. Zhao, A. J. Cimaroli, C. R. Grice, P. Qin, Q. Liu, L. Xiong, Y. Yan and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24163–24168 CAS .
D. Y. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Oh, D. H. Kim, J. A. Lee, S. S. Shin, J.-W. Lee, I. J. Park, M. J. Ko, N.-G. Park, S. G. Pyo, K. S. Hong and J. Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22991–22994 CAS .
H. S. Kim, J. W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, B. X. Lei, H. S. Rao, Y. F. Xu, Y. F. Wang, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1352 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiang, X. Sheng, Y. Li, X. Feng and T. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14720–14723 RSC .
W.-Q. Wu, F. Huang, D. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502027 CrossRef .
D. Zhong, B. Cai, X. L. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. D. Xing, S. Miao, W. H. Zhang and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 409–418 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin, M. Paulose, M. I. Dar, T. Moehl, N. Arora, P. Gao, O. K. Varghese, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Small, 2015, 11, 5533–5539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cai, D. Zhong, Z. Yang, B. Huang, S. Miao, W.-H. Zhang, J. Qiu and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 729–733 RSC .
Z. Yuan, Z. Wu, S. Bai, Z. Xia, W. Xu, T. Song, H. Wu, L. Xu, J. Si, Y. Jin and B. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500038 CrossRef .
C. Tao, S. Neutzner, L. Colella, S. Marras, A. R. Srimath Kandada, M. Gandini, M. D. Bastiani, G. Pace, L. Manna, M. Caironi, C. Bertarelli and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2365–2370 CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, D. Chen, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, J. Power Sources, 2016, 329, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, S. Song, M. T. Hörantner, H. J. Snaith and T. Park, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6029–6036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Zhu, X. L. Zheng, Y. Bai, T. Zhang, Z. L. Wang, S. Xiao and S. H. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 18265–18268 RSC .
X. Gao, J. Li, J. Baker, Y. Hou, D. Guan, J. Chen and C. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6368–6371 RSC .
X. Wang, Z. Li, W. Xu, S. A. Kulkarni, S. K. Batabyal, S. Zhang, A. Cao and L. H. Wong, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 728–735 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, H. L. Feng, H. S. Rao, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19100–19108 CAS .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, Z. Xue, Q. Peng, A. K. Chandiran, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rong, Z. Ku, A. Mei, T. Liu, M. Xu, S. Ko, X. Li and H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2160–2164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and A. Amassian, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2859–2865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, J. Li, D. Geng, J. Wang, L. Zhang, T. L. Andrew, M. S. Arnold and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 564–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, F. Z. Huang, D. H. Chen, Y. B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3264–3272 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, S. H. Lee, H.-S. Ko, J. Kwon, J. H. Park, S. M. Kang, N. Ahn, M. Choi, J. K. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9179–9186 CAS .
I. S. Yang, J. S. You, S. D. Sung, C. W. Chung, J. Kim and W. I. Lee, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 272–282 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Pascoe, S. Meyer, W. Huang, W. Li, I. Benesperi, N. W. Duffy, L. Spiccia, U. Bach and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1278–1285 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Horantner, W. Zhang, M. Saliba, K. Wojciechowski and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2041–2047 CAS .
J.-Y. Jeng, Y.-F. Chiang, M.-H. Lee, S.-R. Peng, T.-F. Guo, P. Chen and T.-C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3727–3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 Search PubMed .
W. Yan, Y. Li, Y. Li, S. Ye, Z. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2474–2480 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Chen, H.-W. Kang, S.-Y. Hsiao, P.-F. Yang, K.-M. Chiang and H.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6647–6652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, K. Wang, P. Du, C. Yi, T. Meng and X. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402024 CrossRef .
B. Yang, Y. Yuan, P. Sharma, S. Poddar, R. Korlacki, S. Ducharme, A. Gruverman, R. Saraf and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1455–1460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chiang and C.-G. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 196–200 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15001 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, Z. Wu, H.-L. Yip, H. Zhang, X.-F. Jiang, Q. Xue, Z. Hu, Z. Hu, Y. Shen, M. Wang, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501534 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu, J.-Q. Xu, C.-C. Chueh, H. Liu, Z. Li, X. Li, H. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10786–10793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, Z. Zhu, M.-Y. Kuo, C.-C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8999–9003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shao, Z. Chen, H. H. Fang, G. H. ten Brink, D. Bartesaghi, S. Adjokatse, L. J. A. Koster, B. J. Kooi, A. Facchetti and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2419–2426 CAS .
H. Zhang, L. Xue, J. Han, Y. Q. Fu, Y. Shen, Z. Zhang, Y. Li and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8724–8733 CAS .
F. Giordano, A. Abate, J. P. Correa Baena, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, S. H. Im, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-X. Chen, H.-S. Rao, W.-G. Li, Y.-F. Xu, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5647–5653 CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Bao, X. Tao, H. Sun, W. Chen and X. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 64001–64005 RSC .
S. K. Pathak, A. Abate, P. Ruckdeschel, B. Roose, K. C. Gödel, Y. Vaynzof, A. Santhala, S.-I. Watanabe, D. J. Hollman, N. Noel, A. Sepe, U. Wiesner, R. Friend, H. J. Snaith and U. Steiner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6046–6055 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. Qin, H. Tao, W. Ke, Z. Chen, J. Wan, P. Qin, L. Xiong, H. Lei, H. Yu and G. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 121104 CrossRef .
B. Roose, K. C. Gödel, S. Pathak, A. Sadhanala, J. P. C. Baena, B. D. Wilts, H. J. Snaith, U. Wiesner, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501868 CrossRef .
H. Nagaoka, F. Ma, D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, M. S. Glaz, A. E. Colbert, M. E. Ziffer and D. S. Ginger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 669–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and A. Amassian, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500568 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Y. Deng, Q. Wang, J. Zhao, X. Zheng, Y. Zhang and J. Huang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2686–2691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Lei, H. Tao, X. Zheng, J. Ma, Q. Liu, W. Ke, Z. Chen, L. Xiong, P. Qin, Z. Chen, M. Qin, X. Lu, Y. Yan and G. Fang, Small, 2017, 13, 1601769 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xiong, M. Qin, G. Yang, Y. Guo, H. Lei, Q. Liu, W. Ke, H. Tao, P. Qin, S. Li, H. Yu and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8374–8383 CAS .
H. Tao, W. Ke, J. Wang, Q. Liu, J. Wan, G. Yang and G. Fang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 290, 144–152 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Rao, B.-X. Chen, W.-G. Li, Y.-F. Xu, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7200–7207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gubbala, V. Chakrapani, V. Kumar and M. K. Sunkara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2411–2418 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ke, G. J. Fang, J. W. Wan, H. Tao, Q. Liu, L. B. Xiong, P. L. Qin, J. Wang, H. W. Lei, G. Yang, M. C. Qin, X. Z. Zhao and Y. F. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S.-M. Dai, P. Zhu, L.-L. Deng, S.-Y. Xie, Q. Cui, H. Chen, N. Wang and H. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21358–21365 CAS .
K. Lee, C.-M. Yoon, J. Noh and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4231–4234 RSC .
G. S. Han, H. S. Chung, B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, J. W. Lee, B. S. Swain, K. Mahmood, J. S. Yoo, N.-G. Park, J. H. Lee and H. S. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9160–9164 CAS .
Y. Ogomi, K. Kukihara, S. Qing, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. Pandey, H. Momose and S. Hayase, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1062–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
S. H. Hwang, J. Roh, J. Lee, J. Ryu, J. Yun and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16429–16433 CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Chandiran, A. Yella, M. T. Mayer, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4309–4312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Mali, C. S. Shim, H. K. Park, J. Heo, P. S. Patil and C. K. Hong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1541–1551 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and A. Amassian, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12812–12819 RSC .
G. S. Han, H. S. Chung, D. H. Kim, B. J. Kim, J.-W. Lee, N.-G. Park, I. S. Cho, J.-K. Lee, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15284–15290 RSC .
G. S. Han, Y. H. Song, Y. U. Jin, J.-W. Lee, N.-G. Park, B. K. Kang, J.-K. Lee, I. S. Cho, D. H. Yoon and H. S. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23521–23526 CAS .
K. Wang, Y. Shi, B. Li, L. Zhao, W. Wang, X. Wang, X. Bai, S. Wang, C. Hao and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2015, 28, 1891–1897 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Abrusci, S. D. Stranks, P. Docampo, H.-L. Yip, A. K. Y. Jen and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3124–3128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wojciechowski, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, G. Sadoughi, A. Sadhanala, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles, C.-Z. Li, R. H. Friend, A. K. Y. Jen and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12701–12709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zuo, Z. Gu, T. Ye, W. Fu, G. Wu, H. Li and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2674–2679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, C. O. R. Quiroz, S. Scheiner, W. Chen, T. Stubhan, A. Hirsch, M. Halik and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501056 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, L. Bai, W. Shang, W. Xie, H. Ma, Y. Fu, D. Fang, H. Sun, L. Fan, M. Han, C. Liu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7461–7467 RSC .
H. P. Dong, Y. Li, S. F. Wang, W. Z. Li, N. Li, X. D. Guo and L. D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9999–10004 CAS .
Y. Dkhissi, F. Huang, S. Rubanov, M. Xiao, U. Bach, L. Spiccia, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 325–331 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, R. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Liu and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3208–3214 CAS .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y.-Y. Lee, H.-W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. K. Ahn, Y.-C. Joo, K. S. Hong, N.-G. Park, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916–921 CAS .
L. Qiu, J. Deng, X. Lu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10425–10428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiu, S. He, J. Yang, J. Deng and H. Peng, Small, 2016, 12, 2419–2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, L. Qiu, X. Fang, G. Guan, P. Chen, Z. Zhang and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9406–9410 CAS .
X. Xu, H. Zhang, J. Shi, J. Dong, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19288–19293 CAS .
A. Kogo, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8119–8122 RSC .
W. Ke, D. Zhao, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, J. Ge, H. Tao, H. Lei, G. Fang and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17971–17976 CAS .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, Y. Bai, X. Liu, C.-C. Chueh, S. Yang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6478–6484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C.-C. Chueh, Z. Zhu, S. B. Jo, Y. Sun and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15294–15301 CAS .
J. You, L. Meng, T.-B. Song, T.-F. Guo, Y. Yang, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Liu and N. De Marco, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 75–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3461 Search PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, A. Henning, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, Y. Rosenwaks, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1000–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, K. Wang, P. C. Du, C. Yi, T. Y. Meng and X. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402024 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Yue, M. Cai, F. Xie, E. Bi, A. Islam and L. Han, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16148 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Wu-Qiang Wu	Wu-Qiang Wu received his PhD from the University of Melbourne in March 2017. He received his Bachelor and Master degrees at Sun Yat-sen University in 2011 and 2013, respectively. He is presently a research fellow at the Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln. His current research interests lie in the fabrication of functional inorganic and organic hybrid materials and their applications in thin-film optoelectronic devices.
Dehong Chen	Dehong Chen received his PhD in chemistry from Fudan University, China in 2006. He currently has interests in the design and synthesis of functional inorganic materials for energy conversion and storage applications. He is currently working in the Research School of Chemistry, the Australian National University as a research fellow.
Rachel A. Caruso	Rachel A. Caruso is the Director of the Advanced Materials Enabling Capability Platform and a Professor in Chemistry at RMIT University in Melbourne, Australia. Her expertise is in the fabrication of advanced porous functional materials with potential applications in a range of areas including solar energy, water purification, and energy storage devices.
Yi-Bing Cheng	Yi-Bing Cheng is a Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Monash University, Australia and the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, China. He was a graduate of Wuhan University of Technology, China and received his PhD from the University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, U.K. He joined Monash University in 1991. He specialises in inorganic materials and composites and his research interest is currently in solution processed solar cells.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of an ALD-SnO2 ETL based photovoltaic device. (b) Schematic electron injection characteristics of mixed perovskite ((FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbI3)0.15) materials and different ETLs (TiO2 and SnO2).49 Schematic illustrations of (c) spin-coating (SC) and (d) chemical bath deposition (CBD) for the fabrication of SnO2 thin film. Both steps are followed by post-annealing at 180 °C. Top-view SEM images of SnO2 layers deposited by (e) spin coating and (f) spin coating and chemical bath deposition. Scale bars are 200 nm in (e) and (f).50 Adapted with permission from ref. 49 and 50. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a complete PSC based on a ∼600 nm CH3NH3PbI3-infiltrated TiO2 film. (b) Enlarged SEM image showing the efficient infiltration of CH3NH3PbI3 into the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold.19 Sketches showing the perovskite film formation and electron transfer behavior on (c) a rough TiO2 film and (d) a smoother TiO2 film.63 Adapted with permission from ref. 19 and 63. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group, 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A cross-sectional SEM image of a complete PSC based on 1D rutile TiO2 nanorod arrays.67 (b) J–V curves of PSCs based on rutile TiO2 nanorods with different length as labelled.67 (c) Cross-section and (d) Fast Fourier transform patterns of TEM images of 1D well-defined single-crystalline TiO2 thin film on a FTO substrate.77 (e) Sketch of a heterojunction device structure: TiO2 nanosheets/ZrO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C.84 Adapted with permission from ref. 67, 77 and 84. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, 2016 American Chemical Society, 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of (a) 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanowire architecture (inset is an enlarged SEM image showing the tree-like branched nanowire structure),86 and (b) 3D hyperbranched nanofiber-nanorod TiO2 array.85 (c) Schematic of the PSC consisting of TiO2 helices, and cross-sectional SEM images of three different TiO2 helices grown on a silicon wafer.88 Adapted with permission from ref. 85, 86 and 88. Copyright 2015 Wiley, 2015 American Chemical Society, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of (a) textured CH3NH3PbI3 film and (b) completed textured cell. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of four planar CH3NH3PbI3 films (dashed grey curves) and four separate textured CH3NH3PbI3 films (solid black curves) on FTO glass substrates, indicating the highly reproducible absorbance data for the planar films and differences in the absorbance of the textured films owing to variations in the surface morphology from device to device. The inset plot shows the fraction of diffusely scattered radiation excluding the direct reflection of light perpendicular to the perovskite film. (d) PL spectra for a compact-TiO2 + planar perovskite sample (dashed grey curve) and a mesoporous-TiO2 + textured perovskite sample (solid black curve).90 SEM images of (e) porous TiO2 with honeycomb structure and (f) this TiO2 scaffold after filling with a 20 wt% perovskite precursor solution. (g) Sketch of the device architecture with oxide honeycomb scaffold. (h) Colour enhanced cross-section SEM image of a complete device fabricated from the oxide honeycomb with 20 wt% perovskite precursor solution.91 (i) Schematic showing the different electron transfer pathways and charge collection at the TiO2 nanoparticle (TNP)–, TiO2 nanosheet (TNS)–, and TiO2 nanowire (TNW)–CH3NH3PbI3 interfaces.70 Adapted with permission from ref. 70, 90 and 91. Copyright 2016 Wiley, 2016 Wiley, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the surface recombination reduction by passivating the trap states in the presence of the PCBM layer.99 The PEDOT:PSS is poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate). (b) Schematic illustration of how energy disorder of the PCBM layer influences the Voc of device: a wide distributed electronic density of states reduces the quasi-Fermi level of the photogenerated electrons (EFn) and thus reduces the device Voc. EFp is the quasi-Fermi level of the photogenerated holes. Blue and purple dashed lines represent the quasi-Fermi level of devices with disordered and ordered PCBM, respectively.100 Adapted with permission from ref. 99 and 100. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group, 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Sketch showing the SnO2 nanowire@TiO2 core–shell heterostructure and an energy level diagram showing the conduction band of SnO2, TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3.131 (b) Schematic diagram of the device structure (ITO/TiOx–Au-NPs/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/HTM/Ag); Au-nanoparticles (NPs) are sandwiched between two TiOx layers.74 (c) Sketch of the PSC device structure with self-assembled monolayers (SAM) that induce permanent dipole formation, and involvement of the SAM in directing the crystal evolution of the perovskite crystals.136 Adapted with permission from ref. 74, 131 and 136. Copyright 2015 Wiley, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image and photograph of the Zn2SnO4-based flexible PSC (scale bar, 500 nm).34 (b) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication process of a fiber-shaped PSC based on the aligned ZnO nano-obelisks. (c) Photograph of a PSC fiber under twisting. (d) SEM image of the ZnO nano-obelisk array grown on a stainless steel fabric. (e) Photograph of the PSC fabric.145 Adapted with permission from ref. 34 and 145. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagrams of band alignment and charge recombination in the cells with the TiO2/ZnO bilayer as the compact layers, where pero represents the perovskite layer.146 (b) Device structure, consisting of all metal oxide transport layers. (c) Normalized PCE as a function of storage time in an ambient environment (30–50% humidity, T = 25 °C) based on different device structures: ITO/NiOx/perovskite/ZnO/Al (red) and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/Al (black).152 Adapted with permission from ref. 146 and 152. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Device architecture of the inverted PSCs with a perovskite–PCBM bulk heterojunction. (b) Sketch showing the formation of perovskite with large grains and reduced pinholes in the presence of PCBM. (c) J–V curves of PSCs with BHJ structure scanned under two different directions.98 (d) Schematic of the inverted device with a graded heterojunction (GHJ); EEL = electron-extracting layer; HEL = hole-extracting layer. The interlayer is composed of perovskite with a gradient distribution of PCBM. (e) Schematic of the band shift of perovskite and PCBM in the GHJ structure with a mixed and graded interlayer. The negative and positive circles represent electrons and holes, respectively, and the arrows indicate their direction of flow.156 Adapted with permission from ref. 98 and 156. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group, 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
