Direct synthesis of flexible graphene glass with macroscopic uniformity enabled by copper-foam-assisted PECVD   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA00299E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA00299E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4813-4822Direct synthesis of flexible graphene glass with macroscopic uniformity enabled by copper-foam-assisted PECVD†

        
          
            Nan 
            Wei‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Qiucheng 
            Li‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Shan 
            Cong‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Haina 
            Ci
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yingze 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qifeng 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Lu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guifu 
            Zou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingyu 
            Sun
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yanfeng 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Zhongfan 
            Liu
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Energy, Soochow Institute for Energy and Materials InnovationS (SIEMIS), Key Laboratory of Advanced Carbon Materials and Wearable Energy Technologies of Jiangsu Province, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, People's Republic of China. E-mail: sunjy86@suda.edu.cn
bCenter for Nanochemistry (CNC), Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People's Republic of China. E-mail: yanfengzhang@pku.edu.cn; zfliu@pku.edu.cn
Received 
      9th January 2019
    , Accepted 1st February 2019First published on 1st February 2019AbstractThe direct growth of graphene on conventional soda-lime glass substrates via chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is of great significance in readily producing functional graphene glass materials for a variety of applications. However, the large-scale uniformity of the thus-grown graphene films on glass can hardly be realized. In addition, there has been no report whatsoever on the direct synthesis of flexible graphene glass so far. Herein, we use a copper-foam-assisted plasma-enhanced CVD approach to harness the direct formation of flexible graphene glass materials at temperatures below the softening points of various flexible glass substrates. Benefiting from the ion bombardment shielding and the electric field dictating effects of copper foam, the as-produced graphene glass possesses favorable flexibility, good conductivity, tunable transparency, and much improved macroscopic film uniformity. Specifically, heteroatom doping (such as N-doping) into the graphene matrix can be incorporated in target areas, and 5.5-inch-sized flexible graphene glass is simply attained. Furthermore, the resulting flexible graphene glass materials readily serve as transparent conductive layers for perovskite solar cells and as active electrodes for metal-free hydrogen evolution reaction, thus shedding light on their direct applications in next-generation flexible electronic and energy devices.
Introduction
Graphene, a fascinating two-dimensional atomic crystal with carbon atoms arranged into a honeycomb lattice, has stimulated enormous scientific and technological interests owing to its high carrier mobility, outstanding electronic conductivity, low optical absorption, excellent flexibility and chemical stability.1–3 To fulfill its great potentials in various application sectors, versatile methods have thus far been developed toward the controllable synthesis of graphene, including mechanical cleavage,4 reduction of graphite oxide,5,6 liquid-phase exfoliation,7,8 and chemical vapor deposition (CVD).9–12 In particular, CVD has been widely explored as an efficient approach for the high-quality production of large-area uniform graphene, mainly on transition metal substrates.13 For instance, foot-long graphene films with a growth rate reaching 2.5 cm h−1 have been readily demonstrated on polycrystalline Cu–Ni alloy surfaces, which manifest single-crystal nature.14 Nevertheless, to enable real applications, the graphene grown on metals requires an inevitable and tedious transfer process onto the target dielectric substrates, which would otherwise induce defects and contaminants that jeopardize the film quality. In this sense, the direct growth of graphene over insulators in a tailorable fashion to bypass the transfer procedure would be highly meaningful and desirable.
Recent years have seen exciting progress in the employment of direct CVD techniques for transfer-free graphene syntheses on a plethora of dielectric and insulating substrates such as SiO2,15–17 Al2O3,18,19 SrTiO3,20 h-BN,21–24 and specifically glass. Recently, our group has reported the tailored production of graphene glass by means of systematically-designed, direct CVD-enabled graphene growth on glass.25–35 The resulting glass materials demonstrated advanced surface properties (e.g., enhanced electrical/thermal conductivity, improved hydrophobicity) as distinguished from or complementary to those of traditional glass. Despite these conspicuous advances in the fabrication of rigid graphene glass, there have been no reports whatsoever on the production of flexible graphene glass thus far.
The direct growth of graphene on flexible glass substrates (e.g., Willow glass, mica, glass fiber cloth) would be of paramount significance for key applications pertaining to wearable electronics and energy storages/conversions. However, such growth has been handicapped by conventional direct CVD routes with extremely high reaction temperatures (e.g., 1000–1600 °C), considering that the softening temperature of flexible glass substrates is normally as low as 760 °C. Therefore, lowering the growth temperature of graphene is imperative. In this respect, one reliable and feasible way lies in the plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD) route, in which the generated plasma boosts the activation and pyrolysis of hydrocarbon precursors at relatively low temperatures (i.e., 500–700 °C).32,34
In the present work, we report, possibly for the first time, an innovative, directly-CVD-derived, flexible graphene glass material that possesses favorable flexibility, good conductivity, and tunable transparency. This could be ultimately realized by the direct, low-temperature growth of graphene over a series of flexible glass substrates (Willow glass, mica, glass fiber cloth) with the aid of a modified copper-foam-assisted PECVD approach. Producing graphene glass at low temperatures would allow low-energy consumption and cost-effective production, which is necessary for large-scale manufacturing. The uniqueness of employing the copper foam lies in its key functions in weakening the ion bombardment and smoothing the electric field, thereby achieving an outstanding uniformity of graphene films on the flexible glass.27 Of particular note, such a synthetic methodology is versatile in dictating the thickness, doping level, and production scale of the as-derived graphene films by simply altering the growth temperature, duration, precursor, and furnace dimensions. As such, heteroatom doping (such as nitrogen-doping) into the graphene matrix can be simply incorporated; 5.5-inch-sized flexible graphene glass can be readily attained. As proof-of-concept demonstrations, the resulting flexible graphene glass was employed as transparent conductive layers for perovskite-based solar cells (PSC) or as active electrodes for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), shedding light on their direct applications in next-generation flexible electronic and energy storage devices.
Experimental
Synthesis of flexible graphene glass
Various types of glass of varied flexibility (Willow glass, glass fiber cloth, and mica sheet) served as the growth substrates. Typically, the as-received substrate (e.g., Willow glass) was thoroughly cleaned with acetone, deionized water, and ethanol in sequence to remove surface impurities. After drying, the substrate was enclosed by a commercial copper foam and loaded inside a quartz tube in the center of an electrical furnace for direct graphene growth. The CVD system was pumped with a base pressure of 2 Pa and then purged with 30 standard cubic centimeters per minute (sccm) H2 and 100 sccm Ar as carrier gases. Upon reaching the desired growth temperature (e.g., 500–750 °C), plasma (80 W power) was turned on, and then 10 sccm CH4 was introduced into the quartz tube. After the CVD reaction, the system was cooled to room temperature under H2 and Ar. In terms of N-doped graphene synthesis, pyridine was employed as both the nitrogen and carbon source. The flexible glass substrate was heated to the desired temperature and exposed to the evaporated pyridine precursor, which was placed in a precursor reservoir connected to the growth tube.
Fabrication of flexible PSC device
Silver nanowire (Ag NW) films were prepared on a basis of a previously reported recipe.36 The diluted Ag NW solution was spin coated onto the flexible graphene glass. PH1000 and PEDOT: PSS were subsequently spin-coated and annealed at 120 °C for 20 min, respectively. A two-step spin-coating method was used to form a dense and uniform perovskite film. PbI2 (1.36 M) was mixed with PbCl2 (0.24 M) in DMF and stirred for 4 h at 70 °C. After preheating for 10 min, the PbX2 precursor was spin-coated onto the preheated-flexible substrate and then annealed at 70 °C for 10 min. MAI mixed with FAI in isopropanol solution was then spin-coated onto PbX2 films and annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. PC61BM (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was deposited by spin-coating in sequence. Finally, Al (100 nm) was deposited by thermal evaporation using a shadow mask.
Material characterizations
The as-prepared graphene was inspected with the aid of scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi SU8010), atomic force microscopy (AFM, Veeco Nanoscope IIIa, tapping mode), Raman spectroscopy (Horiba, HR Evolution, 532 nm), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI Titan Themis G2, with an acceleration voltage 30–300 kV), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Escalab 250Xi Spectrophotometer using a monochromatic Al Kα source), UV-vis absorption spectroscopy (Perkin-Elmer Lambda 750S UV/Vis/NIR Spectrophotometer), and the four-probe resistance measuring system (Guangzhou 4-probe Tech Co. Ltd., RTS-4). The current density–voltage characteristics of the PSC devices were measured at 100 mW cm−2 under AM 1.5 G solar irradiation (SAN-EI, Class AAA solar simulator, XES-70S1).
Electrochemical measurements
Electrochemical measurements were conducted in a three-electrode setup with the as-prepared graphene materials directly as a working electrode, graphite rod as a counter electrode and the Ag/AgCl electrode (3 M KCl) as a reference electrode (EAg/AgCl = +0.194 V vs. NHE). HER performance tests were conducted in a 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at 25 °C saturated by continuous Ar gas to remove hydrogen bubbles on the electrode surface. The linear-sweep voltammograms (LSVs) were recorded with a potential range from −0.1 to −0.9 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. All the final potentials were referenced to a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE).
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a illustrates the schematic diagram of the copper-foam-assisted PECVD growth process for achieving flexible graphene glass. In our case, Corning Willow glass was selected as the representative growth substrate, considering its low cost, good flexibility, and excellent transparency. Mica sheets and glass fiber cloth were also used to attempt graphene synthesis (Fig. S1, ESI†). Typically, the substrate was enclosed by a copper foam cage (Fig. 1a inset) and loaded inside a quartz tube in a single-zone furnace. It is noted that nickel foam was also tried for comparison (Fig. S2†). The copper foam cage was designed to aid graphene growth due to its ion bombardment shielding and catalytic assistance effect, thereby giving rise to the direct growth of graphene on flexible graphene glass with an extraordinarily macroscopic uniformity. After growth, there was no copper residue on the glass substrate, which could be verified by high-resolution XPS analysis (Fig. S3†).
 Fig. 1  Copper-foam-assisted PECVD growth of the flexible graphene glass. (a) Schematic diagram of the copper foam-assisted PECVD process. (b) Photographs of as-grown flexible graphene glass samples (3.0 cm × 1.5 cm) obtained for growth times of 60, 120, and 180 min with a bare flexible glass (leftmost) shown for comparison. Growth condition: Ar:H2:CH4 flow rate of 100:30:10 sccm at 700 °C; radio frequency of 80 W. (c-d) Photograph of the as-grown flexible graphene glass exhibiting good flexibility. (e) Representative Raman spectra obtained from flexible graphene glass samples grown at 650 °C (blue), 700 °C (red), and 750 °C (cyan), respectively. (f) Static water contact angle plotted as a function of graphene growth time. The inset shows the hydrophilic and hydrophobic characteristics of bare flexible glass (left) and flexible graphene glass (right). (g) Series of the transmittance spectra of flexible graphene glass samples with corresponding sheet resistance values. (h) Sheet resistance comparison between this work and the reported results, wherein graphene glasses were prepared with reduced graphene oxide, liquid-exfoliated graphite, as well as by PECVD approaches. 

Fig. 1b displays the digital photograph of the bare flexible glass substrate (3.0 cm × 1.5 cm; leftmost) and flexible graphene glass samples produced by PECVD at 700 °C for a growth duration of 60, 120, and 180 min, respectively (with other synthetic parameters kept identical). As a result, the transparency of the samples declines with extended growth time (from left to right), corresponding to increased graphene thickness. Upon experiencing the PECVD procedure, the resulting graphene glass (5 cm × 1 cm) still demonstrates highly flexible, uniform, and transparent features over the entire sample, as shown by the photograph in Fig. 1c, S4 and S5.† Of note, our approach could be scaled-up and hence enables the production of large-area graphene glass samples with macroscopic film uniformity. Along this line, Fig. 1d shows a 5.5-inch-sized (diagonal length) graphene glass that possesses excellent transparency and mechanical robustness.
To inspect the film quality of graphene directly grown on the flexible glass substrates, Raman spectroscopy was employed, as shown by the collected spectra in Fig. 1e. It is evident that all the obtained samples (produced at different temperatures: 650, 700, and 750 °C) present featured Raman signals of graphene at ∼1340 cm−1 (D band), ∼1570 cm−1 (G band), and ∼2660 cm−1 (2D band), indicative of successful graphene formation on the flexible glass via our designed PECVD approach. It is noted that the ID/IG intensity ratios for these Raman profiles normally fall in a range of 1.4–1.6, implying the defective nature of the as-generated graphene, in good agreement with previously reported results pertaining to direct PECVD-derived counterparts.37 The 2D band is a prominent feature for the Raman signal of graphene, and its shape is sensitive to the layer numbers. The relatively broader and weaker signals of the 2D band displayed in Fig. 1e suggest the few-layer nature of the directly synthesized graphene films on flexible glass. The growth scenario on the mica substrates also indicates that successful graphene formation was achieved directly at different growth temperatures of 600, 650, and 700 °C (Fig. S6†).
It was found that the surface wetting behavior of flexible glass could be markedly modified upon the conformal coating of graphene through a simple water dropping test. The water displays drop-wise condensation on the flexible graphene glass, in stark contrast to the scenario of film-wise formation on bare glass (Fig. 1f inset). Static contact angle (CA) measurement reveals a clear disparity in the surface wettability between graphene glass (CA > 90°) and bare glass (CA ∼45–55°). Accordingly, the CA values show a gradual augmentation with the increase of CVD growth duration, reaching ∼128° for a 4 h growth (Fig. 1f). Such a tailorable surface hydrophobicity of the flexible graphene glass is of practical significance for various potential applications including self-cleaning smart windows and wearable displays. Furthermore, the optical transparency and the sheet resistance (Rs) of the produced flexible graphene glass can be comprehensively adjusted by controlling the growth conditions (i.e., the growth duration and synthetic temperature). The key information displayed in Fig. 1g exemplifies the tunability of the optical and electrical properties of the synthesized graphene glass samples. As such, the transparency at 550 nm of the flexible graphene glass can be precisely tuned with values of 89.5%, 85.7%, 77.6%, and 68.5%, in response to the Rs value of 5.15, 3.60, 2.52, and 1.38 kΩ sq−1. Fig. 1h summarizes the transmittance and sheet resistance statistics of graphene between this work and the reported systems for comparison. Under similar transmittance, the conductivity of the directly-grown graphene achieved herein is superior to that of liquid-phase exfoliated graphite and reduced graphene oxide.38,39 More significantly, it also compares favorably with those derived by state-of-the-art PECVD approaches.27,34,38 This again corroborates the obvious excellence of copper-foam-assisted PECVD-enabled flexible graphene glass in conductivity and transparency. A detailed comparison is drawn on the synthetic methods for graphene glass reported between this work and previous studies (Table S1†).
The direct growth of graphene on flexible glass substrates by the Cu-foam-assisted PECVD route results in a continuous network consisting of vertical-oriented graphene (VG) nanosheets (under typical growth conditions: 650 °C, 100 sccm Ar, 30 sccm H2, 10 sccm CH4 for 30 min, 80 W). The representative SEM micrograph in Fig. 2a shows the uniform formation of VG nanosheets on glass. The formation of VG nanosheets can also be realized by employing a nickel foam cage (Fig. S7†). The density of the flake can be tuned by adjusting the synthetic parameters (i.e., growth time), as shown in Fig. S8.† Our previous report substantiated that the preference to grow perpendicularly to rather than in parallel with the glass substrate can be explained by the concurrent effect of strain energy relaxation, the fast diffusion of carbon atoms, and the vertically-aligned electric field in the plasma sheath.34 In this respect, the Cu foam cage would function as a perfect shield to smooth the electric field and weaken the ion bombardment, thereby imparting an overwhelming influence on the large-scale uniformity of the as-grown VG layers. Note that the present work does not investigate the effect of the aperture sizes of copper foam on dictating the morphology of the graphene on glass (e.g., horizontal growth vs. vertical growth), as recently reported by Qi et al.27 Instead, specific attention has been given to the production of flexible graphene glass with large-scale uniformity. In addition, the vertical formation of graphene herein might induce ample topological defects, which are beneficial to electrochemical and electrocatalytic reactions. To demonstrate the macroscopic uniformity of the sample, optical microscopy (OM) images were obtained by transferring the as-grown graphene films from the flexible glass onto SiO2/Si. To reveal the unique morphological features of VG, the obtained sample was inspected by AFM. The AFM height image in Fig. 2c clearly exhibits the vertically-oriented and curved structures of graphene nanosheets, accompanied by a considerable surface corrugation value. Furthermore, the thickness and detailed structures of the as-formed graphene films were examined using TEM, as shown in the sequential zoom-in images in Fig. 2d–f. Evidently, the graphene nanosheets consist of 5–7 layers with an interlayer spacing of ∼0.34 nm.
 Fig. 2  PECVD growth towards vertical graphene (VG) nanosheets on flexible glass at growth parameters of 650 °C, 100 sccm Ar, 30 sccm H2, 10 sccm CH4, 80 W. (a) SEM image of vertically oriented graphene films grown on flexible glass by the copper foam-assisted PECVD approach. (b) OM image of the VG films transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate. (c) AFM images of the VG nanosheets on the flexible glass substrate by a PECVD route. (d–f) Continuous zoom-in TEM images of the VG nanosheets transferred onto copper grids. 
Our Cu-foam-assisted, low-temperature PECVD strategy enables the synthesis of uniform graphene films directly on flexible glass on a large scale in a controllable manner, which is crucial for practical applications. Fig. 3a depicts a digital photograph illustrating two rows of four produced graphene glass samples, with each row synthesized under identical growth conditions (the case of mica shown in Fig. S9†). The difference in film uniformity between the presence and absence of Cu foam is remarkable. For instance, with respect to the lower row (growth condition: 700 °C, 100 sccm Ar, 30 sccm H2, 10 sccm CH4 for 60 min), the sample generated with the aid of Cu foam displays a uniform grey color over the entire substrate (right panel), whereas the sample without such assistance manifests inhomogeneous color contrast that is indicative of uneven film thickness (left panel). Accordingly, the uniformity of directly grown graphene on flexible glass was inspected by Rs mapping. As such, the measured Rs values at 28 points over a 2 cm × 2 cm area were mapped out using a four-probe method. The spatial distribution of the Rs of the graphene film with or without Cu foam assistance (other parameters kept identical) is respectively displayed in Fig. 3b and c. The uniformly distributed green color in most of the areas in Fig. 3c possessing a small and narrow Rs range (1–3 kΩ sq−1) highlights the good uniformity of the as-grown graphene via the Cu-foam-assisted route, which is markedly superior to that produced by a conventional method (a large and wide Rs range of 5–18 kΩ sq−1; non-uniform distribution).
 Fig. 3  Copper-foam-assisted PECVD growth of flexible graphene glass with macroscopic uniformity. (a) Photograph of the typically grown flexible graphene glass (left panel) and the copper-foam-assisted grown flexible graphene glass (right panel), with each row synthesized under identical growth conditions (700 °C, 100 sccm Ar, 30 sccm H2, 10 sccm CH4 for 60 and 180 min). (b–c) Spatial distribution of the Rs of the graphene film with or without Cu foam assistance (with other parameters kept identical). (d) Surface temperature mapping of such flexible graphene glass under a bent state upon light exposure for 100 s. (e) Raman mapping of G-band intensity over the graphene film directly grown on flexible glass. (f) The direct integration of the thus-derived graphene glass as a flexible transparent conductive electrode toward lighting the LED indicator. 
To further evaluate the large-scale uniformity of the directly grown graphene films on flexible glass, we took advantage of the light-to-heat feature of direct-CVD-derived graphene glass to map out the surface temperature distribution after light exposure. In this respect, a 5 cm × 10 cm flexible graphene glass (synthetic parameter: 580 °C, 20 sccm H2, 40 sccm CH4 for 2 min) was selected. Fig. 3d shows the surface temperature mapping of such flexible graphene glass under a bent state upon exposure to simulated sunlight for 100 s. The surface temperature reached 32.7 ± 3.3 °C across the whole area (room temperature: 21 °C), verifying the excellent uniformity and robustness of graphene on flexible glass. Similarly, a large-scale 10 cm × 10 cm sized sample was mapped in the horizontal direction (Fig. S10†). The macroscopic uniformity of the directly grown graphene film was additionally corroborated by the Raman spectroscopic mapping result. As shown in Fig. 3e, Raman mapping of the G peak intensity was obtained, displaying a homogeneous color contrast. Such directly grown, flexible graphene glasses with large-area graphene uniformity is promising for transparent conductive electrode (TCE) applications with excellent flexibility. As a proof-of-concept demonstration, Fig. 3f and S11† present the direct integration of the thus-derived graphene glass as a flexible TCE for use in lighting LED indicators in a practical fashion.
To demonstrate the application potential of flexible graphene glass with large-scale uniformity, the as-fabricated samples were specifically employed as flexible TCEs in PSC devices. As described above, there exists a trade-off between the light transmittance and the electrical conductivity of the flexible graphene glass. Therefore, the flexible graphene glass with balanced transparency and conductivity was selected and modified with solution-processed Ag NWs.40Fig. 4a and b display the flexible device configuration and corresponding energy level diagram of each layer, respectively. Ag NWs with large length-width ratios (an average diameter of 30 nm and an average length of ca. 150 ± 50 mm) were advantageous for boosting the electrical conductivity. As shown in Fig. 4c, the sheet resistance of our transparent flexible graphene glass is markedly reduced to ca. 40 Ω sq−1 upon Ag NW modification. The photograph of the modified electrode (Fig. 4c inset) demonstrates its macroscopic transparent nature. Microscopically, spin-coated Ag NW films with a rougher surface may increase the possibility of short-circuiting. Further surface treatment pertaining to the sequential spin-coating of PH1000 and PEDOT: PSS on the Ag NW films were carried out.41 As a result, flexible PSC devices based on flexible graphene glass/Ag NWs/PH1000/PEDOT: PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/Al managed to achieve an efficiency of 10.34% (Fig. 4d), with an open circuit voltage of 0.88 V, a short-circuit current of 17.87 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.66. Although the efficiency of such a device is not particularly high, it is worth mentioning that the directly grown graphene films enhance the adhesion of Ag NWs to the substrate as compared to that from the bare glass scenario. It is striking that such a PSC device based on flexible graphene glass is highly resistant to mechanical bending. As shown in Fig. 4e, the flexible PSC encapsulated within the PDMS layer can be directly integrated onto human skin, showing promise for next-generation wearable solar cell applications.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the PSC device configuration based on flexible graphene glass (modified by AgNWs/PH1000)/PEDOT: PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/Al. (b) Corresponding energy level diagram of each layer. (c) UV-vis transmittance spectra of flexible graphene glass with/without modification, showing similar transparency. Inset: digital photograph of the modified transparent electrode. (d) Performance of the flexible PSC device. (e) Digital photograph of a flexible PSC device attached to an arm, demonstrating wearable features. 
The direct synthesis of flexible graphene glass with favorable conductivity (i.e., low sheet resistance) would indeed be intriguing in facilitating key applications in wearable electronics and energy-related fields. In this regard, chemical doping is straightforward for dictating the carrier concentration and hence the electronic properties of the as-grown graphene on glass substrates. One of the striking features of our synthetic method lies in the direct incorporation of chemical dopant into the graphitic networks via the proper selection of precursors. As such, N-doped graphene can be realized directly on flexible glass with the employment of pyridine serving as the nitrogen and carbon source simultaneously. The schematic CVD set-up for achieving flexible N-doped graphene glass is shown in Fig. S12.† The average sheet resistance of the as-synthesized N-doped graphene glass is ca. 1.0 kΩ sq−1 (Fig. 5a), which is evidently lower than that of the non-doped graphene under identical growth conditions (700 °C, 100 sccm Ar, 30 sccm H2 for 120 min). By employing the Cu-foam-assisted PECVD, our N-doped graphene glass again demonstrated the key feature of macroscopic film uniformity (Fig. S13†). To substantiate the successful nitrogen doping of graphene directly formed on flexible glass plates, XPS measurements were carried out. The asymmetric C 1s signal could be fitted into three peaks located at 284.82 eV, 285.76 eV, and 286.86 eV, corresponding to the graphitic sp2 carbon and two different C–N bonding structures pertaining to sp2 and sp3 hybridized carbon, respectively. As for the N 1s signal in Fig. 5c, the fitted peaks centering at 398.37 eV, 400.05 eV, and 401.31 eV can be attributed to pyridine, pyrrolic, and graphitic N, respectively.42 The atomic percentage of N in the sample is estimated to be 3.5 at%, with the respective contributions from pyridine, pyrrolic, and graphitic nitrogen signals accounting for 22.2%, 36.4%, and 41.4%. This result probably marks the first-time synthesis of heteroatom-doped graphene directly on flexible substrates.
 Fig. 5  Copper-foam-assisted PECVD growth of N-doped graphene on the flexible glass plate and glass fiber cloth. (a) Spatial distribution of the sheet resistance (2 cm × 2 cm) of the N-doped graphene film grown on flexible glass. (b-c) XPS spectra of the C 1s and N 1s signals for N-doped graphene, respectively. (d) Raman spectra of N-doped graphene grown at 580 °C in comparison with pristine graphene grown under the same conditions. (e) SEM image of vertically oriented graphene wrapping directly grown on glass fiber. Scale bar: 2 μm. (f) SEM image and corresponding EDS maps of N-doped graphene grown on the glass fiber. Scale bar for SEM image: 2 μm; scale bar for EDS maps: 200 nm. 
It can be noted that our method also enables the direct growth of N-doped graphene on the flexible glass fiber cloth (Fig. S14†). Fig. 5d comparatively presents the Raman spectrum of N-doped and non-doped graphene synthesized on the glass fiber cloth under identical growth conditions (580 °C; 100 sccm Ar, 30 sccm H2 for 180 min). The Raman signal for N-doping shows characteristic peaks of graphene located at 1342 cm−1 (D band), 1580 cm−1 (G band), and 2671 cm−1 (2D band). In comparison with pristine graphene, the 2D peak position of N-doped graphene is slightly upshifted, which corresponds well with those mentioned in published reports for N-doped graphene. This observation is additionally accompanied by an increased ID/IG intensity ratio. Such a ratio reflects the degree of the defects in the graphene lattice or the edges, and the increased ratio could be ascribed to the introduction of topological defects originated from the N-atom insertions in the sp2 carbon.43 These comparative Raman data confirm the N-doping behavior of the graphene grown on the glass fiber cloth using pyridine as the precursor. The temperature was found to exert an impact on the quality of the graphene on the glass fiber cloth (Fig. S15†). To closely examine the morphological features of directly grown graphene on glass fibers, the representative SEM image in Fig. 5e shows continuous and uniform networks, highlighting the conformal coating of vertically oriented N-doped graphene flakes. Furthermore, Fig. 5f displays a low-magnified SEM image and the corresponding elemental maps of N, C, and N + C, which suggest that both N and C are uniformly distributed over the probed sample area. The spatial distribution of the Rs of the non-doped graphene and N-doped graphene grown on the glass cloth was further mapped out (Fig. S16†).
The perpendicular N-doped graphene formed on the glass fiber cloth with enriched edge defects and abundant open spaces could have an application in the electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).44–46 Indeed, previous reports systematically explored the use of graphene-based materials as metal-free and non-precious catalysts for the HER process; nevertheless, the usage of direct-CVD-grown graphene for the HER process has rarely been demonstrated.45,47 In the present study, the conductivity of the N-doped graphene/glass fiber cloth electrode was first measured. The flexibility of such electrode enables the repeated bending operation, where the variance of electrical resistance was recorded over 100 bending cycles, as shown in Fig. 6a. For a constant bending state of 45° (Fig. 6a inset), there is little discernible evolution of electrode resistance, exhibiting superb mechanical robustness. The electrical conductivity of the N-doped graphene/glass fiber product was further probed by a four-point method, showing an average conductance value of 1.8 S m−1 (Fig. 6b). Electrocatalytic HER measurements were carried out via steady-state LSV in the acidic medium (0.5 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte) with a three-electrode configuration. Fig. 6c shows the HER polarization curves of different electrocatalysts including pure glass fiber, pristine graphene, and N-doped graphene examined for comparison. As such, the pure glass fiber has negligible electrocatalytic activity, whilst the direct coating of vertically-oriented graphene could enhance the HER activity by generating ample active sites. N-doped graphene can offer a cathodic current density of 10 mA cm−2 for HER at an overpotential (η) of 336 mV (η10), lower than that of pristine graphene. Note that the HER activity of our N-doped graphene is superior to those of the previously reported metal-free graphene electrocatalysts and is comparable to those of benchmarking metal-based catalysts for HER such as MoxSy, NixPy, and Mo/Ni alloy.44,48Fig. 6d presents the Tafel plots of the pure glass fiber, pristine graphene and N-doped graphene. According to the Tafel equation: η = a + blog(j), where a is the Tafel constant, b is the Tafel slope, and j is the current density. The N-doped graphene electrocatalyst yields the smallest Tafel slope of 87 mV dec−1, indicating the better catalytic kinetics of HER as compared to the reported 116 mV dec−1.44 The comparatively enhanced HER of N-doped graphene is presumably pertaining to the fact that N-doping would activate the adjacent C atom in the graphene matrix and create lattice/edge defects to improve the catalytic activities.48 Further in-depth study and performance optimization will be required to probe these aspects in more detail. Our N-doped catalysts also display favorable stability and durability in HER. After 1000 cycles of continuous operation at a test rate of 50 mV s−1, no remarkable performance decay could be detected (Fig. 6e). Long-term continuous HER operation for 21000 s at an overpotential of 400 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution was further performed where the HER current density was overall stable (Fig. 6f). These results suggest that directly-grown, vertical-oriented N-doped graphene on glass fibers holds promise as a durable electrocatalyst for H2 generation. The present study provides a facile and economical route for preparing efficient electrocatalysts using heteroatom-doped carbon materials for HER and other catalytic reactions.
 Fig. 6  HER performance of flexible, N-doped graphene glass fiber cloth. (a) Resistance measured as a function of bending cycles. Inset: photograph showing the bent state of the graphene glass fiber cloth. (b) Plot of the electrical conductance of flexible, N-doped graphene glass fiber cloth. (c) Polarization curves and (d) corresponding Tafel plots of the pure glass fiber, non-doped graphene glass fiber, and N-doped graphene glass fiber. (e-f) HER stability and durability test. LSV curves of the HER process on the N-doped graphene glass fiber before and after 1000 cycles of CV scans (e) and the time dependence of the HER current density on operation time at an overpotential of 400 mV (f). 
Conclusions
In summary, flexible graphene glass with large-scale graphene film uniformity was successfully fabricated by a designed copper-foam-assisted PECVD approach. The film thickness, doping level, and production scale of directly-grown graphene could be tailored by simply altering the growth temperature, duration, precursor, and furnace dimension. As such, 5.5-inch-sized flexible graphene glass samples could be readily produced. The resulting flexible graphene glass further served as transparent conductive electrodes for perovskite-based solar cells and as active electrocatalysts for metal-free HER, shedding light on their direct integrations in next-generation flexible electronic and energy storage devices. In a broader context, such an innovative synthetic route could be extended to the fabrication of other graphene-related materials on flexible substrates that have huge potentials for advanced wearable applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51702225), the National Key Research and Development Program (2016YFA0200103), the Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (Z161100002116020), and the Jiangsu Youth Science Foundation (BK20170336). N. W., Q. C. L., S. C., Y. Z. S., Q. F. Y., C. L., C. L., G. F. Z., J. Y. S., and Z. F. L. acknowledge the support from the Suzhou Key Laboratory for Advanced Carbon Materials and Wearable Energy Technologies, Suzhou, China. J. Y. S. acknowledges the support from the Thousand Youth Talents Plan of China.
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal'ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Some, Y. Kim, Y. Yoon, H. Yoo, S. Lee, Y. Park and H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1929 CrossRef .
K. R. Paton, E. Varrla, C. Backes, R. J. Smith, U. Khan, A. O'Neill, C. Boland, M. Lotya, O. M. Istrate, P. King, T. Higgins, S. Barwich, P. May, P. Puczkarski, I. Ahmed, M. Moebius, H. Pettersson, E. Long, J. Coelho, S. E. O'Brien, E. K. McGuire, B. M. Sanchez, G. S. Duesberg, N. McEvoy, T. J. Pennycook, C. Downing, A. Crossley, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hao, M. S. Bharathi, L. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Chen, S. Nie, X. Wang, H. Chou, C. Tan, B. Fallahazad, H. Ramanarayan, C. W. Magnuson, E. Tutuc, B. I. Yakobson, K. F. McCarty, Y. W. Zhang, P. Kim, J. Hone, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2013, 342, 720–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, W. Ren, H. Xu, L. Jin, Z. Wang, T. Ma, L. P. Ma, Z. Zhang, Q. Fu, L. M. Peng, X. Bao and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 699 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Y. Teng, C. C. Lu, K. Akiyama-Hasegawa, Y. C. Lin, C. H. Yeh, K. Suenaga and P. W. Chiu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1379–1384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ismach, C. Druzgalski, S. Penwell, A. Schwartzberg, M. Zheng, A. Javey, J. Bokor and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1542–1548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dai, L. Fu, Z. Zou, M. Wang, H. Xu, S. Wang and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 522 CrossRef PubMed .
I. V. Vlassiouk, Y. Stehle, P. R. Pudasaini, R. R. Unocic, P. D. Rack, A. P. Baddorf, I. N. Ivanov, N. V. Lavrik, F. List, N. Gupta, K. V. Bets, B. I. Yakobson and S. N. Smirnov, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 318–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Guo, L. Jiang, Z. Xu, L. Huang, Y. Xue, D. Geng, B. Wu, W. Hu, G. Yu and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1348–1353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bi, S. Sun, F. Huang, X. Xie and M. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 411–416 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Wen, Y. Guo, B. Wu, L. Huang, Y. Xue, D. Geng, D. Wang, G. Yu and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17548–17551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, Y. Lu, C. Han, T. Niu, W. Chen and A. T. Wee, Angew. Chem., 2013, 52, 14121–14126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Song, M. Son, C. Park, H. Lim, M. P. Levendorf, A. W. Tsen, J. Park and H. C. Choi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3050–3054 RSC .
J. Sun, T. Gao, X. Song, Y. Zhao, Y. Lin, H. Wang, D. Ma, Y. Chen, W. Xiang, J. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6574–6577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, S. Zhao, C. Jin, A. L. Koh, Y. Zhou, W. Xu, Q. Li, Q. Xiong, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gao, X. Song, H. Du, Y. Nie, Y. Chen, Q. Ji, J. Sun, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zuo, Z. Xu, R. Zheng, A. Khanaki, J. G. Zheng and J. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, S. K. Jang, W. J. Jang, M. Kim, S. Y. Park, S. W. Kim, S. J. Kahng, J. Y. Choi, R. S. Ruoff, Y. J. Song and S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2746–2752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Sun, J. Gao, F. Du, Q. Han, Y. Nie, Z. Chen, A. Bachmatiuk, M. K. Priydarshi, D. Ma, X. Song, X. Wu, C. Xiong, M. H. Rummeli, F. Ding, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7839–7846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qi, B. Deng, X. Guo, S. Chen, J. Gao, T. Li, Z. Dou, H. Ci, J. Sun, Z. Chen, R. Wang, L. Cui, X. Chen, K. Chen, H. Wang, S. Wang, P. Gao, M. H. Rummeli, H. Peng, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704839 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, Y. Chen, M. K. Priydarshi, T. Gao, X. Song, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10333–10339 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Chen, W. Jiang, C. Zhang, J. Sun, H. Wang, W. Xin, L. Lin, M. K. Priydarshi, H. Yang, Z. Liu, J. Tian, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603428 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, Z. Chen, L. Yuan, Y. Chen, J. Ning, S. Liu, D. Ma, X. Song, M. K. Priydarshi, A. Bachmatiuk, M. H. Rummeli, T. Ma, L. Zhi, L. Huang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11136–11144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, Y. Chen, M. K. Priydarshi, Z. Chen, A. Bachmatiuk, Z. Zou, Z. Chen, X. Song, Y. Gao, M. H. Rummeli, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5846–5854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, Y. Chen, X. Cai, B. Ma, Z. Chen, M. K. Priydarshi, K. Chen, T. Gao, X. Song, Q. Ji, X. Guo, D. Zou, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3496–3504 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, B. Guan, X. Chen, Q. Zeng, L. Lin, R. Wang, M. K. Priydarshi, J. Sun, Z. Zhang, T. Wei, J. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3048–3055 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ci, H. Ren, Y. Qi, X. Chen, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3106–3115 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Chen, X. D. Chen, H. H. Wang, X. Q. Li, L. Lin, K. Chen, H. N. Ci, X. S. Wu, Y. Y. Zhang, Y. F. Zhang and Z. F. Liu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700212 CrossRef .
M. Song, D. S. You, K. Lim, S. Park, S. Jung, C. S. Kim, D.-H. Kim, D.-G. Kim, J.-K. Kim, J. Park, Y.-C. Kang, J. Heo, S.-H. Jin, J. H. Park and J.-W. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4177–4184 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Jacob, R. S. Rawat, B. Ouyang, K. Bazaka, D. S. Kumar, D. Taguchi, M. Iwamoto, R. Neupane and O. K. Varghese, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5702–5708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Sun, X. Wang, E. Wang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Duan, S. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 931–940 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Loh, S. W. Tong and J. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1095–1102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Meng, Y. M. Yang, G. Xu, Z. Hong, Q. Chen, J. You, G. Li, Y. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Wei, Y. Q. Liu, Y. Wang, H. L. Zhang, L. P. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, B. Wu, L. Jiang, Y. Guo, L. Huang, J. Chen, J. Tan, D. Geng, B. Luo, W. Hu, G. Yu and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11060–11063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. H. Li, T. Xing, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5290–5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, G. Gao, H. Chen, B. Wang, J. Zhou, M. T. Soo, M. Hong, X. Yan, G. Qian, J. Zou, A. Du and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700017 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, X. B. Li, L. Gao, H. L. Wu, J. Yang, L. Cai, T. B. Ma, C. H. Tung, L. Z. Wu and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 192–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shinde, A. Sami and J.-H. Lee, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 3873–3880 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, A. Du, G. Gao, J. Chen, X. Yan, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9532–9538 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional characterization information and electrochemical measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta00299e‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Copper-foam-assisted PECVD growth of the flexible graphene glass. (a) Schematic diagram of the copper foam-assisted PECVD process. (b) Photographs of as-grown flexible graphene glass samples (3.0 cm × 1.5 cm) obtained for growth times of 60, 120, and 180 min with a bare flexible glass (leftmost) shown for comparison. Growth condition: Ar:H2:CH4 flow rate of 100:30:10 sccm at 700 °C; radio frequency of 80 W. (c-d) Photograph of the as-grown flexible graphene glass exhibiting good flexibility. (e) Representative Raman spectra obtained from flexible graphene glass samples grown at 650 °C (blue), 700 °C (red), and 750 °C (cyan), respectively. (f) Static water contact angle plotted as a function of graphene growth time. The inset shows the hydrophilic and hydrophobic characteristics of bare flexible glass (left) and flexible graphene glass (right). (g) Series of the transmittance spectra of flexible graphene glass samples with corresponding sheet resistance values. (h) Sheet resistance comparison between this work and the reported results, wherein graphene glasses were prepared with reduced graphene oxide, liquid-exfoliated graphite, as well as by PECVD approaches.	 

 	Fig. 2  PECVD growth towards vertical graphene (VG) nanosheets on flexible glass at growth parameters of 650 °C, 100 sccm Ar, 30 sccm H2, 10 sccm CH4, 80 W. (a) SEM image of vertically oriented graphene films grown on flexible glass by the copper foam-assisted PECVD approach. (b) OM image of the VG films transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate. (c) AFM images of the VG nanosheets on the flexible glass substrate by a PECVD route. (d–f) Continuous zoom-in TEM images of the VG nanosheets transferred onto copper grids.	 

 	Fig. 3  Copper-foam-assisted PECVD growth of flexible graphene glass with macroscopic uniformity. (a) Photograph of the typically grown flexible graphene glass (left panel) and the copper-foam-assisted grown flexible graphene glass (right panel), with each row synthesized under identical growth conditions (700 °C, 100 sccm Ar, 30 sccm H2, 10 sccm CH4 for 60 and 180 min). (b–c) Spatial distribution of the Rs of the graphene film with or without Cu foam assistance (with other parameters kept identical). (d) Surface temperature mapping of such flexible graphene glass under a bent state upon light exposure for 100 s. (e) Raman mapping of G-band intensity over the graphene film directly grown on flexible glass. (f) The direct integration of the thus-derived graphene glass as a flexible transparent conductive electrode toward lighting the LED indicator.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the PSC device configuration based on flexible graphene glass (modified by AgNWs/PH1000)/PEDOT: PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/Al. (b) Corresponding energy level diagram of each layer. (c) UV-vis transmittance spectra of flexible graphene glass with/without modification, showing similar transparency. Inset: digital photograph of the modified transparent electrode. (d) Performance of the flexible PSC device. (e) Digital photograph of a flexible PSC device attached to an arm, demonstrating wearable features.	 

 	Fig. 5  Copper-foam-assisted PECVD growth of N-doped graphene on the flexible glass plate and glass fiber cloth. (a) Spatial distribution of the sheet resistance (2 cm × 2 cm) of the N-doped graphene film grown on flexible glass. (b-c) XPS spectra of the C 1s and N 1s signals for N-doped graphene, respectively. (d) Raman spectra of N-doped graphene grown at 580 °C in comparison with pristine graphene grown under the same conditions. (e) SEM image of vertically oriented graphene wrapping directly grown on glass fiber. Scale bar: 2 μm. (f) SEM image and corresponding EDS maps of N-doped graphene grown on the glass fiber. Scale bar for SEM image: 2 μm; scale bar for EDS maps: 200 nm.	 

 	Fig. 6  HER performance of flexible, N-doped graphene glass fiber cloth. (a) Resistance measured as a function of bending cycles. Inset: photograph showing the bent state of the graphene glass fiber cloth. (b) Plot of the electrical conductance of flexible, N-doped graphene glass fiber cloth. (c) Polarization curves and (d) corresponding Tafel plots of the pure glass fiber, non-doped graphene glass fiber, and N-doped graphene glass fiber. (e-f) HER stability and durability test. LSV curves of the HER process on the N-doped graphene glass fiber before and after 1000 cycles of CV scans (e) and the time dependence of the HER current density on operation time at an overpotential of 400 mV (f).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional characterization information and electrochemical measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta00299e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
