Low-pressure accessible gas-quenching for absolute methylammonium-free perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA08402J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA08402J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 2105-2112Low-pressure accessible gas-quenching for absolute methylammonium-free perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Tian 
            Hou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Meng 
            Zhang
          
        
      *abd, 
      
        
          
            Wenjing 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengying 
            Gu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lan 
            Lan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoran 
            Sun
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yuelong 
            Huang
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Bolin 
            Zheng
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Xu 
            Liu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Martin A. 
            Green
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Xiaojing 
            Hao
          
        
      *d
aInstitute of Photovoltaics, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu 610500, China. E-mail: meng.zhang@swpu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Reservoir Geology and Exploitation, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu, 610500, China
cSchool of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China
dThe Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics, School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
Received 
      28th September 2021
    , Accepted 21st December 2021First published on 22nd December 2021AbstractGas-quenching is a promising technique for the up-scalable fabrication of metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs). However, it has been challenging to produce high-quality gas-quenched perovskite films without the use of the methylammonium (MA) cation. By employing tetramethylene sulfoxide (TMSO) as a ligand in the precursor solution, high-quality FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 perovskite films have been successfully obtained by gas-quenching. A study on the precursor solution and film-forming process revealed the effect of TMSO on the formation of large-grain films, as well as the critical role of gas-quenching in regulating the intermediate films. The absolute MA-free perovskite device exhibits superior stability over the PSCs obtained with the MACl additive. The fabricated MA- and Br-free PSCs show a power conversion efficiency of 21.3% without any passivation treatment. Moreover, gas-quenching with TMSO enables a wide gas pressure processing window and superior accessibility to low-pressure processing, demonstrating its promising potential in up-scaling manufacturing of high-efficiency MA-free PSCs.
Introduction
Organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have witnessed tremendous progress over the past decade.1–5 Because of their cheap manufacturing cost and excellent optoelectronic properties, PSCs have been recognized as the key to the new generation photovoltaic technology, realizing low-cost solar energy conversion. Although some PSCs have already demonstrated acceptable durability that passed the IEC standard test,6 the stability of perovskites still lags far behind that of silicon-based light absorbing materials, which remains a huge concern for their commercialization potential.
The development of PSCs started with methylammonium (MA)-based perovskites. However, the MA cation does not have a desired stability because it can be easily deprotonated, which leads to considerable outgassing of the film as a result of the decomposition of the perovskite.7 In comparison, the formamidinium (FA)-based perovskite has been considered as a more promising candidate for the further development of PSCs due to its superior thermal stability and smaller band-gap.8–12 Pristine FAPbI3 perovskite usually undergoes a phase-transition from the black α-phase to the non-perovskite yellow δ-phase under ambient conditions, and it is also difficult to obtain high-quality films for pristine FAPbI3 compared to MA-based perovskite films. The above issues are believed to result from the distorted lattice of FAPbI3 due to the large FA cation.7,11,13 Therefore, partial substitution of the FA cation by a smaller MA cation or Cs cation has demonstrated an instant improvement in the phase-stability as well as the film quality.14,15 In particular, FA-Cs based perovskites have reached a delicate compromise of thermal stability and phase-stability, demonstrating encouraging operational performance stability of PSCs.16,17
Compared to the anti-solvent-quenching conventionally used to prepare perovskite films for research purposes, gas-quenching is considered more promising for up-scalable fabrication of perovskite films in practical applications. It not only avoids the use of harmful anti-solvents, but also exhibits high reproducibility and robustness in producing high-quality perovskite films. More importantly, gas-quenching also facilitates precise control of the crystallization process due to the controllable supersaturation. Therefore, the air-blade treatment based on the gas-quenching mechanism has become increasingly popular in fabricating large area perovskite films and modules.18–21 Unfortunately, the preparation of a high-quality FA-Cs based perovskite film with large grains usually relies heavily on the MA containing additive of solvent, which might induce the incorporation of unwanted MA cations into the perovskite lattice, risking the long-term stability of perovskite solar cells and modules.22–24 On the other hand, the requirement of gas-pressure for the gas-quenching process on the FA-based perovskite is much higher than that of the MA-based perovskite.25 Although a high-pressure up to 1.0 MPa guarantees the fast-nucleation of the perovskite film, it also causes a considerable limitation of gas-quenching in practical applications, especially for the preferable MA-free perovskite materials. As such, reducing the pressure limitation has become a major challenge for the gas-quenching approach in fabricating high-quality MA-free perovskite films.26
Herein, we report FA-Cs PSCs prepared by a low-pressure accessible gas-quenching approach in the absence of any MA cation or MA-containing solvent. A high boiling point solvent of tetramethylene sulfoxide (TMSO) as a ligand has been introduced into the gas-quenching fabrication of perovskite films to mediate the size of colloids in the precursor solution. By applying gas-quenching and thermal annealing to the wet precursor film, a high-quality perovskite film with large-grains and fewer defects is obtained. The corresponding solar cell yields a high-power conversion efficiency of 21.3% with reduced hysteresis, which is among the highest efficiencies reported for the MA-free and Br-free PSCs without any interfacial passivation. Notably, gas-quenching with TMSO shows excellent compatibility with low-pressure processing, delivering decent device performance at reduced equivalent gas pressure down to 1 g. The obtained absolute MA-free PSCs demonstrate superior stability over devices with the widely used MACl additive.
Results and discussion
In this work, we focus on the MA-free perovskite with the composition of FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 due to its optimized phase stability among various ratios of FA-Cs double cation perovskites. TMSO was introduced by mixing with DMF with a volume ratio of 1:9, and the mixed solvent was used to prepare the perovskite precursor solution. The perovskite film was fabricated by gas-quenching as described in our previous reports.20 There are several identified stages during the gas-quenching and the annealing process as shown in Fig. 1a. The precursor solution was spread throughout the substrate as the spinning starts, presenting a transparent and colourless wet film. Upon gas-stream blowing, the colour of the film turned yellow and gradually got richer and darker from 2 s to 15 s. It is notable that the colour change from transparent to yellow is very quick, which implies the fast evaporation of DMF upon gas-quenching in the first 2 s. Considering that the saturated vapor pressure of TMSO is much lower than that of DMF, evaporation of TMSO is rather difficult upon gas-quenching and thereby exhibits a slow colour change when DMF was fully evaporated. Gas-quenching stops when there is no obvious film colour change, and the intermediate film was then transferred onto a hotplate for post-annealing. During annealing, the coordinated TMSO was further driven out from the intermediate film, where the yellow film turns black, indicating the crystallization of perovskite. Additionally, it can be noted that such a black film also goes through an obvious change on the surface, where a deep black film with a smooth surface is first formed and then gradually gets rougher. This can be interpreted as a dynamic solvent annealing process,27,28 in which the TMSO vapor is enriched on the surface forming an intermediate phase until TMSO is completely evaporated.
 Fig. 1  (a) The fabrication process of the FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 film with TMSO at different stages; (b) the FTIR spectra of TMSO, the intermediate film and the annealed perovskite film; (c) the FTIR spectra of the pristine and aged intermediate film without gas-quenching and (d) with gas-quenching. 
In order to understand the role of TMSO in the film formation process, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed for the perovskite and intermediate films under various conditions. As shown in Fig. 1b, compared to the stretching vibration peak of the SO double bond (ν(SO)) of the pristine TMSO film at 990–1000 cm−1,29–31 the ν(SO) of the intermediate film obtained by gas-quenching exhibits an obvious red shift to 980 nm−1, indicating the coordination with iodoplumbate. The original peaks without a shift can still be observed as shoulder peaks for both intermediate films with and without gas-quenching, implying that a certain amount of uncoordinated TMSO molecules remains in the intermediate film. Obviously, the unshifted ν(SO) peak of the intermediate film without gas-quenching is much higher, suggesting that the gas-quenching process has effectively reduced the amount of uncoordinated TMSO. The above result matches well with our observation that gas-quenching is therefore considered as a colloid condensation process rather than a direct crystallization process of preparing MAPbI3 films.21 Additionally, as can be seen from Fig. 1c, the intermediate film without gas-quenching exhibits a significant change in absorption peaks after aging for 20 min. A sharp peak near 935 nm−1 emerges, suggesting a stronger coordination between TMSO and iodoplumbate. In comparison, the gas-quenched intermediate film is more stable (Fig. 1d), with only a minor peak at 935 nm−1 observed after aging for 60 min (Fig. S1†). These films with the presence of the peak at 935 nm−1 after annealing generate massive pinholes (Fig. S2†), highly likely due to the disordered nucleation from the various structures of the complex. Consequently, the corresponding solar cell also presents abnormal photovoltaic performance. The above results collectively revealed the critical role of the gas-quenching process in guiding the formation of a uniform intermediate phase and preventing the drastic and inhomogeneous change of the coordination environment in the intermediate film, which facilitates the formation of a homogeneous MA-free perovskite film.
The morphology of the annealed MA-free film obtained by gas-quenching has been characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). As shown in Fig. 2a, the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 perovskite film with TMSO exhibits microscale grains. In comparison, the grains of the films obtained from the control sample (with DMSO) are much smaller (Fig. 3b). Though the enlarged grain size usually leads to increased surface roughness, the atomic force microscopy topography (Fig. S3†) suggests that the roughness of the TMSO sample remains the same as that of the DMSO sample. Fig. 3c presents the size distributions of 150 random grains of the samples prepared with TMSO and DMSO at the same magnification (Fig. S4†). The average size of the TMSO sample and the DMSO sample is 1.04 μm and 0.54 μm, respectively. A few extra-large grains up to 3 μm can be found in the TMSO sample, while the largest grain in the DMSO sample just exceeds 1 μm. Despite the low nucleation rate associated with the slow evaporation of TMSO,31–33 the colloidal distribution of the precursor solutions may contribute to the large grains of TMSO samples.34,35 The dynamic light scattering analysis was performed for both MA-free perovskite precursor solutions with TMSO and DMSO. Interestingly, the colloidal distribution is totally opposite to the grain distribution. The average diameter of the colloids of precursors with TMSO and DMSO is 0.7 nm and 2.1 nm, respectively. The TMSO-containing precursor also clearly shows a much narrower distribution of the colloid size, indicating a better uniformity compared to the DMSO-containing precursor. Combining the observation of the film preparation process presented previously, we propose a film formation mechanism as shown in the scheme of Fig. 2e. The TMSO and DMSO mixed solvent works as a ligand to form colloids of PbI2-TMSO/DMSO complexes with various sizes. Because the ligand containing precursor is a colloidal sol instead of a solution, gas-quenching can be regarded as a colloid condensation process. The intermediate film after gas-quenching is stacked by the colloids of PbI2-TMSO/DMSO adducts. From the DLS results, we can confirm that the TMSO sample largely consisted of small colloids, and has much fewer large colloids than the DMSO sample. Assuming the intermediate film subjected to gas-quenching is at a quasi-wet state, and the condensation of colloids does not affect their size, the intermediate film with TMSO would also have fewer large colloids. As the coordinated TMSO is degassed during the annealing process, these large colloids will more likely reach the critical nucleation radius and grow up, leading to fewer nuclei generated in the TMSO containing film. Therefore, the nucleation rate of the TMSO containing film is limited, and the associated film presents dramatically enlarged grains compared to the DMSO containing film, in which larger colloids are observed.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM image of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 film prepared with TMSO and (b) DMSO; (c) grain size distribution of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 films; (d) size distributions of colloids in the perovskite precursor solutions obtained from DLS measurements; (e) scheme of the proposed crystallization process. 
 Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 films; (b) light absorption spectra and steady-state PL spectra of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 films; (c) time-resolved PL spectra of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 films; (d–h) distribution of photovoltaic parameters of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 PSC with TMSO and DMSO. (i) The equivalent relation of gas-pressure to the balance weight. (j and k) Performance of DMSO and TMSO devices fabricated under reduced gas-pressure. 

Fig. 3a shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 perovskite film. Obviously, the films obtained with TMSO exhibit not only stronger diffraction peaks of perovskite, but also a suppressed peak of PbI2 at 12.6° in comparison to the DMSO sample. PbI2 is usually present in gas-quenched MA-free perovskite films, which is typically due to the incomplete reaction as a result of the relatively fast crystallization in the presence of DMSO. In contrast, the ligand of TMSO provides a slow crystallization which contributes to a more balanced assembly of the perovskite structure. Optical characterization studies are also performed to understand the effect of TMSO on gas-quenched MA-free perovskite films. As shown by the UV-Vis absorption spectra in Fig. 3b, both the TMSO sample and DMSO sample exhibit a similar absorption onset, demonstrating no noticeable change in the bandgap of the perovskite film. The slightly enhanced absorption can be related to the slightly higher average thickness of the TMSO sample (628 nm) than that of the DMSO sample (Fig. S5†), which also partially contributes to the increased peak intensity of the XRD pattern. Notably, the TMSO sample exhibits a significantly higher photoluminescence (PL) emission peak than the DMSO sample, which indicates reduced non-radiative recombination in the TMSO sample. This resulted from the improved crystallinity of the perovskite film, as can be also evidenced by the reduced full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the XRD peaks (Table S1†). Besides, an obvious red-shift of the emission peak of the TMSO sample is observed. Such a red-shift might be associated with the enlarged grain size, which has been also observed in previous reports on large grain perovskite films.31,36,37 From the time-resolved PL decay measurement (Fig. 3c) it can be observed that the TMSO samples exhibit slower decay with an average recombination lifetime of 186.7 ns, whilst the DMSO samples exhibit faster decay with an average recombination lifetime of 88.9 ns. The result further demonstrates an improved film quality of the gas-quenched MA-free perovskite films with TMSO.

Fig. 3d–f demonstrate the photovoltaic parameters of an absolute MA-free PSC by gas-quenching with the device structure of ITO/SnO2/FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag. Compared to the control devices processed with DMSO, the TMSO devices show a substantial improvement in open-circuit voltage (VOC) up to 1.094 V (Fig. S6†). Considering the 1.526 eV band gap of the FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 perovskite, the use of TMSO instead of DMSO has reduced the VOC deficit of the device from 468 mV to 436 mV, which is the smallest among the reported FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 (or similar composition) PSCs without passivation treatment. The small VOC deficit can be attributed to the improved film quality with fewer defects in the large-grain polycrystalline film. On the other hand, the average short-circuit current (JSC) of TMSO devices is also slightly higher than that of DMSO devices. This is likely because the higher viscosity of the precursor solution with TMSO leads to a thicker perovskite film (Fig. S7†), which can be also evidenced by the enhanced absorption. Besides, the fill factor (FF) does not show much difference. As a result, the TMSO device showed an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 19.8%, which is higher than that of the 18.0% of the control devices. It should be also noted that the device performance cannot be further improved with additional MACl in the precursor, which indicates that the quality of the perovskite film prepared with TMSO has already reached a desired level (Fig. S8†). We also find that the hysteresis of the J–V scans of the TMSO device has been effectively suppressed with the average hysteresis index reduced from 3.2% to 2.4% at a high scan rate of 1 V s−1. Since the J–V hysteresis mainly results from ion-migration within the device, the reduced hysteresis of the TMSO device is therefore considered to be related to the microscale grains with fewer grain boundaries providing pathways for the mobile ions. In order to estimate the trap-assisted recombination, the VOC of the devices was measured under regulated light intensity. As shown in Fig. S9† (the ideality factor of the device is calculated from the slope of the curve), the TMSO device exhibits an ideality factor of 1.32 kT/q, whereas the ideality factor of the DMSO device is 1.39 kT/q. Since a higher ideality factor represents the prevalence of the trap-assisted nonradiative recombination, the smaller ideality factor of the TMSO device indicates a lower trap-density within the gas-quenched perovskite film with TMSO, which is consistent with the TRPL result. The trap density of the gas-quenched film is further characterized by space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurement (Fig. S10†). The trap density Nt is estimated according to the equation V = VTFL = qNtL2/(2ε0εr), where the trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) is the onset voltage at which all traps are filled and L is the film thickness measured by using a stylus profiler. The calculated Nt DMSO and Nt TMSO are 2.77 × 1015 cm−3 and 1.95 × 1015 cm−3, respectively, demonstrating an improved film quality of the TMSO sample. The TMSO device also exhibits improved stability over DMSO devices (Fig. S11†). This is considered to be related to the reduced grain-boundaries in the TMSO sample, which provided fewer tunnels for the mobile ions to initiate the deterioration of device performance.
More interestingly, we find that gas quenching with TMSO is capable of enabling a much wider gas pressure process window and realize low-pressure processing for high-quality absolute MA-free perovskite films. In order to quantify the pressure of the gas-flow being used in the quenching process, its equivalent weight measured on a balance is used instead of the pressure reading on the regulator considering that the working pressure is always lower than the set pressure. Their correlation is explained in Fig. 3i. For instance, to reach a 20 g equivalent weight of gas flow, the regulator pressure is set at 0.18 MPa, whereas the working pressure is stabilized at 0.12 MPa during the gas-quenching process. We first evaluated the low-pressure accessibility for gas-quenching with DMSO (Fig. 3j). Although moderate efficiency can be obtained at 40 g equivalent gas-pressure, further reduction in the gas-pressure leads to significant deterioration of device performance and reproducibility. In contrast, gas-quenching with TMSO exhibits superior compatibility with low pressures. Even at 1 g equivalent gas-pressure, where the working pressure is too low to read from the regulator, the TMSO device can still achieve 20% efficiency (with an average efficiency of over 19%). It is worth noting that the various gas-pressures do not affect the thickness of the perovskite film (Fig. S12†). Moreover, the distribution of device performance has been kept at a narrow range, demonstrating decent reproducibility under low-pressure gas-quenching. The low-pressure accessibility presented by gas-quenching with TMSO is undoubtedly highly desired for the up-scaling gas-quenching manufacturing of absolute MA-free perovskite devices and modules.
The best performing FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 perovskite device fabricated by gas-quenching with TMSO exhibits limited hysteresis at a high scan rate of 1 V s−1 without any additional passivation treatment, demonstrating an average PCE of over 21.0% with a PCE of 21.3% from reverse scan and 20.8% from forward scan as shown in Fig. 4a. On a larger scale with the active-area above 1 cm,2JSC of 24.8 mA cm−2, VOC of 1053 mV, FF of 78.2% and a high PCE of 20.4% can be obtained (Fig. 4b), demonstrating the potential for up-scaling fabrication of PSCs. The external quantum efficiency spectrum of the TMSO device without additional light bias is given in Fig. S13,† showing a high integrated JSC of 24.1 mA cm−2 which is comparable to the measured JSC. The high JSC mainly benefits from the absence of MA and Br, which leads to a reduced bandgap compared to that of the widely used FA-MA-Cs triple cation perovskite. Therefore, a decent response to light with a wavelength longer than 810 nm can be obtained, which is consistent with the absorption spectrum of the FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 perovskite film. The stability of the absolute MA-free devices fabricated with TMSO is also evaluated versus the corresponding device prepared with additional 0.2 M MACl in the precursor solution. It is found that for most of the devices with MACl, the efficiency exhibits an obvious decline with repeated J–V measurements, whereas the efficiency of the devices without MACl keeps increasing (Fig. 4c). This results in a more prominent I–V hysteresis of MACl added devices compared to that of the devices without MACl (Fig. 4e). We further heated the associated encapsulated devices in air on a hotplate in the dark with a relative humidity of 45% to 50% to carry out the accelerated stability test (Fig. 4d). The results clearly showed the negative effect of the MACl additive on the device performance of FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 PSCs. After the 10 hour stress test, the average PCE of the absolute MA-free devices remains above 85%. In contrast, the average PCE of MACl added devices drops below 70% with a much wider distribution. More surprisingly, the I–V hysteresis of the MACl added devices grows considerably after the test (Fig. 4e), indicating an accelerated ion-migration within the devices under thermal and moisture stresses. The deteriorated stability of the MACl-added device could be related to the residue of MA cations in the perovskite film, even though the film has been additionally annealed at 150 °C to facilitate the removal of MA. The XRD result (Fig. S14†) shows that with the addition of MACl, diffraction peaks corresponding to (210) and (112) facets shift slightly towards larger angles, indicating a shrinkage of the perovskite lattice resulting from the partial substitution of the FA cation by the MA cation. The MA incorporation can be also evidenced by the blue shift of the absorption onset and the PL emission peaks as presented in the inset figure. XPS spectra also indicate a small amount of residual MA cations on the film surface (Fig. S15†). Due to the unstable nature of MA cations, the MA incorporation induced by the MACl additive reasonably results in the deterioration of the device stability, which further justified the necessity of developing absolute MA-free PSCs.
 Fig. 4  (a) Bidirectional J–V curves of the small-area and (b) large-area gas-quenched devices fabricated with TMSO; (c) normalized efficiency at the max-power point of the gas-quenched devices with and without the additive of MACl (d) accelerated stability test of the gas-quenched devices heated in air without encapsulation at 60 °C and 45% to 50% RH (e) statistical data on I–V hysteresis of the fresh devices and the devices after the accelerated stability test (data collected from 24–30 cells under each condition). 
Conclusions
In summary, a highly efficient absolute MA-free PSC has been fabricated by a gas-quenching method in the presence of TMSO. The gas-quenching process enables a homogeneous condensation of colloids to improve the uniformity of the intermediate film post-annealing. The employment of TMSO leads to a reduced size of colloids in the precursor solution, resulting in large grain polycrystalline films. The FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 film prepared with TMSO showed less PbI2 precipitation and reduced trap-density, enabling higher device performance. Additionally, TMSO enables high performance MA-free PSC devices fabricated by the gas-quenching method with a much wider gas pressure processing window and even at low gas-pressures down to an equivalent weight of 1 g. The absolute MA-free device also demonstrates superior thermal and moisture stabilities over the MACl added FA-Cs perovskite. The absolute MA-free device without any passivation delivered a hysteresis-less power conversion efficiency of over 21% on a small area device and 20% on a 1 cm2 device, which demonstrates the feasibility of gas-quenching in the fabrication of highly efficient large area MA-free PSCs.
Experimental
Materials
Formamidinium iodide (FAI, 99.5%), lead iodide (PbI2, 99.99%), cesium iodide (CsI, 99.99%), Spiro-OMeTAD (99.5%), (trifluoromethane) sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI, >99%), and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, >96%) were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp. SnO2 colloidal solution [15% tin(IV) in H2O colloidal dispersion] was purchased from Alfa Aesar. The solvents tetramethylene sulfoxide (TMSO, >95.0%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, anhydrous, 99.8%) and chlorobenzene (anhydrous, 99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Device fabrication
High-transparency ITO glass substrates were cleaned subsequently with detergent (5 vol% in deionized water), acetone, isopropanol, and ethanol for 20 min respectively. The substrates were dried by flowing N2 gas. Then the substrates were subjected to UV-ozone treatment for 15 min to remove the organic residue. After cleaning, the SnO2 colloidal dispersion (15% in water, Alfa Aesar) diluted with deionized water (1:3 wt) with an additive of 4 vol% polyethylene glycol (Alfa Aesar) and 8 vol‰ Triton X-100 (Aladdin) was spin-coated on the ITO substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 30 min and UV-ozone treatment for 15 min.
The FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3-based perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing PbI2 (1.5 M), FAI (1.35 M), and CsI (0.15 M) in a mixed solvent (TMSO:DMF = 1:9, v/v). For comparison, 0.2 M MACl was added to the precursor solution to prepare the pseudo-MA-free perovskite films and devices. The perovskite absorber layer was coated onto the pre-deposited SnO2 using a spin-coater (LEBO science) in a nitrogen filled glove box (box pressure set at 0.4 mbar). The spin-setup contains two stages: (i) 1000 rpm for 5 s, and (ii) 4000 rpm for 30 s. Gas-quenching is applied during the second stage, where nitrogen was sprayed on the wet film in the tenth second and continued until the end of spin coating. The gas-pressure at the regulator was set to 0.3 MPa. The equivalent weight of the pressure was measured by using a balance in the glovebox. Subsequently the deposited perovskite layer was annealed at 150 °C for 20 min. The HTL solution, in which a spiro-OMeTAD solution (73 mg ml−1 in 1 ml chlorobenzene) mixed with 17.5 μL of Li-TFSI solution (520 mg ml−1 in acetonitrile) and 28.8 μL TBP was deposited on the perovskite layers by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, about 100 nm sliver electrodes were prepared by thermal evaporation.
Characterization
The morphology images of the perovskite films were acquired by high-resolution field emission SEM (FEI Quanta 650 FEG). The AFM images were obtained by using a Kelvin probe force microscope (KPFM, KEYSIGHT Technologies 7500). The FTIR spectra were recorded by using a FT-IR spectrometer (BRAIC, WQF-520). The colloid size distributions of the perovskite precursors were measured with a dynamic light scattering DLS system (Malvern Instruments, Zetasizer Nano-ZS90) 468 nm light and a 406 nm pulsed laser were used as the excitation sources for the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) measurements (Edinburgh FLS 980), respectively. The UV-Vis absorption/reflection spectra were obtained using a UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer (Shimadzu, UV-3600 Plus). The thickness of the films was measured by using a stylus profiler (Bruker, DektakXT). X-ray diffraction patterns of the series of films were recorded by using an X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical B.V., X'Pert Pro MPD) with Cu Kα irradiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The J–V characteristics of the photovoltaic cells were obtained by using a Keithley B2901A source meter under simulated one-sun AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a solar simulator (Enli Tech, SS-F5-3A), and the scan rate is 1 V s−1. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were obtained using an EQE system (BENTHAM TMC300).
Author contributions
T. Hou and M. Zhang conceived the idea of the project, carried out the experiments, analysed the data, and wrote the manuscript. W. Yu, X. Wang, Qian. Chen and L. Lan contributed to the fabrication, optimization and characterization of the perovskite films and solar cells. Z. Gu and X. Sun performed the DLS measurements. X. Liu and B. Zheng performed the optical characterization studies. Y. Huang, X. Sun and X. Hao contributed to the funding acquisition and writing of the manuscript. M. Zhang, M. Green and X. Hao supervised the project, advised on its direction, and helped to prepare the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Sichuan Science and Technology Program (2018JY0015 and 22GJHZ0085). This work was also supported by the scientific research starting project of SWPU (No. 2021QHZ005 and No. 2021QHZ021). X. H. acknowledges the Australian Research Council (ARC) Future Fellowship program (FT190100756).
Notes and references

National Renewable Energy Laboratory Best Research Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html Search PubMed.
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y.-K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon, J.-P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulović, S. S. Shin, M. G. Bawendi and J. Seo, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, M. P. Bucknall, T. L. Young, M. Zhang, L. Hu, J. Bing, D. S. Lee, J. Kim, T. Wu, N. Takamure, D. R. McKenzie, S. Huang, M. A. Green and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Science, 2020, 368, 1309 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Turren-Cruz, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Science, 2018, 362, 449–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
H. Min, M. Kim, S.-U. Lee, H. Kim, G. Kim, K. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Science, 2019, 366, 749–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jeong, I. W. Choi, E. M. Go, Y. Cho, M. Kim, B. Lee, S. Jeong, Y. Jo, H. W. Choi, J. Lee, J.-H. Bae, S. K. Kwak, D. S. Kim and C. Yang, Science, 2020, 369, 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Pang, H. Hu, J. L. Zhang, S. L. Lv, Y. M. Yu, F. Wei, T. S. Qin, H. X. Xu, Z. H. Liu and G. L. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1485–1491 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
J. W. Lee, D. J. Seol, A. N. Cho and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4991–4998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T. Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, M. J. Yang, J. S. Park, S. H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, S. Xu, S. Chen, X. Xiao, J. Zhao and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 633–641 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yao, Q. Xue, Z. Li, K. Zhang, T. Zhang, N. Li, S. Yang, C. J. Brabec, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Z. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. C. Huang, M. D. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. F. Lin, L. C. Jiang, Y. C. Zhou, A. Gray-Weale, J. Etheridge, C. R. McNeill, R. A. Caruso, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y. B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, J. S. Yun, Q. Ma, J. Zheng, C. F. J. Lau, X. Deng, J. Kim, D. Kim, J. Seidel, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 438–444 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, J. M. Bing, Y. Y. O. Cho, Y. Li, J. H. Zheng, C. F. J. Lau, M. A. Green, S. J. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103853 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, H. Yu, J. H. Yun, M. Q. Lyu, Q. Wang and L. Z. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10038–10041 RSC .
S. N. Habisreutinger, D. P. McMeekin, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, APL Mater., 2016, 4, 091503 CrossRef .
S. Gholipour and M. Saliba, Small, 2018, 14, 1802385 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. J. Shi, T. T. Li, Y. H. Chen and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1190–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Du, X. Zhu, L. Wang, H. Wang, J. Feng, X. Jiang, Y. Cao, Y. Sun, L. Duan, Y. Jiao, K. Wang, X. Ren, Z. Yan, S. Pang and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, F. Zhang, T. Hou, X. Sun, H. Yu and M. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100386 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiao, Y. Bai, X. Meng, T. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Zheng, C. Hu, Y. Qu and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604944 CrossRef .
J. F. Masson and P. Collins, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 440–442 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Bertran and S. K. Madan, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1974, 36, 983–988 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Y. Chen, R. Li, Y. Xu, J. Feng, D. Yang, N. Yuan, W.-H. Zhang, S. Liu and J. Ding, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, S. Wang, L. Gu, N. Yuan and J. Ding, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000733 CrossRef .
L. Gu, S. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Xu, R. Li, D. Liu, X. Fang, X. Jia, N. Yuan and J. Ding, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 6883–6891 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yan, M. Long, T. Zhang, Z. Wei, H. Chen, S. Yang and J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 13, 4460 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Hu, L. Zhao, J. Wu, K. Gao, D. Luo, Y. Jiang, Z. Zhang, C. Zhu, E. Schaible, A. Hexemer, C. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Zhang, M. Grätzel, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Hörantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, X. Zhang, X. Feng, S. Lu, Z. Chen, X. Yong, S. A. T. Redfern, H. Wei, H. Wang, H. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, H. Zhang, J. S. Tse and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705393 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Characterization of the films and devices and video of the gas-quenching process. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta08402jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The fabrication process of the FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 film with TMSO at different stages; (b) the FTIR spectra of TMSO, the intermediate film and the annealed perovskite film; (c) the FTIR spectra of the pristine and aged intermediate film without gas-quenching and (d) with gas-quenching.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM image of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 film prepared with TMSO and (b) DMSO; (c) grain size distribution of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 films; (d) size distributions of colloids in the perovskite precursor solutions obtained from DLS measurements; (e) scheme of the proposed crystallization process.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 films; (b) light absorption spectra and steady-state PL spectra of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 films; (c) time-resolved PL spectra of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 films; (d–h) distribution of photovoltaic parameters of the gas-quenched FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 PSC with TMSO and DMSO. (i) The equivalent relation of gas-pressure to the balance weight. (j and k) Performance of DMSO and TMSO devices fabricated under reduced gas-pressure.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Bidirectional J–V curves of the small-area and (b) large-area gas-quenched devices fabricated with TMSO; (c) normalized efficiency at the max-power point of the gas-quenched devices with and without the additive of MACl (d) accelerated stability test of the gas-quenched devices heated in air without encapsulation at 60 °C and 45% to 50% RH (e) statistical data on I–V hysteresis of the fresh devices and the devices after the accelerated stability test (data collected from 24–30 cells under each condition).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Characterization of the films and devices and video of the gas-quenching process. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta08402j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
