“Turning the dials”: controlling synthesis, structure, composition, and surface chemistry to tailor silicon nanoparticle properties  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR04701A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR04701A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 16379-16404“Turning the dials”: controlling synthesis, structure, composition, and surface chemistry to tailor silicon nanoparticle properties

        
          
            Sarah 
            Milliken
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alyxandra N. 
            Thiessen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            I Teng 
            Cheong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kevin M. 
            O'Connor
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ziqi 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Riley W. 
            Hooper
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Christopher Jay T. 
            Robidillo
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jonathan G. C. 
            Veinot
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Chemistry, Edmonton, Canada. E-mail: jveinot@ualberta.ca
Received 
      19th July 2021
    , Accepted 24th August 2021First published on 24th August 2021AbstractSilicon nanoparticles (SiNPs) can be challenging to prepare with defined size, crystallinity, composition, and surface chemistry. As is the case for any nanomaterial, controlling these parameters is essential if SiNPs are to realize their full potential in areas such as alternative energy generation and storage, sensors, and medical imaging. Numerous teams have explored and established innovative synthesis methods, as well as surface functionalization protocols to control these factors. Furthermore, substantial effort has been expended to understand how the abovementioned parameters influence material properties. In the present review we provide a commentary highlighting the benefits and limitations of available methods for preparing silicon nanoparticles as well as demonstrations of tailoring optical and electronic properties through definition of structure (i.e., crystalline vs. amorphous), composition and surface chemistry. Finally, we highlight potential opportunities for future SiNP studies.
1. Introduction
In 1980, Brus et al. discovered quantum dots (QDs) or “small semiconductor crystallites” and found these materials exhibited size- and shape-dependent properties.1 Silicon is the semiconductor that provides the basis for the modern electronics that have revolutionized society; it is bioinert, abundant, and electrochemically stable.2,3 The unsurpassed precision with which the properties of silicon can be tailored and the associated processes used to incorporate it into devices are a tour-de-force of 20th Century creativity and ingenuity. In the context of Brus’ discovery and the ubiquitous presence of silicon in the electronics industry, it is no surprise that nano-scaled silicon became and continues to be the focus of extensive research efforts.
It is generally accepted that studies into nano-Si began with the discovery of porous silicon and its luminescent properties.4,5 Efforts to explore, define and exploit these new-found (and complex) optical properties have been extensive and the scope of nano-Si investigations now encompasses a variety of structures (e.g., “smart dust”,6,7 oxide-embedded nanocrystals,8,9 freestanding nanoparticles/QDs,10–14 nanowires,15,16etc.) as well as the impact of structure, surface chemistry, and composition. There are many similarities seen in the reactivity, as well as optical and electronic properties of these different manifestations of nano-Si and reviewing all aspects of the field is daunting. We direct readers to a series of reviews that complement this one to gain a broad understanding of the field.17–22 The present review focuses on advances specifically related to silicon nanoparticles (SiNPs). Herein, we outline recent advances in synthesis, defining internal structure and composition, as well as tailoring surface chemistry to tune and exploit SiNP optical and electronic properties; we will also provide context for future directions in research and development.
2. Preparing silicon nanoparticles
One must first have access to materials to fully appreciate their properties, hence it is useful to begin our discussion with SiNP synthesis. Several methods have been developed to produce SiNPs of tailored dimensions including, pyrolysis of silicon precursors,23–27 nonthermal plasma,28–31 laser ablation,32,33 as well as reduction of metal silicides34–37 and silicon halides.38–43 Each of these diverse (even divergent) procedures comes with associated benefits and challenges while providing varying degrees of control over parameters (e.g., structure/crystallinity, size, composition, surface chemistry) that impact SiNP properties; in fact, SiNPs often appear to exhibit synthetic method-dependant characteristics. To afford the reader with context of the challenges associated with SiNP preparation we begin with a brief historical perspective. Table 1 provides a summary of commonly reported literature procedures used to produce SiNPs that we have chosen to describe in this section.
Table 1 A summary of the methods used to prepare SiNPs and their associate properties




Method
PL rangea (nm)
Diameter (nm)
PL QYb (%)
Ref.





a PLmax reported in literature. Excitation wavelengths vary in the range of 300–560 nm as indicated in the listed references.
b Absolute PLQY calculated using excitation and emission peak areas.





Precursor thermal decomposition
530–1060
1–200
5–70

8–10, 44–46, 51–57, 60–69 and 75–79


Nonthermal plasma
690–920
2–10
0.5–70

14, 80–85 and 87


Laser ablation
400–750
2–100
10–70

90–94



Etching bulk Si
300–510
2–35
12–25

99 and 100


Solution reactions
320–460
1.5–10
10–25

13, 103, 109, 111–122




2.1 Thermally-induced decomposition of silicon-based precursors
One of the first successful synthesis routes for producing small quantities (i.e., <500 mg) of SiNPs reported by Brus and coworkers involved pyrolysis of disilane.44 This procedure afforded a narrow size distribution (i.e., d = 1–2 nm) of particles that showed photoluminescence maxima (PLmax) in the range of 600–750 nm and a relative photoluminescent quantum yield (PLQY) of 5.6%.45,46 This early work spawned several studies focused on silicon cluster growth.47–50 The Swihart group subsequently developed a high-throughput, scalable method (20–200 mg h−1) that employed a CO2 laser to induce gas-phase decomposition of a common industrial silicon precursor – silane (i.e., SiH4). The resulting product contained oxidized SiNPs with crystallite diameters in the 5–20 nm range as well as amorphous silicon-based materials. In light of the material complexity the authors suggested the polydispersity was too broad to report accurately. The as synthesized materials showed no detectable PL, however etching with a mixture of hydrofluoric (HF) and nitric (HNO3) acids reduced the crystalline size, and led to the appearance of PL. The etched products showed PLmax in the range of 420–855 nm with PLQY of ca. 1%.51 The Swihart group improved upon the PLQY realizing 2–10% for styrene grafted SiNPs and 10–20% for those bearing alkyl ligands.52–54
Looking to further improve upon production rates, Swihart and co-workers developed an independent microwave plasma methodology for thermolyzing silane that showcased one of the highest reported rates for generating SiNPs (i.e., 0.1–10 g h−1).10 As synthesized, SiNPs were ca. 13 nm in diameter with a 10.6% polydispersity and showed no PL, however, etching provided a photoluminescent material with a range of PLmax (i.e., 456–735 nm) that was tuneable by varying the etching time; unfortunately, PLQYs were not reported.10 One important challenge with these approaches is, silane gas can be unpredictable and presents a significant safety hazard. In this regard, Guruvenket et al. aimed to supplant silane by synthesizing SiNPs via gas-phase pyrolysis of cyclohexasilane. This approach afforded SiNPs 2 nm in diameter with a polydispersity of 10%. Introducing alkyl surface functionalization via hydrosilylation provided a PLmax range of 370–457 nm with PLQYs 9–13%.55
In efforts to reduce reliance on costly instrumentation and hazardous precursors, methods that employ solid-state precursors have also been investigated. Nearly four decades ago, researchers discovered nanoscale inclusions of crystalline silicon could be formed within silicon oxide matrices upon annealing of silicon-rich oxides (SRO; SiOx where x = 1.5) often derived from “silicon monoxide”.8,9 Under high-temperature heating phase segregation of Si and SiO2 occurs to yield oxide-embedded SiNPs that can be liberated via etching (Fig. 1a).56,57
 Fig. 1  (a) Synthesis of SiNPs from thermally-induced disproportionation of HSQ. (b–g) Bright-field transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of SiNPs prepared at the indicated temperatures using the procedure in (a). (h) Photoluminescence spectra of allylbenzene-passivated SiNPs showing a blue-shift with decreasing size. Adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2012, 12(1), 337–342. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (i) Normalized diffuse reflectance spectra of SiNP solutions and (j) scattering spectra data from SiNPs of 100–220 nm in diameter converted into CIE1931 colour space. Adapted with permission from Adv. Optical Mater., 2020, 8, 2000033. 
In 2006, Hessel et al. drew inspiration from these early SiOx studies and developed a versatile approach using a solution processible SRO polymer, hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ; (HSiO1.5)n). Others have followed this method using alternative insoluble sol–gel derived polymers as precursors.23,58,59 Heating HSQ induces disproportionation and provides oxide-embedded SiNPs in thin films, as well as bulk powders from which freestanding SiNPs are readily isolated.27 The SiNPs prepared in this way possessed dimensions in the range of from 3.3–8.7 nm that were defined by the thermal processing conditions (i.e., temperature, dwell time, etc.) as well as etching time. These particles show size dependant PLmax. As synthesized H-terminated particles have low PLQY of ca. 4%,60 however like SiNPs prepared using many other procedures presented here, hydrosilylation-based surface passivation provided improved PLQYs (up to ca. 70%) with an accompanied approximate four-fold increase in brightness.61–67 Furthermore, the dimensions of SiNPs prepared in this way could be tuned throughout the range of 1.1–90 nm with PLmax spanning 530–1060 nm (Fig. 1b).61–66,68
The Fujii group used a similar method to that reported by Hessel to grow SiNPs with diameters as large as 200 nm and polydispersities of ca. 6%. This was achieved by increasing the temperature range beyond the melting point of bulk Si (i.e., 1414 °C) but below that of bulk silica (i.e., 1710 °C).69 Although the resulting particles showed no PL, they exhibited Mie scattering with diffuse reflectance peak maxima spanning from 420 to 700 nm (Fig. 1c and d).69 Terada et al. also suggest the HSQ internal structure can also influence SiNP size and crystallinity and showed that decreasing the HSQ cross-linking density provided comparatively large SiNPs with red-shifted PL maxima (700–800 nm).23 The versatility of the HSQ method, has faciliated the synthesis of near-monodisperse SiNPs and superlattices,70 provided graded structure SiNPs (vide infra), SiNP-based LEDs,71,72 narrow bandwidth emission from SiNP/polymer hybrid optical cavities,73 and even a report claiming a SiNP-based prototype distributed feedback laser.74
Producing SiNPs from SRO thermal treatment comes with several advantages: the required infrastructure is straightforward and inexpensive, precursors are safe and readily manipulated, SiNPs are prepared as oxide-embedded (thin film and bulk) and freestanding forms with a broad range of SiNP sizes and PLmax are accessible,9,56,57,69,75–79 and particle surfaces are readily designed using solution-phase reactions.61–67 Despite these favourable aspects, no approach is perfect. For example, it is necessary to prepare/obtain a suitable precursor. HSQ is attractive because it can be manipulated under ambient conditions but must be prepared using literature methods or purchased from a commercial supplier.27 Other SROs (e.g., “SiOx”) are also attractive but their processability and tailorability are somewhat more limited. It is also necessary to address safety protocols associated with HF etching if freestanding SiNPs are the final target. Finally, the “batch” nature of the various stages of this approach and the low yield of freestanding SiNPs produced (ca. 10%) potentially limits the economically viable large-scale production.27
2.2 Nonthermal plasma precursor decomposition
An alternative aerosol-phase method for preparing SiNPs employs nonthermal plasma to controllably activate precursors. In these syntheses, a defined mixture of argon carrier gas and silicon precursor (e.g., SiH4 or SiCl4) is passed through a nonthermal plasma that imparts energy to induce precursor decomposition and nanocrystal formation.30,31 Pioneering nonthermal plasma synthesis work of the Kortshagen group provides SiNPs with diameters in the range of 2–8 nm with polydispersities of 12–17% that show tuneable PLmax throughout the 700–900 nm range.80 Consistent with other thermal decomposition methods, functionalization improves PLQY substantially (as high as 60%).81,82 Pringle et al. improved upon the PLQY even further by using the liquid precursor, cyclohexasilane, which has the added benefit of being a significantly safer alternative to silane gas.83 The researchers then employed density-gradient ultracentrifugation to effectively size-separate alkene-passivated SiNPs and produce PLQYs approaching 70% for PLmax in the range of 700–1000 nm.83 Recently, Li and Kortshagen expanded upon their method and reported a scalable, high-production rate (10 mg h−1) aerosol-phase synthesis method for alkene functionalized SiNPs that exhibit 20% PLQY (Fig. 2a and b).84 This latest advance presents an attractive option for rapid mass production of SiNPs, however, unlike materials produced using other methods such as thermolysis, the surface functionalization has only a minor effect on PLQY, making the resulting materials potentially less desirable for applications that require high PLQY.
 Fig. 2  (a) Nonthermal plasma synthesis/functionalization of SiNPs. (b) Bright-field TEM images of SiNPs produced using non-thermal plasma processing. Reprinted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(20), 8451–8458. Copyright 2019 American Chemistry Society. 
Generally, nonthermal plasma preparation of SiNPs brings with it several very attractive attributes. Of particular note, it can provide materials with similar polydispersity and PLmax range to those prepared using thermolysis, but at comparatively high production rates (20–52 mg h−1).14,85 Other appealing aspects are: the synthesis occurs entirely in the gas phase and solution-phase processing (i.e., etching, functionalization, etc.) required and the process is amenable with “flow through” preparation and scaling. Still, challenges remain. At present, the accessible NP size range is limited because particles become negatively charged and growth is arrested; this characteristic is both a benefit, because size focusing can be achieve, and a limitation, when larger particles are targeted.30,86 Additionally, high PLQYs (i.e., 70%) have only been realized for SiNPs >4 nm, and PLQY decreases markedly for smaller sizes.87 Finally, while alternative precursors have been explored, the general procedure employs hazardous precursors (e.g., SiH4) whose behaviour is often unpredictable.83,88,89
2.3 Laser ablation and etching of bulk silicon
Broadly, top-down methods involve breaking bulk crystalline Si into smaller pieces with nanoscale dimensions. These methods are generally characterized by less well-defined (i.e., shape/size) products, however, benefit from straightforward infrastructure and scalability. Laser ablation sees bulk Si wafers broken into SiNP fragments using a high-power density light source (Fig. 3a). Švrček et al. prepared polydisperse (d = 2–100 nm) blue-emitting (PLmax ∼ 400–430 nm) SiNPs using laser ablation in deionized water.90 Irradiating the SiNPs in an appropriate organic solvent passivates the particle surfaces with alkyl groups and provides PLQYs of 10–20%.91–93 More recently, Yuan et al. showed irradiation of crystalline Si followed by exposure to pulsed UV light in HF-containing organic solvents produced SiNPs showing PLQY of 50–70% and PLmax = 750 nm. The particle size ranged from ca. 3.1–5.5 nm and possessed a bimodal distribution; when HF was introduced the size was reduced to 2.9 nm with reported improved polydispersity, however it was not quantified (Fig. 3b).94
 Fig. 3  (a) Representative top-down approaches for the synthesis of SiNPs by liquid-phase laser ablation. Reprinted with permission from B. Ghosh and N. Shirahata, Science and Technology of Advanced Materials, 2014, 15(1), 014207. (b) Laser ablation by pulsed-UV-laser irradiation in a liquid medium with and without HF. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(15), 8623–8629. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Preparation of SiNPs from porous Si produced by electrochemical etching. Adapted with permission from Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54(22), 5982–5989. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Another popular top-down method draws on the original porous silicon preparations and involves electrochemical etching of Si wafers; this approach is well-established for producing mesoporous SiNPs and has been expanded to provide SiNPs.95–98 Hwang et al. formed SiNPs by sonicating electrochemically prepared mesoporous and nanoporous silicon (Fig. 3c).99 To improve the size distribution, remove surface oxide and introduce Si–H surface reactivity, the particles were exposed to an HF/HNO3 acid mixture. Following functionalization, using thermal- or photo-induced hydrosilylation small quantities of product (i.e., 0.3 mg NCs per cm2 of wafer) comprised of SiNPs with an average diameter of 2.7 nm were obtained that showed a blue PLmax (i.e., 410 nm) with a QY of 20%.99 In another study, Liao et al. developed a straightforward one-pot hydrothermal etching procedure that provided particles of 2–3 nm diameter and qualitatively appeared to exhibit low polydispersity. The relative PLQY for these SiNPs was ca. 12% for PLmax in the range of 300–480 nm.100
Upon first inspection, top-down methods appear very appealing because they employ readily available, safely handled, high purity starting materials (i.e., Si wafers), and offer straightforward, rapid, and cost-effective approaches that may be amenable with mass-production. Unfortunately, many procedures employ HF etching, provide very small material quantities, and products suffer from large size dispersion and low PLQYs. These factors make them the least-desirable option of those presented here for applications requiring near monodisperse SiNPs that exhibit high luminescence efficiencies; however, this general approach has proven useful in preparing other silicon nanostructures.6,101,102
2.4 Solution-reduction
Given the versatility and prevalence of solution-phase nanomaterial synthesis, it is not surprising that many “wet-chemical” synthesis methods for producing SiNPs have been reported and some of these approaches even come with substantial controversy.103–108 A common and well-established method for synthesizing SiNPs in solution involves the reaction of silicon halides (e.g., SiX4; X = Cl, Br, I) with a strong reducing agent in the presence of a “capping agent”. The liquid/solution phase strategy was originally inspired by work by Heath who used sodium dispersion to simultaneously reduce SiCl4 and octyltrichlorosilane at high temperatures (385 °C) and pressures (>100 atm) to produce large polydisperse SiNPs (d = 5–3000 nm).109 Wilcoxon et al. subsequently reduced silicon halides at room temperature and atmospheric pressure by reacting LiAlH4 with SiCl4 to produce SiNPs in the presence of tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB).103 The SiNPs produced ranged from 2–10 nm in diameter and exhibited PLmax emissions of 350–700 nm, however, the polydispersity of the SiNPs was not mentioned. Unfortunately, the reaction as presented comes with the added hazard of producing significant quantities of pyrophoric SiH4 (incorrectly identified as hydrogen in the original report) as a side product.108,110 As such, using hydride-based reducing agents in comparatively high concentrations is ill-advised for the preparation of SiNPs.
Still, important, and impressive advances using solution-phase reactions employing hydride-based reducing agents have been achieved. The Tilley group improved upon the size distribution and the colloidal stability of the particles reported by Wilcoxon by employing a 1-heptene capping agent that was introduced via Pt-catalysed hydrosilylation. This procedure provided 1.8 nm diameter SiNPs showing a 11% size polydispersity and PLmax of 290 nm.111 As is the case for the products of other syntheses, surface passivation with organic ligands can provide fluorescent SiNPs with improved quantum yield, and defining the strength of the reducing agent can offer some control over the NP size.112 Tilley et al. also showed that particle size could be changed from 1.6 to 2.5 nm using LiAlH4 and NaBH4, with resulting PLmax of 347 and 352, respectively.113 Rosso-Vasic et al. went on to demonstrate this reaction could be scaled to produce 100s of mg quantities.114
To circumvent the obvious challenges/hazards associated with hydride-based reductants while embracing the potential benefits of solution-based syntheses, the Kauzlarich group turned to sodium naphthalide and prepared colloidally stable, 5.2 nm (36% polydispersity) diameter particles from SiCl4 in glyme that were surface capped with 1-octanol; the resulting SiNPs showed PL in the range of 410–430 nm, however no PLQY data was provided.115 It was later demonstrated by these researchers that the same general approach could offer some degree of size control by varying the ratio of starting materials. Particle sizes ranged from 3 to 9 nm with polydispersities of 15–25% and a range of PLmax from 375–425 nm with PLQYs of ca. 12%.13
Even more “gentle” reducing agents (e.g., trisodium citrate) used in solution-phase syntheses of non-silicon nanoparticles have been reported to reduce silicon alkoxide precursors (e.g., 3-aminopropyl trimethoxysilane). Unfortunately, the data provided in these contributions is inconclusive105,116 and independent investigations found the luminescent material reported to be SiNPs could be realized even in the absence of any silicon source bringing the identity of the products of these reactions into question.117
A unique solution-based strategy for preparing SiNPs involves the reaction of metal silicides (M = Mg, K, or Na) or so-called Zintl phases a variety of reagents (Fig. 4). The first report saw the Yang et al. react SiCl4 with Mg2Si in refluxing glyme followed by functionalization using Grignard reagents to provide alkyl-terminated SiNPs with in the size regime of 2–5 nm.118 Subsequently, Pettigrew et al. reported the preparation of SiNPs upon reaction of magnesium silicide (i.e., Mg2Si) with bromine, followed by functionalization with n-butyl lithium. The apparent 4.5 nm diameter particles showed blue (340–390 nm) PL arising from a short-lived excited state.119 Highlighting the challenges associated SiNP syntheses, Wilbrink et al. performed the identical reaction without including the Mg2Si silicon source and observed similar TEM and PL characteristics.119 Clearly, the approach to preparing SiNPs is complex and should be revisited to elucidate the mechanism and identity of the products. The Kauzlarich group also developed procedures to prepare Mn- and Fe-doped SiNPs upon reaction of doped Zintl phases (i.e., Na4Si4) and NH4Br which were coated with allylamine and dextran that could be used for multimodal (i.e., magnetic resonance and luminescence) biological imaging. Particles prepared using this approach showed diameter of 3–4 nm with a polydispersity of 23–37% as well as a broad PL ranging peaking at 441 nm, yielding PLQY from 1–18%.120–122
 Fig. 4  Common solution-based methods for preparing SiNPs. 
Preparing SiNPs via solution-phase reduction of silicon halides, as well as reactions of metal silicides comes with common challenges (Fig. 4). Currently these approaches provide very small material quantities and can require specialized precursors (e.g., metal silicides). In addition, products often contain unidentified impurities that may, or may not, be nitrogen-based that lead SiNPs that exhibit excitation wavelength dependent blue PLmax that arise from a short-lived excited state that resembles the F-band emission of other silicon nanomaterials.123 While these factors do not preclude using these NPs in a variety of specialized applications, they are not well-suited for those that require tuning throughout the visible spectrum.
3. The influence of nanocrystal structure
It is no surprise that nanomaterial structure dictates material properties;17,124,125 this is well illustrated by the observation that the PLmax of core@shell SiNPs bearing a shell of graded composition/structure differs from that of NPs bearing an epitaxially grown shell.126 In this section, SiNP properties are considered in the context of their structure – the nanoparticle core (i.e., composition, degree of crystallinity) as well as the surface groups attached to it (Fig. 5). The size and crystallinity of, as well as structural strain within the SiNP core, can be controlled by defining the synthesis method/parameters (e.g., plasma power during synthesis, etching protocols during liberation, temperature, etc.)127–130 as well as applying external pressure through a diamond anvil.131 The nature of surface groups is defined by their molecular structure, as well as the method used to tether them to the particle. Oxidation can also influence SiNP surface and core structures and hence plays a crucial role in material properties.
 Fig. 5  An illustration of the structural components that make up SiNPs and the parameters that can be altered to define properties. 
3.1 The influence of silicon nanoparticle core structure
As is the case for all QDs, the physical dimensions of the semiconductor core influence the optoelectronic response (i.e., PL); tailoring this aspect of SiNPs can be achieved by defining the synthesis conditions60,80,132 as well as through post-synthesis modification.27,52,133,134 When preparing SiNPs from SROs like SiOx or HSQ, particle size is defined by peak processing/annealing temperature, particle shape is tied to the heating profile, and crystallinity is impacted by post-synthesis etching.25,60,132,135 Similarly, plasma syntheses offer considerable control over SiNP morphology and structure; size is defined by controlling precursor concentration and plasma residence time, while crystallinity is dictated by the power applied.80,136,137
To date, much of the work related to evaluating SiNP structure has focused on size-property relationship; however, some reports have also examined the roles of size uniformity and internal structure. In 2013, pair distribution function (PDF) analysis was used to interrogate Si–Si–Si bond angles and structural coherence within SiNPs; this study showed the internal structure of small particles was disordered and, as the particle sizes increased, the Si atoms became increasingly ordered, as evidenced by more consistent Si–Si–Si bond angles and a Si–Si coordination number closer to 4.138 Raman spectra combined with structural modelling of plasma synthesized SiNPs revealed a thin (two monolayer) amorphous shell on the outer surface.136 Together, these studies point to complexities of the SiNP structure that were recently evaluated for HSQ-derived SiNPs using 29Si Solid State NMR (Fig. 6).128 This investigation showed these SiNPs consist of a radially graded core structure, with a relatively well-ordered core, semi-ordered subsurface, and disordered surface.128 While the structure was generally consistent across sizes (Fig. 6c), only very small (i.e., ca. 1.2 nm) ordered domains were observed in the smallest SiNPs (i.e., d = 3 nm).128 This picture of SiNP structure will be invoked in the following discussion regarding the influence of SiNP structure on PL response.
 Fig. 6  (a) A 29Si[1H] HETCOR MAS NMR spectrum of 64 nm H-SiNPs. (b) An overlay of 29Si MAS NMR and 29Si[1H] CP MAS NMR of 64 nm H-SiNPs for the indicated mixing times. Arrows in the top spectrum highlight subsurface NMR features in the direct 29Si MAS NMR. (c) A representation of the layered H-SiNP structure consisting of an amorphous surface, semi-ordered subsurface, and crystalline core. Adapted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(3), 678–688. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Impact of structure on optical response
SiNPs often are categorized broadly into two groups: those that exhibit size-dependent PL response and long (i.e., microsecond) excited state lifetimes (so-called S-band emitters) and those that show largely size-independent PL and short (i.e., nanosecond) excited state lifetimes (so-called F-band emitters).139 As is typical for QDs, the size-dependent emission is often attributed to carrier quantum confinement.64,65,139,140 Despite a general trend, the relationship between size and PLmax is often not as “clear cut” as for prototypical Cd-based QDs.140 It has been propose that this apparent material difference is related, in part, to size-dependent quantum yields that shift in the PLmax as a function of the SiNP size distribution.65
Despite the established complexities SiNP structure noted above, these materials are still typically considered crystalline or amorphous – this is an important distinction because bulk amorphous and bulk crystalline Si exhibit different band structures.141,142 In crystalline Si atoms are tetrahedrally coordinated and there is long range order. In the amorphous-phase, some atoms are not four-fold coordinated and this disorder leads to defects. Crystalline Si is an indirect bandgap semiconductor with Eg = 1.12 eV; amorphous Si is a direct band gap semiconductor with Eg = 1.75 eV.143 While quantum confinement of carriers occurs in crystalline and amorphous SiNPs,144 disordered (i.e., amorphous) systems typically show larger band gaps and smaller Stokes shifts than their ordered (i.e., crystalline) counterparts.145 Anthony et al. demonstrated PLQYs are impacted by the SiNP core structure – PLQYs are considerably lower for amorphous SiNPs (prepared using low input power plasma) than crystalline systems (prepared using high input power plasma) (Fig. 7a and b).137
 Fig. 7  (a) The relationship between SiNP PLQY and input power used during plasma synthesis. (b) A comparison of the PL spectra of crystalline (red) and amorphous (blue) plasma synthesis prepared SiNPs. (c) The relationship between amorphous SiNP diameter and bandgap. Images (a) and (b) reprinted with permission from R. Anthony and U. Kortshagen, Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 80, 11540, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.80.115407. Copyright 2009 by the American Physical Society. Image (c) reprinted from Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 8011–8016. Licensed under CC BY. 
Amorphous SiNPs are attractive because hydrogenation alters their core composition, bandgap, and PL response (Fig. 7c).146 Askari et al. demonstrated particle size dependent hydrogenation and that increased hydrogenation caused bandgap widening.146 The authors did not report the relationship between degree of hydrogenation and PLQY; clearly, this would be an interesting topic for future study, as it has long been proposed that hydrogenation increases SRO PL efficiency and could lead to further tuning of optical response.147,148 Like hydrogenation, crystal phase impacts the bandgap of bulk silicon and could, in principle, define SiNP PL. In addition, bulk Si allotropes that exhibit direct bandgaps in the range of 0.39–1.25 eV have been proposed – these energies are in stark contrast to the indirect bandgap (1.12 eV) of the ubiquitous diamond-cubic Si that typically comprises SiNPs.149,150 Unfortunately, it is currently not possible to access these Si phases using traditional preparation methods, hence studying their impact on SiNP properties (e.g., PLmax, PLQY, etc.) requires a different approach. An indirect and qualitative evaluation of the impact of crystal structure can be performed by monitoring pressure dependence of SiNP PL as reported by Hannah et al. who noted the PLmax red-shifted and the PLFWHM broadened with increased pressure.151 Despite identifying a number of crystal phases within the SiNP samples, the PL of these phases were not reported presumably because of the complexities of obtaining phase pure systems. In another independent investigation, tensile strain induced a blue-shift in the PLmax that arises from a strain-induced direct bandgap.152 Interestingly, the authors found the impact of tensile strain could be reversed with applied pressure.
The structural uniformity of the SiNP core and its impact on PLmax are also intriguing. Many of the aforementioned studies assume uniform internal SiNP structure – this is not necessarily accurate.153,154 In absence of conclusive evidence, one study examining the PL from plasma-synthesized SiNPs suggested an amorphous layer encapsulating the crystalline core could give rise to a high energy fast-PL band (i.e., F-band).136 It is not clear whether these conclusions could be readily invoked to explain the optical properties of SiNPs prepared using other methods.153,154 Petkov et al. also reported a correlation between SiNP structure and PL response; in the context of the complex nature of the materials it was broadly attributed to carrier confinement, under-coordinated surface atoms, and local structural variabilities.138 To gain insight into the structural uniformity of the SiNP core and its influence on PL response, we evaluated SiNP optical properties as a function of crystallite size (determined using X-ray diffraction) and particle diameter (determined using electron microscopy).127 SiNPs comprised of larger crystallites showed longer-lived, lower energy PL and the effective mass approximation (EMA) provided reasonable predictions of the SiNP PL when using the crystallite size (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Schematic representations of SiNPs with (a) a significant difference between the overall particle diameter and crystallite size and (b) a similar overall particle diameter and crystallite size. The photoluminescence emission maxima of the two types of SiNPs was plotted as a function of overall particle size (dTEM) and crystalline domain size (dXRD). Adapted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2020, 32(16), 6838–6846. Copyright 2020 of the American Chemical Society. 
The combination of the established low PLQYs noted for amorphous SiNPs,137 a graded internal structure of SiNPs prepared via thermally processing (e.g., annealing) of SROs, and the etchant-based surface functionalization methods in which reagents remove the outer SiNP surface provide impressive PLQYs provide insight into how careful consideration of structural features that could improve SiNP optical response.127,128,155,156 In fact, surface functionalization was achieved upon exposure of hydrogenated SiNPs to PCl566 or XeF2155 in the presence of terminal alkenes. These reagents etch bulk silicon surfaces and remove/minimize surface defects on the SiNP surfaces while providing reactive sites for tethering alkyl surface groups.157–159 The resulting materials showed impressive PLQYs of up to 62 and 68%, respectively.66,155
4. Doping SiNPs
Incorporating low concentrations (e.g., 1013–1018 atoms cm−3) of impurities (i.e., dopants) has provided exquisite tailoring of bulk silicon electronic characteristics.160 Suffice it to say, it is common knowledge that introducing dopants such as phosphorus (P) or boron (B) can provide desired conductivity (Fig. 9) and has facilitated the fabrication of fundamental devices such as diodes and transistors.161,162 This doping is readily achieved in bulk materials with exceptional precision. It is also important to recall that doping does not always come with positive outcomes, some impurities (e.g., Au) induce “deep defects” that compromise favourable electronic characteristics.163 Given the benefits afforded by doping in bulk silicon, it is of no surprise that it has been explored as method for tailoring material properties at the nanoscale.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of (a) p-type and (b) n-type doped silicon. In p-type doping with B used as an example, when substituted into the Si lattice it generates a free hole, resulting in an acceptor energy level near the valence band. In n-type doping with P is used as an example, when substituted into the Si lattice it generates a free electron, resulting in a donor energy level near the conductance band. 
As is the case for bulk Si, nanoscale doping must be done with the greatest possible precision if properties are to be predictably controlled. The key material parameters at play when doping NPs have been summarized elsewhere and include dopant location, synthesis method employed and characterization of the resulting materials.22 Clearly, establishing methods that allow definition of these characteristics is paramount to understanding, defining, and exploiting the resultant material properties. However, it is important to recall that regardless of how the NP is prepared, physical dimensions play a role in defining the dopant location. For example, doped SiNPs that are strongly confined (i.e., d < 6 nm) experience “self-purification” that arises because stress within the crystalline NP core induced by substitutional dopants causes dopants to migrate to the surface.164–166 Clearly, doping nanoparticles is a challenging and important.
There are some reports describing doping of SiNPs with various species (e.g., B, P, Sb) that are embedded in a matrix (e.g., oxides, oxynitrides, etc.).145,167,168 These important and foundational contributions point to the potential that doping holds however, material complexities require use of indirect evaluation (e.g., nuclear magnetic resonance, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy) of dopant species, concentration, and location. While doping freestanding SiNPs comes with some of the same challenges (e.g., accurate determination of dopant concentration, locating low Z elements, material uniformity, etc.) in many cases characterization of these systems can be more definitive and property correlation more straightforward; hence, we have chosen to limit this discussion to doped freestanding SiNPs.
Traditional dopants employed in bulk Si (e.g., P, B), as well as others (e.g., Sb) have been introduced to SiNPs using plasma,169–172 chemical vapor deposition (CVD),173 solution,121,174 laser pyrolysis,175 thermal decomposition,176 electrochemical etching177 and co-sputtering methods.178–180 In 2013, Borowik et al. prepared P-doped SiNPs on the surface of n-type silicon substrates using plasma-enhanced CVD with silane and phosphine precursors.173 These supported SiNPs were formed in the size regime of 2–50 nm and volumetric doping concentrations (ND) of 1020–1021 cm−3 were assumed based upon precursor ratios. Only limited characterization (i.e., SEM, electrical measurements) was provided it is not possible to comment on the influence of dopant location, crystallinity, hydrogenation, etc. Still, the authors provide a glimpse of the importance of dopant concentration. They found the depletion layer width within the resulting nanocrystal junction that existed between the particle and the underlying substrate varied with SiNP dopant concentration and that the depletion charge increased linearly with NP size.
Almeida et al. employed co-sputtering of Si, SiO2, and P2O5 to fabricate silicon-rich phosphosilicate glass thin films that they annealed to obtain oxide-embedded P-doped SiNPs; freestanding H-terminated SiNPs (d = 5.0 ± 1.2 nm) doped with P (0.4 at%) were liberated using HF etching.180 Electron pair resonance (EPR) analysis of the oxide-embedded and freestanding particles is core to this study. Using fingerprinting methods, the authors concluded P atoms resided in substitutional sites. They also related the magnitude of the hyperfine splitting in the EPR spectra to the NP size. Additionally, they demonstrated the environment/surface of the NP (e.g., oxide-embedded, freestanding in air, freestanding in argon) impacts the doping efficiency and proposed surface water and oxygen molecules could adhere (reversibly) to the NP surface and provide states that trap electrons supplied by the P donors.164–166
Reaching beyond the tuning electronic properties, doping SiNPs provides unique opportunities in tailoring optical response that can benefit advanced photovoltaic devices and plasmonic materials. Computational data suggests doping can offer fine tuning of optical properties to facilitate optimized absorption of the solar spectrum;164 doping SiNPs also raises the possibility for all-silicon tandem solar cells that require p- and n-type SiNPs.143,160,177,181–183 For applications involving the formation of a p/n junctions and conductivity, doping concentration and surface chemistry play important roles. The Mariotti group showed that upon controlled oxidation of p- and n-type SiNPs synthesized by electrochemical etching of doped wafers, dramatic changes in the bandgap and Fermi level were observed.184 For oxidized p-type SiNPs, improvement in fill factor and efficiency were observed for test devices, while oxidized n-type SiNPs showed little improvement to fill factor and a marked decrease in efficiency. The same research group discovered that electronic structure of doped SiNPs and perovskite MAPbI3 films ideally aligned to form a Type-I heterojunction, showed dramatic increase in short circuit current density, power conversion efficiencies, and slowed the chemical decomposition of perovskite.177
Doping of SiNPs also comes with unique properties not accessible using the bulk material. Using non-thermal plasma methods, Rowe et al. examined how incorporating dopants at concentrations exceeding the bulk solid solubility limit influenced material properties.171 These so-called hyperdoped particles can exhibit localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) that arises from the collective oscillation of free charge carriers in response to exposure to an external electromagnetic field (Fig. 10a). This phenomenon is most commonly associated with noble metals (e.g., gold), and offers the opportunity to overcome the diffraction limit of standard optical fibres concentrating light into exceptionally small areas.185 Unlike noble metals whose plasmonic response is typically tuned by defining particle size and shape, LSPR of doped QDs can be tuned by controlling dopant distribution and carrier concentration.171,186,187 The usefulness of these materials was demonstrated by Ni et al. who incorporated plasmonic B-doped SiNPs into graphene-based hybrid phototransistors and achieved high-sensitivity ultrabroadband photodetection. The hybridized graphene-SiNP structure allowed absorption of light in the UV-NIR region while the B-doped SiNP LSPR extended the detection range to the MIR (Fig. 10b).188
 Fig. 10  (a) Representation of charge carriers oscillating in an electromagnetic field producing LSPR (b) Schematic diagram of the structure of the hybrid phototransistor based on B-doped Si QDs and graphene. Adapted with permission from ACS Nano, 2017, 11(10), 9854–9862. Copyright 2017 American Chemistry Society. 
Zhou et al. extended the scope of plasmonic SiNPs and demonstrated that n- and p-type doping of SiNPs could provide LSPR response using 13 nm diameter SiNPs containing P (4–18 atomic % dopant) and B (7–31 atomic % dopant). Interestingly, the authors indicate that full surface oxidation of both types of NPs was necessary to realize an LSPR response and suggested oxidation lowered the surface defect concentration.169 In a subsequent study, Kramer et al. noted B-doped SiNPs required oxidation to realize LSPR, however, for P-doped SiNPs oxidation was not necessary. This difference in behaviour was attributed to dopant location; P atoms within the SiNPs resided primarily in substitutional sites while B atoms were primarily in surface locations.170 This proposal was further supported by an independent study by Ni et al.172 Recently, Rohani et al. used a laser ablation to produce SiNPs hyperdoped with B. This kinetically controlled synthesis method provided high concentrations of B atoms in substitutional sites and as such, these QDs showed LSPR in their native (i.e., non-oxidized) state.175 This series of reports involving hyperdoped SiNPs prepared using different methods points to the complexities of these systems and the importance of controlling dopant location.
It is not surprising that, in addition to impacting SiNP electronic and plasmonic properties, dopants can also strongly influence the material optical properties, and that the optical response is closely related to identity of the dopant(s) as well as their position and concentration within the particles. Dopant-induced quenching of SiNP PL and/or reduction of PLQY is well established and many studies have aimed to eliminate dopants/impurities to improve PL performance.189–193 In some cases, dopant atoms can lead to non-radiative processes such as Auger recombination;192 Strain induced defects arising from differences in the sizes of host silicon and dopant atoms have also been implicated and may act as non-radiative recombination centres.192,194,195 Interstitial defects can also to lead to a loss of PL.192,194,195 While this may paint a picture that dopants compromise SiNP PL, this is not always the case and typically occurs at comparatively high concentrations (i.e., >3 at%).196–198 Interestingly, there are reports indicating that introducing low concentrations (<1 atomic %) of B or P atoms leads to increased PLQY while the excited state lifetimes remained in the microsecond region.22,196–199 These observations are consistent with dopants passivating dangling bonds on the SiNP surfaces and suppressing the associated non-radiative recombination pathway.165,200–203 Somewhat surprisingly, even hyperdoped SiNPs can exhibit PL as demonstrated by Limpens and Neale for P-doped SiNPs.194 The explanation provided by the authors is, for very small SiNPs (d < 6 nm) the large binding energy of dopant-induced carriers in highly confined systems leads to negligible rates of Auger recombination leading to the appearance of PL. In the same study, the authors note that larger SiNPs (i.e., d > 6 nm) show dramatically reduced PL response; the authors suggest the weak luminescence arises from a small subset (i.e., impurity) of non-doped SiNPs.193,194 Together, these examples highlight the importance of complications associated with controlling dopant concentration and doping uniformity and underscores the importance of careful and thoughtful material characterization and evaluation.
To this point in our doping discussion, we have focused on SiNPs doped with a single species. Co-doping also offers intriguing possibilities and addresses some of the perceived challenges associated with PL quenching.204 Co-doped SiNPs are typically prepared with approximately equal concentrations of B and P in each particle. The resulting charge compensation makes it possible to realize substantially higher dopant concentrations than when single dopant species are used and this same charge compensation leads to a significant reduction in the free carriers leading to a reduction in Auger recombination rates to values that approach that of intrinsic Si.192 The Fujii group used co-sputtering to prepare B and P co-doped SiNPs (d = 1–14 nm) that show size dependent PL (670–1350 nm).205 The PL emission of the co-doped particles were red-shifted as compared to intrinsic silicon. It was observed that the PLQY increased from 1–13% for diameters of 1–2.8 nm, then decreases dramatically with increasing diameter. The authors attributed this to an increase in the fraction of “not-perfectly compensated” NCs in which Auger recombination becomes the dominant emission pathway.205 In a subsequent study they define a critical size for carrier delocalization: co-doped SiNPs smaller than 6 nm in diameter show negligible Auger recombination due to localization of the dopant-induced electrons and SiNPs with diameters larger than 6 nm, activation energies are such that dopants induce majority free-carriers leading to altered photophysics and quenched PL.193
Realizing near-infrared (NIR) PL is particularly desirable for luminescence-based bioimaging because interference from auto-fluorescence background can be significantly reduced.206 Nanoscale Si is particularly attractive due to its low toxicity, long-lived excited states that can provide time gated imaging and co-doping now provides access to the NIR spectral region.207–209 Fujii et al. demonstrated solvent-induced self-assembly of B/P co-doped SiNPs followed by silica encapsulation that provided supramolecular particles showing PLmax in the red-to-NIR (790 nm) with a relative PLQY of 2.3% and the silica coating presents the opportunity to functionalize the assembly surfaces with a variety of molecules that could facilitate targeted imaging.178 The authors observed a decrease in PL lifetime, which they attributed to an energy-transfer between the agglomerated SiNPs, where excitons could recombine nonradiatively in “dark” SiNPs. In a complementary study, Limpens et al. produced P and B co-doped SiNPs (d = 2.9–7.3 nm) using non-thermal plasma. Particles larger than 4 nm prepared in this way showed NIR emission and PLQYs similar to the assemblies prepared using the co-sputtering method (∼12%).210
Moving beyond B and P dopants, Chandra et al. incorporated transition metal dopants (i.e., Co, Mn, and Ni) into oleophilic SiNPs using thermal disproportional of a hydrosilicate gel preloaded with metal ions. The resulting octadecyl-capped SiNPs exhibited diameters of 3–8 nm and contained sub-0.2 atomic % dopant based upon ICP-OES analysis. The particles grown at 1100 C exhibited only minor red-shifts in PLmax upon incorporation of the transition metals as compared to intrinsic SiNPs (Mn = 985 nm, Ni = 992 nm and Co = 1000 nm corresponding to shifts of 67, 74 and 82 nm), however a significant red-shift was seen in particles grown at 900 C (Mn = 984 nm and Co = 928 nm corresponding to a shift of 278 and 222 nm). The PLQY for the Co-doped system approached 26%, however the PLQY of the Mn and Ni doped systems were only 8 and 5%, respectively, the authors attributed the decrease in PLQYs to nonradiative pathways induced by the doping energy levels.176 McVey et al. also explored incorporating transition metal doping and introduced Cu into SiNPs using a solution-based method in which Si and Cu precursors were co-reduced using hydride-based reagents in the presence of amine surfactants. The resulting particles were 2.5 nm in diameter with an estimated average of 2–6 dopant atoms per SiNP based upon ICP-MS analyses. The resulting materials showed PLmax that varied with dopant concentration (438, 451 and 479 nm for dopant concentrations of 2, 4 and 6 dopants per NP) and exhibited a red-shift compared to undoped equivalents (PLmax = 418 nm) and the PLQY approached 22%.211 It should be noted that dopant concentration in both studies were determined by bulk elemental analysis methods (ICP-OES and ICP-MS respectively) which cannot directly confirm if the dopants are incorporated into the NCs.
5. Controlling particle surface chemistry
Prototypical tuning of quantum dot PL is achieved by defining the nanoparticle size (i.e., quantum confinement). This is also possible for SiNPs,212 however, the origin of SiNP PL is complex and surfaces matter. As-synthesized SiNPs are often terminated with hydride (i.e., Si–H), halogen (i.e., Si–X; X = Cl or Br), and/or oxygen containing species (e.g., Si–OH, Si–O–Si, etc.). The established reactivities of these functional groups mean SiNPs are susceptible to oxidation; furthermore, they are not readily compatible with common solvents.132 As such, surface SiNP modification has been widely explored and methods linking surface groups through Si–C,155,213–217 Si–X,218–220 Si–N,221 Si–O,222–224 Si–S,11 and more recently Si–Ge225 have been reported. Comprehensive reviews of SiNPs surface functionalization have appeared elsewhere;12,132,226 the present discussion focuses on recent advances specifically related to tuning SiNP optical and electronic properties through the direct tailoring of surface species.
5.1 Tuning PL emission maximum
In 2014 Dasog et al. reported SiNP surface-chemistry dependent PL spanning the visible spectrum.68 Alkyl-terminated SiNPs (d = 3–4 nm) prepared via hydrosilylation reactions under inert atmosphere exhibited a PLmax at 730 nm (red appearance). This emission arose from a long-lived (μs) excited state consistent with reports of so-called slow-band (S-band) emission and was attributed to a bandgap transition; this luminescence also did not fade upon prolonged excitation. Equivalent alkyl-functionalized SiNPs prepared in air were partially surface oxidized and a PLmax at 630 nm (orange appearance) with a low energy shoulder at 710 nm. This PL emanated from short-lived excited-states (ns) consistent so-called fast-band (F-band) emission, did not fade with prolonged constant excitation, and was attributed to unidentified surface states.
In the same study, identical H-SiNPs were functionalized using other protocols to tune the PLmax (Fig. 11a). Exposure to trioctylphosphine provided trioctylphosphine oxide capped, oxidized SiNPs with a PLmax = 590 nm (yellow appearance) and an excited-state lifetime with nano and microsecond components. Reactions with CO2 yielded blue/green emitting acetal-terminated SiNPs, while N-bonded dodecylamine-SiNPs provide blue PL. In both cases these materials showed excitation wavelength dependant PLmax attributed to complex surface chemistry and emission from short-lived excited states. Finally, reaction with diphenylamine provided green-emitting particles PLmax = 305 nm, however rapid loss of PL intensity upon excitation precluded acquisition of lifetime data. In all cases the exact emitting species was not identified, however, the authors reasonably attributed long-lived excited states (i.e., S-band) and short-lived excited states (i.e., F-band) to band gap and surface state transitions, respectively. It is also interesting, that in all cases involving surface states alone PL intensity decreased with prolonged excitation while emission from bandgap transitions did not.
 Fig. 11  (a) Tuning photoluminescence by functionalizing H-SiNPs with alkyl, carbon dioxide, alkylamines, and alkylphosphine oxide. (b) Representation of halogenation and alkylation of H-SiNPs and (c) PL spectra of alkylated SiNPs bearing Cl, I, and Br surface species. Adapted with permission from Ange. Chemie, 2015, 55(7), 2016 and Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(4), 1153–1156. Licensned under CC BY and copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
In 2015 Dasog et al. subsequently showed trace halide (i.e., Br, I, Cl) content impacts SiNP PL inducing red, yellow/orange, and blue emission, respectively (Fig. 11b and c).218 Again, red-emitting SiNPs showed S-band type behaviour while yellow/orange-, and blue-emitting SiNPs showed short-lived excited states that were attributed to surface species. These observations highlight the important role of surfaces in SiNP PL.218 Interestingly, Matsumoto et al. followed Dasog's investigations and showed that the PL of weakly emitting organic fluorophores could be enhanced via surface adsorption to SiNPs, reinforcing the idea that the surface bonded molecules are a reasonable explanation for the F-band emission.226
In 2017, Sinelnikov et al. provided more insights on the influence of surface oxidation and amine moieties on PL response via temperature-dependent PL and time-resolved PL (TRPL; Fig. 12).227 Two sizes each (davg = 3 and 5 nm) of photoluminescent alkyl-terminated SiNPs (R-SiNPs; R = dodecyl; red) with negligible surface oxidation, partially oxidized alkyl-terminated SiNPs (OxR-SiNPs; orange), and alkylamine-terminated SiNPs (RN-SiNPs; R = N-bonded alkyl and oxynitrides; blue) derived from identical Si–H terminated SiNPs were investigated.227 For R- and OxR-SiNPs the PL maxima red-shifted slightly for larger NPs and the PL blue-shifted upon decreasing the temperature from 377 to 37 K. This size- and temperature-dependent PL response is congruent with bandgap-induced transitions and is consistent with the proposal that alkanes do not interfere with intrinsic core emission.228,229 An emission mechanism involving exciton splitting (i.e., electrons were trapped in oxide surface states and recombined with holes in the valence band) was proposed for oxidized SiNPs because their PL lifetimes remained in the microsecond regime regardless of the temperature. In contrast, and consistent with other reports, the blue emission from RN-SiNPs was independent of the particle size and did not show substantial temperature dependence (and even red-shifted slightly).68,222,230 Based on these observations, and the nanosecond lifetimes, the authors proposed a charge-transfer (CT) from the excited state of the SiNP to a high-energy silicon oxynitride surface state; subsequently, exciton recombination occurred entirely at the oxynitride surface state and is isolated from the SiNP core.
 Fig. 12  (a) Proposed emission mechanisms for SiNPs influenced by surface oxidation and oxynitride moieties. (b) PL spectra of SiNPs functionalized with n-hexyllithium, phenyllithium, and lithium phenylacetylide. (c) Tunnelling spectra of phenylacetylide-SiNPs. The inset shows the corresponding cross-section of some NCs on which the spectra was acquired. Adapted with permission from ACS Photonics, 2017, 4(8), 1920–1929 and Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7849–7853. Copyright of 2017 American Chemical Society and 2016 CC BY-NC. 
SiNP functionalization via reaction with organolithium reagents provided additional insight into the impact of surface groups and their structure on SiNP optical and electronic properties.231 Höhlein et al. prepared solution processible SiNPs bearing aryl and alkynyl monolayer passivation and observed phenylacetylene functionalization resulted in red-shifted PLmax compared to equivalent SiNPs bearing hexyl or phenyl moieties (Fig. 12b), however, no explanation for the observation as provided.232 Although, π−π stacking of conjugated surface groups (e.g., poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT),219 styrene,233,234 naphthalene,233 and allylbenzene235,236) led to SiNP aggregation and red-shifted PLmax. In a follow up study, Angi et al. investigated the phenylacetylene-functionalized SiNPs using scanning tunnelling spectroscopy and found an in-gap state near the conduction band edge that was attributed to the surface groups and shifts the PLmax to a lower energy (Fig. 11c).232 The same authors extended this general approach and used the structure of the surface moiety to define the in-gap state energy and tuned the SiNP PLmax.237 The selected examples noted here show that through appropriate definition of SiNP surface chemistry tailoring of SiNP PLmax may be achieved.
5.2 Energy transfer
The comparatively limited PLQY and brightness of SiNPs are often attributed to thermal and Auger-assisted quenching resulting from carrier trapping at defect-rich SiNP surfaces.238 The graded structure of some SiNPs and specific functionalization protocols that minimize surface defects have important implications for PLQY (vide supra). Another complementary explanation for SiNP PLQY is found in the indirect bandgap that renders the electronic transitions responsible for PL formally disallowed.239 One way to attempt to address this challenge is to interface SiNPs with chromophores that can act as light-harvesting antennae, absorb light and transfer the energy to the SiNP (Fig. 13).240 In general, this antenna effect can occur when the donor excited state (surface groups) is higher in energy than that of the acceptor (SiNP) excited state. Other requirements that must be satisfied for effective energy transfer to proceed include ensuring suitable physical spacing over which energy transfer may proceed as well as temporal considerations that minimize the impact of competitive relaxation processes.240 Although energy transfer can occur between chromophores and SiNPs in physical mixtures, the efficiency varies depending on the preparation procedure and concentration.241,242 Covalently bonding chromophores to SiNP surfaces provides additional control by defining donor–acceptor separation. Ceroni and co-workers exploited this approach and enhanced SiNP (davg = 2.6 and 5.0 nm) optical absorption and emission by introducing surface-anchored pyrene (Py) antennae.243 This functionalization provided >95% energy transfer efficiency between the antenna and SiNP and enhanced PL brightness nearly 300% compared to equivalent antenna-free SiNPs. While the enhancement was not as large for davg = 5 nm SiNPs, near-infrared PL brightness was enhanced by 78% with 65% transfer efficiency (Fig. 13).243
 Fig. 13  Absorbance spectra of (a) ∼3 nm and (c) ∼5 nm dodecyl-functionalized SiNPs (SiNP), Pyrene (Py), and pyrene/dodecyl-co-functionalized SiNPs (SiNP-py). PL spectra of (b) ∼3 nm and (d) ∼5 nm SiNP-py shows quenching of Py emission along with enhanced SiNP emissions in comparison to physical mixture of SiNPs and pyrene. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(19), 3325–3329. Copyright of 2014 American Chemical Society. 
In a subsequent study from the same group, energy transfer and sensitization efficiency decreased with a longer alkyl chain.244 Increasing the physical distance between the SiNP and pyrene antennae also brought with it the possibility of forming pyrene excimers that the authors suggest are prevented from forming when shorter surface linkers (i.e., C3) are used because dodecyl moieties prevent interaction between pyrene functional groups. These excimers were also implicated in the decreased energy. Interestingly, the appearance of the excimers also pointed to a possible mode of interaction with carbon allotropes (e.g., graphene and SWNTs) and the authors exploited this to explore hybrids in which energy was transferred from the SiNPs to the carbon species. Surface bonded antennae have not been limited to polycyclic aromatic species; Ceroni et al. also investigated tetraphenylporphyrin Zn(II) and found tethering this species to SiNPs enables NIR emission upon excitation with visible light.245
Examples of SiNP-bonded antenna systems are not limited to down-conversion; Xia et al. recently demonstrated up-conversion is also possible when they pair pairing anthracene-functionalized SiNPs with 9,10-diphenylanthracene emitters.246 The upconversion process was attributed to Dexter spin-triplet exciton transfer from the SiNP core to the tethered anthracene moieties, followed by exciton transfer to solution borne 9,10-diphenylanthracene.246
6. Conclusions and outlook
SiNPs are an intriguing and useful class of materials based upon earth abundant elements. They are expected to have impacts in far-reaching sectors ranging from solar energy conversion to electronic devices to medical imaging. Substantial and important advances have been realized and there is still much to be explored. Herein, we have compared available methods for controllably preparing and tuning SiNP optical and electronic properties. Existing procedures provide a firm foundation on which to build; they offer a variety of avenues for designing SiNP optoelectronic response that will enable numerous uses. Despite the impressive advances realized to date, challenges remain if SiNPs are to realize their full potential. One longstanding obstacle to their widespread deployment is establishing convenient methods for mass production while retaining material quality. Existing routes for preparing/functionalizing SiNPs that provide materials exhibiting high PLQYs often suffer from small material yields; methods that appear to be more readily scalable often require further development to realize PLQYs that are competitive with other quantum dot systems. A systematic study comparing the products obtained via various procedures would be very informative and provide insight into important material differences. In addition, there is a demand for straightforward, scalable, and efficient SiNP synthesis methods that provide control over all aspects of SiNP structure.
The community's understanding of the role of SiNP internal structure (i.e., crystallinity, core@shell, or graded structure) in defining material properties remains in a state of infancy and is a topic of great interest. To expand our understanding, it is essential that methods providing control over these structural aspects be developed and methodical investigations of the resulting materials be performed. It is reasonable that control over internal structure and band gap (e.g., via definition of crystallinity) could see the development of heretofore unknown SiNP structures analogous to Type-I and Type-II quantum dots. As an extension of these structural studies, investigations into the role of structural parameters on the behaviour of doped particles are essential. While doping SiNPs has gained substantial attention of late, many unanswered questions related to defining and understanding the impact of dopant location/speciation remain. Furthermore, most doping protocols involve incorporation during synthesis; very few exploit post-synthesis incorporation which could provide substantial control of parameters that dictate material characteristics.
Finally, surface chemistry plays an essential role in passivating SiNP surfaces and imparting substantial stability. Reaching beyond straightforward functionalization, key examples in which the interplay of surface groups with the NP core have provided tailoring of electronic structure and designing SiNP optical response point to the tremendous potential of these materials in many optical devices, however the scope of these investigations remains limited and should be expanded.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors recognize continued generous funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC Discovery Grant program; RGPIN-2015-03896), Alberta Innovates Strategic Projects program, as well as NSERC CREATE (CREATE-463990-2015) for Alberta/Technical University of Munich International Graduate School for Hybrid Functional Materials (ATUMS), and Future Energy System (FES) which is supported by the Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF). Finally, we acknowledge the efforts of all those researchers who have indirectly contributed to this review through their studies of silicon nanoparticles.
References
L. E. Brus, A Simple Model for the Ionization Potential, Electron Affinity, and Aqueous Redox Potentials of Small Semiconductor Crystallites, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79(11), 5566–5571,  DOI:10.1063/1.445676 .
F. Erogbogbo, K. T. Yong, I. Roy, G. X. Xu, P. N. Prasad and M. T. Swihart, Biocompatible Luminescent Silicon Quantum Dots for Imaging of Cancer Cells, ACS Nano, 2008, 2(5), 873–878,  DOI:10.1021/nn700319z .
S. Bhattacharjee, I. M. Rietjens, M. P. Singh, T. M. Atkins, T. K. Purkait, Z. Xu, S. Regli, A. Shukaliak, R. J. Clark, B. S. Mitchell, G. M. Alink, A. T. M. Marcelis, M. J. Fink, J. G. C. Veinot, S. M. Kauzlarich and H. Zuilhof, Cytotoxicity of Surface-Functionalized Silicon and Germanium Nanoparticles: The Dominant Role of Surface Charges, Nanoscale, 2013, 5(11), 4870–4883,  10.1039/c3nr34266b .
H. Takagi, H. Ogawa, Y. Yamazaki, A. Ishizaki and T. Nakagiri, Quantum Size Effects on Photoluminescence in Ultrafine Si Particles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 56(24), 2379–2380,  DOI:10.1063/1.102921 .
L. T. Canham, Silicon Quantum Wire Array Fabrication by Electrochemical and Chemical Dissolution of Wafers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 57(10), 1046–1048,  DOI:10.1063/1.103561 .
L. Niccolai, M. Bassetto, A. A. Quarta and G. Mengali, A Review of Smart Dust Architecture, Dynamics, and Mission Applications, Prog. Aerosp. Sci., 2019, 1–14,  DOI:10.1016/j.paerosci.2019.01.003 .
B. Warneke, M. Last, B. Liebowitz and K. S. J. Pister, Smart Dust: Communicating with a Cubic-Millimeter Computer, Computer, 2001, 34(1), 44–51,  DOI:10.1109/2.895117 .
W. Sun, C. Qian, X. S. Cui, L. Wang, M. Wei, G. Casillas, A. S. Helmy and G. A. Ozin, Silicon Monoxide-a Convenient Precursor for Large Scale Synthesis of near Infrared Emitting Monodisperse Silicon Nanocrystals, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(6), 3678–3684,  10.1039/c5nr09128d .
L. A. Nesbit, Annealing Characteristics of Si–rich SiO2films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1985, 46(1), 38–40,  DOI:10.1063/1.95842 .
A. Gupta, M. T. Swihart and H. Wiggers, Luminescent Colloidal Dispersion of Silicon Quantum Dots from Microwave Plasma Synthesis: Exploring the Photoluminescence Behavior across the Visible Spectrum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19(5), 696–703,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.200801548 .
Y. Yu, C. E. Rowland, R. D. Schaller and B. A. Korgel, Synthesis and Ligand Exchange of Thiol-Capped Silicon Nanocrystals, Langmuir, 2015, 31(24), 6886–6893,  DOI:10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b01246 .
J. G. C. Veinot, Synthesis, Surface Functionalization, and Properties of Freestanding Silicon Nanocrystals, Chem. Commun., 2006, 40, 4160–4168,  10.1039/b607476f .
J. Zou, P. Sanelle, K. A. Pettigrew and S. M. Kauzlarich, Size and Spectroscopy of Silicon Nanoparticles Prepared via Reduction of SiCl4, J. Cluster Sci., 2006, 17(4), 565–578,  DOI:10.1007/s10876-006-0082-9 .
Z. Li and U. R. Kortshagen, Aerosol-Phase Synthesis and Processing of Luminescent Silicon Nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(20), 8451–8458,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.9b02743 .
B. Wang, J. Ryu, S. Choi, X. Zhang, D. Pribat, X. Li, L. Zhi, S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Ultrafast-Charging Silicon-Based Coral-like Network Anodes for Lithium-Ion Batteries with High Energy and Power Densities, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(2), 2307–2315,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.8b09034 .
J. Hu, T. W. Odom and C. M. Lieber, Chemistry and Physics in One Dimension: Synthesis and Properties of Nanowires and Nanotubes, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 435–445,  DOI:10.1021/ar9700365 .
M. v. Kovalenko, L. Manna, A. Cabot, Z. Hens, D. v. Talapin, C. R. Kagan, V. I. Klimov, A. L. Rogach, P. Reiss, D. J. Milliron, P. Guyot-Sionnnest, G. Konstantatos, W. J. Parak, T. Hyeon, B. A. Korgel, C. B. Murray and W. Heiss, Prospects of Nanoscience with Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(2), 1012–1057,  DOI:10.1021/nn506223h .
J. Liang, C. Huang and X. Gong, Silicon Nanocrystals and Their Composites: Syntheses, Fluorescence Mechanisms, and Biological Applications, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2019, 18213–18227,  DOI:10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b04359 .
M. Dasog, J. Kehrle, B. Rieger and J. G. C. Veinot, Silicon Nanocrystals and Silicon-Polymer Hybrids: Synthesis, Surface Engineering, and Applications, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 2322–2339,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201506065 .
B. K. Teo and X. H. Sun, Silicon-Based Low-Dimensional Nanomaterials and Nanodevices, Chem. Rev., 2007, 1454–1532,  DOI:10.1021/cr030187n .
X. Ji, H. Wang, B. Song, B. Chu and Y. He, Silicon Nanomaterials for Biosensing and Bioimaging Analysis, Front. Chem., 2018, 38,  DOI:10.3389/fchem.2018.00038 .
B. L. Oliva-Chatelain, T. M. Ticich and A. R. Barron, Doping Silicon Nanocrystals and Quantum Dots, Nanoscale, 2016, 1733–1745,  10.1039/c5nr04978d .
S. Terada, Y. Xin and K. I. Saitow, Cost-Effective Synthesis of Silicon Quantum Dots, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32(19), 8382–8392,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c02320 .
Y. Yu, G. Fan, A. Fermi, R. Mazzaro, V. Morandi, P. Ceroni, D. M. Smilgies and B. A. Korgel, Size-Dependent Photoluminescence Efficiency of Silicon Nanocrystal Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(41), 23240–23248,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b08054 .
Z. Yang, A. R. Dobbie, K. Cui and J. G. C. Veinot, A Convenient Method for Preparing Alkyl-Functionalized Silicon Nanocubes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(34), 13958–13961,  DOI:10.1021/ja3061497 .
C. M. Hessel, D. Reid, M. G. Panthani, M. R. Rasch, B. W. Goodfellow, J. Wei, H. Fujii, V. Akhavan and B. A. Korgel, Synthesis of Ligand-Stabilized Silicon Nanocrystals with Size-Dependent Photoluminescence Spanning Visible to near-Infrared Wavelengths, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24(2), 393–401,  DOI:10.1021/cm2032866 .
C. M. Hessel, E. J. Henderson and J. G. C. Veinot, Hydrogen Silsesquioxane: A Molecular Precursor for Nanocrystalline Si-SiO2 Composites and Freestanding Hydride-Surface-Terminated Silicon Nanoparticles, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18(26), 6139–6146,  DOI:10.1021/cm0602803 .
N. J. Kramer, R. J. Anthony, M. Mamunuru, E. S. Aydil and U. R. Kortshagen, Plasma-Induced Crystallization of Silicon Nanoparticles, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47(7), 075202,  DOI:10.1088/0022-3727/47/7/075202 .
D. Jurbergs, E. Rogojina, L. Mangolini and U. Kortshagen, Silicon Nanocrystals with Ensemble Quantum Yields Exceeding 60%, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88(23), 233116,  DOI:10.1063/1.2210788 .
O. Yasar-Inceoglu, T. Lopez, E. Farshihagro and L. Mangolini, Silicon Nanocrystal Production through Non-Thermal Plasma Synthesis: A Comparative Study between Silicon Tetrachloride and Silane Precursors, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23(25), 255604,  DOI:10.1088/0957-4484/23/25/255604 .
Y. Ding, R. Yamada, R. Gresback, S. Zhou, X. Pi and T. Nozaki, A Parametric Study of Non-Thermal Plasma Synthesis of Silicon Nanoparticles from a Chlorinated Precursor, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47(48), 485202,  DOI:10.1088/0022-3727/47/48/485202 .

          J. Yu, H. Hao, R. Zhang, W. Zheng and W. Wu, Silicon Nanocrystals Prepared by Femtosecond Laser Ablation in Solution under Different Ablation Time, in IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering; Institute of Physics Publishing, 2018, vol. 322, p 022049, DOI:  DOI:10.1088/1757-899X/322/2/022049 .
Z. Yuan, T. Nakamura, S. Adachi and K. Matsuishi, Improvement of Laser Processing for Colloidal Silicon Nanocrystal Formation in a Reactive Solvent, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(15), 8623–8629,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b00288 .
M. Beekman, S. Kauzlarich, L. Doherty and G. Nolas, Zintl Phases as Reactive Precursors for Synthesis of Novel Silicon and Germanium-Based Materials, Materials, 2019, 12(7), 1139,  DOI:10.3390/ma12071139 .
T. M. Atkins, J. H. Walton, M. P. Singh, S. Ganguly, O. Janka, A. Y. Louie and S. M. Kauzlarich, EPR and Structural Characterization of Water-Soluble Mn2+-Doped Si Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(3), 1948–1956,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b11000 .
X. Zhang, M. Brynda, R. D. Britt, E. C. Carroll, D. S. Larsen, A. Y. Louie and S. M. Kauzlarich, Synthesis and Characterization of Manganese-Doped Silicon Nanoparticles: Bifunctional Paramagnetic-Optical Nanomaterial, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(35), 10668–10669,  DOI:10.1021/ja074144q .
D. Neiner, H. W. Chiu and S. M. Kauzlarich, Low-Temperature Solution Route to Macroscopic Amounts of Hydrogen Terminated Silicon Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(34), 11016–11017,  DOI:10.1021/ja064177q .
M. Dasog, Z. Yang, S. Regli, T. M. Atkins, A. Faramus, M. P. Singh, E. Muthuswamy, S. M. Kauzlarich, R. D. Tilley and J. G. C. Veinot, Chemical Insight into the Origin of Red and Blue Photoluminescence Arising from Freestanding Silicon Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(3), 2676–2685,  DOI:10.1021/nn4000644 .
B. F. P. McVey, J. Butkus, J. E. Halpert, J. M. Hodgkiss and R. D. Tilley, Solution Synthesis and Optical Properties of Transition-Metal-Doped Silicon Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(9), 1573–1576,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b00589 .
A. Shiohara, S. Hanada, S. Prabakar, K. Fujioka, T. H. Lim, K. Yamamoto, P. T. Northcote and R. D. Tilley, Chemical Reactions on Surface Molecules Attached to Silicon Quantum Dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(1), 248–253,  DOI:10.1021/ja906501v .
J. Zou, R. K. Baldwin, K. A. Pettigrew and S. M. Kauzlarich, Solution Synthesis of Ultrastable Luminescent Siloxane-Coated Silicon Nanoparticles, Nano Lett., 2004, 4(7), 1181–1186,  DOI:10.1021/nl0497373 .
R. K. Baldwin, K. A. Pettigrew, E. Ratai, M. P. Augustine and S. M. Kauzlarich, Solution Reduction Synthesis of Surface Stabilized Silicon Nanoparticles, Chem. Commun., 2002, 17(17), 1822–1823,  10.1039/b205301b .
J. R. Heath, A Liquid-Solution-Phase Synthesis of Crystalline Silicon, Science, 1992, 258(5085), 1131–1133,  DOI:10.1126/science.258.5085.1131 .
L. E. Brus, P. F. Szajowski, W. L. Wilson, T. D. Harris, S. Schuppler and P. H. Citrin, Electronic Spectroscopy and Photophysics of Si Nanocrystals: Relationship to Bulk c-Si and Porous Si, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117(10), 2915–2922,  DOI:10.1021/ja00115a025 .
M. H. Nayfeh, O. Akcakir, G. Belomoin, N. Barry, J. Therrien and E. Gratton, Second Harmonic Generation in Microcrystallite Films of Ultrasmall Si Nanoparticles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77(25), 4086–4088,  DOI:10.1063/1.1334945 .
M. H. Nayfeh, N. Barry, J. Therrien, O. Akcakir, E. Gratton and G. Belomoin, Stimulated Blue Emission in Reconstituted Films of Ultrasmall Silicon Nanoparticles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78(8), 1131–1133,  DOI:10.1063/1.1347398 .
M. T. Swihart and S. L. Girshick, Thermochemistry and Kinetics of Silicon Hydride Cluster Formation during Thermal Decomposition of Silane, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103(1), 64–76,  DOI:10.1021/jp983358e .
M. T. Swihart and S. L. Girshick, Ab Initio Structures and Energetics of Selected Hydrogenated Silicon Clusters Containing Six to Ten Silicon Atoms, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 307(5–6), 527–532,  DOI:10.1016/S0009-2614(99)00545-X .
A. A. Onischuk, V. P. Strunin, M. A. Ushakova and V. N. Panfilov, On the Pathways of Aerosol Formation by Thermal Decomposition of Silane, J. Aerosol Sci., 1997, 28(2), 207–222,  DOI:10.1016/S0021-8502(96)00061-4 .
A. A. Onischuk, V. P. Strunin, M. A. Ushakova and V. N. Panfilov, Studying of Silane Thermal Decomposition Mechanism, Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 1998, 30(2), 99–110,  DOI:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4601(1998)30:2<99::AID-KIN1>3.0.CO;2-O .
X. Li, Y. He, S. S. Talukdar and M. T. Swihart, Process for Preparing Macroscopic Quantities of Brightly Photoluminescent Silicon Nanoparticles with Emission Spanning the Visible Spectrum, Langmuir, 2003, 19(20), 8490–8496,  DOI:10.1021/la034487b .
X. Li, Y. He and M. T. Swihart, Surface Functionalization of Silicon Nanoparticles Produced by Laser-Driven Pyrolysis of Silane Followed by HF-HNO 3 Etching, Langmuir, 2004, 20(11), 4720–4727,  DOI:10.1021/la036219j .
F. Hua, M. T. Swihart and E. Ruckenstein, Efficient Surface Grafting of Luminescent Silicon Quantum Dots by Photoinitiated Hydrosilylation, Langmuir, 2005, 21(13), 6054–6062,  DOI:10.1021/la0509394 .
F. Hua, F. Erogbogbo, M. T. Swihart and E. Ruckenstein, Organically Capped Silicon Nanoparticles with Blue Photoluminescence Prepared by Hydrosilylation Followed by Oxidation, Langmuir, 2006, 22(9), 4363–4370,  DOI:10.1021/la0529106 .
S. Guruvenket, J. M. Hoey, K. J. Anderson, M. T. Frohlich, R. Krishnan, J. Sivaguru, M. P. Sibi and P. Boudjouk, Synthesis of Silicon Quantum Dots Using Cyclohexasilane(Si6H12), J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(35), 8206–8213,  10.1039/c6tc01435f .
S. Sato, H. Yao and K. Kimura, Self-Assembly of Si Nanoparticles: Emergence of Two-Dimensional Si Nanoparticle Lattices, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 2004, 43(7 A), L927,  DOI:10.1143/JJAP.43.L927 .
S. P. Withrow, C. W. White, A. Meldrum, J. D. Budai, D. M. Hembree and J. C. Barbour, Effects of Hydrogen in the Annealing Environment on Photoluminescence from Si Nanoparticles in SiO2, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86(1), 396–401,  DOI:10.1063/1.370699 .
E. J. Henderson, J. A. Kelly and J. G. C. Veinot, Influence of HSiO1.5 Sol-Gel Polymer Structure and Composition on the Size and Luminescent Properties of Silicon Nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21(22), 5426–5434,  DOI:10.1021/cm902028q .
Y. Liao, Y. Xu and Y. Chan, Semiconductor Nanocrystals in Sol-Gel Derived Matrices, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 13694–13704,  10.1039/c3cp51351c .
C. M. Hessel, E. J. Henderson and J. G. C. Veinot, An Investigation of the Formation and Growth of Oxide-Embedded Silicon Nanocrystals in Hydrogen Silsesquioxane-Derived Nanocomposites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(19), 6956–6961,  DOI:10.1021/jp070908c .
N. Shirahata, J. Nakamura, J. I. Inoue, B. Ghosh, K. Nemoto, Y. Nemoto, M. Takeguchi, Y. Masuda, M. Tanaka and G. A. Ozin, Emerging Atomic Energy Levels in Zero-Dimensional Silicon Quantum Dots, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(3), 1491–1498,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b03157 .
M. L. Mastronardi, F. Maier-Flaig, D. Faulkner, E. J. Henderson, C. Kübel, U. Lemmer and G. A. Ozin, Size-Dependent Absolute Quantum Yields for Size-Separated Colloidally-Stable Silicon Nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(1), 337–342,  DOI:10.1021/nl2036194 .
M. L. Mastronardi, F. Hennrich, E. J. Henderson, F. Maier-Flaig, C. Blum, J. Reichenbach, U. Lemmer, C. Kübel, D. Wang, M. M. Kappes and G. A. Ozin, Preparation of Monodisperse Silicon Nanocrystals Using Density Gradient Ultracentrifugation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(31), 11928–11931,  DOI:10.1021/ja204865t .
C. M. Hessel, D. Reid, M. G. Panthani, M. R. Rasch, B. W. Goodfellow, J. Wei, H. Fujii, V. Akhavan and B. A. Korgel, Synthesis of Ligand-Stabilized Silicon Nanocrystals with Size-Dependent Photoluminescence Spanning Visible to near-Infrared Wavelengths, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24(2), 393–401,  DOI:10.1021/cm2032866 .
Y. Yu, G. Fan, A. Fermi, R. Mazzaro, V. Morandi, P. Ceroni, D. M. Smilgies and B. A. Korgel, Size-Dependent Photoluminescence Efficiency of Silicon Nanocrystal Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(41), 23240–23248,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b08054 .
M. A. Islam, M. H. Mobarok, R. Sinelnikov, T. K. Purkait and J. G. C. Veinot, Phosphorus Pentachloride Initiated Functionalization of Silicon Nanocrystals, Langmuir, 2017, 33(35), 8766–8773,  DOI:10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b00518 .
M. Sefannaser, S. A. Thomas, K. J. Anderson, R. J. Petersen, S. L. Brown, P. R. Boudjouk, T. A. Pringle and E. K. Hobbie, Radiative Relaxation in Luminescent Silicon Nanocrystal Thiol-Ene Composites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125(10), 5824–5831,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c11052 .
M. Dasog, G. B. de Los Reyes, L. v. Titova, F. A. Hegmann and J. G. C. Veinot, Size vs Surface: Tuning the Photoluminescence of Freestanding Silicon Nanocrystals Across the Visible Spectrum via Surface Groups, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(9), 9636–9648,  DOI:10.1021/nn504109a .
H. Sugimoto, T. Okazaki and M. Fujii, Mie Resonator Color Inks of Monodispersed and Perfectly Spherical Crystalline Silicon Nanoparticles, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8(12), 2000033,  DOI:10.1002/adom.202000033 .
C. M. Hessel, D. Reid, M. G. Panthani, M. R. Rasch, B. W. Goodfellow, J. Wei, H. Fujii, V. Akhavan and B. A. Korgel, Synthesis of Ligand-Stabilized Silicon Nanocrystals with Size-Dependent Photoluminescence Spanning Visible to near-Infrared Wavelengths, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24(2), 393–401,  DOI:10.1021/cm2032866 .
A. Angi, M. Loch, R. Sinelnikov, J. G. C. Veinot, M. Becherer, P. Lugli and B. Rieger, The Influence of Surface Functionalization Methods on the Performance of Silicon Nanocrystal LEDs, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(22), 10337–10342,  10.1039/c7nr09525b .
F. Maier-Flaig, J. Rinck, M. Stephan, T. Bocksrocker, M. Bruns, C. Kübel, A. K. Powell, G. A. Ozin and U. Lemmer, Multicolor Silicon Light-Emitting Diodes(SiLEDs), Nano Lett., 2013, 13(2), 475–480,  DOI:10.1021/nl3038689 .
I. T. Cheong, W. Morrish, W. Sheard, H. Yu, B. T. Luppi, L. Milburn, A. Meldrum and J. G. C. Veinot, Silicon Quantum Dot–Polymer Fabry–Pérot Resonators with Narrowed and Tunable Emissions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(23), 27149–27158,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.1c01825 .
P. Zeng, F. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Zhou, Z. Guo, X. Wu, M. Lu and S. Zhang, Edge-Emitting Silicon Nanocrystal Distributed Feedback Laser with Extremely Low Exciton Threshold, ACS Photonics, 2021, 21, 1,  DOI:10.1021/acsphotonics.0c01846 .
E. Park, H. Yoo, J. Lee, M. S. Park, Y. J. Kim and H. Kim, Dual-Size Silicon Nanocrystal-Embedded SiOx Nanocomposite as a High-Capacity Lithium Storage Material, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(7), 7690–7696,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.5b03166 .
J. Heitmann, F. Müller, M. Zacharias and U. Gösele, Silicon Nanocrystals: Size Matters, Adv. Mater., 2005, 795–803,  DOI:10.1002/adma.200401126 .
A. M. Hartel, D. Hiller, S. Gutsch, P. Löper, S. Estradé, F. Peiró, B. Garrido and M. Zacharias, Formation of Size-Controlled Silicon Nanocrystals in Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition Grown SiOxNy/SiO2 Superlattices, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520(1), 121–125,  DOI:10.1016/j.tsf.2011.06.084 .
E. J. Henderson, J. A. Kelly and J. G. C. Veinot, Influence of HSiO1.5 Sol-Gel Polymer Structure and Composition on the Size and Luminescent Properties of Silicon Nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21(22), 5426–5434,  DOI:10.1021/cm902028q .
M. Zacharias, J. Heitmann, R. Scholz, U. Kahler, M. Schmidt and J. Bläsing, Size-Controlled Highly Luminescent Silicon Nanocrystals: A SiO/SiO 2 Superlattice Approach, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80(4), 661–663,  DOI:10.1063/1.1433906 .
L. Mangolini, E. Thimsen and U. Kortshagen, High-Yield Plasma Synthesis of Luminescent Silicon Nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2005, 5(4), 655–659,  DOI:10.1021/nl050066y .
R. J. Anthony, K. Y. Cheng, Z. C. Holman, R. J. Holmes and U. R. Kortshagen, An All-Gas-Phase Approach for the Fabrication of Silicon Nanocrystal Light-Emitting Devices, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(6), 2822–2825,  DOI:10.1021/nl300164z .
D. Jurbergs, E. Rogojina, L. Mangolini and U. Kortshagen, Silicon Nanocrystals with Ensemble Quantum Yields Exceeding 60%, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88(23), 233116,  DOI:10.1063/1.2210788 .
T. A. Pringle, K. I. Hunter, A. Brumberg, K. J. Anderson, J. A. Fagan, S. A. Thomas, R. J. Petersen, M. Sefannaser, Y. Han, S. L. Brown, D. S. Kilin, R. D. Schaller, U. R. Kortshagen, P. R. Boudjouk and E. K. Hobbie, Bright Silicon Nanocrystals from a Liquid Precursor: Quasi-Direct Recombination with High Quantum Yield, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(4), 3858–3867,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.9b09614 .
Z. Li and U. R. Kortshagen, Aerosol-Phase Synthesis and Processing of Luminescent Silicon Nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(20), 8451–8458,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.9b02743 .
L. Mangolini, E. Thimsen and U. Kortshagen, High-Yield Plasma Synthesis of Luminescent Silicon Nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2005, 5(4), 655–659,  DOI:10.1021/nl050066y .
U. v. Bhandarkar, M. T. Swihart, S. L. Girshick and U. R. Kortshagen, Modelling of Silicon Hydride Clustering in a Low-Pressure Silane Plasma, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2000, 33(21), 2731–2746,  DOI:10.1088/0022-3727/33/21/311 .
M. v. Kovalenko, L. Manna, A. Cabot, Z. Hens, D. v. Talapin, C. R. Kagan, V. I. Klimov, A. L. Rogach, P. Reiss, D. J. Milliron, P. Guyot-Sionnnest, G. Konstantatos, W. J. Parak, T. Hyeon, B. A. Korgel, C. B. Murray and W. Heiss, Prospects of Nanoscience with Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(2), 1012–1057,  DOI:10.1021/nn506223h .
P. A. Schulte, L. T. McKernan, D. S. Heidel, A. H. Okun, G. S. Dotson, T. J. Lentz, C. L. Geraci, P. E. Heckel and C. M. Branche, Occupational Safety and Health, Green Chemistry, and Sustainability: A Review of Areas of Convergence, Environ. Health, 2013, 1–9,  DOI:10.1186/1476-069X-12-31 .

          D. S. Ruby, Safety Considerations for High-Efficiency Crystalline-Silicon Solar Cell Fabrication, In Conference Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference; Publ by IEEE, 1988, vol. 1, pp 523–528, DOI:  DOI:10.1109/pvsc.1988.105757 .
V. Švrček, T. Sasaki, Y. Shimizu and N. Koshizaki, Blue Luminescent Silicon Nanocrystals Prepared by Ns Pulsed Laser Ablation in Water, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89(21), 213113,  DOI:10.1063/1.2397014 .

          J. Yu, H. Hao, R. Zhang, W. Zheng and W. Wu, Silicon Nanocrystals Prepared by Femtosecond Laser Ablation in Solution under Different Ablation Time, in IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering; Institute of Physics Publishing, 2018, vol. 322, p 022049, DOI:  DOI:10.1088/1757-899X/322/2/022049 .
T. Nakamura, Z. Yuan, K. Watanabe and S. Adachi, Bright and Multicolor Luminescent Colloidal Si Nanocrystals Prepared by Pulsed Laser Irradiation in Liquid, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108(2), 023105,  DOI:10.1063/1.4939902 .
N. Shirahata, D. Hirakawa and Y. Sakka, Interfacial-Related Color Tuning of Colloidal Si Nanocrystals, Green Chem., 2010, 12(12), 2139–2141,  10.1039/c0gc00502a .
Z. Yuan, T. Nakamura, S. Adachi and K. Matsuishi, Improvement of Laser Processing for Colloidal Silicon Nanocrystal Formation in a Reactive Solvent, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(15), 8623–8629,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b00288 .
Y. He, Y. Su, X. Yang, Z. Kang, T. Xu, R. Zhang, C. Fan and S. T. Lee, Photo and PH Stable, Highly-Luminescent Silicon Nanospheres and Their Bioconjugates for Immunofluorescent Cell Imaging, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(12), 4434–4438,  DOI:10.1021/ja808827g .
A. G. Cullis and L. T. Canham, Visible Light Emission Due to Quantum Size Effects in Highly Porous Crystalline Silicon, Nature, 1991, 353(6342), 335–338,  DOI:10.1038/353335a0 .
A. G. Cullis, L. T. Canham and P. D. J. Calcott, The Structural and Luminescence Properties of Porous Silicon, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 909–965,  DOI:10.1063/1.366536 .
J. L. Heinrich, C. L. Curtis, G. M. Credo, K. L. Kavanagh and M. J. Sailor, Luminescent Colloidal Silicon Suspensions from Porous Silicon, Science, 1992, 255(5040), 66–68,  DOI:10.1126/science.255.5040.66 .
J. Hwang, Y. Jeong, K. H. Lee, Y. Seo, J. Kim, J. W. Hong, E. Kamaloo, T. A. Camesano and J. Choi, Simple Preparation of Fluorescent Silicon Nanoparticles from Used Si Wafers, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54(22), 5982–5989,  DOI:10.1021/acs.iecr.5b00446 .
B. Liao, W. Wang, X. Deng, B. He, W. Zeng, Z. Tang and Q. Liu, A Facile One-Step Synthesis of Fluorescent Silicon Quantum Dots and Their Application for Detecting Cu2+, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(18), 14465–14467,  10.1039/c5ra25563e .
J. H. Park, L. Gu, G. von Maltzahn, E. Ruoslahti, S. N. Bhatia and M. J. Sailor, Biodegradable Luminescent Porous Silicon Nanoparticles for in Vivo Applications, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8(4), 331–336,  DOI:10.1038/nmat2398. .
V. S. Y. Lin, K. Motesharei, K. P. S. Dancil, M. J. Sailor and M. R. Ghadiri, A Porous Silicon-Based Optical Interferometric Biosensor, Science, 1997, 278(5339), 840–843,  DOI:10.1126/science.278.5339.840 .
J. P. Wilcoxon, G. A. Samara and P. N. Provencio, Optical and Electronic Properties of Si Nanoclusters Synthesized in Inverse Micelles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60(4), 2704–2714,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.60.2704 .
Q. Li, T. Y. Luo, M. Zhou, H. Abroshan, J. Huang, H. J. Kim, N. L. Rosi, Z. Shao and R. Jin, Silicon Nanoparticles with Surface Nitrogen: 90% Quantum Yield with Narrow Luminescence Bandwidth and the Ligand Structure Based Energy Law, ACS Nano, 2016, 8385–8393,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.6b03113 .
S. P. Pujari, H. Driss, F. Bannani, B. van Lagen and H. Zuilhof, One-Pot Gram-Scale Synthesis of Hydrogen-Terminated Silicon Nanoparticles, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30(18), 6503–6512,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b03113 .
Y. Zhong, X. Sun, S. Wang, F. Peng, F. Bao, Y. Su, Y. Li, S. T. Lee and Y. He, Facile, Large-Quantity Synthesis of Stable, Tunable-Color Silicon Nanoparticles and Their Application for Long-Term Cellular Imaging, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(6), 5958–5967,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.5b00683 .
T. Gong, Y. Li, B. Lei, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and H. Zhang, Solid-State Silicon Nanoparticles with Color-Tunable Photoluminescence and Multifunctional Applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(20), 5962–5969,  10.1039/c9tc00938h .
G. Hu, Y. Sun, Y. Xie, S. Wu, X. Zhang, J. Zhuang, C. Hu, B. Lei and Y. Liu, Synthesis of Silicon Quantum Dots with Highly Efficient Full-Band UV Absorption and Their Applications in Antiyellowing and Resistance of Photodegradation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(6), 6634–6643,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.8b20138 .
J. R. Heath, A Liquid-Solution-Phase Synthesis of Crystalline Silicon, Science, 1992, 258(5085), 1131–1133,  DOI:10.1126/science.258.5085.1131 .
A. S. Wells, On the Perils of Unexpected Silane Generation, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2010, 14(3), 484,  DOI:10.1021/op100080v .
R. D. Tilley, J. H. Warner, K. Yamamoto, I. Matsui and H. Fujimori, Micro-Emulsion Synthesis of Monodisperse Surface Stabilized Silicon Nanocrystals, Chem. Commun., 2005, 14, 1833–1835,  10.1039/b416069j .
B. F. P. McVey and R. D. Tilley, Solution Synthesis, Optical Properties, and, Bioimaging Applications of Silicon Nanocrystals, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47(10), 3045–3051,  DOI:10.1021/ar500215v .
A. Shiohara, S. Prabakar, A. Faramus, C. Y. Hsu, P. S. Lai, P. T. Northcote and R. D. Tilley, Sized Controlled Synthesis, Purification, and Cell Studies with Silicon Quantum Dots, Nanoscale, 2011, 3(8), 3364–3370,  10.1039/c1nr10458f .
M. Rosso-Vasic, E. Spruijt, B. van Lagen, L. de Cola and H. Zuilhof, Alkyl-Functionalized Oxide-Free Silicon Nanoparticles: Synthesis and Optical Properties, Small, 2008, 4(10), 1835–1841,  DOI:10.1002/smll.200800066 .
R. K. Baldwin, K. A. Pettigrew, E. Ratai, M. P. Augustine and S. M. Kauzlarich, Solution Reduction Synthesis of Surface Stabilized Silicon Nanoparticles, Chem. Commun., 2002, 17(17), 1822–1823,  10.1039/b205301b .
Y. Zhong, F. Peng, F. Bao, S. Wang, X. Ji, L. Yang, Y. Su, S. T. Lee and Y. He, Large-Scale Aqueous Synthesis of Fluorescent and Biocompatible Silicon Nanoparticles and Their Use as Highly Photostable Biological Probes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(22), 8350–8356,  DOI:10.1021/ja4026227 .
J. L. Z. Ddungu, S. Silvestrini, A. Tassoni and L. de Cola, Shedding Light on the Aqueous Synthesis of Silicon Nanoparticles by Reduction of Silanes with Citrates, Faraday Discuss., 2020, 222, 350–361,  10.1039/c9fd00127a .
C. S. Yang, R. A. Bley, S. M. Kauzlarich, H. W. H. Lee and G. R. Delgado, Synthesis of Alkyl-Terminated Silicon Nanoclusters by a Solution Route, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121(22), 5191–5195,  DOI:10.1021/ja9828509 .
J. L. Wilbrink, C. C. Huang, K. Dohnalova and J. M. J. Paulusse, Critical Assessment of Wet-Chemical Oxidation Synthesis of Silicon Quantum Dots, Faraday Discuss., 2020, 222(0), 149–165,  10.1039/c9fd00099b .
X. Ma, F. Xu, T. M. Atkins, A. M. Goforth, D. Neiner, A. Navrotsky and S. M. Kauzlarich, A Versatile Low Temperature Synthetic Route to Zintl Phase Precursors: Na4Si4, Na4Ge4 and K4Ge4 as Examples, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2009,(46), 10250–10255,  10.1039/b913320h .
M. P. Singh, T. M. Atkins, E. Muthuswamy, S. Kamali, C. Tu, A. Y. Louie and S. M. Kauzlarich, Development of Iron-Doped Silicon Nanoparticles as Bimodal Imaging Agents, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(6), 5596–5604,  DOI:10.1021/nn301536n .
C. Tu, X. Ma, P. Pantazis, S. M. Kauzlarich and A. Y. Louie, Paramagnetic, Silicon Quantum Dots for Magnetic Resonance and Two-Photon Imaging of Macrophages, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(6), 2016–2023,  DOI:10.1021/ja909303g .
M. Dasog, Z. Yang, S. Regli, T. M. Atkins, A. Faramus, M. P. Singh, E. Muthuswamy, S. M. Kauzlarich, R. D. Tilley and J. G. C. Veinot, Chemical Insight into the Origin of Red and Blue Photoluminescence Arising from Freestanding Silicon Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(3), 2676–2685,  DOI:10.1021/nn4000644 .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, A General Strategy for Nanocrystal Synthesis, Nature, 2005, 437(7055), 121–124,  DOI:10.1038/nature03968 .
A. Albanese, P. S. Tang and W. C. W. Chan, The Effect of Nanoparticle Size, Shape, and Surface Chemistry on Biological Systems, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2012, 1–16,  DOI:10.1146/annurev-bioeng-071811-150124 .
P. Reiss, M. Protière and L. Li, Core/Shell Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Small, 2009, 154–168,  DOI:10.1002/smll.200800841 .
A. N. Thiessen, L. Zhang, A. O. Oliynyk, H. Yu, K. M. O'Connor, A. Meldrum and J. G. C. Veinot, A Tale of Seemingly “Identical” Silicon Quantum Dot Families: Structural Insight into Silicon Quantum Dot Photoluminescence, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32(16), 6838–6846,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c00650 .
A. N. Thiessen, M. Ha, R. W. Hooper, H. Yu, A. O. Oliynyk, J. G. C. Veinot and V. K. Michaelis, Silicon Nanoparticles: Are They Crystalline from the Core to the Surface?, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(3), 678–688,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b03074 .
Y. Shu, U. R. Kortshagen, B. G. Levine and R. J. Anthony, Surface Structure and Silicon Nanocrystal Photoluminescence: The Role of Hypervalent Silyl Groups, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(47), 26683–26691,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b08578 .
C. E. Rowland, D. C. Hannah, A. Demortière, J. Yang, R. E. Cook, V. B. Prakapenka, U. Kortshagen and R. D. Schaller, Silicon Nanocrystals at Elevated Temperatures: Retention of Photoluminescence and Diamond Silicon to β-Silicon Carbide Phase Transition, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(9), 9219–9223,  DOI:10.1021/nn5029967 .
N. N. Ovsyuk and S. G. Lyapin, Raman Spectra of Si Nanocrystals under High Pressure: Metallization and Solid State Amorphization, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116(6), 062103,  DOI:10.1063/1.5145246 .
R. J. Clark, M. Aghajamali, C. M. Gonzalez, L. Hadidi, M. A. Islam, M. Javadi, M. H. Mobarok, T. K. Purkait, C. J. T. Robidillo, R. Sinelnikov, A. N. Thiessen, J. Washington, H. Yu and J. G. C. Veinot, From Hydrogen Silsesquioxane to Functionalized Silicon Nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2017, 80–89,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b02667 .
X. Li, Y. He, S. S. Talukdar and M. T. Swihart, Process for Preparing Macroscopic Quantities of Brightly Photoluminescent Silicon Nanoparticles with Emission Spanning the Visible Spectrum, Langmuir, 2003, 19(20), 8490–8496,  DOI:10.1021/la034487b .
X. D. Pi, L. Mangolini, S. A. Campbell and U. Kortshagen, Room-Temperature Atmospheric Oxidation of Si Nanocrystals after HF Etching, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75(8), 085423,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.75.085423 .
Y. Yu, X. Lu, A. Guillaussier, V. R. Voggu, W. Pineros, M. de La Mata, J. Arbiol, D. M. Smilgies, T. M. Truskett and B. A. Korgel, Orientationally Ordered Silicon Nanocrystal Cuboctahedra in Superlattices, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(12), 7814–7821,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b04006 .
D. C. Hannah, J. Yang, N. J. Kramer, G. C. Schatz, U. R. Kortshagen and R. D. Schaller, Ultrafast Photoluminescence in Quantum-Confined Silicon Nanocrystals Arises from an Amorphous Surface Layer, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1(10), 960–967,  DOI:10.1021/ph500145p .
R. Anthony and U. Kortshagen, Photoluminescence Quantum Yields of Amorphous and Crystalline Silicon Nanoparticles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80(11), 115407,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.80.115407 .
V. Petkov, C. M. Hessel, J. Ovtchinnikoff, A. Guillaussier, B. A. Korgel, X. Liu and C. Giordano, Structure-Properties Correlation in Si Nanoparticles by Total Scattering and Computer Simulations, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25(11), 2365–2371,  DOI:10.1021/cm401099q .
R. Mazzaro, F. Romano and P. Ceroni, Long-Lived Luminescence of Silicon Nanocrystals: From Principles to Applications, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 26507–26526,  10.1039/c7cp05208a .
L. M. Wheeler, N. C. Anderson, P. K. B. Palomaki, J. L. Blackburn, J. C. Johnson and N. R. Neale, Silyl Radical Abstraction in the Functionalization of Plasma-Synthesized Silicon Nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(19), 6869–6878,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b03309 .
K. Jarolimek, E. Hazrati, R. A. de Groot and G. A. de Wijs, Band Offsets at the Interface between Crystalline and Amorphous Silicon from First Principles, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2017, 8(1), 014026,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevApplied.8.014026 .
R. Vatan Meidanshahi, S. Bowden and S. M. Goodnick, Electronic Structure and Localized States in Amorphous Si and Hydrogenated Amorphous Si, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21(24), 13257–13266,  10.1039/c9cp01121h .

          S. Guha, J. Yang and B. Yan, Amorphous and Nanocrystalline Silicon Solar Cells and Modules, in Reference Module in Materials Science and Materials Engineering,  2016,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-803581-8.00835-3 .
N. M. Park, T. S. Kim and S. J. Park, Band Gap Engineering of Amorphous Silicon Quantum Dots for Light-Emitting Diodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78(17), 2575–2577,  DOI:10.1063/1.1367277 .
N. M. Park, C. J. Choi, T. Y. Seong and S. J. Park, Quantum Confinement in Amorphous Silicon Quantum Dots Embedded in Silicon Nitride, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86(7), 1355–1357,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevLett.86.1355 .
S. Askari, V. Svrcek, P. Maguire and D. Mariotti, The Interplay of Quantum Confinement and Hydrogenation in Amorphous Silicon Quantum Dots, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(48), 8011–8016,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201503013 .
I. Lisovskyy, M. Voitovych, V. Litovchenko, V. Voitovych, I. Nasieka and V. Bratus, Radiation Induced Enhancement of Hydrogen Influence on Luminescent Properties of Nc-Si/SiO2 Structures, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11(1), 1–8,  DOI:10.1186/s11671-016-1744-7 .
S. Cheylan and R. G. Elliman, Effect of Hydrogen on the Photoluminescence of Si Nanocrystals Embedded in a SiO2 Matrix, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78(9), 1225–1227,  DOI:10.1063/1.1338492 .
Q. Wang, B. Xu, J. Sun, H. Liu, Z. Zhao, D. Yu, C. Fan and J. He, Direct Band Gap Silicon Allotropes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(28), 9826–9829,  DOI:10.1021/ja5035792 .
Y. Guo, Q. Wang, Y. Kawazoe and P. Jena, A New Silicon Phase with Direct Band Gap and Novel Optoelectronic Properties, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5(1), 1–7,  DOI:10.1038/srep14342 .
D. C. Hannah, J. Yang, P. Podsiadlo, M. K. Y. Chan, A. Demortière, D. J. Gosztola, V. B. Prakapenka, G. C. Schatz, U. Kortshagen and R. D. Schaller, On the Origin of Photoluminescence in Silicon Nanocrystals: Pressure-Dependent Structural and Optical Studies, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(8), 4200–4205,  DOI:10.1021/nl301787g .
K. Kůsová, P. Hapala, J. Valenta, P. Jelínek, O. Cibulka, L. Ondič and I. Pelant, Direct Bandgap Silicon: Tensile-Strained Silicon Nanocrystals, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1(2), 1300042,  DOI:10.1002/admi.201300042 .
D. C. Hannah, J. Yang, N. J. Kramer, G. C. Schatz, U. R. Kortshagen and R. D. Schaller, Reply to “Comment on Ultrafast Photoluminescence in Quantum-Confined Silicon Nanocrystals Arises from an Amorphous Surface Layer”, ACS Photonics, 2015, 456–458,  DOI:10.1021/ph500490a .
K. Kůsová, L. Ondič and I. Pelant, Comment on “Ultrafast Photoluminescence in Quantum-Confined Silicon Nanocrystals Arises from an Amorphous Surface Layer”, ACS Photonics, 2015, 454–455,  DOI:10.1021/ph500403j .
M. H. Mobarok, T. K. Purkait, M. A. Islam, M. Miskolzie and J. G. C. Veinot, Instantaneous Functionalization of Chemically Etched Silicon Nanocrystal Surfaces, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56(22), 6073–6077,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201609651 .
M. A. Islam, M. H. Mobarok, R. Sinelnikov, T. K. Purkait and J. G. C. Veinot, Phosphorus Pentachloride Initiated Functionalization of Silicon Nanocrystals, Langmuir, 2017, 33(35), 8766–8773,  DOI:10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b00518 .
G. T. A. Kovacs, N. I. Maluf and K. E. Petersen, Bulk Micromachining of Silicon, Proc. IEEE, 1998, 86(8), 1536–1551,  DOI:10.1109/5.704259 .
A. Bansal, X. Li, I. Lauermann, N. S. Lewis, S. I. Yi and W. H. Weinberg, Alkylation of Si Surfaces Using a Two-Step Halogenation/Grignard Route, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118(30), 7225–7226,  DOI:10.1021/ja960348n .
S. Rivillon, Y. J. Chabal, L. J. Webb, D. J. Michalak, N. S. Lewis, M. D. Halls and K. Raghavachari, Chlorination of Hydrogen-Terminated Silicon(111) Surfaces, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2005, 23(4), 1100–1106,  DOI:10.1116/1.1861941 .

          R. Satpathy and V. Pamuru, Making of Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells, in Solar PV Power, Elsevier,  2021, pp. 71–134,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-817626-9.00004-6 .
N. M. Johnson, Mechanism for Hydrogen Compensation of Shallow-Acceptor Impurities in Single-Crystal Silicon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 31(8), 5525–5528,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.31.5525 .
M. J. Caldas, A. Fazzio and A. Zunger, A Universal Trend in the Binding Energies of Deep Impurities in Semiconductors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1984, 45(6), 671–673,  DOI:10.1063/1.95351 .
W. M. Bullis, Properties of Gold in Silicon, Solid State Electron., 1966, 9(2), 143–168,  DOI:10.1016/0038-1101(66)90085-2 .
T. L. Chan, S. B. Zhang and J. R. Chelikowsky, An Effective One-Particle Theory for Formation Energies in Doping Si Nanostructures, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98(13), 133116,  DOI:10.1063/1.3571552 .
D. Hiller, J. López-Vidrier, S. Gutsch, M. Zacharias, M. Wahl, W. Bock, A. Brodyanski, M. Kopnarski, K. Nomoto, J. Valenta and D. König, Boron-Incorporating Silicon Nanocrystals Embedded in SiO2: Absence of Free Carriers vs. B-Induced Defects, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 1–11,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-08814-0 .
G. M. Dalpian and J. R. Chelikowsky, Self-Purification in Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96(22), 226802,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.226802 .
S. Gutsch, J. Laube, D. Hiller, W. Bock, M. Wahl, M. Kopnarski, H. Gnaser, B. Puthen-Veettil and M. Zacharias, Electronic Properties of Phosphorus Doped Silicon Nanocrystals Embedded in SiO2, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106(11), 113103,  DOI:10.1063/1.4915307 .
S. Huang, Y. H. So, G. Conibeer and M. Green, Doping of Silicon Quantum Dots Embedded in Nitride Matrix for All-Silicon Tandem Cells, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51(10 PART 2), 10NE10,  DOI:10.1143/JJAP.51.10NE10 .
S. Zhou, X. Pi, Z. Ni, Y. Ding, Y. Jiang, C. Jin, C. Delerue, D. Yang and T. Nozaki, Comparative Study on the Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance of Boron- and Phosphorus-Doped Silicon Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(1), 378–386,  DOI:10.1021/nn505416r .
N. J. Kramer, K. S. Schramke and U. R. Kortshagen, Plasmonic Properties of Silicon Nanocrystals Doped with Boron and Phosphorus, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(8), 5597–5603,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b02287 .
D. J. Rowe, J. S. Jeong, K. A. Mkhoyan and U. R. Kortshagen, Phosphorus-Doped Silicon Nanocrystals Exhibiting Mid-Infrared Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(3), 1317–1322,  DOI:10.1021/nl4001184 .
Z. Ni, X. Pi, S. Zhou, T. Nozaki, B. Grandidier and D. Yang, Size–Dependent Structures and Optical Absorption of Boron–Hyperdoped Silicon Nanocrystals, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4(5), 700–707,  DOI:10.1002/adom.201500706 .
L. Borowik, T. Nguyen-Tran, I. Roca, P. Cabarrocas and T. Mélin, Doped Semiconductor Nanocrystal Junctions, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114(20), 204305,  DOI:10.1063/1.4834516 .
B. F. P. McVey and R. D. Tilley, Solution Synthesis, Optical Properties, and, Bioimaging Applications of Silicon Nanocrystals, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47(10), 3045–3051,  DOI:10.1021/ar500215v .
P. Rohani, S. Banerjee, S. Sharifi-Asl, M. Malekzadeh, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, S. J. L. Billinge and M. T. Swihart, Synthesis and Properties of Plasmonic Boron-Hyperdoped Silicon Nanoparticles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(8), 1807788,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201807788 .
S. Chandra, Y. Masuda, N. Shirahata and F. M. Winnik, Transition-Metal-Doped NIR-Emitting Silicon Nanocrystals, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56(22), 6157–6160,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201700436 .
C. Rocks, V. Svrcek, T. Velusamy, M. Macias-Montero, P. Maguire and D. Mariotti, Type-I Alignment in MAPbI3 Based Solar Devices with Doped-Silicon Nanocrystals, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 245–255,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.05.036 .
M. Fujii, R. Fujii, M. Takada and H. Sugimoto, Silicon Quantum Dot Supraparticles for Fluorescence Bioimaging, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3(6), 6099–6107,  DOI:10.1021/acsanm.0c01295 .
H. Sugimoto, M. Fujii, K. Imakita, S. Hayashi and K. Akamatsu, All-Inorganic near-Infrared Luminescent Colloidal Silicon Nanocrystals: High Dispersibility in Polar Liquid by Phosphorus and Boron Codoping, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116(33), 17969–17974,  DOI:10.1021/jp305832x .
A. J. Almeida, H. Sugimoto, M. Fujii, M. S. Brandt, M. Stutzmann and R. N. Pereira, Doping Efficiency and Confinement of Donors in Embedded and Free Standing Si Nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93(11), 115425,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.93.115425 .
P. K. Nayak, S. Mahesh, H. J. Snaith and D. Cahen, Photovoltaic Solar Cell Technologies: Analysing the State of the Art, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4(4), 269–285,  DOI:10.1038/s41578-019-0097-0 .
R. Mazzaro, A. Gradone, S. Angeloni, G. Morselli, P. G. Cozzi, F. Romano, A. Vomiero and P. Ceroni, Hybrid Silicon Nanocrystals for Color-Neutral and Transparent Luminescent Solar Concentrators, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6(9), 2303–2311,  DOI:10.1021/acsphotonics.9b00802 .
F. Meinardi, S. Ehrenberg, L. Dhamo, F. Carulli, M. Mauri, F. Bruni, R. Simonutti, U. Kortshagen and S. Brovelli, Highly Efficient Luminescent Solar Concentrators Based on Earth-Abundant Indirect-Bandgap Silicon Quantum Dots, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11(3), 177–185,  DOI:10.1038/nphoton.2017.5 .
T. Velusamy, S. Mitra, M. Macias-Montero, V. Svrcek and D. Mariotti, Varying Surface Chemistries for P-Doped and n-Doped Silicon Nanocrystals and Impact on Photovoltaic Devices, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 28207–28214,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.5b06577 .
M. L. Brongersma and V. M. Shalaev, The Case for Plasmonics, Science, 2010, 440–441,  DOI:10.1126/science.1186905 .
Y. Zhong, S. D. Malagari, T. Hamilton and D. Wasserman, Review of Mid-Infrared Plasmonic Materials, J. Nanophotonics, 2015, 9(1), 093791,  DOI:10.1117/1.jnp.9.093791 .
L. Baldassarre, E. Sakat, J. Frigerio, A. Samarelli, K. Gallacher, E. Calandrini, G. Isella, D. J. Paul, M. Ortolani and P. Biagioni, Midinfrared Plasmon-Enhanced Spectroscopy with Germanium Antennas on Silicon Substrates, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(11), 7225–7231,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b03247 .
Z. Ni, L. Ma, S. Du, Y. Xu, M. Yuan, H. Fang, Z. Wang, M. Xu, D. Li, J. Yang, W. Hu, X. Pi and D. Yang, Plasmonic Silicon Quantum Dots Enabled High-Sensitivity Ultrabroadband Photodetection of Graphene-Based Hybrid Phototransistors, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(10), 9854–9862,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.7b03569 .
A. Podhorodecki, G. Zatryb, L. W. Golacki, J. Misiewicz, J. Wojcik and P. Mascher, On the Origin of Emission and Thermal Quenching of SRSO:Er3+ Films Grown by ECR-PECVD, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8(1), 1–12,  DOI:10.1186/1556-276X-8-98 .
D. Hiller, J. López-Vidrier, S. Gutsch, M. Zacharias, K. Nomoto and D. König, Defect-Induced Luminescence Quenching vs. Charge Carrier Generation of Phosphorus Incorporated in Silicon Nanocrystals as Function of Size, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 1–12,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-01001-1 .
A. L. Tchebotareva, M. J. A. de Dood, J. S. Biteen, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Quenching of Si Nanocrystal Photoluminescence by Doping with Gold or Phosphorous, J. Lumin., 2005, 114(2), 137–144,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2004.12.014 .
R. Limpens, M. Fujii, N. R. Neale and T. Gregorkiewicz, Negligible Electronic Interaction between Photoexcited Electron-Hole Pairs and Free Electrons in Phosphorus-Boron Co-Doped Silicon Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(11), 6397–6404,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b12313 .
R. Limpens, H. Sugimoto, N. R. Neale and M. Fujii, Critical Size for Carrier Delocalization in Doped Silicon Nanocrystals: A Study by Ultrafast Spectroscopy, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5(10), 4037–4045,  DOI:10.1021/acsphotonics.8b00671 .
R. Limpens and N. R. Neale, Free Electron-Driven Photophysics in n-Type Doped Silicon Nanocrystals, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(25), 12068–12077,  10.1039/c8nr02173b .
R. C. Newman, Defects in Silicon, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1982, 1163–1210,  DOI:10.1088/0034-4885/45/10/003 .
P. Lu, W. Mu, J. Xu, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, W. Li, L. Xu and K. Chen, Phosphorus Doping in Si Nanocrystals/SiO 2 Msultilayers and Light Emission with Wavelength Compatible for Optical Telecommunication, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6(1), 1–13,  DOI:10.1038/srep22888 .
D. Hiller, J. López-Vidrier, S. Gutsch, M. Zacharias, M. Wahl, W. Bock, A. Brodyanski, M. Kopnarski, K. Nomoto, J. Valenta and D. König, Boron-Incorporating Silicon Nanocrystals Embedded in SiO2: Absence of Free Carriers vs. B-Induced Defects, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 1–11,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-08814-0 .
D. Li, Y. Jiang, J. Liu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, W. Li and K. Chen, Modulation of Surface States by Phosphorus to Improve the Optical Properties of Ultra-Small Si Nanocrystals, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28(47), 475704,  DOI:10.1088/1361-6528/aa852e .
T. Nakamura, S. Adachi, M. Fujii, H. Sugimoto, K. Miura and S. Yamamoto, Size and Dopant-Concentration Dependence of Photoluminescence Properties of Ion-Implanted Phosphorus-and Boron-Codoped Si Nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B, 2015, 91, 165424,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.91.165424 .
B. Puthen Veettil, L. Wu, X. Jia, Z. Lin, T. Zhang, T. Yang, C. Johnson, D. McCamey, G. Conibeer and I. Perez-Würfl, Passivation Effects in B Doped Self-Assembled Si Nanocrystals, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105(22), 222108,  DOI:10.1063/1.4903776 .
H. Sugimoto, H. Zhou, M. Takada, J. Fushimi and M. Fujii, Visible-Light Driven Photocatalytic Hydrogen Generation by Water-Soluble All-Inorganic Core-Shell Silicon Quantum Dots, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(31), 15789–15794,  10.1039/d0ta01071e .
A. R. Stegner, R. N. Pereira, R. Lechner, K. Klein, H. Wiggers, M. Stutzmann and M. S. Brandt, Doping Efficiency in Freestanding Silicon Nanocrystals from the Gas Phase: Phosphorus Incorporation and Defect-Induced Compensation, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80(16), 165326,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.80.165326 .
M. Fujii, A. Mimura, S. Hayashi and K. Yamamoto, Photoluminescence from Si Nanocrystals Dispersed in Phosphosilicate Glass Thin Films: Improvement of Photoluminescence Efficiency, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75(2), 184–186,  DOI:10.1063/1.124313 .
F. Iori and S. Ossicini, Effects of Simultaneous Doping with Boron and Phosphorous on the Structural, Electronic and Optical Properties of Silicon Nanostructures, Phys. E: Low-Dimens. Syst. Nanostructures, 2009, 41(6), 939–946,  DOI:10.1016/j.physe.2008.08.010 .
M. Fujii, H. Sugimoto and K. Imakita, All-Inorganic Colloidal Silicon Nanocrystals - Surface Modification by Boron and Phosphorus Co-Doping, Nanotechnology, 2016, 262001,  DOI:10.1088/0957-4484/27/26/262001 .
H. Li, L. Guan, X. Zhang, H. Yu, D. Huang, M. Sun and S. Wang, A Cyanine-Based near-Infrared Fluorescent Probe for Highly Sensitive and Selective Detection of Hypochlorous Acid and Bioimaging, Talanta, 2016, 161, 592–598,  DOI:10.1016/j.talanta.2016.09.008 .
F. Peng, Z. Cao, X. Ji, B. Chu, Y. Su and Y. He, Silicon Nanostructures for Cancer Diagnosis and Therapy, Nanomedicine, 2015, 2109–2123,  DOI:10.2217/nnm.15.53 .
B. Ghosh and N. Shirahata, Colloidal Silicon Quantum Dots: Synthesis and Luminescence Tuning from the near-UV to the near-IR Range, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2014, 14207–14221,  DOI:10.1088/1468-6996/15/1/014207 .
F. Peng, Y. Su, Y. Zhong, C. Fan, S. T. Lee and Y. He, Silicon Nanomaterials Platform for Bioimaging, Biosensing, and Cancer Therapy, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47(2), 612–623,  DOI:10.1021/ar400221g .
R. Limpens, G. F. Pach and N. R. Neale, Nonthermal Plasma-Synthesized Phosphorus-Boron Co-Doped Si Nanocrystals: A New Approach to Nontoxic NIR-Emitters, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(12), 4426–4435,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.9b00810 .
B. F. P. McVey, D. König, X. Cheng, P. B. O'Mara, P. Seal, X. Tan, H. A. Tahini, S. C. Smith, J. J. Gooding and R. D. Tilley, Synthesis, Optical Properties and Theoretical Modelling of Discrete Emitting States in Doped Silicon Nanocrystals for Bioimaging, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(33), 15600–15607,  10.1039/c8nr05071f .
Y. Yu, G. Fan, A. Fermi, R. Mazzaro, V. Morandi, P. Ceroni, D. M. Smilgies and B. A. Korgel, Size-Dependent Photoluminescence Efficiency of Silicon Nanocrystal Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(41), 23240–23248,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b08054 .
R. J. Clark, M. K. M. Dang and J. G. C. Veinot, Exploration of Organic Acid Chain Length on Water-Soluble Silicon Quantum Dot Surfaces, Langmuir, 2010, 26(19), 15657–15664,  DOI:10.1021/la102983c .
M. Aghajamali, H. Xie, M. Javadi, W. P. Kalisvaart, J. M. Buriak and J. G. C. Veinot, Size and Surface Effects of Silicon Nanocrystals in Graphene Aerogel Composite Anodes for Lithium Ion Batteries, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30(21), 7782–7792,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b03198 .
Z. Yang, C. M. Gonzalez, T. K. Purkait, M. Iqbal, A. Meldrum and J. G. C. Veinot, Radical Initiated Hydrosilylation on Silicon Nanocrystal Surfaces: An Evaluation of Functional Group Tolerance and Mechanistic Study, Langmuir, 2015, 31(38), 10540–10548,  DOI:10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b02307 .
Y. Yu, C. M. Hessel, T. D. Bogart, M. G. Panthani, M. R. Rasch and B. A. Korgel, Room Temperature Hydrosilylation of Silicon Nanocrystals with Bifunctional Terminal Alkenes, Langmuir, 2013, 29(5), 1533–1540,  DOI:10.1021/la304874y .
Z. Yang, M. Iqbal, A. R. Dobbie and J. G. C. Veinot, Surface-Induced Alkene Oligomerization: Does Thermal Hydrosilylation Really Lead to Monolayer Protected Silicon Nanocrystals?, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(46), 17595–17601,  DOI:10.1021/ja409657y. .
M. Dasog, K. Bader and J. G. C. Veinot, Influence of Halides on the Optical Properties of Silicon Quantum Dots, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(4), 1153–1156,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b00115 .
M. A. Islam, T. K. Purkait and J. G. C. Veinot, Chloride Surface Terminated Silicon Nanocrystal Mediated Synthesis of Poly(3-Hexylthiophene), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(43), 15130–15133,  DOI:10.1021/ja5075739 .
L. M. Wheeler, N. R. Neale, T. Chen and U. R. Kortshagen, Hypervalent Surface Interactions for Colloidal Stability and Doping of Silicon Nanocrystals, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4(1), 1–10,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms3197 .
M. Dasog, Z. Yang, S. Regli, T. M. Atkins, A. Faramus, M. P. Singh, E. Muthuswamy, S. M. Kauzlarich, R. D. Tilley and J. G. C. Veinot, Chemical Insight into the Origin of Red and Blue Photoluminescence Arising from Freestanding Silicon Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(3), 2676–2685,  DOI:10.1021/nn4000644 .
J. S. Kim, S. Yang and B. S. Bae, Thermally Stable Transparent Sol-Gel Based Siloxane Hybrid Material with High Refractive Index for Light Emitting Diode(LED) Encapsulation, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22(11), 3549–3555,  DOI:10.1021/cm100903b .
J. P. Bell, J. E. Cloud, J. Cheng, C. Ngo, S. Kodambaka, A. Sellinger, S. K. R. Williams and Y. Yang, N-Bromosuccinimide-Based Bromination and Subsequent Functionalization of Hydrogen-Terminated Silicon Quantum Dots, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(93), 51105–51110,  10.1039/c4ra08477b .
J. Kehrle, I. M. D. Höhlein, Z. Yang, A.-R. Jochem, T. Helbich, T. Kraus, J. G. C. Veinot and B. Rieger, Thermoresponsive and Photoluminescent Hybrid Silicon Nanoparticles by Surface-Initiated Group Transfer Polymerization of Diethyl Vinylphosphonate, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126(46), 12702–12705,  DOI:10.1002/ange.201405946 .
H. Yu, A. N. Thiessen, M. A. Hossain, M. J. Kloberg, B. Rieger and J. G. C. Veinot, Thermally Induced Dehydrogenative Coupling of Organosilanes and H-Terminated Silicon Quantum Dots onto Germanane Surfaces, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32(11), 4536–4543,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c00482 .
T. Matsumoto, M. Maeda and H. Kobayashi, Photoluminescence Enhancement of Adsorbed Species on Si Nanoparticles, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11(1), 1–6,  DOI:10.1186/s11671-015-1220-9 .
R. Sinelnikov, M. Dasog, J. Beamish, A. Meldrum and J. G. C. Veinot, Revisiting an Ongoing Debate: What Role Do Surface Groups Play in Silicon Nanocrystal Photoluminescence?, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4(8), 1920–1929,  DOI:10.1021/acsphotonics.7b00102 .
X. Wen, L. van Dao and P. Hannaford, Temperature Dependence of Photoluminescence in Silicon Quantum Dots, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40(12), 3573–3578,  DOI:10.1088/0022-3727/40/12/005 .
G. Ledoux, J. Gong, F. Huisken, O. Guillois and C. Reynaud, Photoluminescence of Size-Separated Silicon Nanocrystals: Confirmation of Quantum Confinement, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80(25), 4834–4836,  DOI:10.1063/1.1485302 .
A. Shiohara, S. Hanada, S. Prabakar, K. Fujioka, T. H. Lim, K. Yamamoto, P. T. Northcote and R. D. Tilley, Chemical Reactions on Surface Molecules Attached to Silicon Quantum Dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(1), 248–253,  DOI:10.1021/ja906501v .
I. M. D. Höhlein, A. Angı, R. Sinelnikov, J. G. C. Veinot and B. Rieger, Functionalization of Hydride-Terminated Photoluminescent Silicon Nanocrystals with Organolithium Reagents, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21(7), 2755–2758,  DOI:10.1002/chem.201405555 .
A. Angi, R. Sinelnikov, A. Meldrum, J. G. C. Veinot, I. Balberg, D. Azulay, O. Millo and B. Rieger, Photoluminescence through In-Gap States in Phenylacetylene Functionalized Silicon Nanocrystals, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(15), 7849–7853,  10.1039/c6nr01435f .
M. Miyano, Y. Kitagawa, S. Wada, A. Kawashima, A. Nakajima, T. Nakanishi, J. Ishioka, T. Shibayama, S. Watanabe and Y. Hasegawa, Photophysical Properties of Luminescent Silicon Nanoparticles Surface-Modified with Organic Molecules via Hydrosilylation, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2016, 15(1), 99–104,  10.1039/c5pp00364d .
Y. Yu and B. A. Korgel, Controlled Styrene Monolayer Capping of Silicon Nanocrystals by Room Temperature Hydrosilylation, Langmuir, 2015, 31(23), 6532–6537,  DOI:10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b01291 .
X. Liu, S. Zhao, W. Gu, Y. Zhang, X. Qiao, Z. Ni, X. Pi and D. Yang, Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Colloidal Silicon Quantum Dots with Octyl and Phenylpropyl Ligands, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(6), 5959–5966,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.7b16980 .
M. L. Mastronardi, E. J. Henderson, D. P. Puzzo, Y. Chang, Z. B. Wang, M. G. Helander, J. Jeong, N. P. Kherani, Z. Lu and G. A. Ozin, Silicon Nanocrystal OLEDs: Effect of Organic Capping Group on Performance, Small, 2012, 8(23), 3542–3542,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201290131 .
A. Angi, R. Sinelnikov, H. H. Heenen, A. Meldrum, J. G. C. Veinot, C. Scheurer, K. Reuter, O. Ashkenazy, D. Azulay, I. Balberg, O. Millo and B. Rieger, The Influence of Conjugated Alkynyl(Aryl) Surface Groups on the Optical Properties of Silicon Nanocrystals: Photoluminescence through in-Gap States, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29(35), 355705,  DOI:10.1088/1361-6528/aac9ef .
I. Sychugov, R. Juhasz, J. Linnros and J. Valenta, Luminescence Blinking of a Si Quantum Dot in a SiO 2 Shell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71(11), 115331,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.71.115331 .
Y. J. Oh, I. H. Lee, S. Kim, J. Lee and K. J. Chang, Dipole-Allowed Direct Band Gap Silicon Superlattices, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5(1), 1–11,  DOI:10.1038/srep18086 .
M. L. Mastronardi, F. Maier-Flaig, D. Faulkner, E. J. Henderson, C. Kübel, U. Lemmer and G. A. Ozin, Size-Dependent Absolute Quantum Yields for Size-Separated Colloidally-Stable Silicon Nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2011, 12(1), 337–342,  DOI:10.1021/nl2036194 .
F. Erogbogbo, C. W. Chang, J. May, P. N. Prasad and M. T. Swihart, Energy Transfer from a Dye Donor to Enhance the Luminescence of Silicon Quantum Dots, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(16), 5163–5168,  10.1039/c2nr31003a .
N. Liu, H. Z. Chen, F. Chen and M. Wang, Förster Resonance Energy Transfer from Poly(9-Vinyl Carbazole) to Silicon Nanoparticles in Their Composite Films, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 451(1–3), 70–74,  DOI:10.1016/j.cplett.2007.11.057 .
M. Locritani, Y. Yu, G. Bergamini, M. Baroncini, J. K. Molloy, B. A. Korgel and P. Ceroni, Silicon Nanocrystals Functionalized with Pyrene Units: Efficient Light-Harvesting Antennae with Bright near-Infrared Emission, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(19), 3325–3329,  DOI:10.1021/jz501609e .
R. Mazzaro, M. Locritani, J. K. Molloy, M. Montalti, Y. Yu, B. A. Korgel, G. Bergamini, V. Morandi and P. Ceroni, Photoinduced Processes between Pyrene-Functionalized Silicon Nanocrystals and Carbon Allotropes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(12), 4390–4397,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b01769 .
A. Fermi, M. Locritani, G. di Carlo, M. Pizzotti, S. Caramori, Y. Yu, B. A. Korgel, G. Bergamini and P. Ceroni, Light-Harvesting Antennae Based on Photoactive Silicon Nanocrystals Functionalized with Porphyrin Chromophores, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 185, 481–495,  10.1039/c5fd00098j .
P. Xia, E. K. Raulerson, D. Coleman, C. S. Gerke, L. Mangolini, M. L. Tang and S. T. Roberts, Achieving Spin-Triplet
Exciton Transfer between Silicon and Molecular Acceptors for Photon Upconversion, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12(2), 137–144,  DOI:10.1038/s41557-019-0385-8 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:


Precursor thermal decomposition	530–1060	1–200	5–70	
8–10, 44–46, 51–57, 60–69 and 75–79
Nonthermal plasma	690–920	2–10	0.5–70	
14, 80–85 and 87
Laser ablation	400–750	2–100	10–70	
90–94

Etching bulk Si	300–510	2–35	12–25	
99 and 100
Solution reactions	320–460	1.5–10	10–25	
13, 103, 109, 111–122

 	Fig. 1  (a) Synthesis of SiNPs from thermally-induced disproportionation of HSQ. (b–g) Bright-field transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of SiNPs prepared at the indicated temperatures using the procedure in (a). (h) Photoluminescence spectra of allylbenzene-passivated SiNPs showing a blue-shift with decreasing size. Adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2012, 12(1), 337–342. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (i) Normalized diffuse reflectance spectra of SiNP solutions and (j) scattering spectra data from SiNPs of 100–220 nm in diameter converted into CIE1931 colour space. Adapted with permission from Adv. Optical Mater., 2020, 8, 2000033.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Nonthermal plasma synthesis/functionalization of SiNPs. (b) Bright-field TEM images of SiNPs produced using non-thermal plasma processing. Reprinted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(20), 8451–8458. Copyright 2019 American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Representative top-down approaches for the synthesis of SiNPs by liquid-phase laser ablation. Reprinted with permission from B. Ghosh and N. Shirahata, Science and Technology of Advanced Materials, 2014, 15(1), 014207. (b) Laser ablation by pulsed-UV-laser irradiation in a liquid medium with and without HF. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(15), 8623–8629. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Preparation of SiNPs from porous Si produced by electrochemical etching. Adapted with permission from Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54(22), 5982–5989. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Common solution-based methods for preparing SiNPs.	 

 	Fig. 5  An illustration of the structural components that make up SiNPs and the parameters that can be altered to define properties.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A 29Si[1H] HETCOR MAS NMR spectrum of 64 nm H-SiNPs. (b) An overlay of 29Si MAS NMR and 29Si[1H] CP MAS NMR of 64 nm H-SiNPs for the indicated mixing times. Arrows in the top spectrum highlight subsurface NMR features in the direct 29Si MAS NMR. (c) A representation of the layered H-SiNP structure consisting of an amorphous surface, semi-ordered subsurface, and crystalline core. Adapted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(3), 678–688. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The relationship between SiNP PLQY and input power used during plasma synthesis. (b) A comparison of the PL spectra of crystalline (red) and amorphous (blue) plasma synthesis prepared SiNPs. (c) The relationship between amorphous SiNP diameter and bandgap. Images (a) and (b) reprinted with permission from R. Anthony and U. Kortshagen, Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 80, 11540, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.80.115407. Copyright 2009 by the American Physical Society. Image (c) reprinted from Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 8011–8016. Licensed under CC BY.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representations of SiNPs with (a) a significant difference between the overall particle diameter and crystallite size and (b) a similar overall particle diameter and crystallite size. The photoluminescence emission maxima of the two types of SiNPs was plotted as a function of overall particle size (dTEM) and crystalline domain size (dXRD). Adapted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2020, 32(16), 6838–6846. Copyright 2020 of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of (a) p-type and (b) n-type doped silicon. In p-type doping with B used as an example, when substituted into the Si lattice it generates a free hole, resulting in an acceptor energy level near the valence band. In n-type doping with P is used as an example, when substituted into the Si lattice it generates a free electron, resulting in a donor energy level near the conductance band.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Representation of charge carriers oscillating in an electromagnetic field producing LSPR (b) Schematic diagram of the structure of the hybrid phototransistor based on B-doped Si QDs and graphene. Adapted with permission from ACS Nano, 2017, 11(10), 9854–9862. Copyright 2017 American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Tuning photoluminescence by functionalizing H-SiNPs with alkyl, carbon dioxide, alkylamines, and alkylphosphine oxide. (b) Representation of halogenation and alkylation of H-SiNPs and (c) PL spectra of alkylated SiNPs bearing Cl, I, and Br surface species. Adapted with permission from Ange. Chemie, 2015, 55(7), 2016 and Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(4), 1153–1156. Licensned under CC BY and copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Proposed emission mechanisms for SiNPs influenced by surface oxidation and oxynitride moieties. (b) PL spectra of SiNPs functionalized with n-hexyllithium, phenyllithium, and lithium phenylacetylide. (c) Tunnelling spectra of phenylacetylide-SiNPs. The inset shows the corresponding cross-section of some NCs on which the spectra was acquired. Adapted with permission from ACS Photonics, 2017, 4(8), 1920–1929 and Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7849–7853. Copyright of 2017 American Chemical Society and 2016 CC BY-NC.	 

 	Fig. 13  Absorbance spectra of (a) ∼3 nm and (c) ∼5 nm dodecyl-functionalized SiNPs (SiNP), Pyrene (Py), and pyrene/dodecyl-co-functionalized SiNPs (SiNP-py). PL spectra of (b) ∼3 nm and (d) ∼5 nm SiNP-py shows quenching of Py emission along with enhanced SiNP emissions in comparison to physical mixture of SiNPs and pyrene. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(19), 3325–3329. Copyright of 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
