Emerging tellurium nanostructures: controllable synthesis and their applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00013H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00013H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2732-2753Emerging tellurium nanostructures: controllable synthesis and their applications

        
          
            Zhen 
            He†
, 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Yang†
, 
      
        
          
            Jian-Wei 
            Liu
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Shu-Hong 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *
      Division of Nanomaterials & Chemistry, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Hefei Science Centre, CAS, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, China. E-mail: jwliu13@ustc.edu.cn; shyu@ustc.edu.cn
Received 
      6th January 2017
    First published on 20th April 2017AbstractTellurium (Te) is a rare element in trace amounts of about one part per billion, comparable to that of platinum and ranked 75th in the abundance of the elements in the earth crust. Te nanostructures, as narrow bandgap semiconductors, have numerous potential applications in the fabrication of many modern devices. The past decades have witnessed an explosion in new strategies for synthesizing diverse emerging Te nanostructures with controlled compositions, sizes, shapes, and structures. Their structure-determined nature makes functional Te nanomaterials an attractive candidate for modern applications. This review focuses on the synthesis and morphology control of emerging Te nanostructures and summarizes the latest developments in the applications of Te nanostructures, such as their use as chemical transformation templates to access a huge family of nanowires/nanotubes, batteries, photodetectors, ion detection and removal, element doping, piezoelectric energy harvesting, gas sensing, thermoelectric devices and many other device applications. Various Te nanostructures with different shapes and structures will exploit the beneficial properties associated with their assembly process and nanofabrication. Finally, the prospects for future applications of Te nanomaterials are summarized and highlighted.
Zhen He
Zhen received his BS degree in polymer materials and engineering from Northwestern Polytechnical University in 2013. Then, he started his PhD study in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Science and Technology of China. He is interested in the dynamic assembling process of one-dimensional nanomaterials and their device fabrication.
Yuan Yang
Yuan Yang received his BS degree in inorganic chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2011. Then, he started his PhD study in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in the Department of Chemistry at the USTC. He is interested in nanowire synthesis and their applications.
Jian-Wei Liu
Jian-Wei Liu received his BS degree in chemical engineering and Technology from Hefei University of Technology in 2007 and PhD in nanochemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in 2013. Since then, he has joined Yu's group at USTC, and he is now an associate professor. He is interested in the synthesis and self-assembly of nanoscale building blocks as well as their derived nanodevices.
Shu-Hong Yu
Shu-Hong Yu received his PhD in Inorg. Chem. in 1998 from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). From 1999 to 2001, he worked in Tokyo Institute of Technology as a Postdoctoral Fellow. From 2001 to 2002, he worked as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces. He was appointed as a full professor in 2002 and to the Cheung Kong Professorship in 2006 by the Ministry of Education at the Department of Chemistry, USTC. His research interests include the bio-inspired synthesis and self-assembly of nanoscale building blocks, nanocomposites, and their related properties. He has authored and co-authored more than 430 refereed journal publications. He serves as an editorial advisory board member of the journals Accounts of Chemical Research, Chemical Science, Materials Horizons, Chemistry of Materials, Nano Research, CrystEngComm, ChemNanoMat and ChemPlusChem.
1. Introduction
Tellurium (Te) is a member of the chalcogen element family and is a well-known p-type semiconductor with a narrow bandgap energy of 0.35 eV at room temperature, exhibiting intriguing properties.1 Tellurium was discovered in 1782 by Müller. Its presence as a trace constituent (0.002 ppm) in the Earth's crust is comparable to that of platinum. The properties of tellurium nanocrystals are mainly dependent on the electrical structure of the element tellurium which has six outer electrons in the 5s25p4 configuration.2 Two of these electrons are paired in the s-orbital, occupying the lower energetic level in the shell, but four electrons are distributed between three p-orbitals. The Te element is a key component of many functional devices and in 2011 was noted as one of the two most important materials (the other element is platinum) according to the Materials Genome Initiative launched by the United States of America.3 Commercially, the primary use of tellurium is in alloys, foremost in steel and copper to improve machinability. Applications in solar panels and as semiconductor materials are also consuming a considerable fraction of tellurium production.4,5
Size and shape are two typical parameters for tailoring the properties of nanocrystal-based materials.6,7 While the size determines the specific surface area and the ratio of surface to bulk atoms, the shape controls the facets and thus the surface structure of a nanocrystal, as well as the fractions of atoms at corners and edges. As such, control of size and shape offers great versatility in tuning the properties of nanocrystalline materials. In recent years, morphology control has received the most attention in the exploration of novel functional nanocrystals. To this end, solution-phase routes for the synthesis of Te nanomaterials with different morphologies are reported which simply vary the reaction parameters.8–20 These early works clearly demonstrated the importance of controlling the morphology of Te nanocrystals and thus maximizing their performance. A variety of principles and strategies have been developed to synthesize Te nanostructures, such as hydrothermal and solvothermal methods,12,15,21–24 the photo-thermally assisted method,8 the sublimation–condensation process,25 the reflux process,26 microwave assisted synthesis,27,28 template based strategies,20,29–31 vacuum vapor deposition,13 and ultrasonic-induced growth.32 At the beginning of the century, many comprehensive and impressive reviews were published on topics related to tellurium, but mainly on organic tellurium chemistry.33–35 For example, the Chivers group reviewed organophosphorus–tellurium chemistry, including the historical development of each class of phosphorus–tellurium compounds.36 Meanwhile, the same group together with the Laitinen group reviewed organic-tellurium compounds based on their hypervalency and bond energy.37 From the viewpoint of metal and ligands, Jain and Ruck reviewed Te as a ligand in coordination chemistry.38,39 Furthermore, based on the reduction of tellurium compounds by bacterial cells, Zannoni et al. reviewed the microbial production of Te quantum dots and Te nanoparticles for biological and medical applications.40 Xu et al. reviewed the selenium/tellurium chemistry used in block copolymers with novel stimuli responsiveness and enhanced sensitivity.41 However, few reviews focus on the field of Te nanostructures and their novel applications.
As shown in the schematic diagram in Fig. 1, in the following sections we mainly summarize and highlight recent advances in the rational design and morphology control synthesis of Te nanostructures, their novel properties and potential applications. Firstly, we will mainly describe various Te nanostructures with different morphologies which are synthesized by rational design strategies in liquid solution, including nanoparticles, nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes, three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures, and even chiral nanostructures. Then, from the viewpoint of practical applications, recent advances in the scaled-up synthesis of Te nanostructures will also be reviewed. Clearly, all these examples demonstrate that potential applications of Te nanostructures and assemblies can be implemented, which provide us with unprecedented opportunities for applications.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the morphology control of Te nanostructures and their wide application potentials. 
The crystal structure of tellurium, as shown in Fig. 2a and b, is highly anisotropic, comprising helical chains of covalently bound atoms. There are van der Waals forces among the chains which in turn bind the chains to form a hexagonal lattice. Te crystallizes into the lattice at normal pressure, with a systematic arrangement of Te atoms in spiral chains with neighboring atoms rotated by 120° and each sharing covalent bonds with two of its nearest neighbors.32,42–44 The chains in the Te crystal structure are oriented along the c-axis (along the [001] direction), and locating a chain at the centre and at each of the six corners of the hexagon causes the formation of the hexagonal lattice. This structure gives Te inherent chirality, as well as a strong tendency toward one-dimensional (1D) growth so that its crystals always grow along the c-axis and have a tendency to form 1D structures.45,46 Based on theoretical modeling by first-principles calculations, Fig. 2c shows the electronic band structures and total density of states.47 The phase of Te nanostructures can be indexed by the typical X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern which is shown in Fig. 2d.48 Also, two obvious absorption peaks in the ultraviolet-visible spectrum (UV-Vis) can be easily detected, while the absorption peak at 266 nm is caused by the direct transition from the valence band to the conduction band, and the broad peak at 630 nm is due to a forbidden transition.28
 Fig. 2  A schematic illustration showing the crystal structure and electronic structures of tellurium. (a) Spiral chains of the crystals arrange in a crystal structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. (b) View along the c-axis indicating spiral chains of Te atomic structures with an angle of 120°; (c) electronic band structures and total density of states (DOS) of tellurium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 Wiley. (d) The XRD pattern spectrum of Te nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2009 Elsevier. 
2. Synthesis of tellurium nanostructures with controlled morphology
It is now well-known that by shrinking the morphology and size of materials to the nanometer scale, the chemical, optical, electrical, magnetic, and mechanical properties can be altered from their bulk state.49 In addition, the dimensionality of the materials plays a critical role in determining their properties and applications, because of the different ways in which electrons interact in zero-dimensional (0D), 1D and 2D nanostructures. Meanwhile, owing to the unique and novel properties of nanostructures, their synthesis and utilization in various applications have been reported widely.50–52 The past decade has witnessed a remarkable drive for the successful synthesis of Te nanocrystals in a rich variety of shapes, including zero-dimensional nanoparticles, one-dimensional nanostructures, and even more complex hierarchical structures (Fig. 3). To date, solution-based synthesis strategies are of significant importance in synthesizing Te nanocrystals, typically by reducing a Te precursor in the presence of a surfactant such as poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP). The process of forming only one shape as the dominant product is strongly dependent on the nucleation and growth conditions, such as the choice of surfactants, pH value, initial solution, reaction time and so on.
 Fig. 3  A schematic illustration of the reaction pathways that lead to Te nanostructures with different shapes. 
2.1 Zero-dimensional Te nanoparticles
Nanoparticles are particles between 1 and 100 nanometers in size, which have received increasing scientific interest due to a wide variety of potential applications in biomedical, optical and electronic fields.53 A solution strategy bubbling H2Te gas through cylindrical polymer brushes (CPB) into the solution at room temperature was reported by Müller et al.30 to synthesize single-crystalline Te nanoparticles with a uniform size of (22 ± 3) nm, as shown in Fig. 4a. H2Te gas was distributed via argon flow into the reaction container. Fig. 4b shows the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of a trigonal Te nanoparticle, indicating the crystalline structure of the nanoparticles. By controlling the reaction time or cutting off the H2Te flow, the nanoparticles can be grown into Te nanorods with different aspect ratios.30
 Fig. 4  Te nanoparticles: (a and b) TEM image at different amplifications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2008 Wiley. (c and d) Typical TEM and HRTEM images. Inset: Suspensions of Te NPs after cleaning once, twice, and thrice. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2008 IOPscience. 
Dickerson's group developed an environmentally friendly method at room temperature by using Na2Te as a precursor and oleic acid as an oxidizing agent through a one-step procedure to produce Te nanoparticles with sizes of 1.5 ± 3 nm and 27.5 ± 5 nm, as shown in Fig. 4c and d.54 In detail, the oxidized Te firstly nucleates into 1.5 nm Te nanoparticles and some of them grow to 27.5 nm because of a classical Ostwald ripening process. An ultrasonic process can be introduced to synthesize Te nanoparticles with average diameters of 20 and 90 nm.55 Comparing the bulk Te and Te nanoparticles with different diameters, a size-dependent structural phase transition is investigated under a high pressure of 20 GPa. The experimental results indicate that 20 nm Te nanoparticles, 90 nm nanoparticles, and bulk Te all undergo two phase transitions up to 20 GPa, their respective transition pressures being about 7.2 and 10.3 GPa, 5.9 and 8.8 GPa, and 4.0 and 6.8 GPa.54
2.2 One-dimensional Te nanowires, nanotubes, nanorods and nanobelts
Within the past two decades, 1D semiconductor nanostructures, such as nanowires, nanobelts, and nanotubes, have attracted vast interest due to their fundamental significance in basic scientific research and potential applications. It is known that the crystal structure of tellurium is highly anisotropic, consisting of helical chains of covalently bound tellurium atoms with three atom per turn which have a strong tendency to grow along the c-axis direction into a one-dimensional structure.56–58 Various one-dimensional Te architectures, such as nanowires and nanotubes, have been synthesized by different methods, including microwave-assisted synthesis,28 solvothermal or hydrothermal methods,4,22,26,59–61 thermal evaporation,62,63 porous templates method46 and chemical vapor deposition.29,53,56–58 Single-crystalline tellurium nanowires and nanotubes are selectively synthesized from tellurium powder through a hydrothermal recrystallization route.5

2.2.1 One-dimensional Te nanowires. 
Nanowires with nanometer diameters are typical 1D nanomaterials which represent an arguable and versatile platform for basic science and applied science.64 Besides carbon nanotubes and metal nanowires, semiconductor nanowires have attracted explosive attention owing to their unique properties, such as for light-emitting diodes (LEDs), logic gates, lasers, wave guides, and devices for energy conversion.65,66 To get Te nanowires, it is required that only one dimension of the structures extends to a much greater length scale than the nanometer scale, while the other two dimensions should be restricted to a nanometer regime.67 Furuta et al. have extensively investigated the morphologies of tellurium whiskers growing on the surfaces of solid substrates from the vapor phase.46 The formation of filamentary crystals is strongly dependent on the substrate temperature. Then, Xia et al. synthesized tellurium nanostructures via solution-phase routes resembling the Ostwald ripening process.56 In the initial reaction step, the Te precursor is transformed into Te atoms and crystal nuclei are formed during prolonged reaction (Fig. 3). As shown in Fig. 5a, the reaction begins to occur with an initial reduction of t-Te nanocrystallites which have a lower free energy than α-Te. Because of the chain-shaped structures, the process shows the preferential growth of the (001) plane. Fig. 5b shows the typical transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of Te nanowires. The Komarneni group reported a hydrothermal process for the synthesis of Te nanowires with a diameter of 80 nm by using biomolecules (alginic acid) as both reducing agent and directional template (Fig. 5c).4 According to the selected area diffraction (SAED) pattern and HRTEM image, the nanowire has a single-crystalline nature and a preferred growth direction of [001]. Large-scale selective synthesis of uniform single crystalline tellurium nanowires with a diameter of 4–9 nm, and microbelts with a width of 250–800 nm and tens of micrometers in length, can also be realized by a PVP-assisted hydrothermal process or microwave process.22,29
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of Te nanowire; reprinted with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2013 Royal of Society Chemistry. (b and c) TEM image of Te nanowire; reprinted with permission from ref. 4 and 22. Copyright 2004 Wiley and 2006 American Chemical Society. 


2.2.2 One-dimensional Te nanotubes. 
A nanotube is a nanometer-scale tube-like structure and a carbon nanotube is a typical example.68,69 It is well known that tellurium has a highly anisotropic crystal structure consisting of helical chains with covalently bound atoms, which are in turn bound together through van der Waals interactions into a hexagonal lattice. This inherent anisotropy makes these materials ideal candidates for generating 1D nanostructures even without the need for templates or surfactants to induce their anisotropic growth. Te nanotubes along the [001] direction can be prepared when large Te seeds with a hollow center appear (Fig. 6a). This crystalline phenomenon also occurs in the centrosymmetric planes (20), (10), (0), (10) and (20).58 In this context, Te nanotubes with diameters ranging from 200 to 600 nm and lengths of 4 to 15 μm (Fig. 6b and c) were synthesized by Qian's group70 by a simple hydrothermal reduction method. Our group also demonstrated a facile strategy for the selective synthesis of tellurium nanotubes with sloping cross-section and hexagonal cross-section via a surfactant-assisted solvothermal process under mild conditions.61 In detail, super-long and high-quality Te nanotubes with sloping cross-sections are synthesized by the use of TeO2 as a precursor, which is reduced by ethylene alcohol in the presence of cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB). The obtained Te nanotubes show a length of 150–200 μm, with outer diameters of 100–500 nm and wall thicknesses of 50–100 nm, as shown in Fig. 6d and e. When the surfactant CTAB is replaced with cellulose acetate (CA), t-Te nanotubes with hexagonal cross-sections can be obtained. The Te nanotubes grow along the [001] direction and have excellent crystallinity (Fig. 6f and g).61
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth of Te nanotubes; reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2013 Royal of Society Chemistry. (b and c) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image and TEM image of Te nanotubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (d–g) Tellurium nanotube structures with sloping cross-sections synthesized in the presence of CTAB (0.23 g) at 180 °C for 24 h. (d and e) SEM and TEM images of as-prepared tellurium nanotubes. (f) SEM image at higher magnification for Te nanotubes, revealing the sloping cross-sections; (g) SAED pattern taken on the Te nanotube. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 


2.2.3 One-dimensional Te nanobelts. 
A nanobelt is a nanostructure in the form of a belt71 and single-crystal tellurium nanobelts can be synthesized through a controlled hydrothermal route23 or through thermal evaporation and deposition of Te bulk powder in a vacuum system.13 Among all the methods, the hydrothermal route exhibits fast and facile advantages that were selected by Qian et al. to synthesize Te nanobelts.23 The Te nanobelts obtained via the disproportionation of sodium tellurite in the presence of aqueous ammonia at 180 °C possess an average thickness of 8 nm, a width of 30 to 500 nm and lengths of up to several hundred micrometers.
Due to its thin and uniform thickness along its entire length (Fig. 7a),23 some helical and ring-like Te nanobelts are found, indicating their good helical twisting and bending property. The successful formation of high-quality nanobelts strongly depends on their growth kinetics, which is controlled by the pH value, reaction temperature and pressure and the concentration of the sodium tellurite. A proper control leads to a slow formation rate of Te atoms which is helpful for the preferential growth of the (110) crystal plane. Moreover, trigonal tellurium shows the anisotropic helical chain structure, useful for the formation of nanobelts.23 Besides the hydrothermal strategy mentioned above, some other methods have also been reported to synthesize Te nanobelts. Through the simple vacuum vapor deposition method, high-quality Te nanobelts can be obtained at an evaporation temperature of 350 °C and a deposition temperature of 200 °C (the melting point of Te is 449 °C).13 During the deposition process, the reaction time and temperature are two significant parameters that determine the final morphology of Te nanobelts. As a result, nanobelts with an average width of 5 μm and thickness of 100 nm on a Si substrate can be obtained (Fig. 7b and c). These highly crystalline nanobelts with an interplanar spacing of 0.59 nm indicate the preferred growth direction along the c-axis (Fig. 7d). When subjected to electron beams, the nanobelts turn into helical curls due to their sensitivity to the electron beam.13
 Fig. 7  (a) Series of TEM images of Te nanobelts in a twisted, helical state, or bending in a circle; reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2002 Wiley. (b and c) Morphology of Te nanobelts at different magnifications; (d) HRTEM image of the Te nanobelt, inset: fast Fourier transformation (FFT) pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 


2.2.4 One-dimensional Te nanomaterials with controllable aspect ratios. 
With decades of development of the synthesis of Te nanostructures, direct chemical reduction has been demonstrated to be a considerably high-yielding and relatively simple production method.22 The rational design and precise shape/size control of Te nanostructures through solution-based approaches play important roles in fabricating functional nanodevices. Recently, our group reported a solution-based systematic process to dramatically improve the synthesis of monodispersed and well-crystalline Te nanostructures, which can be precisely tuned by the amount of PVP as the chemical ‘condiment’ and by controlling the reaction parameters.44 Nanoparticles, nanorods, and nanowires with different lengths (Fig. 8a–c) are prepared by maintaining the mixture reaction solution at 70 °C from 15 s to 3 h, while nanowires with increasing diameters (Fig. 8e) can be obtained by increasing the ratio of acetone in the reaction solution. When the ratio of acetone is beyond 50% of the total solution volume, Te nanotubes (Fig. 8f) can be prepared. During the synthesis process, the capping agent PVP plays an important role in controlling the size. If acetone is introduced into the reaction system, PVP is soluble in water but insoluble in acetone which confines PVP in the mixture solution and affects the capping effects, resulting in increased diameters.44
 Fig. 8  Te nanostructures with the morphology tuned continuously through a solution phase approach. (a–c) TEM images of Te nanostructures from nanoparticles to nanorods. (d and e) TEM images of Te nanowires with increased diameter. (f) SEM image of Te nanotubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 
Te nanorods with excellent dispersability in aqueous phase were reported by Yu et al. and their aspect ratio can be tuned accurately when the reaction is maintained at 70 °C, which demonstrates that reaction time plays a crucial role in Te nanostructure control.44 With a prolonged reaction time, the length of the nanorods increases and the color goes gradually from yellow to dark blue (Fig. 9a and b). Interestingly, the corresponding series of UV-Vis spectra of the Te nanorods with different aspect ratios display an obvious and gradual red shift of the nanoparticles from 388 nm to 639 nm (Fig. 9c). The typical absorption peak of Te nanostructures can be assigned to a forbidden transition.28,72 To study the optical properties of Te nanowires affected by the length of the nanorods, theoretical modeling was established to explain the morphology control and their optical property tuning. Firstly, first-principles calculations are selected to describe the atomic structures and electronic properties of Te nanostructures which were reported previously.47 The theory is based on the density functional theory (DFT) implemented in the SIESTA package.73,74 In order to make intelligent use of first-principles simulation to describe the valence electrons within the framework of a linear combination of numerical atomic orbitals (LCAO), it is important to arrange all the elements with a double zeta plus polarization orbital basis (DZP).75 A conjugate gradient (CG) algorithm is used here to index the atomic coordinates, and the accuracy requirement is that the convergence criteria of energy and forces are less than 10−4 eV and 0.02 eV Å−1, respectively. In order to simulate Te nanowires with different aspect ratios, three kinds of Te wire structures were introduced.44 Briefly, a single-shelled Te nanowire with 21 Te atoms per cell with a diameter of about 13 Å is named Te-w1, then, a double-shelled Te nanowire with 57 Te atoms per cell and a diameter of about 22 Å is defined as Te-w2. Finally, a three-shelled Te nanowire with 111 Te atoms per cell and a diameter of about 31 Å is named as Te-w3. Fig. 9d and e show the VB and CB of the outermost Te and the center Te of the nanowires with different diameters, indicating the different electronic properties. Then, the joint density of states (JDOS) of three different kinds of Te wires with different diameters (VB, CB and Center) are calculated, as shown in Fig. 9f. From these data, it is found that the VB at the outermost Te wires shows much richer states than the CB at the outermost hexagonal Te wires and Te wires in the center of the Te nanowires. Meanwhile, there are much richer electronic states below the Fermi level in Te wires where the VB is located than in the CB and center of the Te wires.76–79 As a result, the JDOS of the VB of the Te wires with different aspect ratios show a lower energy absorption peak at 3 eV compared with the stronger energy absorption of the CB and the center of the Te wires.44 As we know, with the length of the nanowires increasing, the proportion of the outermost element in the nanowire distribution is reduced. Therefore, a red shift in the UV-Vis spectrum in optical absorption can be detected when the length of the Te nanowires is increased.44
 Fig. 9  The morphology, optical properties and atomic structures of Te nanowires with different diameters. (a and b) A schematic image and optical photographs showing the morphology evolution with aspect ratio increasing. (c) UV/Vis spectrum of Te nanostructures, from nanoparticles to nanowires with different aspect ratios. (d and e) The valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) of Te nanowires with different diameters, Te-w1, Te-w2, and Te-w3 (from left to right). (f) Joint density of states (JDOS) of VB, CB and centre Te wires in Te nanowires with different diameters, including Te-w1, Te-w2 and Te-w3. The Fermi level is set to zero. Reprinted with the permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 

2.3 Three-dimensional hierarchical Te nanostructures
Hierarchical nanostructures have attracted explosive attention owing to the significant role played in the diffusion of guest species through an inorganic network and their technological promise in many applications, including catalysis, sorption, and separation.82–85 Although the synthesis of uniform low-dimensional Te nanostructures has been largely developed, three-dimensional hierarchical Te nanostructures have attracted much attention because of their remarkable properties. Tellurium nanocrystals with a flower-like microstructure can be synthesized through a solvothermal reaction by using different reducing agents.11,81,86–88 The Wang group reported a solvothermal process synthesizing 3D Te nanostructures by using diethyldithiocarbamato tellurium(IV) (TDEC) as the Te source and 2,2′-dithiodibenzoic acid (DTBA) as the organic reducing reagent.80Fig. 10a and b show uniform planar tripod-shaped Te products and all the branches of the superstructure are made up of many sharp secondary branches. Those secondary branches are parallel to each other with a length ranging from 25 to 35 μm, and the length decreases when one gets closer to the tip of the primary branches. This special structure can be used as a template for the reaction with HAuCl4 to prepare Au/Te hybrids which show a sensitivity of 6.35 μA ppb−1 in the electrochemical detection of arsenic.80 The Zhou group reported a controlled synthesis of complex 3D Te architectures, such as flower-like, spherical, ball-like, nest-like, and sheet nanostructures.80 The as-prepared flower-like Te structure can be seen in Fig. 10c and d which confirms that the 2D nanoplates form a flower structure. This morphological control is strongly dependent on the reaction factors, such as the volume ratio of ethylene glycol and ethylenediamine, the quantity of surfactant (PVP), the amount of NaOH, and the reaction time.80 A low-temperature biphasic solvothermal method was reported to successfully synthesize Te flower-like superstructures, as shown in Fig. 10e and f, at 120 °C for 960 min. It is found that the reaction kinetics has a significant influence on the growth of the 3D superstructure and the continuous supply of the reducing reagent also favors the achievement of these uniform superstructures.81 A simple solution-based strategy was reported to fabricate uniform nanostructures by using NaBH4 as reducing agent in the presence of sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate (NaDBS), from low-dimensional nanorods, to 3D nanostructures, as shown in Fig. 10g–i.11 The smooth and uniform nanorods in Fig. 10g can be obtained through the reaction of Te and NaBH4. When the reactant concentration is increased, the Te formation looks like a feather-like structure and t-Te nanoflowers (Fig. 10h and i).
 Fig. 10  (a and b) SEM of Te hybrids with a tripod-shaped planar microstructure. (c and d) SEM of flower-like Te microstructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e and f) SEM images of the Te flower-like samples produced at different reaction times: 150, and 960 min. The reaction temperature is kept at 120 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2010 Royal of Society Chemistry. (g–i) SEM images of Te nanorods, feather-like Te structures and t-Te nanoflowers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2004 Royal of Society Chemistry. 
2.4 Shuttle-like scrolled Te nanostructures
Amino acids with functional groups are one most important kind of biomolecule for constructing proteins.89,90 Due to the adsorption of inorganic elements onto a special face, the morphology of the nanostructures can be controlled by adding amino acids as surfactants. The influence of amino acids with different functionalities and structural conformations on the crystal growth of Te has been investigated.4,91 As shown in Fig. 11a, amorphous Te particles are first yielded from the reduction of sodium telluride, and then bamboo leaf-like nanostructures emerge on the surface of amorphous aggregates, controlled by functionalities of peripheral serine. After that, thinner nanofilms begin to grow onto the surface of amorphous particles. These nanofilms can curl because of the surface tension.91
 Fig. 11  (a) Proposed growth mechanism illustration for the formation of shuttle-like scrolled Te nanotubes. (b) SEM images of the shuttle-like scrolled Te nanotubes. (c) SEM image of the shuttle-like scrolled Te nanotubes in which white arrows indicate the flexible tips and the scrolling edges. (d) TEM image of a typical single shuttle-like scrolled nanotube. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
With prolonged crystal growth, the hypogenetic tubular structures formed on the near-spherical amorphous aggregates prevent the growth of the nanotubes.91 After peeling off from the amorphous aggregate, an individual nanotube will grow further as a result of the Ostwald ripening process. Further epitaxial layer growth begins, which is induced by the interaction between alcohol groups and carboxyl through the adsorption of amorphous nanoparticles onto the backbone of the tubular structures. Gravity and the charge influence of hydroxyl groups on the internal and external surfaces of the layer play a role in the rolling of these extended layers. The middle part of the whole structure joins first with the rolling layers, and finally the shuttle-like nanotubes are obtained (Fig. 11b and c). If serine is substituted by lysine, super-long rigid nanowires with sharp ends can be obtained (Fig. 11d). It can be concluded that a suitable combination of functional groups, such as –NH2, –COOH, and –OH, can induce the formation of different tellurium nanostructures by a facile hydrothermal approach.91
2.5 Chiral Te nanostructures
A chiral structure is one that is non-superimposable with its mirror image, and chirality is a fundamental characteristic that can be found in biomolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids. Many inorganic materials with chiral structures obtained through a synthesizing process should lead to interesting optical activity effects.20,92–94 Chiral Te nanostructures are obtained by using chiral biomolecules as initiating agents.20 In detail, the Te precursors are reduced by hydrazine in the presence of a large concentration of thiolated chiral biomolecules. By tuning the synthesis conditions, tellurium nanostructures with chiral shapes and large optical activity can be obtained. The tellurium nanostructure particles can be seen in scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) mode with a dark-field detector, as shown in Fig. 12a and b, and they are approximately trigonal prisms in shape. Fig. 12c–e display snapshots from 3D tomographic reconstructions at different orientations. On the side faces of the particles twisted ridges cross diagonally between the vertices at the two opposite ends of the prisms. Te nanostructures with different chiral shapes can be obtained, such as small nanocrystals, large crystals, fractured hexagonal tubes and long hollow tubes. The corresponding absorption and circular dichroism (CD) spectra are depicted in Fig. 12f–i. The red shift between 450 and 750 nm in Fig. 12f represents the increase in particle dimension. In Fig. 12g, by virtue of a discrete dipole approximation (DDA)22 calculation, the spectral shift is reproduced. It can be confirmed that the weak CD signal is related to the chiral atomic configuration. The CD line of this series of chiral particles also shifts with size in their absorption spectra (Fig. 12h). The experimental and DDA simulated CD dissymmetry factor spectra for two different sizes are based on the shape chirality and ignore the atomic-scale chirality (Fig. 12i). The simulated spectra match well with the experimental spectra.20
 Fig. 12  Chiral Te nanostructures using chiral biomolecules. (a and b) STEM images of tellurium nanostructures at different magnifications. (c–e) Tomographic reconstruction of tellurium nanostructures from three different orientations. Scale bars, 100 nm. (f–i) Absorption and CD activity of chiral shapes of tellurium samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
2.6 Te based alloy and hetero-nanostructures
Alloy and heterostructure nanomaterials have received significant interest in nanoscience and nanotechnology. The design of a large variety of nanomaterials with heterojunctions in the interface between two dissimilar crystalline regions is indeed playing a major role in the development of advanced materials for emerging applications.102–109 Benefiting from the easily controlled morphology and band gap, Te-based alloy and heterostructures have been successfully synthesized and attract significant attention. As demonstrated early by Xia and his co-workers, single-crystalline Se0.5Te0.5 alloy nanorods with a dimension range of 50–250 nm can be synthesized via a solution-phase approach (Fig. 13a).95 The morphology of the Se0.5Te0.5 alloys is determined by the anisotropic helical chains of Se or Te due to their similar lattice structures (the inset of Fig. 13a).95 Moreover, a series of Te–Se heterostructures have been reported previously through epitaxial growth process and structure design, due to the fact that Se and Te belong to the same group on the periodic table which have similar anisotropic and isomorphous characteristics.110 As shown in Fig. 13b, Te@Se core–shell hetero nanowires were constructed by Liu's group.96 In detail, high temperature is employed to empower the epitaxial growth of a Se shell on the surface of Te nanowires, resulting in Te@Se core–shell nanowires with better crystallinity. After treatment with a high temperature for one hour, Se atoms on the shell are allowed to diffuse into the core nanowires along the Te–Se interface, leading to Te–Se alloyed nanowires.96 In addition, Se–Te–Se hetero-nanowires, were synthesized by Kim's group.97 According to the anisotropic structure of as-prepared Te templates, the tips exhibit higher reactivity and they always act as preferential sites for the growth of another species.111–113 As a result, Se segments from the dismutation of Na2SeSO3 grow onto the tips of Te nanowire templates (Fig. 13c). The Se atoms at the tip of the Te nanowires make hybrid nanowires with inbuilt block and glue functionality.97 In addition, Li and his co-workers reported intricate heterostructure nanowires with alternate stacked Bi2Te3 and Te segments (Fig. 13d).98 The Te–Bi2Te3 multiple heterostructure nanowires are obtained through an annealing process by the precipitation reaction of supersaturated Te–Bi alloy nanowires. During the annealing process, a large amount of Te crystal nuclei would be precipitated and then grow larger by absorbing Te continuously with further reaction. The Te grains grow as large as nanowire size and show a flat interface for the sake of minimizing the free energy with the smallest interfacial area. Furthermore, the length of each segment is dependent on the x value in the supersaturated BixTe1−x nanowires, which could be finely adjusted by varying the ionic concentrations in the electrolyte. This facile annealing method for the synthesis of axial heterostructure nanowires can also be extended to obtain PbTe or Sb2Te3-based multisegmented nanowires.98,114 On the basis of mature technical and precise control methods of synthesis, Wu's group developed a series of Te-based heterostructures synthesized by site-selective conversion on Te nanowires.99,100,115,116 As shown in Fig. 13e, Te–Bi2Te3 “barbell” nanowire heterostructures which are produced by a facile solution-phase chemical route display hexagonal Bi2Te3 plates on Te nanowire bodies.99 By the same route, dumbbell-shaped Te–PbTe nanowire heterostructures can be obtained by injecting a small amount of lead precursor to trigger the growth of PbTe nanocubes at the tips of Te nanowires (Fig. 13f).100 And the Te in the heterostructure nanowire can transform to telluride due to the high reactivity of Te. This versatile strategy makes a significant contribution to producing many kinds of telluride-based nanowire heterostructures, such as Bi2Te3–PbTe,116 Bi2Te3–Ag2Te115 and PbTe–Ag2Te nanowire100 heterostructures, which can be manipulated to achieve greatly reduced thermal conductivity and excellent thermoelectric properties. Te nanowires easily react with silver ions and transform to silver telluride nanowires which have already been reported by many researchers.117–119 However, T. Pradeep's group demonstrated that a different reactivity could be exhibited by clusters, resulting in silver islands at different positions on the Te nanowires.101 It is the unique chemistry of glutathione acting as a surfactant coating to Ag quantum clusters that produces the quite different reactivity from silver ions as well as Ag nanoparticles. The obtained hybrid Ag nodule-decorated Te nanowires are shown in Fig. 13g. However, the presence of Ag quantum clusters on Te nanowires still results in much higher surface energy. When treated by solution phase annealing, these hybrid Ag nodule-decorated Te nanowires transform to dumbbell-shaped silver-tipped Te nanowires (Fig. 13h).101 Both of these new materials can have potential applications in the fabrication of electronic devices.120
 Fig. 13  Te based alloy and hetero-nanostructures. (a) Te–Se alloy. TEM image of an individual Se0.5Te0.5 alloy nanorod. Inset: The hexagonal lattice of Se0.5Te0.5 with the Se and Te atoms randomly distributed. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2001 Wiley. (b) HRTEM image of Te@Se core–shell structure nanowire. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2014 Royal of Society Chemistry. (c) Se–Te–Se hetero-nanowires. TEM image of Se–Te–Se multi-segmented nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (d) Te–Bi2Te3 hetero-nanorods. TEM image of Te–Bi2Te3 multi-segmented nanorods with different segment lengths: Bi0.32Te0.68, Bi0.26Te0.74, and Bi0.19Te0.81. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (e) Te–Bi2Te3 hetero-nanowires. TEM image of Te–Bi2Te3 nanowire-multiple plate heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (f) PbTe–Te–PbTe hetero-nanowires. TEM image of PbTe–Te nanowire heterostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (g and h) Te–Ag hetero-nanowires. TEM images of dumbbell-shaped Ag nodule-decorated and Ag tip-decorated Te nanowires with different magnifications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
2.7 Large-scale synthesis of Te nanostructures
Although many impressive reports have been published on topics related to Te nanostructure synthesis, it must be realized that it is their large-scale production which allows Te nanomaterials to be truly applied.122,123 When the volume of chemical reaction vessels is designed from small to large to macroscopic preparation of high-quality Te nanomaterials (inset of Fig. 14a), practical solutions can be doled out to deal with the heat and mass transfer problem. Our group developed a sub-kilogram-scale synthesis method for the synthesis of as much as 150 g of high-quality ultrathin tellurium nanowires with a diameter of 7 nm and a length of hundreds of micrometers.121 To increase the output of Te nanowires, it is necessary to increase the concentration of the reactants and the volume of the reaction container. While the synthesis scale increases, the production efficiency will decrease due to the heat transfer limitation in large reaction containers with the hydrothermal method (Fig. 14a). By balancing the reaction temperature and the volume of the reaction container, a special 16 L Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave has been designed to better solve the heat transfer problem (Fig. 14b). After extraction by acetone to produce the Te nanowires illustrated in Fig. 14c, the products are very concentrated and look like black mud. More importantly, high-quality pure Te nanowires (Fig. 14d) can be obtained and stored in plastic drum containers at room temperature which is convenient for package, transportation and use.121 The Te nanowires by scale-up synthesis can be used as templates for the scalable synthesis of various other nanowires, such as noble metal nanowires, semiconductor telluride nanowires, core–shell nanowires and carbon nanofibers.124–126 Unfortunately, the pristine Te nanotemplate is sacrificed as waste after template reaction. Recently, our group proposed a conceptually new process to economically recycle the sacrificed Te nanostructures as a template from waste solutions and to use the template repeatedly in order to lower the cost.126,127
 Fig. 14  (a) The relationship between the production efficiency and increased size of reaction containers, inset: photograph of reaction containers increasing in size. (b) A schematic of a container of 16 L with special design of heat transfer. (c) Photograph of the precipitation of Te nanowires. (d) TEM image of Te nanowire via large-scale synthesis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2014 Royal of Society Chemistry. 
As we mentioned above, the approaches to synthesize Te nanostructures include hydrothermal and solvothermal methods, photo-thermally assisted method, sublimation–condensation process, reflux process, microwave assisted synthesis, template-based strategies, vacuum vapor deposition, and ultrasonic-induced growth. The reflux process and ultrasonic-induced growth are mainly used for the synthesis of Te nanoparticles at low temperature, but unfortunately these methods can only synthesize particles with a wide size distribution and low yield. A photo-thermally assisted method has been developed to synthesize Te nanostructures under mild conditions, but it needs a long reaction time, and the obtained Te nanostructures are usually not uniform. Although vacuum vapor deposition has been successfully used for the synthesis of Te nanobelts with uniform morphology, it needs a vacuum environment and high temperature. The sublimation–condensation method has been applied for the synthesis of Te nanotubes. In contrast, hydrothermal and solvothermal methods, as well as microwave assisted synthesis, are widely used for the synthesis of Te nanowires. Uniform Te nanostructures can be prepared by hydrothermal and solvothermal methods while microwave assisted synthesis will shorten the reaction time. Among all these methods, the hydrothermal and solvothermal methods are the more convenient due to their easy morphology control and scale-up synthesis.
3. Properties and applications of Te nanoarchitectures
Compared with bulk materials, nanoscale materials, due to their large specific surface area and quantum-confinement effects, exhibit distinct physical and chemical properties, which many potential applications can benefit from.128,129 It is obvious that investigation of nanostructured Te materials with well-designed dimensions, sizes and shapes provides a new way to investigate structure–property relationships and related applications. The objective of this section is to briefly summarize the novel properties of Te nanostructures, such as photocatalytic properties, ion detection and removal and photoconductive applications.12,28,48,130–137
3.1 Chemical transformation template
The templating technique refers to the use of prefabricated, nanostructured materials to influence the placement of building blocks and it has attracted significant interest as a simple, highly versatile approach that has been widely used to prepare nanostructured materials with tailored properties.138–140 In a solution-based template synthesis, a good templating material should have uniform dispersion, and high reactivity when used as a chemical template. Te nanowires with high surface-to-volume ratio and high reactivity are often used as templates for the synthesis of 1D functional nanowires,121,141–143 such as Ag2Te,121,143–147 Bi2Te3,148–151 CdTe,129,152–155 PbTe,114,142,143,156–159 and Te composites.4,24,30,60,81,121,141,160–175 Wu's group developed a simple method for synthesizing a variety of metal telluride nanowires by using Te nanowires as templates.26 The conversion from Te nanowires to metal tellurides only requires 3.5 h or less, and with high reaction yields of above 75%.26 Since 2006, our group has systematically studied Te nanowires, from their hydrothermal synthesis, template transformation124,176 to their applications.28,177,178 It is well known that elements in the same group always have similar crystal structure, electronic configuration and properties. Elemental Se and Te have similar anisotropic and isomorphous crystal information, so the epitaxial growth process and structure design can be addressed to obtain complex and multistage Te–Se nanostructures. Recently, our group developed a straightforward strategy for the synthesis of TexSey@Se core–shell nanowires with different Te/Se ratios and diameters by epitaxial growth of a Se shell on Te nanowires. Firstly, Te nanowires with a diameter of 7 nm are selected as the template for the synthesis of TexSey@Se nanowires (Fig. 15a and b).110 The core–shell structure of the TexSey@Se nanowires can be confirmed via the line scan pattern (Fig. 15c) and element mapping (Fig. 15d and e). TexSey@Se nanowires showed high chemical reactivity and good dispersity in water, and thus they could be used as templates to synthesize a series of metal chalcogenide nanowires. Through the chemical transformation of TexSey@Se nanowires, as many as nine kinds of monometal chalcogenide (MSeTe) alloy nanowires were obtained, including AgSeTe, HgSeTe, CuSeTe, BiSeTe, PbSeTe, CdSeTe, SbSeTe, NiSeTe and CoSeTe (Fig. 15f–n). Then alloyed and hybrid metal chalcogenide nanowires integrated with two or more MSeTe phases could also be prepared simply by adding two or more kinds of metal precursors in one batch. In fact, 36 kinds of bimetal chalcogenide nanowires consisting of every two-MSeTe combination of the nine kinds of MSeTe were all successfully obtained. This template strategy shows great potential for synthesizing a new generation of 1D metal chalcogenide nanostructures with controllable compositions and multiple functionalities.110
 Fig. 15  (a and b) TEM image and HRTEM image of TexSey@Se core–shell nanowires. (c) The line scan pattern of a single nanowire. (d and e) Element mapping of Se and Te. (f–n) 9 kinds of monometal chalcogenide nanowires from the chemical transformation of TexSey@Se core–shell nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 American Association for the advancement of Science. 
3.2 Electrical property
As a narrow-bandgap semiconductor, the crystal structure of Te has a helical chain with weak van der Waals interaction which are considered to have potential applications in high-efficiency electricity devices. Te nanotubes can be synthesized via a solvothermal process to possess straight and rigid characteristics.61,70 Compared with the flexible, curled, or twisted 1D Te nanostructures synthesized by other methods, these nanotubes can largely resist deformation, resulting in little change in the electrical properties.179,180 Our group reported a four-electrode system for investigating the intrinsic electrical properties of Te nanotubes as well as their size and dimension dependence.134 The fabrication of individual Te nanotubes on Si/SiO2 substrates with pre-deposited Au/Ti microelectrodes is shown in Fig. 16a. After the transfer of Te nanotube into the electrode, platinum is applied for better connection by the FIB deposition technique. An SEM image of Te nanotubes with the four probes is shown in Fig. 16b, and the nanotubes are divided into three different lengths of segment (L12 = 15.56, L23 = 38.26, L34 = 19.56). During the measurement, the performance of the Te nanotubes shows a metallic character in that the resistance decreases with the temperature ranging from 300 K to 7 K (Fig. 16c). Interestingly, the intrinsic nanotube resistivity, ρ300K is about 9.854 μohm m, which is smaller than that of the bulk Te crystal ρbulk = 90 μohm m.181 As a result, the relative resistivity ratio of Te is 0.11 (ρrel = ρnanotube/ρbulk) which is much smaller than that of 60 nm-diameter Cu nanowire (ρrel = 10),182 70 nm-diameter Au nanowire (ρrel = 2),183 or 70 nm-diameter Pt nanowire (ρrel = 3).184 This interesting phenomenon implies the good electrical transport property of small-dimensional Te nanotubes. Furthermore, the nonlinear feature of the I–V curve below 15 K is due to the partially retained semiconductor character, as confirmed by Hall measurements of a thin tablet made of the Te nanotubes. The single-crystalline Te nanotubes statistically exhibit a p-type character at 300 K (Fig. 16d).134
 Fig. 16  Device fabrication by the focused ion beam (FIB) deposition technique with a four-terminal configuration and their electrical properties. (a and b) Optical and SEM images of an Au/Ti electrode pattern on a SiO2/Si substrate. (c) Electronic property of the device measured at a series of temperatures: 300, 250, 200, 150, 100, 50, 40, 30, 20, 15, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, and 7 K. Inset of (c) is the TEM image of Te nanotubes. (d) Hall measurement of a thin tablet made of tellurium nanotubes at 300 K. Inset of (d): schematic illustration for Hall measurement (EH = Hall electric field. The z-directed magnetic field is perpendicular to the sample). Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2008 Wiley. 
3.3 Piezoelectric energy harvesting
Te nanostructures with a high work function (4.95 eV) and a narrow bandgap energy (0.35 eV) are well known as a single-component metallic bonding-based piezoelectric material.185 Wang's group fabricated a high-power density piezoelectric energy device based on trigonal tellurium.125 A trigonal Te nanowire shows an asymmetric crystal structure in its radial direction and has a strong potential to serve as a raw material for an ultrathin nanogenerator (NG). Fig. 17a shows a schematic configuration of an ideally designed t-Te nanowire based NG. The aligned t-Te nanowires with their longitudinal directions parallel to the bending line of the NG show a closely packed monolayer and a hexagonal shaped cross-section. This facial packing gave a (110) plane orientation on a flat substrate, and the piezoelectric potential can be generated only by the strain in the (001) plane. Fig. 17b shows the helical turns of Te atoms with equilateral triangles on the (001) plane.125 By adding a tensile stress along the (110) plane (Fig. 17b), the hexagonal-shaped cross-section changes to a horizontally stretched hexagon while the equilateral triangle contorts into an obtuse-angle isosceles triangle. This induces a displacement of the positive Te ions and the electronic negative charge centre against the Te cores. In contrast, by adding a compressive stress, the cross-sections change sharply to a vertically expanded hexagon and the equilateral triangle changes to an acute-angle isosceles triangle, and generates an upward piezoelectric polarization. In Fig. 17c and d, the tensile stress is applied perpendicular to the bending line. A comparison shows that the output voltage and current in the parallel-aligned t-Te nanowires are three times higher than those in the perpendicular-aligned t-Te nanowires. This confirms that the performance of the NGs depends mainly on the c-axis of the t-Te nanowires.125
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the bent NG device with well-aligned single crystalline t-Te nanowires. (b) The cross-sectional view of a t-Te nanowire, and the dipole moment arising along the [110] direction under tensile stress or compressive stress. (c and d) The output voltage and current of aligned tellurium film with different layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2013 Wiley. (e) Schematic of the fabrication process of TFNG. (f and g) The output voltage and current of the TFNG device during repeated bending and unbending motions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
By using the piezoelectric effect of tellurium, Dang's group introduced the fabrication of a flexible strain sensor based on a single tellurium wire.186 These Te nanowires are synthesized through a solvothermal process, with a diameter of 40 μm and length of 3 mm. The strain sensor composed of Te wire is covered with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) to improve the adhesion of the silver paste to the PS substrate and also prevent the Te wire from oxidization. A theoretical model with the energy band diagram in a different condition is proposed to explain the I–V performance. It is clear that the current decreased while the Schottky barrier height increased with the stretch strain, and under the compressive strain condition, the I–V curve tended to linearity. This explains that the piezoresistance effect resulted in a change in the band gap, and caused the change in the Schottky barrier height.186 Kang's group reported a novel strategy for Te nanoflakes through a low-temperature hydrothermal method.187 The Te nanoflakes nanogenerator (TFNG) devices are composed of a sandwich-like structure with PDMS-coated Te NFs in the middle, as shown in Fig. 17e. This TFNG device not only exhibits fully flexible mechanical performance, but also can reach an open-circuit voltage and a closed-circuit current of 3 V and 290 nA during periodic bending tests under identical strains, respectively (Fig. 17f and g). Furthermore, when an increased driving frequency of 10 Hz and compressive force of 8 N are applied, the output open-circuit voltage can be as high as 125.3 V with the closed-circuit current density increasing to 16.5 μA cm−2. Such a high output power is sufficient to light up at least 10 LEDs.187
3.4 Gas sensing
Elemental Te shows a significant gas response at room temperature, especially for nitrogen dioxide,46,188–190 carbon oxide,191 ammonia,192,193 and hydrogen sulphide,194,195 which allows the fabrication of gas-sensitive devices of small size but with a high sensitivity. The adsorption of atomic oxygen and nitrogen will affect the chemical activity of Te film, which eventually leads to an obvious change in electricity conductivity. The sensitivity to these gases depends mainly on the microstructure of Te, film thickness, and the environmental conditions. Combined with micro and nano technologies, gas-testing interdigitated electrodes including a heating plate were fabricated by Wang's group (Fig. 18a). A single Te nanotube is connected to the electrode to form the gas-sensing device (Fig. 18b). The Te sensing device shows high selectivity to NO2 gas with a response time of 180 s. When pumped into a mixed gas of NH3 and NO2 with increasing concentrations from 200 ppb to 1000 ppb (Fig. 18c and d), the sensor resistance exhibits a rapid change in NO2 compared to NH3 and other gases (CH4, CO, H2 and CO2).149 The Tsiulyanu group reported that the sensitivity of Te films strongly increases with a decrease in film thickness,196 which shows an inverse relationship between conductivity and film thickness when the thickness is below 100 nm. This inverse phenomenon is attributed to the influence of the surface grain boundary resistance at low thickness. Therefore, when the thickness of Te film is decreased, the film conductivity would also decrease, resulting in stronger sensitivity.197 A Te crystal based sensor shows a high sensitivity to NO2 even at a concentration of only 0.1 ppm.198 This confirms that the response-recovery times are shorter at higher concentration. When the concentrations ranges from sub-ppm up to 1 ppm, the sensitivity remains at a constant level, but when it exceed 1 ppm, the layers are easily saturated, leading to a decrease in sensitivity.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of gas testing devices composed of Te, inset: photograph of device. (b) Schematic of a single interdigitated electrode, inset: SEM image of Te nanotube on interdigitated electrode. (c) Sensitivity of Te nanotube toward NH3 and NO2. (d) Sensitivity of Te nanotube to different gases with a concentration of 1000 ppb. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (e) Response and recovery transients of Te film after exposure to 0.4 ppm, 1 ppm and 4 ppm of H2S gas. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. (f) Sensitivity of Te films as a function of ammonia concentration, insets: response curve after exposure to 100 ppm NH3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2004 Elsevier. 
The Te films are also found to be sensitive toward 0.1 ppm of H2S at room temperature. Gupta's group investigated the response of the deposited Te films toward H2S gas.195 The response can vary from 80% to 120% under the same conditions that elucidated the reproducibility of the Te sensors. As for testing the response and recovery times (Fig. 18e), the response time is seen to decrease with an increase in gas concentration and takes nearly 5 min at a concentration of 1 ppm, while the recovery time is seen to have the contrary tendency, taking nearly 20 min under the same conditions.195 This response allows for the potential development of a hydrogen sulfide gas sensor. Sen's group reported a sensor based on Te film which is sensitive to ammonia.193 The p-type conduction Te films are fabricated through a vacuum evaporation process and serve as acceptors. The resistance of the Te films increases upon exposure to NH3.193Fig. 18f shows the sensitivity of the Te film as a function of NH3 concentration at room temperature. When the concentration of the solution is below 100 ppm, the response of the film is shown to be linear.193 But at a higher concentration, the response is seen to be saturated. The response to NH3 takes a few seconds, but the recovery time is slow and the resistance is only reduced to 10% of its initial value. In addition, some research also concentrates on the sensitivity to carbon oxide.191 The absorption of CO gas will influence the electrical conductivity of the Te-based film, but exhibits a lower sensitivity when compared to the detection of NO2. It can be concluded that the remarkable sensitivity toward NO2, NH3 and H2S can be attributed to the special chemistry and structure of tellurium. The considerably short response time and good sensitivity in the ppm and sub-ppm concentration range make Te film a promising material for future sensor applications.
3.5 Ion detection and removal
Mercury is a highly dangerous element to human health and the concentration of inorganic mercury ions is controlled or regulated in a wide variety of fields, such as rivers, potable water and industrial effluents.200–202 The elements Te and Hg have a strong hybridization and a galvanic replacement reaction that induce the dissolution and aggregation of Te in the presence of Hg(II). Huang et al. reported a simple gel-based membrane composed of Te nanotubes (NTs) and agarose gel (AGM) for the detection and removal of Hg ions by taking advantage of the high surface area of the Te nanostructure and the strong hybridization between the Te and the Hg.199,203 The Te NTs–AGM also shows excellent selectivity toward Hg2+ due to their high replacement reaction (Fig. 19a). A linear relationship between the Te NTs–AGM probe values of Rabs/Babs and the logarithm of the concentration of Hg2+ ions is observed (Fig. 19b). The Hg2+ ion detection limit is about 10 nM, which is the maximum allowable level of mercury in potable water. The ultraviolet and visible absorption spectra and photographic images are shown in the inset of Fig. 19b after the Te films meet with Hg2+. Moreover, compared with other metal ions, the Te based membrane responds selectively toward Hg2+ by a factor of 100 or more (Fig. 19c).199
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the absorption process of Hg2+. (b) Rabs/Babsversus Hg2+ ion concentration during the sensing process of Hg2+ ions (0–10 mM) in 5.0 mM sodium phosphate solution. Insets: UV-Vis absorption spectra of Te NTs with and without Hg2+. (c) Selectivity of the Te NTs-AGM probe toward Hg2+. Insets: TEM image of Te NTs with and without Hg2+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2013 Royal of Society Chemistry. 
3.6 Photoconductive properties
Photoconductive properties of materials are usually illustrated by a change (normally an increase) in the electrical conductivity as a result of incident electromagnetic radiation.204–207 It is predicted that nonmetal elements which have a high refractive index (>2) would be photoconductive.208 The element selenium was investigated as the first photoconductive element, and then other elements have gradually been checked for photoconductivity. The electrical properties of tellurium have undergone an intensive investigation initiated by the Bottom group at Purdue University.134,209 To the early investigators, the conductivity of the element Te was unaffected by radiation. However, a photoconductive effect of Te films was firstly reported by Bartlett and coworkers.210 The Te film is commonly fabricated through an evaporation process and photoconductivity observed at 195 K and 90 K.211
In 2006, Kotov et al. demonstrated a layer-by-layer (LBL) strategy to fabricate reversible photoconductive devices composed of Te nanowires and poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA).133 The conductivity of the obtained Te nano-films shows prominent sensitivity when exposed to light. Recently, our group has successfully constructed a Te nanowire device with reversible photoelectric properties (Fig. 20a).212 Different layers of Te nanowires with the same axial direction are firstly fabricated on a Si/SiO2 substrate by the LB technique.12,28,48,130–134,136,209,213,214 After that, Au electrodes which are perpendicular to the orientation of the Te nanowires are obtained by a thermal evaporation strategy. From the I–V curves in Fig. 20b, it is obvious that the current of the devices increases significantly with the increase in light intensity and the current increases linearly with increasing illumination power (inset of Fig. 20b). The light-induced conductivity increase allows us to reversibly switch the nanowire films between “off” and “on” states, and the performance is dependent on the thickness of the nanowire films (Fig. 20c–f, from monolayer, three layers, five layers, to 20 layers of Te nanowire films).212
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of device based on Te sample for photoconductive test. (b) I–V curves measured under different light intensities, inset: linear characteristics between photocurrent and the power of illumination. (c) Reversible switching of a 20-layer Te nanowire film device. (d–f) Reversible switching the photoconductive properties of the Te nanowire films with one, three, and five layers, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Besides the above discussion, the Te nanostructures indeed show other extraordinary novel properties, such as thermoelectric properties215–220 and photocatalytic properties.221 Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop a new type of Te nanodevice that exhibits outstanding performance, while endowed with these excellent applications.
3.7 Li–Te batteries
Rechargeable Li-ion batteries with their wide applications in modern consumer electronics and even in electric vehicles have attracted considerable attention. The quickly increasing demand for energy storage calls for batteries with high energy/power density, superior cycling and reliability stability, as well as low cost.224,225 In previous studies, lithium–chalcogen batteries with high theoretical specific energy are treated as the most promising candidates, but they still face challenges in their low electrochemical activity and poor cycling stability. Compared with S and Se, Te has a higher material density (6.24 g cm−3) and higher rate capability due to its high electronic conductivity (200 S m−1).226,227 Furthermore, the theoretical potential of 1.96 V and energy density of 823.2 W h kg−1 ensure that Te has sufficient energy as a power source.228 Te is proposed as a cathode material with a chemical reaction during the charge–discharge process. The scheme is as follows:Ten + 2nLi+ + 2ne− ↔ Li2nTen
It is noteworthy that pure Te is reported to decay quickly without carbon support with a large volume change.228,229 The combination of Te nanostructures with carbon nanomaterials not only increases the reaction area due to the high aspect ratio but also provides a porous substrate which buffers the volume changes. Recently, our group constructed binder/collector free Te cathodes for high-energy Li–Te batteries via a hydrothermal carbonization process.222 The carbon nanotube (CNT) aerogel serves as a conductive interlayer between the Te nanowire cathode and the separator (Fig. 21a). During the cycling process, Te penetrates gradually into the porous CNT aerogel, and the Te film finally vanishes (Fig. 21b and c). After this process, the CNT aerogel exhibits a high electronic conductivity and hollow porous structure that enables stable electric contact and the fast transportation of Li+. The cycle performance at 0.1C shows a capacity retention of 81.5% after 100 cycles (Fig. 21d). The cathode also remains stable when the rate is raised from 0.1 to 5C. These advantages of the cathodes contribute to Li–Te batteries with ultra-high-energy densities.222 Based on the excellent performance of Te, He and his co-workers developed a three-dimensional rGO/Te nanowires (3DGT) aerogel with Te nanowires wrapped homogeneously with rGO via a hydrothermal reaction (Fig. 21e).223 The as-synthesized 3DGT possesses a high surface area, rich porosity and high electrical conductivity, which facilitate the fast transportation of electrons and ions. Then, the obtained aerogel is cut and compressed into circular pellets for the cathode in a Li–Te battery, which can also undergo repeated bending without breaking (Fig. 21f). The 3DGT cathodes exhibit a stable cyclic performance at 0.2C with a capacity retention of 88% after 200 cycles (Fig. 21g) and also excellent rate performance under various C-rates from 0.2C to 10C.223 This hybrid structure makes Te a promising high-capacity cathode for flexible Li–Te batteries.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the configuration of a battery based on Te NW/CNT and its working principle during cycling. (b) Planar view SEM image of Te NW/CNT cathode. (c) SEM images of Te@CNT cathode. (d) Cycling electrochemical performance of Te@CNT cathode at 1C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2016 Wiley. (e) Illustration of the formation process of 3DGT aerogel and fabrication of free-standing electrode. (f) The free-standing cathode with good flexibility. (g) Cyclic performance of the 3DGT cathode at 0.2C for 200 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
3.8 Element doping of Te
Element doping is one of the most common ways to modulate their properties by intentionally introducing impurities into an extremely pure intrinsic material.229 In past decades, Te has exhibited wide applications in the metallurgy industry, while nearly 80% of the Te was consumed for industrial use.230 The addition of small amounts of Te into steel and copper produces an alloy with better machinability. And in lead alloy, Te improves its strength and durability, and decreases the corrosive action of sulfuric acid.231
In addition, Te is usually selected as the dopant to synthesize multi-component compounds for optimization properties due to its large radius, heavy mass and narrow band gap structure.233 The doping of Te mainly shows a great synergistic effect in thermoelectric,234–236 photoconductive237–240 and conductive properties,241–245 such as Te doping in CuAgSe0.95Te0.05 for a higher thermoelectric figure of merit,235 Te doping in amorphous selenium (a-Se) for increased photo-generation efficiency,240 and Au-assisted Te-doped GaAs nanowires for their stability.244 Zou and his co-workers reported a simple route to synthesize Cu2Se1−xTex (x = 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.10) nanoplates by doping Te into Cu2Se.236 The insertion of Te into the Cu2Se lattice not only enhances the phonon scattering but also modifies the band structure, resulting in a change in the electrical transport properties. The nanostructured Cu2Se0.98Te0.02 pellets reveal outstanding thermoelectric performance with a higher ZT value of about 1.2 compared with undoped-Cu2Se.236 Liu's group fabricated field-effect transistors (FET) devices composed of Te-doped (black phosphorus) BP nanoflakes.232 The undoped and Te-doped BP films show different thicknesses, as shown in Fig. 22a and b. This Te-doped device boosts transport performances in the distribution of hole mobility and ION/IOFF ratios (Fig. 22c and d). Compared to an undoped BP FET device, Te-doped BP shows a much slower degradation in the typical evolution of transfer characteristics with increased ambient exposure to air and moisture. The doping with Te shifts the conduction band minimum of the BP close to the redox potential of O2/O2−, which slows down the reaction between the BP and the absorbed water or oxygen. As a result, the Te-doped FET devices have 30% retention of initial mobility of about 200 cm2 V−1 s−1 after three weeks while the undoped ones have only 2% of the initial value, and the Te-doped devices retain 50% of the ON current and the undoped ones reduce to only 2% (Fig. 22e and f).232 It can be concluded that the element doping gives a better transport performance and also provides a solution to improving the stability of the devices.
 Fig. 22  The characteristics of undoped and Te-doped black phosphorus (BP) FET devices. (a and b) Images of as-fabricated undoped and Te-doped devices (top), AFM height profiles of the BP channels (bottom). (c) The distribution of ION/IOFF ratios for tested undoped and Te-doped BP devices. (d) The distribution of hole mobilities for tested undoped and Te-doped BP devices. (e) Normalized mobility as a function of ambient exposure time. (f) Normalized ION/IOFF ratios as a function of ambient exposure time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 
4. Conclusions and outlook
In the past two decades, accompanied by developments in nanoscience and nanotechnology in full flourish, research on tellurium nanostructured materials inevitably ushered in new opportunities and at the same time encountered severe challenges. Te nanomaterials with different shapes and structures have been summarized here, and their latest applications, such as chemical transformation, photodetectors, ion detection and removal, piezoelectric energy harvesting, batteries, gas sensing, element doping, and thermoelectric devices, have also been highlighted. During the liquid phase synthesis process, surface capping and kinetic control play key roles in the morphology control of the Te nanostructures. The ability to manipulate the shape of Te nanocrystals, together with an understanding of the structure-dependent properties, such as that the photoconductive property is dependent on the thickness of the Te nanowire films, will offer a great opportunity to rationally design new nanodevices with substantially enhanced performances.
To satisfy the needs of applications, it is necessary to realize the large-scale production of Te nanomaterials, which also remains a major issue in the field of nanoscience and nanotechnology at present and which largely limits their wide application. Despite the impressive possibility of sub-kilogram-scale synthesis of ultrathin Te nanowires and telluride nanowires,121,126 macroscopic preparation of high-quality Te nanomaterials should still dole out solutions to the heat and mass transfer problem when the volume of chemical-reaction vessels increases further for scale-up synthesis.
Ensembles and novel arrangements of nanocrystals can collectively exhibit properties vastly different from those of individual nanocrystal or bulk materials.246 The controlled fabrication of macroscopic assemblies of Te nanoscale building blocks is also one of the key challenges in a large range of applications. Manipulating the assembly of individual nanoscale building blocks and designing complex Te structures based on self-assembly strategies may also provide other parameters to tailor the properties of Te nanocrystals.28,135,247 Furthermore, a fundamental understanding of the formation mechanics of well-defined Te nanostructure assemblies will be also useful for the design and synthesis of multilevel nanostructures, which is crucial for device fabrication.
As a versatile template, Te nanostructures have been widely used to synthesize functional materials, such as noble metals, metal oxides, telluride semiconductors, carbon and multiple compounds.124,248,249 High-quality telluride nanomaterials have attracted explosive attention owing to their novel properties, such as Ag2Te nanostructures for nonlinear optical responses and memory devices,177,250 CdTe quantum dots,61,91,251,252 Cu2Te for photodetectors,177 PdTe nanostructures for high thermoelectric performance253–256 and HgTe for topological insulators.257–259 Se and Te belong to the chalcogen group on the periodic table which are well-known p-type semiconductors.260 Both Se and Te exhibit high photoconductivity, thermoelectrics and gas sensing.99,152 From the point of view of their crystal structures, the phases of these two Se and Te materials exhibit a piezoelectric effect because of the lack of centrosymmetry.261 Se–Te heterostructures, alloys or even core–shell structures (Te@Se, Se@Te) can be easily synthesized because of their anisotropic and isomorphous characteristics110 by epitaxial growth and structure design. So, the component and structure design of Se–Te nanomaterials will bring new opportunities to optimize the properties. More importantly, the pristine Te nanotemplate is usually chemically transformed into other compounds and sacrificed after chemical reaction. During the templating process, Te nanostructures can be economically recycled from waste solutions and repeatedly used as templates.126,127 So, it is highly meaningful to develop reliable strategies for the synthesis of Te nanostructures and their further use as templates to prepare telluride nanomaterials, which will provide more possibilities for potential applications.
In fact, the concepts and summaries presented in this review, including a versatile synthesis process to control the morphology of Te nanostructures and their emerging applications, will not only be of benefit to chemists for the synthesis of new nanostructures and new materials, but also to material scientists and engineers to bring the materials into a specific shape that is suitable for targeted technological application. In the best case, the final materials exhibit a combination of the intrinsic properties of the Te element and new properties resulting from synthesis control, including crystallinity, size, size distribution, shape, defect and surface chemistry.
Acknowledgements
S. H. Y. acknowledges the funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 21431006, 21761132008), the Foundation for Innovative Research Groups of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 21521001), Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences, CAS (Grant QYZDJ-SSW-SLH036), the National Basic Research Program of China (Grant 2014CB931800), and the Users with Excellence and Scientific Research Grant of Hefei Science Center of CAS (2015HSC-UE007). J. W. L. acknowledges National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 51471157 and 21401183), Youth Innovation Promotion Association of CAS (2014298), Anhui Provincial Natural Science Foundation, and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WK2060190026).
Notes and references
B. Zare, Z. Sepehrizadeh, M. A. Faramarzi, M. Soltany-Rezaee-Rad, S. Rezaie and A. R. Shahverdi, Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem., 2014, 61, 395–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Weidmann and J. Anderson, Thin Solid Films, 1971, 7, 265–276 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elsayed, R. Krause-Rehberg, W. Anwand, M. Butterling and B. Korff, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 195208 CrossRef .
Q. Y. Lu, F. Gao and S. Komarneni, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1629–1632 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wang, L. L. Wang, J. R. Huang, H. Wang, L. Pan and X. W. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2457–2463 RSC .
Y. N. Xia, W. Y. Li, C. M. Cobley, J. Y. Chen, X. H. Xia, Q. Zhang, M. X. Yang, E. C. Cho and P. K. Brown, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 914–924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. S. Jin, Y. J. Xiong, B. Lim and Y. N. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1783–1794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, W. Y. Hou, X. C. Ye, S. Q. Fu and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 486–492 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, H. Jung, M. L. Zhang, C. H. Chang, N. G. Ndifor-Angwafor, Y. Choa and N. V. Myung, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3058–3062 RSC .
J. M. Shen, J. Y. Li, Y. Chen and Z. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9502–9508 CAS .
U. K. Gautam and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2530–2535 RSC .
X. P. Wu, L. Yuan, S. M. Zhou, S. Y. Lou, Y. Q. Wang, T. Gao, Y. B. A. Liu and X. J. Shi, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1009 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, G. D. Li, Y. L. Liu, S. Xu, K. J. Wang and J. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12926–12932 CAS .
Z. T. Deng, D. Chen, F. Q. Tang and M. Mansuripur, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 1823–1828 CAS .
Z. B. He and S. H. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22740–22745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, K. J. Zhang, H. A. Zhou, W. P. Guan, D. K. Ma, J. J. Lin, L. J. Zhang, S. M. Huang and J. C. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 3852–3857 RSC .
Z. P. Liu, Z. K. Hu, J. B. Liang, S. Li, Y. Yang, S. Peng and Y. T. Qian, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Liu, Z. K. Hu, Q. Xie, B. J. Yang, J. Wu and Y. T. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 159–162 RSC .
J. H. Lim, G. J. Shin, T. Y. Hwang, H. R. Lim, Y. I. Lee, K. H. Lee, S. D. Kim, M. W. Oh, S. D. Park, N. V. Myung and Y. H. Choa, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11697–11702 RSC .
A. Ben-Moshe, S. G. Wolf, M. B. Sadan, L. Houben, Z. Fan, A. O. Govorov and G. Markovich, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4302–4310 CAS .
H. B. Li, L. L. Chai, X. Q. Wang, X. Y. Wu, G. C. Xi, Y. K. Liu and Y. T. Qian, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 1918–1922 CAS .
H. S. Qian, S. H. Yu, J. Y. Gong, L. B. Luo and L. F. Fei, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3830–3835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mo, J. Zeng, X. Liu, W. Yu, S. Zhang and Y. Qian, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1658–1662 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Liang, L. Wang, P. Y. Chen, H. T. Lin, L. F. Chen, D. He and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4691–4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Riley, B. R. Johnson, H. T. Schaef and S. K. Sundaram, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10128–10134 CAS .
H. Yang, S. W. Finefrock, J. D. Albarracin Caballero and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10242–10245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Zhu, W. W. Wang, R. J. Qi and X. L. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1410–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Liu, F. Chen, M. Zhang, H. Qi, C. L. Zhang and S. H. Yu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11372–11377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Liu, J. Zheng, J.-L. Wang, J. Xu, H.-H. Li and S.-H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3589–3593 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yuan, H. Schmalz, Y. Xu, N. Miyajima, M. Drechsler, M. W. Möller, F. Schacher and A. H. E. Müller, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 947–952 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, M. Yosef, E. Pippel, H. Hofmeister, M. Steinhart, U. Gosele and S. Schlecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 8042–8045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, W. Z. Wang, H. L. Xu, L. Zhou, L. S. Zhang and J. L. Shi, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 295, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Chasteen and R. Bentley, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Petragnani and H. A. Stefani, Tetrahedron, 2005, 61, 1613–1679 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Singh and S. Sharma, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2000, 209, 49–98 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nordheider, J. D. Woollins and T. Chivers, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10378–10406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chivers and R. S. Laitinen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1725–1739 RSC .
V. K. Jain and R. S. Chauhan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 306, 270–301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ruck and F. Locherer, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 285, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Turner, R. Borghese and D. Zannoni, Biotechnol. Adv., 2012, 30, 954–963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cao, L. Wang and H. Xu, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 717–736 CrossRef CAS .
H. Selbach, O. Kanert and D. Wolf, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1979, 19, 4435–4443 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Jiang, S. Liu, H. Y. Xu, L. Chen, J. Yang and Y. T. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8480–8483 RSC .
J.-W. Liu, J. Xu, W. Hu, J.-L. Yang and S.-H. Yu, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 167–170 CrossRef CAS .
N. Furuta, H. Itinose, N. Maruyama and Y. Ohasi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1972, 11, 1113–1118 CrossRef CAS .
N. Furuta, Y. Ohasi, H. Itinose and Y. Igarashi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1975, 14, 929–934 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ghosh, M. U. Kahaly and U. V. Waghmare, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 245437 CrossRef .
F. X. Liang and H. S. Qian, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 113, 523–526 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Pitcher, Science, 2006, 313, 300 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545–610 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wiley, Y. G. Sun and Y. N. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 1067–1076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Skrabalak, J. Y. Chen, Y. G. Sun, X. M. Lu, L. Au, C. M. Cobley and Y. N. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Taylor, S. Coulombe, T. Otanicar, P. Phelan, A. Gunawan, W. Lv, G. Rosengarten, R. Prasher and H. Tyagi, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 011301 CrossRef .
W. He, A. Krejci, J. Lin, M. E. Osmulski and J. H. Dickerson, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1523–1525 RSC .
Z. T. Deng, Z. X. Bao, L. Cao, D. Chen, F. Q. Tang, F. F. Wang, C. X. Liu, B. S. Zou and A. J. Muscat, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 045707 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Mayers and Y. N. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1875–1881 RSC .
A. Vonhippel, J. Chem. Phys., 1948, 16, 372–380 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Li, S. Q. Zheng, Y. Z. Zhang, R. Y. Teng, T. Huang, C. F. Chen and G. W. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15046–15052 CAS .
B. Mayers and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 279–282 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Lin, Z. Yang and H.-T. Chang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 351–357 CAS .
J. M. Song, Y. Z. Lin, Y. J. Zhan, Y. C. Tian, G. Liu and S. H. Yu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1902–1908 CAS .
P. Mohanty, T. Kang, B. Kim and J. Park, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 791–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Hawley, B. R. Beatty, G. N. Chen and J. E. Spanier, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 2789–2793 CAS .

          A. Zhang, C. Lieber and G. Zheng, Springer International Publishing,  2016 .
A.
I. Hochbaum and P. D. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 527–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yao, H. Yan, S. Das, J. F. Klemic, J. C. Ellenbogen and C. M. Lieber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 2431–2435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Duan and C. M. Lieber, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 298–302 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature, 1993, 363, 603–605 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xi, Y. Peng, W. Yu and Y. Qian, Cryst. Growth Des., 2005, 5, 325–328 CAS .
Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 1947–1949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sanchez-Iglesias, M. Grzelczak, B. Rodríguez-González, R. N. A. Álvarez-Puebla, L. M. Liz-Marzán and N. A. Kotov, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11431–11435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ordejon, E. Artacho and J. M. Soler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 10441–10444 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Junquera, O. Paz, D. Sanchez-Portal and E. Artacho, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 235111 CrossRef .
A. S. Barnard, S. P. Russo and I. K. Snook, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 235407 CrossRef .
T. M. Willey, C. Bostedt, T. van Buuren, J. E. Dahl, S. G. Liu, R. M. K. Carlson, R. W. Meulenberg, E. J. Nelson and L. J. Terminello, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 205432 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, L. A. Sun, B. Gao, Z. Y. Wu, W. Lu, J. L. Yang and Y. Luo, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 094303 CrossRef .
W. Hu, Z. Y. Li and J. L. Yang, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2013, 1021, 49–53 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Wang, Y. W. Zhao, H. L. Jin, J. X. Zhuang, W. M. Zhang, S. Wang and J. C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5733–5740 CAS .
S. Wang, W. Guan, D. Ma, X. Chen, L. Wan, S. Huang and J. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 166–171 RSC .
W. A. Lopes and H. M. Jaeger, Nature, 2001, 414, 735–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lao, J. G. Wen and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1287–1291 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Fei, Y. Cui, X. H. Yan, W. Qi, Y. Yang, K. W. Wang, Q. He and J. B. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 452–456 CrossRef .
C. W. Cheng, B. Liu, H. Y. Yang, W. W. Zhou, L. Sun, R. Chen, S. F. Yu, J. X. Zhang, H. Gong, H. D. Sun and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3069–3076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. H. Zhang and Y. T. Qian, Solid State Sci., 2008, 10, 1549–1555 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, P. Li and Y. Gu, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2009, 44, 629–635 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Wu, Y. Q. Wang, S. M. Zhou, X. Y. Yuan, T. Gao, K. Wang, S. Y. Lou, Y. B. Liu and X. J. Shi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 136–142 CAS .
B. Thiede, C. J. Koehler, M. Strozynski, A. Treumann, R. Stein, U. Zimny-Arndt, M. Schmid and P. R. Jungblut, Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2013, 12, 529–538 CAS .
G. D'Orazio, A. Cifuentes and S. Fanali, Food Chem., 2008, 108, 1114–1121 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. B. He, S. H. Yu and J. P. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2785–2788 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yeom, B. Yeom, H. Chan, K. W. Smith, S. Dominguez-Medina, J. H. Bahng, G. P. Zhao, W. S. Chang, S. J. Chang, A. Chuvilin, D. Melnikau, A. L. Rogach, P. J. Zhang, S. Link, P. Kral and N. A. Kotov, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 66–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Bisoyi and Q. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3184–3195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Liu and I. P. Hamilton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17757–17761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1380–1384 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, K. Wang, C. Dun, Q. Wang, Z. Shi, G. Liu and G. Qiao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 69268–69272 RSC .
T. Vinod, M. Park, S.-H. Kim and J. Kim, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9195–9197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, X. Lu, T. Zhang, G. Zhang, W. Jiang and X. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6702–6703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, H. Fang, H. Yang, L. A. Jauregui, Y. P. Chen and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3627–3633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, J.-H. Bahk, T. Day, A. M. S. Mohammed, G. J. Snyder, A. Shakouri and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1349–1355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Som, A. K. Samal, T. Udayabhaskararao, M. S. Bootharaju and T. Pradeep, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3049–3056 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, J. Goebl, L. He, S. Aloni, Y. Hu, L. Zhen and Y. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17316–17324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610–2653 RSC .
J. Tian, Z. Zhao, A. Kumar, R. I. Boughton and H. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6920–6937 RSC .
R. W. Day, M. N. Mankin and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2830–2836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, A. Mishchenko, G. Yu, E. Khestanova, A. Rooney, E. Prestat, A. Kretinin, P. Blake, M. Shalom and C. Woods, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4914–4921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qin, J. Zhou, C. Luo, Y. Liu, L. Han and Y. Cao, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 674 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6004–6014 CAS .
S. Fu, K. Cai, L. Wu and H. Han, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 3243–3250 RSC .
Y. Yang, K. Wang, H.-W. Liang, G.-Q. Liu, M. Feng, L. Xu, J.-W. Liu, J.-L. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500714 Search PubMed .
Z.-H. Lin and H.-T. Chang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 365–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Lin, Y.-W. Lin, K.-H. Lee and H.-T. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2569–2572 RSC .
T. Vinod, M. Yang, J. Kim and N. A. Kotov, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13545–13550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Q. Yu, W. Wang and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1959–1962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, H. Yang and Y. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3322–3327 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, T. Feng, H. Yang, X. Ruan and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2058–2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Finefrock, X. Zhu, Y. Sun and Y. Wu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5598–5602 RSC .
H. Yang, J.-H. Bahk, T. Day, A. M. S. Mohammed, B. Min, G. J. Snyder, A. Shakouri and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5398–5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, H. Park, J. Kim, H. Park, T. Wu, S. Kim, S.-D. Park, Y. Choa and N. V. Myung, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5189–5197 CrossRef CAS .
A. Som, I. Chakraborty, T. A. Maark, S. Bhat and T. Pradeep, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2827–2833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Y. Yang, H. W. Liang, J. W. Liu and S. H. Yu, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 338–343 RSC .
S. Kosuri and G. M. Church, Nat. Methods, 2014, 11, 499–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Journet, M. Picher and V. Jourdain, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 142001 CrossRef PubMed .
H. W. Liang, J. W. Liu, H. S. Qian and S. H. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1450–1461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. I. Lee, S. Lee, E. Lee, S. Sohn, Y. Lee, S. Lee, G. Moon, D. Kim, Y. S. Kim, J. M. Myoung and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2920–2925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Wang, J. W. Liu, B. Z. Lu, Y. R. Lu, J. Ge, Z. Y. Wu, Z. H. Wang, M. N. Arshad and S. H. Yu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 4935–4939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Wang, Z.-H. Wang, J.-W. Liu and S.-H. Yu, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59, 538–546 CrossRef .
S.-H. Yu, H. Colfen, K. Tauer and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Gao, J. W. Kim, Y. J. He, R. Song, C. W. Ahn and Z. Y. Tang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11900–11904 RSC .
J. J. Loferski, Phys. Rev., 1954, 93, 707–716 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Vis, J. Appl. Phys., 1964, 35, 360–364 CrossRef CAS .
N. Miura and S. Tanaka, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1968, 12, 374–375 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Tang, P. Podsiadlo, Y. Elkasabi, J. Lahann and N. A. Kotov, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 518–522 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Xu, J. M. Song, L. Sun, J. L. Yang, W. P. Hu, Z. Y. Ji and S. H. Yu, Small, 2008, 4, 888–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, M. Safdar, Z. Wang and J. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10024–10029 CAS .
M. Panahi-Kalamuei, F. Mohandes, M. Mousavi-Kamazani, M. Salavati-Niasari, Z. Fereshteh and M. Fathi, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2014, 27, 1028–1035 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, T. Kale, C.-Y. Nam, D. Choi and R. Grubbs, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7964–7967 RSC .
A. Huczko, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2000, 70, 365–376 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Jones, K. D. Osberg, R. J. Macfarlane, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3736–3827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. S. Angelatos and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 848–858 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Moon, S. Ko, Y. Xia and U. Jeong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2307–2319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Liang, S. Liu, Q.-S. Wu and S.-H. Yu, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4927–4933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Finefrock, G. Zhang, J. H. Bahk, H. Fang, H. Yang, A. Shakouri and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3466–3473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Samal and T. Pradeep, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13539–13544 CAS .
J. In, Y. Yoo, J.-G. Kim, K. Seo, H. Kim, H. Ihee, S. H. Oh and B. Kim, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4501–4504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, J. H. Bahk, T. Day, A. M. Mohammed, G. J. Snyder, A. Shakouri and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1349–1355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Urban, D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 115–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, Q. Chen, K. Schouteden, W. Huang, X. Wang, Z. Li, F. Miao, X. Wang, Z. Li and B. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Guan, S. Wang, W. Gu, J. Zhuang, H. Jin, W. Zhang, T. Zhang and J. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 196, 321–327 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, X. Ai, L. Wang, Y. Chang, W. Luo, W. Jiang and L. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 966–976 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, P. C. Gibbons and W. E. Buhro, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 595–602 RSC .
H. Shen, H. Wang, X. Chen, J. Z. Niu, W. Xu, X. M. Li, X.-D. Jiang, Z. Du and L. S. Li, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4756–4761 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ding, S. Liang, F. Nan, X. L. Liu, J. H. Wang, L. Zhou, X. F. Yu, Z. H. Hao and Q. Q. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1970–1976 RSC .
J. Major, R. Treharne, L. Phillips and K. Durose, Nature, 2014, 511, 334–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Y. Tang, S. S. Tan and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 243–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qiu, Y. Lou, A. C. S. Samia, A. Devadoss, J. D. Burgess, S. Dayal and C. Burda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5855–5857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mokari, M. Zhang and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9864–9865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Urban, D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3248–3255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Quan, Z. Luo, Y. Wang, H. Xu, C. Wang, Z. Wang and J. Fang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3729–3735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Pradhan, D. Rhodes, S. Feng, Y. Xin, S. Memaran, B. H. Moon, H. Terrones, M. Terrones and L. Balicas, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5911–5920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Liang, S. Liu and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3925–3937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Liu, W. R. Huang, M. Gong, M. Zhang, J. L. Wang, J. Zheng and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5910–5915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, Y. Wang, K. Sun and N. A. Kotov, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 358–363 CrossRef CAS .
K. Devami, D. Kang, J.-S. Lee and M. Meyyappan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 504, 62–66 CrossRef CAS .
A. Som, A. K. Samal, T. Udayabhaskararao, M. S. Bootharaju and T. Pradeep, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3049–3056 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sen, U. M. Bhatta, V. Kumar, K. P. Muthe, S. Bhattacharya, S. K. Gupta and J. V. Yakhmi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 8, 238–242 Search PubMed .
Z.-H. Lin, Z. Yang and H.-T. Chang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 8, 351–357 Search PubMed .
S. J. Guo, S. J. Dong and E. K. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4797–4802 CAS .
M. Shaygan, T. Gemming, V. Bezugly, G. Cuniberti, J. S. Lee and M. Meyyappan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15061–15067 CAS .
T. S. Sreeprasad, A. K. Samal and T. Pradeep, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1727–1737 CAS .
G. Xi, C. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Qian and H. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 965–971 CAS .
W. J. Lan, S. H. Yu, H. S. Qian and Y. Wan, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 3409–3417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Lin and H. T. Chang, Langmuir, 2007, 24, 365–367 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Rueda-Fonseca, E. Bellet-Amalric, R. Vigliaturo, M. den Hertog, Y. Genuist, R. Andre, E. Robin, A. Artioli, P. Stepanov, D. Ferrand, K. Kheng, S. Tatarenko and J. Cibert, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1877–1883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, Y. Jung, A. S. Disa, F. J. Walker, C. H. Ahn and J. J. Cha, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4183–4188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Liang, S. Liu, J. Y. Gong, S. B. Wang, L. Wang and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1850–1854 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Liu, J. Xu, H.-W. Liang, K. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7420–7425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Liu, J.-L. Wang, Z.-H. Wang, W.-R. Huang and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 13695–13700 CrossRef .
X. Bai, D. Golberg, Y. Bando, C. Zhi, C. Tang, M. Mitome and K. Kurashima, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 632–637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, X. He, T. Yang, W. Guo, D. Shi, H.-J. Gao, D. Ma, S. Lee, F. Liu and X. Xie, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 043103 CrossRef .
T. Ikari, H. Berger and F. Levy, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 99–105 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Smith, C. D. Nordquist, T. N. Jackson, T. S. Mayer, B. R. Martin, J. Mbindyo and T. E. Mallouk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 1399 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Molares, E. M. Höhberger, C. Schaeflein, R. H. Blick, R. Neumann and C. Trautmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2139–2141 CrossRef .
F. Hernandez-Ramirez, A. Tarancon, O. Casals, E. Pellicer, J. Rodriguez, A. Romano-Rodriguez, J. Morante, S. Barth and S. Mathur, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 085429 CrossRef .
D. Royer and E. Dieulesaint, J. Appl. Phys., 1979, 50, 4042–4045 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liang, J. W. Zha, D. R. Wang and Z. M. Dang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 505103 CrossRef .
W. He, H. Van Ngoc, Y. T. Qian, J. S. Hwang, Y. P. Yan, H. Choi and D. J. Kang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 1055–1061 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, H. C. Su, Y. Rheem, C. M. Hangarter and N. V. Myung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20067–20074 CAS .
A. Vonhippel, Phys. Rev., 1948, 73, 1257 Search PubMed .
D. Tsiulyanu, S. Marian, V. Miron and H. D. Liess, Sens. Actuators, B, 2001, 73, 35–39 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tsiulyanu, S. Marian and H. D. Liess, Sens. Actuators, B, 2002, 85, 232–238 CrossRef CAS .
C. Becher, L. Maurel, U. Aschauer, M. Lilienblum, C. Magen, D. Meier, E. Langenberg, M. Trassin, J. Blasco, I. P. Krug, P. A. Algarabel, N. A. Spaldin, J. A. Pardo and M. Fiebig, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 661–665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sen, K. P. Muthe, N. Joshi, S. C. Gadkari, S. K. Gupta, Jagannath, M. Roy, S. K. Deshpande and J. V. Yakhmi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2004, 98, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
H. SH, J. Non-Oxide Glasses, 2011, 3, 37–44 Search PubMed .
S. Sen, V. Bhandarkar, K. P. Muthe, M. Roy, S. K. Deshpande, R. C. Aiyer, S. K. Gupta, J. V. Yakhmi and V. Sahni, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 115, 270–275 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tsiulyanu, A. Tsiulyanu, H. D. Liess and I. Eisele, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 485, 252–256 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tsiulyanu, NATO Sci. Peace Sec. B, 2010, 363–380 Search PubMed .
S. Marian, D. Tsiulyanu and H. D. Liess, Sens. Actuators, B, 2001, 78, 191–194 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Wei, H.-Y. Chang and C.-C. Huang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13983–13989 RSC .
J. S. Lee, M. S. Han and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4093–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Nolan and S. J. Lippard, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 3443–3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Yang, K. J. Yook and J. Tae, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16760–16761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Y. Wei, H.-Y. Chang, Y.-F. Lee, Y.-L. Hunga and C.-C. Huang, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2011, 58, 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
M. Freitag, Y. Martin, J. A. Misewich, R. Martel and P. H. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1067–1071 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Nature, 1992, 356, 585–587 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Petritz, Phys. Rev., 1956, 104, 1508–1516 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamamoto, T. Fukushima, Y. Suna, N. Ishii, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, M. Taniguchi, T. Kawai and T. Aida, Science, 2006, 314, 1761–1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Moss, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, Sect. A, 1951, 64, 590–591 CrossRef .
V. E. Bottom, Science, 1952, 115, 570–571 CAS .
R. S. Bartlett, Phys. Rev., 1925, 26, 0247–0255 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Moss, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, Sect. A, 1949, 62, 264–266 CrossRef .
J. W. Liu, J. H. Zhu, C. L. Zhang, H. W. Liang and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8945–8952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Tao, J. X. Huang and P. D. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1662–1673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Liu, H.-W. Liang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4770–4799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ahn, K. Biswas, J. He, I. Chung, V. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Environ. Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1529–1537 RSC .
X. Chen, T.-J. Zhu and X.-B. Zhao, J. Cryst. Growth, 2009, 311, 3179–3183 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. W. Liang, W. T. Yao and S. H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15057–15062 RSC .
J. Dong, W. Liu, H. Li, X. Su, X. Tang and C. Uher, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12503–12511 CAS .
Y. Yang, Z.-H. Lin, T. Hou, F. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 888–895 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gelbstein, Z. Dashevsky and M. P. Dariel, Phys. B, 2005, 363, 196–205 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, C. M. Raghavan and D. J. Kang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 116, 341–344 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, S. Xin, J.-W. Liu, J.-L. Wang, Y. Lei and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3580–3588 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Y. Chen, W. Lv, K. Wen, Z. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Qin and W. He, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8837–8842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127–3171 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, D. Bigio and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12201–12207 CAS .
J.-U. Seo, G.-K. Seong and C.-M. Park, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ding, S. F. Chen, D. S. Geng, S. W. Chien, T. An, T. Hor, Z. L. Liu, S. H. Yu and Y. Zong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401999 CrossRef .
B. Zhong, Y. Zhang, W. Q. Li, Z. R. Chen, J. Y. Cui, W. Li, Y. D. Xie, Q. Hao and Q. Y. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 123902 CrossRef .

          M. W. George, US Geological Survey Minerals Yearbook,  2003 Search PubMed .
W. X. Guo, D. Shu, H. Y. Chen, A. J. Li, H. Wang, G. M. Xiao, C. L. Dou, S. G. Peng, W. W. Wei, W. Zhang, H. W. Zhou and S. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 475, 102–109 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, B. Wan, Q. Zhou, Y. Wang, W. Hu, W. Lv, Q. Chen, Z. Zeng, F. Wen and J. Xiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9408–9415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. D. Brown Jr, US Geological Survey Minerals Yearbook, Pennsylvania: Bureau Assoc,  1994, p. 671 Search PubMed .
T. Liang, X. Su, Y. Yan, G. Zheng, Q. Zhang, H. Chi, X. Tang and C. Uher, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17914–17918 CAS .
P. F. Qiu, X. B. Wang, T. S. Zhang, X. Shi and L. D. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22454–22461 CAS .
L. Yang, Z.-G. Chen, G. Han, M. Hong, L. Huang and J. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9213–9219 CAS .
H. D. Shih, M. A. Kinch, F. Aqariden, P. K. Liao, H. F. Schaake and V. Nathan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4157–4159 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Porter, A. L. Cai, J. F. Muth and J. Narayan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 211918 CrossRef .
A. Avidan and D. Oron, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2384–2387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Park and K. Tanioka, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 192106 CrossRef .
J. Park, P. A. Barnes and M. L. Lovejoy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 968–970 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tang, S. Gu, K. Wu, S. Zhu, J. Ye, R. Zhang and Y. Zheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 242101 CrossRef .
R. Hu, K. Wang, H. Ryu, H. Lei, E. S. Choi, M. Uhlarz, J. Wosnitza and C. Petrovic, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 256401 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Darbandi, O. Salehzadeh, P. Kuyanov, R. R. LaPierre and S. P. Watkins, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 234305 CrossRef .
J. Park, Y. A. Soh, G. Aeppli, X. Feng, Y. Ou, K. He and Q. K. Xue, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11595 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yang, H. Chan, G. Zhao, J. H. Bahng, P. Zhang, P. Král and N. A. Kotov, Nat. Chem., 2016, 9, 287–294 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Liu and S.-H. Yu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2015, 2, 392–393 CrossRef .
H. W. Liang, S. Liu and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3925–3937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Z.-H. Wang, H.-H. Li, J.-W. Liu and S.-H. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4038–4041 RSC .
W. Zhang, R. Yu, W. X. Feng, Y. G. Yao, H. M. Weng, X. Dai and Z. Fang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 156808 CrossRef PubMed .
S. F. Wuister, I. Swart, F. van Driel, S. G. Hickey and C. D. Donega, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 503–507 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Tang, N. A. Kotov and M. Giersig, Science, 2002, 297, 237–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Z. Pei, A. D. LaLonde and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1366–1370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Guo, L. Liu, W. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Y. Wang and S. H. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2054–2061 RSC .
Y. Z. Pei, A. LaLonde, S. Iwanaga and G. J. Snyder, Environ. Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2085–2089 RSC .
J. P. Heremans, V. Jovovic, E. S. Toberer, A. Saramat, K. Kurosaki, A. Charoenphakdee, S. Yamanaka and G. J. Snyder, Science, 2008, 321, 554–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Brune, C. X. Liu, E. G. Novik, E. M. Hankiewicz, H. Buhmann, Y. L. Chen, X. L. Qi, Z. X. Shen, S. C. Zhang and L. W. Molenkamp, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 126803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Maier, J. B. Oostinga, D. Knott, C. Brune, P. Virtanen, G. Tkachov, E. M. Hankiewicz, C. Gould, H. Buhmann and L. W. Molenkamp, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 186806 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes and S. C. Zhang, Science, 2006, 314, 1757–1761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. A. Kudriavtsec and E. M. Elkin, The chemistry & technology of selenium and tellurium, Collet's,  1974 Search PubMed .
B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin and Y. N. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1380–1384 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Zhen He
	Zhen received his BS degree in polymer materials and engineering from Northwestern Polytechnical University in 2013. Then, he started his PhD study in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Science and Technology of China. He is interested in the dynamic assembling process of one-dimensional nanomaterials and their device fabrication.

Yuan Yang
	Yuan Yang received his BS degree in inorganic chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2011. Then, he started his PhD study in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in the Department of Chemistry at the USTC. He is interested in nanowire synthesis and their applications.

Jian-Wei Liu
	Jian-Wei Liu received his BS degree in chemical engineering and Technology from Hefei University of Technology in 2007 and PhD in nanochemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in 2013. Since then, he has joined Yu's group at USTC, and he is now an associate professor. He is interested in the synthesis and self-assembly of nanoscale building blocks as well as their derived nanodevices.

Shu-Hong Yu
	Shu-Hong Yu received his PhD in Inorg. Chem. in 1998 from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). From 1999 to 2001, he worked in Tokyo Institute of Technology as a Postdoctoral Fellow. From 2001 to 2002, he worked as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces. He was appointed as a full professor in 2002 and to the Cheung Kong Professorship in 2006 by the Ministry of Education at the Department of Chemistry, USTC. His research interests include the bio-inspired synthesis and self-assembly of nanoscale building blocks, nanocomposites, and their related properties. He has authored and co-authored more than 430 refereed journal publications. He serves as an editorial advisory board member of the journals Accounts of Chemical Research, Chemical Science, Materials Horizons, Chemistry of Materials, Nano Research, CrystEngComm, ChemNanoMat and ChemPlusChem.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the morphology control of Te nanostructures and their wide application potentials.	 

 	Fig. 2  A schematic illustration showing the crystal structure and electronic structures of tellurium. (a) Spiral chains of the crystals arrange in a crystal structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. (b) View along the c-axis indicating spiral chains of Te atomic structures with an angle of 120°; (c) electronic band structures and total density of states (DOS) of tellurium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 Wiley. (d) The XRD pattern spectrum of Te nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2009 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  A schematic illustration of the reaction pathways that lead to Te nanostructures with different shapes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Te nanoparticles: (a and b) TEM image at different amplifications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2008 Wiley. (c and d) Typical TEM and HRTEM images. Inset: Suspensions of Te NPs after cleaning once, twice, and thrice. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2008 IOPscience.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of Te nanowire; reprinted with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2013 Royal of Society Chemistry. (b and c) TEM image of Te nanowire; reprinted with permission from ref. 4 and 22. Copyright 2004 Wiley and 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth of Te nanotubes; reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2013 Royal of Society Chemistry. (b and c) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image and TEM image of Te nanotubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. (d–g) Tellurium nanotube structures with sloping cross-sections synthesized in the presence of CTAB (0.23 g) at 180 °C for 24 h. (d and e) SEM and TEM images of as-prepared tellurium nanotubes. (f) SEM image at higher magnification for Te nanotubes, revealing the sloping cross-sections; (g) SAED pattern taken on the Te nanotube. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Series of TEM images of Te nanobelts in a twisted, helical state, or bending in a circle; reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2002 Wiley. (b and c) Morphology of Te nanobelts at different magnifications; (d) HRTEM image of the Te nanobelt, inset: fast Fourier transformation (FFT) pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Te nanostructures with the morphology tuned continuously through a solution phase approach. (a–c) TEM images of Te nanostructures from nanoparticles to nanorods. (d and e) TEM images of Te nanowires with increased diameter. (f) SEM image of Te nanotubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 9  The morphology, optical properties and atomic structures of Te nanowires with different diameters. (a and b) A schematic image and optical photographs showing the morphology evolution with aspect ratio increasing. (c) UV/Vis spectrum of Te nanostructures, from nanoparticles to nanowires with different aspect ratios. (d and e) The valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) of Te nanowires with different diameters, Te-w1, Te-w2, and Te-w3 (from left to right). (f) Joint density of states (JDOS) of VB, CB and centre Te wires in Te nanowires with different diameters, including Te-w1, Te-w2 and Te-w3. The Fermi level is set to zero. Reprinted with the permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a and b) SEM of Te hybrids with a tripod-shaped planar microstructure. (c and d) SEM of flower-like Te microstructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e and f) SEM images of the Te flower-like samples produced at different reaction times: 150, and 960 min. The reaction temperature is kept at 120 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2010 Royal of Society Chemistry. (g–i) SEM images of Te nanorods, feather-like Te structures and t-Te nanoflowers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2004 Royal of Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Proposed growth mechanism illustration for the formation of shuttle-like scrolled Te nanotubes. (b) SEM images of the shuttle-like scrolled Te nanotubes. (c) SEM image of the shuttle-like scrolled Te nanotubes in which white arrows indicate the flexible tips and the scrolling edges. (d) TEM image of a typical single shuttle-like scrolled nanotube. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chiral Te nanostructures using chiral biomolecules. (a and b) STEM images of tellurium nanostructures at different magnifications. (c–e) Tomographic reconstruction of tellurium nanostructures from three different orientations. Scale bars, 100 nm. (f–i) Absorption and CD activity of chiral shapes of tellurium samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Te based alloy and hetero-nanostructures. (a) Te–Se alloy. TEM image of an individual Se0.5Te0.5 alloy nanorod. Inset: The hexagonal lattice of Se0.5Te0.5 with the Se and Te atoms randomly distributed. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2001 Wiley. (b) HRTEM image of Te@Se core–shell structure nanowire. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2014 Royal of Society Chemistry. (c) Se–Te–Se hetero-nanowires. TEM image of Se–Te–Se multi-segmented nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (d) Te–Bi2Te3 hetero-nanorods. TEM image of Te–Bi2Te3 multi-segmented nanorods with different segment lengths: Bi0.32Te0.68, Bi0.26Te0.74, and Bi0.19Te0.81. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (e) Te–Bi2Te3 hetero-nanowires. TEM image of Te–Bi2Te3 nanowire-multiple plate heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (f) PbTe–Te–PbTe hetero-nanowires. TEM image of PbTe–Te nanowire heterostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (g and h) Te–Ag hetero-nanowires. TEM images of dumbbell-shaped Ag nodule-decorated and Ag tip-decorated Te nanowires with different magnifications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The relationship between the production efficiency and increased size of reaction containers, inset: photograph of reaction containers increasing in size. (b) A schematic of a container of 16 L with special design of heat transfer. (c) Photograph of the precipitation of Te nanowires. (d) TEM image of Te nanowire via large-scale synthesis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2014 Royal of Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) TEM image and HRTEM image of TexSey@Se core–shell nanowires. (c) The line scan pattern of a single nanowire. (d and e) Element mapping of Se and Te. (f–n) 9 kinds of monometal chalcogenide nanowires from the chemical transformation of TexSey@Se core–shell nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 American Association for the advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 16  Device fabrication by the focused ion beam (FIB) deposition technique with a four-terminal configuration and their electrical properties. (a and b) Optical and SEM images of an Au/Ti electrode pattern on a SiO2/Si substrate. (c) Electronic property of the device measured at a series of temperatures: 300, 250, 200, 150, 100, 50, 40, 30, 20, 15, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, and 7 K. Inset of (c) is the TEM image of Te nanotubes. (d) Hall measurement of a thin tablet made of tellurium nanotubes at 300 K. Inset of (d): schematic illustration for Hall measurement (EH = Hall electric field. The z-directed magnetic field is perpendicular to the sample). Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2008 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the bent NG device with well-aligned single crystalline t-Te nanowires. (b) The cross-sectional view of a t-Te nanowire, and the dipole moment arising along the [110] direction under tensile stress or compressive stress. (c and d) The output voltage and current of aligned tellurium film with different layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2013 Wiley. (e) Schematic of the fabrication process of TFNG. (f and g) The output voltage and current of the TFNG device during repeated bending and unbending motions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of gas testing devices composed of Te, inset: photograph of device. (b) Schematic of a single interdigitated electrode, inset: SEM image of Te nanotube on interdigitated electrode. (c) Sensitivity of Te nanotube toward NH3 and NO2. (d) Sensitivity of Te nanotube to different gases with a concentration of 1000 ppb. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (e) Response and recovery transients of Te film after exposure to 0.4 ppm, 1 ppm and 4 ppm of H2S gas. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. (f) Sensitivity of Te films as a function of ammonia concentration, insets: response curve after exposure to 100 ppm NH3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2004 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the absorption process of Hg2+. (b) Rabs/Babsversus Hg2+ ion concentration during the sensing process of Hg2+ ions (0–10 mM) in 5.0 mM sodium phosphate solution. Insets: UV-Vis absorption spectra of Te NTs with and without Hg2+. (c) Selectivity of the Te NTs-AGM probe toward Hg2+. Insets: TEM image of Te NTs with and without Hg2+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2013 Royal of Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of device based on Te sample for photoconductive test. (b) I–V curves measured under different light intensities, inset: linear characteristics between photocurrent and the power of illumination. (c) Reversible switching of a 20-layer Te nanowire film device. (d–f) Reversible switching the photoconductive properties of the Te nanowire films with one, three, and five layers, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 
Ten + 2nLi+ + 2ne− ↔ Li2nTen

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the configuration of a battery based on Te NW/CNT and its working principle during cycling. (b) Planar view SEM image of Te NW/CNT cathode. (c) SEM images of Te@CNT cathode. (d) Cycling electrochemical performance of Te@CNT cathode at 1C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2016 Wiley. (e) Illustration of the formation process of 3DGT aerogel and fabrication of free-standing electrode. (f) The free-standing cathode with good flexibility. (g) Cyclic performance of the 3DGT cathode at 0.2C for 200 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  The characteristics of undoped and Te-doped black phosphorus (BP) FET devices. (a and b) Images of as-fabricated undoped and Te-doped devices (top), AFM height profiles of the BP channels (bottom). (c) The distribution of ION/IOFF ratios for tested undoped and Te-doped BP devices. (d) The distribution of hole mobilities for tested undoped and Te-doped BP devices. (e) Normalized mobility as a function of ambient exposure time. (f) Normalized ION/IOFF ratios as a function of ambient exposure time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
