Flexibly assembled and readily detachable photovoltaics   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE01889D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE01889D
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2117-2123Flexibly assembled and readily detachable photovoltaics†

        
          
            Shi 
            Wang‡
, 
      
        
          
            Kaili 
            Hou‡
, 
      
        
          
            Yujin 
            Xing‡
, 
      
        
          
            Qingshun 
            Dong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yanping 
            Lv
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yantao 
            Shi
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, School of Chemistry, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China. E-mail: Shiyantao@dlut.edu.cn
Received 
      6th July 2017
    , Accepted 11th September 2017First published on 11th September 2017AbstractIs it possible that one day flexible assembly, repeated detachment, facile repair and maintenance will all be realized for photovoltaic devices? Our work provides a feasible strategy. A flexibly assembled and readily detachable stacking perovskite solar cell (S-PSC) consisting of two individual half cells is reported for the first time. High adaptability to various electrode substrates is demonstrated, which endows S-PSCs with promising prospects in future manufacture and applications. Considering that a robust interface between two half cells is an essential precondition for repeated detachment, a series of interfacial modifications are conducted and eventually considerable power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of up to 14.62% are attained. Meanwhile, the S-PSCs can withstand repeated assembly and disassembly tests more than 100 times without a decline in the PCE. This work charts a new path for future innovative design of solar cells featuring flexible and facile production, storage, and cost-effective repair and maintenance.

Broader context
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells are at the frontier of photovoltaic technology. Every step of progress in device performance is being considered and discussed widely. Beyond the exponential evolution of power conversion efficiency versus the relatively inferior long-term stability, another negative factor that always prevents solar cells from being economical and eco-friendly has been long overlooked: the incapacity to process and maintain each component after cell integration. The conventional layer-by-layer structure becomes an obstacle resulting in a big waste of materials and energy. To ameliorate this tough issue, our stacking perovskite solar cells offer valuable references. We imagine that one day flexible assembly, repeated detachment, and facile maintenance will all be realized for perovskite solar cells. Functional materials will be flexibly combined through good design making the customized devices easy to qualify for various product demands. Meanwhile, degraded components in an inferior device will be maintained or replaced individually to achieve performance renewal through the realization of repeated detachment. The innovative stacking perovskite solar cells will play an important role in the design of future environmentally friendly devices and the path towards final commercialization.

Given the rising global energy consumption along with growing concern about pollution coming from fossil fuels such as coal and natural gas, solar energy as an inexhaustible and clean energy resource has enormous prospects to meet the world's huge appetite for power. Solar cells are effective mediators to convert solar energy directly into electricity. However, market-leading silicon photovoltaics are expensive and their manufacture produces toxic by-products.1 Furthermore, another negative factor that always prevents solar cells from being economical and eco-friendly has been long overlooked: the incapacity to process and maintain each component after cell integration. It is acknowledged that currently dominating solar cells suffer from inferior stability without elaborate encapsulation. Improper processing or extreme conditions may further decrease the survival probability. Once the quality of a conventional solar cell can no longer meet the demands of an acceptable product, maybe ascribed to the degradation of one or several components, the consecutive layer-by-layer structure will usually bring many difficulties in effective maintenance, in turn resulting in a big waste of materials and energy. Such intrinsic drawbacks of conventional solar cells will raise the cost and increase the burden of solar factories from the view of device operation life and material recycling. Besides, it is inevitable that the product demands will always be changing with the continuous development of science and industry. The upgrading of currently mature photovoltaic devices is imperative in the future to meet different requirements. In this context, inferior devices with inappropriate electrodes or other components will achieve renewal only if they can be disassembled, recycled, and recombined deliberately without sacrificing their functions. Based on these considerations, we could not help but imagine whether or not we could seek out a breakthrough in the evolution from the typical device architecture to a flexible assembly and readily detachable one.
The emerging perovskite materials, by virtue of their desirable photoelectric attributes as well as relative ease of processing from solution etc., have gradually demonstrated great potential to challenge the dominance of silicon photovoltaics.2–8 The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite based solar cells (PSCs) has exceeded 22% which is fully competitive.9 However, it is noteworthy that high-efficiency PSCs prevalently adopt noble metals as the counter electrode (CE) through high vacuum deposition technologies. Considering that a cost squeeze is always inevitable on the path from laboratory size to industrial scale, it cannot be overemphasized that access to facile and reliable large-scale fabrication techniques is essential for the final commercialization of such photovoltaics.10 Various attempts have been made to realize economical and high-throughput cell manufacture. Industry friendly deposition techniques have been introduced such as screen printing,11 roll-to-roll printing,12 slot die coating,13 and spray coating,14 while several alternative CEs including carbon materials,15 candle soot16 and conductive polymer/metal girds17etc., have been successfully employed in PSCs without significantly sacrificing the PCE.
Actually, many alternative materials and fabrication techniques hold the potential to replace the high-cost noble metal CEs. At present, typical fabrication of PSCs is through consecutive layer-by-layer preparation of various functional layers on a conductive substrate. Meanwhile, some research has provided many valuable references to break the confinement of conventional structure and fabrication methods. Worsley and his co-workers17 reported a corrosion proof Ni mesh electrode (embedded in a polyethylene terephthalate film) which was fabricated separately to the perovskite photoanode and then simply laminated on it. Heo18 fabricated a semi-transparent PSC with a sandwich architecture of FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/PEDOT:PSS, where PTAA and PEDOT:PSS are the abbreviations of poly-triarylamine and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonic acid), respectively. Considering that various external factors such as high temperature, corrosive solutions, UV light and ozone etc. will trigger rapid perovskite material or device degradation,19–21 the above studies demonstrate the feasibility of individual fabrication of cell components, which offers us enormous space for freely designing, tailoring and even repairing functional layers.
Enlightened by the above primary studies, in this paper we formally propose a novel stacking cell architecture, a stacking PSC (S-PSC), that comprises two half cells, a perovskite based photoanode and a PEDOT:PSS/conductive substrate based CE. The two half cells were simply stacked together without additional processes. Then we managed to exploit its electrical and mechanical functionalities so as to realize a new-type of solar cell with flexible assembly, repeated detachment, and facile maintenance. Primarily great importance was attached to testing the ability to deposit PEDOT:PSS on a variety of conductive substrates as alternative CEs. Identical photoanodes with an architecture of FTO/c&m (compact and mesoporous)-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS were stacked with different CEs based on seven conductive substrates including ITO/PEN (polyethylene naphthalate), aluminum sheet, copper sheet, FTO, aluminum foil, steel sheet, and copper foil. More details about cell fabrication can be found in the ESI.† Among them, the aluminum foil, copper foil, and FTO based S-PSCs present relatively high PCEs illustrated in Fig. 1. This result reveals a high adaptability of such stacking architectures to different CEs. The corresponding cross-section SEM image of the photoanode is shown in Fig. 2a. Referring to the energy alignment diagram in Fig. 2b and the common utilization of p-type PEDOT:PSS as a HTM (hole transport material) in ‘inverted’ PSCs, initially we tried to remove the Spiro-OMeTAD layer to simplify the cell architecture. The comparative results summarized in Table S1 (ESI†) elucidate the necessity of Spiro-OMeTAD in our cell. The absence of Spiro-OMeTAD leads to serious declines in all photovoltaic parameters. From the irreplaceable role of Spiro-OMeTAD and the superior performance of aluminum foil based S-PSCs, we would like to clarify which are the most decisive factors that determine the device performance. It is speculated generally that effective hole extraction and transfer from the perovskite material to the CE via the HTM play an important role. Thus, whether or not robust interfaces are formed between each layer will make a big difference and whether the intrinsic properties of CE materials such as work function and conductivity are suitable for the stacking architecture also cannot be ignored.
 Fig. 1  Stacking structured PSCs with various electrode substrates and corresponding PCEs. 
 Fig. 2  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the photoanode. (b) Energy level diagram. 
For a sound understanding of S-PSCs and the potential properties of various CE substrates, it is necessary to clarify the dynamic processes that occur in the low frequency to high frequency domain and their relationship to material and structure combinations in the device.22 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a widely used technique that extracts dynamic operating parameters on a complete device.23Fig. 3a is the capacitance–frequency (C–f) plots which exhibit the real part of the complex capacitance mathematically derived according to the equation C = 1/iωZ, where ω and Z are the angular frequency and the complex impedance, respectively.24 The impact of variations in device architecture and components upon internal charge dynamic processes will be directly reflected in the variations in the C–f plots. We can find that the capacitances in the high frequency region (104–106 Hz) exhibit obvious distinctions between each CE, while the curves in the intermediate (10–104 Hz) and low frequency region (1–10 Hz) nearly superpose each other. Considering that the same perovskite materials are employed in each photoanodes and the substrates are the only variable, we conjecture that the distinctions in the high frequency region are highly relevant to the interfacial dynamic process from the PEDOT:PSS to CEs.25–28 The conductivity, work function, and surface smoothness etc. of various CE substrates and the PEDOT:PSS/CE interfacial electrical structure and contact will make a difference. Since forward bias (0.3 V) is applied in EIS measurement, electrons are injected from an external circuit to the photoanode and then pass through TiO2, perovskite, and PEDOT:PSS, finally arriving at the CE. Such sequential processes can be viewed as electron back-transfer compared to the flowing direction in the condition of a real working solar cell. Among the seven devices, the aluminum foil based S-PSC with the champion PCE presents larger capacitance in the high frequency region. This finding indicates evident interfacial charge accumulation at the interface of PEDOT:PSS/aluminum foil when forward bias is applied. This attribute will help to minimize energy loss caused by interfacial electron back-transfer (or charge recombination). Meanwhile, the response in intermediate regions can be attributed to the bulk resistance and capacitance of perovskite possibly as a result of polarization.29 As for the visible differences in the Nyquist plots shown in Fig. 3b, we would like to underline the effect of partial voltage upon the perovskite layer and its resistance. Normally, the carrier density of semiconductors increases exponentially with applied voltage. In our EIS measurements, the bias for all S-PSC devices was 0.3 V. However, for the seven devices, the characteristics of CEs and the PEDOT:PSS/CE interfaces are different, due to which the partial voltage on the perovskite layer may be different, too. The aluminum foil based S-PSC possesses larger back transfer resistance giving rise to more voltage assigned to this interface. Thus, the partial voltage on the perovskite layer is relatively lower when compared to that of the other six devices, which thus results in a relatively lower charge carrier density and a higher impedance as reflected in the Nyquist plot. Fig. 3c is an enlarged version of the high frequency region. Consulting the relevant literature reported before, we assign the initial value of the Nyquist plot to the series resistance (Rs) of the whole device. In the enlarged view, the aluminum foil based S-PSC exhibits the smallest Rs which can make a contribution to efficient charge transport. We further infer that the small Rs may benefit from a seamless PEDOT:PSS/aluminum interface and the high-quality interface may derive from the high surface smoothness of aluminum foil which realizes a homogeneous electrical contact with PEDOT:PSS. It is worth saying that the EIS results are consistent with the PCE order shown in Fig. 1. Moreover, EIS offers us a viable strategy to evaluate the properties and potential applications of alternative CE materials. The Nyquist plot and C–f plot are complementary forms to investigate the complex impedance and internal kinetics. Drawing conclusions only from the diameter of the semicircle to estimate the internal kinetics is not nearly rigorous enough.
 Fig. 3  (a) C–f plots of seven different PSCs. (b) Nyquist plots of different substrate based PSCs. (c) Enlarged view of the high frequency region. 
The employment of these versatile substrates endows our S-PSCs with a bright future: diverse functional substrate based CEs will develop their optimal manufacturing techniques and will be appropriate for diverse application fields. Rigid metal platforms taking the advantages of low cost, ease of processing, high permeation barrier properties, and high conductivity etc. could be widely applied as inexpensive, large-area substrates through innovative industry-friendly fabrications to provide excellent electrical properties and a robust surface protecting the inner layers. Meanwhile, the intrinsic bendable, lightweight, and portable characteristics of flexible conducting plastic films and metallic substrates permit high volume roll-to-roll manufacturing of PSCs and enable effective harvesting of energy in various areas from indoor electronics to automobiles and from building integrated photovoltaics to portable applications.30 In addition, modularity in manufacture is becoming a focus point presently as companies are making efforts to rationalize engineering design, raw materials, and manufacturing to produce high-volume, low-price products.31 The superiority of such stacking architecture and electrode adaptability in compatibility with the solar modular industry cannot be neglected. It enables companies to achieve a customized PSC by predetermined combinations between various perovskite material modules and various functional CE modules according to the specific requirements such as semi-transparent, high-voltage, flexible, and water proof etc. Therefore, the special advantages of some perovskite materials could be fully taken through the assembly with optimum CEs to maximize the desired specific performance of PSCs.
The successful verification of flexible assembly is a step forward towards our new-type solar cells and it motivates us to further explore the potential of S-PSCs to achieve repeated detachment. However, we must admit that the realization of repeated detachment always cannot stand away from repeated formation of a robust interface between two half cells, namely the photoanode and CE. Given the imperative requirement to improve both the interfacial contact and current cell performance to a relatively satisfactory degree, a variety of optimizations were conducted in advance. There are two individual PEDOT:PSS layers stacking together in this architecture, the thicknesses of which will significantly influence the cell performance. Through a series of comparisons, the optimized thicknesses of the PEDOT:PSS layer were confirmed: 1.5 μm for the photoanode and 3 μm for the CE. Such combination balanced the high conductivity with an effective hole transfer from Spiro-OMeTAD to the electrode substrate without serious charge recombination. Then we managed to achieve an intimate interfacial contact between two PEDOT:PSS layers through delicate controls over the surface morphology of two layers. According to the previous literature studies, when PEDOT:PSS films are treated with an appropriate compound, such as D-sorbitol, the high-conductivity film can adhere various films together.32 PEDOT:PSS/D-sorbitol as an excellent electronic glue has been used in various laminated electronics devices.33,34 Initially D-sorbitol was adopted as an additive to increase the stickiness of the PEDOT:PSS layer, however, the performance of the corresponding S-PSC was far from satisfactory due to low open-circuit voltage (VOC) and FF. Thus, D-sorbitol as an additive was abandoned without hesitation. The ideal additive we prefer ought to be capable of not only affording a seamless interfacial electrical contact by increasing the adhesiveness of the PEDOT:PSS layer but also contributing to suppressing charge recombination. Considering that lithium bis (triuoromethanesulfonyl) imide (Li salt), and 4-tert-butyl pyridine (TBP) have good modification effects on HTMs,35 we attempted to join them in the PEDOT:PSS layer to act as a binder and modifier simultaneously. From the slopes of linear sweep voltammetry curves in Fig. S1 (ESI†), it is found that the addition of TBP or Li salt could not increase the conductivity of pristine PEDOT:PSS, whereas, the participation of them successfully alters the surface roughness and stickiness of the PEDOT:PSS layer. The corresponding top-view SEM images are presented in Fig. 4. We found that the PEDOT:PSS layer with additives exhibits a rougher surface with smaller flakes and more undulations on it, the two rough PEDOT:PSS layers with suitable and similar surface roughness produce more contact sites and form an interpenetrating conductive network at the interface. The optimal combination is finally affirmed to be 100 μL TBP and 60 μL Li salt. As the additive amount increases, a large degradation in the PCE is observed which might be attributed to the corrosion of TBP to the perovskite material. We fabricated two groups of S-PSCs using the pristine PEDOT:PSS and the modified TL-PEDOT:PSS for parallel comparison. Statistical photovoltaic parameters including short-circuit current density (JSC), VOC, FF and PCE of the two groups of cells are presented in Fig. S2 (ESI†), and detailed results are summarized in Table 1. The improvements in average FF and VOC could be preliminarily ascribed to the improved contact across the PEDOT:PSS/PEDOT:PSS interface of two half cells as well as the minimized energy loss at the PEDOT:PSS/CE interface, which facilitates the hole transfer to the CE and simultaneously suppresses undesirable charge recombination or exciton quenching at the interface. EIS was deployed afterward to provide an analysis of the influence of the additives on the charge transport and interfacial charge transfer process.
 Fig. 4  Top-view SEM of (a) PEDOT:PSS, and (b) PEDOT:PSS with TBP and Li salt. Contact angle of water on (c) PEDOT:PSS, and (d) PEDOT:PSS with TBP and Li salt. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of PEDOT:PSS and TL-PEDOT:PSS based PSCs









J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm−2)

R
sh

 (Ω cm−2)





a TBP and Li salt based.
b Shunt resistance.





PEDOT:PSS
Champion
22.10
0.82
0.61
10.95
6.41




Average
20.67 ± 2.26
0.70 ± 0.09
0.49 ± 0.08
6.99 ± 1.51
4.70 ± 1.31
354.35


TLa-PEDOT:PSS
Champion
21.62
0.95
0.71
14.62
2.94




Average
20.49 ± 1.65
0.92 ± 0.02
0.66 ± 0.05
12.45 ± 1.20
3.90 ± 1.05
883.30





Fig. 5a is the C–f plots of PEDOT:PSS based and TL-PEDOT:PSS based devices. As we mentioned above, the capacitance in the high frequency region is dominated by the charge dynamic processes occurring at the PEDOT:PSS/CE interface. When a forward bias of 0.3 V is applied, it can be figured out that the addition of TBP and Li salt enhances the interfacial capacitance and thus could effectively block electron back-transfer. Modification of the stickiness effectively ameliorates the interfacial contact between PEDOT:PSS and the CE and creates extra charge transmission paths for holes to arrive at the CE more efficiently. Fig. 5b shows the Nyquist plots. As for the increase in the diameter of the semicircle in the intermediate frequency region, an explanation related to partial voltage on the perovskite is still practicable. An enlarged semicircle suggests a lower carrier density in the perovskite and a larger back-transfer resistance at the PEDOT:PSS/CE interface, which is strong supporting information. Fig. 5c is the enlarged version of the high frequency region. The decrease in Rs indicates that the resistance of charge transport across the PEDOT:PSS/PEDOT:PSS interface is greatly reduced. TBP and Li salt alter the surface roughness and achieve a more intimate PEDOT:PSS/PEDOT:PSS interfacial contact further promoting charge transport. From the results of EIS, we can generally propose that TBP and Li salt as specific additives are capable of enhancing the performance of S-PSCs by suppressing charge recombination and ameliorating the interfacial electrical structure of two half cells and PEDOT:PSS/CE interface.
 Fig. 5  (a) C–f plots of PEDOT:PSS and TL-PEDOT:PSS based PSCs. (b) Nyquist plots of PEDOT:PSS and TL-PEDOT:PSS based PSCs. (c) Enlarged view of the high frequency region. 
The J–V curve of the champion PEDOT:PSS based and TL-PEDOT:PSS based S-PSCs are shown in Fig. 6a. Benefitting from the functional TBP and Li salt additives, finally we attain a champion device with 14.62% PCE. This device produces a constant photocurrent of 16.7 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 11.25% for 600 seconds in an ambient atmosphere under illumination and a bias voltage of 0.7 V (Fig. 6b). In contrast, the pristine PEDOT:PSS based device exhibits an obvious decline in the PCE for only 300 seconds under the same conditions (Fig. 6c). Next, we aimed to testify the influence of additives on the long-term stability of PSCs. The comparative results in Fig. 6d demonstrate that in the dark and under ambient air with an average humidity of about 38%, the PEDOT:PSS based device without encapsulation shows an apparent degradation with only 40% PCE maintained after 15 days in striking contrast to the superior stability of the TL-PEDOT:PSS based PSC which maintains nearly the same PCE after 50 days. Although we have not attained enough evidence for the stability mechanism of the TL-PEDOT:PSS based device, our conjectures center on the stable interfacial structure between the two PEDOT:PSS layers and enhanced hydrophobicity of PEDOT:PSS with additives. The contact angle of water on the PEDOT:PSS layer seen in Fig. 4b already provides a proof of our latter guess. More investigations will be carried out to further explore the stability and dynamic mechanisms of our S-PSCs. Depending on the achievements of improved interfacial electrical structure and a competent PCE, eventually, we sought to determine whether our S-PSCs were readily detachable. We conducted a special stability experiment through repeatedly assembling and disassembling the half cells 100 times. After one test, the integrated device is just separated by hands without any mechanical assistance or other treatments. Then, without any repairing, the two half cells are simply stacked together again to be ready for the next test. A schematic diagram of the detachable stability tests is shown in Fig. 7a and the relative result is shown in Fig. 7b. What satisfies us most is that, after 100 times of stacking and separating repeatedly, even if the PEDOT:PSS layers become incomplete as parts of it are peeled off owing to the stickiness, our S-PSC manifests little decline in the PCE. To the best of our knowledge, our experiment is among the first to detect and realize the ready detachment of solar cells and our S-PSCs with outstanding detachable stability have not been reported yet. This creative work will play an important role in improving the whole product line, storage and long-term maintenance of commercialized PSCs in the future. For instance, throughout the multiple state-of-the-art CE materials reported in PSC devices, most of them have exhibited decent intrinsic material stability that may have a high tolerance to extreme conditions. In other words, the CE material in an abandoned PSC may remain functional and still be qualified to transport electrons effectively. Readily detachable S-PSCs ensure that cell components in good condition recycled from abandoned devices can escape the fate of destruction and will be redistributed, reserved, and reutilized properly. Moreover, a series of new designed CEs could be stacked on one standard photoanode in succession, which eliminates the unwanted disturbance of other factors and gives an accurate result. Simultaneously we believe that our research will offer valuable guidance for the design and layout of future solar cell factory system,36 which involves upgrading the market-leading techniques and cooperations with incumbent techniques. However, we cannot deny the fact that wishing to accomplish the ultimate goals, our initial work is just a stepping stone. Subsequent experiments concentrating on interfacial engineering, stability mechanisms, alternative CEs, and simplifying cell architecture will be carried out to fulfill the promise of our flexibly assembled and readily detachable S-PSCs.
 Fig. 6  (a) The J–V curves of the champion PEDOT:PSS based device and TL-PEDOT:PSS based device. (b) Performance of the TL-PEDOT:PSS based PSC with bias voltage 0.7 V in 600 s. (c) PCE comparison with bias voltage 0.7 V in 300 s. (d) Long-term stability test. 
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the disassembling experiment. (b) Normalized PCE of PSCs after repeated detachment stability tests. 
Last but not the least, we would like to underline the significance of testifying the universality of our S-PSCs. It will provide a valuable reference for future developments of a solar module system. In this paper, we have given priority to achieving a robust interface, and the flexible assembly of various substrates as well as the performance variation after repeated detachment have been emphatically discussed. Based on these achievements, currently we are seeking to incorporate PSCs with other photovoltaic devices in the stacking architecture to extend our strategy into other photovoltaic technologies. The relative investigations and experiments as the focus are in progress and, with regard to S-PSCs, there still remain some scientific issues to be overcome.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have introduced a flexibly assembled and readily detachable perovskite solar cell in this paper. The high compatibility with various electrode substrates endows this PSC with promising prospects in the future manufacture and applications, while the excellent detachable stability which has not been reported yet paves the way for innovative cell design, production, storage, and long-term maintenance. Through a series of performance optimizations, TBP and Li salt are introduced into the PEDOT:PSS layer to achieve an improved interfacial contact which facilitates hole transport and suppresses charge recombination. A PCE of 14.62% with good long-term stability is attained. Our research has presented an innovative S-PSC, the specific advantages and potential applications of which will make a great contribution to the final commercialization as well as designs of future PSCs and their factory systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51402036 and 51773025) and the International Science & Technology Cooperation Program of China (Grant No. 2013DFA51000).
References
Y. Yang and J. b. You, Nature, 2017, 544, 155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989 CAS .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J. D. Decoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, G. D. A. Fp, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Science, 2017, 355, 722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, L. Xu, X. Feng, J. Jie and Z. He, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603923 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, D. Zhao, Y. Yu, N. Shrestha, C. R. Grice, W. Liao, A. J. Cimaroli, J. Chen, R. J. Ellingson, X. Zhao and Y. Yan, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 223 CrossRef CAS .
NREL Best Research Cell Efficiencies, http://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficency-chart. png, accessed: January 2017.
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Gratzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 47 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hwang, Y. S. Jung, Y. J. Heo, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, J. Subbiah, D. J. Jones, D. Y. Kim and D. Vak, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, S. Zhang, X. Xu, N. Wang, J. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Bi, G. Xu, N. Yuan and J. Ding, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60562 RSC .
I. Jeon, T. Chiba, C. Delacou, Y. Guo, A. Kaskela, O. Reynaud, E. I. Kauppinen, S. Maruyama and Y. Matsuo, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, K. Yan, H. Chen, Y. Yi, T. Zhang, X. Long, J. Li, L. Zhang, J. Wang and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3326 CAS .
D. Bryant, P. Greenwood, J. Troughton, M. Wijdekop, M. Carnie, M. Davies, K. Wojciechowski, H. J. Snaith, T. Watson and D. Worsley, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, M. Lee, M. Song, D. H. Kim and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2922 CAS .
Y. Rong, L. Liu, A. Mei, X. Li and H. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501066 CrossRef .
T. A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323 CAS .
D. Bi, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Oveisi, J. Luo, M. Gratzel, A. Hagfeldt and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N.-G. Park, M. Gratzel and T. Miyasaka, Organic-Inorganic Halide Perovskite Photovoltaics, Springer, Basel, Switzerland,  2016 Search PubMed .
I. Zarazua, G. Han, P. P. Boix, S. Mhaisalkar, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8023 CAS .
Z. Liu, M. Zhang, X. Xu, F. Cai, H. Yuan, L. Bu, W. Li, A. Zhu, Z. Zhao, M. Wang, Y.-B. Cheng and H. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24121 CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Liu, Z. Zuo, M. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Y. Shen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Yang and M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan, X. Zheng and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24226 CAS .
V. Gonzalez-Pedro, E. J. Juarez-Perez, W. S. Arsyad, E. M. Barea, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Di Giacomo, A. Fakharuddin, R. Jose and T. M. Brown, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3007 CAS .
A. M. Shaik, V. V. S. K. Rao and C. S. Rao, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 2014, 76, 789 CrossRef .
J. Ouyang and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2141 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang, T. Goh, J. Kong, Y. Zheng, S. Zhao, Z. Xu and A. D. Taylor, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4236 RSC .
P. You, Z. Liu, Q. Tai, S. Liu and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3632–3638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, K. Hou, Y. Wang, K. Wang, H. Ren, M. Pang, F. Chen and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5415 CAS .
G. D. Spyropoulos, C. O. Ramirez Quiroz, M. Salvador, Y. Hou, N. Gasparini, P. Schweizer, J. Adams, P. Kubis, N. Li, E. Spiecker, T. Ameri, H.-J. Egelhaaf and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2302 CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of experimental section and supplementary figures and table. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01889d‡ Shi Wang, Kaili Hou, and Yujin Xing contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells are at the frontier of photovoltaic technology. Every step of progress in device performance is being considered and discussed widely. Beyond the exponential evolution of power conversion efficiency versus the relatively inferior long-term stability, another negative factor that always prevents solar cells from being economical and eco-friendly has been long overlooked: the incapacity to process and maintain each component after cell integration. The conventional layer-by-layer structure becomes an obstacle resulting in a big waste of materials and energy. To ameliorate this tough issue, our stacking perovskite solar cells offer valuable references. We imagine that one day flexible assembly, repeated detachment, and facile maintenance will all be realized for perovskite solar cells. Functional materials will be flexibly combined through good design making the customized devices easy to qualify for various product demands. Meanwhile, degraded components in an inferior device will be maintained or replaced individually to achieve performance renewal through the realization of repeated detachment. The innovative stacking perovskite solar cells will play an important role in the design of future environmentally friendly devices and the path towards final commercialization.


 	Fig. 1  Stacking structured PSCs with various electrode substrates and corresponding PCEs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the photoanode. (b) Energy level diagram.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) C–f plots of seven different PSCs. (b) Nyquist plots of different substrate based PSCs. (c) Enlarged view of the high frequency region.	 

 	Fig. 4  Top-view SEM of (a) PEDOT:PSS, and (b) PEDOT:PSS with TBP and Li salt. Contact angle of water on (c) PEDOT:PSS, and (d) PEDOT:PSS with TBP and Li salt.	 


PEDOT:PSS	Champion	22.10	0.82	0.61	10.95	6.41	

Average	20.67 ± 2.26	0.70 ± 0.09	0.49 ± 0.08	6.99 ± 1.51	4.70 ± 1.31	354.35
TLa-PEDOT:PSS	Champion	21.62	0.95	0.71	14.62	2.94	

Average	20.49 ± 1.65	0.92 ± 0.02	0.66 ± 0.05	12.45 ± 1.20	3.90 ± 1.05	883.30

 	Fig. 5  (a) C–f plots of PEDOT:PSS and TL-PEDOT:PSS based PSCs. (b) Nyquist plots of PEDOT:PSS and TL-PEDOT:PSS based PSCs. (c) Enlarged view of the high frequency region.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The J–V curves of the champion PEDOT:PSS based device and TL-PEDOT:PSS based device. (b) Performance of the TL-PEDOT:PSS based PSC with bias voltage 0.7 V in 600 s. (c) PCE comparison with bias voltage 0.7 V in 300 s. (d) Long-term stability test.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the disassembling experiment. (b) Normalized PCE of PSCs after repeated detachment stability tests.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of experimental section and supplementary figures and table. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01889d
‡ Shi Wang, Kaili Hou, and Yujin Xing contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
