Nanocomposites and macroscopic materials: assembly of chemically modified graphene sheets   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35179J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35179J
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6160-6177Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanocomposites and macroscopic materials: assembly of chemically modified graphene sheets†

        
          
            Dongqing 
            Wu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haiwei 
            Liang
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Xinliang 
            Feng
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 200240, Shanghai, P. R. China
bMax Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128, Mainz, Germany. E-mail: feng@mpip-mainz.mpg.de
Received 
      14th May 2012
    First published on 9th August 2012AbstractSelf-assembly of chemically modified graphenes (CMGs), including graphene oxide (GO), reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and their derivatives, has emerged as one of the most appealing strategies to develop unprecedented graphene-based functional materials. With the assistance of various non-covalent forces such as hydrogen bonding, ionic, amphiphilic and π–π interactions, CMGs decorated with multiple functional groups are favorable for assembly with different organic and inorganic components which can result in hierarchical composites possessing unique structures and functions. In this review, we will summarize the state-of-the-art self-assembly strategies that have been established to construct CMG based nanomaterials, including nanoparticles, nanospheres, nanofibers, nanorods, nanosheets, and macroscopic thin films, fibers and porous networks. The driving forces involved in the self-assembly process will be elucidated in the context. Further, we will also highlight several representative examples of applications regarding the self-assembled CMG based materials.
Dongqing Wu
Dongqing Wu graduated in 2004 from East China University of Science and Technology with an MSc degree in Applied Chemistry. Then he joined the group of Prof. K. Müllen at Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPIP) and completed his PhD degree in July 2008. Currently, he is an associate professor in School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His primary interests are in the areas of self-assembly of various aromatic species including graphene, heterocyclic aromatics and charged aromatics.
Fan Zhang
Fan Zhang received his B.Eng. degree in electrochemistry from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 1991, and his PhD degree in organic chemistry from Jilin University in 2000. After more than eight years of research experience in Germany and the United States, he was promoted to a Research Professor in School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His research interests span from organometallic catalysis, olefin polymerization to organic π-conjugated functional materials for energy conversion and storage.
Haiwei Liang
Haiwei Liang received his Bachelor's degree in chemistry from East China Normal University in 2006. He received his PhD in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in the Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China. Since June 2012, he has been doing postdoctoral research with Prof. Klaus Müllen and Prof. Xinliang Feng at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz, Germany. His current research topics include design and synthesis of novel carbon-based nanocomposites, and their application as advanced electrode materials.
Xinliang Feng
Xinliang Feng, after obtaining his Master's degree in organic chemistry from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in March 2004, joined the group of Prof. K. Müllen at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPIP) and obtained his PhD degree in April 2008. Since December 2007, he has been a group leader at MPIP. Since June 2010, he has been a professor of Shanghai Jiao Tong University and was appointed as director for the Institute of Advanced Organic Materials. His current scientific interests include graphene, two-dimensional nanomaterials, organic conjugated materials, carbon-rich molecules and materials for electronic and energy-related applications.
1. Introduction
Inspired by nature, supramolecular chemistry has played a key role in the assembly of entities into unconventional materials.1–4 Driven by multiple non-covalent intermolecular forces such as hydrogen bonding, π–π, amphiphilic, and Coulomb interactions, building blocks based on small organic molecules, inorganic nanoparticles and block copolymers can self-assemble into functional nanostructures with diversified morphologies.5–7 According to their sizes and dimensionalities, the building blocks for these self-organized supramolecular structures can be classified as zero-dimensional (0D) nanodots or nanoparticles, one-dimensional (1D) nanofibers, nanorods or nanotubes, two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets, and three-dimensional (3D) vesicles, films or networks.8 With respect to each corresponding building block, the formed nanostructures or macroscopic composites exhibit enhanced optical, electrical and mechanical properties. Additionally, many new functions can be attained via the self-assembly process.5–7 Thereby, the pursuit of hierarchical supramolecular architectures derived from unprecedented building blocks has been a central interest for chemists, physicists and material scientists in the past decades.
Graphene, a single-layer of sp2 carbon lattices, can be regarded as a truly 2D polymer featuring a large aspect ratio, high flexibility and negligible thickness. Graphite is thus the result of self-assembled graphene sheets via Van der Waals interactions.9–13 Although the pristine defect-free graphene exhibits outstanding charge carrier mobility, mechanical robustness, and thermal conductivity,14 it is not a favorable building block for supramolecular chemistry due to difficulties in synthesis and poor processability. In contrast, graphene oxide (GO), reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and their derivatives, which are generally defined as chemically modified graphenes (CMGs), can offer an alternative. First, the synthesis of CMGs is cost-effective which typically involves a chemical oxidation and exfoliation of graphite and does not require special equipment such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD) devices15 or tedious mechanical exfoliation processes.11 Second, the abundant functional groups on CMGs can alleviate the intersheet stacking and thus guarantee a fine dispersibility of CMGs in solutions. Third, the oxygen-containing groups on CMGs can be used to manipulate their self-assembly with other components via different non-covalent forces.16 Therefore, CMGs have attracted tremendous attention for the generation of graphene-based functional materials via self-assembly protocols.17–25 Notably, as requested by these materials, graphene can provide a platform for the fast transportation of charge carriers and give rise to an enhanced performance in various applications such as solar cells, supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries, fuel cells, and catalysis.25
Despite the great efforts that have been dedicated to the investigation of self-assembly of CMGs, we noted that a comprehensive overview on the CMG based hierarchical superstructures of different scales is still absent. The rapid growth of this field makes us feel obliged to review the recent progress that has been made and to outline the challenges for the future research directions. In this article, we will focus on different supramolecular strategies for the synthesis of nanocomposites as well as macroscopic assemblies based on CMGs. The structure–property relationships and potential applications of the formed CMG based hybrids will be also discussed in context. It is anticipated that this review will arouse more attention towards self-assembled materials of graphene and encourage future work to push forward the advancement of this emerging area.
2. CMG based core–shell nanostructures
Organic and inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) belong to the most widely investigated class of 0D nanomaterials.26–31 The application of these NPs, however, usually suffers from their intrinsic instability in the surrounding environment and the tendency for agglomeration. As 2D nanosheets with superb mechanical flexibility and a large surface area, CMGs are suitable candidates for enwrapping NPs. In this way, graphene sheets can coat the surface of NPs, and thus the aggregation of NPs will be prohibited. In addition, the presence of the thin conductive graphene shell is beneficial for the application of these NPs in devices where a high electrical conductivity of graphene is essential. To control the encapsulation process, a critical issue is to solve the incompatibility between NPs and CMGs.32 Generally, non-covalent forces such as ionic interactions33 and amphiphilic interactions34 between CMGs and NPs can be applied to fabricate CMG enwrapped NPs under mild conditions in a reproducible manner.
Ionic self-assembly (ISA) is one of the most frequently used strategies for CMGs to encapsulate NPs. For this purpose, GO is particularly useful owing to its negatively charged nature.35 The surface of NPs can be firstly modified with positively charged molecules. Then, the ISA process can be performed via the co-assembly of GO and modified NPs to generate a core–shell structure with the graphene layers as the shell. In 2010, our group reported the fabrication of GO/RGO-encapsulated NPs. For instance, SiO2 NPs were grafted with aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APS) to render them positively charged, and following co-assembly with GO was realized to provide the target core–shell hybrids (Fig. 1a).33 It was found that the pH value played a crucial role in the ISA process since the zeta potential of GO and SiO2 NPs varied in a wide range (Fig. 1b). In the pH range of 2.0–8.0, the SiO2 NPs were spontaneously enwrapped by GO as soon as the NPs were added into the GO suspension. In contrast, both the modified SiO2 NPs and GO showed stable aqueous dispersions when the pH was above 8.0, and no assembly behavior was identified. Subsequent chemical reduction by NaBH4 yielded RGO encapsulated NPs. As shown by the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. 1c–e), the RGO encapsulated SiO2 NPs showed crinkled and rough textures that were associated with the presence of flexible and ultrathin RGO sheets. This strategy has been further adapted to prepare other CMG enwrapped NPs such as Co3O4,33 silica-coated Fe3O4 microspheres,36 TiO2 NPs,37 TiO2 hollow NPs38 and polystyrene NPs.39
 Fig. 1  (a) Fabrication of GO-encapsulated metal oxide NPs via an ISA approach; (b) zeta potentials of APS-modified silica (●) and GO (■) in aqueous solutions with various pH values; (c, d) SEM, and (e) TEM images of GO-encapsulated silica spheres. (Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)33 
In a modified procedure, layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly has been employed to prepare multi-layer CMG encapsulated NPs. By alternating adsorption of positively charged polyallylamine hydrochloride (PAH) and negatively charged GO on microspheres of Fe3O4@SiO2@Au, and followed by chemical reduction with NaBH4, RGO coated Fe3O4@SiO2@Au microspheres could be obtained.40 In this work, the zeta potential was used to monitor the assembly process, and in this way, multi-layer RGO sheets with controllable thickness could be deposited on the microsphere surface.
Apart from the fabrication of CMG based NPs with core–shell structures, significant research efforts have been also dedicated to the construction of CMG based 1D nanostructures. It is widely accepted that 1D nanomaterials such as nanofibers, nanorods and nanotubes are among the most promising candidates for nanoscale electronic, optoelectronic, electrochemical and electromechanical devices.41 Fabrication of hybrid core–shell nanowires consisting of graphene and other functional components is a promising way to achieve efficient transport performance of electrons or excitons in such devices. Towards this end, wrapping of nanorods or nanowires with flexible CMGs via co-assembly approaches has been developed. For instance, upon diluting the solution of organic peptide diphenylalanine in an aqueous RGO dispersion, peptide/RGO core–shell nanowires were readily formed (Fig. 2a).42,43 The nanocomposites show a wire-like morphology with a diameter of ∼300 nm and a length up to tens of microns (Fig. 2b and c). After calcination of peptide cores, hollow graphene tubes with about tens of graphene layers could be obtained (Fig. 2d and e). It was noted that the formation of peptide/RGO nanowires only occurred in the pH range of 3.7–5.4, and the thickness of the graphene shell could be adjusted by varying the pH value.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the hybrid assembly of peptide and CMGs into core–shell nanowires. (b) Low and (c) high magnification SEM images of core–shell nanowires. (d) TEM image of the hollow graphene-shell structure. (e) High resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of a graphene shell. (Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)42 
The second strategy regarding the assembly of CMGs and 1D organic nanowires lies in applying π–π interactions. As a typical case, hybrid nanowires of GO and N,N′-dioctyl-3,4,9,10-perylenedicarboximide (dioctyl-PDI) could be obtained as precipitates by mixing dioctyl-PDI and a GO aqueous dispersion.44 In this process, GO sheets were suggested to act as a seeding agent to induce the growth of dioctyl-PDI nanowires. In addition, large sized GO sheets could wrap around the nanowires of dioctyl-PDI. Upon hydrothermal reduction or thermal annealing, dioctyl-PDI/RGO nanowires were produced. Such a core–shell hybrid structure is favorable for the charge transportation between the dioctyl-PDI nanowire and RGO sheets, which was supported by the observation of effective fluorescence quenching of dioctyl-PDI. Remarkably, this hybrid material could be further employed as an electron acceptor in organic photovoltaic devices.44
Later, the π–π interaction was also demonstrated as the major driving force for the assembly of CMGs with other carbon allotropes, such as fullerene (C60), to form 1D core–shell nanostructures. By applying a liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation method, C60/RGO hybrid nanowires were fabricated at the interface of isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and m-xylene.45 UV-vis spectra showed that the band peak at 340 nm for C60 was remarkably shifted to 380 nm for C60/RGO hybrids, suggesting a strong delocalization of the π-electron system of RGO in the vicinity of C60 nanowires.
3. CMG based 2D nanostructures
With the rise of graphene, research interest in other 2D nanomaterials has received much attention in the past few years.23,46,47 Similar to graphene, these 2D nanomaterials, including organic and polyaromatic molecules,48–52 C6053,54 and metal oxides,55,56 also show unique features like high specific surface area, large aspect ratio and anisotropic charge carrier transport behavior. The 2D character of CMGs strongly suggests that they can serve as an ideal template for an inspired synthesis of 2D nanomaterials, in which both organic and inorganic components can be loaded on the edge and basal plane of CMGs. Thereby, the intrinsic features of CMGs can be maintained for the formed 2D hybrids. In this section, we will pay attention to the recent progress regarding the fabrication of 2D nanomaterials based on CMGs guided by the chemical nature of the functional components and the driving forces involved during the self-assembly.
3.1 Organic/CMG hybrids
The presence of hydrophilic oxygen containing groups and hydrophobic aromatic frameworks in GO makes it an amphiphilic copolymer system. The functionalization of GO/RGO with suitable amphiphilic molecules/polymers, by them interacting with each other via hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions, is an effective way to improve the processability of the resulting organic/CMG hybrids while keeping a 2D feature in solution. As one of the most frequently used amphiphilic polymer stabilizers for CNTs, poly(N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone) (PVP) is also appealing for the functionalization of CMGs via hydrophobic interactions.57 The resulting colloidal suspension of PVP/CMGs becomes highly stable in different solvents, such as water, ethanol, and dimethylformamide (DMF). In another case, Nafion, comprising hydrophobic perfluoroalkyl backbones and hydrophilic sulfonic acid groups, was employed to assemble with RGO to form a 2D organic/CMG hybrid that exhibited good water dispersibility.58 It was proposed that Nafion could be adsorbed on the RGO surface via hydrophobic interactions between the perfluoro backbones of Nafion and the aromatic moieties of RGO. Meanwhile, the sulfonic acid groups of Nafion provided electrostatic repulsion forces that prevented the aggregation of RGO.
The presence of hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on GO further enables one to tune the dispersibility of the formed 2D composites via hydrogen bonding or ionic interactions between GO and organic molecules such as cyclodextrin (CD), tetraalkyl ammonium surfactants or poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride) (PDDA).59–61
In addition to improving the solution processability of CMGs, binding aromatic molecules on the conjugated basal plane of CMGs offers a promising means to tailor the optical/electronic properties of CMGs. For instance, pyrenebutyric acid (PB) with a large π-system tends to strongly anchor on the aromatic surface of GO via π–π interactions. Moreover, the butyric acid group in PB is exposed to the outside to maintain strong electrostatic repulsion forces between the negatively charged 2D PB/GO hybrids in solution. Thereby, reduction of the mixture of PB and GO by hydrazine monohydrate resulted in a stable black supernatant of the PB/RGO hybrid.62 The mean thickness of the single layer PB/RGO is about 1.7 nm,63 indicating that pyrene molecules stack on both sides of graphene in a face-on manner. The UV/Vis absorption peaks of the PB/RGO film appeared at 334 and 350 nm, both of which were red-shifted by 3 nm in comparison with those of the PB-film. The fluorescence of the PB/RGO film was significantly quenched, which is a characteristic of effective electron/energy transfer between PB and RGO. Further, electron donor or acceptor molecules such as pyrene benzenesulfonic acid (PYS, donor) and the bisbenzenesulfonic acid of 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PDIS, acceptor) can also assembly with RGO via π–π interactions (Fig. 3a). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the resulting hybrids confirmed that the PYS and PDIS molecules were mainly arranged face-on on both sides of the RGO sheet to form a sandwich-like structure (Fig. 3b and c).64 The 2D hybrids of PYS/RGO and PDIS/RGO exhibited tunable electronic properties as the result of charge-transfer effect between the aromatic donor–acceptor and RGO. A thermal treatment of the composite films consisting of RGO and PYS or PDIS led to thermal reduction of RGO with dramatically increased conductivities (>1100 S cm−1 at 1000 °C), which are about twice as high as that of thermally reduced RGO film (517 S cm−1). Such an enhanced conductivity is caused by the additionally introduced carbon sources of large aromatic molecules that can repair the defects of RGO during the thermal annealing. Further, the utilization of π–π interactions has been demonstrated to functionalize CMGs with other large aromatic molecules including derivatives of PDI,65,66 pyrene,67–69 coronene,70 porphyrin,71,72 conjugated oligomers/polymers,73–77 and biomolecules.78
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of aqueous dispersions of 2D hybrids of PYS/RGO or PDIS/RGO. AFM images and cross-section graphs of (b) PYS/RGO and (c) PDIS/RGO dispersion dip-coated on mica. (Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH.)64 
3.2 Inorganic/CMG hybrids
In addition to the non-covalent functionalization of CMGs with organic small molecules and polymers, a spontaneous assembly of CMGs with inorganic components is more fascinating, as expected, and yields functional 2D inorganic/CMG hybrids. The resulting materials commonly show high specific surface areas, large aspect ratios, and high electrical conductivity, rendering them suitable for applications in catalysis, energy storage and conversions.
Generally, two different strategies have been established to prepare 2D inorganic/CMGs nanocomposites. The first one is based on the direct deposition of inorganic nanostructures on the surface of CMGs, while the other one involves an in situ growth of inorganic NPs or nanofibers on graphene when their precursor salts are adsorbed on the basal planes of CMGs. For both methods, non-covalent forces play a key role in stabilizing the inorganic nanostructures on CMGs. Therefore, the surface modification of CMGs or inorganic materials is expected to enhance their compatibility and interface interactions.
Regarding the direct assembly of inorganic NPs on CMG sheets, 2D hybrids of TiO2,79 ZnO,80 Au81 and Pt82 NPs have been prepared by sonicating GO with a colloidal suspension of the corresponding NPs. Nevertheless, morphology studies indicated that the distribution of NPs on GO is not homogeneous. Moreover, the major driving forces for the formation of these hybrids remain unclear. Therefore, applying specific intermolecular forces such as π–π, ionic and amphiphilic interactions to control the assembly of CMGs and inorganic NPs is necessary to create 2D hybrids with a uniform morphology. For instance, by mixing an RGO suspension with 2-mercaptopyridine capped gold NPs,83 2D gold NPs/RGO hybrids could be obtained. The π–π interactions between the aromatic framework of RGO and the modified Au NPs was assumed to be the major driving force. In a different procedure, 2D hybrids of GO with 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP) capped Au NPs could be prepared via ionic interactions (Fig. 4a and b).84 Moreover, 2D hybrids consisting of GO and TiO2 nanorods (Fig. 4c and d) were produced by modifying anatase TiO2 nanorods with oleic acid (OLA), in which the coordination between TiO2 and phenolic hydroxyl groups of GO85 assisted the composite formation.86
 Fig. 4  TEM images of (a) and (b) 2D hybrids of GO with DMAP capped Au NPs;84 (c) and (d) 2D hybrids of GO and TiO2 nanorods. (c and d Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)86 
The electrostatic adsorption of positively charged metal salts on negatively charged CMGs followed by in situ conversion of the mixture into 2D inorganic/CMGs hybrids provides an opportunity to control the growth of inorganic NPs on the CMG surface. In a typical case, the carboxylic acid groups on GO were firstly transformed under basic conditions into carboxylate anions which are capable of capturing iron ions through electrostatic interactions. Next, treatment of the mixture with NaOH led to the formation of 2D hybrids, which showed a diameter of 2–4 nm for Fe3O4 NPs.87 Further, 2D hybrids of Fe3O4/CMGs have also been fabricated under different reaction conditions, such as microwave irradiation,88 solvothermal treatment,89–92 thermal reduction93 and chemical reduction.94,95 This strategy has been further adapted to synthesize CMG based 2D hybrids incorporating other metal NPs,96–104 metal oxide/hydroxide NPs105–127 and QDs.128–132
On the other hand, the content of oxygenated groups on GO, which typically refers to the oxidation degree of graphene,133–135 principally determines the dispersibility and colloid behavior of GO in solution. Since these oxygen containing functional groups serve as the anchor points for the adsorption of metal salts, the oxidation degree of graphene can affect the morphology of final 2D inorganic/CMG hybrids.133,134 For instance, a step-wise hydrothermal treatment was applied to grow hexagonal nanoplates of Ni(OH)2·0.75H2O on less oxidized graphene sheets (GS) and highly oxidized GO (Fig. 5). It was found that the size and crystallinity of resulting nanocrystals were intimately dependent on the chemical nature of graphene. For the less oxidized GS, large, single-crystalline hexagonal Ni(OH)2 nanoplates with a typical size of several hundred nanometres and thickness of less than 10 nm (Fig. 5b) were obtained. In contrast, small Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles were produced on the surface of highly oxidized GO (Fig. 5c). It was assumed that the large amount of oxygen functional groups interacted strongly with the anchored inorganic NPs, and in this way retarded the diffusion and recrystallization of NPs (Fig. 5a). Following this strategy, 2D hybrids of CMGs with other crystallized inorganic materials such as CoO(OH),134 Fe2O3,134 Mn3O4136 and MnCo2O4137 NPs were also prepared.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of two-step Ni(OH)2 nanocrystal growth on (top) graphene sheets (GS) and (bottom) graphite oxide (GO). Insets: AFM images of GS and GO. SEM images of (b) Ni(OH)2·0.75H2O nanocrystals uniformly coated on GS; (c) Ni(OH)2·0.75H2O nanoparticles grown on GO. (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.)133 
As discussed above, the random distribution of oxygen containing groups on GO sets obstacles for the reliable construction of 2D inorganic/CMG hybrids with uniform structures.138 On the other hand, the negative charges on CMGs may hinder the interaction of CMGs with negatively charged or electron rich inorganic NPs or their precursors. Therefore, non-covalent modification of CMGs with suitable small organic molecules or polymers is an indispensable means to fabricate CMG based 2D hybrids with metal or metal oxide NPs. One can expect that the modified CMGs can provide active sites to promote the in situ growth of some inorganic nanostructures. Further, the compatibility between CMGs and inorganic components can be improved.
By modifying RGO with polyelectrolyte PDDA, associated with PVP as a stabilizer, functionalized CMGs with positively charged features can be realized via ionic interactions. Thus, citrate-capped Au and Au@Pd hybrid NPs, with a negative charge feature, could be uniformly deposited on CMGs with high loading amounts of NPs.61 Similarly, 2D CMG based hybrids with Au NPs,139 PdPt alloy NPs140 and CdSe QDs141 could be also prepared.
Different from positively charged polyelectrolytes, small organic surfactants possess prominent features such as well-defined molecular structures, easily adjustable physical properties and controllable supramolecular behavior in solution. Therefore, 2D hybrids of CMGs with metal NPs including Au, Pt and Pd were fabricated by applying a cationic Gemini-type surfactant, bis(cetyldimethylammonium)butane dibromide, as stabilizer.142 On the other hand, given that the cationic surfactants can readily self-assemble into micelles in aqueous solution, they are particularly useful for serving as a template for the controlled nucleation and growth of mesoporous inorganic nanostructures.143 By this means, CMG functionalized with cationic surfactants may allow for a templated synthesis of 2D mesoporous nanocomposites. An exciting example is the successful fabrication of well-defined, sandwich-like GO based mesoporous silica (MS/GO) nanosheets by employing cationic surfactant, cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), functionalized GO as the template (Fig. 6).143 As a typical synthetic protocol, GO sheets were first modified with CTAB via ionic interactions in an alkaline solution. The micelles of CTAB were then coupled with tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS), and in this way, the hydrolysis of the silica precursor resulted in mesoporous silica on the surface of the GO sheets (Fig. 6a). The structural characterization indicates that the MS/GO sheets keep a morphology similar to that of GO with sizes ranging from 200 nm to several micrometres (Fig. 6b–d). More importantly, these sheets possess numerous mesopores with sizes of about 2 nm (Fig. 6e). AFM images (Fig. 6f and g) reveal that the thickness of the MS/GO is around 28 nm, which can be tuned by simply adjusting the ratio of GO to TEOS in the fabrication process. GO can be further reduced by thermal treatment, giving rise to RGO based mesoporous silica nanosheets. Moreover, by employing cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC) as surfactant, it was found that GO based mesoporous silica nanocomposites with vertically oriented channels could be attained via a modified procedure.144 Remarkably, the 2D mesoporous silica nanosheets can produce various 2D graphene-based mesoporous carbon or metal oxide hybrids via nanocasting technology. This can certainly broaden the accessibility and application of different CMG based 2D materials.145,146
 Fig. 6  GO based mesoporous silica (MS/GO) sheets. (a) Fabrication process for MS/GO sheets. (b), (c) SEM and (d), (e) TEM images reveal the flat MS/GO sheets. (f) AFM image and (g) thickness analysis taken around the white line in (f) reveal a thickness of 28 nm for MS/GO sheets. (Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)143 
Different from the above cases, combination of CMGs with negatively charged surfactants may allow for the binding of positively charged inorganic species, which therefore provides another opportunity to synthesize 2D inorganic/CMG hybrids. By mixing positively charged Au NPs stabilized by 4-dimethylaminopyridine147 and pyrenebutyric acid functionalized RGO62 (see Section 3.1), 2D Au NPs/RGO hybrids could be produced.148 In another case, the micelles of an anionic surfactant, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS),149,150 were adopted to stabilize thermally expanded graphene sheets in aqueous solution. The hydrophilic head groups of SDS are favorable for the interaction with TiCl3, leading to a controlled nucleation and growth of TiO2 nanoparticles (i.e., rutile and anatase) on the graphene surface.151
Biomacromolecules functionalized CMGs can also serve as an appealing hybrid template for the synthesis of 2D hybrids. In this respect, the deposition of inorganic NPs on CMGs can be promoted by the presence of multiple functional groups such as thiol, amine and imidazole groups on the biomacromolecules that can assist the ionic and amphiphilic interactions with inorganic species.152,153 A typical example is the fabrication of 2D Au NPs/RGO coupled via thiolated d(GT)29SH DNA oligomers. The driving force for the 2D hybrid formation is based on the interactions between thiol groups of the oligomers and Au NPs.154 In addition, Tyr residues (4-hydroxyphenylalanine) of bovine serum albumin (BSA) could be utilized as both reductant and stabilizer for GO,155 for which the formed BSA/RGO is favorable for a uniform assembly with pre-synthesized Au, Pt, Pd, Ag, and PS NPs (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of protein-based decoration and reduction of GO, leading to a general platform for assembly of NPs; TEM images of (b) BSA/RGO, (c–e) AuNP/BSA/RGO, (f) PdNP/BSA/RGO, and (g,h) PtNP/BSA/RGO. AuNPs and PtNPs had average diameters of 6 and 4 nm, respectively. PdNPs had a worm-like shape ∼4 nm in one dimension. (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.)155 
4. Macroscopic materials based on CMGs
As discussed in the above sections, self-assembly has been an effective strategy to build up CMG based nanostructures. In order to translate the intrinsic features of individual graphene sheets into a macroscopic scale, undoubtedly, the hierarchical self-assembly of CMGs into macroscopic architectures is an important concern. The CMG-built macroscopic composites can possess numerous applications in optoelectronics, energy conversion/storage, and catalysis. In the following part, we will focus on macroscopic materials of self-assembled CMG sheets according to the morphology of the targets, such as thin films, papers, hydrogels, aerogels, and fibers. Different from the nanostructures mentioned above, the construction of macroscopic materials typically requires fabrication techniques such as Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) assembly, LBL self-assembly and flow-induced self-assembly.
4.1 CMG based thin films, membranes and papers
Due to the high electrical conductivity and mechanical flexibility, graphene films are regarded as one of the most promising candidates for stretchable electronic and optoelectronic devices. With respect to that produced by CVD approaches involving additional transferring process,156 graphene films fabricated by solution processing can avoid the use of expensive catalytic surfaces and can be operated under mild conditions.
To obtain highly uniform graphene films, a good solution processability of CMGs is required. Different solution processing technologies that have been earlier developed for conventional polymers, such as dip-coating, LB assembly and LBL self-assembly, can be also applied for CMGs. In a typical case, conductive graphene films were produced by dip-coating an aqueous GO suspension on quartz substrate followed by high temperature treatment.157 The hydrophilic nature of GO is beneficial for a uniform deposition on the hydrophilic quartz surface. It was demonstrated that the electrical conductivity of graphene films was closely related to the annealing temperature and the thickness of the film could be adjusted by changing the temperature of the GO dispersion and the dipping repetition. After thermal annealing at 1100 °C, a conductivity of 550 S cm−1 for the graphene film with 10.1 nm thickness could be achieved. In contrast to traditional window electrodes such as fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) and indium–tin oxide (ITO), which show strong absorption in the region of near- (750–1400 nm) and short-wavelength infrared (1400–3000 nm), graphene films remained transparent over 60% in the whole region from 500 to 3000 nm. Therefore, with such prominent optical features, graphene films are a vital candidate for window electrodes applicable to a wide range of wavelengths.
For the above mentioned work, the hydrophilic interaction between GO and the solid substrate serves as the main driving force for the thin film deposition via dip-coating. However, a precise control over the thickness and homogeneity of graphene film is lacking. LB assembly, in contrast, enables a monolayer floating at the air–water interface by utilizing the amphiphilic nature of GO. This method has the advantage of fabricating large-area, flat graphene films with controllable thicknesses.158,159 Water supported monolayers of GO could be made without any surfactant or stabilizing agent and the single layers formed stable dispersions against flocculation or coagulation when confined at the 2D air–water interface (Fig. 8). It was attributed to the edge-to-edge repulsion between the single layers of GO sheets preventing them from overlapping during monolayer compression. After chemical reduction with hydrazine vapor, the resultant monolayer film of RGO exhibited a sheet resistance of 1.9 × 107 Ω and average transmittance of 95.4%. Further, it was noted that the size of GO sheets exerts a large influence on their self-assembly behavior during the LB assembly.160–162 Firstly, amphiphilicity of GO is supposed to be size-dependent since the ratio of its hydrophobic basal plane and hydrophilic edges can be tuned by its size. Smaller sheets should be more hydrophilic due to higher charge density resulting from the ionizable carboxyl groups, which was confirmed by the increased zeta potential of the GO dispersion when the size of GO decreased. During LB assembly, the size-dependent amphiphilicity could lead to spontaneous interfacial size separation of GO sheets, in which the larger sheets could float on the water surface while smaller ones could sink. On the other hand, the sizes of GO sheets used for the construction of LB monolayer films can affect the properties of the resulting films. It turns out that the films obtained from larger GO sheets exhibit more compact morphology, fewer structural defects, and higher conductivity after chemical reduction than that produced from smaller ones.
 Fig. 8  LB assembly of GO single layers. (a–d) SEM images showing the collected GO monolayers on a silicon wafer at different regions of the isotherm. The packing density was continuously tuned: (a) dilute monolayer of isolated flat sheets, (b) monolayer of close-packed GO, (c) overpacked monolayer with sheets folded at interconnecting edges, and (d) over packed monolayer with folded and partially overlapped sheets interlocking with each other. (e) Isothermal surface pressure–area plot showing the corresponding regions a–d at which the monolayers were collected. Scale bars in a–d represent 20 μm. (Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.)159 
LBL self-assembly has proven powerful to prepare multi-layer CMG enwrapped NPs.40 Similarly, this protocol is also appealing to produce graphene-based hybrid thin films on flat substrates with the assistance of ionic interactions or hydrogen bonding. With this technique, stepwise deposition of polymers, GO/RGO sheets, and other functional components such as inorganic NPs, can result in large area, multi-layer CMG based films with alternate stacking of each component.163–169 For instance, alternating casting of polyethyleneimine (PEI), titania (Ti0.91O2) and GO sheets on quartz substrate and subsequent exposure to UV-light irradiation yielded Ti0.91O2/RGO composite films.163 Further, a hybrid film consisting of RGO, poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and Co–Al–NO3 layered double hydroxide (LDH) could be manufactured by LBL assembly.170 The hydrogen bonding between RGO, PVA and Co–Al–NO3 sheets was suggested to promote the assembly process on the quartz surface.
Recently, our group demonstrated the LBL fabrication of a photoactive hybrid film based on a Keggin-type polyoxometalate cluster (H3PW12O40, PW), GO, PEI and PAH (Fig. 9).171 With the photocatalytic activity of PW clusters,172 GO could be transformed to RGO upon UV irradiation (Fig. 9a). By this means, uniform and large-area composite films of RGO with precisely controlled thickness were achieved on quartz, silicon, and plastic supports (Fig. 9b–e). The photo-reduced PW/RGO films with one and six layers, (PAH/GO/PAH/PW)1 and (PAH/GO/PAH/PW)6, exhibit conductivities of about 10 and 120 S m−1, respectively. These values are comparable to those of RGO films produced by chemical reduction,173 therefore, highlighting the photoreduction as a green method to fabricate graphene thin films.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of PW/RGO films, involving the LBL assembly of GO and PW with PEI and PAH as electrostatic linkers, and a subsequent in situ photoreduction to convert GO to RGO; AFM images of a (PAH/GO/PAH/PW)1 film (b and c) and a (PAH/GO/PAH/PW)6 film (d and e), both on PEI/PW precursor film modified silicon substrates, which contain 300 nm thermal oxide. (Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.)171 
Free-standing paper-like or foil-like CMG membranes are attractive for flexible electronic and energy storage devices.174–176 Towards this purpose, filtration of a CMG colloid through a membrane filter can be applied.177–179 For instance, GO paper with thicknesses ranging from 1 to 30 μm was obtained after peeling off from the filter paper (Fig. 10a–d).175 Structural characterization of GO paper indicates that compliant GO sheets are interlocked/tiled together in a parallel fashion (Fig. 10e–g). Therefore, the flow-directed assembly process should be responsible for the formation of such ordered structures. It is worth noting that the flexible GO paper shows a Young's modulus of ∼32 GPa and a tensile strength of ∼80 MPa. Compared with traditional carbon- and clay-based papers, the extraordinary mechanical properties of GO paper can be attributed to the strong Van der Waals interactions and hydrogen-bonding within GO sheets.
 Fig. 10  Morphology and structure of GO paper. a–d, Digital camera images of GO paper. (a) 1 mm-thick; (b) folded, 5 mm-thick semitransparent film; (c) folded, 25 mm-thick strip; (d) strip after fracture from tensile loading. (e), (f) and (g) Low-, middle- and high-resolution SEM side-view images of, 10 mm-thick sample. (Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group.)175 
Further investigation regarding the formation mechanism for CMG papers suggested that a gelation process of these CMG sheets occurred at the solution–filter membrane interface during filtration, which is in relation to the formation of mechanically strong, highly conductive and anisotropic graphene films.180 Moreover, CMG based composite papers with organic or inorganic components could be fabricated with the flow-induced assembly protocol.181,182
Interface induced self-assembly is also a promising method to construct CMG papers.183 In this respect, the amphiphilic nature of GO sheets is beneficial to form an oriented packing at the liquid–air interface. By heating a stable hydrosol of GO to 353 K, a smooth and condensed thin film of GO was obtained at the liquid–air interface. Further drying and reduction treatment yielded a flexible, semi-transparent and free-standing graphene membrane with a thickness in the range of 0.5–20 μm which was tunable by the evaporation time of the hydrosol.183 Graphene film was also generated at the oil–water interface from GO. With the presence of a small amount of ethanol, GO films with tunable transmittance and surface resistivity could be formed at the pentane/water interface during the evaporation of pentane.184 This method was further employed to induce the formation of GO/single walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) composite films. After reduction with hydrazine vapor, the hybrid film showed improved conductivity with respect to RGO films, possibly due to the existence of SWCNTs as superior conducting channels in the film.
As the GO sheets show negative charged features, and can thus be manipulated with electric fields, electrodeposition can provide another option for the fabrication of CMG papers. Importantly, the deposited GO can be directly reduced to RGO on the electrode surface by a cyclic voltammetry approach. In addition, co-electrodeposition of GO and metal species to prepare metal/CMG composite films is possible giving that both GO- and metal-reduction reactions can take place under the cathodic conditions. The resulting composite films exhibit layered structures consisting of alternating layers of metal NPs and graphene sheets. Thus, the intercalation of metal NPs between graphene sheets can prevent the agglomeration of graphene and improve the electrical conductivity of the film. By this means, RGO film with intercalation of Pt NPs was produced on an ITO electrode. During the fabrication process, GO sheets with a negative zeta potential of about −64.7 mV in the colloid (pH value = 7.0) were firstly migrated towards the ITO anode under a constant potential, generating a brown GO film. Following electrochemical reduction and deposition of Pt NPs on the film led to Pt/RGO hybrid films which showed better electrocatalytic activity and stability than a commercial Pt/glass carbon (GC) electrode towards methanol oxidation.185 Moreover, with this method, a Au/RGO film could be also produced by applying the mixture of GO and HAuCl4 for electrodeposition.186 Undoubtedly, one can expect that this approach may also allow for the fabrication of CMG based composite papers involving other organic, inorganic and biological materials.
4.2 CMG based hydrogels and aerogels
3D macroporous composites of CMGs containing water are called CMG based hydrogels.187 They can be molded into shape-persistent, free-standing objects because of their great mechanical strength. Upon removal of solvent molecules, such as with supercritical fluid drying or freeze drying, highly porous solid aerogels based on CMGs can be produced. In this regard, the restacking tendency of CMGs can be avoided due to the solid-state confinement of CMGs within 3D macroscopic superstructures.187 In this way, the individual 2D features of CMGs can be maintained. Further, the graphene sheets in the resultant networks can provide a 3D charge transport pathway, which may promote their applications in electronic, energy storage and conversion devices.
Hydrogen bonding is one of the most frequently employed non-covalent forces to build up CMG based hydrogels. In a typical example, Pluronic copolymer (poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(propylene oxide)-block-poly(ethylene oxide) triblock copolymer) (PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO) can stabilize RGO sheets in water.188 The hydrophobic PPO segments tend to bind the hydrophobic surface of RGO, while the hydrophilic PEO chains are extended into the water phase. A supramolecular hydrogel of RGO was then attained after introducing α-cyclodextrin (α-CD) into the suspension of RGO and PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO (Fig. 11a and b). During the self-assembly process, PEO chains can penetrate into the α-CD cavities to form 3D cross-linked pseudopolyrotaxane structures assisted by hydrogen bonding (Fig. 11c and d).188 After removal of water via a freeze drying process, an aerogel of RGO was produced as a loose sponge-like structure which was highly cross-linked (Fig. 11e and f). This result suggests that RGO sheets do not exert obvious influence on the inner morphology of the hydrogels. Similarly, a temperature-responsive hydrogel based on β-cyclodextrin functionalized GO and poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide)-b-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (AZO-PDMA-b-PNIPAM) was reported.189 Furthermore, PVA consisting of hydroxyl groups can promote the hydrogel formation of GO via hydrogen bonding.190–192 Interestingly, the produced PVA/GO hydrogels can undergo a pH-induced gel–sol transition, which is caused by the surface charge densities of GO that can be modulated by the pH values.190
 Fig. 11  (a) Solutions of copolymer (PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO) stabilized GO (left) and copolymer (right), (b) hydrogels from α-CD/copolymer stabilized GO (left) and α-CD/copolymer (right), (c) proposed structure of the copolymer coated graphene, (d) supramolecular well-dispersed graphene sheet containing hybrid hydrogel, (e) SEM images of morphologies of the supramolecular hydrogels and dispersion state of graphene at low magnification and (f) high magnification. (Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.)188 
The in situ polymerization of monomers in the presence of CMGs also enables the formation of CMGs containing 3D superstructures with good dispersion of CMG nanosheets in the composite. In such case, the as-formed polymers can coat around the CMGs surface, as facilitated by the hydrogen bonding, π–π and electrostatic interactions, and finally lead to the gelation of CMGs. Along this line, GO based gels with resorcinol-formaldehyde (RF),193 polypyrrole (PPy),194 poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT),194 polyaniline (PANI),194 poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAm),195 polyacrylamide (PAM)196 or polyacrylamide-co-poly(acrylic acid) (PAM-co-PAA)196 have been reported. It is worth noting that heat treatment of a GO and RF hydrogel at 1050 °C resulted in carbon connected CMG aerogels, in which the formed carbon layers from the RF precursor on the CMG surface could reinforce the 3D structure and provided conductive interconnections between the individual CMG sheets.193
3D hybrid materials of CMGs and metal (oxide) NPs can be readily produced upon introducing inorganic salts into the hydrogel of CMGs. The ionic interactions between CMGs and inorganic metal ions are expected to benefit the formation of such 3D hybrid networks. As a representative example, hydrothermal treatment of GO with glucose and noble metal salts such as PdCl2, HAuCl4 and RhCl3, and followed by freeze drying, resulted in aerogels of RGO and noble metal NPs.197 The size and microstructures of the hybrid aerogels could be adjusted by the volume of the vessel and the concentration of the GO suspension. On the other hand, chemical reduction of GO with NaHSO3 in the presence of inorganic NPs such as Fe3O4 NPs followed by freeze drying allowed fabrication of 3D hybrid aerogels with inorganic NPs homogeneously distributed on the graphene surface.198
Biomolecules have also been developed as the vital component to couple with CMGs for 3D network formation. For such cases, hydrogen bonding, π–π and ionic interactions can play a critical role.199,200 Heat treatment of an aqueous suspension of GO and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) resulted in hydrogel formation.199 It was found that dsDNA was unwound to single-stranded (ssDNA) during the heating process and the in situ formed ssDNA chains bridged adjacent GO sheets via π–π interactions and hydrogen bonding. The prepared DNA/GO hydrogels exhibited high mechanical strength, excellent environmental stability, high dye-adsorption capacity, and self-healing function. Later on, hydrogels of CMG with other biomacromolecules such as Fmoc (N-fluorenyl-9-methoxycarbonyl) protected synthetic dipeptides, Fmoc-Xaa-Asp-OH (Xaa = Tyr, Phe),200 hemoglobin (Hb)201 and vitamin C (VC)202 were also produced.
Apart from the use of polymers, metal ions or biomolecules as cross-linkers, it is striking to note that CMG hydrogels can be also prepared via a direct hydrothermal treatment of a GO aqueous dispersion.203,204 In this respect, the major driving force should originate from the π–π interactions among the hydrothermally reduced GO sheets. In addition, solvent evaporation has been demonstrated to fabricate GO based aerogels without involving other inorganic/organic components.205 Controlled evaporation of the GO suspension in a speed vacuum concentrator (Fig. 12a and b) was crucial to selectively produce either 3D randomly cross-linked GO networks (Fig. 12c) or GO papers with layered stacking of GO sheets (Fig. 12d).205 The GO aerogel (GO sponge) could be further converted to an RGO aerogel upon thermal treatment at 800 °C.
 Fig. 12  (a) and (b) Synthetic process for the fabrication of GO sponges and films by speed vacuum centrifugation. (c) The GO sponges, and (d) free-standing GO films; a representative image of a 3 cm diameter GO film (inset). The scale bar represents 1 cm in c and d. (Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)205 
4.3 CMG based macroscopic fibers
Due to the intrinsic 2D structural features and the rich supramolecular properties of CMG sheets, it is relatively easy to assemble them into film- or paper-like structures or monolithic assemblies via a gelation process, as shown in the above discussion. However, the integration of CMG sheets into macroscopic fibers requires special strategies because of their irregular size and shape as well as the tendency of layer-by-layer stacking.206–208 The macroscopic fibers may have a variety of unique properties, such as high mechanical strength, electrical and thermal conductivity.209 Recently, it was demonstrated that continuous and robust CMG based fibers could be readily obtained by spinning of GO solution.206 The key step involved in this fabrication process is to form highly concentrated GO solution that exhibits lyotropic liquid crystalline (LC) behavior (Fig. 13a). The intrinsic lamellar order of GO LCs results in strong interactions between contacted sheets that are responsible for the relatively high mechanical strength of GO based fibers (102 MPa for fracture strength). After chemical reduction with hydroiodic acid solution, CMG based fibers with enhanced fracture strength (140 MPa) and high electrical conductivity up to ∼2.5 × 104 S m−1 were obtained. The fabricated CMG based fibers showed excellent flexibility and high resistance to torsion and could be embroidered into patterns in other textiles (Fig. 13b–d). It was believed that such CMG based macroscopic fibers would be widely useful in the fields of high-performance fibres, energy storage and fuel cells.206
 Fig. 13  (a) Polarized optical microscopy image of GO LCs with volume fractions of 0.76%. (b) A long GO fiber wound on a Teflon drum with a diameter of 2 cm. (c) SEM image of a knotted GO fiber. (d) A Chinese character pattern knitted in the cotton network (white) using two graphene fibers (black). (Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.)206 
Another successful fabrication of macroscopic CMG based fibers is based on the dimensionally confined hydrothermal strategy.207 A GO solution with high concentration was first injected into a glass capillary and then hydrothermally treated at 230 °C for 2 h. After drying in air, the CMG based fiber matching the pipe geometry was obtained. During the drying process, the capillary-induced shear force and surface tension-induced tensile force push the CMG sheets to align with the fiber's main axis. The produced fibers show a measured tensile strength of up to 180 MPa and a four probe electrical conductivity of ∼10 S cm−1 at room temperature, which are comparable with these of wet-spun CNTs yarns.
5. Applications of self-assembled CMGs
Hierarchical composites of CMGs with unique morphologies and tailored compositions can facilitate their applications in different areas such as electronic, energy, environment and catalysis. The versatility of the self-assembly behavior of CMG sheets enables one to obtain desirable nanocomposites and macroscopic architectures targeted to special functions and applications. Certainly, CMG sheets within these superstructures are not merely the supporting material featuring a large aspect ratio, atomic thickness, and high specific surface area, but also act as active components to boost the performance of composites in devices. In addition, a synergistic effect frequently occurs between the CMG sheets and other components, resulting in enhanced performances. In this section, several representative examples of the self-assembled CMG composites applied in optical/electronic, catalysis, energy storage and conversion applications will be highlighted.
5.1 Optoelectronic devices
Due to the high electrical conductivity, transparency and flexibility, graphene thin films can rival ITO and FTO for the next generation window electrodes. Although the electrical conductivity of graphene films from self-assembled CMG sheets still fails to compete with that derived from CVD approaches, they show the merits of solution-processing associated with low-cost and tailored properties. For instance, thermally reduced graphene film based on PYS/RGO delivers an electrical conductivity of 916 S cm−1 and transmittance of 70% for 10 nm thick film. The graphene film was further introduced as the anode in a bulk-heterojunction organic solar cell consisting of poly(3-hexyl)thiophene (P3HT) as the electron donor, phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the electron acceptor, PEDOT:PSS as an electron-blocking layer and ZnO NPs as the hole-blocking and optical-space layer.64 The device exhibited a large short-circuit current and fill factor (8.2 mA cm−2 and 0.31) with an overall power efficiency of 1.12%. Although this unoptimized efficiency is not comparable to that of an ITO-based device (about 2.50% under the same experimental conditions), the application of defect repairing,210 chemical doping211 and using graphene–metal hybrid electrodes212 may allow for further improvement of device performance.
Self-assembled CMG nanostructures can be also employed as electron acceptors in organic heterojunction solar cells.44 Nanofibers from the assembly of dioctyl-PDI and RGO exhibited superior performance to pure dioctyl-PDI and a mixture of dioctyl-PDI and RGO in P3HT:dioctyl-PDI based solar cell devices. The current density of 3.85 mA cm−2 and power conversion efficiency of 1.04% could be achieved for dioctyl-PDI/RGO hybrid wires, which are higher than those of dioctyl-PDI (0.78 mA cm−2 and 0.064%) and dioctyl-PDI/RGO blending (0.013 mA cm−2 and 0.002%). The enhanced device performance is attributable to efficient exciton dissociation at the interface of P3HT and dioctyl-PDI/RGO nanowires combined with efficient charge transport within the nanowires.
To achieve high performance field-effect transistors (FET) based on solution-processed graphene thin films, large-area uniformity and high reduction degrees of the films are required. Towards this end, hybrid films of (PAH/GO/PAH/PW)1 and (PAH/GO/PAH/PW)6 with one and six layers of GO were fabricated and subjected to photoreduction of GO upon irradiation with UV-light.171 In this way, FET devices were constructed based on hybrid graphene films. The devices exhibited a typical ambipolar feature for CMG films of different thickness, for instance, with hole and electron mobilities (μh and μe) ranging from 0.03–0.15 cm2 V−1 S−1 (μh) and 0.01–0.06 cm2 V−1 S−1 (μe), respectively. The hole-dominated transport behavior can be attributed to the electron trapping effect of the cage-type structure of PW. The on/off ratio of the devices is about 1.1–2.0.
5.2 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are the electrochemical devices that allow for the fast and reversible storing and releasing of energy. Generally, the performance of carbon materials as electrodes for supercapacitors is intimately dependent on both the accessible specific surface area and pore structure. Within the 3D CMG superstructures, the isolated CMG sheets can provide a highly open porous structure, rendering the surface of individual sheets to be easily accessed by the electrolyte solution. Thereby, these features can ensure the fabrication of CMG based devices with high power/energy density and high operational rates.
With this consideration, the electrochemical properties of supercapacitors based on self-stacked, solvated graphene (SSG) film obtained by flow-directed assembly were examined (Fig. 14a and b).213 A capacitance of 156.5 F g−1 was obtained even when the supercapacitor was operated at an ultrafast charge–discharge rate of 1080 A g−1. Further, a maximum power density of 414.0 kW kg−1 at a discharge current of 108 A g−1 was achieved for SSG films (Fig. 14c–f), which is 1 to 3 orders of magnitude higher than the freeze dried/thermally annealed counterparts and other carbon materials.214 The SSG film also shows excellent cycle stability, with 97% capacitance maintained over 10000 cycles under the operation current of 100 A g−1.
 Fig. 14  (a) Photographs of the as-formed flexible SSG films. (b) SEM image of the cross-section of a freeze dried SSG film. (c, d) Charge–discharge curves obtained at different current densities. (e) Gravimetric capacitances measured at various charge–discharge currents. (f) Ragone plots of the SSG films-based supercapacitors. (Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.)213 
The deposition of electrochemically active metals or metal oxides on the conductive CMGs can give rise to novel hybrid electrode materials for electrochemical pseudocapacitors. As a typical example, Ni(OH)2/GS hybrids delivered a high specific capacitance of ∼1335 F g−1 at a current density of 2.8 A g−1 and ∼953 F g−1 at 45.7 A g−1 with excellent cycling stability.133 The excellent electrochemical performance can be attributed to the synergetic effect of 2D hybrids with high electrical conductivity of graphene and high crystallinity of Ni(OH)2 nanoplates. 2D hybrids of CMGs and other inorganic NPs such as Fe3O4, ZnO and SnO2 have also been developed as the electrode materials for supercapacitors.127,215–218
5.3 Lithium ion batteries
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been considered as one of the most effective and practical technologies for electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices. Electrochemically active inorganic materials such as Si, SnO2, and Co3O4 are regarded as promising candidates in the next generation LIBs due to their high theoretical capacities and natural abundance. Nevertheless, the extremely large volume change induced by the alloying reaction with Li can lead to rapid capacity fading during charge–discharge cycling. Therefore, the commercialization of these inorganic materials is hampered by the aforementioned drawbacks. One of the most promising strategies to avoid the aggregation of inorganic materials is to confine them within carbonaceous matrices. Therefore, CMG enwrapped metal oxide NPs seem to be attractive electrode materials since the graphene shell can not only suppress the aggregation of NPs, but also accommodate the volume change during the cycle processes. Additionally, CMGs can further provide a high electrical conductivity for the overall electrode. With these in mind, RGO enwrapped Co3O4 (Co3O4/RGO) was fabricated by electrostatic assembly of GO and Co3O4 NPs followed by chemical reduction. Co3O4/RGO showed a high and stable reversible capacity of about 1100 mA h g−1 at a current density of 74 mA g−1. In contrast, the blending mixture of Co3O4 and RGO with the same Co3O4 to RGO ratio delivered only a 67% retention of the initial capacity (832 mA h g−1) after 30 cycles. The high performance for the Co3O4/RGO electrode is attributable to the synergistic effect between the flexible, thin graphene shells and the Co3O4 nanoparticles.33
2D hybrids of CMGs also hold promise as electrode materials for LIBs. Importantly, the prominent features for 2D hybrids, such as nanoscaled thickness, high aspect ratio and high surface area are favorable for the accessibility of the electrolyte and rapid diffusion of lithium ions and electrons.88,92,94,106,109,118,122,136,151,219 Moreover, the conductive CMG substrates in the sandwich-like hybrids can act as mini-current collectors homogeneously dispersed in the electrode, which can benefit the transportation of charge carriers during the cycling processes (Fig. 15a). A noteworthy example is 2D RGO based mesoporous carbon nanosheet (MC/RGO) with a thickness of around 30 nm and a surface area of 910 m2 g−1.143 MC/RGO shows a reversible capacity stabilized at about 770 mA h g−1, which is even higher than that of the porous graphitic carbons (Fig. 15).220
 Fig. 15  Electrochemical performance of MC/RGO sheets for lithium ion storage. (a) Lithium insertion and extraction in MC/RGO sheets, where graphene acts as mini-current collectors during discharge and charge processes, facilitating the rapid diffusion of electrons during cycling processes. (b) First two discharge–charge curves (black: first discharge, red: first charge, green: second discharge, blue: second charge) and (c) cycle performance (black: discharge, red: charge) of MC/RGO sheets at a rate of C/5. The inset is the rate capability of MC/RGO sheets at various rates of C/5, 1C, 5C, 10C, and 20C. (Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)143 
3D networks of CMGs have also been demonstrated as anode materials for LIBs. For example, an Fe3O4/RGO aerogel was prepared by in situ hydrothermal reduction of a mixture of GO and Fe3O4 NPs. Such 3D hybrids generated a high capacity of ∼990 mA h g−1 when the current density was below 800 mA h g−1 and ∼730 mA h g−1 even at a current density of 1600 mA h g−1, which is comparable to the composites of Fe3O4 NPs and single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs).221 Further, it was found that the nanocomposites had a good cycling stability with a capacity of ∼1100 mA h g−1 retained after 50 cycles of charge and discharge. The good performance of the 3D hybrid aerogel should derive from the high specific surface area and high electrical conductivity of the materials.198
5.4 Catalysis
With anisotropic 2D morphology, high surface area and excellent electrical conductivity, CMG sheets are also good substrates for immobilizing catalyst materials. The resulting CMG based hybrids loaded with catalytic active components have shown extraordinary high catalytic performances in many reaction systems such as photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.
As one of the most important photocatalytic materials, TiO2 exhibits long-term thermodynamic stability, strong oxidizing power, and relative nontoxicity. Hence, the combination of TiO2 and CMG sheets can be expected to yield hybrids with a high photocatalytic activity. For instance, 2D hybrids of GO and TiO2 nanorods (TiO2/GO) were prepared via the interfacial self-assembly of these two components. The photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) for TiO2/GO was examined by comparison with that of the blending of commercial TiO2 NPs (P25) and GO (P25/GO).86 As monitored by the UV-vis absorption spectra of MB in aqueous solution, the photodegradation of MB (10 ppm) was complete after 15 min UV-light irradiation for TiO2/GO and P25/GO, while only 70% and 68% of MB were decomposed with oleic acid stabilized TiO2 nanorods and P25, respectively. The good photocatalytic performance for TiO2/GO is due to the presence of the GO substrate, which can effectively prevent charge recombination during the photocatalytic process. Interestingly, the hybrids exhibited better photocatalytic efficiency in the second cycle than that in the first cycle. This was because the irradiation of TiO2/GO during the first cycle led to the photoreduction of GO, which therefore enhanced the conductivity of the 2D hybrids.
Self-assembled hybrids of CMGs have been further employed as noble-metal-free catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in fuel cells. Typically, nitrogen-doped graphene sheets loaded with manganese–cobalt spinel MnCo2O4 NPs (MnCo2O4/N-rmGO) show four electron transfer pathways in alkaline solution which are required for ORR.137 The electrocatalytic study indicated that the onset potential and peak potential of the MnCo2O4/N-rmGO hybrid was 0.95 and 0.88 V, respectively, which are about 20 mV less positive than those of commercial Pt/C catalyst (0.93 and 0.86 V). Remarkably, the current density of MnCo2O4/N-rmGO is similar to that of the Pt/C catalyst at low overpotential and exceeds that of Pt/C at high overpotential. Further, the hybrid catalyst also showed excellent stability as examined by chronoamperometric measurements, in which the ORR current density decreased by only 3.5% over 20000 s of continuous operation, while the Pt/C catalyst exhibited a 33% decrease.
Due to their unique morphology as well as outstanding mechanical strength, chemical stability, electronic and thermal conductivity, self-assembled CMG hybrids have also gained applications in diversified areas such as sensing222–225 and actuators.226,227 In these applications, CMGs play pivotal roles in the enhanced performance of the resulting hybrids.
6. Summary and outlook
As a new generation of 2D polymers, CMGs have shown great potential in hierarchical self-assembly owing to their unique 2D structure, high surface area and flexibility, which can facilitate the anisotropic organization of CMGs with other functional components via the assistance of non-covalent forces. Correspondingly, self-assembly of CMGs provides an appealing bottom-up strategy to develop unprecedented materials which may not be accessible by conventional fabrication techniques or from other carbon precursors. The rational selection of CMG building blocks and self-assembly protocols is a critical issue to obtain CMG-based hybrids with unique morphologies and desired functions. Despite the fast developments in the past few years, this area of research is still in its infancy and many challenges remain: (1) as the key starting materials for most CMGs, GO obtained from the Hummers method has an undefined structure and shows a random distribution of oxygen containing groups on the surface. This certainly presents obstacles to the precise control of the morphology and properties of the self-assembled CMG materials. Therefore, there is a high demand to develop controlled oxidization/exfoliation protocols for graphite that can yield GO with a defined shape and number of oxygenated groups.228 As an alternative to GO, the development of new exfoliation approaches such as reductive alkylation,229 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition and amide-condensation230 may provide an option to obtain novel CMG sheets with controllable decoration of diversified functional groups including alkyl chains, aryl groups and dendrons. (2) As the conductivity of CMG sheets plays an important role in determining the performance of resultant CMG based hybrid materials, the restoration of the aromatic framework of GO remains a crucial step in the construction of self-assembled RGO composite materials. In addition to the chemical or thermal reduction methods, a combination of photocatalytic components within the self-assembled nanostructures can directly produce novel hierarchical materials via photoreduction of GO. Such in situ reduction therefore may provide a new concept to construct CMG hybrids with homogeneous distribution of active components. (3) The mechanisms of the self-assembly of CMGs are not yet clearly understood, although lots of knowledge developed for the supramolecular chemistry of other polymers and carbon-rich materials such as CNTs, conjugated polymers, and large polycyclic aromatic carbons have been introduced. Thereby, the study on the basic principles and theories about self-assembly of CMG sheets should become one of the major concerns in this field.
Although the study on the self-assembly of CMGs only started a few years ago, the emergence of various self-assembled CMG based hybrid materials with unprecedented architectures and functions have apparently proven the rise of this exciting field that combines multiple disciplines such as chemistry, physics, materials science, and engineering. There is no doubt that the research on the self-assembly of CMGs will not only enrich the academic knowledge about graphene science, but also benefit our daily life in the near future.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by 973 Program of China (2012CB933404), Natural Science Foundation of China (21174083 and 21102091), BASF, Shanghai Pujiang Program (11PJ1405400), PhD Programs Foundation of Ministry of Education of China for Young Scholars (20110073120039).
References

          J.-M. Lehn, Supramolecular Chemistry: Concepts and Perspectives, Wiley-VCH, 1st edn,  1995 Search PubMed .

          J. W. Steed and J. L. Atwood, Supramolecular Chemistry, Wiley, 1st edn,  2000 Search PubMed .

          J. W. Steed, D. R. Turner and K. Wallace, Core Concepts in Supramolecular Chemistry and Nanochemistry, Wiley, 1st edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Science, 2002, 295, 2418 CrossRef CAS .

          J. A. Pelesko, Self Assembly: The Science of Things That Put Themselves Together, Chapman and Hall/CRC,  2007 Search PubMed .

          Y. S. Lee, Self-Assembly and Nanotechnology: A Force Balance Approach, 1st edn, Wiley-Interscience,  2008 Search PubMed .
G. M. Whitesides, J. P. Mathias and C. T. Seto, Science, 1991, 254, 1312 CAS .
J. N. Tiwari, R. N. Tiwari and K. S. Kim, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 724 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Today, 2007, 60, 35 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, R. S. Ruoff and C. W. Bielawski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9336 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mattevi, H. Kim and M. Chhowalla, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3324 RSC .
L. J. Cote, J. Kim, V. C. Tung, J. Y. Luo, F. Kim and J. X. Huang, Pure Appl. Chem., 2011, 83, 95 CrossRef CAS .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228 RSC .
G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2392 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kim, L. J. Cote and J. X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1954 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. W. Cai, X. S. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Xu and G. Q. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3311 RSC .
D. Q. Wu, F. Zhang, P. Liu and X. L. Feng, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10804 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Loh, Q. L. Bao, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 1015 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1089 CrossRef CAS .

Nanoparticles: From Theory to Application, ed. G. Schmid, 1st edn, Wiley-VCH,  2004 Search PubMed .

Inorganic Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Applications, and Perspectives, ed. C. Altavilla and E. Ciliberto, CRC Press,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. Dupont and J. D. Scholten, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1780 RSC .
M. E. Franke, T. J. Koplin and U. Simon, Small, 2006, 2, 36 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, G. U. Kulkarni, P. J. Thomas and P. P. Edwards, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 27 RSC .
T. K. Sau and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1781 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Li, H. Q. Yu, H. Li, C. G. An, K. Zhang, K. M. Liew and X. F. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6229 CAS .
S. B. Yang, X. L. Feng, S. Ivanovici and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8408 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. J. Faul and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 673 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, J. B. Shi, M. T. Cheng, G. L. Li, D. Cao and G. B. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1874 RSC .
J. S. Lee, K. H. You and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1084 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, Z. Wang, X. C. Dong, P. Chen and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2158 RSC .
S. A. Ju, K. Kim, J.-H. Kim and S.-S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2904 CAS .
J. H. Shen, Y. H. Zhu, K. F. Zhou, X. L. Yang and C. Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 545 RSC .
Y. N. Xia, P. D. Yang, Y. G. Sun, Y. Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin, F. Kim and Y. Q. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Han, W. J. Lee, D. H. Lee, J. E. Kim, E.-Y. Choi and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2060 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, Y. Jing, J. Zeng, Q. Qi, C. Wang, D. Goldfeld, C. Xu, Y. Zheng and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18174 RSC .
S. Wang, B. M. Goh, K. K. Manga, Q. Bao, P. Yang and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M. Heo, H. J. Lee, S.-M. Park, J. Y. Kim and H. S. Shin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8365 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mas-Balleste, C. Gomez-Navarro, J. Gomez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 20 RSC .
T. Zemb, M. Dubois, B. Deme and T. Gulik-Krzywicki, Science, 1999, 283, 816 CrossRef CAS .
R. Davis, R. Berger and R. Zentel, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3878 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Wang, Z. Y. Li, C. J. Medforth and J. A. Shelnutt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2440 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, K. Li, W. Lu, S. S.-Y. Chui, C.-W. Ma and C.-M. Che, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9909 CrossRef CAS .
D. Q. Wu, R. L. Liu, W. Pisula, X. L. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2791 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathish and K. Miyazawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13816 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathish, K. Miyazawa, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6372 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Omomo, T. Sasaki, L. Wang and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3568 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kim, E.-J. Oh, A.-Y. Jee, S. T. Lim, D. H. Park, M. Lee, S.-H. Hyun, J.-H. Choy and S.-J. Hwang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 10752 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 547 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, L. Gao, J. Sun, Y. Wang and J. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 465605 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, S. Guo, J. Ren, Y. Zhai, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4001 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, D. Wu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1679 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, S. Guo, C. Zhu, Y. Zhai and E. Wang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11277 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Xu, H. Bai, G. W. Lu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Hunter and J. K. M. Sanders, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 5525 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Su, S. Pang, V. Alijani, C. Li, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3191 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Englert, J. Roehrl, C. D. Schmidt, R. Graupner, M. Hundhausen, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4265 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Xu, L. Wang, B. Zhang, C. H. Lim, Y. Chen, K.-G. Neoh, E.-T. Kang and G. D. Fu, Polyhedron, 2011, 52, 2376 CAS .
X. Dong, C.-Y. Su, W. Zhang, J. Zhao, Q. Ling, W. Huang, P. Chen and L.-J. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 2164 RSC .
M. Zhang, R. R. Parajuli, D. Mastrogiovanni, B. Dai, P. Lo, W. Cheung, R. Brukh, P. L. Chiu, T. Zhou, Z. Liu, E. Garfunkel and H. He, Small, 2010, 6, 1100 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, X. Zhong, H. Yang, Y. Hu, F. Zhang, Z. Niu, W. Hu, Z. Dong, J. Jin, R. Li and J. Ma, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4239 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghosh, K. V. Rao, S. J. George and C. N. R. Rao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 2700 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, L. Zhao, H. Bai, W. Hong, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13490 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geng and H.-T. Jung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8227 CAS .
H. Bai, Y. Xu, L. Zhao, C. Li and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1667 RSC .
H. Yang, Q. Zhang, C. Shan, F. Li, D. Han and L. Niu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6708 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qi, K.-Y. Pu, H. Li, X. Zhou, S. Wu, Q.-L. Fan, B. Liu, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9426 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qi, K.-Y. Pu, X. Zhou, H. Li, B. Liu, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 663 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jo, T. Lee, H. J. Choi, J. H. Park, D. J. Lee, D. W. Lee and B.-S. Kim, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2014 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, F. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Ma, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2213 CrossRef CAS .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487 CrossRef CAS .
G. Williams and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13869 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bei, X. Hou, S. L. Y. Chang, G. P. Simon and D. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 5958 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Sun, H.-H. Lee, J.-M. Yang and C.-C. Wu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, L. M. Zhang, B. A. Chen, N. Ji, F. H. Chen, Y. Zhang and Z. J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2733 RSC .
Y. Choi, H. S. Bae, E. Seo, S. Jang, K. H. Park and B.-S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15431 RSC .
T. Szabó, O. Berkesi, P. Forgó, K. Josepovits, Y. Sanakis, D. Petridis and I. Dékány, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2740 CrossRef .
J. Liu, H. Bai, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Zhang and D. D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4175 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Ma, Y. Huang, Y. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2710 RSC .
M. Zhang, D. Lei, X. Yin, L. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Wang and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5538 RSC .
K. Zhou, Y. Zhu, X. Yang and C. Li, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 2950 RSC .
C. Y. Hou, Q. H. Zhang, M. F. Zhu, Y. G. Li and H. Z. Wang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 47 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Sun, L. Y. Cao and L. H. Lu, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, M. Cao, L. Ren and C. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14469 CAS .
H. He and C. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3201 CAS .
B. J. Li, H. Q. Cao, J. Shao, M. Z. Qu and J. H. Warner, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5069 RSC .
T. Tran Thanh, J.-F. Feller, T. Kim, H. Kim, W. S. Yang and K. S. Suh, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 927 CrossRef .
J. Shen, M. Shi, N. Li, B. Yan, H. Ma, Y. Hu and M. Ye, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 339 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, G. Zhang, M. Zhang, S. Guo and Z. H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 376 CrossRef CAS .
D. Marquardt, C. Vollmer, R. Thomann, P. Steurer, R. Mulhaupt, E. Redel and C. Janiak, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1326 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ji, X. Shen, G. Zhu, H. Zhou and A. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3471 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Li, D. Sun, D. Tian, J. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7604 RSC .
X. Huang, S. Z. Li, S. X. Wu, Y. Z. Huang, F. Boey, C. L. Gan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 979 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ji, X. Shen, Y. Song and G. Zhu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 176, 711 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nethravathi, E. A. Anumol, M. Rajamathi and N. Ravishankar, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 569 RSC .
Y. Zheng, J. Xie, S. Liu, W. Song, G. Cao, T. Zhu and X. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 276 CrossRef CAS .
L.-S. Zhang, L.-Y. Jiang, H.-J. Yan, W. D. Wang, W. Wang, W.-G. Song, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5462 RSC .
M. Zhang, D. Lei, Z. F. Du, X. M. Yin, L. B. Chen, Q. H. Li, Y. G. Wang and T. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1673 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3634 RSC .
J. Zhu, Z. Lu, M. O. Oo, H. H. Hng, J. Ma, H. Zhang and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12770 RSC .
S. Ding, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7155–7157 RSC .
J. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Wang, T. Yang, X. Guo, S. Wu, S. Zhang and S. Wang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3538 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, X. Shen, L. Jiang, K. Wang and K. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 2826 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhang, H.-P. Li, X.-L. Cui and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2801 RSC .
J. F. Shen, B. Yan, M. Shi, H. W. Ma, N. Li and M. X. Ye, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3415 RSC .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, H. Sanchez Casalongue, Z. Chen and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 701 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, P. Xu, G. Du, Z. Chen, K. Oh, D. Pan and Z. Jiao, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 274 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Ji, J. L. Wu, X. P. Shen, H. Zhou and H. T. Xi, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 1190 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Wang, Z.-A. Hu, Y.-Q. Chang, Y.-L. Chen, Z.-Q. Lei, Z.-Y. Zhang and Y.-Y. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 8974 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. P. Guo, A. J. Du and H. K. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3600 RSC .
W. L. Zhang and H. J. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12286 RSC .
B. Zhao, J. Song, P. Liu, W. Xu, T. Fang, Z. Jiao, H. Zhang and Y. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18792 RSC .
Z. Ji, J. Wu, X. Shen, H. Zhou and H. Xi, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 1190 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. He, D.-W. Bai, X. Yang, J. Chen, X.-Z. Liao and Z.-F. Ma, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 570 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Zhu and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11829 CAS .
N. W. Li, M. B. Zheng, X. F. Chang, G. B. Ji, H. L. Lu, L. P. Xue, L. J. Pan and J. M. Cao, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 953 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, C. Yuan, H. Luo, X. Zhang, S. Yang and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 572 RSC .
Q. Qu, S. Yang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cao, Z. Liu, S. Chu, M. Wu, Z. Ye, Z. Cai, Y. Chang, S. Wang, Q. Gong and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 103 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wu, S. Bai, X. P. Shen and L. Jiang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 747 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, T. F. Jiang, C. Z. Zhu, Y. M. Zhai, D. J. Wang and S. J. Dong, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 794 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pan, X. Fu, S. Liu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23501 CAS .
Z. S. Lu, C. X. Guo, H. B. Yang, Y. Qiao, J. Guo and C. M. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 353, 588 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3270 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gongkai, S. Xiang, L. Changsheng and L. Jie, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 053114 CrossRef .
H. Wang, L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. Sanchez Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Zhang, D. Du, Y. Shao, Z. Li, J. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, J. Li and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5319 RSC .
J.-J. Shi, G.-H. Yang and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7343 RSC .
L.-L. Li, K.-P. Liu, G.-H. Yang, C.-M. Wang, J.-R. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 869 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, D. Wu, F. Zhang, P. Liu, Q. Lu and X. Feng, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2119 RSC .
S. Yang, X. Feng, L. Wang, K. Tang, J. Maier and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4795 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-M. Wang, W. Wang, N. Coombs, N. Soheilnia and G. A. Ozin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7437 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3575 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Gittins and F. Caruso, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 3001 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hong, H. Bai, Y. X. Xu, Z. Y. Yao, Z. Z. Gu and G. Q. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1822 CAS .
J.-M. Bonard, T. Stora, J.-P. Salvetat, F. Maier, T. Stöckli, C. Duschl, L. Forró, W. A. de Heer and A. Châtelain, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 827 CrossRef CAS .
C. Richard, F. Balavoine, P. Schultz, T. W. Ebbesen and C. Mioskowski, Science, 2003, 300, 775 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, D. W. Choi, J. Li, Z. G. Yang, Z. M. Nie, R. Kou, D. H. Hu, C. M. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. G. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Maye, M. T. Kumara, D. Nykypanchuk, W. B. Sherman and O. Gang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 116 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sharma, R. Chhabra, A. Cheng, J. Brownell, Y. Liu and H. Yan, Science, 2009, 323, 112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Li, J. Li and Z. Deng, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 900 RSC .
J. Liu, S. Fu, B. Yuan, Y. Li and Z. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7279 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2007, 8, 323 CrossRef .
X. L. Li, G. Y. Zhang, X. D. Bai, X. M. Sun, X. R. Wang, E. Wang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 1043 CrossRef .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote, F. Kim, W. Yuan, K. R. Shull and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8180 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zheng, W. H. Ip, X. Lin, N. Yousefi, K. K. Yeung, Z. Li and J.-K. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6039 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wang, H. Bai and G. Q. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6338 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Manga, Y. Zhou, Y. L. Yan and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3638 CrossRef CAS .
Q. M. Ji, I. Honma, S. M. Paek, M. Akada, J. P. Hill, A. Vinu and K. Ariga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9737 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Kulkarni, I. Choi, S. Singamaneni and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4667 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Sheng, H. Bai, Y. Q. Sun, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5567 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park, S. M. Cho, W. J. Kim, J. Park and P. J. Yoo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 360 CAS .
X. Zhao, Q. H. Zhang, Y. P. Hao, Y. Z. Li, Y. Fang and D. J. Chen, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 9411 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Li, J. Q. Wang, X. H. Liu, S. Liu, J. F. Ou and S. R. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3397 RSC .
D. Chen, X. Y. Wang, T. X. Liu, X. D. Wang and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2005 CAS .
H. L. Li, S. P. Pang, S. Wu, X. L. Feng, K. Müllen and C. Bubeck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9423 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Pang, X. Feng, K. Müllen and C. Bubeck, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6243–6245 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Baughman, C. X. Cui, A. A. Zakhidov, Z. Iqbal, J. N. Barisci, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, A. Mazzoldi, D. De Rossi, A. G. Rinzler, O. Jaschinski, S. Roth and M. Kertesz, Science, 1999, 284, 1340 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hennrich, S. Lebedkin, S. Malik, J. Tracy, M. Barczewski, H. Rosner and M. Kappes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 2273 RSC .
H. Chen, M. B. Muller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Hu, C. Peng, W. J. Luo, M. Lv, X. M. Li, D. Li, Q. Huang and C. H. Fan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4317 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. He, H. Q. Chen, J. W. Zhu, F. L. Bei, X. Q. Sun and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14631 RSC .
X. W. Yang, L. Qiu, C. Cheng, Y. Z. Wu, Z. F. Ma and D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7325 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, N. Mohanty, J. W. Suk, A. Nagaraja, J. H. An, R. D. Piner, W. W. Cai, D. R. Dreyer, V. Berry and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1736 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Liang, Y. F. Xu, D. Sui, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. F. Ma, F. F. Li and Y. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17465 CAS .
C. Chen, Q.-H. Yang, Y. Yang, W. Lv, Y. Wen, P.-X. Hou, M. Wang and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3007 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Chen, S. B. Liu, J. M. Shen, L. Wei, A. D. Liu, M. B. Chan-Park and Y. Chen, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9174 CAS .
S. Liu, J. Q. Wang, J. Zeng, J. F. Ou, Z. P. Li, X. H. Liu and S. R. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4628 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Liu, K. Wang, S. L. Luo, Y. H. Tang and L. Y. Chen, Small, 2011, 7, 1203 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Wang and M. W. Ellsworth, in Graphene and Emerging Materials for Post-Cmos Applications, ed. Y. Obeng, S. DeGendt, P. Srinivasan, D. Misra, H. Iwai, Z. Karim, D. W. Hess and H. Grebel,  2009, vol. 19, p. 241 Search PubMed .
S. Z. Zu and B. H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13651 CAS .
J. H. Liu, G. S. Chen and M. Jiang, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7682 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, C. Li, X. L. Wang and G. Q. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2376 RSC .
V. Sridhar and I. K. Oh, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 348, 384 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Wang, C. Xu, Y. Li, J. Gao, W. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10399 RSC .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, K. Sheng, P. Zhang, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18653 RSC .
C. W. Lo, D. F. Zhu and H. R. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5604 RSC .
N. N. Zhang, R. Q. Li, L. Zhang, H. B. Chen, W. C. Wang, Y. Liu, T. Wu, X. D. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhao and J. P. Gao, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 7231 RSC .
Z. Tang, S. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4603 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, S. Li, C. Chen and L. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5679 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Q. Wu, Y. Sun, H. Bai and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7358 CrossRef CAS .
B. Adhikari and A. Banerjee, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 9259 RSC .
C. C. Huang, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4962 RSC .
Z. Y. Sui, X. T. Zhang, Y. Lei and Y. J. Luo, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4314 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and G. Q. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17206 CAS .
F. Liu and T. S. Seo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1930 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 571 CrossRef .
Z. Dong, C. Jiang, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, T. Zhao, K. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Wei, F. Kang, D. Wu and H. Zhu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12164 CrossRef CAS .
N. Behabtu, M. J. Green and M. Pasquali, Nano Today, 2008, 3, 24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, J. Frisch, L. Zhi, H. Norouzi-Arasi, X. Feng, J. P. Rabe, N. Koch and K. Müllen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 434007 CrossRef .
X. Li, H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pang, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 2779 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Yang, J. W. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Xia, J. P. Tu, Y. J. Mai, R. Chen, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu and X. B. Zhao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10898 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lu, Y. P. Zhang, H. B. Li, L. K. Pan, Y. L. Li and Z. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4170 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zhang, H. B. Li, L. K. Pan, T. Lu and Z. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 634, 68 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Li, Y. J. Mi, X. H. Liu, S. Liu, S. R. Yang and J. Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14706 RSC .
Y. M. Sun, X. H. Hu, W. Luo and Y. H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17229 RSC .
N. A. Kaskhedikar and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2664 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ban, Z. Wu, D. T. Gillaspie, L. Chen, Y. Yan, J. L. Blackburn and A. C. Dillon, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 145 CrossRef .
B. G. Choi, H. Park, T. J. Park, M. H. Yang, J. S. Kim, S. Y. Jang, N. S. Heo, S. Y. Lee, J. Kong and W. H. Hong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2910 CrossRef CAS .
M. Du, T. Yang and K. Jiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9253 RSC .
T. Zhang, Z. G. Cheng, Y. B. Wang, Z. J. Li, C. X. Wang, Y. B. Li and Y. Fang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4738 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, F. G. Xu, Y. J. Sun, Y. Shi, Z. W. Wen and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16949 RSC .
J. J. Liang, Y. F. Xu, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. F. Ma, F. F. Li, T. Y. Guo and Y. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9921 CAS .
J. J. Liang, Y. Huang, J. Y. Oh, M. Kozlov, D. Sui, S. L. Fang, R. H. Baughman, Y. F. Ma and Y. S. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3778 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Kosynkin, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, J. R. Lomeda, A. Dimiev, B. K. Price and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2009, 458, 872 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Englert, K. C. Knirsch, C. Dotzer, B. Butz, F. Hauke, E. Spiecker and A. Hirsch, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5025 RSC .
M. Quintana, A. Montellano, A. E. del Rio Castillo, G. V. Tendeloo, C. Bittencourt and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9330 RSC .

Footnote† Part of a themed issue on supramolecular polymers.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Dongqing Wu
	Dongqing Wu graduated in 2004 from East China University of Science and Technology with an MSc degree in Applied Chemistry. Then he joined the group of Prof. K. Müllen at Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPIP) and completed his PhD degree in July 2008. Currently, he is an associate professor in School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His primary interests are in the areas of self-assembly of various aromatic species including graphene, heterocyclic aromatics and charged aromatics.

Fan Zhang
	Fan Zhang received his B.Eng. degree in electrochemistry from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 1991, and his PhD degree in organic chemistry from Jilin University in 2000. After more than eight years of research experience in Germany and the United States, he was promoted to a Research Professor in School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His research interests span from organometallic catalysis, olefin polymerization to organic π-conjugated functional materials for energy conversion and storage.

Haiwei Liang
	Haiwei Liang received his Bachelor's degree in chemistry from East China Normal University in 2006. He received his PhD in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in the Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China. Since June 2012, he has been doing postdoctoral research with Prof. Klaus Müllen and Prof. Xinliang Feng at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz, Germany. His current research topics include design and synthesis of novel carbon-based nanocomposites, and their application as advanced electrode materials.

Xinliang Feng
	Xinliang Feng, after obtaining his Master's degree in organic chemistry from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in March 2004, joined the group of Prof. K. Müllen at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPIP) and obtained his PhD degree in April 2008. Since December 2007, he has been a group leader at MPIP. Since June 2010, he has been a professor of Shanghai Jiao Tong University and was appointed as director for the Institute of Advanced Organic Materials. His current scientific interests include graphene, two-dimensional nanomaterials, organic conjugated materials, carbon-rich molecules and materials for electronic and energy-related applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Fabrication of GO-encapsulated metal oxide NPs via an ISA approach; (b) zeta potentials of APS-modified silica (●) and GO (■) in aqueous solutions with various pH values; (c, d) SEM, and (e) TEM images of GO-encapsulated silica spheres. (Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)33	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the hybrid assembly of peptide and CMGs into core–shell nanowires. (b) Low and (c) high magnification SEM images of core–shell nanowires. (d) TEM image of the hollow graphene-shell structure. (e) High resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of a graphene shell. (Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)42	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of aqueous dispersions of 2D hybrids of PYS/RGO or PDIS/RGO. AFM images and cross-section graphs of (b) PYS/RGO and (c) PDIS/RGO dispersion dip-coated on mica. (Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH.)64	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images of (a) and (b) 2D hybrids of GO with DMAP capped Au NPs;84 (c) and (d) 2D hybrids of GO and TiO2 nanorods. (c and d Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)86	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of two-step Ni(OH)2 nanocrystal growth on (top) graphene sheets (GS) and (bottom) graphite oxide (GO). Insets: AFM images of GS and GO. SEM images of (b) Ni(OH)2·0.75H2O nanocrystals uniformly coated on GS; (c) Ni(OH)2·0.75H2O nanoparticles grown on GO. (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.)133	 

 	Fig. 6  GO based mesoporous silica (MS/GO) sheets. (a) Fabrication process for MS/GO sheets. (b), (c) SEM and (d), (e) TEM images reveal the flat MS/GO sheets. (f) AFM image and (g) thickness analysis taken around the white line in (f) reveal a thickness of 28 nm for MS/GO sheets. (Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)143	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of protein-based decoration and reduction of GO, leading to a general platform for assembly of NPs; TEM images of (b) BSA/RGO, (c–e) AuNP/BSA/RGO, (f) PdNP/BSA/RGO, and (g,h) PtNP/BSA/RGO. AuNPs and PtNPs had average diameters of 6 and 4 nm, respectively. PdNPs had a worm-like shape ∼4 nm in one dimension. (Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.)155	 

 	Fig. 8  LB assembly of GO single layers. (a–d) SEM images showing the collected GO monolayers on a silicon wafer at different regions of the isotherm. The packing density was continuously tuned: (a) dilute monolayer of isolated flat sheets, (b) monolayer of close-packed GO, (c) overpacked monolayer with sheets folded at interconnecting edges, and (d) over packed monolayer with folded and partially overlapped sheets interlocking with each other. (e) Isothermal surface pressure–area plot showing the corresponding regions a–d at which the monolayers were collected. Scale bars in a–d represent 20 μm. (Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.)159	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of PW/RGO films, involving the LBL assembly of GO and PW with PEI and PAH as electrostatic linkers, and a subsequent in situ photoreduction to convert GO to RGO; AFM images of a (PAH/GO/PAH/PW)1 film (b and c) and a (PAH/GO/PAH/PW)6 film (d and e), both on PEI/PW precursor film modified silicon substrates, which contain 300 nm thermal oxide. (Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.)171	 

 	Fig. 10  Morphology and structure of GO paper. a–d, Digital camera images of GO paper. (a) 1 mm-thick; (b) folded, 5 mm-thick semitransparent film; (c) folded, 25 mm-thick strip; (d) strip after fracture from tensile loading. (e), (f) and (g) Low-, middle- and high-resolution SEM side-view images of, 10 mm-thick sample. (Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group.)175	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Solutions of copolymer (PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO) stabilized GO (left) and copolymer (right), (b) hydrogels from α-CD/copolymer stabilized GO (left) and α-CD/copolymer (right), (c) proposed structure of the copolymer coated graphene, (d) supramolecular well-dispersed graphene sheet containing hybrid hydrogel, (e) SEM images of morphologies of the supramolecular hydrogels and dispersion state of graphene at low magnification and (f) high magnification. (Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.)188	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) and (b) Synthetic process for the fabrication of GO sponges and films by speed vacuum centrifugation. (c) The GO sponges, and (d) free-standing GO films; a representative image of a 3 cm diameter GO film (inset). The scale bar represents 1 cm in c and d. (Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)205	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Polarized optical microscopy image of GO LCs with volume fractions of 0.76%. (b) A long GO fiber wound on a Teflon drum with a diameter of 2 cm. (c) SEM image of a knotted GO fiber. (d) A Chinese character pattern knitted in the cotton network (white) using two graphene fibers (black). (Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.)206	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photographs of the as-formed flexible SSG films. (b) SEM image of the cross-section of a freeze dried SSG film. (c, d) Charge–discharge curves obtained at different current densities. (e) Gravimetric capacitances measured at various charge–discharge currents. (f) Ragone plots of the SSG films-based supercapacitors. (Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.)213	 

 	Fig. 15  Electrochemical performance of MC/RGO sheets for lithium ion storage. (a) Lithium insertion and extraction in MC/RGO sheets, where graphene acts as mini-current collectors during discharge and charge processes, facilitating the rapid diffusion of electrons during cycling processes. (b) First two discharge–charge curves (black: first discharge, red: first charge, green: second discharge, blue: second charge) and (c) cycle performance (black: discharge, red: charge) of MC/RGO sheets at a rate of C/5. The inset is the rate capability of MC/RGO sheets at various rates of C/5, 1C, 5C, 10C, and 20C. (Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)143	 
Footnote
† Part of a themed issue on supramolecular polymers.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
