Characteristics, properties, synthesis and advanced applications of 2D graphdiyne versus graphene  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QM01342D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QM01342D
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2022, 6, 528-552Characteristics, properties, synthesis and advanced applications of 2D graphdiyne versus graphene

        
          
            Ying 
            Zhao†
a, 
      
        
          
            Luxiao 
            Chai†
b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaobing 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Weichun 
            Huang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Taojian 
            Fan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Omar A. 
            Al-Hartomy
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Ahmed 
            Al-Ghamdi
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Swelm 
            Wageh
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Abdullah G. 
            Al-Sehemi
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Zhongjian 
            Xie
          
          
        
      *fg and 

        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b
aKey Laboratory of Brain-like Neuromorphic Devices and Systems of Hebei Province, College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, P. R. China. E-mail: xiaobing_yan@126.com
bInternational Collaborative Laboratory of 2D Materials for Optoelectronics Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, Institute of Microscale Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: hzhang@szu.edu.cn
cNantong Key Lab of Intelligent and New Energy Materials, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nantong University, Nantong 226019, Jiangsu, P. R. China
dDepartment of Physics, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
eDepartment of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Research Center for Advanced Materials Science (RCAMS), King Khalid University, PO Box 9004, Abha 61413, Saudi Arabia
fInstitute of Pediatrics, Shenzhen Children's Hospital, Shenzhen, 518038, Guangdong, P. R. China. E-mail: zjxie2011@163.com
gShenzhen International Institute for Biomedical Research, Shenzhen 518116, Guangdong, P. R. China
Received 
      4th October 2021
    , Accepted 14th December 2021First published on 7th January 2022AbstractLike graphene, graphdiyne is a newly discovered two-dimensional planar carbon allotrope with highly π-conjugated interactions. It shows a lot of affinities with graphene in terms of properties and applications. However, graphdiyne has a uniqueness in its structure, including acetylenic linkages and a three-dimensional network with large pores, making it subtly different with graphene in many areas. This review aims to introduce graphdiyne systematically and to describe its similarities and differences with graphene. It starts with a comparison between graphdiyne and graphene in terms of structure and properties. Then, the main synthetic routes of graphdiyne are listed, which are different from those of graphene. Next, the high performance of graphdiyne in the areas of catalysis, energy storage, environmental remediation, biosensors, cancer therapy, and so on are summarized. The featured characteristics of graphdiyne are highlighted to better understand this material and pave the way for more exploration of the adhibitions of graphdiyne.
Ying Zhao
Ying Zhao received her BSc degree in applied electronic technology education from the School of Physics and Electronic Science, Hunan University of Science and Technology in 2019. She is currently an ME student of Hebei University. Her current research focuses on the field of memristors.
Luxiao Chai
Luxiao Chai obtained her PhD degree at the University of Lyon, France, majoring in the synthesis of polymers and construction of smart nanostructures for drug delivery. Now she is doing research as a post-doc at Shenzhen University. Her work focuses on the synthesis and bioapplications of 2D materials and polymers, and the treatment and early diagnosis of cancer. Dr Chai has also done some work on AI medicine.
Xiaobing Yan
Xiaobing Yan is currently a professor at the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Hebei University. He received his PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2011. From 2014 to 2016, he held a research fellow position at the National University of Singapore. His current research focuses on the field of memristors.
Zhongjian Xie
Zhongjian Xie received his PhD from the University of Lyon, France, in 2016. Then, he joined Prof. Han Zhang's laboratory at Shenzhen University. He has published over 50 peer-reviewed papers with a total of 2200 citations and an H-index of 22. His research interests focus on the application of nanomaterials in biophotonics.
Han Zhang
Han Zhang is a full Professor and Director of the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of phosphorene and optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. He is an expert on low-dimensional optoelectronic devices and applications. He has published over 400 peer-reviewed papers and invited review articles in the last 10 years. The related works have been published in many prestigious journals such as PNAS, Physics Reports, Nature Communications and so on. All of his publications have received >46000 citations, with an H-index of 121. He has been named three times as a Highly Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics in 2018, 2019 and 2020, and he is also an OSA Fellow.
Introduction
Carbon is one of the most abundant elements in the world. Nowadays, carbon materials, especially carbon-based batteries, supercapacitors, sensors, and nano–microelectronic devices, have touched every item of our daily life.1 In general, carbon atoms possess three types of hybridization state in carbon materials: sp3, sp2, and sp, and hence, it is possible to form numerous allotropic structures with varied characteristics.2–5 For example, graphene (GR) is formed by sp2-hybridization of carbon atoms, and it shows significant differences in its crystal structures, physical properties and applications to those of diamond that is made by sp3-hybridization of carbon atoms.6
Since it was first obtained in 2004 by extraction from graphite by researchers at the University of Manchester (UK), GR has drawn the attention of scientists around the world.2 GR is found to be one of the thinnest and toughest materials available. It is more elastic than most materials and can be stretched to 20% of its original length without breaking.7 Moreover, GR is completely transparent, and absorbs only 2.3% of light.8 All of these unexpected properties give GR unusual electrical and optical properties and its potential for use in various areas such as microtransistors, solar cells, batteries, and catalysts, and so on.9–26 Nowadays, GR has definitely been one of the most popular materials in the world, not only for scientific research but also for industrial uses. Its widespread applications and outstanding performance in electronics, photocatalysts, photoelectronics, and medical areas have led it to be called “the wonder material”.
Graphdiyne (GDY) is a newly studied and developed carbon allotrope. Its existence was predicted as early as 1968 based on a theoretical calculation by the famous scientist Baughman but it wasn’t successfully prepared until 2010 by Li et al. via the in situ chemical method.27 GDY was found to have a two-dimensional (2D) planar structure with highly π-conjugated interactions that was similar to GR. In addition, GDY was observed to have unique sp + sp2 hybridization and 1,3-acetylenic linkages in structure, which were not seen in GR. Hence, there must be both similarities and differences between GR and GDY in preparations, properties and applications. To date, GDY materials have been explored by many groups and have been proved to have a outstanding performance like GR in optics, electricity and biomedicine.28–59 The great research and application potentials of GDY in the fields of energy, the environment and health are rewarded by scientists with profound expectation to promote scientific research progress greatly, especially for catalysis.34,60–63
On this basis, it is thought that it is meaningful and interesting to make a comparative review of the two stars of carbon allotropes that share so many similarities and differences. This will help researchers to deepen their understanding of them and do better informed research. Thus far, few reports have been discovered for this topic.64–67 This paper comprehensively compares and contrasts GR and GDY. It should be noted that given the extensive published reports of GR in the past, the focus of this narrative is on GDY. In addition, only points that are deemed to be critical and necessary are compared and discussed instead of displaying endless examples everywhere that GDY is used (see Fig. 1). The aim is to highlight the characteristics of GDY by comparing it with GR, and then finally look forward to the development and future prospects of GDY materials.
 Fig. 1  An overview of the manuscript. 
Properties of graphdiyne versus graphene
Structural stability
GR features a structure of a 2D periodic honeycomb composed of six-membered rings of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms. The bond distance between the two carbon atoms is only 0.142 nm with an angle of 120 degrees, as shown in Fig. 2a.68,69 The connections between the carbon atoms of GR are flexible. In the presence of external strength, the carbon atoms’ surface will bend and deform to keep the structure stable with no need of rearrangement.70 Electrons in GR do not scatter in the presence of lattice defects or upon the introduction of foreign atoms. In addition, due to the strong connection between carbon atoms, the internal electrons of GR are minimally disturbed at room temperature even with the squeezing of the surrounding carbon atoms.71 Therefore, GR is very stable in structure. It should be noted that although the carbon atoms within the same layer of GR are strongly linked, the bonding interactions between the layers are very weak.
 Fig. 2  (a) Structure of graphene. (b) Structure of graphdiyne. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. (c–e) Single-layer, double-layer and triple-layer structures of graphdiyne. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2017 Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH, Germany, 2017. (f) Graphite geometry with arrows representing different strain directions. (g and h) The relationship between band gap and strain value of GR and GDY, respectively. (i) The relationship between the in-plane stiffness C and the number of acetylene connections. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
GDY presents an infinitely extended hexagonal shape on the plane. Different from GR, its 2D planar network structure is generated by the benzene rings connecting with the 1,3-diyne bonds. There are two acetylenic linkages contained in each unit cell, as shown in Fig. 2b.68,73,74 Both sp and sp2 hybridized carbon atoms are observed in GDY. The bonding length between sp2 carbon atoms is 0.146 nm, longer than that of GR. The van der Waals forces and high π-bond interactions also exist which cause the stacking of the layer structure of the material, generating certain folds of lamellar linkages in the vertical direction and finally a homogeneous three-dimensional (3D) pore network, as shown in Fig. 2c–e.72 Due to these multiple bonds, GDY is predicted to be the most stable diacetylenic carbon allotropes.37,75 The interesting thing is that even though there is the existence of multiple structural reinforced linkages, the structural stability of GDY is still to be discussed and given in detail. The reason for this is that the presence of –CC–CC– bonds in GDY lead to the formation of special electron-rich cavities, resulting in the uneven distribution of the surface charge. Hence GDY is conferred with a high intrinsic activity. As a result, its structure becomes more flexible and less stable than that of GR. The greater the proportion of –CC–CC– linkages, the less stability of GDY.76,77 This conclusion is also supported by the theoretical study of Qiao and co-workers in 2011.42 The researchers calculated the Gibbs free energy (δG) of a series of carbon materials by a defined formula as follows:δG = −E(COH) + x(H)μ(H) + (1 − x(H))μ(C)where E(COH) is the cohesive energy per atom in the system, x(H) is the mole fraction of hydrogen atoms, μ(H) and μ(C) are the chemical potential of the constituents in a given state. Obviously, δG is countable with respect to molecular C and H. According to their results, the δG of 2D GDY is 0.803 eV, which was larger than that of 2D GR (0 eV), meaning that 2D GDY was less stable than GR from the viewpoint of energy. This may be caused by there being more carbonization of GDY in the structure.
Mechanical properties
As mentioned previously, the existence of stable sp2 bonds in GR makes it resistant to all kinds of in-plane deformations, thus it displays impressive intrinsic mechanical properties. From many calculations and experiments on the stiffness, strength and toughness, scientists have considered GR to be the strongest material ever measured.78,79 Hone and co-workers reported that the breaking strength of the defect-free monolayer of GR was 42 N m−1 and this remained unchanged even at higher sp3-type defect densities.21 The GR's in-plane stiffness and Young's modulus were measured and found to be 340 ± 50 N m−1 and 1 Tpa, respectively. Other researchers found that monolayer GR could be stretched up to 240% of the initial length or be twisted without breaking in a magnetic field, which indicated the possibility of constructing GR-based microscale metamaterials with outstanding mechanical performance.80
GDY also presents excellent mechanical properties that are caused by its internal uniform pores instead of the sp2 bonds. Its inter-sheet adhesion and out-of-plane bending stiffness are comparable to those of GR although its atomic density is smaller than that of GR (29.61 nm2vs. 39.95 nm2).36 However, the reported in-plane stiffness of GDY was 120 N m−1 and 375 GPa, respectively, which were lower than that of GR, 340 ± 50 N m−1 and 1000 GPa, respectively, meaning that GDY is softer (weaker in bonding) than GR.81 This can be explained in terms of the effect of bonding in the lattice. On the one hand, less C–C in GDY lead to lower in-plane atomic mass density and electronic charge density.82 On the other hand, the bond length between the benzene ring and the alkyne group of GDY is prolonged due to the weak conjugation, resulting in a decrease of the benzene unit's aromaticity and an increase of lattice spacing. The lattice spacing roughly increases by 2.58 Å with each additional alkyne bond.83,84
Many researchers have reported that GDY displays obvious nonlinear stress–strain behavior. For example, Yue et al. found that no matter what the tensile strain was, GDY's band gap was always kept at Γ point, whereas GR presented a direct gap at the M point or S point (Fig. 2f–h).69 In Fig. 2g and h, the band gaps of GR and GDY showed exactly the same change trend with increasing strain. A downward trend was observed under the compressive H strain, whereas an upward trend was found under the A strain and Z strain. Notably, GDY showed a greater decrease of in-plane stiffness due to the presence of more acetyl bonds in the GDY networks (Fig. 2i). Degabriele et al. further demonstrated that the mechanical properties of GDY can be controlled by varying the type of substitution and the length of the acetylene chain.85 Cranford and Buehler measured the elastic fracture strain and compressive strain of GDY within 8.2–13.2% and 48.2–107.5 GPa, respectively.86 It could be concluded that the internal stiffness and stress of GDY strongly depends on the load orientations that were used. When the strain was removed, the strained structure could recover the equilibrium geometry. This phenomenon may result from the existence of directional acetylene linkages in GDY.
Electronic properties
The electronic property is one of the most basic properties of carbon materials. Due to the free movement of the π-type electrons in the crystal, both GR and GDY possess outstanding electronic properties. GR has been shown to be a typical zero-band gap metal-like material, with valence bands (VB) and conduction bands (CB) intersecting symmetrically at the Fermi energy levels.87 This leads to the nonadjustable electrical conductivity of GR, and thus, the requirement of additional doping when it is used as a semiconductor material.88
The sp and sp2 hybrid carbon structure of GDY gives it high π conjugation, orderly pore structure and adjustable electronic structure. The presence of acetylenic groups gives GDY a rich variety of electronic properties which are very different from those of GR. Generally, GDY is considered as an inherent direct gap semiconductor. In 2011, Luo et al. calculated that the band gap of the single-layered GDY was 0.44 eV and 1.10 eV using density functional theory (DFT) and Green functional theory (GW) multi-body theory, respectively, which was higher than that of GR 0 eV (Fig. 3a).89 At room temperature, the intrinsic electron mobility of GDY is 105 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is higher than that of GR, 15000 cm2 V−1 s−1.72 Zheng et al. further observed that the band gaps of double-layered and triple-layered GDY are 0.35 eV and 0.33 eV, respectively and they have metal characteristics with AB and ABA-stacking mode metal characteristics, respectively (Fig. 3b).90 This may lay the foundation for the development of new GDY materials for use as semiconductors in the electronic field. Considering the fact that the band gap of GDY is readily tunable by varying the strain (see Mechanical properties section), this coupling of mechanical and electronic properties is very useful, and promising for specific engineering applications.36
 Fig. 3  (a) Band structures, density of states, and optical transitions of graphdiyne at the LDA and GW levels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2011 American Physical Society. (b) Energy surface and band structure of bilayer graphdiyne. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 RSC Publishing. (c) Raw experimental absorbance of graphdiyne film. (d) Experimental and LDA + RPA absorbance of graphdiyne film. (e) Experimental absorbance of graphdiyne film and its theoretical absorbance at the GW + RPA and BSE level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2011 American Physical Society. (f) Raman spectra of graphene at 514 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2006 The American Physical Society. (g) Raman spectra of GDY. (h) Vibrational modes of GDY. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Optical properties

Optical absorption. 
Optical absorption is one of the fundamental properties of carbon materials. With an sp2-hybridized carbon atom, GR has many intriguing optical features. It is identified as a nonlinear absorption (NLA) material in the ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-Vis-NIR) range of light.93 The optical conductivity of GR in the infrared region is approximately constant with an infrared spectral absorbance of 2.3%.8 Hence, GR has been certificated as having excellent light transmittance. The light transmittance of single-layer GR can be as high as 97.7% which tends to decrease with the increase of layer numbers.94
The GDY also has an outstanding ultraviolet NLA property.95 However, the existence of sp-hybridized CC bonding results in its NLA property being very different from that of other carbon allotropes.93,95,96 For example, Luo et al. determined the UV-Vis-NIR spectrum of GDY by comparing the observed absorbance (Fig. 3c) with the theoretical spectra at the local density approximation (LDA) + random-phase approximation (RPA) (Fig. 3d) and GW + RPA and the Bethe–Salpeter equation (BSE) (Fig. 3e).89 It was found that the BSE level matched the experimental measurement (experimental 0.56, 0.89, and 1.79 eV which most corresponded to the BSE excitonic peaks at 0.75, 1.00, and 1.82 eV, respectively). It was notable, that the position of the first two measured peaks was lower than the BSE prediction because the interlayer van der Waals interaction influenced the position of the excitonic peak with increasing dimensionality. The results indicated that the light absorption of GDY was mainly impacted by the exciton effect. The exciton binding energy of GDY was as small as 0.55 eV indicating the favourable competitiveness of GDY for use as nanoscale semiconductors and optoelectronic devices. Zhou et al. observed a clear dark shift of the UV-Vis spectrum of GDY when compared with that of hexaethynylbenzene (HEB) monomer, showing that the electron delocalization increases with the expansion of the conjugated π system.97 Recently, Zhang and co-workers demonstrated the strong wideband Kerr nonlinear optical effect and a large nonlinear refractive index (∼10−5 cm2 W−1) of GDY.98 Later, the group studied the broadband saturation absorption and transient absorption characteristics of GDY from visible to infrared light.99 According to the study, a stronger nonlinear absorption, lower saturation strength and ultrafast relaxation time was observed for GDY when compared with other traditional 2D materials. This research revealed the excellent nonlinear optical properties of GDY and laid a foundation for its future development for use in advanced nano-photonic devices.


Raman spectroscopy. 
There are three main characteristic peaks in the Raman spectrum of GR, which represent the in-plane vibration of the sp2 carbon atom, the number of layers, and the structural defects or edges (Fig. 3f).91 Using group theory and first-principles calculations, Zhang et al. reported that in the Raman spectrum of GDY, six peaks corresponding to six types of vibrational modes could be found, including two typical peaks generated from synchronous and out-of-phase stretching/contracting modes of the unique alkyne triple bonds of GDY (Fig. 3g and h).92 Similar to GR, GDY showed a peak from the stretching of the aromatic bonds, but a bathochromic shift took place due to its alkyne-rich 2D aromatic system. Although the typical Raman spectrum of GDY had been explored systematically, scientists found that the predicted spectral features were always be in good agreement with the experimental results.27,97,100 This may be because of the poor crystallinity and high defects of the GDY structure resulting in poor resolution and broader bands.

Magnetic properties
For low-dimensional carbon materials, the generation of intrinsic magnetism is normally caused by vacancy and sp3-type defects in the structure. GR is composed of carbon hexatomic rings and all its outer electrons are perfectly paired to form σ- and π-bonds. Therefore, GR is intrinsically nonmagnetic at room temperature. Over the past decades, numerous efforts have been made to break the symmetric bonds and induce localized magnetic moments in GR either theoretically or experimentally using the vacancy approach, the edge approach, the sp3 approach, and so on.101–103
As a type of semiconductor material with a narrow band gap, GDY's unique structural characteristics effectively prevent the aggregation of sp3 type functional groups. GDY shows a typical intrinsic paramagnetism. In 2017, Zhang et al. found that that the hydroxyl group in GDY was the main source of its intrinsic magnetism based on DFT calculations.103 Liu et al. prepared a N-doped GDY with a nitrogen–carbon ratio of 5.29% and obtained a surprising enhancement of the magnetic properties compared with pure GDY.104 It is concluded that the natural large pore structure gives GDY strong chemical activity and excellent adsorption capacity for functional groups. Therefore, there is great research potential in the magnetic aspects of GDY.
Thermal conductivity
Thermal conductivity is an essential property of 2D materials which is required for their applications in nanodevices. Defect-free, single crystal and single-layer GR exhibits an unusually high intrinsic thermal conductivity (κ) of about 3000–5000 W m−1 K−1 for a sample length of ∼10 μm, which is much higher than that of metals and second only to that of the heat pipe.105 Because phonons are the main heat carriers of GR, the high thermal conductivity of GR is partly attributed to its long phonon mean free path (MFP). The superb thermal conduction property of GR makes it an excellent material to avoid overheating issues in nanoelectronic circuits. Unlike GR, GDY possesses a very low thermal conductivity of just ∼5 W m−1 K−1 by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.106 This may result from the high porosity, small atomic density and weak single bonds in the acetylenic linkages of GDY.107,108
The thermal conductivity of both materials was found to exponentially correspond to the density or Young's modulus (Fig. 4a and b), which resulted conjointly from the combination of specific heat and MFP.106 However, a clear explanation for this exponential dependence has not yet been made by researchers. The difference of thermal conductivity between GDY and GR is a reflection of the influence of the length. As shown in Fig. 4c, with the augmentation of the length, the calculated thermal conductivity of the 2D GR sheets (3.35 Å in thickness) in the armchair and zigzag directions increases from 73.0 to 657.6 W m−1 K−1 and from 75.0 to 690.6 W m−1 K−1, respectively.109 Whereas in Fig. 4d, the thermal conductivity of GDY increases first and then remains almost stable as the length increases.110 From Fig. 4d, the thermal conductivities of both GR and GDY are convincingly isotropic because the thermal conductivity values are very close along the armchair and zigzag directions.
 Fig. 4  (a) The evolution curve of thermal conductivity–density of various carbon materials. (b) The evolution curve of thermal conductivity–Young's modulus of various carbon materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2020 Elsevier Ltd. (c) The evolution curve of thermal conductivity–length of graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The evolution curve of thermal conductivity–length of B-graphdiyne along the armchair and zigzag directions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110, Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The low thermal conductivity of GDY makes it a promising thermoelectric material. This is deduced using the law of ZT = S2σT/κ, where ZT is the thermoelectric conversion efficiency, S is the Seebeck coefficient, T is the absolute temperature, σ is the electrical conductivity, and κ is the thermal conductivity. The higher the value of σ and the smaller the value of κ, the larger the conversion efficiency ZT.111–115 Sun et al. reported that the maximum value of ZT could be up to 3.0 for the p-type GDY and 4.8 for the n-type GDY, which are greater than for most currently reported thermoelectric materials, including carbon materials.116 The study proves that GDY is a suitable candidate for high-performance thermoelectric applications.
In short, the two allotropes of carbon, GR and GDY, show a certain degree of difference in both structure and properties. To learn more about GR and GDY, a comprehensive list of the lattice constants, atomic densities, band gaps, carrier mobilities and some other key parameters, are shown in Table 1.17,46,73,76,106,117,118 It can be found that both GR and GDY are isotropic by the in-plane stiffness C, Poisson's ratio ν, and Young's modulus (TPa) parameters. As can be seen from Table 1, the hole mobility of GR increases up to 3.512 × 105 and 3.217 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1, and the electron mobility increases to 3.202 × 105 and 3.389 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1. Correspondingly, the values for GDY are 1.97 × 104 and 2.081 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. It should be noted that the mobilities of GDY varying with its width, orientation, and carrier type, and can reach up to 106 cm2 V−1 s−1.
Table 1 The comprehensive performance parameters of graphene and graphdiyne




Parameters
Graphene
Graphdiyne





x represents the zigzag direction and y represents the armchair direction.




Lattice constant (Å)
2.47
9.48


Percentage of t acetylenic linkages (%)
0
50


Band gap (eV)
0
0.44


In-plane stiffness C (N m−1)
341.09x
118.6x




117.5y


Poisson's ratio (ν)
0.18x
0.40x




0.40y


Ultimate strength σ (N m−1)
34.71
10.71


41.94
13.54


Ultimate strain ε (%)
0.134
6.3


0.191
8.0


Hole mobility μh (×104 cm2 V−1 s−1)
35.12x
1.91x


32.17y
1.97y


Electron mobility μe (×104 cm2 V−1 s−1)
32.02x
17.22x


33.89y
20.81y


Thermal conductivity κ (W m−1 K−1)
3000–5000
4.48x




4.81y




Preparation of graphdiyne versus graphene
In past years, various techniques have been established for the formation of GR.119 These include: (1) a micromechanical exfoliation approach is carried out using repeat rubbing of microfabricated graphite micropillars, followed by the repeat peeling off of GR flakes from graphite crystals using a glass tip. Monolayered or multilayered GR can be obtained. Even though the micromechanical exfoliation method is simple and less costly, its poor reproducibility makes it less suitable for mass-production. (2) The epitaxial growth method relies on the excellent chemisorption capability of GR on metals by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of hydrocarbons.120 Large-scale monolayer GR films with uniform thickness can be obtained by this high-temperature and complicated procedure. (3) The CVD method was also used. Firstly, hydrocarbon compounds, such as methane and ethanol, were placed onto the surface of preheated Cu or Ni metal substrates.121 After a particular reaction time, the system is cooled during which the GR with a monolayer or multilayers will appear on the substrate's surface. As one of the most commonly used methods today, CVD is considered to be the most likely method for the preparation of GR to obtain high quality and a large area. This pathway is also expected to be exploited for the industrial production of GR films. (4) The reduction GR oxide method is an of oxidization process followed by reduction from the graphite precursor.122 This method is one of the best means for preparing GR simply, at a large scale and with low cost.
In 2010, Li et al. synthesized GDY film successfully for the first time by a homo-coupling reaction of a HEB monomer on a Cu surface.27 The prepared film had a surface area of 3.61 cm2 and electrical conductivity of 2.516 × 10−4 S m−1. After that, several new protocols were established to generate GDY materials with diverse morphologies, and these mainly include a CVD method, an explosion method, a vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) method, a solution method, and a two-phase coupling method.43,123–126
Explosion method
Zuo et al. reported that HEB monomers were subjected to a heating process under different atmospheres, and heating rates for the homocoupling reaction at 120 °C, effectively generated GDY powders with different shapes, including nanobelt, three-dimensional skeleton and nanochain, as shown in Fig. 5a.127 The GDY materials obtained by this method showed excellent thermal stability, and high thermal conductivity and surface area. Shang et al. also prepared the N-doped GDY by an explosive method.128 Firstly, the solution containing the GDY precursor was stirred at 0 °C, until the GDY was completely dissolved, followed by dilution and washing steps to obtain an off-white powder. Afterwards, the off-white powder obtained was put into a preheated Erlenmeyer flask, and finally a black GDY powder was obtained after an explosive reaction at 120 °C (Fig. 5b). The GDY produced displayed great potentials in the field of high-performance two-electrode supercapacitors. According to the report, no metal catalyst was required during the whole process. The report provides a new idea for the preparation of all-carbon GDY materials, the preparation of which is pollution-free and environmentally-friendly.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) GDY generation by explosion method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 and 128, respectively. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry and Copyright 2018 Elsevier Ltd. (c) GDY generation by VLS method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (d) GDY generation by CVD method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
Vapor–liquid–solid (VLS)
Qian et al. reported a method combining reduction and an autocatalytic VLS growth process to form GDY films on ZnO nanorod arrays, as shown in Fig. 5c.129 In this process, GDY powder was used as the steam source and ZnO nanorods as substrate. Firstly, an appropriate amount of GDY powder was placed on the quartz boat of a tube furnace and then put in the quartz tube. Subsequently, pure Ar gas flowed into the tube, followed by the tube furnace being heated to 700 °C. Afterwards, the tube furnace was cooled to room temperature after holding the temperature for 30 min and finally a gray GDY film formed on the nanorod array in the presence of a high concentration of N2. The prepared GDY film showed strong conductivity and a field effect mobility up to 100 cm2 V−1 s−1. This research promoted the development of basic nanoscience and technology.
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
CVD is a simple and effective technique for GDY preparation either in a scanning tunneling microscopic (STM) system under an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) or in the CVD system under a certain atmosphere.130–132 Liu et al. sealed the HEB upstream with silver foil, and it was then treated with heat 150 °C for film growth (Fig. 5d).104 After the introduction of Ar gas onto the surface of the Ag, a linked carbon monolayered GDY film with acetylenic scaffolding was successfully grown using a covalent coupling reaction of the terminal alkynes. It was shown that the GDY film formed (thickness ∼0.6 nm) possessed outstanding semiconductor characteristics. Shu et al. successfully prepared a GDY molecular wire under ultra-vacuum conditions with Cu as the base, with a homocoupling reaction of the trichloromethyl (–CCl3) groups.132 This protocol overcame the limitation in previous work, that alkyne groups had to be contained in precursors. Therefore, the construction and further investigation of tailored molecular architecture has become more flexible. In addition to Ag and Cu, an Au substrate has also been used for the CVD procedure. Sun et al. designed a specific terminal alkynyl bromide containing the precursors for the coupling, in the dehalogenative homocoupling reaction, on an Au surface.133 The process yielded an acetylene-linked ordered 2D porous network with high selectivity and fewer byproducts.
Solution method
The solution method is normally involved in the template coupling reaction in organic solvents. Yang et al. successfully prepared N-substituted GDY film using the Glaser–Hay diyne coupling reaction of the 2,4,6-triethynylpyridine monomer.134 Briefly, a solution containing the N-doped precursor was placed in the Cu foil and heated at 70 °C for 3 d away from light. The coupling reaction then took place on the surface of the Cu foil, generating GDY films of different sizes (Fig. 6a). It was proved that adjusting the area of the Cu foil enabled the formation of GDY films with various areas. The largest area of the GDY film could be as high as 81 cm2 and this displayed outstanding self-supporting properties. Zhou et al. successfully synthesized GDY nanowalls via the improved Glaser–Hay diyne coupling reaction with a HEB precursor.97 As shown in Fig. 6b, after the immersion of the Cu plate in the mixed solution, the Cu was easily converted into Cu ions, thus enhancing its solubility and leading to the improvement of the coupling rate. The pH and the amount of N-ligand in the solution can also be regulated to promote the uniform growth of GDY. Therefore, the solution method is proposed for the preparation of GDY.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) GDY generation by solution method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84 and 97. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society and Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) GDY generation by two-phase coupling method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Two-phase coupling method
Matsuoka et al. prepared GDY films via a two-phase coupling reaction method (Fig. 6c).100 For the liquid/liquid interfacial synthesis, dichloromethane containing HEB monomer was added into an aqueous solution as the upper layer and subsequently a Cu containing aqueous solution was dropped onto the surface of the upper layer. In the presence of Ar gas, the coupling reaction took place to form a multilayer GDY film with a lateral size of 25–100 μm. For the dried gas/liquid interface synthesis, a small amount of HEB-containing solution was gradually dropped onto the surface of the Cu-containing water phase to form high-quality single crystal GDY nanosheets under an inert environment. The GDY prepared by the two-phase coupling method showed low oxygenation and a regular hexagonal shape with a uniform size of just 3 nm. Compared with the liquid-phase interfacial approach, the gas–liquid interfacial approach produces GDY with fewer layers and a higher quality.
In short, there is a big difference between GR and GDY in preparation, which is mainly resulted from their distinction in structure. Normally, GDY can be formed by well-devised monomers with diverse structures for the generation of products with varied sp and sp2 hybridization contents. Through solution chemistry approach, the size, morphology, and physicochemical properties (such as band gap, pore size, and affinity for gas molecules) of GDY products can be regulated conveniently. Moreover, the position and number of the heteroatoms introduced can also be precisely controlled by changing the reaction conditions during the generation of GDY.
Advanced applications of graphdiyne
As mentioned previously, GR was characterized by sp2 hybridization. However, GDY is different, in that it is composed of unique sp + sp2 hybrid carbon atoms. The triangular ring structure of the benzene ring and the CC bond in GDY make it form a uniformly distributed pore structure. On the one hand, the rich carbon chemical bond, high conjugation, uniform and dispersed pore configuration of GDY make it charge mobilities and electron transport properties. On the other hand, the inside diacetylenic linkages induce the electron-deficient properties of GDY.67 Hence, GDY plays a role of not only an electron-acceptor but also an electron-donor. This inspires researchers to explore the interactions of GDY with other systems such as metals, metal oxides, heteroatoms, organic molecules, and so on. All these investigations show its great potential in various practical and critical areas. In the next sections, the advanced applications of GDY materials in different fields will be shown in detail. Objective evaluations between GR and GDY are made where necessary.
Electrocatalysts
The development of electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is the key to the conversion and storage of sustainable clean energy. At present, commercial electrocatalysts are mainly precious metals and their alloys or oxides. Their high price restricts their use in large scale applications. Carbon-based materials have the characteristics of low cost, large surface area and they are suitable for doping, thus can effectively reduce the adsorption energy barrier and increase the electron reaction pathways.3–6 Moreover, GDY possesses a large band gap and migrated electrons, thus shows remarkable activity for electrocatalysis.135–137

Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). 
Due to the existence of uniform pores in GDY, single metal atoms can be stably anchored on its surface to finally form GDY atomic catalysts with a efficient and stable performance. Xue et al. reported the simple anchoring of Fe (∼1.02 Å) and Ni (∼1.23 Å) single-atom catalysts on GDY to form electrocatalysts for HER (Fig. 7a).138 Thanks to the intense chemical interconnections and electron-coupling of Ni/Fe with GDY, highly efficient charge transport was permitted between the active catalytic sites and the GDY scaffolds, thus resulting in outstanding HER performances. In particular, the overpotential of Fe/GDY (Fe/GD) and Ni/GDY (Ni/GD) were observed at 66 and 88 mV, respectively, at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which were far less than those of most approved bulk non-precious HER catalysts such as Ni2P, MoS2, WS2, Pt nanowires, single-layered Ni(OH)2, and so on (Fig. 7b and c). Moreover, the synthesized electrocatalysts could retain a long-term stability for HERs under acidic conditions. Xue et al. synthesized Cu@GD core–shell 3D nanocomposite electrocatalysts with an overpotential that reached 79 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7d).139 Compared with most of the reported non-noble metal electrocatalysts, the prepared nanocomposite was observed to have superior catalytic activity (Fig. 7e). Among all the represented catalysts, Cu@GD was observed to have the lowest Tafel slope (69 mV dec−1, Fig. 7f).
 Fig. 7  (a) Structure of Ni/GD and Fe/GD. (b) Onset values and c overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 of Ni/GD and Fe/GD. (c) HER activity of various electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (d–f) Cu@GD core–shell 3D nanocomposite electrocatalyst and its polarization curves and Tafel plots at sweep rate of 0.5 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (g) GDY@NiFe composite and the OER process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (h) LSV curves of various electrocatalysts. (i) High performance of the N′N-GDY catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (j) CO2 photoreduction of TiO2/GDY heterojunction under UV-visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Considering the high cost and rarity of the source metal materials, various non-metallic materials (e.g., transition metal sulfur compounds, heteroatom atoms) have been investigated by combining them with GDY to boost its HER activity. For example, Li and co-workers synthesized a 3D GDY/MoS2 heterostructure on a carbon fiber/nanosheet network (GDY MoS2 NS/CF) which showed outstanding catalytic activity in both acidic and alkaline dielectrics due to the strong electronic hybridization formed between GDY and MoS2.143 In alkaline conditions, the overpotential of GDY MoS2 NS/CF was only 90 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which was 45.7 times larger than that of pristine MoS2. A high HER activity with outstanding long-term stability was observed at all pH values. Since CuS can both catalyze hydroxide and promote the in situ growth of GDY, Shi et al. designed a GDY/CuS heterostructure with plentiful active sites and effective electron transfer.144 The prepared GDY/CuS composite gave a superior HER performance in alkaline electrolytes. Recently, Zhao et al. prepared B and N co-doped GDY catalysts for the first time.145 In the experimental work, B and/or N were doped into GDY, generating a series of samples, including BFLGDY (sequential B doping into few-layer GDY), NFLGDY-M (sp-N doping into few-layer GDY), BNFLDGY (B-to-N sequential doping into few-layer GDY), and NBFLGDY (N-to-B sequential doping into few-layer GDY). The study found that the doping sequence of the heteroatoms strongly influenced the configurations and furthermore the HER performances as well. To be specific, sp-N was found to be a decisive influence on the HER efficiency of the system. The BNFLGDY presented the lowest current density due to the generation of the h-BN byproduct, whereas NBFLGDY showed the highest HER activity with a current density of 48.6 mA cm−2 (at 0.25 V vs. a relative hydrogen electrode (RHE)) and the lowest overpotential of 84 mV. The HER performance of NBFLGDY was superior to the currently reported metal-free catalysts and the results were even comparable to those of Pt/C. The study concluded that the overpotential can be reduced by the introduction of sp-N, and the current density can be increased by further incorporation of B.


Oxygen evolution reaction (OER). 
Nowadays, the development of oxygen-free catalysts, and catalysts with a high activity for the OER are of urgent need in the energy and environmental fields. Recently, Chen and co-workers synthesized a metalloporphyrin-based GDY analogue (Co-PDY) with butadiyne linkages, swollen pores and unique π-conjugated interactions.146 The rich catalytic sites in the composite were very favorable for small molecule diffusion and OER reactions. Shi et al. synthesized the GDY-supported NiFe layered double hydroxide (NiFe LDH) nanocomposite for the first time.140 With an increased surface area and improved electronic conductivity, the composite material achieved a resistive current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a small overpotential of 260 mV. In addition, the nanocomposite showed extraordinary durability in an alkaline medium. These results implied that the synthesized catalyst had excellent OER electrocatalytic activity (Fig. 7g). Zhao et al. explored the HER performance of multiple heteroelement-doped GDY systems for the first time by controlling the distribution of the doping sites.147 Compared with pristine few-layer GDY (FLGDY) and N or S individually doped GDY, N and S co-doped GDY (NSFLGDY, prepared at 900 °C) showed the highest OER catalytic activity with a lower overpotential, higher current density (47.2 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1.6 V vs. RHE), as well as faster kinetics. This was caused by the synergistic effect between different heteroatoms. Moreover, the OER catalytic activity of NSFLGDY was still remarkable in 0.1 M KOH.


Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). 
The ORR is considered to be important for the commercialization of fuel cells due to its lower cost, greater durability and higher catalytic efficiency when compared to Pt-based catalysts. By doping double heteroatoms (N and F) into GDY, Zhang et al. enhanced the selectivity of ORR electrons and this provided better tolerance and stability for the methanol crossover and CO poisoning effects, than the commercial Pt/C catalyst.148 Zhao et al. successfully introduced sp-N onto the surface of few-layer GDY (sp-NFLGDY-T, where T represents temperature: 700, 800, and 900 °C) by pericyclic replacement of the acetylene groups.149 Because of the optimized O2 adsorption of sp-N atoms, the prepared sp-NFLGDY-900 gave the best catalytic performance for the ORR out of these three samples. By comparing the values of peak potential, half-wave potential and current density, sp-NFLGDY-900 displayed a comparable catalytic activity to that of commercial Pt/C in alkaline solution and gave a superior performance when compared to other metal-free materials. Lv et al. fused pyridine with GDY materials (Py-GDY) and then doped N into the composites to form N-GDY catalysts which gave a temperature-dependent, high activity for the ORR (Fig. 7h).141 Moreover, after increasing the number of N from the NH3 source, the newly obtained N′N-GDY catalyst had a more enhanced electrocatalytic activity, which was comparable to that of commercial Pt/C for the ORR in alkaline solution (Fig. 7i). Its stability and methanol tolerance were even better than those of Pt/C. Zhang and co-workers proposed a PtCu/GDY electrocatalyst for the oxidation of methanol.146 The results showed a current density of 336 mA mg−1, which indicated excellent electrocatalytic activity. Xue and co-workers combined NiO and GDY to act as electrocatalyst for efficient overall water-splitting.150 The catalytic activity could be further promoted by covering the NiO with an ultrathin GDY film to accelerate charge transfer, increase the number of electrocatalytic active sites, and expand the catalytic area. This discovery is beneficial for increasing the understanding of GDY and to expand its applications.
On the basis of the synergistic effect of the alkyne bond, the large specific surface and pore structure of GDY with its loaded atoms (B, Fe, N, Ni, and so on), the surface activity of GDY-based atomic catalysts is highly dispersed. This solves the key problems of easy migration, easy aggregation and unstable charge transfer of the traditional carrier-based atomic catalysts. The previous experiments indicate the high stability and superior performance of GDY-based atomic catalysts in the HER, OER and ORR. Their quality is even higher than that of commercial Pt/C. The GDY-based atomic catalysts have opened up a new way for the development of new catalysts with high efficiency.

Photocatalysts
With the increase of environmental pollution, great efforts have been made to develop photocatalytic systems that cause less pollution and have a higher energy utilization efficiency.151–154 GDY possesses a strong light absorption ability, high carrier mobility, intrinsically occurring bandgap, highly conjugated structure, and evenly distributed pores. These characteristics make GDY an ideal candidate for a photocatalyst like with GR. Liu studied the photocatalytic mechanism of TiO2-GDY and TiO2–GR by DFT with dispersion corrections (DFT-D) methods.155 Compared with the GR–TiO2(101) complex, the interaction between GDY and TiO2(101) was stronger and could introduce more impurity levels into the band gap to provide an auxiliary platform for electron transition during photoexcitation. Moreover, the valence band (VB) position of the GDY–TiO2 (101) complex was lower, which indicated a stronger oxidation capacity. Therefore, GDY–TiO2 featured a more superior photocatalytic performance than GR–TiO2 due to the unique structure of GDY. Yang further calculated by first-principles DFT calculation, that the methylene blue photocatalytic degradation rate constant of the TiO2(001)–GDY composite was 1.63 ± 0.15 times and 1.27 ± 0.12 times higher than those of pure TiO2(001) and TiO2(001)-GR, respectively.156 Li et al. prepared a sequence of TiO2@β-GDY composites with various GDY concentrations.151 Maybe 150. Among them, the TiO2 catalyst with 0.6 wt% of β-GDY was found to have the highest photocatalytic efficiency which was also higher than that of bare TiO2.
The combination of ZnO, graphene oxide (GO) and some other materials with GDY has also been proved to enhance the catalytic activity.31,142,157–160 Xu et al. reported a self-assembly method for synthesizing an emerging 2D GDY co-catalyst with TiO2 nanofibers (Fig. 7j).142 Under UV irradiation, the TiO2/GDY photocatalytic activity and the adsorption of CO2 molecules were effectively enhanced, and the carrier separation and electron transfer of GDY was improved greatly. GDY as cocatalyst can improve the reduction efficiency and selectivity of TiO2-based photocatalysts for CO2 reduction. Wang et al. reported the photocatalytic performance of P25/GDY (P25 is a type of titania nanoparticles).153 The formation of Ti–O–C facilitated the migration of electrons from the VB to the CB, leading to better photocatalytic degradation rate of P25/GDY for methylene blue than that of P25/GR composites. Compared with TiO2(001)/GR, a more positive Mulliken charge in the TiO2(001)/GDY composite was found using first-principles DFT calculations, resulting in easier electron capture and stronger photocatalytic oxidation.52
Electronic/photoelectronic devices
In past years, a lot of research has developed a way for the opening of the bandgap of GR by directly destroying its lattice or chemical structure (by doping, adsorption of atoms, introduction of periodic defects or constraints, and so on) or by disrupting its symmetry (introduction of an outer field or substrate, and so on) for its electronic utilizes.161 GDY possesses a natural band gap and is an intrinsic semiconductor. Its special molecular and electronic structure gives it both electron donating and electron absorption characteristics. Hence, GDY can be used for electronic devices directly.

Organic field-effect transistor (OFET). 
The GDY semiconductor features excellent electronic properties and outstanding stability. The internal electrons of GDY can move quickly even in a small potential field, thus attracting wide attention as OFETs.45,118,146,150,162,163 Cui et al. prepared a GDY doped P-o-FBDTP-C8DTBTff OFET (GDY/PFC), leading to the significant improvement of the OFET's electron mobility from 0.002 to 0.69 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 8a).164 This research proposed new ideas for the progress of electronic devices. In 2017, Jin et al. designed a flexible resistive random access memory (RRAM) by combining GDY and Al–Al2O3 nanoparticles.165 The memory displayed not only excellent stability but also outstanding retention time that was longer than 104 s, which proved the great potential of GDY for information storage applications.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the device structure and mobility with and without GDY. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Preparation process of electrochemical actuators and electrochemical performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (c) The preparation and performance of boron/graphdiyne-based batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting by GDY. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (e) Graphdiyne-based perovskite solar cell and J–V curves for forward and reverse scanning. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 


Electrochemical actuator. 
Electrochemical actuators play a critical role in artificial intelligence for the conversion of electrical energy to mechanical energy. In the past 20 years, landmark actuators based on various carbon materials (carbon nanotubes, GR, and so on) have been reported. However, most of their energy transduction efficiencies were lower than 1.0%. This is mainly because of the lack of the active units in the sp2 carbon-based nanostructures.170–172 Lu et al. constructed a type of molecular-scale GDY-based electrochemical actuator using an electrode membrane and an electrolyte layer (Fig. 8b).166 The conductive efficiency of the resultant GDY-contained flexible ion actuator could be as high as 6.03%, which was much higher than the commonly used actuators that were made of piezoelectric ceramics/shape memory alloys and other materials. Moreover, the prepared GDY actuators possessed good cycle stability. Recently, Li et al. prepared a practical GDY-based electrochemical sensor to detect Cd2+ and Pb2+ concentrations in water.173 The empty orbitals in Cd2+ and Pb2+ were able to receive the sp hybridized electrons of GDY. In all this research, the numerous alkyne sites with high ion complexation activity in the GDY greatly enhanced its binding interaction with cations, hence the energy density of the system was significantly increased during the electrochemical charging and discharging process resulting in an extremely outstanding actuator system.


Rechargeable batteries. 
Nowadays, rechargeable batteries have become the most commonly used energy storage devices in our daily life. In order to further improve the rechargeable performance, various techniques have been explored to improve their storage capacity and durability, such as the use of different materials like flexible electrodes, the addition of carbon nanofibers, and so on.128,174–184 In particular, GDY has excellent electronic conductivity introduced by the asymmetric distribution of π electrons and large pores formed by the sp and sp2 hybridization, thus these are all conducive to the diffusion of lithium in and out of the plane of GDY. Many reports have proved the outstanding lithium storage capacity of GDY anodes for lithium ion batteries (LIBs). For example, Wang et al. prepared a boron-GDY electrode.167 With the distribution of electron-deficient B atoms on the 2D GDY plane, the electrode provided extra sites to bind Na atoms, and larger tunnels to transport Na ions, resulting in an outstanding performance in conductive rate, reversible capacity, as well as cycle stability (Fig. 8c).
The bonding of the acetylene group and the benzene ring in GDY produces in-plane interstices and lower atomic densities, which are very favorable for the loading of sulfur for lithium–sulfur batteries (LiSBs). He et al. reported a type of hydrogen substituted GDY (HsGDY) for use as flexible electrodes of LiBs and sodium ion batteries (SIBs).185 Due to the fact that HsGDY was capable of storing more Li/Na/S, the flexible electrodes thus showed a more superior performance than that of graphite. Du et al. designed a novel sulfide GDY (SGDY)-based sulfur cathode.186 The high Li+ mobility and short sulfur energy storing units of the conducting carbon skeleton led to the essential avoidance of the polysulfide dissolution, thus resulting in interesting electrochemical performances, such as high-capacity, rapid response, high-capacity retention and coulomb efficiency.


Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. 
As is well known, hydrogens can be generated by water decomposition based on the PEC mechanism. The utilization of hydrogen energy alleviates air pollution and energy shortage greatly.187,188 Hole transfer is considered to be the significant step for PEC water splitting. GDY, with a highly π-conjugated structure, high hole mobility, appropriate VB position and excellent light-harvesting ability, recently appeared as a novel photocathode material for PEC water splitting. Li et al. prepared a quantum dot sensitized photocathode with a hole transport layer of GDY (Fig. 8d).168 Upon Xe lamp irradiation, the current density of the integrated photocathode was observed to be −70 μA cm−2 at a potential of 0 V vs. a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) in a neutral aqueous solution. The PEC activity of the GDY-based photocathode could be maintained for at least 12 h. GDY can also be compounded with multiple oxides to achieve a superior electrocatalytic performance in water splitting reactions. Gao et al. fabricated the GDY/BiVO4 hybrid photoanode with a hole-injection efficiency of 60% (twice as much as that of bare BiVO4) and a relatively constant current density during testing for 4 h because of the fast extraction of the photogenerated holes.189 This is the first study to grow the GDY nanostructure on a BiVO4 substrate. The advantage of the large diffusion distance of the GDY carriers is that is can be exploited to increase the transmission efficiency of the photogenerated holes, thus greatly improving the photoconversion efficiency of the BiVO4 photoanode material. This study provides a feasible solution for the efficient electrolysis of water by solar energy.


Solar cells. 
Solar cells are a type of device that convert the sunlight into electrical energy using the photovoltaic effect. High-efficiency solar cells require a photodiode with a higher resolution, faster speed, longer service-life, and better compatibility.190–193 GR is an excellent conductor, and its good flexibility and ductility make it an ideal candidate for use in solar cells. Suitable actions are usually taken to modify GR so as to better collect the electricity generated inside solar cells.
The outstanding conductivity of GDY is able to speed up the electron transmission inside the photoanode and improve the overall photoelectric conversion efficiency of solar cells. Zhang et al. reported a class of perovskite-type solar cells which were doped with γ-GDY quantum dots (GD QDs), as shown in Fig. 8e.169 From the forward and reverse scans of the J–V curves, it was concluded that the performance of the perovskite solar cell was significantly improved by the introduction of GD QDs. In addition, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) was also increased from 17.01% to 19.57%. In addition to the perovskite-based solar cells, the insertion of GDY materials improves the performance of dye-sensitized and QD-based solar cells.28,168,194–196 For example, Ren et al. synthesized Pt@GDY nanocomposites by ion beam sputtering and found that their incorporation into dye-sensitized solar cells can effectively improve the catalytic activity and enhance the photoelectric conversion efficiency.197 Compared with the Pt@GR electrode, the prepared Pt@GDY electrode gave a better catalytic ability to the I-/I3-redox couples in the electrolyte of dye-sensitized solar cells. The efficiency of the cells was enhanced significantly. In addition, the open circuit photovoltage (VOC) of the solar cells was also improved. The previous studies have confirmed the great application prospects of the GDY-based solar cells in the field of solar energy. It is crucial to seek a reliable approach that can produce GDY with a high quality and at a large-scale for the development and extended application of GDY-based solar cells.

Molecular adsorption
It is urgent to improve the clean-up rate of human pollution as industrialization increases. Both GR and GDY own porous structures, large specific surface area and high chemical activity, thus are broadly applied to the field of seawater desalination and gas separation because of its high permeability and selectivity.198 Studies have shown that the GDY film has a higher permeability, and selectivity than the commercial film for molecular adsorption and it is expected to be applied in industry in the future.199

Water purification. 
GDY shows a great potential for use in water purification and desalination applications due to its porous structure and super-hydrophobic properties.200–205 Gao et al. exploited a low-cost commercial copper foam catalyst to support the vertical honeycomb of GDY nanostructures formed by the Glaser–Hay coupling reaction.206 After coating of poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) on the formed GDY, the foam became super-hydrophobic and could separate water and oil efficiently. In order to further improve the water remediation efficiency, Li et al. synthesized a GDY sponge with a melamine sponge skeleton.207 It was found that surprisingly, the synthesized GDY displayed a super adsorption capacity, and was able to selectively adsorb oil or organic solvents whose weight was 160 times more than its own weight in wastewater. It is worth mentioning that the adsorption capacity of the GDY sponge was still strong in some extreme environments, such as strong acid and alkaline solutions.


Gas separation. 
GDY's porous structure and large specific surface area endow it with great advantages in the field of gas adsorption.208–212 By changing acetyl bonds or replacing them with other heteroatoms, the pore sizes of GDY are changed to allow the transit of molecular gases with different sizes, and to finally separate the gas. Zhao et al. tried to control the pore size of GDY by replacing diacetyl bonds with three different heteroatoms (hydrogen, fluorine and oxygen), and CO2/N2/CH4 was successfully separated in the DFT and MD simulations.48 However, there are few reports on the separation of oxygen from toxic gases. Meng et al. studied the performance of pure GDY film in separating oxygen from harmful gases using first-principles calculations.213 From the first-principles calculation, the barriers for different gases to permeate from the GDY film were varied, and consequently, O2 was observed to have the lowest permeation barrier (0.21 eV) and could be easily withdrawn from toxic gas mixtures (CH2O, Cl2, HCN, H2S, SO2, and so on), implying the great potential of well-defined porous GDY in medical treatment and industrial applications.

Biomedical applications

Biosensors. 
Currently, with the development of science and technology, biosensors are playing a more and more important role in human health issues, especially in preventing epidemics.214–226 GDY has large surface area, strong adsorption capacity and fast electron transfer, thus presenting tremendous potential in the preparation of high-performance biosensors with short response times and high sensitivity for biomedical detection and clinical theranostics.
The GDY sensor displayed a high sensitivity and selectivity to the target DNA molecules. Parvin et al. developed a GDY-based multiplexed real-time DNA biosensor for the first time, which was based on excellent fluorescence quenching abilities and the affinity difference of GDY between single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) and dsDNA227. The sensor provided two main routes for DNA detection (Fig. 9a). Route 1: GDY nanosheets mixed with ssDNA which was stained with different fluorescent labels to quench the dye, and afterwards, with the occurrence of the target DNA, the GDY releases the florescence-labeled DNA, leading to the production of fluorescence and complete detection. Route 2: GDY nanosheets were mixed with both the target DNA and labeled DNA for detection. The GDY-based biosensor could detect targets simply and rapidly with a detect limit as low as 25 × 10−12 M, which was superior to GO and MoS2 nanomaterial-based sensors. The GDY-based fluorescent sensing platform could also be used to detect thrombin very sensitively and selectively.228 This research paved the way to develop 2D nanomaterial-based biosensing systems for widespread biological analysis.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the DNA testing protocol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Cancer therapy by photothermal effect of graphdiyne. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Photothermal/chemotherapy for cancer with graphdiyne as drug carriers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
The unique carbon hybridization and acetylenic bonds in GDY oxide (GDO) are stronger at retrieving electrons than the ethylenic bonds in GO, leading to a faster binding capacity and higher sensitivity for water molecules. It was proved for the first time by Yan et al. that GDO could be used as a humidity sensor as it exhibited an ultrafast response speed of ∼7 ms to humidity, which was three times faster when compared with that of GO based on the same thickness and O/C ratio.229 The GDO sensor could also detect the changes of breathing frequency of organisms in real time, which could be used in the development of sensors to monitor respiration in a medical setting.


Cancer therapy. 
Due to large specific surface area and wide absorption in the visible light range, both GR and GDY show potential for their use in the biomedical field mainly for drug loading improvement, photothermal therapy (PTT) and tumor photoacoustic imaging (PAI).230–238 In 2017, Li et al. carried out PAI and photothermal therapy PTT with PEGylated GDY (GDY-PEG) for the first time on living mice for in vivo cancer treatment (Fig. 9b).56 Rats treated with GDY-PEG + NIR were found to have their tumors completely eliminated, and there was no recurrence within 14 d, and rats had their lives prolonged by nearly 30 days. In contrast, tumor growth was not inhibited after treatment with GDY-PEG-NIR, saline alone, or NIR alone. The study proved not only excellent biocompatibility of GDY materials but also showed great potential in cancer therapy as photothermal agents.
Like GR, GDY can also be used as a drug carrier due to its large surface areas and chemical activity. Moreover, the multiple conjugated electronic structure induced by benzene rings and acetylene units in GDY enhanced cancer inhibition rates effectively. For example, Jin et al. developed a doxorubicin (DOX)-carried GDY nanoplatform for synergetic photothermal/chemotherapy (Fig. 9c).57 Using π–π stacking and electrostatic interactions, DOX was loaded on to the surface of the GDY sheets. The photothermal conversion efficiency of GDY could be as high as 42% and the DOX loading content could be as high as 38%. With NIR irradiation, tumor cells were observed to be dramatically killed, when compared to treatment with solo PTT and solo chemotherapy, both in vitro and in vivo and no obvious side effects were observed.
In short, the applications of GDY are as extensive as those of GR. Currently, the high electron transfer rate and low expansion coefficient of GDY have not been sufficiently studied, which may be an effective solution to the electrode expansion problem of batteries in the future. In addition, the regulation of the morphology, dimensions and pore structure of GDY may be a future research direction to improve the performance of GDY-based energy storage materials. So far, there is still little research on the application of GDY materials in the biomedical field. It should be noted that compared with other sp2 hybrid carbon materials, the conjugated structure of GDY can be retained after covalent functionalization. This realization will significantly expand the biological applications of GDY by covalently linking it with targeting, tracking and biocompatibility molecules. The regular nanopores of GDY can also be adjusted in size and shape to create different types of structures for DNA sequencing in the future.

Conclusions and perspectives
GR and GDY are two allotropes of 2D carbon materials. They both possess large specific surface areas, good stability, and outstanding optical/electronic properties with wide applications in various fields involved in industry and health. In particular, GDY shows some unique structural characteristics, such as porosity, ability to multiple bond, and three-dimensional reticulation, leading to its appreciable performance in many fields. For example, in the biomedicine field, GDY presents extraordinary ability and potential in biodetection and cancer treatment. In the new energy sources field, GDY shows strong electrical conductivity and high energy conversion efficiency as a solar cell material. GDY materials have also been part of remarkable achievements in water purification and gas separation. Further research on GDY should be extended to more aspects such as water pollution treatment and new energy sources development, to promote its greater role in environmental governance. Moreover, in the field of non-metallic catalysts, most of the prepared GDY-based devices used at present perform better than the previous reported ones. In short, on the basis of their unique hybrid structures, the study of GDY materials provides new ideas for the research and development of nanomaterials in many areas.
Even though the development of GDY has been widely considered a great breakthrough, inspection of the structure of carbon materials, shows that there are still some major difficulties that remain to be solved. On the one hand, the generation of GDY with high quality and high impurities are still an ongoing challenge. Because of the weak stability of HEB monomers in high concentration solutions or in the air, a high proportion of amorphous GDY is usually generated. The free rotation around the HEB's alkyne-aryl single bonds during transfer also contributes to bad control of the structure during synthesis. On the other hand, HEB failed for the scale-up preparation of GDY using current methods because of the previous reasons, resulting in a premature bottleneck in its practical application.
In summary, both GR and GDY are current research hotspots. GDY is a newly found material whose research is still in its infancy. There are several target issues of GDY's synthesis and practical use that need to be improved. Firstly, it is crucial to develop a preparation process that is much simpler and more efficient for practical applications. The improvement of HEB stability during GDY growth holds the key to obtaining GDY with high-integrity, high-purity, and a capability for scaled-up production. Future research should focus on the control on HEB coupling reaction onto the 2D plane. Secondly, the development of new transfer technologies for GDY synthesis is urgent. The current transfer progress mainly relies on hydrofluoric acid, which is not safe and may also have a negative impact on the structure of GDY as the intensity of the Raman peak is decreased according to research. The in situ growth of GDY on a Cu grid is worth trying even though some of inherent disadvantages such as the damage of the grid by post-treatment cleaning. Finally, new GDY derivatives should be developed to discover new GDY family members who may possess unique and more superior properties. This would be a benefit to the research community to expand the applications of the GDY family, and to make them more practical to serve human life and health.
Author contributions
X Yan, Z. Xie and H. Zhang proposed the topic and outline of the manuscript. Y. Zhao and L. Chai cowrote the manuscript. W. Huang, T. Fan, O. Al-Hartomy, A. Al-Ghamdi, S. Wageh, A. Al-Sehemi collected the information needed to write the paper. X. Yan, Z. Xie and H. Zhang revised and polished this manuscript. All the authors discussed and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National key R & D plan ‘nano frontier’ key special project grant no. 2021YFA1200502, Cultivation projects of national major R & D project (grant no. 92164109), National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 61874158, 62004056 and 62104058), Special project of strategic leading science and technology of Chinese Academy of Sciences (grant no. XDB44000000-7), Hebei Basic Research Special Key Project grant no. F2021201045, the Support Program for the Top Young Talents of Hebei Province (Grant no. 70280011807), the Supporting Plan for 100 Excellent Innovative Talents in Colleges and Universities of Hebei Province (grant no. SLRC2019018), outstanding young scientific research and innovation team of Hebei Universitygrant no. 605020521001, Special support funds for national high level talents grant no. 041500120001, High-level Talent Research Startup Project of Hebei University grant no. 521000981426, Funded by Science and Technology Project of Hebei Education Department (grant no. QN2020178, QN2021026), Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (Grant no. KCXFZ20201221173413038), Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (Grant No. KQTD2015032416270385, JCYJ20180307164612205, GJHZ20180928160209731, and JCYJ20180508152903208), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (Grant No. 2019B1515120043), Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (Grant No. 2020A151501612) and Longhua District Science and Innovation Commission Project Grants of Shenzhen (Grant No. JCYJ201904) are grateful acknowledged. Authors also acknowledge support and funding of King Khalid University (Grant No. #KKU/RCAMS/007/21).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Baughman, H. Eckhardt and M. Kertesz, Structure-property predictions for new planar forms of carbon: layered phases containing sp2 and sp atoms, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 6687–6699 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. De Heer, Carbon nanotubes-the route toward applications., Science, 2002, 297, 787–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Single-shell carbon nanotubes of 1 nm diameter, Nature, 1993, 363, 603–605 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube arrays with high electrocatalytic activity for oxygen reduction, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Carbon nanomaterials for electronics, optoelectronics, photovoltaics, and sensing, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2824–2860 RSC .
R. Singh, D. Kumar and C. C. Tripathi, Graphene: Potential material for nanoelectronics applications, Indian J. Pure Appl. Phys., 2015, 53, 501–513 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, J. Deslippe, C. H. Park, L. M. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Excitonic Effects on the Optical Response of Graphene and Bilayer Graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 186802 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, Y. Lin, A. A. Bol, K. A. Jenkins, F. Xia, D. B. Farmer, Y. Zhu and P. Avouris, High-frequency, scaled graphene transistors on diamond-like carbon, Nature, 2011, 472, 74–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, C. Chen and Y. Zhao, Progress and Prospects of Graphdiyne-Based Materials in Biomedical Applications, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Graphene-Based Composite Materials, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Alvial-Palavicino and K. Konrad, The Rise of Graphene Expectations: Anticipatory Practices in Emergent Nanotechnologies, Futures, 2019, 109, 192–202 CrossRef .
M. Inagaki and F. Kang, Graphene Derivatives: Graphane, Fluorographene, Graphene Oxide, Graphyne and Graphdiyne, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13193–13206 RSC .
A. Ivanovskii, Graphynes and Graphdyines, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2013, 41, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. R. Nulakani and V. Subramanian, A Theoretical Study on the Design, Structure, and Electronic Properties of Novel Forms of Graphynes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15153–15161 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, Z. Xie, Y. Peng, K. Wang and X. Yan., Current status and prospects of memristors based on novel 2D materials, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7(6), 1495–1518 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Q. Pei and C. Wang, Mechanical Properties of Graphynes under Tension: A Molecular Dynamics Study, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 081909 CrossRef .
D. Malko, C. Neiss, F. Vines and A. Görling, Competition for Graphene: Graphynes with Direction-Dependent Dirac Cones, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 086804 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. Ferrari, Graphene Photonics and Optoelectronics, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Zhou, J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Q. Liu and J. Chen, Highly Improved Performance in Zr0.5Hf0.5O2 Films Inserted with Graphene Oxide Quantum Dots Layer for Resistive Switching Non-Volatile Memory, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11046–11052 RSC .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Measurement of the Elastic Properties and Intrinsic Strength of Monolayer Graphene, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, L. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Li, J. Wang, Q. Liu, C. Lu, J. Chen, H. Wu and P. Zhou, Graphene Oxide Quantum Dots Based Memristors with Progressive Conduction Tuning for Artificial Synaptic Learning, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803728 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim, Graphene: Status and Prospects, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, B. Ding, X. Tian, R. Zhao, Y. Zhang, C. Lu, D. Ren and X. Yan, Improving Zr0.5Hf0.5O2-Based Charge-Trapped Performance by Graphene Oxide Quantum Dots, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2019, 12, 1850093 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Experimental Observation of the Quantum Hall Effect and Berry's Phase in Graphene, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Y. Dong, J. Zhao, D. Ma, W. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Jiang, Y. Xiang and J. Li, Kerr Nonlinearity in 2d Graphdiyne for Passive Photonic Diodes, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807981 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Architecture of graphdiyne nanoscale films, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3256–3258 RSC .
H. Ren, H. Shao, L. Zhang, D. Guo, Q. Jin, R. Yu, L. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Wang and H. Zhao, A New Graphdiyne Nanosheet/Pt Nanoparticle-Based Counter Electrode Material with Enhanced Catalytic Activity for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500296 CrossRef .
H. Du, H. Yang, C. Huang, J. He, H. Liu and Y. Li, Graphdiyne Applied for Lithium-Ion Capacitors Displaying High Power and Energy Densities, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 615–622 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, M. Yuan, H. Li, H. Yang, Q. Zhou, H. Liu, X. Lan, M. Liu, J. Wang and E. H. Sargent, Graphdiyne: An Efficient Hole Transporter for Stable High-Performance Colloidal Quantum Dot Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5284–5289 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Zhu, P. Chen, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Li and M. Liu, Pristine Graphdiyne-Hybridized Photocatalysts Using Graphene Oxide as a Dual-Functional Coupling Reagent, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1217–1225 RSC .
Z. Jin, Q. Zhou, Y. Chen, P. Mao, H. Li, H. Liu, J. Wang and Y. Li, Graphdiyne: Zno Nanocomposites for High-Performance Uv Photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3697–3702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, J. Li, Z. Xue, Y. Li, H. Liu, D. Li, W. Yang and Y. Li, Extraordinarily Durable Graphdiyne-Supported Electrocatalyst with High Activity for Hydrogen Production at All Values of Ph, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31083–31091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, Y. Li, N. Wang, Y. Xue, Z. Zuo, H. Liu and Y. Li, Progress in Research into 2d Graphdiyne-Based Materials, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7744–7803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Cranford and M. J. Buehler, Selective Hydrogen Purification through Graphdiyne under Ambient Temperature and Pressure, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4587–4593 RSC .
Y. Pei, Mechanical Properties of Graphdiyne Sheet, Phys. B, 2012, 407, 4436–4439 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Haley, S. C. Brand and J. J. Pak, Carbon Networks Based on Dehydrobenzoannulenes: Synthesis of Graphdiyne Substructures, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 836–838 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jia, Z. Zuo, Y. Yi, H. Liu, D. Li and Y. Li, Low Temperature, Atmospheric Pressure for Synthesis of a New Carbon Ene-Yne and Application in Li Storage, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 343–349 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, Z. Wei and J. Li, Graphyne and Its Family: Recent Theoretical Advances, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 2692–2706 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Luo, Q. Zheng, W. Mei, J. Lu and S. Nagase, Structural, Electronic, and Optical Properties of Bulk Graphdiyne, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13072–13079 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, M. Cheng, S. Wu and Z. Zhu, First-Principle Study of Structure Stability and Electronic Structures of Graphyne Derivatives, Acta Phys. Sin., 2017, 66, 107102 CrossRef .
H. Bai, Y. Zhu, W. Qiao and Y. Huang, Structures, Stabilities and Electronic Properties of Graphdiyne Nanoribbons, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 768–775 RSC .
S. Chandra Shekar and R. Swathi, Stability of Nucleobases and Base Pairs Adsorbed on Graphyne and Graphdiyne, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4516–4528 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Ahangari, Effect of Defect and Temperature on the Mechanical and Electronic Properties of Graphdiyne: A Theoretical Study, Phys. E, 2015, 66, 140–147 CrossRef .
A. León and M. Pacheco, Electronic Properties of B-Graphyne Bilayers, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 620, 67–72 CrossRef .
A. R. Puigdollers, G. Alonso and P. Gamallo, First-Principles Study of Structural, Elastic and Electronic Properties of A-, B-and Γ-Graphyne, Carbon, 2016, 96, 879–887 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gong, Y. Tang, H. Yang and P. Yang, Theoretical Investigations of Sp–Sp2 Hybridized Capped Graphyne Nanotubes, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 134, 217–221 CrossRef CAS .
A. Enyashin, Y. N. Makurin and A. Ivanovskii, Quantum Chemical Study of the Electronic Structure of New Nanotubular Systems: A-Graphyne-Like Carbon, Boron–Nitrogen and Boron–Carbon–Nitrogen Nanotubes, Carbon, 2004, 42, 2081–2089 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bu, X. Wang, Y. Xi, X. Zhao and M. Zhao, Role of Acetylenic Bonds in the Mechanical, Electronic and Optical Properties of Yne-Diamonds, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2013, 37, 55–63 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, Y. Pan, K. Luo, J. He, D. Yu and B. Xu, Three Dimensional Graphdiyne Polymers with Tunable Band Gaps, Carbon, 2015, 91, 518–526 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, P. Sang, S. Guo, X. Liu, J. Li, H. Zhu and W. Guo, Promising Monolayer Membranes for Co2/N2/Ch4 Separation: Graphdiynes Modified Respectively with Hydrogen, Fluorine, and Oxygen Atoms, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 405, 455–464 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, Y. Liu, H. Wen, Z. Tang, H. Zhao, Y. Li and D. Wang, Photocatalytic Properties of Graphdiyne and Graphene Modified Tio2: From Theory to Experiment, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1504–1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, Rational Design of Ag38 Cluster Supported by Graphdiyne for Catalytic Co Oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3463–3468 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qi, P. Yu, Y. Wang, G. Han, H. Liu, Y. Yi, Y. Li and L. Mao, Graphdiyne Oxides as Excellent Substrate for Electroless Deposition of Pd Clusters with High Catalytic Activity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5260–5263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, A. Du, M. Hankel, Z. Zhu, V. Rudolph and S. C. Smith, Graphdiyne: A Versatile Nanomaterial for Electronics and Hydrogen Purification, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11843–11845 RSC .
S. Li, Y. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Liu, F. Lv, Y. Li and S. Wang, Graphdiyne Materials as Nanotransducer for in Vivo Photoacoustic Imaging and Photothermal Therapy of Tumor, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6087–6094 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, M. Guo, J. Liu, J. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Li, L. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Zhao, Graphdiyne Nanosheet-Based Drug Delivery Platform for Photothermal/Chemotherapy Combination Treatment of Cancer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8436–8442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, C. Wang, N. Wang, S. Zhu, L. Mei, X. Zhang, Y. Yong, L. Li, C. Chen and C. Huang, Graphdiyne Nanoradioprotector with Efficient Free Radical Scavenging Ability for Mitigating Radiation-Induced Gastrointestinal Tract Damage, Biomaterials, 2020, 119940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Srimathi, V. Nagarajan and R. Chandiramouli, Investigation on Graphdiyne Nanosheet in Adsorption of Sorafenib and Regorafenib Drugs: A Dft Approach, J. Mol. Liq., 2019, 277, 776–785 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, H. Liu, D. Wang and J. Zhang, Graphdiyne: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 908–936 RSC .
J. Liu, C. Chen and Y. Zhao, Progress and Prospects of Graphdiyne-Based Materials in Biomedical Applications, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804386 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, C. Lai, M. Zhang, G. Zeng, S. Liu, D. Huang, L. Qin, X. Liu, H. Yi, F. Xu, N. An and L. Chen, Graphdiyne: A Rising Star of Electrocatalyst Support for Energy Conversion, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, H. Tang, N. Yang and D. Wang, Graphdiyne: Recent Achievements in Photo- and Electrochemical Conversion, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800959 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Peng, A. Dearden, J. Crean, L. Han, S. Liu, A. Wen and S. De, New materials graphyne, graphdiyne, graphone, and graphane: review of properties, synthesis, and application in nanotechnology, Sci. Appl., 2013, 2014, 1–29 Search PubMed .
A. H. Mashhadzadeh, A. M. Vahedi, M. Ardjmand and M. G. Ahangari, Investigation of heavy metal atoms adsorption onto graphene and graphdiyne surface: a density functional theory study, Superlattices Microstruct., 2016, 100, 1094–1102 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, Y. Gao, X. Deng, H. Liu, J. Liu, R. Liu, J. Shao, Y. Li and L. Jia, Comparisons between graphene oxide and graphdiyne oxide in physicochemistry biology and cytotoxicity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32946–32954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Zhang and J. Qi, Graphdiyne with enhanced ability for electron transfer, Acta Phys. Chim. Sin., 2018, 34, 1048–1060 CAS .
S. C. Shekar and R. S. Swathi, Molecular switching on graphyne and graphdiyne: realizing functional carbon networks in synergy with graphene, Carbon, 2018, 126(489–499), 67 Search PubMed .
Q. Yue, S. Chang, J. Kang, S. Qin and J. Li, Mechanical and Electronic Properties of Graphyne and Its Family under Elastic Strain: Theoretical Predictions, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14804–14811 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Ghuge, A. R. Shirode and V. J. Kadam, Graphene: A Comprehensive Review, Curr. Drug Targets, 2017, 18, 724–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amiri, M. Naraghi and G. Ahmadi, A review on liquid-phase exfoliation for scalable production of pure graphene, wrinkled, crumpled and functionalized graphene and challenges, FlatChem, 2018, 8, 40–71 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Lu, Y. Han, S. Tang, Y. Ding, R. Liu, H. Bao, Y. Li, J. Luo and T. Lu, Direct imaging and determination of the crystal structure of six-layered graphdiyne, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1714–1721 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Xi, D. Wang and Z. Shuai, Carrier Mobility in Graphyne Should Be Even Larger Than That in Graphene: A Theoretical Prediction, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1443–1448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and Z. Chen, Graphene-Related Nanomaterials: Tuning Properties by Functionalization, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4541–4583 RSC .
X. Gao, H. Liu, D. Wang and J. Zhang, Graphdiyne: synthesis, properties, and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 908–936 RSC .
S. W. Cranford, D. B. Brommer and M. J. Buehler, Extended graphynes: simple scaling laws for stiffness, strength and fracture, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7797–7809 RSC .
A. N. Enyashin and A. L. Ivanovskii, Graphene allotropes, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2011, 248, 1879–1883 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Papageorgiou, I. A. Kinloch and R. J. Young, Mechanical properties of graphene and graphene-based nanocomposites, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 90, 75–127 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Measurement of the Elastic Properties and Intrinsic Strength of Monolayer Graphene, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Blees, A. W. Barnard, P. A. Rose, S. P. Roberts, K. L. McGill, P. Y. Huang, A. R. Ruyack, J. W. Kevek, B. Kobrin, D. A. Muller and P. L. McEuen, Graphene kirigami, Nature, 2015, 524, 204–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Peng, A. Dearden, J. Crean, L. Han, S. Liu, A. Wen and S. De, New materials graphyne, graphdiyne, graphone, and graphane: review of properties, synthesis, and application in nanotechnology, Sci. Appl., 2013, 2014, 1–29 Search PubMed .
A. L. Ivanovskii, Graphynes and graphdyines, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2013, 41, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fan, Z. Zheng and Y. Li, Low-cost flexible thin film thermoelectric generator on zinc based thermoelectric materials, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106(7), 073901 CrossRef .
H. Cheng, X. He and Z. Fan, Flexible Quasi-Solid State Ionogels with Remarkable Seebeck Coefficient and High Thermoelectric Properties, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(32), 1901085 CrossRef .
E. P. Degabriele, J. N. Grima-Cornish, D. Attard, R. Caruana-Gauci, R. Gatt, K. E. Evans and J. N. Grima, On the Mechanical Properties of Graphyne, Graphdiyne, and Other Poly (Phenylacetylene) Networks, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2017, 254, 1700380 CrossRef .
S. W. Cranford and M. J. Buehler, Mechanical properties of graphyne, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4111–4121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, J. Heo, S. Park, H. J. Song, D. H. Seo, K. E. Byun, P. Kim, I. Yoo, H. J. Chung and K. Kim, Graphene Barristor, a Triode Device with a Gate-Controlled Schottky Barrier, Science, 2012, 336, 1140–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu and Y. Zhang, Band gap engineering of graphene with inter-layer embedded BN: From first principles calculations, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2015, 54, 103–108 CrossRef CAS .
G. Luo, X. Qian, H. Liu, R. Qin, J. Zhou, L. Li, Z. Gao, E. Wang, W. Mei, J. Lu, Y. Li and S. Nagase, Quasiparticle Energies and Excitonic Effects of the Two-Dimensional Carbon Allotrope Graphdiyne: Theory and Experiment, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 075439 CrossRef .
Q. Zheng, G. Luo, Q. Liu, R. Quhe, J. Zheng, K. Tang, Z. Gao, S. Nagase and J. Lu, Structural and Electronic Properties of Bilayer and Trilayer Graphdiyne, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3990–3996 RSC .
A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Raman Spectrum of Graphene and Graphene Layers, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Li, R. Zhao, L. Tong, Z. Liu, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Raman Spectra and Corresponding Strain Effects in Graphyne and Graphdiyne, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10605–10613 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, G. Liu, J. Yuan, Z. Wang, T. Tang, S. Fu, H. Zhang, Z. Man, F. Xing and X. Xu, 2D graphdiyne: an excellent ultraviolet nonlinear absorption material, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6243–6249 RSC .
R. Raveendran-Nair, P. A. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. Peres and A. K. Geim, Fine structure constant defines visual transparency of graphene, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li and S. Li, Investigations of Electronic and Nonlinear Optical Properties of Single Alkali Metal Adsorbed Graphene, Graphyne and Graphdiyne Systems by First-Principles Calculations, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1630–1640 RSC .
X. Li, Design of Novel Graphdiyne-Based Materials with Large Second-Order Nonlinear Optical Properties, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7576–7583 RSC .
J. Zhou, X. Gao, R. Liu, Z. Xie, J. Yang, S. Zhang, G. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Li, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Synthesis of Graphdiyne Nanowalls Using Acetylenic Coupling Reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7596–7599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Y. Dong, J. Zhao, D. Ma, W. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Jiang, Y. Xian, J. Li, Y. Feng, J. Xu and H. Zhang, Kerr Nonlinearity in 2D Graphdiyne for Passive Photonic Diodes, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1807981 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Guo, R. Shi, R. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Zhang, C. Wang, H. Chen, C. Ma, Z. Wang, Y. Ge, Y. Song, Z. Luo, D. Fan, X. Jiang, J. Xu and H. Zhang, Graphdiyne-Polymer Nanocomposite as a Broadband and Robust Saturable Absorber for Ultrafast Photonics, Laser Photonics Rev., 2020, 14, 1900367 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matsuoka, R. Sakamoto, K. Hoshiko, S. Sasaki, H. Masunaga, K. Nagashio and H. Nishihara, Crystalline Graphdiyne Nanosheets Produced at a Gas/Liquid or Liquid/Liquid Interface, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3145–3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, H. S. S. R. Matte, K. S. Subrahmanyam and U. Maitra, Unusual magnetic properties of graphene and related materials, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 45–52 RSC .
R. Wu, Y. Ding and Z. Luo, Edge-Epitaxial Growth of Graphene on Cu with a Hydrogen-Free Approach, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(7), 2555–2562 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Wang, H. Sun, N. Wang, Q. Lv, W. Cui, Y. Long and C. Huang, Enhanced paramagnetism of mesoscopic graphdiyne by doping with nitrogen, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 11535 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liu, X. Gao, J. Zhou, H. Xu, Z. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Xie, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of Linked Carbon Monolayers with Acetylenic Scaffoldings on Silver Foil, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604665 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Ghosh, I. Calizo and D. Teweldebrhan, Extremely high thermal conductivity of graphene: Prospects for thermal management applications in nanoelectronic circuits, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92(15), 151911 CrossRef .
S. M. Hatam-Lee, A. Rajabpour and S. Volz, Thermal conductivity of graphene polymorphs and compounds: From C3N to graphdiyne lattices, Carbon, 2020, 161, 816–826 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, S. Xiong and B. Ouyang, Thermal transport engineering in graphdiyne and graphdiyne nanoribbons, ACS Omega, 2019, 4(2), 4147–4152 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhang, Q. X. Pei and C. M. Wang, A molecular dynamics investigation on thermal conductivity of graphynes, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 65, 406–410 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, J. Zhang and X. Huang, Thermal conductivity of a two-dimensional phosphorene sheet: a comparative study with graphene, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(44), 18716–18724 RSC .
B. Mortazavi, M. Shahrokhi and X. Zhuang, Boron–graphdiyne: a superstretchable semiconductor with low thermal conductivity and ultrahigh capacity for Li, Na and Ca ion storage, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(23), 11022–11036 RSC .
L. D. Zhao, J. He and D. Berardan, BiCuSeO oxyselenides: new promising thermoelectric materials, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(9), 2900–2924 RSC .
M. Ohtaki, Recent aspects of oxide thermoelectric materials for power generation from mid-to-high temperature heat source, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2011, 119(1395), 770–775 CrossRef CAS .
J. Szczech, J. Higgins and S. Jin, Enhancement of the thermoelectric properties in nanoscale and nanostructured materials, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(12), 4037–4055 RSC .
H. Y. Nan, Z. H. Ni and J. Wang, The thermal stability of graphene in air investigated by Raman spectroscopy, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2013, 44(7), 1018–1021 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mortazavi, M. Makaremi and M. Shahrokhi, N-graphdiyne two-dimensional nanomaterials: Semiconductors with low thermal conductivity and high stretchability, Carbon, 2018, 137, 57–67 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, P. H. Jiang and H. J. Liu, Graphdiyne: a two-dimensional thermoelectric material with high figure of merit, Carbon, 2015, 90, 255–259 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Hernandez and A. F. Fonseca, Anisotropic elastic modulus, high Poisson's ratio and negative thermal expansion of graphynes and graphdiynes, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2017, 77, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .
M. Long, L. Tang, D. Wang, Y. Li and Z. Shuai, Electronic Structure and Carrier Mobility in Graphdiyne Sheet and Nanoribbons: Theoretical Predictions, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2593–2600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. A. Bhuyan, M. N. Uddin, M. M. Islam, F. A. Bipasha and S. S. Hossain, Synthesis of graphene, Int. Nano Lett., 2016, 6, 65–83 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Large-scale pattern growth of graphene films for stretchable transparent electrodes, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Large-area synthesis of high-quality and uniform graphene films on copper foils, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. B. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Synthesis of graphene-based nanosheets via chemical reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Xu, Z. Xie, X. Gao, J. Zhou, Y. Xiong, C. Chen, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Diatomite-Templated Synthesis of Freestanding 3D Graphdiyne for Energy Storage and Catalysis Application, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800548 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, Z. Xie, R. Liu, X. Gao, J. Li, Y. Xiong, L. Tong, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Synthesis of Ultrathin Graphdiyne Film Using a Surface Template, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2632–2637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shang, Z. Zuo, L. Li, F. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Ultrathin Graphdiyne Nanosheets Grown in Situ on Copper Nanowires and Their Performance as Lithium-Ion Battery Anodes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 774–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, H. Ren, J. Zhou, R. Du, C. Yin, R. Liu, H. Peng, L. Tong, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Synthesis of Hierarchical Graphdiyne-Based Architecture for Efficient Solar Steam Generation, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5777–5781 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zuo, H. Shang, Y. Chen, J. Li, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, A Facile Approach for Graphdiyne Preparation under Atmosphere for an Advanced Battery Anode, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8074–8077 RSC .
H. Shang, Z. Zuo, H. Zheng, K. Li, Z. Tu, Y. Yi, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, N-Doped Graphdiyne for High-Performance Electrochemical Electrodes, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 144–154 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, H. Liu, C. Huang, S. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Wang and Y. Li, Self-Catalyzed Growth of Large-Area Nanofilms of Two-Dimensional Carbon, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Q. Zhang, N. Kepcija, M. Kleinschrodt, K. Diller, S. Fischer, A. C. Papageorgiou, F. Allegretti, J. Bjork, S. Klyatskaya, F. Klappenberger, M. Ruben and J. V. Barth, Homo-Coupling of Terminal Alkynes on a Noble Metal Surface, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1286 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Cirera, Y. Q. Zhang, J. Björk, S. Klyatskaya, Z. Chen, M. Ruben, J. V. Barth and F. Klappenberger, Synthesis of Extended Graphdiyne Wires by Vicinal Surface Templating, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1891–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shu, M. Liu, Z. Zha, J. Pan, S. Zhang, Y. Xie, J. Chen, D. Yuan, X. Qiu and P. Liu, On-Surface Synthesis of Poly (P-Phenylene Ethynylene) Molecular Wires Via in Situ Formation of Carbon-Carbon Triple Bond, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, L. Cai, H. Ma, C. Yuan and W. Xu, Dehalogenative Homocoupling of Terminal Alkynyl Bromides on Au(111): Incorporation of Acetylenic Scaffolding into Surface Nanostructures, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7023–7030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, X. Shen, N. Wang, J. He, X. Li, X. Wang, Z. Hou, K. Wang, J. Gao, T. Jiu and C. Huang, Graphdiyne Containing Atomically Precise N Atoms for Efficient Anchoring of Lithium Ion, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2608–2617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zuo, D. Wang, J. Zhang, F. Lu and Y. Li, Synthesis and Applications of Graphdiyne-Based Metal-Free Catalysts, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1803762 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xu, K. Meng, B. Zhu, H. Liu, J. Xu and J. Yu, Graphdiyne: A New Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction Cocatalyst, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904256 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, M. Sun and B. Huang, Graphdiyne based catalysts for energy applications, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 7369–7383 RSC .
Y. Xue, B. Huang, Y. Yi, Y. Guo, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, Z. Jia, H. Liu and Y. Li, Anchoring zero valence single atoms of nickel and iron on graphdiyne for hydrogen evolution, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1460 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xue, Y. Guo, Y. Yi, Y. Li, H. Liu, D. Li, W. Yang and Y. Li, Self-Catalyzed Growth of Cu@ Graphdiyne Core–Shell Nanowires Array for high Efficient Hydrogen Evolution Cathode, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 858–866 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shi, C. Yu, Z. Fan, J. Li and M. Yuan, Graphdiyne-Supported NiFe Layered Double Hydroxide Nanosheets as Functional Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Evolution, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2662–2669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lv, W. Si, Z. Yang, N. Wang, Z. Tu, Y. Yi and Y. Long, Nitrogen-Doped Porous Graphdiyne: A Highly Efficient Metal-Free Electrocatalyst for Oxygen Reduction Reaction, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29744–29752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, K. Meng, B. Zhu, H. Liu, J. Xu and J. Yu, Graphdiyne: A New Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction Cocatalyst, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904256 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, F. He, D. Jia and Y. Li, Efficient hydrogen generation on graphdiyne-based heterostructure, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shi, Z. Fan, L. Du, X. Fu, C. Dong, W. Xie, D. Zhao, M. Wan and M. Yuan, 
            In situ construction of graphdiyne/CuS heterostructures for efficient hydrogen evolution reaction, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 821–828 RSC .
Y. Zhao, N. Yang and C. Wang, Boosting hydrogen evolution reaction on few-layer graphdiyne by sp-N and B co-doping, APL Mater., 2021, 9(7), 071102 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, F. Li, Y. Zhang and Y. Chen, Two-dimensional graphdiyne analogue Co-coordinated porphyrin covalent organic framework nanosheets as a stable electrocatalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5575–5582 RSC .
Y. Zhao, N. Yang and H. Yao, Stereodefined codoping of sp-N and S atoms in few-layer graphdiyne for oxygen evolution reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(18), 7240–7244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Cai, H. He, Y. Zhang, R. Liu, H. Cao and B. Li, Heteroatom doped graphdiyne as efficient metal-free electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction in alkaline medium, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4738–4744 RSC .
Y. Zhao, J. Wan and H. Yao, Few-layer graphdiyne doped with sp-hybridized nitrogen atoms at acetylenic sites for oxygen reduction electrocatalysis, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10(9), 924–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Xue, L. Hui, F. He, C. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Li, Graphdiyne-engineered heterostructures for efficient overall water-splitting, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103928 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Xie, Y. Xiong, Z. Li, Q. Huang, S. Zhang, J. Zhou, R. Liu, X. Gao and C. Chen, Architecture of β-Graphdiyne-Containing Thin Film Using Modified Glaser–Hay Coupling Reaction for Enhanced Photocatalytic Property of TiO2, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700421 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Thangavel, K. Krishnamoorthy, V. Krishnaswamy, N. Raju, S. J. Kim and G. Venugopal, Graphdiyne–ZnO Nanohybrids as an Advanced Photocatalytic Material, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 22057–22065 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Yi, J. E. Halpert, X. Lai, Y. Liu, H. Cao, R. Yu, D. Wang and Y. Li, A Novel and Highly Efficient Photocatalyst Based on P25–Graphdiyne Nanocomposite, Small, 2012, 8, 265–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, W. Liang, C. Xing, K. Chen, J. Chen, W. Huang, N. Xie, M. Qiu, X. Yan and Z. Xie, Rising 2d Pnictogens for Catalytic Applications: Status and Challenges, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12887–12927 RSC .
Y. Liu, First-Principles Study on New Photocatalytic Materials Graphdiyne-TiO2, Acta Chim. Sin., 2013, 71, 260 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Yang, The Preparation of Nano Composites and Their Applications in Solar Energy Conversion, Springer,  2016, pp. 93–110 Search PubMed .
C. Tang, X. Zhang and X. Zhou, Most Effective Way to Improve the Hydrogen Storage Abilities of Na-Decorated Bn Sheets: Applying External Biaxial Strain and an Electric Field, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5570–5578 RSC .
Z. Xie, C. Xing, W. Huang, T. Fan, Z. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Xiang, Z. Guo, J. Li and Z. Yang, Ultrathin 2d Nonlayered Tellurium Nanosheets: Facile Liquid-Phase Exfoliation, Characterization, and Photoresponse with High Performance and Enhanced Stability, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705833 CrossRef .
T. Fan, Z. Xie, W. Huang, Z. Li and H. Zhang, Two-Dimensional Non-Layered Selenium Nanoflakes: Facile Fabrications and Applications for Self-Powered Photo-Detector, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 114002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Z. Xie, L. Lu, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Jiang, Y. Ge, F. Zhang, S. Lu and Z. Guo, Few-Layer Tin Sulfide: A Promising Blac-Phosphorus-Analogue 2d Material with Exceptionally Large Nonlinear Optical Response, High Stability, and Applications in All-Optical Switching and Wavelength Conversion, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1700985 CrossRef .
X. Xu, J. Yu, Z. Zhang and K. Liu, Bandgap opening in graphene, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 2220–2232 Search PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Xue, L. Hui, C. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Zuo and Y. Li, Efficient Hydrogen Production on a 3D Flexible Heterojunction Material, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707082 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Qi, J. Wang, X. Song, Y. Fan, W. Li, A. Du and M. Zhao, Synergistic trifunctional electrocatalysis of pyridinic nitrogen and single transition-metal atoms anchored on pyrazine-modified graphdiyne, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 995–1002 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cui, M. Zhang, N. Wang, J. He, J. Yu, Y. Long, S. Yan and C. Huang, High-Performance Field-Effect Transistor Based on Novel Conjugated P-o-Fluoro-p-alkoxyphenyl-Substituted Polymers by Graphdiyne Doping, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23300–23306 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, Y. Chen, Q. Zhou, P. Mao, H. Liu, J. Wang and Y. Li, Graphdiyne for multilevel flexible organic resistive random access memory devices, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1338–1341 RSC .
C. Lu, Y. Yang, J. Wang, R. Fu, X. Zhao, L. Zhao, Y. Ming, Y. Hu, H. Lin and X. Tao, High-performance graphdiyne-based electrochemical actuators, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 752 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, X. Li, Z. Tu, F. Zhao, J. He, Z. Guan, C. Huang, Y. Yi and Y. Li, Synthesis and Electronic Structure of Boron-Graphdiyne with an Sp-Hybridized Carbon Skeleton and Its Application in Sodium Storage, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 3968–3973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Gao, B. Liu, Q. Feng, X. Li, M. Huang, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, C. Tung and L. Wu, Graphdiyne: A Metal-Free Material as Hole Transfer Layer to Fabricate Quantum Dot-Sensitized Photocathodes for Hydrogen Production, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3954–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, Y. Chen, H. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Li and S. Liu, Graphdiyne Quantum Dots for Much Improved Stability and Efficiency of Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701117 CrossRef .
S. Roth and R. H. Baughman, Actuators of individual carbon nanotubes, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2002, 2, 311–314 CrossRef .
G. W. Rogers and J. Z. Liu, Graphene actuators: quantum-mechanical and electrostatic double-layer effects, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10858–10863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Rogers and J. Z. Liu, Monolayer graphene oxide as a building block for artificial muscles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 021903 CrossRef .
Y. Li, H. Huang, R. Cui, D. Wang, Z. Yin, D. Wang and B. Sun, Electrochemical sensor based on graphdiyne is effectively used to determine Cd2+ and Pb2+ in water, Sens. Actuators, A, 2021, 332, 129519 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, Y. Li, H. Mi, S. Luo, P. Zhang, Z. Lin, J. Li and H. Zhang, Robust SNO2-X Nanoparticle-Impregnated Carbon Nanofibers with Outstanding Electrochemical Performance for Advanced Sodium-Ion Batteries, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 9039–9043 CrossRef .
S. Luo, J. Zhao, J. Zou, Z. He, C. Xu, F. Liu, Y. Huang, L. Dong, L. Wang and H. Zhang, Self-Standing Polypyrrole/Black Phosphorus Laminated Film: Promising Electrode for Flexible
Supercapacitor with Enhanced Capacitance and Cycling Stability, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3538–3548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ma, Y. Li, J. Yang, H. Mi, S. Luo, L. Deng, C. Yan, M. Rauf, P. Zhang and X. Sun, New Strategy for Polysulfide Protection Based on Atomic Layer Deposition of TiO2 onto Ferroelectric-Encapsulated Cathode: Toward Ultrastable Free-Standing Room Temperature Sodium–Sulfur Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705537 CrossRef .
H. Shang, Z. Zuo, L. Yu, F. Wang, F. He and Y. Li, Low-Temperature Growth of All-Carbon Graphdiyne on a Silicon Anode for High-Performance Lithium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801459 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Jang, J. Koo, M. Park, H. Lee, J. Nam, Y. Kwon and H. Lee, Graphdiyne as a High-Capacity Lithium Ion Battery Anode Material, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 263904 CrossRef .
J. He, N. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Shen, K. Wang, C. Huang, Y. Yi, Z. Tu and Y. Li, Fluoride Graphdiyne as a Free-Standing Electrode Displaying Ultra-Stable and Extraordinary High Li Storage Performance, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2893–2903 RSC .
B. Mortazavi, M. Shahrokhi, M. E. Madjet, M. Makaremi, S. Ahzi and T. Rabczuk, As-Triphenylene-Graphdiyne: Strong and Stable 2d Semiconductors with Outstanding Capacities as Anodes for Li-Ion Batteries, Carbon, 2019, 141, 291–303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Jiang, J. Zhang, H. Zhang and Y. Li, Simultaneous Voltammetric Determination of Acetaminophen and Isoniazid Using Mxene Modified Screen-Printed Electrode, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 130, 315–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. Zuo, L. Li, K. Li, F. He, Z. Jiang and Y. Li, Large-Area Aminated-Graphdiyne Thin Films for Direct Methanol Fuel Cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15010–15015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, N. Wang, J. He, Z. Yang, Z. Tu, F. Zhao, K. Wang, Y. Yi and C. Huang, Designing the Efficient Lithium Diffusion and Storage Channels Based on Graphdiyne, Carbon, 2020, 162, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S. H. Chung, C. Zu and Y. S. Su, Rechargeable Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, N. Wang, Z. Cui, H. Du, L. Fu, C. Huang, Z. Yang, X. Shen, Y. Yi, Z. Tu and Y. Li, Hydrogen Substituted Graphdiyne as Carbon-Rich Flexible Electrode for Lithium and Sodium Ion Batteries, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1172 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Du, Z. Zhang, J. He, Z. Cui, J. Chai, J. Ma, Z. Yang, C. Huang and G. Cui, A Delicately Designed Sulfide Graphdiyne Compatible Cathode for High-Performance Lithium/Magnesium–Sulfur Batteries, Small, 2017, 13, 1702277 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Xue, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Chen and Y. Du, 2D graphdiyne loading ruthenium atoms for high efficiency water splitting, Nano Energy, 2020, 104667 CrossRef CAS .
H. Si, Q. Deng, C. Yin, M. M. Tavakoli, J. Zhang and J. Kong, Graphdiyne Coupled with g-C3N4/NiFe-Layered Double Hydroxide, a Layered Nanohybrid for Highly Efficient Photoelectrochemical Water Oxidation, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1902083 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, J. Li, R. Du, J. Zhou, M. Huang, R. Liu, J. Li, Z. Xie, L. Wu, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Direct Synthesis of Graphdiyne Nanowalls on Arbitrary Substrates and Its Application for Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting Cell, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605308 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Sequential deposition as a route to high-performance perovskite-sensitized solar cells, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Hybrid nanorod-polymer solar cells, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Polymer solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, T. Jiu, S. Chen, L. Liu, Q. Yao, F. Bi, C. Zhao, Z. Wang, M. Zhao and G. Zhang, Graphdiyne as a Host Active Material for Perovskite Solar Cell Application, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6941–6947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xing, W. Huang, Z. Xie, J. Zhao, D. Ma, T. Fan, W. Liang, Y. Ge, B. Dong and J. Li, Ultrasmall Bismuth Quantum Dots: Facile Liquid-Phase Exfoliation, Characterization, and Application in High-Performance UV–Vis Photodetector, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 621–629 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, F. Zhang, Z. Liang, T. Fan, Z. Li, X. Jiang, H. Chen, J. Li and H. Zhang, Revealing of the ultrafast third-order nonlinear optical response and enabled photonic application in two-dimensional tin sulfide, Photonics Res., 2019, 7, 494–502 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, Q. Zhong, W. Chen, B. Sang, Y. Wang, T. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang and H. Zhang, Short-Chain Ligand-Passivated Stable α-CsPbI3 Quantum Dot for All-Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900991 CrossRef .
H. Ren, H. Shao, L. Zhang, D. Guo, Q. Jin, R. Yu, L. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Wang, H. Zhao and D. Wang, A New Graphdiyne Nanosheet/Pt Nanoparticle-Based Counter Electrode Material with Enhanced Catalytic Activity for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500296 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, R. Zhao, T. Zhang, K. Zhao, P. Xiao and Y. Ma, Graphene-based standalone solar energy converter for water desalination and purification, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 829–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qiu, M. Xue, C. Shen, Z. Zhang and W. Guo, Graphynes for Water Desalination and Gas Separation, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin and M. J. Buehler, Mechanics and molecular filtration performance of graphyne nanoweb membranes for selective water purification, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11801–11807 RSC .
M. Xue, H. Qiu and W. Guo, Exceptionally fast water desalination at complete salt rejection by pristine graphyne monolayers, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 505720 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kou, X. Zhou, H. Lu, F. Wu and J. Fan, Graphyne as the membrane for water desalination, Nanoscale, 2014, 3, 1865–1870 RSC .
J. Kou, X. Zhou, Y. Chen, H. Lu, F. Wu and J. Fan, Water permeation through single-layer graphyne membrane, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 064705 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liu, J. Zhou, X. Gao, J. Li, Z. Xie, Z. Li, S. Zhang, L. Tong, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Graphdiyne Filter for Decontaminating Lead-Ion-Polluted Water, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700122 CrossRef .
F. Liu, J. Yang, Z. Xu and X. Yang, Selective Surface Adsorption and Pore Trapping for Ethanol-Water Mixtures near Single-Layer Polyporous Graphynes, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 387, 1080–1087 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, J. Zhou, R. Du, Z. Xie, S. Deng, R. Liu, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Robust Superhydrophobic Foam: A Graphdiyne-Based Hierarchical Architecture for Oil/Water Separation, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 168–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Chen, J. Gao, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, H. Liu and Y. Li, Graphdiyne Sponge for Direct Collection of Oils from Water, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 2591–2598 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Lei, C. Liu, Q. Li and X. Xu, Graphyne Nanostructure as a Potential Adsorbent for Separation of H2s/Ch4 Mixture: Combining Grand Canonical Monte Carlo Simulations with Ideal Adsorbed Solution Theory, Fuel, 2016, 182, 210–219 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. He, M. Zhao, M. Zhang, L. Zhao, X. Feng and Y. Luo, Tunable Hydrogen Separation in Sp–Sp2 Hybridized Carbon Membranes: A First-Principles Prediction, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16634–16638 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, L. Kou, H. A. Tahini and S. C. Smith, Charge-Modulated Permeability and Selectivity in Graphdiyne for Hydrogen Purification, Mol. Simul., 2016, 42, 573–579 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dang, W. Guo, L. Zhao and H. Zhu, Porous Carbon Materials Based on Graphdiyne Basis Units by the Incorporation of the Functional Groups and Li Atoms for Superior Co2 Capture and Sequestration, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30002–30013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Hernández, M. Bartolomei and J. Campos-Martínez, Transmission of Helium Isotopes through Graphdiyne Pores: Tunneling Versus Zero Point Energy Effects, J. Chem. Phys. A, 2015, 119, 10743–10749 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Meng, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Wang, Q. Shi, D. Rao, Y. Liu, K. Deng and R. Lu, Graphdiyne as a High-Efficiency Membrane for Separating Oxygen from Harmful Gases: A First-Principles Study, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28166–28170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ge, Z. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Chen, S. Chen, Z. Liang, Y. Song, Y. Zou, H. Zeng and S. Xu, Broadband Nonlinear Photoresponse of 2D TiS2 for Ultrashort Pulse Generation and All-Optical Thresholding Devices. Adv, Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701166 CrossRef .
Z. Li, H. Qiao, Z. Guo, X. Ren, Z. Huang, X. Qi, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, D. Zhang and J. Li, High-Performance Photo-Electrochemical Photodetector Based on Liquid-Exfoliated Few-Layered InSe Nanosheets with Enhanced Stability, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705237 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, L. Zhang, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. He, W. Li, F. Zhang, Y. Shi, W. Lü and Y. Li, Ultrathin Metal–Organic Framework: An Emerging Broadband Nonlinear Optical Material for Ultrafast Photonics, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800561 CrossRef .
L. Wu, W. Huang, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, D. Ma, Y. Xiang, J. Li, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan and H. Zhang, 2d Tellurium Based High-Performance All-Optical Nonlinear Photonic Devices, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806346 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Carbon-Nanotube Based Electrochemical Biosensors: A Review, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Q. Wu, F. Zhang, L. Chen, X. Jin, Y. Hu, Z. Zheng and H. Zhang, 2D Black Phosphorus Saturable Absorbers for Ultrafast Photonics, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1800224 CrossRef .
I. L. Medintz, A. R. Clapp, H. Mattoussi, E. R. Goldman, B. Fisher and J. M. Mauro, Self-assembled nanoscale biosensors based on quantum dot FRET donors, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 630–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cao, H. D. Wang, Z. N. Guo, D. K. Sang, L. Y. Zhang, Q. L. Xiao, Y. P. Zhang, D. Y. Fan, J. Q. Li and H. Zhang, Black Phosphorous/Indium Selenide Photoconductive Detector for Visible and Near-Infrared Light with High Sensitivity, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900020 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, W. Huang, C. Wang, J. Guo, F. Zhang, Y. Song, Y. Ge, L. Wu, J. Liu and J. Li, An All-Optical, Actively Q-Switched Fiber Laser by an Antimonene-Based Optical Modulator, Laser Photonics Rev., 2019, 13, 1800313 CrossRef .
X. Liang, X. Ye, C. Wang, C. Xing, Q. Miao, Z. Xie, X. Chen, X. Zhang, H. Zhang and L. Mei, Photothermal cancer immunotherapy by erythrocyte membrane-coated black phosphorus formulation, J. Controlled Release, 2019, 296, 150–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xie, S. Chen, Y. Duo, Y. Zhu, T. Fan, Q. Zou, M. Qu, Z. Lin, J. Zhao and Y. Li, Biocompatible Two-Dimensional Titanium Nanosheets for Multimodal Imaging-Guided Cancer Theranostics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22129–22140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Jiang, R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Wu, W. Lu, J. Li, Y. Li and H. Zhang, MXene-Enabled Electrochemical Microfluidic Biosensor: Applications toward Multicomponent Continuous Monitoring in Whole Blood, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807326 CrossRef .
L. Wu, J. Gao, X. Lu, C. Huang and J. Chen, Graphdiyne: a new promising member of 2D all-carbon nanomaterial as robust electrochemical enzyme biosensor platform, Carbon, 2020, 156, 568–575 CrossRef CAS .
N. Parvin, Q. Jin, Y. Wei, R. Yu, B. Zheng, L. Huang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Zhang and M. Gao, Few-Layer Graphdiyne Nanosheets Applied for Multiplexed Real-Time DNA Detection, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606755 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, P. Yu, S. Guo, L. Mao, H. Liu and Y. Li, Graphdiyne Oxide as a Platform for Fluorescence Sensing, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5629–5632 RSC .
H. Yan, S. Guo, F. Wu, P. Yu, H. Liu, Y. Li and L. Mao, Carbon Atom Hybridization Matters: Ultrafast Humidity Response of Graphdiyne Oxides, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 3922–3926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, T. Fan, Z. Xie, Q. Zeng, P. Xue, T. Zheng, Y. Chen, X. Luo and H. Zhang, Advances in nanomaterials for photodynamic therapy applications: status and challenges, Biomaterials, 2020, 237, 119827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xie, T. Fan, J. An, W. Choi, Y. Duo, Y. Ge, B. Zhang, G. Nie, N. Xie and T. Zheng, Emerging Combination Strategies with Phototherapy in Cancer Nanomedicine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8065–8087 RSC .
Z. Xie, M. Peng, R. Lu, X. Meng, W. Liang, Z. Li, M. Qiu, B. Zhang, G. Nie, N. Xie, H. Zhang and P. N. Prasad, Black Phosphorus-Based Photothermal Therapy with Acd47-Mediated Immune Checkpoint Blockade for Enhanced Cancer Immunotherapy, Light: Sci. Appl., 2020, 9, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, X. Jiang, T. Fan, Z. Zheng, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, L. Cao, Z. Xie, D. Zhang and J. Zhao, Recent Advances in Photodynamic Therapy Based on Emerging Two-Dimensional Layered Nanomaterials, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1485–1508 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qiu, W. X. Ren, T. Jeong, M. Won, G. Y. Park, D. K. Sang, L. P. Liu, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Omnipotent phosphorene: a next-generation, two-dimensional nanoplatform for multidisciplinary biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5588–5601 RSC .
W. Tao, X. Ji, X. Zhu, L. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, P. E. Saw, W. Li, N. Kong and M. A. Islam, Two-Dimensional Antimonene-Based Photonic Nanomedicine for Cancer Theranostics, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802061 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ji, N. Kong, J. Wang, W. Li, Y. Xiao, S. T. Gan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Song and Q. Xiong, A Novel Top-Down Synthesis of Ultrathin 2D Boron Nanosheets for Multimodal Imaging-Guided Cancer Therapy, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803031 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xing, S. Chen, M. Qiu, X. Liang, Q. Liu, Q. Zou, Z. Li, Z. Xie, D. Wang and B. Dong, Conceptually Novel Black Phosphorus/Cellulose Hydrogels as Promising Photothermal Agents for Effective Cancer Therapy, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1701510 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Qiu, A. Singh, D. Wang, J. Qu, M. Swihart, H. Zhang and P. N. Prasad, Biocompatible and biodegradable inorganic nanostructures for nanomedicine: Silicon and black phosphorus, Nano Today, 2019, 25, 135–155 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These two authors contributed equally to this workThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2022
Table Content:

Ying Zhao
	Ying Zhao received her BSc degree in applied electronic technology education from the School of Physics and Electronic Science, Hunan University of Science and Technology in 2019. She is currently an ME student of Hebei University. Her current research focuses on the field of memristors.

Luxiao Chai
	Luxiao Chai obtained her PhD degree at the University of Lyon, France, majoring in the synthesis of polymers and construction of smart nanostructures for drug delivery. Now she is doing research as a post-doc at Shenzhen University. Her work focuses on the synthesis and bioapplications of 2D materials and polymers, and the treatment and early diagnosis of cancer. Dr Chai has also done some work on AI medicine.

Xiaobing Yan
	Xiaobing Yan is currently a professor at the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Hebei University. He received his PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2011. From 2014 to 2016, he held a research fellow position at the National University of Singapore. His current research focuses on the field of memristors.

Zhongjian Xie
	Zhongjian Xie received his PhD from the University of Lyon, France, in 2016. Then, he joined Prof. Han Zhang's laboratory at Shenzhen University. He has published over 50 peer-reviewed papers with a total of 2200 citations and an H-index of 22. His research interests focus on the application of nanomaterials in biophotonics.

Han Zhang
	Han Zhang is a full Professor and Director of the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of phosphorene and optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. He is an expert on low-dimensional optoelectronic devices and applications. He has published over 400 peer-reviewed papers and invited review articles in the last 10 years. The related works have been published in many prestigious journals such as PNAS, Physics Reports, Nature Communications and so on. All of his publications have received >46000 citations, with an H-index of 121. He has been named three times as a Highly Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics in 2018, 2019 and 2020, and he is also an OSA Fellow.

 	Fig. 1  An overview of the manuscript.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Structure of graphene. (b) Structure of graphdiyne. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. (c–e) Single-layer, double-layer and triple-layer structures of graphdiyne. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2017 Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH, Germany, 2017. (f) Graphite geometry with arrows representing different strain directions. (g and h) The relationship between band gap and strain value of GR and GDY, respectively. (i) The relationship between the in-plane stiffness C and the number of acetylene connections. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 
δG = −E(COH) + x(H)μ(H) + (1 − x(H))μ(C)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Band structures, density of states, and optical transitions of graphdiyne at the LDA and GW levels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2011 American Physical Society. (b) Energy surface and band structure of bilayer graphdiyne. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 RSC Publishing. (c) Raw experimental absorbance of graphdiyne film. (d) Experimental and LDA + RPA absorbance of graphdiyne film. (e) Experimental absorbance of graphdiyne film and its theoretical absorbance at the GW + RPA and BSE level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2011 American Physical Society. (f) Raman spectra of graphene at 514 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2006 The American Physical Society. (g) Raman spectra of GDY. (h) Vibrational modes of GDY. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The evolution curve of thermal conductivity–density of various carbon materials. (b) The evolution curve of thermal conductivity–Young's modulus of various carbon materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2020 Elsevier Ltd. (c) The evolution curve of thermal conductivity–length of graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The evolution curve of thermal conductivity–length of B-graphdiyne along the armchair and zigzag directions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110, Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Lattice constant (Å)	2.47	9.48
Percentage of t acetylenic linkages (%)	0	50
Band gap (eV)	0	0.44
In-plane stiffness C (N m−1)	341.09x	118.6x

	117.5y
Poisson's ratio (ν)	0.18x	0.40x

	0.40y
Ultimate strength σ (N m−1)	34.71	10.71
41.94	13.54
Ultimate strain ε (%)	0.134	6.3
0.191	8.0
Hole mobility μh (×104 cm2 V−1 s−1)	35.12x	1.91x
32.17y	1.97y
Electron mobility μe (×104 cm2 V−1 s−1)	32.02x	17.22x
33.89y	20.81y
Thermal conductivity κ (W m−1 K−1)	3000–5000	4.48x

	4.81y

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) GDY generation by explosion method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 and 128, respectively. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry and Copyright 2018 Elsevier Ltd. (c) GDY generation by VLS method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (d) GDY generation by CVD method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) GDY generation by solution method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84 and 97. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society and Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) GDY generation by two-phase coupling method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Structure of Ni/GD and Fe/GD. (b) Onset values and c overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 of Ni/GD and Fe/GD. (c) HER activity of various electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (d–f) Cu@GD core–shell 3D nanocomposite electrocatalyst and its polarization curves and Tafel plots at sweep rate of 0.5 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (g) GDY@NiFe composite and the OER process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (h) LSV curves of various electrocatalysts. (i) High performance of the N′N-GDY catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (j) CO2 photoreduction of TiO2/GDY heterojunction under UV-visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the device structure and mobility with and without GDY. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Preparation process of electrochemical actuators and electrochemical performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (c) The preparation and performance of boron/graphdiyne-based batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting by GDY. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (e) Graphdiyne-based perovskite solar cell and J–V curves for forward and reverse scanning. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the DNA testing protocol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Cancer therapy by photothermal effect of graphdiyne. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Photothermal/chemotherapy for cancer with graphdiyne as drug carriers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These two authors contributed equally to this work

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2022
