Profiling the organic cation-dependent degradation of organolead halide perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA09687E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA09687E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1103-1111Profiling the organic cation-dependent degradation of organolead halide perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Teng 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiangyue 
            Meng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Bai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuang 
            Xiao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yinglong 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haining 
            Chen
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Shihe 
            Yang
          
        
      *a
aNano Science and Technology Program, Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: chsyang@ust.hk
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
Received 
      9th November 2016
    , Accepted 30th November 2016First published on 1st December 2016AbstractOperational stability is one of the main obstacles that may hold back the commercialization of perovskite solar cells (PVSCs). In this paper, we provide a detailed account of the ion migration accelerated PVSC degradation by comparatively studying perovskite materials with two different organic cations (methylammonium (MA+) and formamidinium (FA+)). Using time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS), we have uncovered the ion migration accelerated degradation of PVSCs at the device level. Not only did mobile iodide (I−) ions from the perovskite layer diffuse out, but Ag atoms/ions from the metal electrode also diffused into the perovskite layer, which resulted in severe device degradation. Besides, we identified I− species in the hole transport material (HTM) layer for even freshly prepared PVSC devices, which was responsible for the degradation of devices kept under inert conditions. This also testifies the existence of ion migration on the device level of PVSCs. Compared with MAPbI3, the ion migration process can slow down in FAPbI3 devices which accounts for a better stability of FAPbI3 devices. This work underscores the impact of organic cation substitution on PVSC degradation and provides solid evidence for mobile ion migration in perovskite materials and the consequent degradation in specific device settings such as the n–i–p type perovskite solar cells.
Introduction
With its booming solar cell efficiency,1–3 organolead halide perovskites represent a promising class of light sensitizers for thin film photovoltaic applications.4 Compared with other prevailing thin film photovoltaic materials such as silicon, CdTe, and copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), high performance perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) can be obtained through facile solution processes at a much lower temperature, which are greatly advantageous for cost-competitive stretchable photovoltaic devices.5 Besides, the band gap of perovskites (CH3NH3PbX3 (denoted as MAPbX3), X = I−, Br−, or Cl−) can be easily tuned by varying the ratio of halide anion; this facilitates their application in tandem cells,6–11 photodetectors,12 light-emitting diodes (LEDs)13 and lasers.14 However, despite all their merits such as tunable band gap14–16 and relatively high carrier motilities,17,18 perovskites (especially MAPbI3) are sensitive to moisture, so the real application of MAPbI3 based devices is still an open question.
Generally, water has been regarded as the main culprit held responsible for the fast degradation of MAPbI3. Under high humidity, MAPbI3 rapidly degrades to its precursor components via intermediate and semi-reversible monohydrate phases.19,20 Besides, although PVSCs can be stable for more than 200 h in a nitrogen atmosphere (0% humidity),21 even an encapsulated cell may degrade significantly in less than 100 h under high humidity (>50%).22 It should be noted that the PVSC device stability is far more complicated than the material stability. For example, an unexpected silver iodide (AgI) phase has been discovered on the surface of degraded PVSCs using silver (Ag) as the metal contact,22,23 however, the formation mechanism of AgI is not well established. Although the stability of PVSCs can be greatly improved by modifying the upper contact layer of perovskite24–27 and thus partially avoiding the in-service penetration of moisture into the cell, a number of studies have shown that even encapsulated devices or devices that were kept in a glovebox show significant degradation.21,28,29 This cannot be explained by moisture alone and Guerrero et al. suggested that other factors such as ion migration could also result in the degradation of PVSCs.29 Interestingly, the stability of PVSCs was found to be significantly improved when the commonly used AM 1.5G simulated light source was replaced by a UV light illuminated LED, and this was taken as evidence for UV light activated ion transport in MAPbI3 that accelerated the degradation of PVSCs.30 Other researchers also reported that the mobile ions in MAPbI3 could contribute to the fast degradation of PVSCs.31 Surprisingly, Domanski et al. discovered that gold (Au) from the top metal contact could interfuse into the perovskite layer, resulting in severe device degradation.32 Recently, greatly improved PVSC stability has been achieved by introducing an inorganic buffer layer (TiO2 (ref. 33) or SnO2 (ref. 34) for instance) between the electron transport layer (ETL) and the top metal contact,33–35 however the underlying mechanism of the improvement remains unclear.
Although the stability of PVSCs has been investigated in various ways, previous studies have mainly focused on MAPbI3 based PVSCs. HC(NH2)2PbI3 denoted as FAPbI3, with a smaller band gap and better thermal stability,36 has recently drawn much interest in the PVSC community,3,8,37 but the stability of FAPbI3 has seldom been touched upon. Of more concern is the fact that when addressing the stability issue of MAPbI3 based PVSCs, most researchers simply focused on the perovskite material itself without paying much attention to the interfaces of the devices during the PVSC degradation process. On a fundamental level, although it has been previously proposed that ion migration accelerated PVSC degradation. Regarding the critical issues proposed by Huang et al. in a review article,38 it is still unclear if ion migration plays s significant role in degrading perovskite devices and how it impacts the long-term stability of PVSCs. Time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) capable of elemental mapping with nanometer resolution has been widely used in characterizing the component and elemental distributions of thin film solar cells,39,40 however, it has been rarely used to elucidate the degradation mechanism of PVSCs.4,32 In this paper, we systematically investigate the organic cation dependent degradation of PVSCs in detail. Generally, moisture, ion migration, and the worse scenario, their synergetic combination greatly contribute to the degradation of PVSCs. This ion migration is due to the out-diffusion of the mobile iodide (I−) to the top metal contact as well as the in-diffusion of the top metal contact (Ag for instance) into the perovskite layer. This combined process results in AgI formation and accelerates the degradation of PVSCs. Compared with MAPbI3, our TOF-SIMS measurements show that the “ion migration” induced degradation was greatly slowed down in FAPbI3 PVSCs. This suppressed ion migration can be explained by a relatively larger radius of FA+ (2.53 Å compared with 2.17 Å for MA+) and a smaller molecular dipole moment (0.21 D for FA+ compared with 2.29 D in MA+). Last but not least, using TOF-SIMS, we unexpectedly detected I− species within the hole transport material (HTM) layer in both MA and FA devices, which should be taken as direct and solid evidence for the ion migration on the device level of PVSCs. Our work also testifies the power of TOF-SIMS in tracking unambiguously the ion migration phenomenon in PVSCs in space and time.
Results and discussion
We refer to the ambient conditions used in this work to expose our devices (films) as the outside laboratory atmosphere. Considering the humidity of Hong Kong during the time of experiments (average relative humidity (R. H.) ≥ 70%) (Fig. S1†), we regard it as an extremely harsh condition for the PVSC stability evaluation. Besides, devices both stored in a dry box (∼20% R.H.) and kept in a standard glove box were also tested.
Performance degradation of PVSCs
In this study, the planar n–i–p device structure with fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/compact TiO2 layer/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD/Ag was selected due to its easy fabrication and acceptable high efficiency. Via the optimized solvent dripping method, the PCE of MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 PVSCs was optimized to as high as 16.56% (Voc 1.09 V, Jsc 21.1 mA cm−2 and fill factor (ff) 0.72) and 15.02% (Voc 1.05 V, Jsc 22.7 mA cm−2 and ff 0.63). Here, although the Jsc of FAPbI3 devices is higher than that of MAPbI3 (22.7 mA cm−2 compared with 21.1 mA cm−2), the high performance of MAPbI3 is mainly due to the higher ff (0.72 compared with 0.63 in FAPbI3). Indeed, the poor ff has been regarded as the main problem that may hinder the development of high performance phase pure FAPbI3 based devices.37
For the stability testing, both dark conditions (devices stored in a dry box and measured once per day under ambient conditions (≥70% R.H.)) and operational conditions (40 °C, ≥70% R.H., AM 1.5G continuous illumination) were considered. Fig. 1c records the dark stability profile of an unencapsulated PVSC. Under these conditions, the Voc, Jsc and ff of MAPbI3 PVSCs drop rapidly and the devices completely degrade in approximately 10 days (Fig. 1c, S2 and S3†). Here, although the devices were kept in the dark dry box, humidity may still play an important role in the degradation of PVSCs since our J–V measurements were conducted under ambient conditions (≥70% R.H.). According to our previous work,41 NiO-based PVSCs lost ∼40% efficiency when kept in a glovebox and measured under ambient conditions during a 2 month storage period. So in the present work, we regard the 10 days fast degradation of MAPbI3 devices as a reasonable stability benchmark after taking our harsh ambient environment into consideration. Although the degradation of FAPbI3 devices is also evident from the stability profiles of Jsc and ff (Fig. 1c, S2 and S3†), the decline rate is far slower than that in MAPbI3 devices. After approximately one week, more than 80% of the original efficiency has been still retained, manifesting a much better stability of FAPbI3 devices. At last, compared with MAPbI3 devices, which totally degrade in 10 days, the degradation of FAPbI3 is much slower, normally complete after more than a month. Moreover, under the operational conditions (40 °C, ≥70% R.H., AM 1.5G continuous illumination), for MAPbI3, a rapid drop to less than 50% of its original efficiency occurs simply after 1 h illumination, whereas the stability of FAPbI3 is still better than MAPbI3 (slowly losing efficiency to 50% of its original one after 4–5 h continuous illumination). Here also, interesting is the observation that the Ag contact of MAPbI3 devices loses its shining luster completely after 5 h of continuous illumination (Fig. 1d), although this is not the case in FAPbI3 PVSCs (Fig. 1f). The stability testing results above suggest different degradation mechanisms in the PVSCs with different organic cations, which deserve a detailed investigation as will be elucidated below.
 Fig. 1  Stability evaluation comparison between MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 based solar cells. (a) J–V curves of PVSCs prepared via the optimized solvent dripping method. (b) Operational and (c) dark stability of both MAPbI3 (black squares) and FAPbI3 (red circles) devices. Here, the dark stability refers to storing our PVSC devices in a dry box (∼20% R.H.) and measuring under ambient conditions (∼70% R.H.), while the operational stability suggests placing the cell under AM 1.5G (100 mV cm−2) continuous illumination with 40 °C, ≥70% humidity. The points with error bars shown in (b) were constructed using the average of 5 films ± 1 standard deviation. (d–g) Photographs of PVSC devices after 5 h AM 1.5G continuous light illumination, (d and f) top view, (e and g) back view, (d and e) MAPbI3, (f and g) FAPbI3. 
Tracing the degradation of PVSCs down to the material level
First, XRD was used to characterize the crystal structure transformation of the perovskite films under ambient conditions (Fig. S4 and S5†). Here, MAPbI3 films could degrade by firstly forming a monohydrated MAPbI3·H2O phase, and then decomposing back to the PbI2 and MAI precursors19,20 (Fig. S4†). While different from MAPbI3, the black FAPbI3 film in the α phase transforms into the δ phase, and this δ-FAPbI3 film could be stable for more than a month in the humid environment (Fig. S5 and S6†). This feature is also confirmed by our absorption spectrum since the color of MAPbI3 film gradually turned from dark brown to yellow during the 1 month exposure (Fig. S7a†), while FAPbI3 films turned from dark brown to light yellow rapidly in less than a day after exposing to the ambient environment, and remained light yellow for the rest of the month (Fig. S7b†). However, the paradox here is that although α-FAPbI3 transferred rapidly into δ-FAPbI3 with humidity, the dark and operational stabilities of FAPbI3 devices were better than those of MAPbI3, so it seemed that the material stability alone cannot explain the stability difference observed in Fig. 1.
Next, we come back to PVSC whole devices. Fig. 2 records the XRD patterns of PVSC devices stored under different conditions. Generally, strong Ag peaks (marked by #/#) were presented in freshly prepared PVSC devices. However, a smaller peak assigned to AgI could be identified in MAPbI3 devices stored in the dry box for a month. After that, the devices were exposed to the ambient conditions to accelerate the degradation process. Now the AgI peak became the strongest of all, and the MAPbI3 peaks completely vanished in fully degraded MAPbI3 devices (after exposure to the ambient conditions for a week). Meanwhile, the Ag peaks could hardly be traced in fully degraded MAPbI3 devices, suggesting a nearly complete conversion of Ag to AgI. Indeed, the formation of AgI can explain the slightly dim color of the Ag contact as we observe in Fig. 1d. However, the underlying mechanism of formation of AgI is not clear, so it will be elucidated below using the SIMS technique. As for FAPbI3, the AgI peaks could hardly be traced in films after a month storage in the dark dry box, and even after exposing the devices to the ambient humidity for a week, the Ag peak was still sharp and clear, although traces of AgI peaks started to appear. These results indicate that the degradation of FAPbI3 PVSCs is slower than that of MAPbI3 devices regardless of storage conditions. This conclusion was also supported by our SEM analysis (Fig. S10†). Here, the relatively slower degradation of FAPbI3 PVSCs possibly explains their better stability compared with that of MAPbI3 (Fig. 1). On the other hand, the formation of AgI for devices stored in the dry box (Fig. 2a) cannot be simply explained by moisture. This is because although the δ phase FAPbI3 shows up in Fig. 2b (red line with devices kept in the glovebox for a month), the peaks of α phase FAPbI3 are stronger than those of δ phase FAPbI3. Taking the moisture induced easy formation of δ phase FAPbI3 into consideration, the devices apparently have not been much influenced by moisture at this stage. Therefore factors other than moisture may have contributed to the AgI formation in MAPbI3 PVSCs (Fig. 2a) stored in the dry box.
 Fig. 2  Phase and structure evolution of PVSCs (Ag/spiro/perovskite/TiO2/FTO) under different conditions as specified (a) MAPbI3, (b) FAPbI3. Dark lines: freshly prepared samples; red lines: devices stored in a dark dry box for a month; blue lines: devices left in the laboratory under ambient conditions for a week. Peaks indexed to different crystal phases are marked by different symbols. 
Evidence for ion migration induced degradation
Although moisture has been regarded as a dominant factor for the degradation of PVSCs, other factors may also play an important role but so far have been less clear. It can be seen from Fig. 1e that the degraded FAPbI3 devices remain dark after 5 h of continuous light illumination, meaning that the degradation of FAPbI3 devices under the operational conditions cannot be simply explained by moisture. Besides, the degradation of PVSCs (especially accompanied by the AgI formation under low humidity Fig. 2a) kept in a dry box is also ambiguous. In the present work, we take advantage of TOF-SIMS to debunk the mysteries of perovskite cell stability. Devices both kept in the dry box and exposed to the ambient atmosphere were tested. To compare different samples, the signal intensities have been calibrated in such a way that the SnO2− counts at around 2500 s are equalized. An ambiguous feature of the SIMS spectra is that the perovskite layer of the FAPbI3 device seems slightly thicker than that of the MAPbI3 device (Fig. 3a and b). However, according to our SEM images, the FAPbI3 and MAPbI3 films share a similar thickness (Fig. S14†). The catch here is that the sputtering time from SIMS measurement cannot be directly linked to the perovskite layer thickness, and the longer sputtering time of the FAPbI3 perovskite layer in this case can be explained by the stronger bonding in FAPbI3.
 Fig. 3  Evidence for ion migration accelerated degradation in degraded devices after 5 h AM 1.5G continuous light illumination: (a) degraded MAPbI3 devices, (b) degraded FAPbI3 devices. Here the TOF-SIMS profiles show the elemental distribution across the devices from the cathode (Ag) to the anode (FTO). (c–f) Reconstructed elemental 3D maps for the elements Ag (c and e) and I− (d and f) from the TOF-SIMS depth profiles in (a and b). 
For the SIMS analysis, we start with degraded PVSC devices after 5 h of continuous illumination (Fig. 3). A full spectrum of the TOF-SIMS profile containing different elements was recorded and is shown in Fig. S12,† but if not stated otherwise, only the Ag−, I−, PbI2− intensity would be considered in our discussion for simplification. Strikingly, traces of I− intensity showed up in the HTM layer, a large amount of I− could even be traced in the Ag metal layer. This result suggests that I− has factually penetrated throughout the HTM layer and diffused into the Ag metal contact. This feature is obvious in both MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 devices, especially in MAPbI3 devices. Besides, as shown in Fig. 3a and b, a small amount of Ag− intensity was detected in the MAPbI3 layer (FAPbI3 is not obvious), this can be clearly observed from our 3D elemental mapping (Fig. 3c and d). Recently, gold migration was observed in PVSCs while using a gold back contact.32 Considering the relatively active feature of Ag compared with Au, we believe that Ag atoms/ions can easily penetrate through the HTM layer and diffuse into the perovskite layer even under the ambient conditions. Furthermore, we could even detect the formation of AgI in both the metal layer and the perovskite layer of PVSC devices (Fig. 3a). So this interdiffusion process can explain the unexpected AgI phase observed from our XRD analysis (Fig. 2). As for the fast degradation of PVSCs under the operational conditions (Fig. 3), according to K. Miyano,42 the ion migration would be significantly accelerated under an external bias (positive bias pointing from Ag to FTO in our case), and this would result in the accumulation of negative I− ions near the Ag contact and degrade the device contact. Importantly, compared with MAPbI3 devices, the I− out-diffusion and Ag in-diffusion are much slower in FAPbI3 devices, which will be discussed in more detail below.
Moisture assisted ion migration
Back to the performance degradation of PVSCs, we notice that the ion migration characteristics revealed from our SIMS measurements can well explain the superb dark stability of FAPbI3 (1 month) compared with that of MAPbI3 (10 days). Generally, the ion migration induced degradation mainly resulted in Jsc and ff drop,32 which is indeed the case for our MAPbI3 PVSCs (Fig. 1 and S3†). On the other hand, the slower decline rate of Jsc and ff in FAPbI3 devices during the dark stability evaluation can be explained by the suppressed ion migration as discovered from our TOF-SIMS measurements (Fig. 3). Next, we consider the poor operational stability with devices exposed to the ambient laboratory conditions. Fig. 4 records the TOF-SIMS analysis for films exposed to the ambient conditions for a week (Fig. 4b and d). Compared with devices kept in the dry box (Fig. 4a and c), the ion migration for PVSCs degraded under the ambient conditions has been greatly enhanced (Fig. 4b and d and S13†), possibly due to the high humidity of the ambient conditions. So the poor operational stability of PVSCs recorded in Fig. 1b is at least partially related to the ion migration. Here, this moisture enhanced ion migration can be explained as follows: according to our XRD analysis (Fig. S4 and S5†), MAPbI3 degraded to its precursor PbI2 and MAI in the presence of moisture, and this results in an excess amount of mobile I−, which contributes to the ion migration process (Fig. 4e and f). However, since the δ phase FAPbI3 can be stable for months in the humid environment, the moisture enhanced ion migration in FAPbI3 cannot be explained by the extra number of mobile ions. The SEM analysis (Fig. S14†) shows that large α-FAPbI3 perovskite crystals turn into smaller aggregated δ-FAPbI3 crystals in the humid environment. Moreover, pin holes could be clearly observed in the cross-sectional image of FAPbI3 films exposed under the ambient conditions for a week, and these pin holes are bound to accelerate the moisture diffusion into the perovskite layer. Additionally, the δ-FAPbI3 films kept under the ambient conditions also suffered from poor crystallinity, since compared with freshly prepared δ-FAPbI3 films (Fig. S6†), less than 20% of the XRD intensity was left for δ-FAPbI3 films kept under the ambient conditions (Fig. S5†). So after exposure to the ambient environment, more defect sites would be created in FAPbI3 films. Considering that the ion migration is a defect assisted process, this can explain the moisture enhanced ion migration in FAPbI3 (Fig. 4g and h). Finally, although moisture dominates the degradation of PVSCs, ion migration aggravated degradation, which is environment sensitive and also needs to be taken into consideration for improving the stability of PVSCs.
 Fig. 4  Evidence for moisture enhanced ion migration in PVSCs. (a–d) TOF-SIMS spectrum for degraded devices (a and b) MAPbI3, (c and d) FAPbI3 kept under different conditions, (a and c) devices kept in the dry box for a month, (b and d) devices exposed to the ambient laboratory conditions for a week. Clearly, the ion migration has been enhanced with the assistance of moisture. (e–h) Schematic illustration of the moisture enhanced ion migration in degrading PVSCs, (e and f) MAPbI3, (g and h) FAPbI3. 
Evidence for ion migration in device level PVSCs
Since a considerable amount of I− species have been identified in the HTM layer of degraded PVSC devices, it is tempting to ask if TOF-SIMS can be used to monitor the migration of mobile ions in the PVSC devices, especially in freshly prepared PVSCs. To this end, the TOF-SIMS experiment was designed for a comparative study by fabricating two PVSCs, one with and the other without an Ag layer atop. Here, we focus on some species which are not supposed to be in the HTM layer, such as I−, for example. After the SIMS testing, the fresh samples were kept in the glovebox for another 2 weeks (0% R.H.), and then measured again to see any changes of the unexpected species (I−) varied with time. Here, in situ SIMS monitoring of the ions from the devices under an external electric field is not considered due to our technical limit. However, if ions could diffuse in (outside) the HTL layer freely without an external electric field, this ion migration process would definitely be accelerated under an external electric field.
As shown in Fig. 5a, a considerable amount of I− was detected in the HTM layer of freshly prepared perovskite devices without the Ag metal contact. However, this I− intensity is not due to mobile ion redistribution under the electric field generated in the space charge region, but rather due to the interaction between spiro-OMeTAD+ and mobile I− as follows:43 Spiro-OMeTAD+ + I− → spiro-OMeTAD–I(1)
 Fig. 5  TOF-SIMS depth profiles of freshly prepared Ag contact free normal structure MAPbI3 (a), PCBM-MAPbI3 (b) and MAPbBr3 perovskite films. (d) The enlarged I− depth profiles (data extracted from (a–c)) in the HTM layer. This halide anion intensity in the HTL increases in the order of MAPbBr3, PCBM-MAPbI3 and MAPbI3, reflecting the mobility of the halide anions in the perovskite films. 
This side reaction results in a large amount of accumulated I− species in the spiro layer, which reduces the p-doping character of the HTL and could be the reason for the observed hysteresis in spiro based PVSCs.43,44 Detailed comparison on the hysteresis features between MA and FA devices will be given below. While varying the perovskite materials, we found this I− intensity increasing in the order of MAPbBr3, PCBM passivated MAPbI3 (PCBM-MAPbI3) and MAPbI3 (Fig. 5d). The far smaller I− intensity with PCBM-MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 can be explained as follows: (1) the crystal lattice of MAPbBr3 is smaller than that of MAPbI3, so a stronger bonding can be guaranteed in MAPbBr3 and the halide ion diffusion can be suppressed;16 (2) PCBM can passivate the grain boundaries of MAPbI3, thus resulting in suppressed mobile ion migration.45 In any event, although the mobile halide ion migration into the HTL was due to the attraction to the spiro cations (eqn (1)), the intensity of this I− in the HTL was determined by the mobile (less mobile) feature of the halide ions in the perovskite materials. Here, halide migration has been reported by S. Stranks46 and D. Carlo.4 They have done excellent studies. However, S. Stranks's work focused on the halide redistribution on the perovskite film level instead of the device level in our case. Besides, D. Carlo reported halide redistribution using STEM instead of SIMS and they suggested that this halide redistribution is related to a fabrication process, which may not be the case. In our current study, we observed halide redistribution (I− showed up in the HTL) in device level PVSCs regardless of perovskite materials.
In order to investigate if this I− intensity is contact dependent, films without the Ag contact and with the Ag contact were considered. Compared with samples without the Ag contact, this mobile I− intensity (the unexpected I− intensity in the HTL layer) has been almost doubled in devices with the Ag back contact (Fig. 6a and b), manifesting a clear sensitivity to the back contact. Besides, taking the storage time into consideration, although this mobile I− intensity in films without the Ag contact is approximately the same after an extra 2 weeks of storage, it has been almost doubled in devices with the Ag back contact under otherwise identical conditions (Fig. 6c and j). The Ag contact accelerated I− migration not only demonstrates the mobile feature of I− but also indicates the ion migration accelerated degradation in PVSC devices. With the metal back contact, even when kept in the glovebox, the mobile ion still manages to penetrate throughout the HTM layer, possibly resulting in device degradation. This unexpected I− out-diffusion for devices kept in the inert atmosphere further accentuates the importance of an inorganic buffer layer (TiO2 (ref. 33) or SnO2 (ref. 34) for instance) to improve the stability of PVSC devices.
 Fig. 6  TOF-SIMS depth profiles of MAPbI3 (a, c, e and g) and FAPbI3 (b, d, f and h) PVSC devices without the Ag layer (a, b, e and f) and with the Ag layer (c, d, g and h) kept in the inert atmosphere. (a–d) Freshly prepared devices; (e–h) devices kept in the glove box for an extra 2 weeks. (i and j) TOF-SIMS profiles of freshly prepared MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 films (perovskite films on clean FTO glasses), which indicate a uniform distribution of elements in the films. (k and l) Enlarged I− profiles (data extracted from (a–h)) in the HTM layer for devices without Ag contact (k) and with Ag contact (l). Although the I− intensity shows up in the HTL layer regardless of the perovskite material type, it is much lower in FAPbI3 than in MAPbI3. Besides, this I− intensity is also sensitive to the substrate contact. 
Compared with MAPbI3, only 25% of the I− intensity (still refers to the unexpected I− intensity in the HTL region) can be detected in FAPbI3 devices (Fig. 6k and l) and this intensity slightly increases after 2 weeks of storage (devices with the Ag layer). The above evidence confirms that the ion migration phenomenon can be suppressed in FAPbI3. Here, the suppressed ion migration in FAPbI3 can be attributed to the larger radius of FA+ (2.53 Å) than that of MA+ (2.17 Å). In particular, considering that the organic MA+/FA+ cation occupies the central hollow site of the cage structure built by 8 [PbI6]4− octahedra, a relatively larger organic cation would definitely stabilize the structure and hinder the migration of mobile I− species.47 Besides, the molecular dipole moment of FA+ (0.21 D) is much smaller than that of MA+ (2.29 D),48 and the energy barrier for the rotation of FA+ (13.9 kJ mol−1) is much higher than that of MA+ (0.3 kJ mol−1),49 all pointing to a higher driving force for the I− migration for the former. At last, DFT calculations showed that the activation energy for mobile I− migration has been greatly increased from 0.32 eV (MAPbI3) to 0.55 eV in FAPbI3.50 Although suppressed ion migration in FAPbI3 has been predicted previously from a computational study,50 we have now for the first time experimentally confirmed this proposition. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. S14 and Table S1,† the hysteresis is much smaller in FAPbI3 devices compared with that of MAPbI3, due reasonably to the reduced iodine migration in FAPbI3 materials.
Conclusion
To conclude, organic cation dependent degradation of PVSCs has been investigated in great detail. It is confirmed that by using TOF-SIMS to track ions in the devices, besides moisture, ion migration plays an important role in the PVSC degradation. Besides, using SIMS, we have verified the existence of mobile ions on the device level of PVSCs instead of simply on the film level, although the existence of I− in the HTL was due to the reaction between spiro+ and I−, the intensity of this I− species also correlates with the mobile (less mobile) feature of the halide ions in the perovskite materials. Compared with MAPbI3, this ion migration tendency can be greatly slowed down in FAPbI3 devices, which possibly explains the improved stability and the hysteresis-less feature of FAPbI3 devices. Overall, this work not only highlights the different PVSC degradation mechanisms dictated by the different organic cations (MA+ and FA+) but also demonstrates the power of the SIMS technique for investigating ion migration in perovskite or other materials, providing the needed insight for device engineering toward high performance PVSCs with a stable output and long-term stability.
Experimental details
All materials if not stated were purchased from Sigma and Aldrich.
Solar cell fabrication
FTO glasses were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath containing ethanol for 30 min, and treated in a UV ozone (UVO) cleaner for 20 min. After that, a TiO2 dense layer was prepared by spin-coating a 0.15 M titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution in 1-butanol three times on the FTO substrate at 2000 rpm for 20 s. Between each coating, the FTO substrate was dried on a hot plate at 125 °C for 5 min, and finally annealed at 500 °C for 1 h.
A one step method34,51 has been used to prepare the perovskite films. The perovskite solution was prepared by mixing 0.553 g PbI2 (99.9985%, Alfa) and 0.19 g MAI or 0.206 g FAI (both purchased from Dyesol) in a 1 ml solution of N,N-dimethylformamide and dimethyl sulfoxide mixture solution with a volume ratio (3:7) and stirred at 60 °C overnight. The perovskite precursor solution was then spuncast on the FTO/TiO2 substrate at 1000 rpm for 15 s and 4000 rpm for 45 s. 0.7 ml chlorobenzene was drop-cast on the substrate during the last 20 s of the second spin-coating step. After the spin-coating process, the MAPbI3 (FAPbI3) films were annealed at 100 °C (150 °C) for 30 min separately. The HTM solution was prepared by dissolving spiro-MeOTAD (Lumtec) in chlorobenzene (72.3 mg/1 ml), 28.8 μl tert-butylpyridine (TBP) solution and 17.5 μl Li-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI)/acetonitrile (540 mg/1 ml). The solution was spin-coated on the prepared film at 5000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, an 80 nm silver electrode was thermally evaporated on the spiro-MeOTAD coated film with a base pressure of 1 × 10−4 Pa. The fabrication of MAPbBr3 PVSCs follows a similar process, while for PCBM-MAPbI3, the prepared MAPbI3 films were dipped in a chlorobenzene solution containing PCBM (3 mg ml−1). After 12 h, the films were washed with chlorobenzene solvent to remove the excess PCBM molecules and spin coated with spiro-MeOTAD at 5000 rpm for 30 s.
Both the dark stability and operational stability were considered in this research. The dark stability measurement refers to storing our devices in a dry box (∼20% R.H.) and measuring per day under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) under the ambient conditions (≥70% R.H.), while the operational stability tests were conducted at 40 °C, ≥70% R.H., AM 1.5G continuous illumination.
Material characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Philips PW-1830 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (K = 0.15418 nm). Morphological and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) characterization was performed on a JEOL 6700F or 7100F SEM with an accelerating voltage of 5 kV.
As for the TOF-SIMS measurement, Cs+ primary ions (3 keV, 30 nA, 300 × 300 μm2) were used for erosion and a Bi+ pulsed primary ion beam for the analysis (25 keV, 1 pA, 48 × 48 μm2). The analysis area was centered inside the cesium raster area. The interlaced mode was used, with 2.5 s sputtering after each bismuth analysis cycle (128 × 128 pixels).
Photovoltaic characterization
The solar light simulator (Newport solar simulator, model number 6255, 150 W Xe lamp, AM 1.5G global filter) was calibrated to 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) using a silicon reference solar cell equipped with a KG-5 filter. The active cell area was all fixed at about 10 mm2 and J–V curves were recorded on an IM6x electrochemical workstation (ZAHNER-Elektrik GmbH & Co., KG, Germany).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the HK-RGC General Research Funds (GRF no. 16300915), the HK Innovation and Technology Fund (ITS/004/14) and the NSFC-HKRGC Joint Research Scheme (N_HKUST610/14).
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J. P. Correa Baena, J. D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 1501170 Search PubMed .
F. Matteocci, Y. Busby, J. J. Pireaux, G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, C. Ducati and A. Di Carlo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26176–26183 CAS .
M. Petrović, V. Chellappan and S. Ramakrishna, Sol. Energy, 2015, 122, 678–699 CrossRef .
T. Todorov, T. Gershon, O. Gunawan, Y. S. Lee, C. Sturdevant, L. Y. Chang and S. Guha, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 1500799 CrossRef .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J. P. C. Baena, F. Lang, L. Kegelmann, M. Mews, L. Steier, A. Abate, J. Rappich, L. Korte, R. Schlatmann, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and B. Rech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 81–88 CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Gurudayal, D. Sabba, M. H. Kumar, L. H. Wong, J. Barber, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3833–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, J. H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiao, H. Chen, F. Jiang, Y. Bai, Z. Zhu, T. Zhang, X. Zheng, G. Qian, C. Hu, Y. Zhou, Y. Qu and S. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 1600484 CrossRef .
L. Dou, Y. M. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 6404 Search PubMed .
J. C. Yu, D. W. Kim, D. B. Kim, E. D. Jung, J. H. Park, A. Y. Lee, B. R. Lee, D. Di Nuzzo, R. H. Friend and M. H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6906–6913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, X. Liu, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5995–6001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Xiao, L. Zhu, C. Hu, Q. Xue and S. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 620–630 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y. B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 CAS .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500195 CrossRef .
L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, M. Remeika, A. J. Winchester, A. Gabe and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15451–15456 CAS .
Z. Wei, X. Zheng, H. Chen, X. long, Z. Wang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16430–16434 CAS .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, K. Yan, H. Chen, Y. Yi, T. Zhang, X. long, J. Li, L. Zhang, J. Wang and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3326–3333 CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
A. Guerrero, J. You, C. Aranda, Y. S. Kang, G. Garcia-Belmonte, H. Zhou, J. Bisquert and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 218–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bag, L. A. Renna, R.
Y. Adhikari, S. Karak, F. Liu, P. M. Lahti, T. P. Russell, M. T. Tuominen and D. Venkataraman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13130–13137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, E. T. Hoke, G. Grancini, D. J. Slotcavage, G. E. Eperon, J. M. Ball, M. De Bastiani, A. R. Bowring, N. Martino, K. Wojciechowski, M. D. McGehee, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500962 CrossRef .
K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, Y. Bai, X. Liu, C. C. Chueh, S. Yang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6478–6484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Sanehira, B. J. Tremolet de Villers, P. Schulz, M. O. Reese, S. Ferrere, K. Zhu, L. Y. Lin, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pang, H. Hu, J. Zhang, S. Lv, Y. Yu, F. Wei, T. Qin, H. Xu, Z. Liu and G. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1485–1491 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, S. Pang, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5535–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Norrman, M. V. Madsen, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16883–16892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chirilă, P. Reinhard, F. Pianezzi, P. Bloesch, A. R. Uhl, C. Fella, L. Kranz, D. Keller, C. Gretener, H. Hagendorfer, D. Jaeger, R. Erni, S. Nishiwaki, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1107–1111 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Bai, H. Chen, S. Xiao, Q. Xue, T. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Q. Li, C. Hu, Y. Yang, Z. Hu, F. Huang, K. S. Wong, H. L. Yip and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2950–2958 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyano, M. Yanagida, N. Tripathi and Y. Shirai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2240–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Carrillo, A. Guerrero, S. Rahimnejad, O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502246 CrossRef .
H. S. Kim, I. H. Jang, N. Ahn, M. Choi, A. Guerrero, J. Bisquert and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4633–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, W. Zhou, W. Ma, S. Meng, H. Li, J. Wei, R. Fu, K. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. deQuilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulović, H. J. Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, J. H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S. H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926–8942 CAS .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, H. Yu, L. Li, F. Wang, H. Xu and N. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1253–1259 CAS .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Han and Y. Tateyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10048–10051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: General characterization of the perovskite films exposed to the humid ambient environment, J–V characterization of the PVSCs under dark stability evolution and TOF-SIMS of PVSC devices exposed to the humid environment for different times. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta09687eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Stability evaluation comparison between MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 based solar cells. (a) J–V curves of PVSCs prepared via the optimized solvent dripping method. (b) Operational and (c) dark stability of both MAPbI3 (black squares) and FAPbI3 (red circles) devices. Here, the dark stability refers to storing our PVSC devices in a dry box (∼20% R.H.) and measuring under ambient conditions (∼70% R.H.), while the operational stability suggests placing the cell under AM 1.5G (100 mV cm−2) continuous illumination with 40 °C, ≥70% humidity. The points with error bars shown in (b) were constructed using the average of 5 films ± 1 standard deviation. (d–g) Photographs of PVSC devices after 5 h AM 1.5G continuous light illumination, (d and f) top view, (e and g) back view, (d and e) MAPbI3, (f and g) FAPbI3.	 

 	Fig. 2  Phase and structure evolution of PVSCs (Ag/spiro/perovskite/TiO2/FTO) under different conditions as specified (a) MAPbI3, (b) FAPbI3. Dark lines: freshly prepared samples; red lines: devices stored in a dark dry box for a month; blue lines: devices left in the laboratory under ambient conditions for a week. Peaks indexed to different crystal phases are marked by different symbols.	 

 	Fig. 3  Evidence for ion migration accelerated degradation in degraded devices after 5 h AM 1.5G continuous light illumination: (a) degraded MAPbI3 devices, (b) degraded FAPbI3 devices. Here the TOF-SIMS profiles show the elemental distribution across the devices from the cathode (Ag) to the anode (FTO). (c–f) Reconstructed elemental 3D maps for the elements Ag (c and e) and I− (d and f) from the TOF-SIMS depth profiles in (a and b).	 

 	Fig. 4  Evidence for moisture enhanced ion migration in PVSCs. (a–d) TOF-SIMS spectrum for degraded devices (a and b) MAPbI3, (c and d) FAPbI3 kept under different conditions, (a and c) devices kept in the dry box for a month, (b and d) devices exposed to the ambient laboratory conditions for a week. Clearly, the ion migration has been enhanced with the assistance of moisture. (e–h) Schematic illustration of the moisture enhanced ion migration in degrading PVSCs, (e and f) MAPbI3, (g and h) FAPbI3.	 
Spiro-OMeTAD+ + I− → spiro-OMeTAD–I	(1)

 	Fig. 5  TOF-SIMS depth profiles of freshly prepared Ag contact free normal structure MAPbI3 (a), PCBM-MAPbI3 (b) and MAPbBr3 perovskite films. (d) The enlarged I− depth profiles (data extracted from (a–c)) in the HTM layer. This halide anion intensity in the HTL increases in the order of MAPbBr3, PCBM-MAPbI3 and MAPbI3, reflecting the mobility of the halide anions in the perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 6  TOF-SIMS depth profiles of MAPbI3 (a, c, e and g) and FAPbI3 (b, d, f and h) PVSC devices without the Ag layer (a, b, e and f) and with the Ag layer (c, d, g and h) kept in the inert atmosphere. (a–d) Freshly prepared devices; (e–h) devices kept in the glove box for an extra 2 weeks. (i and j) TOF-SIMS profiles of freshly prepared MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 films (perovskite films on clean FTO glasses), which indicate a uniform distribution of elements in the films. (k and l) Enlarged I− profiles (data extracted from (a–h)) in the HTM layer for devices without Ag contact (k) and with Ag contact (l). Although the I− intensity shows up in the HTL layer regardless of the perovskite material type, it is much lower in FAPbI3 than in MAPbI3. Besides, this I− intensity is also sensitive to the substrate contact.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: General characterization of the perovskite films exposed to the humid ambient environment, J–V characterization of the PVSCs under dark stability evolution and TOF-SIMS of PVSC devices exposed to the humid environment for different times. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta09687e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
