Stress induction, UV emission variation and efficiency variation in dye-sensitized solar cells of hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructures  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA12213A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA12213A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10274-10280Stress induction, UV emission variation and efficiency variation in dye-sensitized solar cells of hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructuresShih-Shou Lo*a, Yi Ting Hunga and Der Jun JanbaDepartment of Photonics, Feng-Chia University, No. 100, Wehhwa Rd., Seatwen Area, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: sslo@fcu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886-4-24510182;   Tel: +886-4-24517250 ext. 5041bPhysics Division, Institute of Nuclear Energy Research, No. 1000, Wenhua Rd., Jiaan Village, Longtan Township, Taoyaun County, Taiwan 32546, Republic of ChinaReceived 7th June 2013, Accepted 21st June 2013First published on 21st June 2013AbstractWe synthesized a hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure via a two-step chemical colloidal process. The structural and optical properties, and application of the samples were examined in detail. We found that a E2(high) mode with a red-shift of 6 cm−1 compared with original ZnO hollow nanostructure was induced in the Raman spectra. The red-shift of the E2(high) mode is attributed to stress induction in the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure. When the thickness of the ZnS nanoshell increases, a blue-shift UV emission band of approximately 6 nm is displayed in the room temperature photoluminescence spectra. The blue-shift of the UV emission band of the as-synthesized sample deteriorates when the thickness of the ZnS nanoshell becomes thicker. Although, the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure can help in increasing the optical path length within the electrode of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) due to the multiple scattering of the ZnS–ZnO–ZnS interface. In this study, a low performance N719 DSSC was obtained. A possible reason for the lower performance of DSSC with a hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure electrode is discussed.1 IntroductionNanoscale heterostructures have been the focus of current colloidal nanocrystal synthesis because new materials are in demand for science and engineering. These heterostructures have properties that cannot be achieved with only a single material. It is well known that depending on the bandgaps and the relative position of the electronic energy levels of the involved semiconductor, the shell of the heterostructure can have a different function. In this type-I semiconductor, the electrons and holes experience a confinement potential that tends to localize both of the carriers in the core layer, which reduces their interactions with surface trap-states and improves the emission quantum yields of the nanocrystals. Therefore, functional semiconductor materials with designed energy configuration have attracted considerable interest in the past few years. For the functional semiconductor, the fundamental research topics for their applications in optoelectronics include energy transfer and carrier dynamics,1,2 which are strongly dependent on their electronic energy configuration and structure. The hollow structures are expected to have potential applications in catalysts, sensors, energy-storage media, drug-delivery carriers, photonics crystals, and artificial cells because of the special hollow geometrical shapes, and high surface areas.3ZnO (band gap = 3.38 eV) and ZnS (band gap = 3.87 eV) are two crucial direct wide band-gap semiconductor materials. Numerous morphologies of ZnO and ZnS have been synthesized4–7 and their linear and nonlinear optical properties have been extensively discussed.8,9 Several studies have focused on the surface functionalization of ZnO and ZnS to broaden their advanced applications.10,11To date, ZnO-based core–shell-type nanostructures, including ZnO/ZnS, ZnO/SnO2 and ZnO/ZnSe, have been explored. In spite of these successes, challenges for scientists to overcome still exist. First, the traditional preparation method usually has disadvantages related to requiring special equipment and/or high temperatures, which results in a high-cost and energy consuming synthesis process. Second, to the best of our knowledge, hollow ZnO-based sandwich-type core–shell nanostructures have not yet been reported. Therefore, to develop hollow ZnO-based core–shell nanostructures and broaden their applications is necessary.In this article, we demonstrated a hollow ZnO-based core–shell nanostructure synthesised using a low-cost chemical colloidal process. The stress, photoluminescence (PL), and efficiency variation in a N719 dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) can be highly influenced by coating with a ZnS nanoshell.2 Experimental section(a) Synthesis of hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructures and characterisation measurementsThe hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure were prepared using a two-step method. Firstly, the hollow ZnO nanostructures were synthesized using a chemical colloidal process at 180 °C.12 The as-synthesized samples were subsequently immersed in a 0.24 mol L−1 Na2S aqueous solution at room temperature and stirred to allow ZnS nanoshell growth for various treatment times (1, 3, 6 and 12 h). The samples were analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a Cu Kα radiation. The morphology and dimensions of the nanostructure were observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded using a He–Cd laser with 325 nm light and a monochromator.(b) Cell fabrication and photoelectrochemical measurementThe detailed fabrication processes for the N719 DSSC can be found elsewhere.13 In brief, fluorine doped SnO2 (FTO) glass substrate was firstly immersed in a 100 mL 5 mM zinc chlorine aqueous solution. The FTO substrate was covered with hollow ZnO and a thin-layer of hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure and immersed in 0.25 mM absolute ethanol solution of dye N719 for 24 h. When loaded with N719 dye molecules, it was washed with ethanol, dried in air and used as the electrode of DSSC. A thermally coated Au conductive glass with two apertures served as the counter-electrode. The liquid electrolyte contained a modified parameter,12 0.5 M KI, 0.05 M I2, and 0.005 M 4-tert-butylpyriden (TBP) in acetonitrile. Then the photo- and counter-electrodes were sandwich together and several drops of liquid electrolyte were injected into the aperture using an injector to form the aperture to wholly permeate the various hollow ZnO nanostructure thin-films. Finally, a piece of glass was used as a sealant. A DSSC with an electrode with various ZnO nanostructures was assembled, as shown in Scheme 1. Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of the DSSC fabrication process. 3 Results and discussionTypical SEM images of the sample pre-reaction with the Na2S solution are shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b). Clearly, a hole is observed on the surface of the ZnO nanostructure. The detailed hole formation of the ZnO hollow spheres has been reported by Lo and Haung.12 In brief, the formation of the holes in hollow ZnO nanostructure is due to the ZnO nanostructure minimizing the total surface energy at the expense of small interior nanostructures and the solution's vapor bubbles were released from the inside of ZnO nanostructure. An SEM image taken post-reaction with the Na2S solution, 1 h, 3 h, 6 h and 12 h, is shown in Fig. 1(c)–(f). The area marked with a white line also indicates ZnO and ZnS/ZnO/ZnS spheres that cracked during the synthesis process. Detailed investigation of the surface morphology of the as-synthesized sample was carried out. The surface morphology of the hollow ZnO nanostructure with a slight modification was observed after the sulfuration process (12 h). The surface becomes denser due to the ZnO entities covered by ZnS nanoshell. Fig. 1  SEM image of as-synthesized hollow ZnO nanostructure with different sulfuration times. (a) Original nanostructure with low magnification. (b) Original nanostructure with large magnification. (c) 1 h, (d) 3 h, (e) 6 h and (f) 12 h. The chemical composition of as-synthesized nanostructures had been analyzed by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) (Fig. 2(a) and (b)) and the results indicate that the pre-reaction hollow ZnO nanostructure contains only Zn and O without presence of any impurities. After post-reaction, the signal of S can be clearly observed in the EDS spectrum. For a detailed comparison, the composition of Zn, O and S in the as-synthesized samples versus the sulfuration times is shown in Fig. 2(c). When the sulfuration time increases, the sulfur element content increases and the oxygen element content decreases. Fig. 2  (a) EDS spectra acquired from the original hollow ZnO nanostructure. (b) EDS spectra acquired from hollow ZnO nanostructure with sulfuration process 12 h. (c) The composition of O, S, and Zn versus sulfuration time. To examine the structural properties in detail, the XRD patterns of the as-synthesized products were studied (Fig. 3). The XRD results of the pure ZnO architectures showed that all the products exhibited characteristic XRD peaks corresponding to the hexagonal ZnO structure [JCPDS card no. 36-1451]. The sharp and intense diffraction peaks suggest that the resulting products were effectively crystallized. Prior studies have obtained similar results.14 An additional peak was observed at 2θ = 28.6° after the introduction of ZnS. This peak corresponds to the (111) plane of the zinc-blende ZnS (JCPDS Card no. 05-0566). The ZnS peak of the nanostructured sample was relatively broad compared to that from the pure ZnO hollow nanostructure. The higher temperature of sulfuration would cause the phase transformed ZnS to be present.15 Therefore, the higher sulfuration temperature for the hollow ZnO nanostructure conversion was not in the scope of this study. Fig. 3  XRD patterns of the ZnO hollow nanostructure with various sulfuration times. The purity hollow ZnO and composition of hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructures were examined by XPS analysis. Fig. 4(a) presents a survey spectrum of the hollow ZnO nanostructure with various ZnS nanoshell thicknesses. The S binding energy cannot be observed in the survey spectrum of the pre-reaction hollow ZnO nanostructure. However, the peak of Zn, S and O binding energy can be clearly observed in the survey spectrum of the post-reaction hollow ZnO. It implies a complete conversion at the surface, because of the atom ratio of Zn and S is close to 1:1. The binding energy of Zn 2p3/2 located at 1022.0 eV can be indexed to Zn–S bond. The close-up spectrum of the S2p peak of the sample is shown in Fig. 4(b). The asymmetric S2p peak located at 161.9 eV is smaller than that of sulfur-related compounds, which agrees with the binding energy of ZnS.16 Fig. 4  (a) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy scanning the whole spectrum of the hollow ZnO nanostructures for different sulfuration times (b) high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectra of S2p. To further investigate the interface structure between ZnS nanoshell and ZnO layer, TEM and high-resolution TEM were used on the samples that underwent sulfuration for different times. Fig. 5 shows the TEM and HRTEM image of the untreated hollow ZnO nanostructure. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns (the marked area of the corresponding HRTEM image) indicate that the ZnS nanoshell is polycrystalline in nature. Fig. 5  TEM (left) and HRTEM (right) image of hollow ZnO nanostructure under different sulfuration times. (a) 0 h, (b) 1 h, (c) 3 h, (d) 6 h and (e) 12 h. The line scans in (e) are the Zn (red), O (green) and S (blue) elements. Based on the SEM image, a possible growth process for the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure was given, as shown in Scheme 2. In the first step, the hollow ZnO nanostructures were synthesized via a chemical colloidal process. In the second step, the surface of the ZnO hollow nanostructure became denser (3 h), implying the formation of the ZnS nanoshell. When the sulfuration time increases (12 h), the ZnS nanoshell was formed. Therefore, the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure were formed by the direct reaction of H2S with the surface layer of ZnO as ZnO + H2S → ZnS + H2O. The chemical reaction in the aqueous solution can be written as: Na2S + 2H2O → H2S + 2NaOH(1) ZnO + H2S → ZnS + H2O(2) Scheme 2  A schematic diagram of the growth of hollow Zns/ZnO/ZnS core–shell nanostructures: (a) the growth process, (b) sulfur atoms replace the oxygen atoms of the ZnO nanostructure and (c) the ZnS–ZnO interface. Because the conversion of ZnO to ZnS is essentially a substitution reaction, the ZnO layer is thinner, and the growth of the outer and inner ZnS nanoshell occurs, which is supported morphology evolution of hollow ZnO nanostructures. A schematic diagram of the growth process of the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructures and the atomic structure of the hollow nanostructures and the atomic structure of the ZnS/ZnO interface are shown in Scheme 2(a) and (b).The Raman-active photon modes of ZnO nanostructure include E2(low), E2(high), A1 longitudinal optical (LO), A1 transverse optical (TO) and E1, (TO).12Fig. 6 presents the room temperature Raman spectra of the nanostructures of hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure in the spectral range 300–2000 cm−1 excited by a He–Ne laser operating at 632.8 nm. For comparison, the figure also shows the Raman spectrum of the untreated hollow ZnO nanostructure. The strong peak located at 436 cm−1 was attributed to the E2(high) mode of ZnO. The E2(high) mode red-shift 2 cm−1 compared with bulk ZnO, which may be attributed to the stress in the ZnO hollow nanostructures. This has been addressed in a previous study.12 A broad peak at approximately 550–590 cm−1 (marked with the red-circle in the spectrum in Fig. 6) was attributed to the A1(LO) and E1(LO) mode of ZnO. The broad and strong mode of A1 and E1 indicates that these modes are associated with the defects of oxygen vacancy in the untreated ZnO hollow nanostructures. Fig. 6  Raman spectra of ZnO hollow spheres with various sulfuration times. The peaks located at 347 cm−1 were observed when the sulfuration time exceeds 3 h. The peak can be assigned to longitudinal optical (LO) phonon peak of ZnS.17 The vibrational peaks of both ZnO and ZnS can be observed simultaneously, which confirmed the formation of the nanostructures of hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS core–shells after the sulfuration process.For the wurtzite structure crystals, stress induced in the crystals affects the E2 phonon frequency obviously, and from which the information on stress can be extracted.18 An increase in the E2 phonon frequency is ascribed to compressive stress, whereas a decrease in the E2 phonon frequency is ascribed to tensile stress. Therefore, the Raman scattering of the E2 phonon is of great advantage for studies of residual stress within ZnO core–shell nanostructure. It is generally agreed that the stress arises from the mismatch of thermal expansion coefficients or the lattice mismatch and distortion of ZnS/ZnO/ZnS hollow nanostructures. A Raman shift of 6 cm−1 had taken place in the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure. This indicates that a tensile stress caused by the lattice mismatch between ZnO layer and ZnS nanoshell.Fig. 7 shows the room-temperature PL spectra of the as-synthesized nanostructures of the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure. The PL spectra of the untreated ZnO hollow nanostructure were used as references to study the PL of the as-synthesized sample. Two emission bands, including a strong violet emission (centered at approximately 383 nm) and a strong green band (centered at approximately 550 nm), were observed in the ZnO hollow nanostructure. The UV emission at 383 nm originated from the excitonic recombination corresponding to the band emission of ZnO.19 The origin of the green emission (marked with the brown-circle in Fig. 7) was attributed to the defect related emission between oxygen vacancy (Oi) and the valence band.20 It is good agreement with the results of Raman spectra. Fig. 7  Room temperature PL spectra of ZnO hollow nanostructure with various sulfuration times. In general, type-I core–shell semiconductor nanomaterials (e.g. CdSe/ZnS), with a wider band gap in their shell layer, have strong confinement and can improve photoluminescence (PL) efficiency due to the passivation effect. The band-diagram of the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure is shown in Scheme 3. Scheme 3  Schematic band diagram of hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS core–shell nanostructure. Compared with the untreated hollow ZnO nanostructure and the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure, a small blue shift of approximately 6 nm in the UV region, an enhanced violet emission, and reduction green emission compared to that of the original ZnO hollow nanostructures were observed after the sulfuration time exceeded 1 h. Because the sulfur atom can replace the oxygen atom on the ZnO surface, the thickness of the ZnO nanoshell would become thinner. For semiconductor materials, the carrier concentration is a crucial factor that can influence the luminescence spectra. The widened band gap of the as-synthesized sample may be attributed to the Burstein–Moss effect because the thickness of the ZnO nanoshell becomes thinner21 and the enrichment of the sulfur atoms on the nanostructure when the oxygen atoms of the ZnO nanolayer were replayed by the sulfur atoms. A substantial enhancement of UV emission was observed when the sulfuration time of the ZnO hollow nanostructure exceeded 3 h. The enhanced intensity of the UV band was caused by the suppressed tunneling of the charge carrier from the inner and outer ZnS nanoshell. Consequently, more photogenerated electrons and holes were confined inside the ZnO layer, resulting in a high quantum yield of approximately 50 times that of the ZnO layer alone. Enhanced UV emission in the ZnO–ZnS core–shell nanostructure was also observed by Li et al.22The green emission of the PL spectra originates from the oxygen vacancies. During the formation process of the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructures, the hydrolysis of Na2S produces H2S and the sulfur atom replaces and squeezes out the oxygen vacancies from the surface of the ZnO nanocrystals. The density of oxygen vacancies in the ZnO hollow nanostructure is reduced considerably and the green emission is weakened. These results indicated that the sulfuration process has a substantial effect on the relative intensity and position of typical ZnO PL properties and Raman scattering.A lower side band located at 428 nm was observed in the PL spectra (treatment times > 3 h), as shown in Fig. 7. The blue emission was attributed to the surface states of the ZnS nanoshell.23 The thicker ZnS nanoshell caused lower excitation power for ZnO layer and the surface states of the ZnO nanoshell could trap the photogeneration carriers. These are the reasons for the violet emission and blue emission of the as-synthesized sample weakening when the sulfuration time increases.To further study the influence of the ZnS nanoshell on applications for DSSC performance, a N719 DSSC was fabricated with various electrode (hollow ZnO and hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure). Fig. 8 displays the cross section and top-view SEM image of the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure electrode for N719 DSSC. Fig. 9 shows the compared photocurrent-voltage (J–V) characteristics of both the DSSCs under AM1.5. The short-circuit current density (Jsc), the open-circuit voltage (Voc), and the fill factor (FF) are presented in Table 1. From Fig. 10 and Table 1, the Jsc and Voc for the DSSC constructed are lower when the sulfuration time is longer. A lower Jsc would result in a lower η since the η is partly dependent on the Jsc. Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional and (b) top-view SEM images of a film with a hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure (the inset is the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure).  Fig. 9  I–V curve for the most efficient cell with various ZnO electrodes, under AM 1.5 illumination. 
Table 1 Performance taken from the I–V characteristics under AM1.5 for various treatment times

ZnO electrodeJsc (mA cm−2)Voc (V)FF (%)η (%)Un-treated ZnO1.410.47471.02Sulfuration 1 h1.20.44310.94Sulfuration 3 h0.750.39470.56Sulfuration 6 h0.10.37500.19Sulfuration 12 h0.090.38460.16 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the energy levels of the proposed structure: (a) hollow ZnO and (b) a hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS photoelectrode in a DSSC. Usually, the core–shell nanostructure is a configuration designed for electrode films in DSSCs to reduce the recombination rate at the electrode–electrolyte interface. The hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure can help in increasing the optical path length within the electrode due to multiple scattering of the ZnS–ZnO–ZnS interfaces. Highly disordered and complex structures result in light scattering, possibly leading to photon localization because of the formation of traps for optical confinement. Increasing the optical path length will increase the efficiency of the DSSC. Some important studies for DSSCs have been demonstrated, such as ZnS/ZnO,24 ZnO/TiO2,25 CdS/ZnO.26 However, a low performance of the N719 DSSC was obtained in this study. A possible reason is discussed.Fig. 10 presents an energy-level diagram that schematically illustrates the function of the ZnS nanoshell in a hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure. Those photogenerated electrons in the dye molecules with high kinetic energy can readily tunnel through the ZnS nanoshell and be injected into the ZnO layer. However, the transport of electrons in the reverse direction may be blocked due to the presence of an energy barrier provided by the ZnS nanoshell, thereby reducing the recombination rate of photogenerated electrons. Moreover, the conduction-band potential of the shell layer should be more negative than that of the core semiconductor (ZnO). This establishes an energy barrier, which hinders the reaction of electrons in the core with the oxidized dye or redox mediator in the electrolyte. In this study, a barrier would be formed between the ZnO layer and the FTO glass because the ZnO nanoshell was covered by ZnS nanoshell. The thickness of the ZnS nanoshell would influence the transport of electrons. Addition, the surface state of ZnS would trap the photogeneration carriers of electrode. The short-circuit current dramatically decreases when the sulfuration time of the hollow ZnO nanostructure exceeds 6 h. For a DSSC, the open-circuit voltage can be calculated using the formula27 (3)where k is the Boltzman constant, T is the temperature, q is the charge of the electron, Iinj is the injection current, ncb is the concentrations of the conduction band of the photoanode, ket is the reaction constant of injection electrons and I3 ions, and the [I3−] is the balance constant of I3 ions on the electrode. From eqn (3), the concentration of electrons on the conduction band of the electrode, ncb, increases due to the surface state of the ZnS present and the quantum confinement of the type-I semiconductor. The open-circuit voltage would decrease. Therefore, a lower performance of the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure DSSC was presented in this study. A detailed study of the photogeneration carriers transportation dynamic in the N719 DSSC will be carried out in future.4. ConclusionsHollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure has been successfully synthesized via a two-step chemical colloidal process. A possible formation mechanism for this nanostructure in the integrated process is reported. The influence of the ZnS nanoshell on the optical properties, structure, and efficiency of the N719 DSSC were examined in detail. Our promising result makes DSSC technology with a hollow ZnS nanostructure one step closer to commercialization.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank the National Science Council of Republic of China, Taiwan, for financially supporting this research under Contract no. (NSC-100-2112-M-035-002-MY3) and (NSC-101-2627-E-035-001).ReferencesH. Y. Yang, D. I. Son, T. W. Kim, J. M. Lee and W. I. I. Park, Org. Electron., 2011, 11, 1313 CrossRef .J. Song, X. Wang, J. Liu, H. Liu, Y. Li and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 203 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Dinsmore, M. F. Hsu, M. G. Nikolaides, M. Marquez, A. R. Bausch and D. A. Weitzl, Science, 2002, 298, 1006 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Jackson and N. J. Halas, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2743 CrossRef CAS .A. B. Juristic and Y. H. Leung, Small, 2006, 2, 944 CrossRef .H. Wang, D. W. Brandl, F. Le, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 827 CrossRef CAS .H. Kim, M. Achermann, L. P. Balet, H. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 544 CrossRef CAS .A. Burns, P. Sengupta, T. Zedayko, B. Baird and U. Wiesner, Small, 2006, 2, 723 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhu, H. I. Elim, Y.-L. Foo, T. Yu, Y. Liu, W. Ji, J.-Y. Lee, Z. Shen, A. T. S. Wee, J. T. L. Thong and C. H. Sow, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 587 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu, Y. Yin, Z. Y. Li and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 785 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Caruso and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3272 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Lo and D. Haung, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6762 CrossRef CAS .J. X. Wang, X. W. Sun, Y. Yang, H. Huang, Y. C. Lee, O. K. Tan and L. Vayssieres, Nanotechnology, 2005, 17, 4995 CrossRef .L. M. Liz-Marzan, M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 4329 CrossRef CAS .S. B. Qadri, E. F. Skelton, D. Hsu, A. D. Dinsmore, J. Yang, H. F. Gray and B. R. Ratna, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 60, 9191 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang, D. R. Yang, X. Y. Ma and D. L. Que, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2721 CrossRef CAS .O. Brafman and S. S. Mitra, Phys. Rev., 1968, 171, 931 CrossRef CAS .C. Cong, H. Y. Wei, P. F. Zhang, W. Q. Peng, J. J. Wu and X. L. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 231903 CrossRef .Y. J. Fang, J. Sha, Z. J. Wang, Y. T. Wan, W. W. Xia and Y. W. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 033103 CrossRef .F. H. Leiter, H. R. Alves, A. Hofstaetter, D. M. Hofmann and B. K. Meyer, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2001, 226, R4 CrossRef CAS .E. Burstein, Phys. Rev., 1954, 93, 632 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, D. Zhao, X. Meng, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Shen, Y. Lu and X. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 14685 CrossRef CAS .C. Li, G. Fang, N. Liu, J. Li, L. Liao, F. Su, G. Li, X. Wu and X. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12566 CAS .X. L. Xu, J. G. Song, Y. S. Fu, Y. Xie, X. Song, J. Sun and X. W. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2380 Search PubMed .M. Wang, C. Haung, Y. Cao, Q. Yu, W. Guo, Q. Liu, J. Liang and M. Hong, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 285311 CrossRef .Y. Tak, S. J. Hong, J. S. Lee and K. Yong, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5945 RSC .L. M. Peter, N. W. Duffy, R. L. Wang and K. G. U. Wijoyamtha, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 524, 127 CrossRef .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of the DSSC fabrication process.	 

 	Fig. 1  SEM image of as-synthesized hollow ZnO nanostructure with different sulfuration times. (a) Original nanostructure with low magnification. (b) Original nanostructure with large magnification. (c) 1 h, (d) 3 h, (e) 6 h and (f) 12 h.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) EDS spectra acquired from the original hollow ZnO nanostructure. (b) EDS spectra acquired from hollow ZnO nanostructure with sulfuration process 12 h. (c) The composition of O, S, and Zn versus sulfuration time.	 

 	Fig. 3  XRD patterns of the ZnO hollow nanostructure with various sulfuration times.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy scanning the whole spectrum of the hollow ZnO nanostructures for different sulfuration times (b) high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectra of S2p.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM (left) and HRTEM (right) image of hollow ZnO nanostructure under different sulfuration times. (a) 0 h, (b) 1 h, (c) 3 h, (d) 6 h and (e) 12 h. The line scans in (e) are the Zn (red), O (green) and S (blue) elements.	 
Na2S + 2H2O → H2S + 2NaOH	(1)
ZnO + H2S → ZnS + H2O	(2)

 	Scheme 2  A schematic diagram of the growth of hollow Zns/ZnO/ZnS core–shell nanostructures: (a) the growth process, (b) sulfur atoms replace the oxygen atoms of the ZnO nanostructure and (c) the ZnS–ZnO interface.	 

 	Fig. 6  Raman spectra of ZnO hollow spheres with various sulfuration times.	 

 	Fig. 7  Room temperature PL spectra of ZnO hollow nanostructure with various sulfuration times.	 

 	Scheme 3  Schematic band diagram of hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS core–shell nanostructure.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional and (b) top-view SEM images of a film with a hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure (the inset is the hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS nanostructure).	 

 	Fig. 9  I–V curve for the most efficient cell with various ZnO electrodes, under AM 1.5 illumination.	 

Un-treated ZnO	1.41	0.47	47	1.02
Sulfuration 1 h	1.2	0.44	31	0.94
Sulfuration 3 h	0.75	0.39	47	0.56
Sulfuration 6 h	0.1	0.37	50	0.19
Sulfuration 12 h	0.09	0.38	46	0.16

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the energy levels of the proposed structure: (a) hollow ZnO and (b) a hollow ZnS/ZnO/ZnS photoelectrode in a DSSC.	 
	(3)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
