Stable deep blue emission with unity quantum yield in organic–inorganic halide perovskite 2D nanosheets doped with cerium and terbium at high concentr ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC04937A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC04937A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 2437-2454Stable deep blue emission with unity quantum yield in organic–inorganic halide perovskite 2D nanosheets doped with cerium and terbium at high concentrations†

        
          
            Sumaiya 
            Parveen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ponnappa Kechanda 
            Prasanna
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sudip 
            Chakraborty
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            P. K. 
            Giri
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati-781039, India. E-mail: giri@iitg.ac.in
bDiscipline of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Indore-453552, India. E-mail: sudip@iiti.ac.in; sudiphys@gmail.com
cCentre for Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati-781039, India
Received 
      17th October 2020
    , Accepted 6th January 2021First published on 6th January 2021AbstractDespite recent efforts, achieving stable deep blue emission with near unity quantum yield from lead-free perovskite has remained a great challenge. In this study, we have developed a novel strategy to achieve stable and deep blue emission with absolute unity photoluminescence (PL) quantum yield (QY) through Ce3+ and Tb3+ doping at high concentrations in 2D CH3NH3PbBr3 nanosheets (NSs) using a solvothermal method. We investigated the role of dopants in achieving the high QY and deep blue emission in a 2D perovskite using density functional theory (DFT) based calculations of its electronic structure. Our studies reveal that with Ce/Tb doping, the thickness of the NSs systematically goes down from 10 layers to bilayers (1.4 nm) at high doping levels and the bandgap of the 2D perovskite layer increases from 2.394 eV to 2.981 eV. The measured bandgap widening with doping is analyzed and explained on the basis of the quantum confinement effect and lattice contraction. Interestingly, by incorporating 70 mol% CeBr3 in the perovskite crystal, we achieved a deep blue emitting nanoplatelet with 100% QY, narrow linewidth (∼24 nm), and a color coordinate of (0.145, 0.054) closely matching with the standard color Rec. 2020 (0.131, 0.046) specification, making it one of the most efficient perovskite blue light emitters reported to date. We also demonstrate much improved storage stability of the Ce and Tb doped NS, fully consistent with the DFT calculations. The low temperature PL study reveals the coexistence of ordered and disordered orthorhombic phases. From DFT calculations, we show that the dopants stabilize the structure with lower formation energy and enrich the conduction band edge states without introducing deep trap states, which is responsible for the high PL QY. The calculation also reveals that Tb doping leads to a substantial increase in the bandgap, which is fully consistent with our experimental results. Finally, the Ce3+ doped CH3NH3PbBr3 blue-emitting nanoplatelet is used as a white light LED with CIE coordinates (0.334, 0.326). This work demonstrates a versatile approach to develop rare-earth doped deep blue-emitting 2D perovskites with exceptionally high PL QY and provides new insights into the structural stability and electronic structure of rare-earth doped 2D perovskites.
1. Introduction
Over the past few decades, lead halide-based perovskites having the general formula APbX3 (where A = CH3NH3, Cs, etc.; X = Br, Cl, and I) have emerged as an outstanding class of material for the fundamental scientific and technological application-based research.1–5 Despite having several advantages, such as tunable bandgap, superior optoelectronic properties, and excellent photovoltaic efficiency, commercialization of lead halide perovskites still faces hindrance due to its toxicity and poor stability in moisture.1,6–9 Hence, there is an intense search for developing a Pb free perovskite with improved optoelectronic performance due to the toxicity of Pb. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to incorporating transition metals (Mn2+, Cu2+, Fe2+, and Zn2+), metalloids (Sn2+ and Bi3+), lanthanide materials (Ce3+, Eu3+, Yb3+, etc.), etc. in the perovskite crystal.9–17 However, doping-related studies are still far from satisfactory, since the substitution of Pb2+ often deteriorates the remarkable optoelectronic performance of lead halide perovskites.18 Sn was the first metal to be considered as a replacement for Pb.12,13 However, Sn doped perovskite crystals are found to be very unstable in nature, since Sn2+ quickly oxidizes to Sn4+ upon exposure to the atmosphere.9,19 Bi3+ doping in MAPbBr3 or CsPbBr3 crystals significantly quenches the photoluminescence quantum yield (PL QY), since it includes nonradiative recombination centers in the crystal, though it improves the stability.11,20,21 The Mn-doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystal (NC) is one of the most intensively reported systems, as it introduces a new electronic energy level resulting in low energy electronic transition due to strong exchange interactions between the d electron of Mn2+ and the perovskite.22,23 However, the PL QY and doping efficiency were much lower than those anticipated for most synthesis procedures, since the perovskite crystal structure was affected by the high doping concentrations.10,18,24–26
Interestingly, rare earth dopants in perovskites are considered very promising due to their remarkable optical properties.27 The octahedral site (PbBr6) in perovskite crystals perfectly matches the doping criteria of lanthanide materials, as it prefers a higher coordination number (≥6). The energy levels of rare earth elements are not very sensitive to the lattice environment, as their partially filled 4f shell (4fn−1) is shielded from the external shell by 5s2 and 6p6 electrons, which makes it comparatively more stable under ambient conditions.28 Song and coworkers first reported the rare earth codoped (Ce3+ and Yb3+; Yb3+ and Er3+) CsPbCl1.5Br1.5 NCs and explored them as a downconverter of commercial silicon solar cells resulting in an improvement of the power conversion efficiency from 18.1 to 21.5%.14 The same group presented doping of various other lanthanide materials (Ln3+ = Ce3+, Sm3+, Eu3+, Tb3+, Dy3+, Er3+, and Yb3+) into the CsPbCl3 crystal lattice following a modified hot injection method, which exhibits a blue-shift in the absorption spectra in the doped NC with the increase in the atomic number of dopant lanthanide ions.29 However, the PL QY decreases substantially in the blue region. Though Ce3+ doped CsPbCl3 gave blue emission at 430 nm, the QY decreased to 24.3%.29 Even with Tb3+ doping, Song et al. achieved PL emission at 550 nm with a PL QY of 31.2%.29 Zhang et al. reported an enhancement of total (excitonic + dopant) PL QY from 5 to 127.8% with Yb3+ and Yb3+/Er3+ doped CsPbCl3 NCs.30 Gamelin et al. reported an exceedingly high PL QY of 190%, even in bulk like thin films of Yb3+ doped CsPbCl3.31 The high PL QY in Yb3+ doped CsPbCl3 is due to an efficient quantum-cutting phenomenon, where the high absorption coefficient of CsPbCl3 allows it to transfer the excitonic energy to Yb3+ ions upon photoexcitation.
However, the incorporation of rare-earth ions using a direct synthesis process is quite challenging in the narrow bandgap variants of perovskites i.e., CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3.32 Few groups have reported the doping of rare-earth ions following the modified synthesis techniques or post-synthesis strategies. Yao et al. reported enhancement of the photo/electroluminescence efficiency of CsPbBr3 NCs through doping of heterovalent Ce3+ ions via a facile hot-injection method.33 However, they achieved green emission with Ce3+ doping at 515 nm, but the bandgap couldn’t be tuned much with the doping concentration. Duan et al. incorporated RE3+ (RE = La, Ce, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Ho, Er, Yb, and Lu) into CsPbBr3 films via a multistep solution-processable technique for solar cell application.34 Mir et al. followed a post-synthesis doping procedure to dope Mn and Yb in CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, and I) NCs with bandgaps covering the entire visible region.35 However, the relative intensity of the dopant emission is sharply quenched in CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 NCs as compared to CsPbCl3 NCs. Wang et al. introduced Eu3+ in the CsPbI3 crystal by reversible redox cycle, where Pb0 is oxidized by Eu3+ ions and I0 is reduced by Eu2+ ions.16 Though several reports discussed the doping-induced blue emission from the CsPbCl3 nanocrystal, very few studies discussed about the bandgap tuning of Br based perovskites towards the blue region with high emission efficiency. Recently, blue emission has been achieved with metal ion (Sb3+ and Nd3+) doping in CsPbBr3 with 73.8% and 90% PL QYs.36,37 Deep blue emission from bromide-based perovskites has been reported without doping by changing the synthesis conditions, but the PL QY was found to be pretty low compared to that of green luminescent perovskites. All-bromide-based cesium lead perovskite nanocrystals with deep blue emission at 405 (±1) nm were synthesized by Shi et al., however the PL QY could be achieved up to 22 (±3)%.38 Gao and co-workers reported deep blue emission (435 nm) from CsPbBr3 nanoribbons of two-unit-cell thickness with a PL QY up to 10%.39 Hence, the reported PL QYs are still quite low as compared to the unity QY of perovskite nanomaterials in the green region. With growing uses of blue LEDs in the modern technology, there is an emerging need for achieving stable blue emission. Though rare-earth doping in all-inorganic halide perovskite (CsPbX3) shows excellent optoelectronic and photovoltaic performance, incorporation of rare earth dopants in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites (MAPbX3) is quite challenging due to its volatile nature in an exposed environment. To our knowledge, to date only one report demonstrated rare earth doping in organic–inorganic halide perovskites for solar cell application. Wu et al. incorporated anhydrous EuI2 as a dopant into the MAPbI3 thin film to increase the grain size and they achieved improved stability of the solar cell, though the device efficiency was not improved significantly.40 However, a higher grain size usually results in a lower PL QY. To the best of our knowledge, there is no report on the doping of rare-earth ions on the MAPbBr3 nanostructure, particularly by the solvothermal method to incorporate the dopants in ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) lead halide perovskites. Due to the versatility of the solvothermal method, it is imperative to explore this method for doping of rare-earth atoms in the ultrathin perovskite layers. Recently, we have demonstrated the efficacy of the solvothermal process to precisely tune the thickness and optical properties of highly stable 2D organometal halide perovskite nanosheets and their applications in white LEDs and fast photodetectors.41
Here, we develop a facile and fast solvothermal synthesis process for doping of Ce and Tb ions into MAPbBr3 2D nanosheets (NS). This method allows us to tune the optical properties of the host MAPbBr3 NSs at different doping concentrations of Ce and Tb. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging was utilized to study the systematic change in the NS dimension with increasing doping concentrations. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were recorded to estimate the thickness of the perovskite NSs and NPLs. X-Ray diffraction (XRD) analysis is utilized to characterize the 2D diffraction peaks in Ce and Tb doped 2D perovskite layers. Optical absorption studies enable us to monitor the systematic change in the bandgap with doping concentrations. Room temperature and low-temperature PL analyses were carried out to study the effect of doping concentrations on the light emission characteristics of the doped 2D NS. A time-resolved PL (TRPL) study is carried out to understand the contribution of nonradiative recombination and defect density on doped MAPbBr3 NSs. The origin of high PL quantum yield and large blue-shift of the PL peaks is studied thoroughly through various experimental tools and our conclusions are fully supported by the density functional theory calculations of its electronic structure and formation energy of the dopants. Finally, we fabricate a downconverter white light-emitting diode (LED) by depositing a MAPb1−xCexBr3 nanoplatelet (NPL) onto a Rhodamine B coated commercially available UV LED.
2. Experimental details
2.1. Materials
Methylamine solution (CH3NH3, 33 wt% in absolute ethanol, Sigma-Aldrich), lead(II) bromide (PbBr2, 99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich), hydrobromic acid (HBr, 48 wt% in water, Sigma-Aldrich), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, >99%, Sigma-Aldrich), diethyl ether (>99%, Merck), toluene (Merk), oleic acid (CH3(CH2)7CHCH(CH2)7COOH, Merk), oleylamine (OAm) (≥98% (primary amine), Sigma-Aldrich), cerium(III) bromide (CeBr3, 99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich), terbium(III) chloride hexahydrate (TbCl3·6H2O, 99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich), and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) powder (Sigma Aldrich) were used to synthesize the doped and undoped perovskite NSs. All the materials were used as received without any further purification.
2.2. Synthesis procedures

2.2.1. Synthesis of CH3NH3Br. 
The organic part of the hybrid perovskite is synthesized by diluting 8.2 ml of CH3NH3 solution with 30 ml of absolute ethanol and the solution is stirred in a round-bottom flask. After that, 3 ml of HBr was slowly added to the previous solution in an ice bath with vigorous stirring at 1000 rpm for 3 h. To evaporate the solvents, the solution was heated at 70 °C for several hours with continuous stirring. Once the solvents completely evaporate, the remaining MABr salt was washed several times with ethanol to remove the impurities. Then, the powder was washed with anhydrous diethyl ether to recrystallize. The powder dried was at 70 °C in a vacuum oven.


2.2.2. Synthesis of undoped and Ce, Tb doped 2D perovskite NSs. 
2D perovskite NSs were synthesized by a solvothermal method following our previous work with minor modifications.41 The precursor solution was prepared by mixing equal moles of MABr and PbBr2 in DMF, and then oleic acid and 60 μl OAm were added, and the solution was then transferred into a Teflon lined autoclave without any pretreatment and solvothermally treated at 120 °C for 30 min. After the solvothermal process, the crude solution was allowed to cool down naturally for 30 min in an ambient environment. The autoclave was then opened and 180 μl of the product solution was added to 10 ml of toluene while stirring. To wash the as-prepared NS and separate it from the crude solution, it is centrifuged two times at 10000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was discarded each time, and the precipitate was redispersed in 10 ml of toluene for further characterization. Note that all the syntheses procedures were carried out in an ambient environment without the use of a glove box.
To synthesize the Ce and Tb doped 2D perovskite NSs, different amounts of PbBr2 were replaced by CeBr3 and TbCl3 according to the desired doping concentrations. Typically, for 20 mol% doping concentration of CeBr3, 0.1 mM MABr, 0.02 mM CeBr3, and (0.1 − 0.02) = 0.08 mM PbBr2 were first mixed and after that the same solvothermal procedure was followed, as discussed earlier. We varied the concentrations of CeBr3 and TbCl3 from 0 to a maximum of 70 mol%. The 0, 20, 50 and 70 mol% CeBr3/TbCl3 doped samples are named Ce0/Tb0, Ce20/Tb20, Ce50/Tb50, and Ce70/Tb70, respectively.

2.3. Characterization techniques
The high magnification surface morphology of the undoped and doped perovskite NSs has been characterized using a field-effect TEM (JEOL-JEM 2010) operated at 200 kV. AFM (Cypher, Oxford Instruments) images were taken to calculate the thicknesses. XRD (Rigaku RINT 2500 TRAX-III, Cu-Kα radiation) patterns were recorded to determine the crystal structure of different samples. X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were carried out using a PHI X-tool automated photoelectron spectrometer (ULVAC-PHI, Japan) with an Al Kα X-ray beam (1486.6 eV) at a beam current of 20 mA for the analysis of the chemical compositions and chemical environment. UV-Vis absorption spectra of the 2D NSs were recorded using a commercial spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer, Lamda 950). The room temperature steady-state PL spectra were recorded under 350 nm lamp excitation using a commercial fluorimeter (Fluoromax-4, Horiba Scientific). The PL QY of the samples was measured in solution mode using an integrating sphere (FM-SPHERE, Horiba) attached to the fluorimeter. Low temperature (80–300 K) PL measurements were carried out using a liquid nitrogen-cooled optical cryostat (Optistat DNV, Oxford Instruments) attached to the above fluorimeter under 405 nm laser excitation in thin-film mode. TRPL measurements were performed using 375 nm pulsed laser excitation for perovskite NSs, with an instrument response time of <50 ps (LifeSpecII, Edinburgh Instruments).
2.4. Computational methodology
To envisage the electronic and optical properties of pristine, Ce and Tb-doped 2 × 2 × 2 super-cells of CH3NH3PbBr3 we have performed first-principles electronic structure calculations within the framework of density functional theory (DFT).42 Throughout the work, we have used Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code,43 where projector augmented wave (PAW)44 formalism has been implemented. We have used Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE)45 form of Generalized gradient approximation (GGA) as the exchange–correlation functional, whereas the converged energy cut off has been chosen to be 500 eV. The Brillouin zone has been sampled using the 3 × 3 × 3 Monkhorst–Pack scheme46 for the ionic relaxation of the systems. After finding the minimum energy configuration of the pristine system, the pristine system was doped with cerium (Ce) and terbium (Tb) with a concentration of 12.5% for an individual doped system, while the minimum energy configuration is achieved through the full ionic relaxations of the atoms. Furthermore, we have determined the projected density of states (PDOS) to analyze the elemental orbital contribution of the constituent atoms in the valence band and conduction band regime. The self-consistency has been achieved with 10−3 eV energy convergence and 1 × 10−2 eV Å−1 force convergence criteria in all the geometry optimization calculations. In order to compliment the experimental outcome of stability enhancement in the doped system as compared to the pristine CH3NH3PbBr3, we have estimated the formation energy of the individual systems from the total energy calculations.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Morphology analysis

3.1.1. FETEM analysis. 
The effect of Ce/Tb doping on the morphology of the as-synthesized 2D MAPbBr3 NS was characterized using TEM analysis. The doping concentration in 2D perovskite NSs is varied by replacing PbBr2 with CeBr3/TbCl3 during the solvothermal synthesis. It is observed that doping of Ce3+ and Tb3+ has quite a significant effect on the morphology of the 2D perovskite NSs, as shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1(a) represents the NS without any doping element revealing a typically rectangular shaped large area NS of width ∼346 nm and length ∼890 nm. Interestingly, after doping of 20 mol% CeBr3, the dimension of the NS decreases and the shape of the NS is observed to be changed from rectangular to square shape with a lateral dimension of ∼546 nm × 507 nm (see Fig. 1(b)). As the doping concentration further increased to 50 mol%, a uniform distribution of NSs of perfectly square shape is observed with a lateral size ∼240 nm in Ce50 (see Fig. 1(c)). With 70 mol% CeBr3 doping, the NS dimension is further decreased, which is termed as nanoplatelets (NPLs). The NPLs are observed to be uniformly grown and vertical stacking of NPLs can be seen in some regions, as marked with a yellow square in Fig. 1(d). The inset of Fig. 1(d) shows the high-resolution TEM image of self-assembled vertically stacked NPLs in Ce70, revealing a thickness of ∼1.6 nm for each layer, which corresponds to ∼2 monolayers of the cubic perovskite phase, since the unit cell size of the MAPbBr3 perovskite is 5.93 Å. Interestingly, both the lateral size and thickness are successfully tuned with Ce3+ doping at different concentrations, which induces an extraordinary improvement in the optical properties of the host lattice (discussed later). To verify the incorporation of dopant ion Ce3+ inside the MAPbBr3 crystal, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was performed on the 2D doped NS. The inset of Fig. S1(a) (ESI†) shows the quantification of the EDX spectrum revealing a Ce/Pb atomic ratio of 0.03 for Ce20. This indicates a low doping concentration (∼3.3%) of Ce3+ inside the MAPbBr3 crystal consistent with the previous report on the doping of Ce3+ inside the CsPbBr3 host.33 Thus, the actual concentration of doped atoms is about six times lower than the reactant amount. On this basis, Ce70 is expected to contain ∼11.6% Ce3+ inside the MAPbBr3 crystal. Considering this, we have taken 12.5% as the dopant concentration for the theoretical DFT calculation to understand the stability and electronic structure of the doped system (discussed later). Uniform distribution of every element of the MAPbBr3 perovskite structure and also the dopant Ce on NS is shown in elemental mapping images, shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). Fig. 1(e) represents the TEM image of 2D perovskite NSs doped in MAPb0.8Tb0.2Br2.4Cl0.6 showing a square-shaped NS of width ∼378 nm. Interestingly, the TEM image of Tb20 reveals the presence of nanoparticles (NPs) attached at the edges of the NS (see Fig. 1(e)). With the increase in the TbCl3 doping concentration to 50 mol%, the lateral size of the NSs decreases and it is uniformly decorated with tiny NPs appearing like dots at the edges, as shown in Fig. 1(f). In Tb70, the lateral size of NSs is further decreased, which is considered as the NPL of average lateral size ∼36 nm with uniformly decorated 2D NCs over it (see Fig. 1(g)). Hence, the incorporation of rare earth dopants in the MAPbBr3 crystal inhibits the lateral as well as vertical growth of NSs and it results in a decrease in the thickness and lateral size of the NSs and eventually, the NSs break into a large number of uniformly distributed NPLs under the solvothermal conditions. Fig. 1(h) shows the high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) lattice fringe patterns of perovskite NPLs and the inset shows the corresponding inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) image, in Tb70, revealing a lattice spacing of 0.35 nm related to the (002) plane of the perovskite phase.47 The EDX analysis on Tb20 proved the inclusion of guest Tb3+ ions in the MAPbBr3 crystal, as shown in the inset of Fig. S2(a) (ESI†). Fig. S2 (ESI†) depicts the elemental mapping of 2D NSs in Tb20, showing the uniform spatial distribution of each component in MAPb1−xTbxCl3xBr3(1−x).
 Fig. 1  TEM images of (a) undoped 2D perovskite, and Ce3+ doped perovskite NSs with CeBr3 concentrations: (b) 20 mol%, (c) 50 mol% and (d) 70 mol%. The inset in (d) shows the vertically aligned 2D NSs. TEM images of Tb3+ doped NSs at TbCl3 concentrations: (e) 20 mol%, (f) 50 mol% and (g) 70 mol%. (h) HRTEM lattice images of the Tb70 NS; the inset shows the corresponding IFFT image. 


3.1.2. AFM analysis. 
To provide more direct evidence of the evolution of the thickness of the 2D MAPbBr3 NS with the inclusion of Ce3+ ions, AFM topography images were acquired in the tapping mode, as shown in Fig. 2. To record the AFM images, the NS solution was first diluted and drop cast on a SiO2 substrate. The solution was then allowed to dry at room temperature to avoid agglomeration. Fig. 2(a) represents the AFM topography image of the undoped MAPbBr3 NS and the thickness of the NS is found to be ∼5.6 nm calculated from the AFM height profile, as shown in Fig. 2(b). Fig. 2(c) and (d) exhibit the AFM image and the corresponding height profile of the marked region of Ce20 indicating the thickness of the NS to be ∼4 nm. With a further increase in the doping concentration, i.e., in Ce50, the thickness and width of the NS are further decreased to ∼1.8 nm and ∼133 nm, respectively, as depicted from the AFM image and the corresponding height profile in Fig. 2(e) and (f). Interestingly, for Ce70, uniform distribution of NPLs is observed, as shown in the AFM image in Fig. 2(g). Fig. 2(h) shows the corresponding height distributions indicating the average thickness of the NPLs to be ∼1.4 nm, which closely matches with the thickness estimated from the TEM imaging. In the case of 2D NS/NPLs, a single layer (1L) MAPbBr3 sheet consists of 2D arrangement of corner-sharing (PbBr6)4− octahedra with a thickness of 0.593 nm.48 Therefore, the measured thicknesses in Ce0, Ce20, Ce50, and Ce70 correspond to 10L, 7L, 3L, and 2L, respectively. Hence, the doping by the solvothermal method enables us to tune the thickness of the 2D perovskite NS from ten layers (10L) to bilayers (2L) with Ce3+ doping, which may trigger a strong quantum confinement effect in the NPL. A similar change in thickness is expected with Tb3+ doping in MAPbBr3. The mechanism behind the change in the thickness of NSs with doping may be the replacement of Pb2+ ions with smaller size Ce3+ ions. In addition, the dopant atoms (CeBr3/TbCl3) may act as an inorganic ligand or an intercalating agent, which stimulates the exfoliation of the 2D NS. The presence of a large number of inorganic ligands helps in exfoliation of the inorganic sheet layer promoting a thinner NS. Here, a large dopant concentration may also increase the reactivity of OAm because of the high pressure and high temperature inside the autoclave.41 The elevated pressure and temperature inside the autoclave increase the reactivity of any material, which may be insoluble at room temperature.41 Therefore, the solvothermal process results in a stronger effect of doping on the dimensions of the perovskite nanosheets as compared to other methods. This resulted in the systematic decrease in thickness and lateral dimension of the 2D NSs at higher doping concentration. Note that the measured doping concentration in Ce20 and Tb20 is much less than the desired one, which supports the assertion that a small fraction of the dopants occupy the substitutional sites in perovskites and rest of the dopants help in the exfoliation of the NS by a kind of intercalation process similar to the well-known layered 2D materials.
 Fig. 2  AFM topography images of undoped and Ce doped MAPbBr3 NSs in (a) Ce0, (c) Ce20, (e) Ce50 and (g) Ce70 and the corresponding height profiles are shown in (b), (d), (f) and (h), respectively. 

3.2. Structural analysis
To acquire more insights into the structural quality of doped perovskite NSs, the crystal structures of various doped and undoped samples are characterized using the XRD technique. Fig. 3(a) and (b) show the comparison of XRD patterns of Ce and Tb doped samples i.e., MAPb1−xCexBr1−x and MAPb1−xTbxClxBr1−x. Fig. 3(a) reveals the characteristic (001) diffraction plane of a cubic structure at ∼14.81° in undoped 2D NSs, confirming the formation of a pure perovskite phase without any impurity. Interestingly, with the substitution of Pb2+ by Ce3+ diffraction peaks (002l) (l = 1–6) at low angles (2θ < 14.81°) are observed, which is a signature of the layered structure, as shown in Fig. 3(a). It is reported that there is an increase in the d-spacing in the 2D perovskite phase due to the insertion of inorganic octahedral sheets (PbBr6) and, as a result several low diffraction angle peaks emerge.49 The XRD pattern of Ce20 exhibits diffraction peaks at 11.50° and 12.53° corresponding to the disparate layered structure with inorganic sheets combined with corner-sharing octahedral containing Pb and Ce ions, respectively.50 The (001) diffraction peak shifts monotonically towards a higher angle in Ce20 and Ce50 as compared to the undoped sample due to the decrease in the layer distance between inorganic sheets as Pb ions (ionic radius of 119 pm) are partially substituted by smaller size Ce ions (ionic radius 115 pm). In addition, the splitting of two peaks at 14.87° in Ce20 indicates the phase transition from a higher symmetry cubic phase to a lower symmetry tetragonal phase.51 Interestingly, the (001) diffraction peak completely disappeared in Ce70 confirming the fully transformed pure 2D perovskite phase. Similarly, the XRD patterns of the Tb doped samples represent the evolution of diffraction peaks at low angles (2θ < 14.81°), which are the characteristic features of the 2D perovskite structure, suggesting the formation of an extremely thin MAPb1−xTbxCl3xBr3(1−x) layer (see Fig. 3(b)).52 The (001) diffraction peak systematically shifts towards a higher angle with an increase in the Tb doping concentration, which gives direct evidence of the inclusion of smaller radius Tb ions (ionic radius 106.2 pm) in place of Pb ions (ionic radius 119 pm). Besides the effect of Tb ions, halide mixing of Cl (ionic radius of 167 pm) and Br ions (ionic radius of 182 pm) in the 2D perovskite phase results in the shrinkage of the size of the unit cell. Similar to the Ce doped case, Tb doped samples exhibit diffraction peaks at ∼11.24° and ∼13.07°, which further confirms its 2D layered structure.50 This indicates an in-plane orientation of BX6 (B = Pb/Tb, X = Br/Cl) sheets. With the increase in Ce3+ and Tb3+ doping concentrations, the (100) diffraction peak shifts towards a higher angle from 14.81° to 14.93° and 15.32°, respectively, indicating the lattice contraction. The interplanar spacing (d001) decreases with an increasing doping concentration from 5.97 Å to 5.93 Å and 5.84 Å for Ce and Tb doped NSs, respectively revealing the lattice contraction, as shown in Fig. S3(a) (ESI†). In addition, significant broadening in the diffraction peaks of doped samples implies a reduction in the NS thickness upon inclusion of doped ions. Hence, with the incorporation of Ce/Tb ions in the 2D perovskite crystal, the subsequent change in the lattice spacing and structural phase transition from the cubic to lower symmetry tetragonal phase are observed due to the rotation and distortion of inorganic octahedra. Note that the lattice distortion is expected at a high doping concentration, which is consistent with our experiments.
 Fig. 3  A comparison of XRD patterns of perovskite NSs before and after the doping with (a) Ce3+ and (b) Tb3+ at different molar concentrations. (c–f) Deconvoluted XPS spectra of Br 3d, Pb 4f, Cl 3p, Br 3p and Tb 3d in Tb20. 
XPS analysis was conducted to further confirm the successful incorporation of Tb ions in the MAPbBr3 host as shown in Fig. 3(c)–(f). Fig. 3(c)–(f) exhibit XPS peaks of Br 3d, Pb 4f, Cl 3p, Br 3p and Tb 3d. The broad Br 3d XPS spectrum of Tb20 is deconvoluted with two peaks centered at 68.9 (3d5/2) and 70.0 eV (3d3/2), corresponding to the inner and surface Br ions, respectively (see Fig. 3(c)). The doublet peaks of Pb 4f are observed at 143.6 (4f5/2) and 138.8 eV (4f7/2) with a spin orbit split of 4.8 eV (see Fig. 3(d)). The metallic Pb contribution is not seen at lower energy confirming the absence in the reduction of Pb. The Cl 2p peak is fitted with two peaks at 198.4 and 200 eV corresponding to 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 as shown in Fig. 3(e). The doublet peaks shown in Fig. 3(e) at 182.2 and 188.8 eV correspond to Br 3p3/2 and Br 3p1/2. The peaks at 1243.1 and 1278.1 eV correspond to Tb 3d5/2 and 3d3/2, as shown in Fig. 3(f). The presence of Cl 3p and Tb 3d peaks confirms the successful incorporation of TbCl3 in MAPbBr3 NS. Tb/Pb ratio is found to be 0.014 in Tb20, which indicates a doping concentration of ∼1.4%.
3.3. Optical analysis

3.3.1. UV-Vis absorption and photoluminescence studies. 
The effect of lanthanide doping on the absorption and emission spectra of the 2D perovskite is studied using synthetic spectroscopic tools. Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the absorption and PL spectra of Ce3+ and Tb3+ doped samples demonstrating a systematic blue-shift in the absorption edges with the increase in doping concentrations. With respect to the undoped sample, we observe blue-shifts up to 42 and 86 nm in the excitonic absorption peak in 70 mol% Ce and Tb doped samples, respectively (see Fig. 4(a) and (b)). Therefore, a significant enlargement (∼0.25 eV and ∼0.54 eV in Ce and Tb, respectively) in bandgap is observed with doping of rare-earth ions in the 2D MAPbBr3 NS indicating the successful incorporation of dopant ions in the crystal lattice.20 Furthermore, a sharper excitonic peak is observed in the doped NS, which may be attributed to the enhanced dielectric confinement effect in thinner 2D layered NS/NPLs. The Urbach tail is weakened with the introduction of rare-earth ions suggesting an increase in the exciton binding energy to the extent that thermal energy at room temperature is insufficient to dissociate the excitons. A weaker Urbach tail in the doped NS compared to the undoped one also implies less disorder in the doped NS.53 A distinct and narrow excitonic emission peak implies that efficient excitonic recombination is responsible for efficient light emission. Note that Tb doping induces a larger enlargement in bandgap compared to the Ce doping case due to the incorporation of both metal and halide ions in the host lattice, i.e., with TbCl3 doping, both Pb and Br are partially replaced by Tb and Cl, respectively. In contrast, for Ce doping, only Pb2+ is replaced by Ce3+. The valence state of halide ions changes from 4p to 3p when Br is replaced by Cl resulting in an increase in the bandgap. Insets of Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the digital photographs of all the solutions under UV excitation depicting the tuning of the color from green to deep blue after Ce and Tb doping. To quantify the tuning in the emission color in Ce3+ and Tb3+ doped MAPbBr3 NSs, the steady-state PL spectra are plotted in Fig. 4(a) and (b). The PL measurements of all the samples were performed under 350 nm lamp excitation. A strong green emission peak located at 518 nm is observed in undoped MAPbBr3 NSs. With the increase in the CeBr3 concentration, the PL peak is gradually blue-shifted and the emission intensity systematically increased by 6 times with respect to the undoped NS. When x reaches 0.7 in MAPb1−xCexBr3, the strong blue fluorescence peak centered at 454 nm with a narrow FWHM (full width at half maxima) of ∼24 nm is observed at room temperature, which is much narrower than that of the conventional blue QDs.54 This is significant and it indicates an effective modulation in the electronic structure of the 2D NS at high doping concentration.33 The PL peak of Ce70 coincides with the excitonic absorption peak without any Stokes shift, indicating the absence of any disorder or defects. The pure blue emission peaked at 454 nm from Ce70 has a color coordinate of (0.145, 0.054) very close to the Rec. 2020 (0.131, 0.046) specifications.54 In case of Tb doping, the PL peak blue-shifts from 518 nm to 414 nm (deep blue), indicating a larger change (0.587 eV) in the bandgap with Tb doping than the Ce doping case (0.337). The PL intensity in the Tb doped NS increased by 3.5 times as compared to the undoped NS. The deep blue emission in Tb50 provides a color coordinate of (0.160, 0.0441), approaching the standard color Rec. 2020 (0.131, 0.046) specification.54 In addition, the emission peak in Tb50 has a FWHM of 18 nm at room temperature, which is much smaller than those of the other conventional deep blue-emitting quantum dots, indicating its high color purity.54
 Fig. 4  Optical absorption (dashed line) and PL (solid line) spectra of undoped 2D perovskite NSs and (a) Ce3+ and (b) Tb3+ doped 2D perovskite NSs at different molar concentrations. The inset in each case shows the digital photographs of the corresponding perovskite NSs under UV illumination. (c) Optical bandgap energy as a function of thickness (d) of the Ce doped 2D perovskite NSs. (d) Comparison of PL QY of as-synthesized 2D perovskite NSs with Ce3+ and Tb3+ doping. 
We find that a doping concentration higher than 70 mol% leads to the quenching of the PL emission in the NS, which implies that 70 mol% of CeBr3 is the highest limit and optimum for Ce doping in 2D MAPbBr3 NSs, and this appears to be the highest doping concentration of rare-earth ions reported till date. Note that the dopant concentration is proportional to the amount of CeBr3 precursors added during synthesis, since the optical properties are systematically improved with doping in our samples, which rules out the presence of any impurity or self-crystalized phases unlike earlier reports.33 Various factors may be responsible for the large PL spectral shift and enlargement of the bandgap. One of the factors accountable for the shift is the quantum confinement effect since lateral and vertical dimensions of the NS are systematically decreased with an increase in the doping concentration, as observed from TEM and AFM images. With doping, the thickness of the NS decreases from 10 layers to 2 layers (1.4 nm), which may impose a quantum confinement effect on the carriers and it may be responsible for the significant enlargement of the bandgap. However, the thickness vs. bandgap plot does not obey the well-known Brus equation,55 as shown from the fitting in Fig. S3(b) (ESI†). Simple effective mass approximation of the infinite quantum well strongly overestimates the bandgap with respect to the experimental values, as reported earlier.3,56–58 Note that in our case the change in the bandgap is slower than that predicted by the Brus fit, as shown in Fig. 4(c), since other factors have a competing effect on the bandgap variation. Interestingly, the doping causes lattice contraction, and it results in the reduction of the bandgap. However, in our system we observed an overall increase in the bandgap with doping, indicating the dominating effect of quantum confinement.5,59 It may be noted that in case of 2D perovskite NSs, additional factors need to be taken into account to accurately predict the bandgap variation with thickness. The exciton binding energy is an important factor in 2D perovskites, since with decreasing thickness dielectric screening becomes minimal, as a large number of electric field lines between the charge carriers are outside the perovskite layer.3 This enhances the exciton binding energy of the NS, which in turns decreases the blue-shift in the bandgap.3 Also, the electron and hole effective mass is considered to be constant in the effective mass approximation method; however, in 2D materials, this strongly depends on the width of the well and a correction factor needs to be added considering the second order perturbation theory.58,60 In our case, there is a competing effect of a strong increase of bandgap due to reduction in the thickness, while a decrease in the bandgap due to the lattice contraction and considering the other factors, it finally results in a slower increase in bandgap than that is expected from the QC effect alone (see Fig. 4(c)).
The excitation wavelength-dependent PL spectra for various Ce doping concentrations show narrow and intense PL emission under UV excitations (see Fig. S4, ESI†). This ascertains the applicability of the NSs in the practical field under conventional UV excitation. The PL excitation (PLE) spectra of Ce3+ doped MAPbBr3 NSs monitored at their respective emission peaks are shown in Fig. S5(a) (ESI†), demonstrating a blue-shift in the PLE peak with increasing doping concentration and it is fully consistent with the absorption spectra, which is a reflection of bandgap widening due to the successful incorporation of the Ce3+ ions in the host crystal. The PL excitation spectra of Tb doped 2D NSs monitored at their respective emission peak is shown in Fig. S5(b) (ESI†), demonstrating again a gradual blue-shift with increasing doping concentration consistent with the band filling effect in the emission spectrum. The narrow emission properties of the doped NS retained over the wide excitation wavelength range, as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI†), signify the band-to-band recombination. The intense excitonic absorption peak, negligible stock shift, narrow and single PL emission peak indicate the negligible inhomogeneity and nearly monodisperse thickness of the NS/NPL. To ascertain the influence of band tail states in high doping concentration cases, the PL spectra of Ce0, Ce70 and Tb70 are deconvoluted with three Gaussian peaks, as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†). It is clear that the excitonic peak (peak 1) has the highest contribution in all the three cases. However, the contribution of higher wavelength peaks (peak 2 and 3) is higher in Ce70 and Tb70 as compared to the undoped system. The higher wavelength peaks originate from the shallow states present just below the conduction band (∼0.1 eV) in the doped system.20 This could arise from the surface states as well as the bulk states of the doped atoms.20 Previously, these kinds of tail states were observed in the blue emissive perovskite QDs due to carrier transition between low and high lying tail states.61
The change in the PL QY with doping concentration is shown in Fig. 4(d). The PL QY is observed to be increased dramatically from 58% to 100% with Ce3+ doping, and in case of Tb doped NPLs it is enhanced to 70% (see Table 1). Hence, we have remarkably achieved absolute unity quantum yield in deep blue-emitting perovskite NPLs with Ce3+ doping by a novel solvothermal process, rendering them as a highly efficient source of blue light. It has been predicted from theoretical calculations that Ce3+ has very small formation energy in perovskites (less than 2 eV at Pb site for any growth condition), which makes it easy for the incorporation of the Ce3+ dopants in the MAPbBr3 lattice.20 Interestingly, the Ce3+ dopant does not create any deep trap states, but it enhances the lattice order when it is introduced in the MAPbBr3 host lattice. The dominant dopant (Ce3+) is reported to have a transition level ∼0.2 eV below the conduction band, and thus it introduces shallow transition features, which enhances the emission properties.20 Additional transition states are created near the conduction band edge due to hybridization between Ce-d and Br-p states, which enrich the conduction band states causing the PL enhancement.20,62 Considering theoretical calculations and experimental results, the primary reasons for improved PL QYs in doped (Ce3+, Mg2+, Cd2+, Nd2+) perovskite nanomaterials are considered to be the introduction of shallow energy levels and reduction in the structural disorder with doping.20,37,62,63 Also, the radiative recombination rate increases significantly with doping due to the flattening of the conduction and valence bands and lattice contraction upon doping due to the overlap between the wave function of electron and hole states form the excitons.37 Upon light excitation, an electron can transfer along the Pb–Br bond towards the Pb ions, while holes remain delocalized and hence the electron–hole wave function overlap increases as the Pb–Br bond length decreases.37,63 Therefore, lattice contraction is another important factor for the enhancement in PL QYs in the doped NSs. In addition, if there are any surface Ce atoms, which were unsuccessful in being incorporated into the bulk lattice, they provide additional electronic states near the conduction band rather than nonradiative trapping center.20 In our system, the thickness of the NPLs in Ce70 is ∼1.4 nm (bilayer). Hence, in case of high doping concentrations, most of the dopants are on the surface or very close to the surface, which contributes to create emissive channels near the conduction band. This is fully supported by our DFT calculations (discussed later). The strong quantum confinement effect is also an important factor for the PL enhancement in our system. The achievement of unity quantum yield in solvothermally grown Ce doped perovskites is very significant for their large-scale production and application in deep blue emitters.
Table 1 Details of the photoluminescence (PL) characteristics of the undoped and rare earth doped MAPbBr3 nanosheets




Rare earth dopants
Sample code
PL peak wavelength (nm)
PL QY (%)




Undoped
Ce0, Tb0
518
58


20 mol% CeBr3
Ce20
504
63


50 mol% CeBr3
Ce50
465
90


70 mol% CeBr3
Ce70
454
100


20 mol% TbCl3
Tb20
500
60


50 mol% TbCl3
Tb50
432
66


70 mol% TbCl3
Tb70
416
70






3.3.2. Low-temperature photoluminescence studies. 
The temperature-dependent PL spectra were studied to understand the excitonic trap and photonic properties of the doped and undoped NSs. Fig. 5(a) shows the temperature-dependent PL spectra of undoped NSs in the temperature range of 80–300 K demonstrating multiple peaks at lower temperatures along with its excitonic peak. It can be noted that 2D perovskites show strikingly different behavior in the low-temperature region depending on the number of layers, which is of great interest for the fundamental research and their optoelectronic application and this aspect remains largely unexplored. The evolution of PL spectra of Ce0 with lowering of temperatures suggests that it has multiple recombination channels, which get activated in the low temperature region (<260 K) (See Fig. 5(a)). The temperature-dependent PL spectra of Ce20 show three shoulder peaks in the lower wavelength region (493, 483 and 468 nm) along with its excitonic peak below 110 K. The peaks at 483 and 468 nm in Ce20 disappear at 160 and 260 K, respectively, without showing any spectral shift when the temperature is increased from 80 K to 300 K (Fig. 5(b)). Similarly, Tb doped MAPbBr3 2D NSs reveal three prominent shoulder peaks along with excitonic PL peaks at low temperatures (see Fig. 5(c)). In case of Tb20, three shoulder peaks emerge at ∼474, ∼457 and ∼442 nm below 160, 220 and 260 K, respectively, as shown in Fig. 5(c). The position of the peaks does not vary significantly with temperature, though their intensity gradually decreases with the increasing temperature. No new PL peak appears in the lower energy region, which rules out the possibility of any impurity or defect states in the samples.64,65 The higher energy peaks in doped and undoped 2D NSs at the low-temperature region may have originated due to the phase transition or the coexistence of different phases of perovskites. MAPbBr3 is reported to have orthorhombic (<145 K) and tetragonal phases (145–237 K) in the low-temperature region, and with increasing temperature it stabilizes to a more symmetric cubic phase (>237 K) resulting in PL peaks at different positions.64,66
 Fig. 5  Temperature-dependent PL spectra of 2D NS of (a) Ce0, (b) Ce20 and (c) Tb20 in the range of 80–300 K. (d) Integrated PL intensity vs. inverse of temperature for Ce0, Ce20 and Tb20. The experimental data in the range of 220–300 K are fitted with the Arrhenius equation for each case shown in the expanded view in the inset. Temperature dependence of (e) FWHM and (f) PL peak energy for the excitonic peak in Ce0, Ce20 and Tb20. 
Dar et al. assigned the origin of additional PL peaks in MA-based perovskites at the high energy region to the presence of molecularly disordered orthorhombic domains using density functional theory.67 With a decreasing temperature, the MA cations are kinetically trapped in a disordered domain along with the ordered orthorhombic phase.67 The disordered MA cation produces a strong local electric field resulting in an increase in the bandgap of the ordered orthorhombic phase due to the Stark-like effect which eventually splits the PL peaks.67 The thickness of the NS is atomically thin in our system (<10 monolayers) and due to the ultrathin 2D structure the crystal lattice is very vulnerable to the changes in environmental temperature. The PbBr6 octahedra are arranged on the surface with MA cations between them making them very feasible to orient in different directions resulting in a change in the overall perovskite structure with the environmental change. The shoulder peaks may also originate from bound excitons or multiple exciton-effects.41,68,69 The broad PL peak due to intrinsic electronic transitions (5d → 4f) of Ce3+ ions is reported to occur ∼450 nm.70 Though at room temperature, the intrinsic transition features do not appear in PL spectra, they may get activated at low temperature resulting in high energy PL peaks. To distinguish the possible origin of the shoulder peaks, a detailed analysis of the evolution of the PL intensity, FWHM and PL peak energy of the samples with temperature was carried out. Fig. 5(d) shows the temperature-dependent integrated PL intensity of Ce0, Ce20 and Tb20 in the temperature range of 80–300 K. It can be seen that the variation in the integrated intensity of PL with temperature has different slopes at different temperature regions. As shown in Fig. 5(d), the integrated PL intensities do not change significantly in the temperature range of 150–180 K, 120–190 K and 140–190 K for Ce0, Ce20 and Tb20, respectively, which may be due to the phase transition. Note that the decrease in the integrated PL intensity with an increasing temperature is much smaller in Ce20 and Tb20 as compared to the undoped 2D NS (Ce0). As the temperature is increased from 80 K to 300 K, the integrated PL intensities decrease by 98%, 78% and 90% for Ce0, Ce20 and Tb20, respectively, indicating the enhanced excitonic recombination with the incorporation of Ce3+ in MAPbBr3 NSs. Comparatively less quenching in the PL intensity in the doped NS implies the presence of very few nonradiative recombination centers, which are activated at the low temperature. However, the excitonic PL intensity of undoped MAPbBr3 NSs decreases by a factor of ∼54 with an increase in the temperature from 80 K to 300 K. In contrast, for the Ce and Tb doped NSs, it decreases only by ∼4.6 and ∼9.6 times, respectively. This proves that carrier trapping and non-radiative channels are nearly eliminated in the doped NS. The inset of Fig. 5(d) shows the temperature-dependent integrated PL intensity in the range of 220–300 K and the experimental data are fitted using the Arrhenius equation, given by,I(T) = I0/(1 + Aexp(−EB/kBT)),where, I(T) and I0 are the integrated PL intensities at temperatures T and 0 K, respectively.41A is a constant and EB is the exciton binding energy. Exciton binding energy is calculated in the high-temperature region since MAPbBr3 has a stable cubic phase at higher temperatures. From the fitting parameters, exciton binding energies are estimated to be 136, 173 and 149 meV in Ce0, Ce20 and Tb20 NSs. Thus, the Eb is the highest for the 20% Ce doped NS. To the best of our knowledge the exciton binding energy of Ce and Tb doped 2D MAPbBr3 NSs has not been reported yet and our data are consistent with the other reported 2D perovskite structures.68 Higher binding energy of excitons in doped NSs implies better excitonic stability and high recombination rate consistent with its ultrahigh PL QY, highlighting the strong potential of such materials in exciton-related optoelectronic devices.65 Hence, at room temperature nonradiative decay processes and the dissociation of excitons are less probable in the Ce doped NSs resulting in 100% absolute PL QY. The spectral line width or FWHM of the excitonic PL peak is plotted as a function of temperature for Ce0, Ce20 and Tb20 in Fig. 5(e). The line width gradually increases with an increase in temperature due to the strong exciton phonon coupling, which resulted in the overlap of close energy bands. The spectral line width of the PL peak in Ce20 varies at a slower rate compared to the undoped and Tb doped NSs. Above 160 K, the line width of the excitonic PL peak broadens with an increasing temperature at a faster rate implying a wider thermal distribution of carriers in the discrete energy levels and intense exciton phonon interactions. A comparison of the temperature evolution of bandgap of the undoped and doped NSs is shown in Fig. 5(f). Below 160 K, the PL peak energies of the samples do not vary much with the temperature and above 160 K the peak energy increased with the increasing temperature, which is contrary to the behavior of the conventional semiconductors. The sudden change/discontinuity in the peak energy with temperature mostly arises from the structural phase transition of the perovskite phase, as reported earlier.71 At the transition point (160 K), the lattice phase in the NS transforms from orthorhombic to tetragonal to final cubic phase resulting in sudden shifts in the emission energy. The reason behind the unusual blue-shift in the PL peak energy with increasing temperature is still not well understood. However, it is reported that the pseudocubic lattice constant of the perovskite crystal increases with temperature.72 The valence band maximum (VBM) of MAPbBr3 is primarily constituted by antibonding hybrid states of the Br(p) and Pb(s) orbitals, while the conduction band minimum (CBM) is determined by a hybrid of Pb(p) and Br(p) orbitals and bonding between Pb(s) and Pb(d) states.59,73 The CBM is much less affected by any external factors like structural distortion, however the VBM is highly vulnerable to the lattice distortion.59 Any change in the lattice constant destabilizes the VBM by increasing the Pb–Br overlap, which in turn results in the shift of the VBM to the higher energy levels.59 This effect contributes to the enlargement of the bandgap in perovskites resulting in the blue shift of the PL peak energy with the increase in temperature in contrast to the conventional semiconductor.


3.3.3. Time-resolved photoluminescence studies. 
Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurement was performed on undoped and doped perovskite NSs using a 405 nm pulsed laser excitation to study the decay kinetics. Fig. 6(a) shows the PL decay curves of MAPb1−xCexBr3 NS, fitted with a triexponential decay function given by, , where Ai is the amplitude of the PL decay component corresponding to the lifetime τi. The average lifetime (τavg) of the samples is calculated using the following relationship: . The faster component of the decay function corresponds to the nonradiative recombination of charge carriers, while slower components are associated with radiative recombination of free charge carriers.29 Details of the decay components of the samples are tabulated in Table S1 (ESI†). It is observed that the carrier lifetime decreases from 92.01 to 6.28 ns with an increase in the Ce3+ doping concentration, as shown in the inset of Fig. 6(a). The decrease in the lifetime is accompanied by the enhancement in the PL QY suggesting the partial elimination of nonradiative decay paths due to the incorporation of Ce3+ ions in perovskite lattices. 2D NPLs in Ce70 is better fitted with a single exponential function suggesting a very homogeneous electronic transition environment for the Ce3+ ions promoting 100% PL QY.24,29Fig. 6(b) shows the PL decay curves of MAPb1−xTbxClxBr1−x 2D NSs demonstrating a downward shift in decay time constant with increasing doping concentrations. The corresponding lifetimes are calculated to be 92.01, 59.14, 34.44, and 4.14 ns for Tb0, Tb20, Tb50, and Tb70, respectively. Hence, a 22-fold decrease in lifetime is observed after Tb3+ doping, as shown in the inset of Fig. 6(b). Interestingly, the Tb70 is fitted well with a bi-exponential decay function, while Tb0, Tb20 and Tb50 are fitted with tri-exponential decay functions indicating the absence of the nonradiative decay channel with the incorporation of Tb3+ lanthanide ions. The decrease in carrier lifetime corresponds to an increase in the recombination rate due to increasing carrier density, consistent with the quantum confinement effect and lattice contraction discussed earlier.37,74 Therefore, doping of Ce3+ and Tb3+ lanthanide ions introduces new emissive channels near the conduction band rather than nonradiative trapping channels promoting significant improvement of the PL emission characteristics of the host MAPbBr3 crystal.75 These conclusions are further supported by electronic structure calculations, presented below.
 Fig. 6  A comparison of the TRPL spectra of undoped 2D perovskite NSs and (a) Ce3+ and (b) Tb3+ doped 2D perovskite NSs at different doping concentrations. The insets in the corresponding figures show the variation in lifetime with the doping concentrations. Comparison of relative PL intensity of the (c) Ce3+ and (d) Tb3+ doped 2D perovskite NSs taken at different time intervals after storing the samples under ambient conditions with relatively high humidity. The inset of (c) shows the change in PL intensity with storage time for the undoped perovskite sample. 


3.3.4. Stability of the 2D NS. 
The stability of the doped 2D NSs is studied to understand its efficacy in different environments. The evolution of the PL emission spectra of Ce and Tb doped MAPbBr3 NSs under 370 nm excitation is monitored during long-term storage under ambient conditions without any encapsulation. We found that the PL spectra of Ce20 were nearly unchanged for at least one month, as shown in Fig. 6(c). The PL peak intensity in Ce20 decreases by ∼12% after 2 months of storage (see Fig. 6(c)). The inset of Fig. 6(c) shows the decrease in the PL intensity of undoped NSs by ∼27% after 2 months. In contrast, the Tb doped NS shows only ∼3% quenching in PL intensity after 2 months of storage, as shown in Fig. 6(d). These observations indicate that the trivalent rare-earth ions (Ce3+ and Tb3+) provide good support to the 2D MAPbBr3 NS framework with excellent storage stability under ambient conditions, which makes them suitable for use in various applications as environmentally friendly Pb-free halide perovskites. Note that Ce and Tb doped 2D NSs prepared by our method show superior stability as compared to other metal-doped samples.25,76 Yao et al. reported a 40% decrease in the PL QY after 30 days of storage in Ce doped CsPbCl3 NCs.33 In our case, the Tb doped 2D MAPbBr3 NSs show better optical and storage stability compared to the Ce doped sample, which may be due to the stronger bonding of the Tb3+ ions with the host lattice. Also, the ionic radius of Tb (106 pm) is lower than that of Ce (115 pm) resulting in more lattice contraction induced by Tb3+ doping giving rise to better stability.

3.4. Electronic structure calculations
In order to comprehend the effect of Ce and Tb doping in the bandgap and electron density of the pristine MAPbBr3 system, we have performed first-principles electronic structure calculations within the framework of density functional theory (DFT).42 To investigate the structural changes and the corresponding stability in the pristine system under the influence of Ce and Tb doping, we have also determined the formation energy of the individual systems. The crystal structures of doped and undoped systems are shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†). We have analysed the projected density of states (PDOS) of all three systems, as depicted in Fig. 8. This analysis provides a clear picture of the electronic structure while describing the elemental orbital contribution of the constituting elements and their corresponding hybridization. The PDOS of the pristine MAPbBr3 system shows the semiconducting nature with a bandgap of 1.76 eV (see Fig. 7(a)). A strong hybridization between Pb-6p and Br-4p is observed near the Fermi level of the valence band as well as in the higher energy range in the conduction band regime. The contribution of the organic cation, which consists of carbon (C), hydrogen (H) and nitrogen (N), is negligible near the Fermi level. In the case of Ce-doped MAPbBr3, though a pretty negligible contribution near the Fermi level of the valence band has been observed corresponding to Ce-4f, it contributes substantially in the conduction band regime along with Pb-6p and Br-4p (see Fig. 7(b)). Hence, Ce-4f is hybridized with Pb-6p and Br-4p in the conduction band and contributes to the enhancement of total DOS in the conduction band regime around 2 eV. Since we do not observe the presence of Ce-5d in the valence band, the well-known 5d–4f rare-earth transition is not expected from Ce3+ in the MAPbBr3 host, which is consistent with the absence of the Ce3+ emission peak in the PL spectra. Deep trap states corresponding to dopant defects are not observed in the case of Ce doped MAPbBr3, which may lead to nonradiative recombination, as seen in an earlier reported Bi3+ doped CsPbBr3 system.20 Instead, it can be seen from Fig. 7(b) that in the Ce doped system shallow transition levels are introduced approximately ∼0.1 eV below the conduction band that acts as new emissive channels, as discussed earlier. We can also infer from the PDOS of the Ce doped MAPbBr3 system that the total electron density in the conduction regime substantially increases after Ce doping than the pristine one, which would lead to the possible modulation of the exciton relaxation and recombination. This supports the large enhancement in the PL emission intensity post Ce3+ doping. Interestingly, the electronic structure analysis provides ∼0.1 eV enlargement in the bandgap post Ce doping, whereas experimentally, the value is ∼0.25 eV since the quantum confinement effect and lattice contraction together contribute to the overall change in the bandgap. Similar to the Ce doped system, Tb does not play a major role in the valence band regime, as shown in Fig. 7(c). The contribution in the conduction band regime is mainly due to the synergistic hybridization of Tb-4f, Pb-6p and Br-4p orbitals. Therefore, in case of Tb doping also, intrinsic transition due to Tb is not possible. Tb contributes to the overall rearrangement of band positions. The density of state calculation shows an increment of bandgap of ∼0.3 eV due to Tb doping in MAPbBr3, which is larger than the Ce doped case. This is fully consistent with our experimental observation, which shows a total ΔEg ∼ 0.54 eV in Tb70 as compared to ΔEg ∼ 0.25 eV in Ce70. From the total PDOS of Tb doped MAPbBr3, it can be seen that the inclusion of Tb decreased the electron density. However, the enhancement in the PL QY may be due to the quantum confinement effect and lattice contraction in Tb doped NSs. We have also compared the total DOS in the conduction band regime of the pristine and doped cases, as reflected in Fig. 7(d) in a magnified scale. We can observe the small circle depicting the conduction band edge that has been shifted differently in case of Ce and Tb doped systems, where the shift is not very substantial in Ce doped MAPbBr3, whereas Tb doping shifted the conduction band edge far from the Fermi level. Thus, there is a substantial increase in the bandgap in the Tb doped case, which is fully consistent with the experimental results. Thus, the DFT calculation correctly predicts that Ce doping leads to a major increase in the PL emission yield, while the Tb doping causes a substantial increase in the bandgap along with an increase in the PL emission yield.
 Fig. 7  Projected density of states (DOS) of (a) pristine, (b) Ce, and (c) Tb doped MAPbBr3. (d) Comparative analysis of total DOS in the conduction band regime for pristine and doped systems. The small circle depicts the shift of the conduction band edge, which is much larger in the Tb doped case than the Ce doped system. 
 Fig. 8  (a) EL spectra of the white light-emitting Ce doped 2D perovskite NS device fabricated with a UV LED chip, Ce70, and Rhodamine B (RhB). The inset shows white light emission from the colloidal solution under UV excitation and digital photograph of the white light converter. (b) CIE chromaticity coordinates of the Ce doped 2D perovskite white light converter. 
Furthermore, from our calculation of the formation energy to theoretically predict the relative stability of the undoped and rare-earth doped systems, we have found that the pristine system has a value of −6.85 eV, which is comparable to the earlier reported value.77 This formation energy becomes lower with Ce and Tb doping, where it attains the values −7.06 eV and −7.25 eV, respectively. As more negative value of formation energy asserts the stability enhancement of a system, we can infer that the decrease in the formation energy by ∼0.21 eV and ∼0.4 eV in case of Ce and Tb doped systems, respectively, signifies higher stability in the doped systems. This is fully consistent with our experimental data on the improved stability of doped systems. Hence, the following major aspects can be inferred from our theoretical calculations: (a) the stability enhancement under the influence of Ce and Tb doping in MAPbBr3, (b) bandgap increment after doping of Ce and Tb in MAPbBr3, and (c) substantial enhancement of the electron density in the conduction band in the Ce doped system giving rise to a high emission yield. These results are fully consistent with our experimental observation and it complements our understanding of the electronic structure of the doped system.
3.5. Application of Ce doped NSs for white LEDs
We have shown that MAPb0.3Ce0.7Br3 possesses excellent light emission properties and to demonstrate its practical application, we have fabricated a down-converting white light-emitting diode with Ce doped MAPbBr3, as shown in Fig. 8(a). To fabricate the white LED, Ce70 and Rhodamine B were mixed with PMMA solution separately and sequentially deposited on a low cost commercial UV emitting chip (400 nm). The layers were kept to dry under ambient conditions without any heating. The electroluminescence spectrum of the as-prepared white LED represents a blue emission peak centered at 462 nm corresponding to Ce70 and a broad orange emission peak at 578 nm corresponding to Rhodamine B under the excitation of a UV LED operating at 2.45 V (Fig. 8(a)). At an optimized ratio of the solutions, bright, warm, pure white emission is achieved, which can be seen from the photograph of a working white LED shown in the inset of Fig. 8(a). White light emission from the colloidal solution of the mixture can be seen under the UV excitation as shown in the inset of Fig. 8(a). The CIE coordinates of (0.334, 0.326) of the white light converter is remarkably close to the standard white light (0.33, 0.33) (see Fig. 8(b)). The white light converter demonstrates a CCT of 5437 K, a CRI of 73 and a luminescence efficiency of 79.6 lm W−1 at 2.74 V. A mixture of sky-blue MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 and orange-red Rhodamine 6G was previously used as the emissive layer for the fabrication of perovskite white light-emitting diodes.78 It was reported that the chance for electron–hole recombination increases due to the decrease in the crystallite/grain size in the Rhodamine B and perovskite mixture.78 With the bias voltage, electrons can be injected from the perovskite layer into the conduction band of Rhodamine 6B, leading to a higher electroluminescence intensity.78 The CIE coordinates of the white LED are very close to Planckian locus, as shown in Fig. 8(b) indicating that the color temperature is very pleasant and soothing to human eyes.17 The quality of white light is determined by how well the CIE coordinates align with the black body radiation curve and accordingly it can be chosen as next-generation white LEDs.15 The CRI of a light source apparently indicates the ability of the light source to reveal the actual color of the object. Hence, a high CRI is expected to recognize the natural color of any object under the light source. The high luminescence efficiency of the fabricated white light converter using Ce doped MAPbBr3 makes it very promising for use in highly energy-efficient LEDs and it can broaden the range of their potential applications in cutting-edge optoelectronic and imaging devices.
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have demonstrated a facile, reproducible solvothermal method to synthesize Ce and Tb doped MAPbBr3 2D perovskite nanosheets possessing deep blue emission with 100% PL QY. Our report expanded the family of perovskite nanomaterials with MAPb1−xCexBr3 and MAPb1−xTbxCl3xBr3(1−x) being added to the list having extremely high PL QY blue emission. The layered structure of the 2D perovskite NS allows easy substitution of Pb2+ with Ce3+/Tb3+ enabling a doping concentration up to 70 mol% CeBr3/TbCl3, which is believed to be the highest among the rare earth dopants reported to date. The introduction of rare-earth dopants significantly tuned the lateral size and thickness of the 2D NSs to uniformly distributed ultrathin (bilayer) 2D NPLs. Characteristic 2D diffraction peaks are observed at low diffraction angles in doped NSs and NPLs signifying the formation of a pure 2D perovskite phase. The PL peak energy could be successfully tuned by ∼0.337 eV and 0.587 eV to the deep blue region in Ce and Tb doped MAPbBr3 NSs, respectively. From the qualitative and theoretical analysis, it was revealed that the bandgap widening mainly results from the quantum confinement effect. In addition, the PL QY of the doped NS significantly improved post-doping. A strong deep blue emission with 100% PL QY is achieved with 70 mol% CeBr3 concentration by our solvothermal method, which is very significant. Our experimental results are fully supported by the electronic structure calculations using the DFT method. Our calculation results reveal that Tb doping allows the enlargement of the bandgap by a larger amount than Ce doping, while the PL QY is highest for the Ce doped case. Multiple PL peaks emerge at low temperatures due to the coexistence of different lattice phases as the atomically thin NS structure allows easy orientation of the perovskite structure. The highly luminescent NPLs are further demonstrated as a down converter white light-emitting diode with CIE coordinates (0.334, 0.326), closely matching with those of pure white light and thus indicating their promising application in the solid-state lightning field. Hence, successful doping of Ce and Tb ions in the 2D MAPbBr3 NS by the versatile solvothermal method may bestow other perovskite systems with highly efficient, narrow, stable blue emission, which illustrates its great potential for the fabrication of blue laser, light-emitting diodes, displays, photodetectors, and medical devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from DEITY (Grant No. 5(9)/2012-NANO (VOL-II)) for carrying out part of this work. Central Instruments Facility, I. I. T. Guwahati is acknowledged for providing the TEM, FESEM and AFM facilities. We thank Dr H. Sugimoto and Prof. M. Fujii, Japan, for their help in XPS analysis. PKP and SC would like to acknowledge MHRD Fellowship, IIT Indore for Infrastructure and NSCC for computing time.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS .
V. D’Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 CrossRef .
J. A. Sichert, Y. Tong, N. Mutz, M. Vollmer, S. Fischer, K. Z. Milowska, R. García Cortadella, B. Nickel, C. Cardenas-Daw and J. K. Stolarczyk, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6521–6527 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nagaoka, K. Hills-Kimball, R. Tan, R. Li, Z. Wang and O. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606666 CrossRef .
S. Parveen, S. M. Obaidulla and P. K. Giri, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 530, 147224 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jeffries, J. K. Zuo and M. M. Craig, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 4931–4934 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, M. Ikegami, K. Teshima and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41, 397–399 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Wang, W. Wang, A.-C. Tang, H.-Y. Tsai, Z. Bao, T. Ihara, N. Yarita, H. Tahara, Y. Kanemitsu, S. Chen and R.-S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13650–13654 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Q. Lin, H. Li, K. Wu, I. Robel, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14954–14961 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Nayak, M. Sendner, B. Wenger, Z. Wang, K. Sharma, A. J. Ramadan, R. Lovrinčić, A. Pucci, P. K. Madhu and H. J. Snaith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 574–577 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094–8099 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Feng, T. R. Paudel, E. Y. Tsymbal and X. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8227–8236 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, D. Liu, G. Pan, X. Chen, D. Li, W. Xu, X. Bai and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704149 CrossRef .
G. C. Adhikari, S. Thapa, H. Zhu and P. Zhu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900916 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Hu, B. Huang, M. Sun, B. Dong, G. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Li, Z. Xu, N. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, Science, 2019, 363, 265 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thapa, G. C. Adhikari, H. Zhu, A. Grigoriev and P. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 18636 CrossRef CAS .
B. Luo, F. Li, K. Xu, Y. Guo, Y. Liu, Z. Xia and J. Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2781–2808 RSC .
A. B. F. Vitoreti, S. Agouram, M. Solis de la Fuente, V. Muñoz-Sanjosé, M. A. Schiavon and I. Mora-Seró, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 14222–14231 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, G. H. Ahmed, O. M. Bakr, J.-L. Brédas and O. F. Mohammed, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 789–795 CrossRef CAS .
R. Begum, M. R. Parida, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, N. M. Alyami, G. H. Ahmed, M. N. Hedhili, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 731–737 CrossRef CAS .
R. Buonsanti and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1305–1317 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pradhan, S. Das Adhikari, A. Nag and D. D. Sarma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7038–7054 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rossi, D. Parobek, Y. Dong and D. H. Son, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17143–17149 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Lin, K. Y. Xu, D. Wang and A. Meijerink, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 45906 CrossRef CAS .
D. Parobek, B. J. Roman, Y. Dong, H. Jin, E. Lee, M. Sheldon and D. H. Son, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7376–7380 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, Y. Xu, Z. Zhang, Z. Gao, M. Luo, Z. Yin, C. Zhang, J. Xu, B. Huang, F. Luo, Y. Du and C. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1109–1143 RSC .
A. J. Kenyon, Prog. Quantum Electron., 2002, 26, 225–284 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pan, X. Bai, D. Yang, X. Chen, P. Jing, S. Qu, L. Zhang, D. Zhou, J. Zhu, W. Xu, B. Dong and H. Song, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 8005–8011 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Yin, Y. Wang, H. Wang, M. Lu, Z. Li, Z. Gu and W. W. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10101–10105 RSC .
D. M. Kroupa, J. Y. Roh, T. J. Milstein, S. E. Creutz and D. R. Gamelin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2390–2395 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Mir, T. Sheikh, H. Arfin, Z. Xia and A. Nag, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 9 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Yao, J. Ge, B.-N. Han, K.-H. Wang, H.-B. Yao, H.-L. Yu, J.-H. Li, B.-S. Zhu, J.-Z. Song, C. Chen, Q. Zhang, H.-B. Zeng, Y. Luo and S.-H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3626–3634 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, Y. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Wang, B. He and Q. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802346 CrossRef .
W. J. Mir, Y. Mahor, A. Lohar, M. Jagadeeswararao, S. Das, S. Mahamuni and A. Nag, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8170–8178 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Hu, Y. Pei, S. Wang, Z. Shi, V. L. Colvin, S. Wang, Y. Zhang and W. W. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1750–1756 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, B. Peng, I. Bravić, Y. Yu, Y. Dong, R. Liang, Q. Ou, B. Monserrat and S. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001698 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, X. Zhang, X. Sun and X. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, W. Feng, H. Liu, S. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Yao, Y. Liu, D.-K. Teng, B. Yang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 4826–4836 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, H. Li, K. Wang, X. Sun and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 11095–11101 RSC .
S. Parveen, K. K. Paul and P. K. Giri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6283–6297 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev., 1965, 140, A1133–A1138 CrossRef .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1976, 13, 5188–5192 CrossRef .
L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1171–1190 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Bohn, Y. Tong, M. Gramlich, M. L. Lai, M. Döblinger, K. Wang, R. L. Z. Hoye, P. Müller-Buschbaum, S. D. Stranks, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5231–5238 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, J. Yuan, Y. Ni, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Jiu, M. Yuan and J. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1356–1368 CrossRef .
L. Gan, J. Li, Z. Fang, H. He and Z. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5177–5183 CrossRef .
L. Wang, P. Yao, F. Wang, S. Li, Y. Chen, T. Xia, E. Guo, K. Wang, B. Zou and H. Guo, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902900 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. Guo, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700841 CrossRef .
M. Roy, Vikram, S. Banerjee, A. Mitra, A. Alam and M. Aslam, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 9892 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yuan, Y.-K. Wang, G. Sharma, Y. Dong, X. Zheng, P. Li, A. Johnston, G. Bappi, J. Z. Fan, H. Kung, B. Chen, M. I. Saidaminov, K. Singh, O. Voznyy, O. M. Bakr, Z.-H. Lu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 171–176 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 2555–2560 CrossRef CAS .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS .
I. Levchuk, A. Osvet, X. Tang, M. Brandl, J. D. Perea, F. Hoegl, G. J. Matt, R. Hock, M. Batentschuk and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2765–2770 CrossRef CAS .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau and C. Katan, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 3733–3741 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prasanna, A. Gold-Parker, T. Leijtens, B. Conings, A. Babayigit, H.-G. Boyen, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11117–11124 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mathieu, P. Lefebvre and P. Christol, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 4092–4101 CrossRef .
J. Li, L. Gan, Z. Fang, H. He and Z. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 6002–6008 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Wang, P. Liang, R.-J. Xie, Y. Yao, P. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Hu, L. Shao, X. W. Sun, F. Kang and G. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 7814–7821 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, A. De and A. Samanta, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1178–1188 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sadhukhan, A. Pradhan, S. Mukherjee, P. Sengupta, A. Roy, S. Bhunia and S. Das, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 131102 CrossRef .
H. Ji, Z. Shi, X. Sun, Y. Li, S. Li, L. Lei, D. Wu, T. Xu, X. Li and G. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42893–42904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ghosh, R. Ghosh and P. K. Giri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14917–14931 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Dar, G. Jacopin, S. Meloni, A. Mattoni, N. Arora, A. Boziki, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger and M. Grätzel, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1601156 CrossRef .
W. Zhai, C. Ge, X. Fang, K. Zhang, C. Tian, K. Yuan, S. Sun, Y. Li, W. Chen and G. Ran, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 14527–14531 RSC .
S. Parveen, K. K. Paul, R. Das and P. K. Giri, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 539, 619–633 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, F. You, H. Peng and S. Huang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 7561–7565 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, C. Zhu, C. Xu, P. Fan, F. Qin, A. Gowri Manohari, J. Lu, Z. Shi, Q. Xu and A. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7739–7745 RSC .
J. Tilchin, D. N. Dirin, G. I. Maikov, A. Sashchiuk, M. V. Kovalenko and E. Lifshitz, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6363–6371 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Y. Zhou, H. Hosono, T. Kamiya and N. P. Padture, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 2305–2316 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C. Lu, J. Lu, L. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, E. Gu and X. Hu, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 14182–14187 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, S. Yuan, H. Zeng and J. Song, Mater. Today Nano, 2019, 6, 100036 CrossRef .
P. J. S. Rana, T. Swetha, H. Mandal, A. Saeki, P. R. Bangal and S. P. Singh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 17026–17034 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, T. R. Paudel, P. A. Dowben, S. Dong and E. Y. Tsymbal, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 195309 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chang, W.-L. Hong, P.-H. Lo, T.-H. Wen, S.-F. Horng, C.-L. Hsu and Y.-C. Chao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 12951–12958 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TRPL decay components, TEM, Brus fit, PL and PLE data, and crystal structures of undoped and doped CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskites. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc04937aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  TEM images of (a) undoped 2D perovskite, and Ce3+ doped perovskite NSs with CeBr3 concentrations: (b) 20 mol%, (c) 50 mol% and (d) 70 mol%. The inset in (d) shows the vertically aligned 2D NSs. TEM images of Tb3+ doped NSs at TbCl3 concentrations: (e) 20 mol%, (f) 50 mol% and (g) 70 mol%. (h) HRTEM lattice images of the Tb70 NS; the inset shows the corresponding IFFT image.	 

 	Fig. 2  AFM topography images of undoped and Ce doped MAPbBr3 NSs in (a) Ce0, (c) Ce20, (e) Ce50 and (g) Ce70 and the corresponding height profiles are shown in (b), (d), (f) and (h), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  A comparison of XRD patterns of perovskite NSs before and after the doping with (a) Ce3+ and (b) Tb3+ at different molar concentrations. (c–f) Deconvoluted XPS spectra of Br 3d, Pb 4f, Cl 3p, Br 3p and Tb 3d in Tb20.	 

 	Fig. 4  Optical absorption (dashed line) and PL (solid line) spectra of undoped 2D perovskite NSs and (a) Ce3+ and (b) Tb3+ doped 2D perovskite NSs at different molar concentrations. The inset in each case shows the digital photographs of the corresponding perovskite NSs under UV illumination. (c) Optical bandgap energy as a function of thickness (d) of the Ce doped 2D perovskite NSs. (d) Comparison of PL QY of as-synthesized 2D perovskite NSs with Ce3+ and Tb3+ doping.	 

Undoped	Ce0, Tb0	518	58
20 mol% CeBr3	Ce20	504	63
50 mol% CeBr3	Ce50	465	90
70 mol% CeBr3	Ce70	454	100
20 mol% TbCl3	Tb20	500	60
50 mol% TbCl3	Tb50	432	66
70 mol% TbCl3	Tb70	416	70

 	Fig. 5  Temperature-dependent PL spectra of 2D NS of (a) Ce0, (b) Ce20 and (c) Tb20 in the range of 80–300 K. (d) Integrated PL intensity vs. inverse of temperature for Ce0, Ce20 and Tb20. The experimental data in the range of 220–300 K are fitted with the Arrhenius equation for each case shown in the expanded view in the inset. Temperature dependence of (e) FWHM and (f) PL peak energy for the excitonic peak in Ce0, Ce20 and Tb20.	 
I(T) = I0/(1 + Aexp(−EB/kBT)),

 	Fig. 6  A comparison of the TRPL spectra of undoped 2D perovskite NSs and (a) Ce3+ and (b) Tb3+ doped 2D perovskite NSs at different doping concentrations. The insets in the corresponding figures show the variation in lifetime with the doping concentrations. Comparison of relative PL intensity of the (c) Ce3+ and (d) Tb3+ doped 2D perovskite NSs taken at different time intervals after storing the samples under ambient conditions with relatively high humidity. The inset of (c) shows the change in PL intensity with storage time for the undoped perovskite sample.	 

 	Fig. 7  Projected density of states (DOS) of (a) pristine, (b) Ce, and (c) Tb doped MAPbBr3. (d) Comparative analysis of total DOS in the conduction band regime for pristine and doped systems. The small circle depicts the shift of the conduction band edge, which is much larger in the Tb doped case than the Ce doped system.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) EL spectra of the white light-emitting Ce doped 2D perovskite NS device fabricated with a UV LED chip, Ce70, and Rhodamine B (RhB). The inset shows white light emission from the colloidal solution under UV excitation and digital photograph of the white light converter. (b) CIE chromaticity coordinates of the Ce doped 2D perovskite white light converter.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TRPL decay components, TEM, Brus fit, PL and PLE data, and crystal structures of undoped and doped CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskites. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc04937a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
