Enhancing operational stability in perovskite solar cells by solvent-free encapsulation method   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE02054D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE02054D
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 2264-2275Enhancing operational stability in perovskite solar cells by solvent-free encapsulation method†

        
          
            Manuel 
            Salado
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Payno
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Shahzada 
            Ahmad
          
        
      *ab
aBCMaterials, Basque Center Centre for Materials, Applications and Nanostructures, UPV/EHU Science Park, 48940 Leioa, Spain. E-mail: manuel.salado@bcmaterials.net
bIKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Plaza Euskadi 5, 48009 Bilbao, Spain
Received 
      24th December 2021
    , Accepted 19th March 2022First published on 21st March 2022AbstractThe long-term stability of perovskite solar cells is one of the main concerns regarding the upscaling of this technology. In this paper, we develop a simple, fast, and green method to encapsulate perovskite solar cells, maintaining the optoelectronic properties after water immersion. The use of a photo-curable monomer as a sealant offers a fast encapsulation process as well as avoids the need of solvent that could degrade the perovskite layer. Electrical characterization of the devices (J–V curves and IS) barely shows any changes in the sample's behaviour. In addition, encapsulated samples kept 80% of their initial PCE after the aging test (e.g., ISOS-D-1) as well as after exposure to harsh environmental conditions such as high humidity (>80% RH) and elevated temperature (140 °C). The article presents an insight into the electrical processes after the encapsulation method, paving the way to the development of an efficient method to protect high efficient solar cells.
Introduction
Perovskite solar cells have become a reality as a possible replacement of silicon technology by its impressive progress in the last decade with an improvement of the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3.8% to over 25.5%.1,2 The key to success is based on the excellent optical and optoelectronic properties, such as high carrier mobility, high absorption coefficients as well as long charge-carrier diffusion length and the possibility of tuning optical bandgaps. However, there are still some issues to be addressed in order to upscale and commercialize this technology. Among them, are the perovskite instabilities to external factors (e.g., humidity, temperature, and light intensity) and possible phase segregation induced by an intrinsic degradation. Moreover, full devices as multilayer systems include a variety of materials, which will behave differently according to the external stimulus and consequently follow dissimilar degradation pathways. In this regard, Wang et al.3 studied the chemical degradation reactions induced in the perovskite material by the aforementioned different external factors. The authors concluded that the decomposition of perovskite film in the presence of high humidity (>90% RH) is mainly ascribed to the hydrolysis of CH3NH3PbI3. Under such conditions, water molecules easily penetrate the perovskite structure and form an intermediate monohydrate and dihydrate perovskite. Although these intermediates are reversible after dry conditions, water molecules weaken the bond between the cation and PbI6, allowing for faster deprotonation of the organic cation. Regarding the effect on perovskite materials with temperature, all compositions have good resistance under operating temperatures (333–383 K). Nevertheless, when single organic compound based perovskite films (e.g., CH3NH3PbI3) are used, they are more temperature-sensitive than their mixed counterpart (e.g., (MAPbBr3)0.17(FAPbI3)0.85, where MA and FA correspond to methylammonium and formamidinium, respectively). In particular, at temperatures higher than 423 K, CH3NH3PbI3 readily decomposes due to an endothermic reaction into its components PbI2, CH3NH2, and HI.4–6 If these gaseous decomposition products (CH3NH2 and HI) reach other layers and reactions take place, they will be consumed and have no chance to form perovskite anymore. Regarding the hole transporting layer (HTL), the generalized use of Spiro-OMeTAD also contributes to the device degradation, firstly absorbing water molecules due to its hygroscopic character7 and secondly inducing gold migration to the perovskite layer as a consequence of its amorphous and soft nature at temperatures above 358 K.8,9 Those sequential reactions decrease device performance, or in the last term, the complete annihilation of their optoelectronic properties. Another factor that induces perovskite instability is high-intensity light illumination.10 Although its effect could be reduced by the use of UV-light filters, the combination with temperature or humidity entails the outbreak of degradation processes. To overcome these external instabilities, great effort has been made, such as taking advance of the hydrophobic character of some polymers,11 tune perovskite compositions,12–14 passivation layers15–17 or novel hole transporter materials (HTM).18,19 For instance, Li et al.20 deposited a naphthalene diimide (NDI)-based conjugated polymer bearing 3,4-difluorothiophene (PTzNDI-2FT) between the perovskite and HTL. This strategy not only resulted in a high PCE of 23.2% but also performance retention of 97% after 3000 h in 5–10% RH. Tuning perovskite composition, an efficient (over 17% PCE) and operationally stable inorganic perovskite has been fabricated.21 The addition of 0.5% FeCl2 to CsPbI2Br exhibit a PCE retention of over 95% after 330 h at ∼50% RH (under light and at room temperature). One extended approach followed by many groups has succeeded in utilizing the interface engineering strategy to minimize the influence of moisture and improve stability.22–25 For that, many interfacial materials have been investigated, including metal oxides,26 polymers,27 and carbon-based materials.28 As an example of this approach, the use of phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) as a passivating agent, reduces the trap density (1.53 × 1015 cm−3) compared to the control sample (2.78 × 1015 cm−3).29 A seminal work presented by Grancini et al.30 created a 2D/3D interface with a protonated salt of aminovaleric acid iodide (AVAI) that protects perovskite against moisture, improving the long-term stability of the cell under illumination for one year at 55 °C. Regarding HTMs, employing fluorinated compounds such as Spiro-mF and Spiro-oF (fluorinated analogues of Spiro-OMeTAD) have favourable shifting of the electronic state for hole extraction. As a result, PCE of 24.82% along with long-term stability in wet conditions of un-encapsulated devices (87% efficiency retention after 500 h) was achieved.31 Generally, the concluding results consist of an improvement of the intrinsic device stability due to the passivation of the voids and interface imperfections. Consequently, an increment of the open-circuit voltage (VOC) is observed after the reduction of trap-states. Nevertheless, those aforementioned approaches have not reached a simple and consistent method that implies both high efficiency and long-term stability. On the other hand, instead of the modification of materials that comprise the solar device, novel methods of encapsulation have lately been proposed with the main purpose to first, to improve long-term life span and secondly to avoid the leakage of lead when the perovskite layer is fully degraded.32–36 Those encapsulation methods should be considered as a supporting step of the approaches aforementioned. Contrarily to silicon technology, in perovskite solar cells, organic material is generally used as HTM in n-i-p configuration. Therefore, standard encapsulation methods employed in silicon technology are prohibited as they suffer from degradation at temperatures above 363 K. Moreover, perovskite material is also sensitive to a wide variety of polar solvents, which limits the encapsulation materials possibilities. Considering this, few works have been successfully implemented in the encapsulation of perovskite solar cells maintaining competitive PCE.
In summary, encapsulation methods can be classified according to the method and the materials used in the process. It is well known that the high sensitivity of perovskite material to illumination intensity, high temperature, and polar solvents limits the use of well-established sealants in silicon technology (e.g., based on polyisobutylene (PIB), polyurethane (PU), silicone and MS Polymer technologies, as well as acrylic and butyl tapes). It has been demonstrated37 that solar cells encapsulated with a stiffer ionomer, such as Surlyn60® or SentryGlas® Plus (SGP), severely decreased the performance, mainly due to the heating of the cell at the curing temperature (373 K) of the thermoplastic sealant as well as delamination processes after temperature cycling, which facilitates the inclusion of water molecules. However, solar cells encapsulated with softer polymers withstood temperature cycling and retained above 85% of their initial performance after several temperature cycles. In particular, the combination of a desiccant material and UV epoxy resin exhibited significantly improved stability.33,36,38 Recently, Bonomo et al.39 polymerized a thermosetting PU directly in contact with the perovskite surface to be protected. Encapsulated samples retained 94% of the initial PCE after 2500 h under ambient light, 28–65% RH, and 18–30 °C compared to the 10% PCE retained in the control devices. Additionally, environmental problems derived from perovskite degradation have attracted the interest of researchers in controlling the leakage of the initial reactants from the solar device after degradation. As an example, Jiang et al.32 demonstrated that the encapsulation method based on an epoxy resin (with self-healing properties) lessens the Pb leakage after simulating a realistic scenario in which perovskite modules are mechanically damaged by a hail impact. International Summit on Organic Photovoltaic Stability (ISOS) protocols are defined to unify the stability assessment and to understand failure modes. Recently, a formative work has been focused on the influence of the aforementioned stress factor in the intrinsic stability of perovskite solar cells under dark conditions.40 According to the current normative,41 IEC 61215:2016, samples should pass a series of tests depending on the external inputs, temperature, humidity, or UV exposure. Specifically, the norm is divided into sequences containing some stress tests pointing specifically to one of the identified main degradation causes. The sequences cover from minor conditions to provide basic characterisation (Sequence A), hot-spots and outdoor behaviour (Sequence B) to the exposure of external parameters such as temperature (Sequence D) or the combination of various factors as 50 thermal and 10 humidity freeze cycles (Sequence C) or damp-heat test together with the mechanical stability tests (Sequence E). Two characteristics are relevant for perovskite solar cells in order to pass the damp heat test and the thermal cycling test (Sequence D). First, a device architecture stable with temperature, where particularly the chemical composition of the perovskite is crucial. In this regard, inorganic perovskites (mainly MA-free) avoid the volatility of MA; however, high efficiency (PCE > 20%) is still a challenge. Second, a proper strategy needs to be set to avoid delamination of the protective encapsulation under high temperature oscillations. It is expected that an efficient encapsulation can successfully prevent humidity. However, long-term stability against heat and constant illumination may be more challenging because they affect the intrinsic stability of perovskites. Moreover, in order to be comparable to silicon technology, perovskite solar devices would require a perfect hermetic encapsulation lasting at least 25 years.
In this work, we propose a simple and effective strategy to retard perovskite solar cell degradation by employing an ultraviolet-cured polymer as a sealant. To evaluate the encapsulation effectiveness, perovskite thin films, as well as full devices, were exposed to heat (>80 °C), high humidity conditions (∼100% RH) as well as light exposure (1000 mW cm−2). Additionally, full devices were characterized to unravel how these conditions affect the electro-optical properties. Special attention was taken to evaluate the charge transport of degraded perovskite by impedance spectroscopy. In particular, changes in the recombination mechanisms due to the migration or charge accumulation at the interfaces. Although we are aware that the current normative IEC 61215:2016 should be followed to ensure a standardized encapsulation process, the lack of adequate equipment to perform long-test degradation experiments entailed the design of a new set-up (more details in experimental part). Consequently, fast degradation processes (not common in real conditions) were induced to samples, exposing them to harsh experimental conditions.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a represents the encapsulation process of perovskite solar devices. Once the device is fabricated, a certain amount of curable polymer is dropped on top of the cell in ambient air. To avoid those possible pinholes or scratches facilitating the inclusion of water at high humid conditions, a piece of glass was placed onto the full device keeping the electrodes free to connect the sample. Due to the fast kinetics, the curable reaction takes less than 30 seconds, which makes it a fast method to protect perovskite solar cells. At working cell conditions, an increment of the temperature until values close to 353–363 K is expected. For that, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) were used to extract the thermal behaviour of the UV-curable polymer in terms of the variations of the thermal degradation and glass transition temperatures, respectively. According to the DSC thermogram (Fig. 1b), thermal behaviour is characterized by a glass transition around room temperature (293 K). TGA of polyurethane-based UV-polymer (Fig. 1c) depicts that the degradation occurs following mainly three steps: first, residual monomers and physically absorbed solvent caused the first small decomposition (433–553 K), the second step involved the decomposition of the main polymer chains (553–673 K) and finally, the full degradation entails the combustion of the carbonaceous residues (673–723 K). The optical properties of the UV-curable polymer (Fig. 1d) are in accordance with the photoreaction, which occurs at short wavelengths. Moreover, the polymer and the glass cover are transparent and they are located on the opposite side of the incoming light; therefore, perovskite layer can absorb in its full wavelength range (400–760 nm). Fig. 1e represents an encapsulated device immersed partially into the water to evaluate the protective efficacy.
 Fig. 1  (a) Visual scheme of the encapsulation process. (b) DSC thermogram, (c) thermogravimetric analysis, (d) UV-vis spectra of the thermoplastic polyurethane-based UV-polymer, and (e) encapsulated device soaked in water. 
Regarding the physicochemical properties of the UV-polymer used, it not only has no chemical reaction with perovskite, but it also has a low elastic modulus, similar to EVA.42 This low elastic modulus has an important effect in the delamination process that occurs when the samples are exposed to temperature changes (e.g., day and night). If a delamination process takes place, the perovskite layer would be exposed to water infiltration by the cavities formed between the glass and the perovskite layer. Recently, Kim et al.43 deposited a very thin layer of dimethylpolysiloxane (PDMS) with a synthesized CdSe/ZnS-QD to prevent the penetration of solvent into PSCs and its UV-induced degradation. Interestingly, the encapsulation of flexible perovskite solar cells enhanced the photovoltaic performance as well as retained more than 99% of the initial efficiency throughout more than 400 h under ambient conditions.
One strategy to study changes in the composition of the perovskite during operation conditions is the analysis of the optical bandgap. The direct and indirect transitions in the bandgap of the material are then obtained by analysing the absorption coefficient α (extracted from Tauc relation) and applying the following formula: αhν = C(hνEg)n with α = 2.303A/d,(1)where A and d are the absorbance and thickness (extracted from a cross-sectional SEM image) of the film, respectively, h is Planck's constant, ν is the incident radiation frequency, C is a constant that depends on the transition probability, Eg is the energy bandgap, and n = 1/2 and 2 are the direct and indirect bandgaps, respectively. Assuming that perovskite possesses a direct bandgap, the optical bandgap energy Eg of the perovskite layer was estimated from the intercept of the obtained straight lines at zero absorption.

Fig. 2 represents the evolution of the optical bandgap when samples (perovskite deposited on glass) were heated from 298 K to 413 K. An increment of the optical bandgap was observed when the temperature increased. To check if samples go to an irreversible degradation process, cooled samples (orange line in Fig. 2a and b) exhibit different values depending on whether they are encapsulated or not, (the final (blue/red) point refers to the bandgap after cooling-down at RT in Fig. 2e). Un-encapsulated samples display an increment of the initial bandgap until 1.62 eV, which can be ascribed to a Pb2 formation that provokes an enhancement of Eg.44 According to Fig. 2a, encapsulated samples present better stability when samples are exposed to temperatures above the phase transition/ionic migration. Previous studies45,46 have indicated the tendency of methylammonium iodide to be removed from the crystal structure when the temperature exceeds 400 K. The temperature dependence of the bandgap of the perovskite semiconductor compound is extracted and shown in Fig. 2e and f. At room temperature, the samples yielded the typical absorption spectrum of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite between 300 and 760 nm due to the bandgap of 1.56 eV. When samples are heated, the absorption onset in CH3NH3PbI3 changes from 780 nm at 298 K to 740 nm at 423 K. The bandgap increases linearly as the lattice temperature increases in un-encapsulated devices with a linear coefficient of 1.6 meV K−1. This behaviour is particularly different from that in most tetrahedral semiconductors. According to previous work,47 this effect can be ascribed to the appearance of two bandgaps related to the CH3NH3-ordered and CH3NH3-disordered domains due to a phase transition. On the other hand, encapsulated devices also show phase transition, but the linear coefficient is reduced to 1.1 meV K−1. To study if there exists some influence in the optical properties of the perovskite material during the evolution of temperature at operational conditions, we performed (Fig. 2f) different temperature cycling from room temperature (298 K) to average operation temperature (353 K). As was expected, the perovskite layer was not affected when it was heated below 473 K, and humidity conditions did not exceed more than 50% RH. Nevertheless, as a multi-layered device, the nature of the different materials would alter the degradation process of the device. For example, some authors suggest48,49 that due to the thickness of the metal contact, an infiltration of the metal through the organic layer (usually Spiro-OMeTAD), used as a hole extractor, partially affected the final performance of the device when we increase the temperature above 355 K.
 Fig. 2  (a) and (b) Absorbance dependence with temperature of encapsulated and un-encapsulated perovskite film. (c) and (d) Absorbance cycling stability of encapsulated and un-encapsulated perovskite film. (e) Bandgap dependence with temperature of encapsulated and un-encapsulated perovskite film (final (blue/red) point refers to the bandgap after cooling-down at RT). (f) Evolution of bandgap after temperature cycling (298.15–353.15 K) (red/blue rectangles represent: in (e)) bandgap value after cooling down and (f) the average bandgap average value depending on the temperature. 
For that, to evaluate the performance of the un-encapsulated perovskite solar device under a change in the operation temperature, we have inserted a full device inside a climate chamber and varied the temperature from 320 K to 360 K (Fig. 3). The PCE at maximum power point (MPP) was registered continuously while the temperature was increased by a ramp of 1.5 K min−1. According to Fig. 3, the PCE shows a clear dependence on the temperature as was expected in accordance with the optical measurements. Nevertheless, after one cycle (heating and cooling), a drop of efficiency of almost 28% from the initial value can be observed, mainly due to a drop in the open-circuit voltage (ESI Fig. S1†). As it was previously discussed, the temperature will affect not only perovskite material but also other layers such as organic HTM or metal contact. According to chemical reactions induced by temperature stimulus, CH3NH3I diffuses out of the perovskite structure, mainly by its attachment with hydrogen bonds to the inorganic structure.
 Fig. 3  Power conversion efficiency (PCE) evolution at maximum power point (MPP) with a temperature cycle (320 K to 360 K) of un-encapsulated device. 
Besides, CH3NH2 + HI (both in gas form) are produced due to the decomposition of the perovskite structure. Recent work50 pointed out the importance of avoiding the presence of MA in the chemical composition of the perovskite to retard degradation under thermal stress. After exposing the samples to ISOS-D-2I protocol (85 °C under nitrogen atmosphere). FA-based perovskites showed better thermal stability, similar to CsMAFA perovskite composition.
Bearing this in mind, PCE at MPP of encapsulated devices were compared with un-encapsulated ones at high temperatures under constant light illumination. The performance after the combination of both factors will give us an idea of the effectiveness of the encapsulation with the UV-polymer. Fig. 4 summarized the evolution of the device performance at 358 K and under illumination and standard humidity conditions (45% RH) for 16 h. The results suggest the success of the encapsulation as it kept above 80% of the initial efficiency.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of the evolution of the normalized PCE at MPP of encapsulated and un-encapsulated devices. A threshold of 80% of the initial PCE is indicated to consider good stability. 
This result is consistent with Fig. 3, as the un-encapsulated device lost almost 30% of its initial PCE in 3 h. The authors suggested that encapsulation avoids/retards the generation of MA (gas) and therefore keeps the optical properties of the solar device.
The inset of the figure shows the set-up of the experiment, where a Peltier element was used as a heater to achieve the desired temperature.
It is well determined that high humidity conditions contribute to the majority of degradation of perovskite solar devices. For that, we have estimated first the effect of the encapsulation process and then the immersion of the device underwater for some time. The characterization through J–V curves (Fig. 5) reveals negligible degradation nor after the encapsulation step nor after its immersion in water for 5 min. If we compare the values of the characteristic parameters extracted from the measurements, open-circuit voltage (VOC) did not change considerably, but a drop of 13 mV can be attributed to an increment in the series resistance. The increment of the current density values was supposed to be a small effect of photo-doping as the same sample was measured in the test. However, the main value affected after the immersion was the fill factor, which decreased from 75.3% to 71.2%. According to the curves, we suggest that this slight drop can be due to a lack of contact (from the clip to the sample) during the measurement.
 Fig. 5  Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of MAPbI3 based un-encapsulated fresh device, after encapsulation and after its immersion in water for 5 min measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination conditions. 
To further investigate the degradation effect of the humidity on devices, we compare the PCE of encapsulated and un-encapsulated devices after their exposure to water vapour (85–90% RH). With this, we can evaluate the encapsulation effectiveness at high humidity conditions because the vapour is generated very close to the devices. After exposure for 24 h (Fig. 6), encapsulated devices showed a very good performance as they kept 70% of the initial efficiency. If we compare with the un-encapsulated device (inset of Fig. 6), after only 2 h, it suffered from a drastic poor performance. Consistent with the visual appearance of the devices after the experiment, the un-encapsulated device suffered optical losses by a fast deterioration and consequently collapse of the perovskite layer.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of the evolution of the PCE of encapsulated and un-encapsulated devices during their exposure to water vapour. A threshold of 80% of the initial PCE is indicated to consider good stability. 
Furthermore, we compared J–V parameters of the encapsulated devices before and after the experiments at room temperature (outset of Fig. 6 and S2†). According to the constant temperature experiment (Fig. 4), we observed an increment of the current density caused by a photo-doping effect51 due to continuous illumination. However, a high drop in the fill factor of the device was noticed (from 71.13% to 51.56%).
A difference of the previous sample exposed to water for 5 min and according to the visual appearance of the encapsulated device (inset Fig. 6), metallic contact seemed to be affected by the water exposure. The series resistance increased from 6.6 Ω cm2 to 16.6 Ω cm2, calculated from the dark I–V curves (ESI Fig. S3b†), resulting in a drop in efficiency of ∼3% from the initial value. To evaluate if the fill factor drop is caused by a degradation of the perovskite, the carrier density profiling52 was calculated from the capacitance–voltage measurements (ESI Fig. S3a†). Fresh samples, aged (12 months), and un-encapsulated samples are shown as references.
The profiling distance (Fig. 7) is not affected for the encapsulated sample, even after being exposed to high humidity, which is a good indicator of a low quantity of free charges in the absorber. Conversely, in the aged sample, a residual capacitance does not allow for deeper profiling than 0.25 μm, even if the perovskite layer is thicker.
 Fig. 7  Carrier density distribution along the device profile. 
Aged sample reaches minimum values in the order of 1016 cm−3, with values higher than 1018 cm−3 in the interface, suggesting an increase of defects due to exposure to air. A value lower than 1016 cm−3 is considered to be a good enough defect density to avoid most of the bulk recombination.53 Fresh and encapsulated samples show a carrier density from 1015 to 1016 cm−3 along with the absorber thickness, indicating high quality and lack of perovskite defects. An increase is observed that approaches 1017 cm−3 close to the junction, which is caused by an increase of defects at the interface.
Therefore, it is clear that the encapsulation process is not affecting the quality of the absorber material and is effectively protecting it against moisture exposure, with most of the losses produced in the metallic contacts.
Extreme conditions such as immersion in water of encapsulated samples will demonstrate its efficacy in an easy and fast approach. Fig. 8 (inset) represents the experimental setup, where an encapsulated full device is immersed and illuminated (1 sun) constantly during the measurement. The backside of the sample was maintained outside the water in order to avoid the attenuation of the radiation due to the aqueous media. Normalized PCE and voltage are parameters taken to assess the evolution of the cell performance at MPP, as is shown in Fig. 8. It had already been reported54 that the drop of VOC was related to bulk and interface degradation after trap formation. The sample proved excellent stability for 17 h, retaining almost 100% of the initial efficiency followed by a drastic drop in voltage.
 Fig. 8  Evolution of the PCE at MPP of encapsulated devices during its immersion in water. 
Nevertheless, the failure was due to a lack of metallic contact (gold migration/precipitation). It has been proved that as perovskites react with almost all metals, especially under moderate temperatures and illumination, since heat volatilizes halide species and light enhances halogen mobility.55,56 Recently, a type of reduction/oxidation reaction termed under-potential deposition (UPD) was evaluated by X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS). The formation of Pb and I species at direct MAPbI3/Au contacts accelerate the degradation of the perovskite by the catalysis of HI and MAI.57 Wang et al.58 recently demonstrated that intrinsic degradation entails a metal cathode degradation due to stripping/plating behaviour. With the aim to explain devices' performance fading under operation at MPP, the authors proposed the electrochemical metallization effect as the main reason for the degradation and mechanism of the device. Additionally, it has been probed as electrochemical reactions take place when samples are biased at 0.8 V, observing a gold migration and accumulation both in the perovskite bulk near its interface with Au and at the FTO cathode.59
It was demonstrated that encapsulation is quite effective (ESI Tables S1 and S2†) but more effort must be addressed to improve the encapsulation of the metallic contacts, as the polymer possesses an insulator characteristic. For that, future approaches are focused on the design of new electrode shapes to allow a better encapsulation.
The experiments aforementioned corroborate that the solvent-free encapsulation process has not chemically interacted with the perovskite layer. Nevertheless, a deeper study of the recombination processes in the device can evaluate the effectiveness of the encapsulation after exposure to harsh conditions.
Impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements were performed in order to obtain information about various internal processes occurring in the full perovskite device at various operation conditions, discerning interfacial from bulk processes.
In particular, by means of IS it is possible to differentiate various resistive and capacitive processes occurring in the device either on the interfaces or in the bulk on a different time scale, including charge transport, recombination and slow ionic processes (at low frequencies) to which hysteretic behaviour has been lately associated.60 As shown in Fig. 9a, the impedance spectra obtained are characterized by two semicircles. However, in the sample after the water immersion, those two signals are not well defined, which means that different processes are linked. As those processes are very close in time, there are certain difficulties in estimating the exact values of time constants and resistances for each process individually. In order to understand the recombination kinetics under different optical excitation wavelengths, Nyquist plot of impedance spectra (ESI Fig. S4†) was examined. According to the previous J–V characterization, where slight variation between the fresh and the encapsulated sample was observed, impedance measurements present almost the same response, confirming the inexistence of a detrimental chemical interaction during the encapsulation process. Fig. S5 (ESI†) shows the electron recombination resistance extracted by fitting the impedance response under illumination to a simple –Rs–(R1,CPE1)–(R2,CPE2)– equivalent circuit, where a constant phase element (CPE) replaces an ideal capacitor in order to obtain a better fitting. Moreover, it is well known that capacitance in perovskite solar cell is in general dominated by the geometrical component that can be expressed by the following formula; Cg = εε0A/d, where ε is the dielectric constant of the perovskite, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, A the effective contact area, and d is the thickness of the depletion width. Fig. 9a (outset) shows that the capacitance extracted from the high-frequency component is indeed constant with respect to the applied voltage, which is in accordance with the geometrical nature of the complex dielectric constant.61 Also, we can observe that the fresh sample was in the same order of magnitude as the sample after the encapsulation process. However, after the water immersion, the sample presented a higher capacitance value, which is in agreement with the lower recombination resistance. Fig. 9b represents the general response of the frequency-dependent capacitance for the fresh, encapsulated, and degraded devices, respectively. According to the literature,62 a certain specific polarization process is associated with a plateau in the graph. As aforementioned, at different frequencies, we can observe various processes taking place inside the devices. At high frequency ranges (106 Hz to 102 Hz), a plateau is observed, which is attributed to a dielectric polarization in the bulk of the perovskite. Nevertheless, at low frequencies (0.1 Hz to 1 Hz), ionic motion and charge accumulation at the ETM interface are associated.63
 Fig. 9  (a) Nyquist plot at 0.98 V and capacitance vs. voltage. (b) Low frequency vs. voltage extracted from the capacitance–frequency spectra from IS of fresh, after the encapsulation process and after 5 min immersion in water samples. 
According to Zarazua et al.,64 from the exponential correlation of the capacitance at low frequency and voltage, the ionic motion can be evaluated. The outset of Fig. 9b depicts the linear dependency of the capacitance extracted at low frequency with respect to the voltage. From the slope, the β-parameter, and consequently the ideality factor (n) can be obtained as n = 1/β.
In fresh and encapsulated samples, the ideality factor was close to n = 2, indicating a trap-limited recombination mechanism, but after immersion, the mechanism changes as evidenced by the significant variation of the ideality factor. Previous research work65 suggested that ideality factor n > 2 indicated a combination of different recombination processes with a high contribution of the surface resistance at high injection mode, which can be attributed to a degradation of the metallic contacts in our case. Table 1 summarizes the β-parameter and the ideality factor of the samples.
Table 1 Ideality factors for the studied solar cells extracted from impedance spectroscopy




Sample
Slope

β-Parameter
Ideality factor




Fresh
26.7
0.7
1.42


Encapsulated
22.3
0.58
1.72


Immersed
18.46
0.47
2.12




Focusing on the effect of the water immersion in the device, plateaus at high frequencies are in the same order for the fresh and degraded devices. However, a new polarization process in the range of (102 Hz to 103 Hz) was identified at mid frequencies after water immersion. Fig. 10 represents the Bode plot extracted from IS of fresh, after the encapsulation process, and after 5 min immersion in water samples. Contrary to the fresh and the encapsulated sample, after 5 min immersion, the sample showed a widening of the peak at high frequencies and a new process at medium frequencies. When the spectrum is de-convoluted, two processes can be identified at high frequencies (peaks 1 and 2) and a new one at 103 Hz (peak 3). In previous research,66,67 possible charge accumulation at the HTM/perovskite interface was suggested to be the cause of high frequency processes and peaks at medium frequencies were ascribed to perovskite degradation. This degradation process observed by spectroscopy techniques has slight importance (at least in the short term) when J–V curves are measured.
 Fig. 10  Bode plot extracted from IS of fresh, after the encapsulation process and after 5 min immersion in water samples. Dash lines represent the deconvolution of the immersed sample where new processes are identified. 
Concerning the long-term stability, the evolution of the PCE of reference (un-encapsulated) and encapsulated cells was explored following ISOS-D-1 in larger time scales of 360 days in RT and 50% moisture represented in Fig. 11. After 30 days of registering the stability of the samples, both (encapsulated and un-encapsulated) were immersed for 5 min in water, and then PCE was periodically measured. Between the periodic measurements, samples were kept at room temperature, 40–55% RH and dark conditions. According to Fig. 11, un-encapsulated samples suffered from a drastic drop in efficiency mainly due to a decomposition of the perovskite layer immediately after their immersion in water, while encapsulated samples kept almost the same PCE even after 30 days after exposure to water. Although in our study, a gold migration is expected due to perovskite degradation, encapsulated samples retained more than 80% over 160 days and 50% of the initial PCE over one year, demonstrating the improvement of long-term stability after the encapsulation process.
 Fig. 11  Evolution with time of the power conversion efficiency of samples encapsulated and un-encapsulated after immersion in water. 
Nevertheless, aging processes took place with time due to a lack of proper encapsulation in the metallic contact area and lateral side of the device and intrinsic processes. Recently, novel concepts of metal contacts have kept the attention not only for stability reasons but for reducing fabrication costs. Copper, silver, and aluminium used for metal contacts often lead to instability issues, indicating that they are not an immediate alternative to gold electrodes. Recently, Mei et al.68 proposed an Au–Ag bilayer to inhibit the chemical reaction between halogens and electrode metals and reduce corrosion of metal electrodes and decomposition of the perovskite.
Another alternative is the use of carbon electrodes due to their low cost, superior stability, and solution processability. In particular, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) passivated carbon electrode was hot-pressed onto the perovskite to enhance the combination of the carbon electrode, improving the interface carrier transport and retaining almost 87% of its initial PCE after 50 days at 60% RH.69
Conclusions
Independent of the perovskite composition, which influences the performance of the solar cells, they fail when the device is exposed to harsh conditions such as high humidity or temperature.
Additionally, perovskite suffers from high sensitivity in the presence of a wide variety of solvents, which limits the use of resins for encapsulation of solar cell devices. In order to improve stability, an encapsulation solvent-free procedure is required. Although great efforts have been proposed lately in this direction, it is not sufficient. In order to contribute to improving long-term stability, a UV-cured polymer has been successfully implemented as a sealant agent to encapsulate the solar cells.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the encapsulation, samples were exposed to harsh environmental conditions (e.g., high humidity, high temperature, and light). Results indicate that the use of the UV-polymer has no chemical interaction and therefore no influence on the opto-electronic properties of the perovskite. Additionally, after fast degradation experiments under high humidity conditions, encapsulated devices maintain 80% of the initial PCE over 20 h. Remarkably, devices measured following ISOS-D-1 were stable for 12 months after their immersion in water for 5 min. The good performance of polymer + glass approach is ascribed to the impediment to escape volatile gaseous degradation products (i.e., MA or HI), shifting the reaction equilibrium toward the perovskite. However, electrode contacts seem to be one of the critical aspects to be addressed in order to avoid an increment in the series resistance. After impedance spectroscopy studies, a certain specific polarization process was observed in the encapsulated sample that was immersed in water, indicating recombination processes at the interfaces. However, charge density was not affected after water vapour exposure for 24 h. Accordingly we suggest that the UV-encapsulation is a promising technique as it also protects the perovskite layer against ionic migration and avoids a collapse in the crystal structure. This work brings this technology closer to the standards for industrial applications.
Experimental
Materials and methods
Lead iodide PbI2 (99.8%) was procured from Tokyo Chemical Industry (TCI) and used without further purification. TiO2 nanoparticles (30 NRD from Dyesol) and methylammonium iodide (>99.99%) were obtained from Dyesol and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) 99% (HPLC) was acquired from Merck KGaA. For encapsulation, polyurethane acrylate (PUA) photo-resin SPOT-E™ (SPOT-A Materials®) was used.
Solar cell device fabrication
PSCs were fabricated on FTO (NSG10) substrates previously cleaned by a sequential treatment in the ultrasonicator bath in a 2% Hellmanex solution, acetone, and isopropanol, followed by UV ozone treatment for 20 min. The samples were then heated to 500 °C, and a compact blocking layer of TiO2 was deposited onto the FTO glass substrate by spray pyrolysis using a diluted 1/19 mL of titanium(IV) diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution in ethanol, keeping them for 30 min. Once the samples achieved room temperature, a mesoporous dispersion of TiO2 nanoparticles (30 NRD from Dyesol) in ethanol was spun-coated at 2000 rpm (1000 rpm s−1 acceleration) for 30 s, followed by a progressive heating step till 500 °C for 30 min. Stoichiometric precursor solutions (1.25 M) were prepared by mixing MAI and PbI2 in N,N′-dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and kept under stirring at 70 °C overnight in order to dissolve PbI2 completely. The perovskite and HTM films were prepared inside an argon filled glove box under moisture and oxygen controlled conditions (H2O level: 1 ppm and O2 level: 10 ppm). The perovskite layers were fabricated using a two-step spin-coating process, first step 1000 rpm for 10 s; and second step 3500 rpm for 30 s. During the second step, 120 μL of chlorobenzene was poured onto the films 8 s prior to the end of the program, and then substrates were annealed at 100 °C for 40 min. When samples were cooled down to room temperature, Spiro-OMeTAD was then spun coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s by dissolving 72.3 mg of Spiro-OMeTAD in 1 mL of chlorobenzene; 28.8 mL of 4-tert-butylpyridine was added to the solution as dopants. Finally, 70 nm of gold was deposited by thermal evaporation.
Encapsulation process
Polyurethane acrylate (PUA) photo-resin SPOT-E™ (SPOT-A Materials®) was selected as the UV curable polymer encapsulating material. The encapsulation process was carried out by dropping a certain amount of the photo-resin onto the perovskite solar cell and covering it with a piece of thin glass (500 nm) with no external pressure and slightly overlapping the metallic contacts. Samples were cured for 60 s at room temperature using a UV curing chamber UVACUBE 400 from Honle UV America, Inc. (irradiance of 1000 W m−2) to complete the polymerization reaction.
UV-polymer characterization
Thermal behaviour of the samples was evaluated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) in a Mettler Toledo TGA/SDTA851 instrument. Measurements were performed from room temperature to 800 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under air atmosphere. For each sample, degradation temperature (Tdeg) and temperature of the maximum degradation rate (Tmax) were obtained from the first derivative peak.
The glass transition temperature (Tg) was evaluated by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). For that, two successive scans were performed under a nitrogen atmosphere from −50 to 250 °C at 20 °C min−1 and from −50 to 150 °C at 20 °C min−1, respectively. Measurements were carried out using a DSC 822e from Mettler Toledo. The glass transition temperature was extracted by the extrapolated onset of the baseline shift.
Film characterization
Optical properties of perovskite films were studied by Cary 60 UV-vis spectrophotometer with a Peltier thermoelectric module in the range of temperature 298–363 K.
Device characterization
Current density–voltage (J–V) curves were recorded using an Oriel solar simulator (Newport), producing 1 sun AM 1.5 (1000 W m−2) 3 A sunlight. Current–voltage curves were measured in air with a potentiostat (Keithley 2604). J–V measurements were performed at 100 mV s−1 scan rate (pre-sweep delay: 10 s) and a black metal mask (0.16 cm2) was used over the square solar cell active area to reduce the influence of scattered light. Long-term stability measurements at MPP were performed with an in-house made LabVIEW software for a micro-amperimeter Keithley 6487. The software tracks the maximum power point by the perturbation-observation method of the voltage.
The capacitance–voltage measurement was performed using a Biologic potentiostat. The measurements were performed under dark, with a frequency of 100 kHz, an AC voltage of 50 mV, in a range of applied DC bias from −1.2 V to 1.2 V. The carrier density profiling was calculated using eqn (2) and (3). (2) (3)where xd is the profiling distance, ε is the dielectric constant of the perovskite, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, A is the active area, C the series capacitance, ND is the carrier density in the absorber, q is the electron charge, and V is the applied DC voltage.
Impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements were carried out, altering the positions of the Fermi level by a white LED source. During the measurements, samples were kept inside a faradaic chamber to avoid external interferences. A 20 mV perturbation in the range 2 MHz–1 mHz was used to obtain the spectra. After measurement, data were fitted by Z-view software and analyzed in order to extract the characteristic parameters of the cells.
Author contributions
Manuel Salado, sample preparation, electro-optical characterization, experiment design, data analysis, results and discussion, manuscript preparation. David Payno, spectroscopic experiments, data analysis, revised manuscript. Shahzada Ahmad, discussion and revised manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work has received funding from the European Union H2020 Programme under the European Research Council Consolidator grant (MOLEMAT, 726360). M. S. thanks the National Research grant “Juan de la Cierva” (FJCI-2017-31761).
References
N. Dean, J. Gallagher, F. Khan, G. Tregnago and C. Zhang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 1 CrossRef .

          http://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, n.d.
Z. Wang, Z. Shi, T. Li, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1190–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cojocaru, S. Uchida, Y. Sanehira, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, J. Bisquert, J. Nakazaki, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Chem. Lett., 2015, 1557–1559 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Misra, S. Aharon, B. Li, D. Mogilyansky, I. Visoly-Fisher, L. Etgar and E. A. Katz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 326–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, S. Wang, Y. Kato and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9074–9080 RSC .
A. Dualeh, T. Moehl, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2292–2301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Xiao, Y. Yang, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, J. A. Christians, M. Yang, P. Schulz, S. U. Nanayakkara, C. S. Jiang, J. M. Luther, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard, M. M. Al-Jassim and K. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1234–1242 RSC .
R. S. Sanchez and E. Mas-Marza, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salado, M. A. Fernández, J. P. Holgado, S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. J. Dyson and S. Ahmad, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3846–3853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, G. Grancini, Y. Feng, A. M. Asiri and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2(4), 802–806 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tombe, G. Adam, H. Heilbrunner, D. H. Apaydin, C. Ulbricht, N. S. Sariciftci, C. J. Arendse, E. Iwuoha and M. C. Scharber, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1714–1723 RSC .
G. Grancini and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 4–22 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hwang, I. Jeong, J. Lee, M. J. Ko and K. Yong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17330–17336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Salado, A. D. Jodlowski, C. Roldan-Carmona, G. de Miguel, S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin and S. Ahmad, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 220–228 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, T. Giovenzana, S. N. Habisreutinger, J. S. Tinkham, N. K. Noel, B. A. Kamino, G. Sadoughi, A. Sellinger and H. J. Snaith, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5981–5989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Calió, S. Kazim, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14522 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, E. L. Lim, H. Xie, J. Song, T. Kong, Y. Zhang, M. Yang, B. Wu, C. Duan and D. Bi, ACS Photonics, 2021, 8, 3185–3192 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ozturk, E. Akman, A. E. Shalan and S. Akin, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106157 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, D. Martineau and S. Narbey, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Han, S. Tan, J. Xue, L. Meng, J. W. Lee and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1803515, 1–35 Search PubMed .
M. Salado, L. Calió, L. Contreras-Bernal, J. Idígoras, J. A. Anta, S. Ahmad and S. Kazim, Materials, 2018, 11, 1073 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Salado, M. Andresini, P. Huang, M. T. Khan, F. Ciriaco, S. Kazim and S. Ahmad, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 1910561, 1–11 Search PubMed .
A. A. Sutanto, C. Igci, H. Kim, H. Kanda, N. Shibayama, M. Mensi, V. I. E. Queloz, C. Momblona, H. J. Yun and H. J. Bolink, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1259–1268 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S. Tu, G. You, J. Cao, D. Wu, L. Yao, Z. Zhou, W. Shi, W. Wang and H. Zhen, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133951 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, J. Choi, J. Byun, J. T. Kim, G. S. Lee, J. G. Kim, D. Kim, P. Boonmongkolras, P. F. McMillan and H. M. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 61215–61226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, Q. Huang, J. Song, Y. Zhang, C. Ding, F. Liu, D. Liu, X. Li, H. Yasuda, K. Yoshida, J. Qu, S. Hayase, T. Toyoda, T. Minemoto and Q. Shen, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900243 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mingyu, C. I. Woo, G. E. Min, C. Yongjoon, K. Minjin, L. Byongkyu, J. Seonghun, J. Yimhyun, C. H. Won, L. Jiyun, B. Jin-Hyuk, K. S. Kyu, K. D. Suk and Y. Changduk, Science, 2020, 369, 1615–1620 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, L. Qiu, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono, Z. Hu, Z. Liu, Z. Wu, L. Meng, Q. Wang and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 585–593 CrossRef CAS .
J. Idígoras, F. J. Aparicio, L. Contreras-Bernal, S. Ramos-Terrón, M. Alcaire, J. R. Sánchez-Valencia, A. Borras, Á. Barranco and J. A. Anta, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11587–11594 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, E. Lamanna, S. Cacovich, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, C. Ducati and A. Di Carlo, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 162–172 CrossRef CAS .
S. Emami, J. Martins, D. Ivanou and A. Mendes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2654–2662 RSC .
S. Ma, Y. Bai, H. Wang, H. Zai, J. Wu, L. Li, S. Xiang, N. Liu, L. Liu, C. Zhu, G. Liu, X. Niu, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1–8 Search PubMed .
R. Cheacharoen, C. C. Boyd, G. F. Burkhard, T. Leijtens, J. A. Raiford, K. A. Bush, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2398–2406 RSC .
L. Shi, T. L. Young, J. Kim, Y. Sheng, L. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Feng, M. J. Keevers, X. Hao, P. J. Verlinden, M. A. Green and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25073–25081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bonomo, B. Taheri, L. Bonandini, S. Castro-Hermosa, T. M. Brown, M. Zanetti, A. Menozzi, C. Barolo and F. Brunetti, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 54862–54875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V Khenkin, E. A. Katz, A. Abate, G. Bardizza, J. J. Berry, C. Brabec, F. Brunetti, V. Bulović, Q. Burlingame, A. Di Carlo, R. Cheacharoen, Y.-B. Cheng, A. Colsmann, S. Cros, K. Domanski, M. Dusza, C. J. Fell, S. R. Forrest, Y. Galagan, D. Di Girolamo, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt, E. von Hauff, H. Hoppe, J. Kettle, H. Köbler, M. S. Leite, S. Liu, Y.-L. Loo, J. M. Luther, C.-Q. Ma, M. Madsen, M. Manceau, M. Matheron, M. McGehee, R. Meitzner, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. F. Nogueira, Ç. Odabaşı, A. Osherov, N.-G. Park, M. O. Reese, F. De Rossi, M. Saliba, U. S. Schubert, H. J. Snaith, S. D. Stranks, W. Tress, P. A. Troshin, V. Turkovic, S. Veenstra, I. Visoly-Fisher, A. Walsh, T. Watson, H. Xie, R. Yıldırım, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. Zhu and M. Lira-Cantu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 35–49 CrossRef .

          International Electrotechnical Commission, International Standard IEC 60904-1:2020, Photovoltaic devices - Part 1: Measurement of photovoltaic current-voltage characteristics,  2020, p.67 Search PubMed.
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3418–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, J. H. Jang, J. H. Kim, K. Park, J. S. Jang, J. Park and N. Park, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9257–9263 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ou, X. Bao, Y. Zhang, H. Shao, G. Xing, X. Li, L. Shao and Q. Bao, Nano Mater. Sci., 2019, 1, 268–287 CrossRef .
A. F. Akbulatov, M. I. Ustinova, G. V Shilov, N. N. Dremova, I. S. Zhidkov, E. Z. Kurmaev, L. A. Frolova, A. F. Shestakov, S. M. Aldoshin and P. A. Troshin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 4362–4367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Khadka, Y. Shirai, M. Yanagida and K. Miyano, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 11121–11132 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Dar, G. Jacopin, S. Meloni, A. Mattoni, N. Arora, A. Boziki, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger and M. Grätzel, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2(10), 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Cacovich, L. Ciná, F. Matteocci, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, A. Di Carlo and C. Ducati, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4700–4706 RSC .
N. Marinova, W. Tress, R. Humphry-Baker, M. I. Dar, V. Bojinov, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4200–4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Schwenzer, T. Hellmann, B. A. Nejand, H. Hu, T. Abzieher, F. Schackmar, I. M. Hossain, P. Fassl, T. Mayer, W. Jaegermann, U. Lemmer and U. W. Paetzold, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 15292–15304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Das, Z. Liu, I. Aguilera and U. Rau, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 3655–3670 RSC .
Z. Ni, S. Xu and J. Huang, Science, 2021, 371, 1352–1358 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Jamal, S. A. Shahahmadi, M. A. Abdul Wadi, P. Chelvanathan, N. Asim, H. Misran, M. I. Hossain, N. Amin, K. Sopian and M. Akhtaruzzaman, Optik, 2019, 182, 1204–1210 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, F. Zhang, J. He, J. Lian, P. Zeng, J. Song and J. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 384, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1772–1778 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 2–7 Search PubMed .
R. A. Kerner, P. Schulz, J. A. Christians, S. P. Dunfield, B. Dou, L. Zhao, G. Teeter, J. J. Berry and B. P. Rand, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 041103 CrossRef .
H.-Q. Wang, S. Wang, L. Chen, Z. Yin, S. Mei, Y. Zhong, Y. Yao, N. Li, J. Wang and W. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 230, 111278 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Kerner, L. Zhao, S. P. Harvey, J. J. Berry, J. Schwartz and B. P. Rand, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3352–3356 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, Z. Sun, M. Liang and S. Xue, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 245–251 RSC .
R. M. Martin and G. Ortiz, Solid State Commun., 1997, 102, 121–126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salado, L. Contreras, L. Calio, A. Todinova, C. Lopez-santos, S. Ahmad, A. Borras, J. A. Idígoras and J. A. Anta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10917–10927 RSC .
V. Roiati, S. Colella, G. Lerario, L. De Marco, a. Rizzo, a. Listorti and G. Gigli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1889 RSC .
I. Zarazua, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 525–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          O. Almora Rodríguez, Hysteresis and Capacitive Features of Perovskite Solar Cells Osbel Almora Rodríguez,  2020 Search PubMed .
M. Salado, J. Idigoras, L. Calio, S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. A. Anta and S. Ahmad, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(50), 34414–34421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, T. Wang, J. Ji, M. Li, P. Cui, Y. Li, G. Li, J. M. Mbengue and D. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1991–1998 RSC .
S. Mei, Z. Yin, P. Gu, H.-Q. Wang, J. Wang and W. Song, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 11062–11068 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Wu, X. Li, M. Liu, Z. Chen, P. Zhang and S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 1270–1275 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se02054dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Visual scheme of the encapsulation process. (b) DSC thermogram, (c) thermogravimetric analysis, (d) UV-vis spectra of the thermoplastic polyurethane-based UV-polymer, and (e) encapsulated device soaked in water.	 
αhν = C(hνEg)n with α = 2.303A/d,	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) and (b) Absorbance dependence with temperature of encapsulated and un-encapsulated perovskite film. (c) and (d) Absorbance cycling stability of encapsulated and un-encapsulated perovskite film. (e) Bandgap dependence with temperature of encapsulated and un-encapsulated perovskite film (final (blue/red) point refers to the bandgap after cooling-down at RT). (f) Evolution of bandgap after temperature cycling (298.15–353.15 K) (red/blue rectangles represent: in (e)) bandgap value after cooling down and (f) the average bandgap average value depending on the temperature.	 

 	Fig. 3  Power conversion efficiency (PCE) evolution at maximum power point (MPP) with a temperature cycle (320 K to 360 K) of un-encapsulated device.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of the evolution of the normalized PCE at MPP of encapsulated and un-encapsulated devices. A threshold of 80% of the initial PCE is indicated to consider good stability.	 

 	Fig. 5  Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of MAPbI3 based un-encapsulated fresh device, after encapsulation and after its immersion in water for 5 min measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination conditions.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of the evolution of the PCE of encapsulated and un-encapsulated devices during their exposure to water vapour. A threshold of 80% of the initial PCE is indicated to consider good stability.	 

 	Fig. 7  Carrier density distribution along the device profile.	 

 	Fig. 8  Evolution of the PCE at MPP of encapsulated devices during its immersion in water.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Nyquist plot at 0.98 V and capacitance vs. voltage. (b) Low frequency vs. voltage extracted from the capacitance–frequency spectra from IS of fresh, after the encapsulation process and after 5 min immersion in water samples.	 

Fresh	26.7	0.7	1.42
Encapsulated	22.3	0.58	1.72
Immersed	18.46	0.47	2.12

 	Fig. 10  Bode plot extracted from IS of fresh, after the encapsulation process and after 5 min immersion in water samples. Dash lines represent the deconvolution of the immersed sample where new processes are identified.	 

 	Fig. 11  Evolution with time of the power conversion efficiency of samples encapsulated and un-encapsulated after immersion in water.	 
	(2)
	(3)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se02054d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
