Functionalised hexagonal boron nitride for energy conversion and storage  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA05008C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA05008C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14384-14399Functionalised hexagonal boron nitride for energy conversion and storage

        
          
            Rui 
            Han
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xuefei 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Minghong 
            Huang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Wenxian 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yusuke 
            Yamauchi
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Xudong 
            Sun
          
        
      *f and 

        
          
            Zhenguo 
            Huang
          
        
      *b
aKey Laboratory for Anisotropy and Texture of Materials (Ministry of Education), Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China
bSchool of Civil & Environmental Engineering, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia. E-mail: zhenguo.huang@uts.edu.au
cInstitute of Materials, School of Materials and Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200072, China
dSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia
eAustralian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia
fState Key Laboratory of Rolling and Automation, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China. E-mail: xdsun@mail.neu.edu.cn
Received 
      15th May 2020
    , Accepted 1st July 2020First published on 1st July 2020AbstractEnergy conversion and storage materials have received wide attention as fossil fuels are gradually running out and climate change is looming. Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is not usually considered as a promising material for these applications because of its chemical inertness and poor electronic conductivity. However, through physical and chemical modification, h-BN shows tuneable properties that make it interesting for energy conversion and storage. The excellent stability and environmentally benign nature make h-BN derived materials particularly attractive for green energy applications. In this review, we survey the studies on structural and chemical properties of functionalised h-BN materials as well as their energy-related applications. Research progress in energy conversion and utilisation such as electrochemical catalysis, photocatalysis, and selective oxidative dehydrogenation is reviewed. Energy storage applications including rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, and hydrogen storage are also presented. Finally, we discuss the future and challenge for functionalised h-BN in energy conversion and storage.
1. Introduction
The ever-increasing energy demand and imminent climate crisis call for rapid deployment of renewable energy solutions. Efficient and cost-effective energy conversion and storage technologies are central to the development of renewable energy systems. These technologies including rechargeable batteries, electrochemical and photocatalytic water-splitting, hydrogen fuel cells, supercapacitors, etc., which can provide and make efficient use of clean and renewable energy, are among the most studied. The current commercial energy conversion and storage applications typically utilise noble or transition metals which feature high costs and/or environmental ramifications associated with disposal and recycling.1,2 Thus, extensive research efforts have been shifted to pursuing efficient, environmentally friendly and cost-effective materials that can afford long-term high performance. 2D layered materials and their derivatives, such as graphene and transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), have shown great potential in energy applications because of their unique physical, chemical and electronic properties enabled by their 2D feature. For example, the electrocatalytic performance of graphene co-doped with N, S, and Fe has eclipsed that of Pt/C in the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).3 In the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), the VS2 catalyst exhibits performance comparable to that of Pt/C but with much higher long-term catalytic activity when its dimension shrinks to 2D.4,5 In comparison, 2D h-BN based materials are still at their early stage of development in the field of energy conversion and storage.
h-BN is a group III–V compound consisting of layers of sp2-hybridised alternating boron and nitrogen atoms in a honeycomb lattice, with the layers coupled by van der Waals forces. Since they are isostructural to graphene, h-BN nanosheets (h-BNNS) are also known as “white graphene”. Their layered structure and great chemical and thermal stability allow their application as lubricants and protective coatings. Pristine h-BN has a wide band gap energy of 5.9 eV,6 enabling it to emit deep ultraviolet light at around 200 nm.7 Unlike graphene, which is gapless and has rich electronic properties, the wide band gap renders h-BN an insulator and consequently hinders its application in the fields of energy conversion and storage. There have been research activities on how to modify the properties of h-BN so that it can be used in various applications. Heteroatom doping and functional group grafting have been proved to be effective. Depending on the incorporated dopants and functional groups (H, F, OH, CH3, CHO, CN, NH2, etc.), the band gap of h-BN can be theoretically lowered to the range of 0.3 eV to 3.1 eV.8 Experimentally, doping h-BNNS with carbon can reduce their band gap from 5.9 eV to 2.6 eV and therefore make them a promising non-metal photocatalyst.9 Carbon and oxygen co-doping can modify the optical, electronic and surface properties of h-BN, granting it interesting fluorescence, electrochemical energy storage and gas sorption capabilities.10–12 Edge-hydroxylation, an effective functionalisation method, which can be realised by the reaction between commercial h-BN and hot steam, gives the material the ability for enhanced catalytic oxidative dehydrogenation of alkanes.13,14
2. Synthesis and functionalisation of hexagonal boron nitride
h-BN in its bulk form cannot be effectively functionalised mainly due to the low specific surface area. Thus, most research studies have focused on the synthesis and functionalisation of h-BN in the 2D form, namely h-BNNS. There are various means to fabricate h-BNNS, with most methods falling into either top-down or bottom-up strategies. The essential feature of the top-down approach is the exfoliation of bulk h-BN by overcoming the van der Waals forces between the layers. There are two main categories of the top-down strategy, namely mechanical and chemical exfoliation. Inspired by mechanically exfoliating graphene using Scotch tape,15 crystals of h-BNNS can also be obtained in a similar manner.16 Generally, mechanically exfoliated h-BNNS are of high crystallinity but suffer from low yield and small lateral sizes, making them less favourable for scaling up and subsequent applications.
2.1. Chemical exfoliation
Chemical exfoliation is the other main top-down approach to produce h-BNNS. It has many different variations such as oxidation intercalation,17 ion intercalation,18 hydrothermal treatment in aqueous solution19 and molten hydroxides,20 sheer exfoliation in liquids21 and sonication in various solvents.22–25 The h-BNNS produced by these methods usually lack consistency in morphology and contain contaminants which may require laborious washing and post-processing steps.26 Despite the drawbacks, compared with mechanical exfoliation, chemical methods are facile and suitable for large scale production.23 More importantly, chemical exfoliation enables in situ functionalisation of h-BN when treated in different media, and this typically makes h-BN hydrophilic and increases its dispersibility and subsequent processability for device manufacturing.27 For example, Lin et al. reported that simple sonication in water can effectively peel off BN layers and graft –OH groups onto the edges (Fig. 1).28 The resulting few-layered hydroxylated h-BNNS can form a stable aqueous dispersion in the order of 0.1 mg mL−1. Ball milling can also facilitate chemical exfoliation and functionalisation due to the high shear forces at the interface between the materials and the ball-milling media/additives.29 Depending on chemical additives/reagents used in the processes, different functional groups (OH, NH2, F, etc.) can be grafted onto the exfoliated nanosheets.30–34 In Lei's study, commercial h-BN powders and urea were ball milled together at ambient temperature to produce h-BNNS.35 The resulting h-BNNS are mostly less than 2.5 nm in thickness and form a highly stable water suspension of 30 mg mL−1. Their light-yellow appearance and ultra-violet and blue light photoluminescence suggest a modification of the electronic structure during exfoliation as the result of a high level of amino group functionalisation. Through chemical exfoliation and in situ functionalisation, h-BNNS are produced and simultaneously provided with novel properties that make them ready to be utilised in energy conversion and storage applications.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the sonication-assisted hydrolysis process to produce hydroxyl functionalised h-BN nanosheets. Reprinted from ref. 28 with permission. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
2.2. Chemical vapour deposition (CVD)
Chemical vapour deposition is a typical bottom-up synthetic route that can produce h-BNNS with controllable atomic thickness and minimal contaminants.36 The state of the metal substrates for CVD growth is a crucial factor for maintaining the quality of h-BNNS as surface defects and grain boundaries serve as nucleation sites leading to polycrystalline growth and other inconsistencies in the film. Our group has demonstrated that melting of metallic substrates can significantly improve film quality.37–40 This is because volatile impurities are removed and high surface dynamics at the molten state suppresses nucleation. Unlike h-BNNS in the powder form, CVD grown h-BNNS are bound to metallic substrates and thus require delicate and laborious processes of transferring before certain applications. Therefore, h-BNNS produced by this technique currently face difficulties in functionalisation and post-processing.
2.3. Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis of boron and nitrogen sources is another bottom-up approach to generate functionalised h-BNNS. Inexpensive boron- and nitrogen-containing precursors such as boric acid, boron oxide, urea and melamine are commonly utilised in this method.41,42 Since gaseous products such as CO2, CO, and NH3 are formed during the heat treatment, this method is capable of producing highly porous structures of h-BNNS. Moreover, the products obtained by this method are mainly in the form of fine powders which are suitable for post-processing and characterisation. For example, h-BNNS with a specific surface area of 1900 m2 g−1 were obtained by pyrolysing a mixture of boric acid and urea.42 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images (Fig. 2) show that h-BNNS are mainly of 2–3 layers and contain a high level of defects. Besides creating porous structures, pyrolysis provides a relatively simple route for heteroatom doping because of the significantly enhanced reactivity of the precursors and doping agents at high temperatures. Heteroatom doping, an indispensable means for functionalisation, can change the electronic and optical properties. Carbon, positioned in between boron and nitrogen in the periodic table, is the most common dopant for h-BN nanostructures. According to Chen et al.'s study, simple pyrolysis of a boric acid and melamine mixture under argon at 800 °C can produce carbon-doped h-BN porous materials with superior CO2 adsorption capacity compared with pristine h-BN.43 In addition to carbon doping, oxygen doped h-BNNS have also been studied. Bando's group reported that oxygen doped h-BNNS could be successfully produced by a thermal reaction between boric acid and hexamethylenetetramine at 1000 °C under an ammonia atmosphere.44 The yellow h-BN has a significantly reduced band gap energy of 2.1 eV with an oxygen doping level of 23.1 at%. Compared to other techniques in which functionalisation usually occurs at preferential sites (edge or defect sites),28,35 direct pyrolysis can provide an easy route for introducing a rather uniform and high level of heteroatom doping, bringing about more significant changes in materials' properties.
 Fig. 2  Morphologies of h-BNNS with very high specific surface areas. (a) SEM image; (b) and (c) TEM images; (d) and (e) STEM images with the inset in (e) showing the FFT pattern; (f) AFM image and line profile showing the thickness. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.4. Templated synthesis
Pyrolysis is effective in constructing highly porous structures, but controlling the morphology and porosity of the h-BN products can be difficult. Templated synthesis enables better control over these features and hence the properties through structural transcription of soft or hard templates.45,46 Functional h-BN materials have been produced by templated synthesis. For example, mesoporous h-BN was synthesised using mesoporous carbon CMK-3 as a hard template.47 The prepared h-BN preserved the ordered porous structure of the CMK-3 hard template with a very narrow pore size distribution centred at 4.4 nm. In another case, a novel 3D spherical superstructure with 2D BN nanosheet building blocks can be obtained by pyrolysing a novel boron-containing metal–organic framework template with a spherical superstructure under an ammonia atmosphere (Fig. 3).48 Reactants and intermediates that evolve dynamically during chemical reactions can serve as templates as well. A dynamic template of magnesium diboride was employed to obtain hierarchically porous h-BNNS.49 The unique layered crystal structure of magnesium diboride along with the formation and decomposition of by-products during heat treatment all contribute to obtain few-layered h-BNNS with a modulated pore size.
 Fig. 3  Synthetic scheme of the boron-containing metal–organic framework template and the spherical superstructure composed of BNNS. Reprinted from ref. 48 with permission. Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society. 
3. Functionalised hexagonal boron nitride for energy conversion and utilisation
3.1. Electrochemical energy conversion
Electrochemical processes such as the HER and oxygen evolution reaction (OER), as well as the ORR are important reactions in water splitting and hydrogen fuel cells, respectively. The sluggish kinetics of these reactions at electrodes is often the main obstacle for high-performance devices. Platinum (Pt)-based materials have long been the benchmark catalysts owing to their low overpotential and high current density, but their high cost and issues associated with catalyst poisoning are evident.50 It is therefore critical to develop efficient, durable, and inexpensive catalysts. In this regard, h-BN based materials can be promising candidates due to their low cost, excellent chemical stability under harsh conditions and easy tuneability of electronic structures. In this section, we focus on theoretical insights and experiments where the potential and application of various functionalised h-BN structures as different electrocatalysts are demonstrated. Particularly, the reaction pathway and activation energy in relation to the modified electronic structures of h-BN are discussed in depth.

3.1.1. Theoretical studies. 
h-BN by itself does not have significant electrochemical catalytic activity as it is an insulator with a wide band gap. But through interface engineering (e.g., h-BNNS being supported on a metal substrate), it has potential for catalysing different electrochemical reactions. Uosaki and co-workers demonstrated enhanced ORR when gold (111) was covered with h-BNNS.51 Theoretical calculations suggest that the mixing of metal d orbitals and p orbitals of single-layer BN modifies the electronic properties of h-BN (Fig. 4a and b). The resulting interaction between h-BN and the Au surface causes O2 to bond with two B atoms nearest to the N atom sitting on top of the Au atoms (Fig. 4c). In addition to the terrace of h-BNNS/Au, the edges of h-BNNS seem to play a role in the ORR as well. Calculations suggest that O2 can be readily adsorbed in highly activated states on the edges of the h-BNNS and the free energy diagram (Fig. 4d) shows the ORR is energetically favourable.51,52 This is consistent with another work where oxidation of a Cu substrate is effectively accelerated along the edges of h-BNNS.39 In both cases, the O atoms are predicted to interact with both metal atoms and B along the edges. Interestingly, enhanced HER catalytic performance has also been shown for the same h-BNNS/Au system, where the otherwise too strong H adsorption for bare h-BNNS significantly decreased when supported on Au (111). DFT calculations illustrate that the edge sites possess suitable hydrogen adsorption energies favourable for the HER, which is validated experimentally by h-BNNS with reduced lateral sizes showing a lower overpotential.53 Similar augmented HER performance has also been shown both theoretically and experimentally on h-BN/Pt owing to the synergistic effect of h-BN and underlying Pt.54 The electrocatalytic activity of h-BN also heavily depends on the underlying metal support. One study found that h-BNNS grown on Cu displays HER performance much inferior to that of h-BNNS/Au, with two orders of magnitude lower current density at a given potential.55 The difference in catalytic activity likely arises from the change in free energy of the adsorbed H determined by the interactions between h-BNNS and the substrate, and this is in agreement with Uosaki's study.53 Besides the ORR and HER, h-BN/Ni and h-BN/Co were found to facilitate selective electrochemical conversion of CO2 while suppressing the HER, as a result of strong HCOO binding and weak H binding.56
 Fig. 4  (a) Spin-polarised DOS calculations for the pristine h-BN monolayer. (b) PDOS of B and N atoms for h-BN/Au (111). (c) Optimised structure of the O2 adsorbed onto the h-BN/Au (111) surface. Distances are in angstrom. (d) Free energy diagram for the ORR on h-BN/Au (111). Reprinted from ref. 51 with permission. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
Defect engineering and single metal atom doping are promising approaches to modulate the electronic structure and catalytic activities of a material.57,58 Computational studies show that pristine h-BNNS can be engineered with N impurities to become catalytically active for the ORR, where the N impurity defects could be the active sites.59 Doping h-BN with metal atoms has also been found to endow h-BN with enhanced electrocatalytic activity. DFT calculations show that incorporating Fe atoms in the B vacancies can elevate the adsorption energy of O2.60 Subsequently, the free energy of the system decreases as the defective h-BN sheets promote the ORR via a direct four-electron pathway. Theoretical analysis has been carried out for different single metal (Mg, Al, Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Pd, Pt, and Au) atoms incorporated in B-deficient h-BNNS for the ORR.61–63 The system possesses high stability when a single metal atom is embedded in the B defective nanosheet. In particular, the ORR for Co/BN via a four-electron pathway has a reaction barrier of 0.3 eV, 0.49 eV lower than that of commercial Pt-based catalysts. The favourable ORR performance stems from the strong mixing between metal 3d states and 2p states of nearby N atoms and the low activation barrier in the rate-limiting step (reduction of O2 to OOH in the Co/BN case), as calculated theoretically.62 DFT calculations also indicate that a very deep π-hole is generated when B atoms are substituted by beryllium, which can improve the reaction dynamics of the first hydrogenation step of CO2 reduction to hydrocarbons.64 Furthermore, both defective h-BN and h-BN-graphene hybrid nanosheets functionalised with a single Mo atom anchored at the B vacancy site show interesting catalytic properties for the nitrogen fixation reaction according to computations.65,66 Embedding Mo atoms gives rise to localised spin density and significantly reduced bandgap energy, which are pivotal in activating N2 molecules and lowering the overpotential for the electrochemical conversion of N2 to NH3via an enzymatic mechanism. Liquid exfoliated h-BNNS have been tested experimentally as an electrocatalyst for the N2 reduction reaction (NRR). They show promising results as a non-metal NRR catalyst with a high NH3 formation rate (22.4 μg h−1 mgcat−1) and faradaic efficiency (4.7%) at −0.75 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE).67 Computational studies suggest that chemisorption of N2 readily occurs at unsaturated boron at the zigzag edge of h-BNNS as a result of boron accepting electrons from the π-orbital of nitrogen. The subsequent NRR proceeds through the enzymatic pathway similar to the single Mo atom modified h-BN catalyst.65
Carbon-based metal-free nanostructures with heteroatom doping have been investigated for electrocatalysis, with performances comparable to or even better than that of benchmark Pt/C.68–77 Particularly, Dai's group discovered that graphene with B and N co-doping showed remarkable catalytic activity for the ORR compared with either B or N doped graphene.78 First principles calculations suggest that co-doping leads to a smaller gap between the LUMO and HOMO, and higher atomic spin and charge densities of the material. As the B and N doping concentrations increase further, B, N co-doped graphene is transformed into C-doped h-BNNS. This has inspired research on C-doped h-BNNS for electrochemical catalysis. Zhao and Chen performed DFT investigations on various configurations of C-doped h-BNNS.79 They found that when N atoms were replaced by C, O2 was adsorbed onto the active sites of the material with a moderate adsorption energy of −0.81 eV. The subsequent ORR was promoted via a four-electron pathway with the largest activation barrier of 0.61 eV, smaller than that of a commercial Pt-based ORR electrocatalyst (0.79 eV). In a recent study, an interesting correlation of magnetism and chemical activation was drawn for C-doped h-BN.80 It is found that the magnetic islands of graphene in h-BN give rise to high levels of chemical activation, in turn the enhanced ORR performance. Furthermore, C-doped h-BNNS were evaluated as a non-metal ORR/HER bifunctional catalyst by Nguyen and Tran.81 In their study, four geometric configurations of C-doped h-BNNS were proposed, i.e., double and single C-doped h-BNNS with C atom(s) occupying either B or N site(s) (Fig. 5). The authors found that C-doping at N sites is more catalytically efficient for the ORR because of suitable O2 adsorption energy. It is also shown that the double C-doped catalyst with dopants at N sites (2CN) is more ORR active due to more active sites, whereas the single C-doped catalyst with dopants at the N site (CN) shows moderate H2 adsorption energy that is favourable for the HER. C-doped BNNS have also been theoretically suggested as an efficient electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction. With certain configurations, the material can selectively convert CO2 to C2 products such as C2H4 and C2H5OH.82
 Fig. 5  Geometric configurations of double (upper) and single (lower) C-doped h-BNNS. B, N, C, and H atoms are shown in green, grey, brown, and white, respectively. Reprinted from ref. 81 with permission. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2. Experimental studies. 
Experimentally, h-BN based electrodes usually require an electrically conductive support/medium, because otherwise the insulating nature makes it hard for electrons to be transported to the active centres. Khan et al. explored pristine h-BNNS on various carbon-based electrodes as electrocatalysts for the ORR.83 They found that the catalytic behaviour of h-BN relied highly on the underlying substrate as well as the h-BN coverage. When h-BNNS were immobilised on screen-printed graphite electrodes (SPEs), the peak potential was brought down by ca. 0.28 V, compared to unmodified ones owing to the high proportion of h-BN edge sites exposed on a ridged surface. Even though the catalytic performance of h-BN/SPE is less ideal as it predominantly generates H2O2via a two-electron pathway, the experiment demonstrates the potential of h-BN for the ORR.
The graphene/h-BN heterostructure is a versatile nanoscale architecture where graphene can modify the electronic structure of h-BN as well as transfer charges to active sites in the h-BN plane. Narayanan's group studied different vertically stacked graphene/h-BN heterostructures for electrocatalysis.84 In one case, a vertical van der Waals graphene/h-BN structure showed enhanced HER activity in experiments. The stacking sequence can influence the HER performance due to the difference in the hydrogen adsorption energy, with graphene on top of h-BN showing higher catalytic activity. In another study, a non-van der Waals graphene/h-BN vertical structure was fabricated via CVD.85 DFT calculations show that chemical linking between graphene and h-BN allows for generation of more positively charged sites that are active for the ORR. This explains the augmented catalytic performance compared to the van der Waals stacked (non-linked) graphene/h-BN structure. The catalyst showed an onset potential of 780 mV vs. RHE with a direct four-electron pathway for the ORR.84,85
In-plane carbon-doping is also experimentally proved to endow inert h-BN with intriguing properties for electrocatalysis. By pyrolysing boric acid and hexamine together, nanorice-like C-doped h-BN was obtained which showed interesting catalytic activity with an onset potential of +0.83 V vs. RHE under alkaline conditions.86 Despite the onset potential of nanorice-like C-doped h-BN being inferior to that of Pt/C, it outperformed Pt/C in terms of long-term stability and methanol oxidation tolerance.
Bao's group developed novel h-BN nanoreactors encapsulating catalyst nanoparticles (NPs) which show outstanding ORR, OER and hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) catalytic activity and stability.87–89 For example, by annealing boron and metal containing precursors under NH3 at moderate temperatures, ultra-thin h-BN shells encapsulating catalytically active metal nanoparticles (NP) can be obtained. The h-BN shells acted as nanoreactors preventing catalysts from deactivation caused by agglomeration and leaching. The resulting NPs@h-BN systems (Pt@h-BN/C, Ni@h-BN and CoBx@h-BN) showed enhanced catalytic performance in the ORR, HOR and OER respectively with much improved stability owing to the confinement effect of ultra-thin h-BN shells.87–89 Being more than a “reactor”, the ultra-thin h-BN shell can serve as active centres for ammonia synthesis in the system of single-wall h-BN nanotubes filled with early transition metals such as Ti, Zr, V, Cr and Sc.90 Simulations show that the activity stems from the coexistence of the occupied and unoccupied p states of boron, which act as electron reservoirs facilitating N2 fixation and reduction through the enzymatic pathway.
To summarise, the promising candidature of functionalised h-BN to be utilised in electrochemical energy conversion is predicted by computational studies, with the catalytic activity of certain systems theoretically surpassing that of the benchmark Pt/C. Experimental studies, albeit sparse, have shown the high stability of functionalised h-BN materials and their resistance to catalyst poisoning, which are much favoured properties in electrochemical reactions. However, there is still a gap between theoretical and experimental studies where functionalised h-BN often shows an inferior onset potential compared with commercial Pt/C. This is mainly because the current synthetic methods of functionalised h-BN (e.g., direct pyrolysis), which usually have little control over the chemical structures at atomic scale, cannot replicate the theoretical models. Therefore, future research should be focused on developing novel syntheses that have the capability to achieve experimental realisation of theoretical models. This should include interface and defect engineering as well as heteroatom doping with controllable precision in terms of quantity and site selection. This would allow for a well-controlled chemical environment, and in turn defined electronic properties and desired catalytic performance.

3.2. Solar energy conversion and utilisation
Solar energy is green and renewable. Photocatalysis that converts solar energy into chemical energy via redox reactions and photovoltaic cells that produce electricity, have attracted tremendous research interest. The tuneable bandgap energy and high chemical stability in harsh environments help functionalised h-BN to find application in solar energy conversion and utilisation. This section summarises recent advances in utilising functionalised h-BN materials in photocatalytic water splitting, CO2 reduction, dye degradation and photovoltaic cells. Given the extensive research efforts made in the related fields in the past few decades, there are many review papers on photovoltaic cells and photocatalytic applications. For the mechanisms, one can refer to Wang et al.'s review on overall water splitting,91 Habisreutinger et al.'s review on the reduction of CO292 and Chen et al.'s review on pollutant degradation.93
h-BN has been used as a support for catalysts since it is both chemically and thermally stable. When conventional semiconductor photocatalysts such as TiO2,94–96 Ag3VO4,97 Ag3PO4,98 Bi2WO6,99 CdS,100 and TMDs101 are coupled with various h-BN structures, the hybrid systems show significantly improved photocatalytic and photovoltaic performances. This is believed to be associated with the ability of h-BN to accept and/or transfer photogenerated charges resulting in effective charge separation and suppressed recombination.97 Interested readers can refer to reviews by Zhou et al.102 and Wang et al.103 to get a comprehensive understanding of semiconductor/h-BN composites for photocatalytic applications.
Pristine h-BNNS with a wide band gap can be utilised in vacuum-ultraviolet (VUV) photodetection, an important detection method in deep space exploration. In a recent study, h-BN sandwiched between graphene and SiC in a van der Waals photovoltaic device showed a very short response cut-off wavelength (227 nm) and ultrafast response time (680 ns) in VUV photodetection.104 A similar sandwich structure of graphene/h-BN/GaAs also shows enhanced power conversion efficiency for solar cells and on/off ratios for photodetectors owing to the increased barrier height when h-BN is inserted between graphene and GaAs.105
In most cases, pristine h-BN cannot efficiently utilise the majority of solar irradiation due to its large band gap. Modifying h-BN with functional groups is a common and viable approach to tune the band gap. As mentioned previously, the band gap of h-BN can be theoretically lowered to 0.3–2.1 eV, depending on the functional groups used.8 For example, highly defective h-BNNS with edges and surface holes functionalised with –OH and –NH groups were found to exhibit much higher performance of hydrogen evolution than commercial h-BN under ultraviolet irradiation.106 As a result of functionalisation, the band gap was brought down to 4.2 eV allowing for a broader range of light adsorption along with a drop in the flat band potential (Efb) which is thermodynamically favourable for water reduction.
Heteroatom doping is another effective technique to achieve enhanced photocatalytic performance through modifying the h-BN's electronic structure. In one case, S-doped h-BNNS were achieved via heat treatment of h-BN and sublimed sulphur under a N2 atmosphere.107 The incorporation of sulphur, evidenced by the progressively compressed (002) interlayer spacing, reduces the band gap to 2.77 eV (Fig. 6a and b). The narrowed band gap is due to the decrease of the conduction band (CB) potential when the sulphur dopants are introduced, while the valence band (VB) position remains unchanged (Fig. 6c–f). This is believed to promote photogenerated charge separation indicated by the decreased photoluminescence intensity. The enhanced optical absorption, charge separation and surface reactivity all contributed to the performance of photocatalytic degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol.
 Fig. 6  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance and (b) optical bandgap energy derived from Tauc plots for h-BN and xS-BN samples. (c) The trend of Efb potentials and (d) valence band X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (VB XPS) spectra of h-BN and xS-BN samples. (e) Partial density of state (PDOS) plot for the simulated S doped h-BN: pristine h-BN, 3% S doped, 6% S doped, and 9% S doped. (f) The schematic diagram of the band structure variations. Note: samples are denoted as xS-BN, where x = 1, 2, 3 and 4, and the heating time at 400 °C is 30, 60, 90 and 120 min, respectively. Reprinted from ref. 107 with permission. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
In recent years, Wang's group has made progress in understanding carbon-doped h-BN for various photocatalytic applications.108 In one paper they reported that carbon-doped h-BNNS efficiently catalysed water splitting and CO2 reduction under visible light, with H2 evolution performance higher than that of widely-used P25 and g-C3N4.9,109 The band gap can be easily tuned by varying the carbon content through adjusting the amounts of glucose in the precursor mixture. In particular, the sample with a moderate doping level (8 wt%) and a band gap of 2.72 eV showed the best photocatalytic performance. This is because the addition of carbon enhances optical absorption, whereas excessive carbon causes disruption to the ordered structure and shortens the charge-carrier lifetime.110 Furthermore, no morphological or structural change was observed for the catalyst after the catalytic reaction, demonstrating the material's high stability. A series of B, C, N ternary compounds including boron carbon nitride (BCN) aerogels,111 ordered BCN,112 fluorine modified BCN,113 BCN modified with molten salt,114 layered Co/h-BCN hybrids,115 and CdS NP decorated BCN116 have been developed and show promising performance for various photocatalytic applications.
Boron and nitrogen atoms in BN can adopt configurations different from the honeycomb structure in h-BN. Theoretical studies have suggested that the band gap of porous BN can be tuned by modifying the configuration of the pores (Fig. 7).117,118 For a certain configuration shown in Fig. 7c, the band gap can be lowered to 4.57 eV and it can be further reduced by means of carbon substitution.118 Computational studies indicate that C-doped porous BN has the potential to drive overall water splitting under visible light.119 This is particularly appealing given the simplicity in experimentally achieving h-BN structures with high porosity.120 Very recently, Shankar et al. synthesised a semiconducting carbon-free porous BN catalyst with a band gap of 4.32 eV by pyrolysis.121 The catalyst showed significantly better CO2 adsorption and gas-phase CO2 photoreduction to CO under UV-Vis irradiation than benchmark photocatalysts (g-C3N4 and P25), owing to the large specific surface area and efficient light-harvesting ability. Interestingly, the porous BN showed catalytic activity upon visible light irradiation despite its relatively large band gap, and this likely stems from the shallow trapped state. The absolute band edge potential of porous BN vs. vacuum was experimentally determined by combining relative band positions obtained by VB XPS and the absolute positions of the Fermi level derived from work function measurements through photoelectron spectroscopy. The results showed that the absolute positions against vacuum for valence and conduction bands were 5.95 eV ± 0.32 eV and 1.74 eV ± 0.37 eV, respectively. By aligning them against the redox potentials for CO2/CO and H+/H2, it was confirmed that porous BN is an n-type semiconductor and ideal for gas phase photoreduction of CO2.121
 Fig. 7  Structural models and corresponding band structures of the DOS for h-BN and two types of porous BN. (a) h-BN with two atoms in the unit cell, (b) porous BN with 18 atoms in the unit cell, and (c) porous BN with 12 atoms in the unit cell. Reprinted from ref. 118 with permission. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
In summary, functionalised h-BN has shown potential as a new class of catalytic materials for converting solar energy into chemical and electrical energy. This is due to the tuneable band gaps that can be achieved through grafting functional groups, doping heteroatoms, and constructing porous structures. In addition, its high surface area and chemical stability are desired in various applications. Despite the research progress, the performance of functionalised h-BN materials in solar energy conversion is not satisfactory for commercial applications. This is mainly because the band gap of h-BN, even after functionalisation, is still too wide to utilise the majority of solar energy that reaches the ground. Besides, most h-BN based catalysts are generated through pyrolysis which allows for poor control over the morphology, porosity and defects. Therefore, future research should focus on further narrowing the band gap of these materials to achieve visible light driven catalytic activities with high performance. This may be realised through more radical functionalisation or combinations of different functionalisation methods. Moreover, elaborate precursor design, e.g., pre-locking the relative position of doping atoms, should also help achieve structures with a better defined chemical environment and enhanced catalytic performance.
3.3. Oxidative dehydrogenation
Olefins are important raw materials in various industrial and chemical processes. Oxidative dehydrogenation (ODH) reaction producing olefins is a potential game-changing technology as it is exothermic and thus thermodynamically favourable. Owing to the presence of O2, it overcomes the main limitations in the direct dehydrogenation process such as coke formation. In addition, due to the exothermic nature, ODH can proceed at comparably lower temperatures at a faster reaction rate than the conventional direct dehydrogenation.122–126 Despite these advantages, there are still major issues for ODH including poor selectivity and overoxidation.
Recently Grant et al.127 discovered that h-BN and boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs) showed unique catalytic activity in ODH conversion of propane with 79% propene and 12% ethene selectivity respectively, higher than that of some state-of-the-art vanadium oxide-based catalysts.128 They proposed that oxygen terminated armchair BN edges (B–O–O–N) are the catalytically active sites. Their study has opened up a stream of research on h-BN based materials as novel ODH catalysts. The h-BN catalyst was found to also be effective in ODH conversion of n-butane and isobutane to olefins.129 In the ODH of propane catalysed by h-BN, it is notable that the selectivity towards C2 products was much higher than that for C1 products. This is in contrast to the ODH process by V-based catalysts where products contain negligible C2 products. By comparing h-BN with conventional VOx/γ-Al2O3 catalysts, Tian et al. proposed that the C2 products can be formed not only through cleavage of the C–C bond of propane but also through oxidative coupling of methyl groups.130
h-BN functionalised with hydroxyl groups at edges has afforded appealing efficacy in catalysing ODH conversion of propane with negligible CO2 formation.14,131 It was suggested that pristine h-BN was not catalytically active, and an activation period was required when h-BN was in situ functionalised with oxygen. The edge-hydroxylated h-BN showed a much higher olefin productivity of 6.8 golefin gcat−1 h−1 as opposed to the h-BN production rate of 1 golefin gcat−1 h−1. Based on characterisation, the authors found that the majority of the edge configuration is boron-terminated zig-zag edges and there is oxygen exchange between molecular oxygen and the oxygen atoms in B–OH (Fig. 8). This evidence led the authors to believe that the B–OH groups at the BN edges were the catalytic sites. This corroborates Huang et al.'s study where freshly formed B–O(H) catalysed the ODH conversion of ethane based on operando infrared spectroscopy and an 18O isotope tracer study.132 Herman's group also reported that the ODH activity was not unique to h-BN, and various B-containing materials (B, B4C, TiB2, etc.) were able to catalyse the ODH of propane.133 Various characterisation techniques such as XPS, solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and X-ray absorption spectroscopy showed increased boron–oxygen bonding after ODH, again suggesting that BOx moieties are catalytically active.133
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of the proposed reaction pathway in the oxidative dehydrogenation of propane over the boron nitride catalyst at the B–OH active sites. Reprinted from ref. 131 with permission. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
The porous structure could boost the ODH conversion of propane thanks to the more exposed active sites, but the conversion started to decay after 5 hours possibly due to the oxidation of surface B–N bonds. Chaturbedy et al. found that the catalyst can be regenerated upon heating under ammonia.134 In another instance, a 3D ordered spherical structure with 2D BNNS (Fig. 3) which has a high surface area (439 m2 g−1) and a high level of active sites, achieved attractive catalytic performance in the ODH of propane with 78.1% propene selectivity at a propane conversion of 20.8%.48
C-doped h-BNNS also showed enhanced ODH conversion of ethylbenzene to styrene with ∼89% styrene selectivity at 49% ethylbenzene conversion.135 The authors attributed the improvement to oxygen-terminated armchair BN edges (B–O–O–N) and carbonyl groups. Enhanced catalytic performance has been achieved by h-BN catalysts with more elaborate doping structures. Our group developed a novel two-step synthesis to achieve uniform carbon doping at nanoscale (Fig. 9).136 The first step reaction yields a solid polymeric precursor with the atomic positions of B, C, and N fixed relative to each other without agglomeration, which is conducive to the uniform carbon doping in the final h-BN matrix. The nanoscale carbon clusters are removed during initial treatment under oxygen creating reactive BN edges that act as catalytic sites, leading to stable and high performance in the ODH of ethylbenzene to styrene (Fig. 9b).
 Fig. 9  (a) A high resolution bright field TEM image of the carbon-doped h-BN catalyst; (b) high and stable ODH performance with 52% ethylbenzene conversion and 89% styrene selectivity; (c) and (d) electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) maps of carbon in the catalyst with a probe size of 0.75 nm × 0.75 nm showing that carbon is uniformly distributed at nanoscale. Adapted from ref. 136 with permission. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
In summary, h-BN and functionalised h-BN materials are novel non-metal ODH catalysts with high olefin selectivity and little COx formation. Moreover, the capability of unique methyl coupling during the catalytic process may enable their application in light alkane upgrading reactions. Through progressive research, it is now widely accepted that edge B–O(H) groups formed during the ODH reactions are the most likely catalytically active sites. Functionalisation strategies to expose more active sites, such as edge-hydroxylation and construction of ordered superstructures, have demonstrated to be effective in enhancing catalytic performance. However, important aspects for industrial application such as long-term stability and cycling performance have not been studied extensively. These aspects are crucial to successful commercialisation of the novel functional h-BN ODH catalysts. Thus, future research efforts should not only focus on generating h-BN catalysts with more active sites, but also encompass more practical aspects.
4. Functionalised hexagonal boron nitride for energy storage
Energy storage devices can store energy generated by various means for controllable use later on. As power generation progressively shifts to renewables, energy storage technologies, which can store intermittent energy generated by renewables such as solar and wind energy, are becoming increasingly important. Unique chemical and structural properties, such as high carrier mobility,137 large specific surface areas,138 and high mechanical strength,139 have enabled many 2D materials to show superior performance in these applications compared to materials in their bulk form.140,141 Despite being in their early development stage, h-BNNS show great promise in related fields as they can be functionalised to have desired properties for different purposes without sacrificing their excellent chemical stability and mechanical strength. This section introduces recent advances in functionalised h-BNNS utilised in key energy storage applications such as rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors and hydrogen storage.
4.1. Rechargeable batteries
Rechargeable batteries are the most widely used electrical energy storage systems. The increasing application in mobile electronic devices, electric vehicles, and stationary energy backup promotes strong research efforts in developing anode and cathode materials, as well as electrolytes with high performance.
Pristine h-BN has been employed in rechargeable batteries as a component of composite separators,142 interfacial layers,143–145 polymer electrolyte,146–148 and casing149 owing to its chemical inertness, mechanical robustness and excellent thermal conductivity. However, due to intrinsic limitations in the electrical conductivity, it is difficult to employ pristine h-BN itself as an electrode material. When h-BN is applied in electrodes in rechargeable batteries, it usually relies on conductive materials such as graphene to transfer charges.150–153
Functionalised h-BN has been applied in Li-ion batteries which are widely used in devices from small portable electronics to large energy backup equipment. Zhang and co-workers reported that after being treated in molten LiOH, h-BN was simultaneously exfoliated and functionalised.154 When the functionalised h-BN was used as an anode in a Li half-cell, a capacity of 400 mA h g−1 at a discharge voltage of 0.01 V was achieved experimentally. The electron-deficient nature of B atoms in h-BN structures enables a unique charge storage mechanism. The hydroxyl functionalisation theoretically facilitates a desirable electrochemical potential (∼2.97 V vs. Li/Li+) for the following redox reaction (eqn (1)), which has a theoretical specific capacity of 550 mA h g−1. However, due to heavy agglomeration, the experimental capacity was lower than the theoretical value. HO-BN + Li+ + e− → Li(OH)-BN(1)
Heteroatom doping has also been found effective to change the chemical and electronic structures of h-BNNS. In one case, carbon and oxygen co-doped h-BNNS exhibited enhanced capacity and cycling stability (5000 cycles at 2 A g−1).11 The enhanced cycling performance was attributed to the stability of the 2D layered structure at high currents, improved electrode/electrolyte contact and short Li+ ion transport path enabled by the high surface area, and high density of redox centres at B–N and C–N.
Lithium–sulphur (Li–S) batteries with high theoretical capacity, cost-effectiveness and environmental sustainability have attracted tremendous interest as the next generation rechargeable batteries.155 However, the performance of Li–S batteries is constrained by sulphur's low conductivity and large volume change during lithiation/delithiation. As the cathode matrix for the sulphur cathode, h-BNNS with nitrogen vacancies (v-BN) were found to improve the cycling performance of Li–S batteries.156 Compared with the pristine h-BN electrode, the v-BN electrode demonstrated significantly improved capacity. The engineered vacancies were believed to improve the kinetics of polysulphide conversion, lithium-ion diffusion rate, and protection of the Li anode from corrosion.
F-doped h-BNNS were used as the cathode material for magnesium batteries, a potential alternative to Li-ion batteries due to their higher safety and lower cost. It was reported that fluorine can be grafted via a reaction between h-BNNS and fluoroboric acid.157 Fluorination effectively improves the electrical conductivity of h-BNNS and their electrochemical performance for Mg batteries.
As can be seen from related studies, functionalised h-BN proves to be useful in rechargeable batteries. The unique electron-deficient properties of boron could give rise to novel redox reaction mechanisms. The combination of intrinsic stability of h-BN and tuneability of electrochemical properties brought by functionalisation is expected to stimulate research on utilization of functionalised h-BN in rechargeable batteries. However, h-BN materials do have limitation in conductivity, which is crucial for facilitating charge transfer in batteries. Thus, future research in this area should be focused on functionalisation that also improves the conductivity of h-BN.
4.2. Supercapacitor
Supercapacitors, which usually play a complementary role to rechargeable batteries in an energy storage system, are also a crucial electrochemical storage technology. Their ultra-high power density, superior cycling stability and fast charge/discharge rate capability enable their use in applications that complement, protect and/or replace rechargeable batteries.158–160
Functionalisation is also effective in making h-BNNS a suitable material in this context. Heteroatom doping, especially carbon-doping, is efficacious in making devices with high capacitance. The level of carbon doping in h-BNNS can be varied to a certain degree by adjusting the proportion of the carbon-containing precursor.161 The B atoms with an empty p orbital attract and store more charge, while combination of holes and electrons occurs at N sites. The synergistic effect of B and N atoms leads to enhancement in capacitance. The electrochemical performance was evaluated using cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge/discharge, where the C-doped h-BNNS showed a specific capacitance of 244 F g−1 at 1 A g−1.161 Thanks to the chemical stability of the h-BN matrix, the device showed only 4% capacitance decay after 3000 cycles at high current density. Alloying h-BN with reduced graphene oxide by a hydrothermal treatment can effectively increase electrical conductivity and charge transfer, resulting in a high specific capacitance of 824 F g−1.162 In an asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) device, a 145.7 F g−1 specific capacitance at a current density of 6 A g−1 with almost no IR drop hints at the competency of engineered h-BNNS as an electrode. h-BN suppresses the restacking of GO sheets which is detrimental to the capacitance. It also enhances charge storage capacity due to its free π electrons and alteration in the oxidation state of B and N atoms during charging and discharging.
h-BN based materials for supercapacitors are still an understudied topic. The properties of h-BNNS such as the high surface area and high chemical stability are much desired in this technology which involves high dynamics of electrochemistry. The electronic properties of h-BN, such as the empty p orbital of B and its ability to change in the oxidation states of B and N atoms during charging/discharging, give rise to better charge storage capabilities. Nonetheless, the low electrical conductivity of h-BN remains a hurdle for it to be used as a high-performance electrode material in supercapacitors. Functionalisation that modifies electrochemical properties and improves charge transfer may facilitate the exploration of h-BNNS for supercapacitors.
4.3. Hydrogen storage
Hydrogen is an energy source that only generates H2O when consumed in fuel cells. Therefore, it is a great alternative to fossil fuels that release harmful particulate matters and greenhouse gases when consumed. However, it has been challenging to store a large amount of hydrogen in a safe and efficient manner since hydrogen gas is very light and hard to compress and liquefy. Materials-based hydrogen storage has therefore attracted huge attention since they offer high volumetric and gravimetric energy densities, and also improves safety aspects.163
The unique structure and properties of h-BN such as the polar B–N bond, and high chemical and thermal stability make it an attractive material for hydrogen storage applications. Theoretical studies suggest that the extra dipole moment brought by the ionic character in the B–N bond promotes a stronger adsorption of H2 than the carbon counterpart.164 Functionalisation, which introduces changes in the electronic structure and porosity, can impact h-BN's hydrogen storage properties. In this section, we sum up recent advances in the synthesis and application of functionalised h-BN materials in hydrogen storage, with performances of various h-BN structures listed in Table 1.12,120,165–172
Table 1 Hydrogen storage capacity of h-BN based materials




h-BN structures
H2 uptake (wt%)
BET SSA (m2 g−1)

T (K)

P (bar)
Physisorption/chemisorption
Reference




Nanostructured h-BN by ball mill
2.6
NA
298
10
Mostly chemisorbed

165



Multiwall BN nanotubes
1.8
150
298
100
30/70

166



Bamboo-like BN nanotubes
2.6
210
298
100
30/70

166



Collapsed BN nanotubes
4.2
789.1
293
100
Mostly chemisorbed

167



BN nanofibers
2.9
260
298
100
20/80

168



Ultrathin-shell BN hollow spheres
4.07
215
298
100
NA

169



Porous BN whiskers
5.6
1687
298
30
83.9/16.1

170



Porous h-BN microbelts
2.3
1144
77
10
100/0

120



Porous h-BN microsponges
2.57
1900
77
10
100/0

171



O-doped h-BNNS
5.7
536
298
50
89/11

172



C/O co-doped h-BNNS
2.14
1040
77
10
100/0

12





h-BN was first explored as a hydrogen sorbent material in 2002 by Wang et al. following the studies on graphite-based hydrogen storage materials.173–175 Despite relatively low hydrogen storage capacities compared to chemical hydrogen storage compounds such as amine borane and borohydride,176–180 the low cost and reversible H2 uptake under low-temperature conditions make h-BN based materials promising for certain applications.120 In their study, ball milling facilitated the breakdown of the long-range order and crystal size. The resulting nanostructured h-BN had a lateral size of ∼3 nm and adsorbed up to 2.6 wt% hydrogen both physically and chemically after 80 h of ball milling under a H2 atmosphere. The material could retain its defective nanostructure at temperatures up to 1173 K, whereas recrystallisation of nanostructured graphite started at 950 K during desorption.165 The simplicity in fabrication and high stability of nanostructures are valuable properties for hydrogen storage materials and thus stimulate further research.
As porosity in terms of size and volume is a key parameter in determining the hydrogen storage capacity, much effort has been made to create porous h-BN with a high specific surface area (SSA). For example, h-BN microbelts with SSAs ranging from 1161 to 1488 m2 g−1 were produced by pyrolysis of a mixture of boric acid and melamine under ammonia (Fig. 10).120 A reversible 2.3 wt% hydrogen uptake was obtained at 77 K and 1 MPa for the porous h-BN synthesised at 1100 °C (Fig. 10e). In another study, h-BN microsponges with SSAs up to 1900 m2 g−1 featuring a majority of micropores showed up to 2.57 wt% reversible hydrogen adsorption under the same conditions.171 In contrast, h-BN in the bulk form showed only negligible adsorption (<0.1 wt%). In both cases, porous h-BN structures demonstrated fully reversible H2 uptake via physisorption under cryogenic conditions.
 Fig. 10  Morphology and gas sorption properties of porous h-BN microbelts. (a) SEM images; (b) TEM image; (c) high-resolution TEM image showing the (0002) spacing; (d) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms; (e) H2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of porous h-BN microbelts at 77 K and 1 MPa compared to bulk h-BN. Adapted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
The hydrogen storage capabilities of h-BN based materials can go beyond low-temperature conditions. Room temperature hydrogen storage was realised by h-BN structures with various morphologies, especially tubular structures. h-BN structures such as bamboo-like nanotubes,166 collapsed nanotubes,167 nanofibers,168 hollow spheres with ultra-thin shells,169 and porous whiskers with mesopores/micropores,170 exhibited room temperature hydrogen uptake from 2.6 to 5.6 wt%. In all the cases, incomplete desorption is observed when the pressure is released, which is attributed to partially chemisorbed H2. The formation of strong B–H and N–H bonds is indicated by the release of chemisorbed H2 at elevated temperatures above 350 °C, an obstacle for practical hydrogen storage.166,167 Computation reveals that the chemisorbed hydrogen atoms on BNNTs show heteropolarity, i.e., the hydridic character of B–H and the protic character of N–H.181 They resemble the bipolar hydrogen atoms in ammonia borane and create possibilities for catalytic dehydrogenation under mild conditions.
The high surface area favours hydrogen storage, but it is not the sole factor for determining the hydrogen storage capacity. Studies have shown hydrogen uptakes not in proportion to SSAs for porous h-BN, again hinting that surface electronic/chemical structures can affect the hydrogen uptake.12,120,172,182 As heteroatom doping is a common and useful functionalisation method to change electronic/chemical properties, it can have an effect on the hydrogen storage properties. When carbon substitutes boron and nitrogen in h-BN, the computational study shows that the binding energies of hydrogen increase at both sites.164 Adsorption energy is also found to be stronger at defect sites such as vacancies and Stone–Wales defects which lead to deviation from sp2 bonding.164,183 Thus, hydrogen tends to be chemisorbed on these sites, which agrees with the observation that tubular nanostructured h-BN with a high level of defects has higher levels of chemisorption (Table 1). These findings demonstrate that nanostructured h-BN with a high doping level and defects might afford high hydrogen storage capacity due to the locally and globally increased binding energy and high surface area. Lei and co-workers reported a 5.7 wt% capacity under 5 MPa H2 at room temperature for oxygen-doped h-BNNS. They claimed that the 2D structure facilitated cycling stability and O-doping sites facilitate H2 adsorption.172 Furthermore, various doping elements (Sc, Ti and V,184 Pt,185 Ni and Rh,186 Rh, Ni and Pd,187) in h-BN have been theoretically screened with respect to enhancement in H2 adsorption.
So far, functionalised h-BN materials have been found with the capability to store hydrogen at both room temperature and low temperatures. The low cost and simple routes for generation of a porous structure make them attractive for hydrogen storage applications. In fact, some h-BN based materials have already demonstrated a H2 uptake over 5 wt%.188 However, fully reversible hydrogen uptake has only been achieved at cryogenic temperatures (Table 1). Problematic hydrogen release associated with chemisorption at room temperature prevents h-BNs from becoming practical hydrogen storage materials. Functionalisation such as heteroatom doping, vacancy engineering and functional group grafting can create more adsorption sites with elevated binding energies. This has provided design strategies to enhance the hydrogen storage capacity, e.g., exposing more edge sites with grafted functional groups and dangling bonds. But the negative impact of too strong interactions between H2 and adsorbents causing difficulty in hydrogen release must be considered.
5. Conclusions
Chemically inert h-BN had not been widely studied for energy conversion and storage until recently. With the advances in physical and chemical modifications, functionalised h-BN exhibits unique properties such as tuneable band gaps and high porosity which enable various energy-related applications. The overall chemical and thermal stability of h-BN make it effective as a support for catalytic reactions. Furthermore, the B and N atoms at the edges are still reactive enough to form bonds such as B–O and B–OH, which can catalyse metal oxidation and alkane dehydrogenation. The easily achievable large surface area of h-BN structures not only facilitates hydrogen storage but also provides more active centres for catalytic reactions. Band gap tuning using heteroatoms opens up the possibilities of employing h-BN based materials as metal-free catalysts for photocatalysis. Interface and defect engineering can modify the electronic structure of h-BN and also the underlying metal supports in some cases, providing systems with interesting electrochemical catalytic properties.
There are, however, gaps between theoretical and experimental studies in many cases. This is largely due to the lack of methodologies to precisely control the atomic composition of dopants and functional groups. For instance, in the cases of C-doped BNNS, segregated C and BN domains are typically formed,189 and consequently, uncontrollable properties arise. Abundant space remains for fine-tuning the energy storage and the catalytic performance via functionalisation and doping with various elements. Novel precursor design with favourable atomic contents, positions of dopants and functional groups may result in controllable functionalisation, which provides a possible solution to the aforementioned problem. Furthermore, the advancement in electron microscopy allowing for resolving individual atoms both spatially and chemically can better facilitate the characterisation of functionalised h-BN and in turn help with the design and synthesis of h-BN for energy conversion and storage.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was partially funded by the Australian Government through the Australian Research Council's Discovery Projects funding scheme (project number DP170101773). Z.H. is a recipient of the Australian Research Council Future Fellowship (project number FT190100658). This work was performed in part at the Queensland node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF), a company established under the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy to provide nano and microfabrication facilities for Australia’s researchers.
Notes and references
B. Huang, Z. Pan, X. Su and L. An, J. Power Sources, 2018, 399, 274–286 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ordoñez, E. J. Gago and A. Girard, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 60, 195–205 CrossRef .
C. Chen, X.-D. Yang, Z.-Y. Zhou, Y.-J. Lai, M. Rauf, Y. Wang, J. Pan, L. Zhuang, Q. Wang, Y.-C. Wang, N. Tian, X.-S. Zhang and S.-G. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17092–17095 RSC .
J. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Wen, X. Zhao, X. Zhang, J. Xu and Z. Lu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703098 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fan, S. Wang, Y. An and W. Lau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1623–1632 CrossRef CAS .
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and H. Kanda, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kubota, K. Watanabe, O. Tsuda and T. Taniguchi, Science, 2007, 317, 932–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhattacharya, S. Bhattacharya and G. P. Das, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 035415 CrossRef .
C. Huang, C. Chen, M. Zhang, L. Lin, X. Ye, S. Lin, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7698 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, A. Nattestad, S. Naficy, R. Han, G. Casillas, A. Angeloski, X. Sun and Z. Huang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1901380 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, S. Qin, D. Liu, D. Portehault, Z. Liu and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 352–354 RSC .
Q. Weng, X. Wang, X. Wang, D. Liu, X. Jiang, C. Zhi, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem.–Asian J., 2013, 8, 2936–2939 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xiao, S. Naficy, G. Casillas, M. H. Khan, T. Katkus, L. Jiang, H. Liu, H. Li and Z. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7196–7203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, D. Wang, W. Song, D. Shao, W.-P. Zhang and A.-H. Lu, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1788–1793 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pacilé, J. C. Meyer, Ç. Ö. Girit and A. Zettl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 133107 CrossRef .
M. Du, Y. Wu and X. Hao, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1782–1786 RSC .
O. Danae Gonzalez, C. Pochat-Bohatier, J. Cambedouzou, B. Mikhael and P. Miele, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 716 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, G. Yang, H. Wang, C. Yan, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Mater. Today, 2019, 27, 33–42 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Hao, M. Zhao, Y. Wu, J. Yang, Y. Tian and G. Qian, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2200–2204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, R. A. Boulos, J. F. Dobson and C. L. Raston, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 498–502 RSC .
W. Luo, Y. Wang, E. Hitz, Y. Lin, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701450 CrossRef .
Y. Xue, Q. Liu, G. He, K. Xu, L. Jiang, X. Hu and J. Hu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 49 CrossRef .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Zhou, N. N. Mao, H. X. Wang, Y. Peng and H. L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10839–10842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, J. Li, Y. Hang, J. Yu, G. Tai, X. Li, Z. Zhang and W. Guo, Small, 2016, 12, 2942–2968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Weng, X. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3989–4012 RSC .
Y. Lin, T. V. Williams, T.-B. Xu, W. Cao, H. E. Elsayed-Ali and J. W. Connell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2679–2685 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Li, Y. Chen, G. Behan, H. Zhang, M. Petravic and A. M. Glushenkov, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11862–11866 RSC .
D. Lee, B. Lee, K. H. Park, H. J. Ryu, S. Jeon and S. H. Hong, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1238–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Joni, R. Balgis, T. Ogi, T. Iwaki and K. Okuyama, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 388, 49–58 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cao, Y. Xue, Z. Liu, Z. Zhou, J. Ji, Q. Song, Q. Hu, Y. Fang and C. Tang, 2D Mater., 2019, 6, 035014 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, R. Xu, J. Liu, X. Zou, L. Qiu, F. Kang, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804810 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Bai, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Cao, L. An, B. Zhang, Y. Yu, J. Zhang and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 3187–3195 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, V. N. Mochalin, D. Liu, S. Qin, Y. Gogotsi and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Khan, H. K. Liu, X. Sun, Y. Yamauchi, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and Z. Huang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 611–628 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Khan, G. Casillas, D. R. G. Mitchell, H. K. Liu, L. Jiang and Z. Huang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15926–15933 RSC .
M. H. Khan, Z. Huang, F. Xiao, G. Casillas, Z. Chen, P. J. Molino and H. K. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Khan, S. S. Jamali, A. Lyalin, P. J. Molino, L. Jiang, H. K. Liu, T. Taketsugu and Z. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603937 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Han, M. H. Khan, A. Angeloski, G. Casillas, C. W. Yoon, X. Sun and Z. Huang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2830–2835 CrossRef CAS .
S. Marchesini, X. Wang and C. Petit, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wu, W. Zhu, Y. Chao, J. Zhang, P. Zhang, H. Zhu, C. Li, Z. Chen, H. Li and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 144–147 RSC .
S. Chen, P. Li, S. Xu, X. Pan, Q. Fu and X. Bao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1832–1839 RSC .
Q. Weng, D. G. Kvashnin, X. Wang, O. Cretu, Y. Yang, M. Zhou, C. Zhang, D. M. Tang, P. B. Sorokin, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700695 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Malgras, Q. Ji, Y. Kamachi, T. Mori, F.-K. Shieh, K. C.-W. Wu, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2015, 88, 1171–1200 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, A. Vinu, Y. Yamauchi, Q. Ji and J. P. Hill, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2012, 85, 1–32 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dibandjo, L. Bois, F. Chassagneux, D. Cornu, J.-M. Letoffe, B. Toury, F. Babonneau and P. Miele, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 571–574 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, P. Dai, J. Tang, D. Li, R. Chen, D. Liu, X. Gu, L. Li, Y. Bando, Y. S. Ok, X. Zhao and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8755–8762 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xiao, Z. Chen, G. Casillas, C. Richardson, H. Li and Z. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3911–3914 RSC .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Uosaki, G. Elumalai, H. Noguchi, T. Masuda, A. Lyalin, A. Nakayama and T. Taketsugu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6542–6545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Elumalai, H. Noguchi and K. Uosaki, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13755–13761 RSC .
K. Uosaki, G. Elumalai, H. C. Dinh, A. Lyalin, T. Taketsugu and H. Noguchi, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guha, T. Veettil Vineesh, A. Sekar, S. Narayanaru, M. Sahoo, S. Nayak, S. Chakraborty and T. N. Narayanan, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6636–6644 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Q. Liu, B. Tao, H.-C. Ruan, C. L. Bentley and P. R. Unwin, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 628–631 RSC .
G. Hu, Z. Wu, S. Dai and D.-e. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6694–6700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, C. Jin, J. Yuan and Z. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606434 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xia, J. Tang, J. Li, S. Zhang, K. C.-W. Wu, J. He and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13354–13359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lyalin, A. Nakayama, K. Uosaki and T. Taketsugu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2809–2820 RSC .
L.-y. Feng, Y.-j. Liu and J.-x. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2015, 287, 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deng, R. He, W. Shen and M. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 18589–18594 RSC .
C. Deng, R. He, W. Shen, M. Li and T. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 6900–6907 RSC .
C. Deng, R. He, D. Wen, W. Shen and M. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 10240–10246 RSC .
L. M. Azofra, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3548–3551 RSC .
J. Zhao and Z. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12480–12487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, T. T. Yang, L. Yang, R. Liu, G. Z. Zhang, J. Jiang, Y. Luo, P. Lian and S. B. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15173–15180 RSC .
Y. Zhang, H. Du, Y. Ma, L. Ji, H. Guo, Z. Tian, H. Chen, H. Huang, G. Cui, A. M. Asiri, F. Qu, L. Chen and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 919–924 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zhu, C. Guo, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 915–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, H. Chen, M. Yang, D. Yang and H. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 426, 294–300 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Liu, F. Peng, H. J. Wang, H. Yu, W. X. Zheng and J. Yang, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 3315–3319 CrossRef .
J. Zhang and L. Dai, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7244–7253 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, N. Mahmood, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4932–4937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. V. Vineesh, M. P. Kumar, C. Takahashi, G. Kalita, S. Alwarappan, D. K. Pattanayak and T. N. Narayanan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500658 CrossRef .
J. Tang, J. Liu, C. Li, Y. Li, M. O. Tade, S. Dai and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 588–593 CAS .
H. Huang, M. Yan, C. Yang, H. He, Q. Jiang, L. Yang, Z. Lu, Z. Sun, X. Xu, Y. Bando and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26348–26354 CrossRef CAS .
R. Maji and J. Bhattacharjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 16731–16740 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Nguyen and L. N. Tran, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 21124–21131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tang, X. Zhou, S. Zhang, X. Li, T. Yang, W. Hu, J. Jiang and Y. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 906–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Khan, E. P. Randviir, D. A. C. Brownson, X. Ji, G. C. Smith and C. E. Banks, Electroanalysis, 2017, 29, 622–634 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bawari, N. M. Kaley, S. Pal, T. V. Vineesh, S. Ghosh, J. Mondal and T. N. Narayanan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 15007–15014 RSC .
P. K. Rastogi, K. R. Sahoo, P. Thakur, R. Sharma, S. Bawari, R. Podila and T. N. Narayanan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 3942–3953 RSC .
P. Marbaniang, I. Patil, M. Lokanathan, H. Parse, D. Catherin Sesu, S. Ingavale and B. Kakade, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11115–11122 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Y. Li, Z. Zhang, Q. Fu and X. Bao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10644–10648 RSC .
M. Sun, J. Dong, Y. Lv, S. Zhao, C. Meng, Y. Song, G. Wang, J. Li, Q. Fu, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3490–3498 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, Y. Wang, H. Li, Q. Li, N. Ta, L. Zhuang, Q. Fu and X. Bao, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5728–5734 RSC .
S. Zhou, X. Yang, X. Xu, S. X. Dou, Y. Du and J. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 308–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206–4219 RSC .
B. Singh, G. kaur, P. Singh, K. Singh, J. Sharma, M. Kumar, R. Bala, R. Meena, S. K. Sharma and A. Kumar, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 11640–11646 RSC .
Y. Sheng, J. Yang, F. Wang, L. Liu, H. Liu, C. Yan and Z. Guo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 465, 154–163 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Weng, Y. Ide, X. Wang, X. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Jiang, Y. Xue, P. Dai, K. Komaguchi, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lv, J. Wang, Z. Yan, D. Jiang and J. Liu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 418–419, 146–153 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Wang and Z. Lan, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 16682–16687 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Q. Wang, L. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Song, Q. Zhang, H. Xu and H. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 88832–88840 RSC .
X. Li, F. Qi, Y. Xue, C. Yu, H. Jia, Y. Bai, S. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Zhang and C. Tang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 99165–99171 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Feng, L. Chen, L. Wang, W. C. Tan, L. Huang and K.-W. Ang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 667–673 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, C. Lai, C. Zhang, G. Zeng, D. Huang, M. Cheng, L. Hu, W. Xiong, M. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Yang and L. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 6–18 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, G. Yang, H. Wang, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zheng, R. Lin, L. Jia and F. Huang, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1869–1875 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Lin, X. Lin, Z. Xu, P. Wang, S. Zhang, H. Zhong, W. Xu, Z. Wu and W. Fang, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 134–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, C. Chen, M. Du, Y. Wu, C. Ren, K. Ding, M. Song and C. Huang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 4566–4575 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, L. Tang, Y. Deng, G. Zeng, J. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Yu and J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117827 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15506–15518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, M. Zhou, Z. Luo, M. Wakeel, A. M. Asiri and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 246–255 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Wang, M. Anpo and X. Wang, in Adv. Inorg. Chem., ed. R. van Eldik and W. Macyk, Academic Press,  2018, vol. 72, pp. 49–92 Search PubMed .
Z. Luo, Y. Fang, M. Zhou and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6033–6037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, P. Yang, S. Wang, Z. Luo, C. Huang and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3949–3955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xing, Q. Liu, M. Song and C. Huang, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 5270–5279 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, T. Yuan, J. Shi, W. Cai and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8068–8072 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Z. Luo, M. Zhou, C. Huang and X. Wang, Sci. China Mater., 2015, 58, 867–876 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, S. Wang, P. Yang, C. Huang and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4928–4936 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, Y. Wang, S. Shi and W. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5334–5343 CrossRef CAS .
E. Perim, R. Paupitz, P. A. S. Autreto and D. S. Galvao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 23670–23674 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wan, F. Wei, Z. Ma, M. Anpo and S. Lin, Adv. Theory Simul., 2019, 2, 1800174 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Weng, X. Wang, C. Zhi, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shankar, M. Sachs, L. Francàs, D. Lubert-Perquel, G. Kerherve, A. Regoutz and C. Petit, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23931–23940 RSC .
L. Shi, G.-M. Deng, W.-C. Li, S. Miao, Q.-N. Wang, W.-P. Zhang and A.-H. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13994–13998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Bodke, D. A. Olschki, L. D. Schmidt and E. Ranzi, Science, 1999, 285, 712–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. R. Pereira, J. J. M. Órfão and J. L. Figueiredo, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 184, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cavani, N. Ballarini and A. Cericola, Catal. Today, 2007, 127, 113–131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, Y. Wang, B. Yan, W. Song, D. Shao and A.-H. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10936–10946 RSC .
J. T. Grant, C. A. Carrero, F. Goeltl, J. Venegas, P. Mueller, S. P. Burt, S. E. Specht, W. P. McDermott, A. Chieregato and I. Hermans, Science, 2016, 354, 1570–1573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Carrero, R. Schloegl, I. E. Wachs and R. Schomaecker, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3357–3380 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Venegas, J. T. Grant, W. P. McDermott, S. P. Burt, J. Micka, C. A. Carrero and I. Hermans, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 2118–2127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, J. Tan, M. Xu, Z. Zhang, S. Wan, S. Wang, J. Lin and Y. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav8063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, D. Wang and A.-H. Lu, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 908–913 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huang, B. Zhang, J. Wang, K.-H. Wu, W. Shi, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, A. Zheng, R. Schlögl and D. S. Su, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 3293–3297 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Grant, W. P. McDermott, J. M. Venegas, S. P. Burt, J. Micka, S. P. Phivilay, C. A. Carrero and I. Hermans, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 3623–3626 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chaturbedy, M. Ahamed and M. Eswaramoorthy, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 369–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Guo, P. Yang, Z. Pan, X.-N. Cao, Z. Xie and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8231–8235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Han, J. Diao, S. Kumar, A. Lyalin, T. Taketsugu, G. Casillas, C. Richardson, F. Liu, C. W. Yoon, H. Liu, X. Sun and Z. Huang, J. Energy Chem., 2020 DOI:10.1016/j.jechem.2020.03.027 .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jayaramulu, D. P. Dubal, B. Nagar, V. Ranc, O. Tomanec, M. Petr, K. K. R. Datta, R. Zboril, P. Gómez-Romero and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705789 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Akinwande, C. J. Brennan, J. S. Bunch, P. Egberts, J. R. Felts, H. Gao, R. Huang, J.-S. Kim, T. Li, Y. Li, K. M. Liechti, N. Lu, H. S. Park, E. J. Reed, P. Wang, B. I. Yakobson, T. Zhang, Y.-W. Zhang, Y. Zhou and Y. Zhu, Extreme Mech. Lett., 2017, 13, 42–77 CrossRef .
X. Ling, H. Wang, S. Huang, F. Xia and M. S. Dresselhaus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4523–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, D. Ye, P. Liu, Y. Tang, J. Guo, L. Wang and H. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702383 CrossRef .
M. Waqas, S. Ali, W. Lv, D. Chen, B. Boateng and W. He, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801330 CrossRef .
B. Shen, T.-W. Zhang, Y.-C. Yin, Z.-X. Zhu, L.-L. Lu, C. Ma, F. Zhou and H.-B. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7703–7706 RSC .
Q. Cheng, A. Li, N. Li, S. Li, A. Zangiabadi, T.-D. Li, W. Huang, A. C. Li, T. Jin, Q. Song, W. Xu, N. Ni, H. Zhai, M. Dontigny, K. Zaghib, X. Chuan, D. Su, K. Yan and Y. Yang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1510–1522 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yan, H.-W. Lee, T. Gao, G. Zheng, H. Yao, H. Wang, Z. Lu, Y. Zhou, Z. Liang, Z. Liu, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6016–6022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xia, J. Wu, Q. X. Shi, X. Xiang, X. Li, H. Pei, H. Zeng, X. Xie and Y. S. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2019, 414, 283–292 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shim, H. J. Kim, B. G. Kim, Y. S. Kim, D.-G. Kim and J.-C. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1911–1916 RSC .
H. Aydın, S. Ü. Çelik and A. Bozkurt, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 309, 71–76 CrossRef .
L. H. Saw, Y. Ye and A. A. O. Tay, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2014, 73, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, R. Y. Tay, S. H. Tsang, W. Liu and E. H. T. Teo, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 166, 197–205 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, S. Zhang, J. Zhang and Q. Chen, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 220–225 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Q. Duan, Y.-T. Liu, X.-M. Xie, X.-Y. Ye and X.-D. Zhu, Chem.–Asian J., 2016, 11, 828–833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, L. Liao, Y. Gong, Y. Li, F. Shi, A. Pei, J. Sun, R. Zhang, B. Kong, R. Subbaraman, J. Christensen and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao3170 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, K. Németh, J. Bareño, F. Dogan, I. D. Bloom and L. L. Shaw, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 27901–27914 RSC .
R. Fang, S. Zhao, Z. Sun, D.-W. Wang, H.-M. Cheng and F. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606823 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yi, H. Li, H. Chang, P. Yang, X. Tian, P. Liu, L. Qu, M. Li, B. Yang, H. Li, W. Zhu and S. Dai, Chem.–Eur. J., 2019, 25, 8112–8117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Venkateswarlu, D. Madhu and J. V. Rani, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 226, 356–361 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816–6854 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925–5950 RSC .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y.-H. Lee, K.-H. Chang, J.-M. Li, P. Simon, J. Tang, N. L. Torad, C.-C. Hu and Y. Yamauchi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 13838–13852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Karbhal, R. R. Devarapalli, J. Debgupta, V. K. Pillai, P. M. Ajayan and M. V. Shelke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 7134–7140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Saha, M. Jana, P. Khanra, P. Samanta, H. Koo, N. C. Murmu and T. Kuila, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14211–14222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang and T. Autrey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9257–9268 RSC .
S.-H. Jhi and Y.-K. Kwon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 245407 CrossRef .
P. Wang, S. Orimo, T. Matsushima, H. Fujii and G. Majer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 318–320 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Y. Bando, H. Zhu, T. Sato, C. Xu and D. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7672–7673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, Y. Bando, X. Ding, S. Qi and D. Golberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14550–14551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, Y. Bando, T. Sato, D. Golberg, H. Zhu, C. Xu and D. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 5225–5227 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lian, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, D. Liu, D. Cui and Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7072–7080 RSC .
J. Li, J. Lin, X. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Xue, J. Mi, Z. Mo, Y. Fan, L. Hu, X. Yang, J. Zhang, F. Meng, S. Yuan and C. Tang, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 155603 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Weng, X. Wang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301525 CrossRef .
W. Lei, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Zhang, D. Liu, S. Qin, Z. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Nano Energy, 2014, 6, 219–224 CrossRef CAS .
S. Orimo, G. Majer, T. Fukunaga, A. Züttel, L. Schlapbach and H. Fujii, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 3093–3095 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukunaga, K. Itoh, S. Orimo, M. Aoki and H. Fujii, J. Alloys Compd., 2001, 327, 224–229 CrossRef CAS .
S. Orimo, T. Matsushima, H. Fujii, T. Fukunaga and G. Majer, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 1545–1549 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lai, M. Paskevicius, D. A. Sheppard, C. E. Buckley, A. W. Thornton, M. R. Hill, Q. Gu, J. Mao, Z. Huang, H.
K. Liu, Z. Guo, A. Banerjee, S. Chakraborty, R. Ahuja and K.-F. Aguey-Zinsou, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2789–2825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, X. Chen, T. Yisgedu, E. A. Meyers, S. G. Shore and J.-C. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 3738–3742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Ouyang, H. Zhong, J. Liu, H. Wang, H. Shao, Z. Huang and M. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 8623–8629 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Huang, S. Wang, R. D. Dewhurst, N. V. Ignat'ev, M. Finze and H. Braunschweig, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8800–8816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, H. Yu, G. Wu, T. He, Z. Li, Z. Guo, H. Liu, Z. Huang and P. Chen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 7727–7729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Roy, S. Mittal and A. Paul, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4152–4156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Portehault, C. Giordano, C. Gervais, I. Senkovska, S. Kaskel, C. Sanchez and M. Antonietti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1827–1833 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lale, S. Bernard and U. B. Demirci, ChemPlusChem, 2018, 83, 893–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Shevlin and Z. X. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 153104 CrossRef .
X. Wu, J. L. Yang and X. C. Zeng, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 044704 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Venkataramanan, M. Khazaei, R. Sahara, H. Mizuseki and Y. Kawazoe, Chem. Phys., 2009, 359, 173–178 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Zhang, P. Wu and M. B. Sullivan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4289–4296 CrossRef CAS .

Hydrogen Storage U.S. Department of Energy, https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen-storage, accessed June 2020 Search PubMed.
L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. M. Reddy, N. T. Narayanan, J. Taha-Tijerina, J. Peng, G. Gao, J. Lou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4878–4895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the sonication-assisted hydrolysis process to produce hydroxyl functionalised h-BN nanosheets. Reprinted from ref. 28 with permission. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Morphologies of h-BNNS with very high specific surface areas. (a) SEM image; (b) and (c) TEM images; (d) and (e) STEM images with the inset in (e) showing the FFT pattern; (f) AFM image and line profile showing the thickness. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Synthetic scheme of the boron-containing metal–organic framework template and the spherical superstructure composed of BNNS. Reprinted from ref. 48 with permission. Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Spin-polarised DOS calculations for the pristine h-BN monolayer. (b) PDOS of B and N atoms for h-BN/Au (111). (c) Optimised structure of the O2 adsorbed onto the h-BN/Au (111) surface. Distances are in angstrom. (d) Free energy diagram for the ORR on h-BN/Au (111). Reprinted from ref. 51 with permission. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Geometric configurations of double (upper) and single (lower) C-doped h-BNNS. B, N, C, and H atoms are shown in green, grey, brown, and white, respectively. Reprinted from ref. 81 with permission. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance and (b) optical bandgap energy derived from Tauc plots for h-BN and xS-BN samples. (c) The trend of Efb potentials and (d) valence band X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (VB XPS) spectra of h-BN and xS-BN samples. (e) Partial density of state (PDOS) plot for the simulated S doped h-BN: pristine h-BN, 3% S doped, 6% S doped, and 9% S doped. (f) The schematic diagram of the band structure variations. Note: samples are denoted as xS-BN, where x = 1, 2, 3 and 4, and the heating time at 400 °C is 30, 60, 90 and 120 min, respectively. Reprinted from ref. 107 with permission. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structural models and corresponding band structures of the DOS for h-BN and two types of porous BN. (a) h-BN with two atoms in the unit cell, (b) porous BN with 18 atoms in the unit cell, and (c) porous BN with 12 atoms in the unit cell. Reprinted from ref. 118 with permission. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of the proposed reaction pathway in the oxidative dehydrogenation of propane over the boron nitride catalyst at the B–OH active sites. Reprinted from ref. 131 with permission. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A high resolution bright field TEM image of the carbon-doped h-BN catalyst; (b) high and stable ODH performance with 52% ethylbenzene conversion and 89% styrene selectivity; (c) and (d) electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) maps of carbon in the catalyst with a probe size of 0.75 nm × 0.75 nm showing that carbon is uniformly distributed at nanoscale. Adapted from ref. 136 with permission. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 
HO-BN + Li+ + e− → Li(OH)-BN	(1)

Nanostructured h-BN by ball mill	2.6	NA	298	10	Mostly chemisorbed	
165

Multiwall BN nanotubes	1.8	150	298	100	30/70	
166

Bamboo-like BN nanotubes	2.6	210	298	100	30/70	
166

Collapsed BN nanotubes	4.2	789.1	293	100	Mostly chemisorbed	
167

BN nanofibers	2.9	260	298	100	20/80	
168

Ultrathin-shell BN hollow spheres	4.07	215	298	100	NA	
169

Porous BN whiskers	5.6	1687	298	30	83.9/16.1	
170

Porous h-BN microbelts	2.3	1144	77	10	100/0	
120

Porous h-BN microsponges	2.57	1900	77	10	100/0	
171

O-doped h-BNNS	5.7	536	298	50	89/11	
172

C/O co-doped h-BNNS	2.14	1040	77	10	100/0	
12


 	Fig. 10  Morphology and gas sorption properties of porous h-BN microbelts. (a) SEM images; (b) TEM image; (c) high-resolution TEM image showing the (0002) spacing; (d) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms; (e) H2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of porous h-BN microbelts at 77 K and 1 MPa compared to bulk h-BN. Adapted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
