Mapping the space charge carrier dynamics in plasmon-based perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA02852H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA02852H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19811-19819Mapping the space charge carrier dynamics in plasmon-based perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Shrabani 
            Panigrahi‡
*, 
      
        
          
            Santanu 
            Jana‡
, 
      
        
          
            Tomás 
            Calmeiro
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Daniela 
            Nunes
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jonas 
            Deuermeier
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rodrigo 
            Martins
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Elvira 
            Fortunato
          
        
      *
      CENIMAT/i3N, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, CEMOP/Uninova, Campus de Caparica, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal. E-mail: spqdot@gmail.com; emf@fct.unl.pt
Received 
      15th March 2019
    , Accepted 23rd July 2019First published on 25th July 2019AbstractEnergy conversion by the surface plasmon effect is considered a promising alternative to an effective transformation of solar energy in photovoltaic devices through the generation of hot electrons in plasmonic nanostructures. Here, we report the direct visualization of the space charge potential profile across the cross-section of perovskite solar cells before and after plasmonic treatment and the nanoscale photoresponses of perovskite thin films to gain key insights into the fundamental mechanism of the charge carrier dynamics inside the cells during operation. Understanding the charge transport dynamics inside the solar cells is important for identifying the basic processes of the photovoltaic mechanism. Plasmon resonances in metal nanostructures and the accelerated charge transfer improved the overall performances of the solar cells. The recorded photocurrent images reveal an enhanced photo-response at the nanoscale for the plasmonic solar cells due to hot electron generation in Au nanoparticles. In addition, the potential-profiling results also indicate enhanced charge separation in the plasmon-based solar cells, which is associated with the better performances of the devices. The results represent a new feature for plasmonic nanostructures in photovoltaics, which could lead to the tuning of the carrier transfer dynamics inside the cells.
1. Introduction
Halide perovskites as light harvesting materials in solar cells have received significant attention in the last few years due to their high solar conversion efficiencies and low-cost fabrication methods.1–4 Within the last few years, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells has increased from 3.8% to above 25%, as already reported.5,6 In this context, the photovoltaic research community has been making extensive efforts to enhance the photovoltaic performances of perovskite solar cells for the past few years. In spite of their high efficiency, crystallinity, and proper band alignment, inefficient light absorption and charge transport are the main obstructions to the enhancement of their PCE. Researchers have applied different strategies to improve the absorption capability of the cells by surface texturing,7,8 using thin film absorber layers of binary and ternary semiconductor compounds,9–11 mixing with polymer blends,12–14 or applying plasmonic effects through metal nanostructures15,16 to improve photon absorption, among other novel approaches. The photovoltaic community has broadly investigated the surface plasmon effects of metallic nanostructures to improve the photon to electron conversion efficiency. Exceptional light trapping properties have been achieved by using metallic nanostructures which provide surface plasmons.17,18 Plasmonic enhancement is achieved through either radiative emission of photons or non-radiative excitation of hot electrons depending mainly on the size and shape of the plasmonic metal nanostructures. Smaller nanostructures can transfer energy in a non-radiative way by generating hot electrons through absorption of photons and can directly convert the light energy into electrical energy.19 These excited electrons have enough energy to cross the barrier, i.e. the difference between the work function of the metal nanostructures and the electron affinity of the adjacent semiconducting material, and reach the semiconductor. This produces a charge separation which works as a trigger for light energy conversion. Therefore, metallic nanostructures have been proposed as efficient light-trapping components and successfully employed to improve the performances of different types of cells, such as dye-sensitized solar cells, silicon solar cells, and organic and perovskite solar cells.20–23 There are some reports on the surface plasmon resonance effect in perovskite solar cells especially using Au and Ag nanostructures blended in the active layer or the anode buffer layer.24–27 The blending of metal nanostructures in the perovskite layer has an impact on the local properties of the perovskite films which affects the local photoresponse of the film and the charge transfer dynamics at the interfaces of the solar cell. Plasmon induced charge separation and transport of carriers in solar cells play a key role in device operation. To date, most of the reports described the increase of light absorption and enhancement of the photovoltaic performances of the solar cells through plasmonic effects.26,28–30 To obtain more information about the electric potential profile inside the solar cell due to the surface plasmon resonance effect, we have investigated the cross-sectional distribution of the surface potential inside the cell and also the local photoresponse of the perovskite layer before and after the plasmonic effect. Techniques such as conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM) and Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) have been employed to understand the charge carrier dynamics inside solar cells, where C-AFM is an ideal tool for simultaneous local probing of the surface morphology and electrical properties.31–33 On the other hand, KPFM is an electrical operation mode of AFM used as a powerful method to study solar cell devices through analysis of the electric potential across the layers of the cell with nanoscale resolution.34–37
In this context, Au nanoparticles (NPs) were employed as the metal plasmonic nanostructures in lead halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3 or MAPbI3) solar cells where TiO2 and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) act as the electron and hole transport layers, respectively, due to their good optical transparency and band alignment with MAPbI3. C-AFM has been applied to planar perovskite thin films to map the local photoresponse for both types of cells before and after plasmonic treatment. Significant enhancement in the photocurrent generation has been observed in the Au NP treated perovskite layer due to the surface plasmon effect. Concurrently, the spatial distribution of the electric potential across the layers for both solar cells has been analyzed by KPFM. This observation shows a significant difference in the surface potential across the layers of the solar cells after the plasmonic effect. Therefore, a detailed experimental investigation dealing with the nanoscale measurement of the photoresponse and surface potential across the cross-sectional layers of the solar cells provides potential suggestions that may contribute to obtaining a better understanding and insight into plasmon-based perovskite solar cells.
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials
Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates, titanium isopropoxide [Ti(OC3H7)4], ethanol (CH3CH2OH), acetylacetone (C5H8O2) for a compact TiO2 layer and TiO2 paste (798517-25 G, Sigma Aldrich) were used as precursors for the mesoporous TiO2 layer. Lead(II) iodide (PbI2), methylammonium iodide (MAI; CH3NH3I), dimethylformamide (DMF), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were employed for the preparation of the MAPbI3 perovskite solution. For the synthesis of gold (Au) nanoparticles we have used gold(III) chloride (AuCl3) and tri-sodium citrate dihydrate precursors. For the hole transport layer, spiro-MeOTAD, 4-tert-butylpyridine (4-tBP, 96%), bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI) and chlorobenzene (C6H5Cl) were employed. Deionized water from Millipore equipment was used. All the chemicals and solvents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and were employed without any further treatment or purification.
2.2 Device fabrication
After etching the ITO coated glass substrates, they were thoroughly washed with soap solution and then rinsed with deionized water, acetone and iso-propanol, respectively, followed by drying with compressed air. Before the compact layer deposition, the substrates were cleaned through an UV-ozone treatment for 15 min. The TiO2 compact layer was deposited by the spin coating technique using a solution of titanium isopropoxide [Ti(OC3H7)4] and acetylacetone in ethanol at 4000 rpm for 35 s. Then, the samples were dried at 120 °C for 15 min followed by an annealing treatment at 500 °C for 30 min. The TiO2 mesoporous layer was deposited by the spin coating technique with a solution of TiO2 paste (0.31 g) in ethanol (2 ml) at 4000 rpm for 20 s. This was followed by heating (100 °C for 15 min) and annealing (450 °C for 30 min) treatments. MAI and PbI2 (molar ratio 1:1) were dissolved in a mixture of DMF and DMSO under continuous stirring. The perovskite solution was spin coated on the mesoporous layer by a subsequent two-step spinning (at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 6000 rpm for 30 s) followed by a thermal annealing in a N2 atmosphere at 100 °C for 15 min. A colloidal Au nanoparticle (NP) solution was prepared by adding 500 μl of an aqueous solution of tri-sodium citrate dihydrate to 50 ml of boiling hot 0.25 mM HAuCl4 under vigorous stirring. The reaction lasted for 15 min until the solution reached a wine red color. After cooling, 1.25 ml of a 5% aqueous solution of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) was added into the solution and stirred for 12 h at room temperature. The reaction mixture was centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 15 min to collect the Au NPs, which were dispersed in ethanol. The as-prepared solution was spin coated (3000 rpm for 30 s) on a perovskite layer followed by an annealing treatment at 100 °C for 15 min in a N2 atmosphere. For the hole transport layer, 50 μl of the spiro-MeOTAD solution was spin coated at 3500 rpm for 30 s. The spiro-MeOTAD solution was made by dissolving 54.2 mg of spiro-MeOTAD in 0.75 ml of chlorobenzene; 13.12 μl of LiTFSI stock solution (520 mg of LiTFSI in 1 ml of acetonitrile) and 21.37 μl of 4-tBP were also added to the solution as additives. Fabrication of the cells was finally completed by depositing 100 nm of gold as a cathode using the thermal evaporation (Vinci Technologies) technique under vacuum.
2.3 Characterization details

2.3.1 Optical characterization. 
The absorption spectra were taken using a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (Agilent Cary series UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer).


2.3.2 Structural and microstructural characterization. 
TEM images of the Au NPs were taken on a JEOL JEM-2010 electron microscope using a 200 kV accelerating voltage. The morphological characterization of the perovskite layers with and without Au NPs was performed by SEM measurements using a Carl Zeiss AURIGA Cross Beam workstation. For focused ion beam (FIB) experiments, Ga+ ions were accelerated to 30 kV at 20 pA and the etching depth was kept at around 1200 nm.


2.3.3 Electrical characterization. 
For electrical characterization, a digital source meter (Keithley, Model 2400) was used to apply the voltage to the cell while the current was recorded. Illumination was provided under AM 1.5 illumination conditions with a Sciencetech SS1.6kW-A-2-Q system consisting of a Xe lamp with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2.


2.3.4 C-AFM and KPFM. 
All C-AFM measurements were performed using an MFP-3D AFM (Asylum Research, Santa Barbara, CA) using an ORCA-2 current preamplifier holder operated in air. All current measurements were performed using a conductive Pt/Ir-coated silicon AFM tip (CONTPt, Nanoworld) with a resonant frequency of ∼13 kHz and a force constant of ∼0.2 N m−1. To investigate the surface potential across the cross-section of the solar cell under dark and illumination conditions, KPFM was used. After polishing the cross-sectional surface of the solar cell, the sample was transferred to the atomic force microscopy setup, where it was fixed in a sample holder with electrical connections to both of the electrodes. KPFM was performed using Olympus AC240TM probes (spring constant: 2 N m−1, resonant frequency: 70 kHz) in an Asylum Research MFP-3D standalone system with the AC tip voltage tuned to 3 V in a double pass mode. We illuminated the device with a Fiber-Lite MI-150R light source for both measurements.


2.3.5 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. 
An Axis Supra spectrometer from Kratos Analytical was used with monochromatic Al Kα radiation, an X-ray power of 300 W and a pass energy of 40 eV.


2.3.6 Raman spectroscopy. 
Raman spectra were measured for MAPbI3 and MAPbI3–Au film deposited on ITO and the spectra recorded on a Labram 300 Jobin Yvon spectrometer from Horiba (Kyoto, Japan) equipped with an air-cooled CCD (charge-coupled device) detector with a He/Ne laser excitation at 532 nm.

3. Results and discussion
3.1 Characterization of the perovskite layers and solar cells

Fig. 1a shows the schematic diagram of the typical perovskite solar cell configuration, in which the Au NPs were incorporated in the perovskite layer of the solar cell. To incorporate metal NPs into the perovskite active layer, ethanol solution containing a certain concentration of Au NPs was deposited on the perovskite layer. Details of the film preparation procedure can be found in the Experimental section. Fig. 1b shows the schematic diagram of the plasmon-induced effect for the Au NPs and perovskite system where excited plasmons can transfer energy to the perovskite layer in the form of energetic hot electrons. Fig. 2a and b show the typical field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images of the top surface morphology of the perovskite layers before and after treatment with Au NPs, respectively. From Fig. 2b, it is clear that Au NPs (white sphere) were distributed on the top surface of the perovskite layer. The inset figure shows the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the Au NPs. The sizes of the NPs are between 30 and 35 nm. The absorbance of the prepared perovskite layers before and after Au treatment is shown in Fig. 2c. It shows that the absorbance is higher for the Au incorporated perovskite layer than the bare perovskite layer. The efficient light trapping properties are observed due to incorporation of metal NPs which can directly convert the collected light into electrical energy by generating hot electrons. Elrashidi et al.38 also observed the enhancement of light harvesting and power conversion efficiency of a-Si:H solar cells using plasmonic nanoparticles. We used X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to study the surface chemical composition of both Au-treated and untreated perovskite films. The appearance of Au 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 peaks suggests the presence of Au NPs in the perovskite layer, but the peak intensity is low, only slightly above the noise level, due to the small quantity of Au used during deposition (Fig. S1b†). However, subtracting the spectra of the untreated perovskite film from the one of the Au-treated surface clearly reveals the characteristic peak splitting between the 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 lines, shown in Fig. 2d. Since, the absolute binding energies were slightly shifted due to differential charging, the peak positions were charge corrected to Pb 4f7/2 at 137.5 eV, which is the literature value for PbO2.39 We chose this charge correction method due to the large uncertainty associated with using the usual C 1s as a reference, in particular when compared to literature spectra from metallic samples, like gold.40 Using a charge correction to an element which is an integral part of the sample (as opposed to adventitious carbon) allows to observe that the Au binding energy corresponds to metallic gold.39
 Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of the device structure with the different layers labeled. (b) Schematic diagram of the plasmon-induced effect for the Au nanoparticle and perovskite system. 
 Fig. 2  (a and b) Top view SEM image of MAPbI3 perovskite layers without and with Au NPs. The inset in (b) shows a TEM image of the Au NPs. (c) UV/Vis absorption spectra of mp-TiO2-based perovskite absorbers without and with Au NP modification. (d) XPS difference spectra of the perovskite surface with Au NPs minus the signal from the untreated perovskite layer. 
We have prepared two types of solar cells using two different types of perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) layers (without Au NP treatment named cell 1 and Au treated plasmon based cell named cell 2) to show the surface plasmon resonance effect of metal NPs on the space charge carrier dynamics inside the solar cells. Fig. 3a shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the device where every layer is clearly identified. It is shown that the stack architecture used in this study composed of indium tin oxide (ITO)/compact-TiO2/mesoporous-TiO2/perovskite/spiro MeOTAD/gold. We have deposited a Au NP solution on top of the perovskite layer by the spin coating technique. In the perovskite film, there are many cracks and pores inside the film. When the Au NP solution was spin coated on it, the NPs go inside the perovskite film. Therefore, we have not seen any extra layer for Au on top of the perovskite layer in the cross sectional SEM image. The solar cells showed an open circuit potential of VOC = 1.043 and 1.061 V, a short-circuit current density of JSC = 15.69 and 19.35 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.66 and 0.658 for cell 1 and cell 2, respectively (Fig. 3b). This yields power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of 10.8 and 13.5% for these two cells, respectively. This result shows the enhanced photovoltaic performances for the plasmon based cell. Zhang et al.21 also observed photocurrent and efficiency enhancement in halide perovskite solar cells by incorporating core–shell Au@SiO2 NPs with a device efficiency of up to 11.4%.
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM cross-sectional image of the device. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the solar cells with and without plasmonic treatment (red and black curves, respectively) collected under AM1.5 simulated sunlight. The inset shows the device parameters. 
3.2 Mapping the photoresponse of the perovskite thin films
For probing the photocurrent response at the nanoscale, C-AFM measurements were performed on the surfaces of the planar perovskite thin films using Asylum Research MFP-3D AFM equipment with conductive probes and an ORCA-2 current preamplifier holder operated in an ambient atmosphere. Fig. S2† shows a schematic diagram showing a planar perovskite solar cell mounted in a pc-AFM measurement system for measuring the local photoresponse on the perovskite layer. Generally, a hole transport layer (HTL) is present on top of the absorber layer in the perovskite solar cell structure. If it was there then it would be difficult to understand any details of the localized properties of the perovskite thin film. It was not included to focus only on the local photoresponse of the perovskite thin films. The cell is considered as a HTL free perovskite solar cell where the conductive AFM probe behaves as the top electrode. We have measured the photoresponse at the nanoscale for both types of cells (HTL free cell 1 and cell 2) to confirm the improvement of the device performance through the surface plasmon effect of Au NPs. Fig. 4a shows the surface topography of the top layer of cell 1 i.e. the perovskite layer before plasmonic treatment. Fig. 4b and c show the corresponding local current response images under dark and illumination conditions, respectively collected at zero bias. At zero applied bias, under illumination, photons are absorbed and charge carriers are generated. Due to the built-in bias at the junction, opposite carriers are separated and thus produce photocurrent. Similarly, Fig. 4d shows the surface topography of the top surface of cell 2 i.e. the perovskite layer after plasmonic treatment and Fig. 4e and f show the current response images under dark and illumination conditions, respectively. In both cases, current responses are higher under illumination than under dark conditions through the transformation of light into electrical energy under zero applied bias, which shows the photovoltaic nature. Fig. 4g shows the dark and photocurrent line profiles for cell 1 as indicated in Fig. 4b and c. Similarly, Fig. 4h shows the dark and photocurrent line profiles for cell 2 as indicated in Fig. 4e and f. The line profiles under dark and illumination conditions for both cells show a difference in the electrical response. The variation in short-circuit current (ISC) at the nanoscale under dark and illumination conditions has also been observed across MAPbI3 perovskite thin films by Kutes et al.32 Furthermore, a significant difference in electrical response has been observed between cell 1 and cell 2 under illumination conditions. The photocurrent line profiles for both devices (Fig. 4i) as indicated in Fig. 4c and f also clearly represent the difference. Due to plasmonic energy transfer to the perovskite layer in cell 2, the photoresponse is much higher than that of cell 1. For further confirmation, we have also examined the surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) effect (excitation wavelength 532 nm) of the perovskite layer before and after the plasmonic treatment with Au NPs, as shown in Fig. S3.† An apparent enhancing effect of the Raman signals of MAPbI3 has been observed after the treatment with the metal NPs. The origin of the SERS signals are attributed to two possible sources: electromagnetic (EM) enhancement and chemical enhancement (CE).41,42 For EM enhancement, the illumination intensity is enhanced due to surface plasmon resonance.43,44 Here, the enhancement factor mainly arises from the EM effect based on the charge transfer between MAPbI3 and the Au NPs.
 Fig. 4  Two-dimensional images of a 2.5 μm × 2.5 μm region of a MAPbI3 thin film (for cell 1, scale = 500 nm): (a) topography, (b) dark ISC, and (c) ISC under illumination. Two-dimensional images of a 2.5 μm × 2.5 μm region of a Au treated MAPbI3 thin film (for cell 2, scale = 500 nm): (d) topography, (e) dark ISC, and (f) ISC under illumination. (g) Dark and photocurrent line profiles for cell 1 as indicated in (b) and (c) (across the whole area shown in the images). (h) Dark and photocurrent line profiles for cell 2 as indicated in (e) and (f) (across the whole area shown in the images). (i) Photocurrent line profiles for cell 1 and cell 2 as indicated in (c) and (f). 
3.3 KPFM measurements for the solar cells
To deeply understand the carrier dynamic processes at the internal interfaces of the solar cells before and after the plasmonic effect, KPFM has been used for simultaneous mapping of the topography and the contact potential difference (CPD) between the tip and sample with nanometer scale resolution. To perform mapping using KPFM across the cross-sectional surface of the solar cell, the device has been cut directly and the cross section was polished. After the polishing process the device has been mounted in a sample holder in such a way that it allows for mapping across the cross-sectional area. Fig. 5a shows the schematic diagram of the side view of the device under operating conditions. Fig. 6a and e show the topography images of the cross-sectional surface for cell 1 and cell 2, respectively. The interfaces between the different layers were recognized for both cells and marked by black dotted lines. These interface lines were directly passed through the simultaneously recorded CPD map under dark and illumination conditions. Fig. 6b and c show the CPD maps across the different layers of cell 1 under dark and illumination conditions, respectively. Under dark conditions there is no such difference in surface potential across the layers of the solar cell. But under illumination, a significant difference in surface potential has been observed between electron and hole transport layers. During a single scan also, before and after turning on the light, a huge difference in surface potential is observed across the electron and hole transport layers of the cell (Fig. S4†). Similarly, Fig. 6f and g show the CPD maps for the plasmon based solar cell (cell 2) under dark and illumination conditions, respectively. Here a sharp difference in surface potential was also observed across the electron and hole transport layers under illumination conditions compared to that under dark conditions. Fig. 6d and h show the CPD line profiles across the cross-section of cell 1 and cell 2, respectively under dark and illumination conditions, which reveal the difference in carrier transport between the two cells. Due to the surface plasmon effect of Au NPs in the case of cell 2, a larger difference in CPD has been observed than in the case of the bare cell.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the side view of the cross-sectional layers of the perovskite solar cell under the operating conditions of KPFM. The CPD can be measured in the dark and under illumination. (b) Schematic diagram of carrier transition across the material interfaces inside the solar cell under illumination. 
 Fig. 6  (a) AFM topography and (b and c) the corresponding CPD map for the same area recorded under dark and illumination conditions for cell 1. (d) CPD line profiles under dark and illumination conditions for cell 1 as indicated in (b) and (c). (e) AFM topography and (f and g) the corresponding CPD map for the same area recorded under dark and illumination conditions for cell 2. (h) CPD line profiles under dark and illumination conditions for cell 2 as indicated in (f) and (g). We were able to define the material interfaces of the perovskite solar cells (black dotted lines). 
3.4 Discussion of the results
We now turn to the discussion of our results where the variation in the local photoresponse has been observed across the perovskite layers between the two cells. The enhancement in absorption capability for the Au treated perovskite layer through plasmonic light trapping has been observed experimentally (Fig. 2c). It is clear that plasmonic NPs in the perovskite layer led to improved light absorption and increased device performance. Simultaneously, histograms of this photocurrent (Fig. 4i) reveal that an enhanced ISC response under illumination has been observed in the plasmon based solar cell. When it was irradiated with high energy photons, hot electrons were generated and produced more photocurrent. The photoresponse enhancement is due to better light harvesting capability during plasmonic light interaction in the metal nanoparticles. Such photoresponse at the nanoscale is considerable experimental evidence to show that light scattering from Au NPs increases the local photocurrent response and enhances the device performance. We have imaged the generation of the charge carriers due to excitation and followed the charge transfer dynamics at the interfaces of the solar cells. In solar cells, carrier separation, transport and collection depend on the band alignment across multiple layers. KPFM measures the CPD across the layers, which depends on the work function of the materials. As the tip work function remains constant during the line scan, CPD reveals the built-in bias of the device. Under dark conditions, we have observed a decreasing nature of CPD from the ITO towards the Au electrode (Fig. 6b and f). The line profiles (Fig. 6d and h) also show the same nature. Under dark conditions, the Fermi levels are aligned through electron current flow, indicating the presence of a homogeneous electric field throughout the device. At the same time, vacuum energy levels drop and are no longer at the same position, which shows the VCPD across the layers of the device. Under illumination, free charge carriers are generated and separated due to the build-in potential across the device. Accumulation of an excess amount of opposite charge carriers (electrons and holes) in n-type (TiO2) and p-type (spiro-MeOTAD) layers generates a large difference in surface potential between the two layers. For cell 1, the increase in CPD is only in the perovskite layer due to less charge extraction through the HTL. The accumulation of excess holes in this layer creates an electrical potential barrier that reduces the short-circuit current. However, in the case of cell 2, the increase in CPD across the perovskite and hole transport layers indicates the presence of positive charge carriers which passes through the HTL. The difference in CPD characteristics (Fig. 6d and h) across the layers for both devices clearly reveals that more carrier generation, transport and separation occur in the plasmon based perovskite cell. Surface plasmons in Au NPs can generate hot electrons by absorbing white light. These hot electrons have high enough energies to overcome the barrier and reach the conduction band of the neighboring absorber material (Fig. 1b) and enhance the current generation. After injection of hot electrons, the plasmonic NPs become positively charged due to electron reduction. The hole transport layer (spiro-MeOTAD), in contact with the plasmonic nanoparticles, can transfer the generated holes to the counter electrode (Au) (Fig. 5b). We have also seen a higher VOC in cell 2 because of fast hole transfer to the counter electrode. However, by changing the geometrical parameters of the plasmonic nanostructures like changing the NP size or using different shaped nanostructures similar to nanostars, nanorods, etc., their optical properties can be tuned. Based on this perspective, further study will be focused on that point to enhance the overall photovoltaic performance.
4. Conclusion
In summary, we have successfully incorporated Au NPs into the MAPbI3 perovskite layer, which significantly increased the device photocurrent and changed the internal surface potential. Pc-AFM was used for mapping the photocurrent at the nanoscale across the perovskite layer. The results showed an improvement of the photoresponse across the plasmon based perovskite layers due to enhancement of carrier generation through plasmonic scattering of Au NPs. Furthermore, the potential distribution in two types of cells with different perovskite layers have been measured using KPFM, allowing us to collect information about the surface potential inside the solar cells. From these internal electrical potential profiles, we can get an idea about the electric field generated by the excess charge carriers under illumination. An increased interfacial carrier generation with effective charge carrier separation through the surface plasmon effect enhanced the surface potential across the layers of the plasmon based solar cell. Our KPFM results support the argument that the plasmonic effect has an influence on the charge carrier dynamics inside the solar cells. This approach should be generally applicable to other devices like perovskite and quantum dot solar cells, and thin film transistors, among others, thus allowing researchers to understand the mechanisms for further improvement of these devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is funded by FEDER funds through the COMPETE 2020 Programme and National Funds through the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology under project number POCI-01-0145-FEDER-007688, Reference UID/CTM/50025. SP acknowledges FCT-MCTES for the postdoctoral grant SFRH/BPD/123502/2016 and SJ acknowledges the ERC AdG postdoctoral grant from the project DIGISMART ref. 787410. We acknowledge Ms. Maria João Oliveira for help with Raman experiments. We are also thankful to Ms. A. Lopes for her help in polishing the device for KPFM measurements.
Notes and references
F. Giordano, A. Abate, J. P. Correa Baena, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, S. H. Im, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, M. K. Gangishetty and T. L. Kelly, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19873 RSC .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, H. Tan, H. Yuan, Z. Yang, J. Z. Fan, J. Kim, O. Voznyy, X. Gong, L. N. Quan, C. S. Tan, J. Hofkens, D. Yu, Q. Zhao and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1607 CrossRef .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sahli, J. Werner, B. A. Kamino, M. Bräuninger, R. Monnard, B. Paviet-Salomon, L. Barraud, L. Ding, J. J. Diaz Leon, D. Sacchetto, G. Cattaneo, M. Despeisse, M. Boccard, S. Nicolay, Q. Jeangros, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 820 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Schneider, N. Lal, S. Baker-Finch and T. White, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, A1422 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Wang, L. Zhu, B.-G. Zhao, Y.-L. Zhao, J. Song, X.-Q. Gu and Y.-H. Qiang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14478 CrossRef .
J. Jeong, H.-B. Kim, H. Kim, B. Walker, S. Song, J. Heo, Y. J. Yoon, Y. Jo, H. Choi, G.-H. Kim, D. S. Kim and J. Y. Kim, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 712 CrossRef CAS .
L. Po-Wei, C. Chu-Chen, X. Xu-Kai, Z. Fan, S. T. Williams, L. Chien-Yi and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400960 CrossRef .
L. Meng, W. Zhao-Kui, Z. Ming-Peng, H. Yun, H. Ke-Hao, Y. Qing-Qing, S. M. Jain, Y. Ying-Guo, G. Xing-Yu and L. Liang-Sheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800258 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zuo, H. Guo, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Jariwala, N. De Marco, S. Dong, R. DeBlock, D. S. Ginger, B. Dunn, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700106 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xiang, Q. Chen, Y. Wang, M. Liu, F. Huang, T. Bu, T. Wang, Y.-B. Cheng, X. Gong, J. Zhong, P. Liu, X. Yao and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5486 RSC .
J. Jiexuan, W. Qian, J. Zhiwen, Z. Xisheng, L. Jie, B. Haijun, Z. Zhi-Guo, L. Yongfang and L. Shengzhong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701757 CrossRef .
Q. Luo, C. Zhang, X. Deng, H. Zhu, Z. Li, Z. Wang, X. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34821 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Beck, A. Polman and K. R. Catchpole, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 114310 CrossRef .
F. J. Beck, S. Mokkapati and K. R. Catchpole, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2010, 18, 500 CrossRef CAS .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kah, W. Matthew, E. Naveen, U. Ashraf and P. Supriya, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600698 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Yen, P.-H. Chen, J.-Z. Chen, J.-A. Chen and K.-J. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shaik, U. Basavaraju, S. N. Rachith, M. Sundaramurthy, A. S. Sheik and G. M. Rao, Opt. Mater., 2017, 73, 179 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, J. M. Ball, M. B. Johnston, A. Goriely, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5038 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Ginting, S. Kaur, D.-K. Lim, J.-M. Kim, J. H. Lee, S. H. Lee and J.-W. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Carretero-Palacios, A. Jiménez-Solano and H. Míguez, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, X. Pan, Y. Ma, Y. Li, L. Zheng, D. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Chen, S. Wang, B. Qu, F. Liu, Y. Huang, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11175 RSC .
S. Saravanan, R. Kato, M. Balamurugan, S. Kaushik and T. Soga, Journal of Science: Advanced Materials and Devices, 2017, 2, 418 Search PubMed .
C. Jin, C. Cheng, H. Junbo, C. Kun, Z. Wenjun, S. Yan and W. Mingkui, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500312 CrossRef PubMed .
W. R. Erwin, H. F. Zarick, E. M. Talbert and R. Bardhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1577 RSC .
D. C. Coffey, O. G. Reid, D. B. Rodovsky, G. P. Bartholomew and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kutes, Y. Zhou, J. L. Bosse, J. Steffes, N. P. Padture and B. D. Huey, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xuan-Dung, A. B. Tamayo, S. Junghwa, C. V. Hoven, W. Bright and N. Thuc-Quyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3314 CrossRef .
S. Panigrahi, S. Jana, T. Calmeiro, D. Nunes, R. Martins and E. Fortunato, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. W. Bergmann, S. A. L. Weber, F. Javier Ramos, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, D. Li, A. L. Domanski, I. Lieberwirth, S. Ahmad and R. Berger, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Panigrahi, T. Calmeiro, R. Martins, D. Nunes and E. Fortunato, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Glatzel, D. F. Marrón, T. Schedel-Niedrig, S. Sadewasser and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 2017 CrossRef CAS .
A. Elrashidi, Mater. Today: Proc., 2017, 4, S27 Search PubMed .

          J. F. Moulder, W. F. Stickle, P. E. Sobol and K. D. Bomben, Handbook of X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, Physical Electronics Division, Perkin-Elmer Corp.,  1995 Search PubMed .

          G. Greczynski and L. Hultman, Reliable determination of chemical state in x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy based on sample-work-function referencing to adventitious carbon: Resolving the myth of apparent constant binding energy of the C 1s peak,  2018, p. 451 Search PubMed .
S. Sun and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21116 RSC .
D. P. Fromm, A. Sundaramurthy, A. Kinkhabwala, P. J. Schuck, G. S. Kino and W. E. Moerner, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 2167649 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Pistor, A. Ruiz, A. Cabot and V. Izquierdo-Roca, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Quarti, G. Grancini, E. Mosconi, P. Bruno, J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. D. Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02852h‡ These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of the device structure with the different layers labeled. (b) Schematic diagram of the plasmon-induced effect for the Au nanoparticle and perovskite system.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) Top view SEM image of MAPbI3 perovskite layers without and with Au NPs. The inset in (b) shows a TEM image of the Au NPs. (c) UV/Vis absorption spectra of mp-TiO2-based perovskite absorbers without and with Au NP modification. (d) XPS difference spectra of the perovskite surface with Au NPs minus the signal from the untreated perovskite layer.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM cross-sectional image of the device. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the solar cells with and without plasmonic treatment (red and black curves, respectively) collected under AM1.5 simulated sunlight. The inset shows the device parameters.	 

 	Fig. 4  Two-dimensional images of a 2.5 μm × 2.5 μm region of a MAPbI3 thin film (for cell 1, scale = 500 nm): (a) topography, (b) dark ISC, and (c) ISC under illumination. Two-dimensional images of a 2.5 μm × 2.5 μm region of a Au treated MAPbI3 thin film (for cell 2, scale = 500 nm): (d) topography, (e) dark ISC, and (f) ISC under illumination. (g) Dark and photocurrent line profiles for cell 1 as indicated in (b) and (c) (across the whole area shown in the images). (h) Dark and photocurrent line profiles for cell 2 as indicated in (e) and (f) (across the whole area shown in the images). (i) Photocurrent line profiles for cell 1 and cell 2 as indicated in (c) and (f).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the side view of the cross-sectional layers of the perovskite solar cell under the operating conditions of KPFM. The CPD can be measured in the dark and under illumination. (b) Schematic diagram of carrier transition across the material interfaces inside the solar cell under illumination.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) AFM topography and (b and c) the corresponding CPD map for the same area recorded under dark and illumination conditions for cell 1. (d) CPD line profiles under dark and illumination conditions for cell 1 as indicated in (b) and (c). (e) AFM topography and (f and g) the corresponding CPD map for the same area recorded under dark and illumination conditions for cell 2. (h) CPD line profiles under dark and illumination conditions for cell 2 as indicated in (f) and (g). We were able to define the material interfaces of the perovskite solar cells (black dotted lines).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02852h
‡ These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
