Artificial photosynthesis systems for solar energy conversion and storage: platforms and their realities  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS01008E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS01008E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 6704-6737Artificial photosynthesis systems for solar energy conversion and storage: platforms and their realities

        
          
            Zhenfu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Hu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Songping 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yan 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Biochemical Engineering, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology and Key Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering and Frontiers Science Center for Synthetic Biology (Ministry of Education), Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China. E-mail: ysun@tju.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
Received 
      5th December 2021
    First published on 11th July 2022AbstractIn natural photosynthesis, photosynthetic organisms such as green plants realize efficient solar energy conversion and storage by integrating photosynthetic components on the thylakoid membrane of chloroplasts. Inspired by natural photosynthesis, researchers have developed many artificial photosynthesis systems (APS's) that integrate various photocatalysts and biocatalysts to convert and store solar energy in the fields of resource, environment, food, and energy. To improve the system efficiency and reduce the operation cost, reaction platforms are introduced in APS's since they allow for great stability and continuous processing. A systematic understanding of how a reaction platform affects the performance of artificial photosynthesis is conducive for designing an APS with superb solar energy utilization. In this review, we discuss the recent APS's researches, especially those confined on/in platforms. The importance of different platforms and their influences on APS's performance are emphasized. Generally, confined platforms can enhance the stability and repeatability of both photocatalysts and biocatalysts in APS's as well as improve the photosynthetic performance due to the proximity effect. For functional platforms that can participate in the artificial photosynthesis reactions as active parts, a high integration of APS's components on/in these platforms can lead to efficient electron transfer, enhanced light-harvesting, or synergistic catalysis, resulting in superior photosynthesis performance. Therefore, the integration of APS's components is beneficial for the transfer of substrates and photoexcited electrons in artificial photosynthesis. We finally summarize the current challenges of APS's development and further efforts on the improvement of APS's.
Zhenfu Wang
Zhenfu Wang received his PhD degree in 2022 from the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, under the supervision of Prof. Yan Sun. He received his Masters degree in 2018 from the National Engineering Technology Research Center for Biotechnology, Nanjing Technological University, under the guidance of Prof. Hanjie Ying. His research focuses on the design of biomimetic hybrid catalysts based on enzyme immobilization and their application in (photo-)chemoenzymatic cascade synthesis.
Yang Hu
Yang Hu received his MS and PhD degree in the group of Prof. Yan Sun from the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University in 2021. He is currently a postdoctoral research fellow working with Prof. Xiangzhao Mao at Ocean University of China. His research interests include artificial micro/nanorobots and catalytic systems.
Songping Zhang
Songping Zhang received BS degree in Applied Chemistry (1998) and PhD degree in Biochemical Engineering (2002) from Tianjin University, China. She worked as a post doc at Lund University, Sweden during 2002–2004. Afterward, she joined Institute of Process Engineering, CAS as an assistant professor, and was promoted to a full professor in 2014. She has broad research interests in biocatalysis, bioseparation, and bioformulation. She has prepared hollow nanofiber hosting complex multienzyme systems and developed a series of artificial photosynthesis system platforms based on hybrid nanoparticles, 2-D nanosheets, and polyelectrolyte-doped hollow nanofibers, etc.
Yan Sun
Yan Sun received his Bachelor of Engineering Degree from Tianjin University in 1983, and Master and Doctor of Engineering Degrees from the University of Tokyo in 1987 and 1990, respectively. From 1991, he started his teaching and research career at Tianjin University and became a full Professor in 1993. In 2000, he obtained the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Outstanding Young Scientists grant and was appointed to the Cheung Kong Professorship by the Ministry of Education (MOE) of China. His research interests include biocatalysis and bioseparation. His work has produced over 400 research papers and one book.
1. Introduction
Nowadays, the exhaustion of fossil resources on the Earth is increasingly becoming serious, and efforts have been devoted to exploring renewable energies such as biomass, wind power, and solar energy.1–3 Among them, the rich, economical, and sustainable solar energy has emerged as an ideal alternative to traditional energy resources.4–6 The utilization and storage of solar energy are achieved in nature by photosynthesis, which is regarded as one of the most important reactions on the Earth. Photosynthesis is widely found in green plants, algae, and some bacteria.7 Typically, photosynthesis in green plants consists of light reaction and dark reaction.8 Light reaction refers to the conversion of light energy into chemical energy in adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide cofactor (NADPH). Dark reaction, also called the Calvin cycle, involves the enzymatic fixation of CO2 into carbohydrates with the help of NADPH and ATP. Taking the advantage of photosynthetic systems, plants and algae are capable of converting light energy into stable chemical energy,9 and the resulting chemical energy plays a significant role in biosphere operation.10 However, the primary objective of these photosynthetic organisms and plants in nature is survival rather than maximizing the efficiency of conversion and storage of solar energy. Therefore, the natural biosynthesis systems always operate at low solar-to-biomass efficiency (between 0.1% and 2% for most plants),11 which is too low to meet the global energy consumption.
Thus, inspired by the natural photosynthetic process, artificial photosynthesis systems (APS's) that mimic natural photosynthesis by combining the photochemical reactions (catalyzed by photocatalysts) and enzymatic reactions (catalyzed by biocatalysts) have emerged as a promising and efficient way to convert and store solar energy.11 These mimics have exhibited important achievements and practical significance in the fields of resources, environment, food, and energy.7,12 A typical APS contains three catalytic modules, (1) a light-harvesting and converting module based on a photocatalyst, (2) a biocatalysis system based on oxidoreductases, and (3) a regenerative module for the photocatalyst recovery by an electron donor. The three modules refer to the photosensitization of the photocatalyst, activation of oxidoreductase(s), and regeneration of photocatalyst in the presence of electron donor. However, as the key parts of these catalytic modules, photocatalysts and oxidoreductases usually work under different conditions, thus, their combination requires a careful adaption of the reaction conditions (including pH, solvent, and temperature), especially in platform-free APS's.13 When designing an APS, the co-immobilization of the photocatalyst and biocatalyst on/in a platform is a practical way to relieve the incompatibility of the two catalysts and to improve the robustness of the biocatalyst and photoinduced electron transfer. Moreover, fast and oriented electrons transfer from the photocatalyst to the redox biocenter benefits the effective charge separation and decreases the recombination of electron–hole pairs in the photocatalyst.14 Moreover, minimizing the side reactions in light energy conversion, such as the generation of various free radicals that can damage the enzyme proteins,15 is conducive for maintaining the enzyme activity. Hence, APS's confined on/in platforms with higher integration degrees often exhibit higher catalytic robustness and even higher efficiency of energy conversion than the platform-free systems.
Due to the importance of APS's, there have been many review papers published in the past several decades. However, these previous reviews are mainly focused on the development of APS's components and the design of cascade reaction systems, such as the photoactivation of redox enzymes,16–18 photoregeneration of cofactors,19,20 fabrication of artificial photocatalysis,21–26 synthesis of alternative products,27–32 and semi-biological approaches for solar-to-chemical conversion,33–35 rather than on APS's themselves. Moreover, there is still a lack of a systematic understanding of how a reaction platform affects the APS's performance, specifically, the contribution of the platform to the transfer of photogenerated electrons from the photocatalyst to the oxidoreductase and the subsequent activation of the latter. Therefore, this review is devoted to discussing the research progresses of APS's with various reaction platforms in the past decade with emphasis on the integration of APS's components and its impacts on APS's performances and realities. The current challenges in APS's research are summarized with a prospective discussion on how to improve APS's to make them applicable in the real world.
2. Lessons from natural photosynthesis
Taking the natural photosynthetic system as a blueprint, scientists have developed many APS's for various applications. A deep understanding of natural photosynthesis is essential to improve the energy conversion and storage efficiency of APS's. In green plants, thylakoids in chloroplasts are the main biostructures for photosynthesis. The primary photosynthesis components, photosystem I (PS I), photosystem II (PS II), cytochrome b6f protein complex (b6f-protein), ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase (FNR), and ATPase, are embedded in the thylakoid membrane.36 They are the main materials for the collection and conversion of solar energy. The rational distribution and well-matched redox potential of these photosynthesis components minimize energy loss during electron transfer.37 As shown in Fig. 1, under sunlight illumination, photoexcited electrons are transferred from P680 to the destination through a so-called “Z-scheme” path along with the formation of stable compounds.38 The “Z-scheme” consists of P680 in PS II, plastoquinone B (QB), b6f-protein, plastocyanin (PC), and P700 in PS I. Finally, electrons are transferred to FNR through ferredoxin A (FA) or ferredoxin B (FB) to participate in NADP+ reduction. Meanwhile, the resultant proton concentration gradient drives ATPase to synthesize ATP from adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and phosphoric acid (Pi). NADPH and ATP are further utilized for the bioconversion of CO2 to carbohydrates in the Calvin cycle.39 It should be pointed out that the electron transfer mediated by QB also provides a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane for ATP synthesis.40
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the photoexcited electron transfer pathway (Z-scheme) in the natural photosynthetic system under light illumination. Photons are firstly harvested by pigment-protein complexes around P680 in PS II. Secondly, P680 is photoexcited and the electrons are transferred from PS II to PS I by the electron-transport chain consisting of QB, b6f, and PC. Then, electrons are re-excited in P700. Finally, the excited electrons are transferred through FA or FB to Fd-FNR and used to regenerate NADPH. Protons generated in the water oxidation process are utilized in ATP synthesis by ATPase. Water acts as the electron donor in the natural photosynthetic process. 
The light reaction that involves the capture and conversion of solar energy provides an excellent template for APS's. When mimicking natural photosynthesis, the absorption, transfer, and conversion of light energy into available chemical energy are the key to APS's fabrication.41 The APS's based on photocatalysts and biocatalysts has been developed for the utilization of solar energy.42 Under light illumination, the photocatalyst mimicking PS absorbs photons to generate photoexcited electrons. Then, the electrons are transferred to biocatalyst(s) to participate in the single/multi-enzymatic redox reactions for energy storage. In the enzymatic processes, various oxidoreductases can be used to catalyze the synthesis of value-added products. Meanwhile, the oxidized photocatalyst is continuously recovered by the electron donor, making the artificial photosynthesis sustainable. Such a timely recovery of the photocatalyst can prevent the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes, thus reducing energy loss.5 Therefore, the rational choice of the aforementioned APS's components (i.e., photocatalyst, electron donor, and oxidoreductase(s)) is indispensable for the fabrication of a high-performance APS. Photocatalysts, electron donors, and oxidoreductases commonly used in APS's are summarized in Fig. 2 and discussed in the following sections.
 Fig. 2  Common photocatalysts, oxidoreductases, and electron donors in APS's. Under light illumination, the photocatalyst generates photoexcited electrons that are transferred to the oxidoreductase(s) to participate in substrate bioconversion. The electron donor recovers the photocatalyst and provides continuous power to APS's operation. Photocatalysts include (1) photosensitive nanoparticles, such as Ag, Au, TiO2, carbon QD, (2) xanthenes, (3) porphyrins, (4) Ru-polypyridyls complex, (5) g-C3N4. Oxidoreductases (redox enzymes) include (1) YqjM, (2) P450 BM3, (3) nitrogenase, (4) laccase, (5) H2ase, (6) FDH, (7) ALDH, (8) ADH. Electron donors: (1) water, (2) formic acid, (3) TEOA, (4) diethyldithiocarbamate, (5) AA, (6) EDTA. 
2.1 Photocatalyst
In chloroplasts, porphyrin derivatives are effective photosensitive molecules. The primary photoinduced charge separation in porphyrin molecules caused by the absorbed photons is the key step of energy conversion.43 Similarly, photocatalysts act as the core material of the energy conversion system in APS's. Common photocatalysts can be divided into three categories, namely, organic dyes, inorganic materials, and organic–inorganic hybrid materials. Organic dyes, such as xanthenes (e.g., eosin Y and rhodamine) and ruthenium polypyridine complexes ([Ru(bpy)3]2+, where bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine), porphyrins, and their derivatives, usually possess good water-solubility, high cross-system efficiency, and wide visible-light absorption spectra; thus, they have been widely used in various light-driven reaction systems.44 Inorganic photocatalysts used in APS's include CdS, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), Ag, Au, and carbon quantum dot (CQD).45 These inorganic materials generally exhibit good dispersity, stable properties, and wide absorption spectra. Such excellent (photo)physical properties make them beneficial for efficient light energy absorption and conversion. The organic–inorganic hybrid materials used in APS's mainly include dye-sensitized semiconductors such as TiO2 and chromophoric assemblies by incorporating photosensitizing molecules into organic nanoparticles, or as the struts in metal–organic frameworks (MOFs).46
2.2 Electron donor
In natural photosynthesis, water acts as the electron donor. It annihilates the photogenerated holes in P680, avoiding the reflux of photoexcited electrons. However, only a few hybrid photocatalysts can oxidize water with low efficiency, while most of the pure photocatalysts are incapable of using water as the electron donor for recovery.47 Instead of water, other inexpensive and low-toxicity chemicals, such as triethanolamine (TEOA), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and ascorbic acid (AA), have been utilized as the sacrificial agents to provide electrons to the photogenerated holes in the ground state, thus facilitating durative electron transfer from the photocatalyst to the biocatalyst for continuous APS's operation.48 Generally, an electron donor exhibits its effective performance at the pH near its pKa value, but the choice of an electron donor in APS's is usually empirical.49 It has revealed that non-covalent interactions between the electron donor and the photocatalyst may be a key factor for APS's performance. For example, different electron donors (i.e., AA, EDTA, TEOA, and 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES)) were used in APS's for CO production with CO dehydrogenase (CODH) as the oxidoreductase and CdS nanocrystals as the photocatalyst.50 Compared with other reaction systems, the EDTA-containing system showed the highest turnover frequency (TOF). The cause for the highest activity of this system was considered as the strong interaction between EDTA with the surface of CdS nanocrystals. Such a strong interaction contributed to the better electron-donating ability of EDTA than the other electron donors.
2.3 Oxidoreductase
Dehydrogenases (e.g., alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), formate dehydrogenase (FDH), and glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH)), nitrogenase, hydrogenase (H2ase), cytochrome P450, and old yellow enzyme (OYE) are the most important enzymes in the fabrication of APS's.40 With the help of different metal ions and metal/non-metal electron-transfer cofactors (e.g., flavin mononucleotide (FMN), flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), heme, and NAD(H)/NADP(H)), these oxidoreductases can selectively introduce/remove oxygen atom, hydrogen atom, or other atoms into/from the C–H or CC bonds of the substrate molecules to catalyze the synthesis of value-added products.51
In general, photoexcited electrons are transferred directly or indirectly to the active sites of oxidoreductases to participate in the enzymatic reactions, mainly depending on the binding status of the cofactors in the enzymes.10 For the enzymes bound with cofactors, such as [NiFe]–H2ase and [FMN]-OYE, the photoexcited electrons can be directly transferred from the photocatalyst to the cofactor, thus activating the oxidoreductases by intraprotein electron transfer. However, about 90% of oxidoreductases are NAD(P)H-dependent, which cannot be directly activated by photoexcited electrons unless the cofactors are exogenously provided.52 Hence, in the APS's containing NAD(P)H-dependent oxidoreductases, NAD(P)H photoregeneration is the key process to connect photocatalysis and enzymatic catalysis.53 In many circumstances, the direct reduction of NAD(P)+ by photocatalysts leads to the formation of NAD(P)H isomers and dimers that are not in an enzymatically active form due to their low specificity and selectivity.52 Therefore, developing stable and efficient electron mediators becomes necessary for NAD(P)H photoregeneration. To date, the most widely used electron mediators are the organometallic complex [Cp*Rh(bpy)(H2O)]2 (denoted as M, where Cp* = C5Me5) and its derivatives due to their high stability and electron transfer efficiency.54,55 After reducing NAD(P)+ with high specificity and selectivity, M and its derivatives can be regenerated by photocatalysts. Fig. 3 shows several typical APS's containing NAD(P)H-dependent enzymes. In these APS's, the photocatalysis part (photocatalysts and M) could realize the regeneration of NAD(P)H under light illumination, and the resultant NAD(P)H, as a hydride carrier delivering two electrons and one proton, participates in the subsequent biocatalytic transformation by the oxidoreductases. Meanwhile, electron donors are utilized to recover the photocatalysts to boost the continuous operation of the APS's. Interestingly, redox enzymes that can be directly activated by light have also been found in nature. For example, an FAD-containing algal photodecarboxylase can catalyze the decarboxylation of fatty acids under blue light illumination without a photocatalyst.56
 Fig. 3  APS's containing NAD(P)H-dependent enzymes driven by the indirect transfer of photoinduced electrons in the presence of electron donor, photocatalyst, and M. (A) GDH, (B) OYE, (C) FDH & ALDH & ADH. 
3. Fabrication of APS
The natural PS in chloroplast relies on the precise arrangement and high integration of light-harvesting photosensitizers, coenzymes, and enzyme molecules at the nanoscale to fulfill a series of compatible and specific photochemical reactions and enzymatic reactions for synthesizing complex metabolites under solar illumination. By mimicking the natural PS, therefore, efforts must be paid to combine photochemical reactions and enzymatic reactions to enhance the realities of APS's. In detail, the photochemical reactions and enzymatic reactions in APS's refer to the photoexcitation and regeneration of the photocatalyst, and the activation and catalysis of oxidoreductase, respectively. On the one hand, the photocatalyst and oxidoreductase in the cascade catalysis system should be compatible so that the two catalysts can work together efficiently.57 On the other hand, the redox potentials of different APS's components (i.e., photocatalyst, electron donor, and oxidoreductase) should be well-matched to ensure the proper transfer of photoexcited electrons, which is important to prevent the energy loss caused by electron backflow.12 Moreover, the spatial distribution and interaction of APS's components should be regulated to allow the proper transmission of electrons and substrates.
To achieve efficient photosynthesis, plants employ the thylakoid membrane as the functional platform with appropriate active components confined into it.58 As presented in Fig. 1, the thylakoid membrane in chloroplasts provides suitable reaction conditions (e.g., temperature, pH, and ionic strength) and supporting the matrix for the photosynthesis components. In particular, the precise arrangement of the photosynthesis components allows efficient capture and conversion of light energy. Inspired by the natural strategy for combining photochemical catalysis and biocatalysis, several platform-free APS's and APS's confined on/in different platforms have been fabricated for wide applications in recent years.
3.1 Platform-free APS's
As the simplest form of APS's, a platform-free APS can be prepared by physically mixing APS's components into bulk solution. Under light irradiation, free photosynthetic components complete electron transfer and a series of photochemical and biocatalytic reactions through weak non-covalent interactions among them. The strength of these non-covalent interactions and the physicochemical property of APS's components directly and significantly affect the performance of the artificial systems with or without an NAD(P)H regeneration system. Table 1 summarizes the performance of platform-free APS's that consist of various photocatalysts, oxidoreductases, and electron donors.
Table 1 Performances of various platform-free APS's




Photocatalyst
Electron donor
Electron mediator
Redox center
APS's performance
Ref.





a If not stated, the NADH TOF refers to photocatalyst.





W2Fe4Ta2O17
EDTA
M, NADH
GDH
NADH TOFa of 0.015 h−1, 15% production of L-glutamate within 24 h

67



Eosin Y
TEOA
M, NADH
GDH
Initial NADH TOF of 24.23 h−1, 81.4% production of L-glutamate within 40 min

68



Proflavine
TEOA
M, NADH
GDH
NADH TOF of 127.8 h−1, 65.3% production of L-glutamate within 1 h

69



[Ru(bpy)2(NH2phen)](PF6)2
EDTA
—
[NiFe]–H2ase
H2 TOF of 0.184 h−1, H2 TON of 11.04

70



Eosin Y
TEOA
M, NADPH
P450 BM3 Y51F/F87A mutant
TOF of 8.6 h−1

71



Zinc tetramethylpyridinium porphyrin
EDTA
—
Laccase
TOF of 480 h−1

72



[Co4(H2O)2(PW9O34)2]10−
Water
M, NADH
GDH
NADH TOF of 0.214 h−1, L-glutamate production of 30% within 12 h

73





TEOA




NADH TOF of 1.414 h−1, L-glutamate production 100% within 12 h




Rose bengal/Si-NaYF4:Yb,Er
TEOA
M, NADH
GDH
NADH TOF of 0.038 h−1, L-glutamate conversion of 20.25% within 5 h

74



Carbon nitride mesoporous spheres
TEOA
M, NADH

L-Lactate dehydrogenase
NADH conversion of 100% within 30 min, L-lactate production of 100% within 6 h

75



PS II
Water
Fe(CN)64−
Ru/SrTiO3:Rh
TOF of 2489 h−1 (based on PS II)

76











TOF of 1000 h−1 (based on PS II)




Ordered carbon nitride array
TEOA
M, NADH
FDH, ALDH, ADH
0.21 mmol methanol min−1 g−1 enzyme

77







—
Pt nanoparticles
TOF of 4.878 h−1




CdSe QD
AA
NADPH
FNR and ADH
NADPH TOF of 1440 h−1 (based on FNR), QE of 5.8%

78



CdS nanorod
HEPES
—
Nitrogenase
TOF of 4500 h−1, QE of 3.3%

78



Au–TiO2
MeOH
H2O2
Peroxygenase
(R)-1-Phenylethanol (98.2% ee) with a TON of more than 7.1 × 104, QE of 0.036%

79



Deazariboflavin
EDTA
NADH
PDR, ADH
NADH TOF of 9 h−1 (based on PDR), ethyl-(S)-3-hydroxybutyrate production of 45% within 24 h

80



FAD
EDTA
H2O2
Halogenase PyrH
TOF of 0.72 h−1

81



g-C3N4
HCO2H
H2O2
Peroxygenase
TON of >6 × 104

82



FMN
HCO2H
NADH, H2O2
FDH and peroxygenase
FDH TON of 135, peroxygenase TON of 6490

83



Phenosafranine






FDH TON of 520, peroxygenase TON of 25000




Methylene blue






FDH TON of 832, peroxygenase TON of 39920




Amorphous carbon nitride
TEOA
M, NADH
GDH
NADH regeneration of 62.3% within 1 h, α-ketoglutarate TOF of 2640 h−1

84



g-C3N4@red phosphorus
TEOA
M, NADH
ADH
QE of 0.6%, NADH regeneration of 80.45% within 6 min, methanol production of 80.45% within 1 h

85



NAD+
TEOA
—
OYE
TOF of 1263.4 h−1

86



Zn-TPPS
TEOA
MV, CV, MCV
FDH
Formic acid TOF with MV, CV, and CMV of 5.469, 7.760, and 8.958 h−1, respectively

87





As the bioconversion center in APS's, most of the oxidoreductases catalyze the synthesis of value-added products with the help of NAD(P)H, which has to be regenerated due to the high cost.59 In the APS's containing NAD(P)H-dependent oxidoreductases, photocatalysts are employed for continuous NAD(P)H regeneration to allow the enzyme to work continuously. Organic dyes are usually employed as the photocatalyst to reduce NAD(P)+ in the presence of M. Among these dyes, xanthene dyes have been widely used in dye-sensitized solar cells and photocatalytic organic transformations due to their non-metallic molecular structure, good photochemical property, and low cost.60 Lee et al. tested ten xanthene dyes (Fig. 4A) for the photochemical reduction of NAD+ and L-glutamate synthesis.61 Their abilities to drive the photochemical regeneration of NADH significantly affected the synthetic yield and reaction rate in the subsequent L-glutamate synthesis. Among them, fluorescein and its halogen-substituted derivatives (i.e., eosin Y, erythrosine B, phloxine B, rose bengal, and merbromin) were capable of driving NADH regeneration for L-glutamate biosynthesis, while the other four xanthene dyes did not exhibit any activity in this APS because of their poor NAD+ reduction efficiency. Taking fluorescein and its other four halogen-substituted derivatives as model dyes, the NAD+ photoreduction activities of these dyes matched the order of heavy halogen atom substitution. The researchers suggested that as the substituted atom in the dye molecule became heavier, the electron-donating capability and reduction potential of the xanthene dye increased in the order of decreasing electronegativity, thus improving the NAD+ photoreduction activity.
 Fig. 4  (A) The molecular structures of xanthene dyes for light-driven NADH regeneration and photoenzymatic synthesis. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH. (B) Biocatalytic CC bond reduction through the regeneration of NADH analogues: illustration of photoenergy conversion into chemical energy by combining photocatalysis and biocatalysis. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (C) Illustration of the light-driven activation of OYE using rose bengal as a photosensitizer. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (D) Overall reaction scheme for the multicatalytic, light-driven upgradation of butanol to 2-EH and hydrogen. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Porphyrin is another important category of photosensitive dyes used in APS's.62,63 Due to the presence of changeable metal ions and meso-functional ligands, porphyrin and its derivatives exhibit versatile photochemical properties.64 One of the well-known derivatives of porphyrin is chlorophyll in green plants.65 Chlorophyll can absorb light energy and supply photoexcited electrons for NADPH regeneration. To mimic the natural NADPH photoregeneration system, Kim et al. utilized three kinds of tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (TPPC) and three kinds of tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin (TPPS) for NAD+ photoreduction and L-glutamate biosynthesis.66 With the APS-containing ZnTPPS as an example, under light illumination, the photoexcited electrons were transferred from ZnTPPS to M by non-covalent bonds to drive NAD+ reduction and L-glutamate biosynthesis. The central metal atom and meso-functional ligand of the porphyrin molecule significantly affected the performance of NAD+ reduction in the bulk solution due to the difference in the redox properties of porphyrins and M as well as the axial coordination between the center atom of porphyrins and the nitrogen atom in TEOA. Taken together, these enhanced interactions between ZnTPPS, TEOA, and M in the bulk buffer improve photoinduced electron transfer, NAD+ reduction, and α-ketoglutarate bioconversion. However, it is worth noting that these platform-free APS's containing water-soluble photocatalysts such as xanthene dyes and porphyrins cannot be reused, which would restrain their practical applications, though the results would contribute to the design of reusable platform-based APS's.
Because of the higher thermal and chemical stability than organic dyes, solid photocatalysts such as graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) have gained intense interests in photocatalysis and environmental remediation.88–90 When solid photocatalysts are used in the platform-free APS's, not only the molecular structure but also the size and morphology can affect their catalytic performance. Liu et al. prepared three C3N4-based materials for the photochemical regeneration of NADH, which was further consumed in the sustainable bioconversion of α-ketoglutarate to L-glutamate.91 Compared with bulky and mesoporous counterparts, the one-dimensional uniform g-C3N4 (CNR) nanorod possessed superior photoelectrochemical behaviour, thus exhibiting enhanced photocatalytic capability in NADH reduction. The higher NADH yield of the CNR nanorod was due to its higher specific area than those of the bulk and mesoporous g-C3N4. This work provided direct evidence that the photocatalytic performance of solid photocatalysts can be tuned by adjusting their morphology.
Besides the photoregeneration of NAD(P)H, using synthetic NAD(P)H analogs is another strategy to address the disadvantages of APS's containing NAD(P)H-dependent redox enzymes. NAD(P)H analogs usually have lower price, higher stability, and better biocatalytic performance than NADH.92 Kim et al. synthesized three different NADH analogs, i.e., 1-benzyl-3-carbamoylpyridinium (mNH2+), 1-butyl-3-carbamoylpyridinium (mBu+), and 1-benzyl-3-carboxypyridiniumion (mCOOH+), as depicted in Fig. 4B, for APS's fabrication.93 N-Doped carbon nanodots, TEOA, and M were employed for the photochemical reduction of NAD+ and its analogs. The different reduction efficiencies of NAD+ and its analogs (Fig. 4B) were attributed to the thermodynamic driving force of M and the ionic interactions between the carboxyl group of these cofactors and the metal center of M. When coupled with the trans-hydrogenation reaction of 2-methyl-2-cyclohexen-1-one catalyzed by OYE, the APS-containing mNH2H regeneration system showed higher TOFOYE and total turnover number (TTN) of OYE than those of the APS-containing NADH regeneration system. The researchers attributed this inverted order to the better kinetic parameters of mNH2H, which showed a catalytic efficiency for the reductive half-reaction (kred/KD) of OYE about 3 times higher than that with NADH. The results suggest that the application of NADH analogs is promising for the efficient activation of various NAD(P)H-dependent oxidoreductases in APS's.
Except for the application of NADH analogs, the direct injection of photoexcited electrons to the active site can endow direct photoactivation of oxidoreductases in APS's.45 OYEs can catalyze the asymmetric reduction of activated CC bonds, and have been usually employed in the APS's for the production of useful chiral alkanes.40 However, the application of the OYE-containing APS is limited by the necessity of NAD(P)H. It has been proven that a few NAD(P)H-dependent OYEs could be directly activated by several xanthene dyes under visible-light illumination, as illustrated in Fig. 4C.94 Different halogenated xanthene dyes were found to be able to inject their photoexcited electrons to FMN for OYE activation. The TOF of these dyes decreased in the order: eosin Y > erythrosine B > phloxine B > rose bengal. These results indicate that the heavier the substitution halogen atom in xanthene molecules, the slower the conversion rate of the corresponding xanthene. The researchers suggested that the non-specific association of the halogenated xanthene dyes to OYE increased in the same order, while the hydrophobic interaction between the dyes and the enzyme that restrained the electron transfer increased with the halogenation of the dyes. Considering the fact that most of the redox enzymes are NAD(P)H-dependent, the direct photoactivation of OYEs by organic dyes may become a foundation for the design of APS's containing more oxidoreductases.
In addition, platform-free APS's can be coupled with other reaction systems for extensive applications. Amao and coworkers combined the APS for CO2 fixation catalyzed by FDH with the H2 evolution system catalyzed by Pt nanoparticles.95 In this system, methyl viologen (MV) regenerated by the photosensitized ZnTPPS was used for the synthesis of formic acid and H2. Then, the oxide ZnTPPS was regenerated by the NADPH regeneration system containing glucose and GDH. Under visible-light irradiation, this system could produce H2 and formic acid simultaneously. Later on, the same group used a chlorophyll derivative, chlorin-e6 of the zinc complex (Zn Chl-e6), as a photocatalyst to drive the regeneration of NADPH and MV for ethanol biosynthesis.96 Remarkably, water photolysis by Zn Chl-e6 was utilized in this research, which provided a novel method for the fabrication of the photocatalysis part in APS's.
Hafenstine et al. reported the first example of upgrading C4 alcohol (BuOH) into the C8 hydrocarbon 2-ethylhexenal (2-EH) by combining a platform-free APS with an organocatalyzed reaction (Fig. 4D).97 This hybrid system was run by photo, organo, and enzymatic catalysis in aqueous solution. Pt@CdS was employed as the hybrid photocatalyst to catalyze NADH oxidation and H2 evolution under visible-light irradiation. Afterward, NADH was regenerated by ADH in the presence of BuOH. The enzymatic oxidation product, butyraldehyde, was then upgraded to 2-EH in the presence of β-alanine. Finally, H2 and 2-EH were simultaneously detected in the reaction solution. Unlike TEOA and EDTA whose oxidation products are not conducive to the purification of the subsequent product, BuOH was employed as the final electron donor in this research, and its oxidation product could be further used for 2-EH generation. Hence, the combination of the platform-free APS's and other reaction systems could not only expand the application field but also address the disadvantages caused by the oxidation product of the electron donor, thus opening up a new avenue for the design of multifunctional APS's. However, a challenge in addressing the recyclability of these platform-free APS's remains.
3.2 Platform-based APS's
The poor reusability and stability of platform-free APS's restrain their availability and extensive applications. Moreover, when not confined, the APS's components are dispersed evenly in the bulk solution. The fact that photoexcited electrons are transferred to the redox center by weak non-covalent interactions, low integration, and random arrangement of the APS's components at the micro/nanoscale in the platform-free systems lead to the hindered transfer of electrons and substrate molecules.
As the blueprint of APS's, the natural photosynthesis system highly integrates its components in nanostructures to realize efficient photoinduced charge separation and electron transfer (Fig. 1). Similarly, confining an APS (especially for the photocatalyst and the biocatalyst) on/in a solid support surface or a nano/micro-environment is an important strategy to improve its performance over platform-free systems. The platforms employed in the confined APS's can be divided into general and functional ones (Fig. 5). The general platforms include whole-cell systems and supporting platforms. The two kinds of platforms are able to enhance the connections among APS's components and confining on/in supporting platforms also enables the recyclability as well as the creation of robustly-bound redox enzymes for APS's. The confining of APS's components can be achieved either physically or via covalent bonding, coordination, electrostatic interaction, hydrogen bonding, van der Waals force, and/or steric hindrance.98 After being bound to/in a confined platform, on the one hand, the photocatalyst and biocatalyst in an APS can exhibit enhanced stability and reusability that allow the confined APS's to tolerate more extreme environmental conditions (e.g., acidic, alkaline, and high temperature). On the other hand, because the local density of the photocatalyst and biocatalyst on/in the solid support increases significantly, and the distance between the photocatalyst and the biocatalyst decreases remarkably. This proximity is highly favorable for improving the catalytic efficiency of the cascade reaction system due to the efficient substrate and electron/proton transferring between the active centers of the two catalysts.99
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the photoexcited electron transfer paths of platform-free APS's (1) and APS's with different reaction platforms (2–7). Reaction platforms of APS's include general platforms and functional platforms. General platforms include whole-cell systems (2) and supporting platforms (3). Functional platforms can be further subdivided into the transmitter (4), collector (5), and motor (6). The APS's based on PEC (7) are also presented. 
Besides, as shown in Fig. 5, various functional platforms have been constructed, which can be subdivided into three types––the transmitter that can enhance photoexcited electrons transfer, the collector that can harvest light and enhance the generation and transfer of photoexcited electrons, and the motor that plays a dominant role in the photon-to-electron process and provides power for biocatalysts directly. They are deeply involved in the artificial photosynthetic reactions for electron transfer, light-harvesting, or synergistic catalysis. In particular, some motor-type platforms can be employed as not only the reaction platform but also the non-enzyme catalyst for photochemical catalysis. Broadly speaking, these motor-type platforms are similar to the inactive part of enzyme protein, while the confined oxidoreductase is considered to be the active part of the whole APS's. In addition, constructing hybrid APS's consisting of photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) and oxidoreductases can also be an ideal strategy for improving the energy conversion efficiency by minimizing back electron transfer. The separated half-redox reactions on the two electrodes allow the directional transfer of photoexcited electrons from the photoelectrode to the enzyme-loaded electrode, thus minimizing the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes.100 Therefore, the introduction of confined platforms in APS's provides a new and distinctive strategy for the optimization of APS's performance. It is an inherent feature that distinguishes platform-based APS's from the common catalyst immobilization. The following sections focus on APS's fabricated in/on different platforms and their realities.

3.2.1 APS's in whole-cell systems. 
Except for the sensitivity to external stimulus (e.g., temperature, pH, ionic strength, and heavy metal ions), there are two other major bottlenecks when constructing APS's in the bulk solution. Firstly, the purification process of the biocatalyst is expensive and time-consuming. Secondly, the low stability and poor self-repair capability of the biocatalyst inhibit its effectiveness. To circumvent such defects, biocatalytic diversities have been explored.101,102 A feasible strategy combining the light-harvesting ability of the photocatalyst with the biocatalytic ability of the whole-cell catalyst has been established (Fig. 6). Without the need for a purification process, the whole-cell system can realize the self-replication and self-repair of the biocatalyst.103
 Fig. 6  (A) The fabrication and reaction schematics of self-photosensitization of nonphotosynthetic bacteria for solar-to-chemical production. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2016, AAAS. (B) Light-driven CO2 reduction to methane by M. barkeri-CdS: the reaction schematics (B1) and time curves of the increasing rate of mcrA copies (B2) by M. barkeri-CdS and the deletional control. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (C) Cofactor-free light-driven whole-cell cytochrome P450 catalysis in E. coli. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (D) Recombinant cyanobacteria for asymmetric reduction fueled by the biocatalytic oxidation of water, EWG = electron-withdrawing group. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Yang and coworkers designed an inorganic-biological hybrid APS consisting of CdS nanoparticles and nonphotosynthetic CO2-reducing bacterium Moorella thermoacetica fabricated via a one-pot process.104 As shown in Fig. 6A, the precipitation of CdS nanoparticles on the surface of M. thermoacetica was triggered by the addition of Cd2+ and cysteine. Under illumination, photoexcited electrons were transferred from CdS to M. thermoacetica and consumed in the conversion of CO2 to acetic acid. Meanwhile, the photogenerated holes left in CdS were quenched by cysteine to recover the photocatalyst and protect the bacterium. This hybrid APS was able to transform CO2 to acetic acid with a peak quantum efficiency (QE) of 2.44%, which was of the same order of magnitude as the established annual average for plants and algae (0.2–1.6%).105 Moreover, continuous acetic acid production in the dark periods during simulated day-night cycles indicated the robustness of this hybrid APS. Similarly, another hybrid APS (Fig. 6B1) consisting of CdS and another nonphotosynthetic bacterium, CO2-reducing bacterium Methanosarcina barkeri, was constructed for CH4 production.106 Under light illumination, CH4 was accumulated in the presence of the biohybrid APS after days of irradiation. The methyl coenzyme M reductase gene copies (encoded by mcrA) increased by 151.4% during the reaction (Fig. 6B2), illustrating the robustness of this type of hybrid APS nanomachine.
Besides the endogenous biocatalysts, exogenous redox enzymes can also be introduced into appropriate bacteria to expand APS's application. Cytochrome P450 enzymes catalyze several oxidation reactions of non-functionalized hydrocarbons with high regio and stereospecificity. Similar to OYE, cytochrome P450 enzymes can be activated by the direct injection of electrons from the photocatalyst.25 Park et al. mixed the cell producing endogenous P450s with free eosin Y to photoactivate P450 enzymes in vivo for biocatalysis (Fig. 6C).107 Using CO-binding analysis, they confirmed the activation of the P450 heme domain by the photosensitized eosin Y. Under light illumination, the resultant E. coli cells containing different P450 heme domains could efficiently catalyze the O-dealkylation of 7-ethoxycoumarin. To further expand the applications of the whole-cell APS's, Rowe and coworkers exploited a cell-based APS supporting different biocatalytic systems (i.e., H2 evolution or the hydrogenation of CC and CO bonds) in a nonphotosynthetic microorganism Shewanella oneidensis MR-1.108 Under illumination, MV transferred the photoexcited electrons from eosin Y to oxidoreductases in the cells to drive the reduction of pyruvate, CO2, fumarate, or proton. This approach provides a versatile strategy for accessing diverse and selective APS's without costly enzyme purification procedures. Thus, the introduction of various exogenous oxidoreductases demonstrates the potential of the whole-cell APS's in diverse and selective visible light-driven chemical synthesis. Recently, they fabricated a whole-cell APS containing human cytochrome P450 (CYP) using natural flavins as a photosensitizer to activate the biocatalyst directly.109 However, H2O2 and superoxide were derived unavoidably by the reduced FMN that could inhibit the CYP activity. CYP destruction might be overcome by introducing exogenetic catalase, which, however, would compromise the practicability of this APS.
In the above whole-cell APS's, the photosensitization of exogenetic photocatalysts unavoidably induces side reactions that could diminish the activity of the endogenous biocatalysts. To address this problem, Katharina et al. developed an APS based on the endogenous photocatalyst in the engineered cyanobacteria.110 In this APS, the combination of the natural photosynthesis system and exogenetic oxidoreductase allowed asymmetric synthesis using water as the electron donor (Fig. 6D). By expression in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, exogenetic YqjM could catalyze the conversion of different substrates through the endogenous NADP+/NADPH cycle without any disturbance from other cell components. This APS cell was able to work without the external sacrificial electron donors or cofactors. Under optimized conditions, 80% prochiral 2-methylmaleimide was reduced to 2-methylsuccinimide with 99% enantiomeric excess (ee), which was comparable to the typical whole-cell conversion in E. coli. Thus, this strategy offered the possibility of realizing cofactor regeneration with the combination of water and light, which may be extended to all the NAD(P)H-dependent oxidoreductases to promote the development of the whole cell-based APS's.


3.2.2 APS's based on supporting platforms. 
The APS's based on the whole-cell system can efficiently address the shortcomings of costly purification processes and poor self-repair capability of free biocatalysts. However, the whole cell APS's still exhibits poor reusability and resistance against extreme conditions. The immobilization of the two different catalysts of APS's on/in supporting platforms provides an excellent strategy to address these issues. The materials used as supporting platforms are expected to have high mechanical strength, low price, good chemical/thermal stability, and easy separation from the reaction systems. Moreover, their shape, size, pore structure, and surface physicochemical properties should be tunable as required.111,112 For example, silica oxide (SiO2) is usually utilized as the scaffold material to directly control the loading and integration of APS's components.113,114 When constructing an APS based on a supporting platform, a typical approach is to integrate the photocatalyst and biocatalyst on the solid surface by covalent, semi-covalent, or non-covalent bonding.
By utilizing SiO2 as the platform, Lee et al. fabricated an APS-containing immobilized CdS QD and GDH on monodispersed mesoporous SiO2 nanoparticles.115 In this APS, CdS QD was employed as the photocatalyst because of its narrow bandgap116 and ability to reduce NAD+ in the presence of M and visible light (Fig. 7A). During the light reaction, CdS QD grown on SiO2 nanoparticles worked efficiently without an obvious loss of the photocatalytic activity with repeated use. Thus, the SiO2-based platform was demonstrated to be a continuous and efficient matrix for sustainable cofactor regeneration and photoenzymatic synthesis.
 Fig. 7  (A) Fabrication of CdS-coated SiO2 and photoenzymatic synthesis of L-glutamate via light-driven NADH regeneration. (B) Hybrid nanoparticles mimicking chloroplast with enhanced electron transfer for APS: fabrication of the chloroplast-mimicking APS (B1) and schematic diagram showing electron transfer routes of this APS (B2). Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (C) Schematic illustration of the APS encapsulated in alginate capsules for photobiocatalysis. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
To achieve higher integration in an APS with NAD(P)H regeneration system, a reasonable strategy is the co-immobilization of electron medium M and photocatalyst. Ji et al. prepared porphyrin/SiO2/Cp*Rh(bpy)Cl (H2TPPC/SiO2/Rh) nanoparticles to mimic the natural chloroplast.117 In this hybrid nanoparticle, photocatalyst (H2TPPC) and M were bound with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane, respectively, to establish intramolecular and intermolecular electron transfer chains (Fig. 7B1). Then, FDH and NADH were assembled on the nanoparticle surface for CO2 bioconversion. After 3 h light irradiation, this highly integrated APS exhibited better performance over the free system such that the reduction yield of NADH increased from 11% to 75%, while the production of formic acid increased from 15 to 100 μmol. These enhancements were attributed to the enhanced integration of the APS's components, which made APS exhibit improved electron transfer from H2TPPC to M (Fig. 7B2) by the intramolecular electron transfer pathway (P2) and intermolecular electron transfer pathway (P3) rather than the solution-mediated random electron transfer pathway (P1) in the free system. The intramolecular and intermolecular electron transfer pathways accelerate electron transfer from TCPP to M in this APS with high integration due to the shorter distance than that of the free system. It was ascertained that the coassembly of M and photocatalyst in the APS's containing NAD(P)H regeneration system was capable of improving the APS's performance, which could provide a vital strategy for designing intermolecular electron transfer pathways in the APS's to drive the NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H redox cycle.
Compared to the traditional mesoporous SiO2 nanoparticle, macroporous ordered silica foam (MOSF) shows better perfor mance in enzyme immobilization since enzyme and substrate molecules exhibit more freedom in the macroporous structure.118 Lu et al. constructed an MOSF-based APS by integrating 2,9,16,23-tetraaminophthalocyanine cobalt (CoTAPc), reduced graphene oxide (RGO), and cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) on MOSF.119 Under visible light, CoTAPc/RGO mediated direct electron transfer to the heme domain of CYP450 to drive the bioconversion of 7-ethoxytrifluoromethyl coumarin (7-EFC). CYP3A4/CoTAPc/RGO confined in MOSF exhibited higher conversion rate of 7-EFC than CYP3A4/CoTAPc/RGO immobilized on mesoporous SiO2 nanoparticles and those systems in which various catalytic components were mixed physically. It indicates that the integration degree of APS's components, as well as the large specific surface area of the supporting platform are critical for the performance of CYP3A4/CoTAPc/RGO. Moreover, this integrated APS maintained 85% of the initial activity after 10 cycles. Thus, MOSF was proven as a good host for APS's components due to its good biocompatibility and large specific surface area for maintaining the stability and catalytic activity of the biocatalyst.
Some organic materials including natural polymers (such as chitosan, sodium alginate, cellulose, and agarose) are used as the matrix for catalyst immobilization.120 Generally, these organic carriers exhibit hydrophilicity, biodegradability, low cost, and better compatibility with biocatalysts than SiO2. They can achieve the confinement of APS's components without any modification through a variety of non-covalent interactions (e.g., hydrogen bonding and π–π stacking). Due to the low cost, good biocompatibility, and simple gelation process, alginate is widely used in the encapsulation of biological substances.121 Based on the research that demonstrated the direct photoactivation of OYEs by rose bengal,94 Yoon et al. embedded rose bengal and OYE in alginate gel for light-driven asymmetric hydrogenation (Fig. 7C).122 In the absence of NADH, OYE could be activated by the direct injection of photoexcited electrons from rose bengal. The spontaneous rose bengal-OYE association in the alginate hydrogel matrix enabled both rose bengal and OYE to be effectively and stably embedded in the hydrogel. Under illumination, the hybrid alginate hydrogel matrix catalyzed the asymmetric reduction of 2-methylcyclohexenone to the enantiomer (R)-2-methylcyclohexanone with good recyclability, thermal stability, and tolerance to organic reagents. The researchers considered that the good recyclability and resistance of this hybrid APS were attributed to the hydrophilic and dense gel network of the alginate material. Thus, the encapsulation of APS's components in the gel network provided a green and useful approach for the fabrication of APS's.
As a promising natural biomaterial, cellulose possesses several advantages, such as low cost, wide availability, abundant binding sites, amphiphilicity, and chemical inertness at physiological conditions.123 Shah et al. employed 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO)-oxidized cellulose nanofiber film (TOCNF) modified by amine-terminated fourth-generation poly(amido amine) dendrimer as the platform of an APS for CO2 capture and conversion.124 To fabricate this APS, H2TPPC, NADPH, and enzymes were loaded onto the modified TOCNF. When exposed to CO2 gas, the hybrid TOCNF adsorbed more CO2 than TOCNF mixed with free APS's components. The improvement was attributed to the preferable capture of CO2 molecules on the dendrimers by the formation of carbamate species and the light-driven bioconversion of CO2. Hence, the accumulation of CO2 on the APS based on the dendrimer-modified cellulose nanofiber provided a novel approach to efficient CO2 conversion.


3.2.3 APS's based on electroconductive platforms: function of transmitter. 
The electroconductive platform can not only act as a supporting matrix but also regulate the APS's performance by intervening in the transfer of photoexcited electrons. Such a platform is called transmitter in this review. A typical transmitter is a polyelectrolyte. By codissolving APS's components in the charged polymer solution with the opposite charge, the in situ encapsulation of APS's components can not only prevent their leakages but also favor electron transfer. Moreover, the layer-by-layer self-assembly of the charged polymers with different charges driven by electrostatic interactions allows the controllable and spatial arrangement of APS's components. Zhang and coworkers employed polyelectrolyte-doped hollow nanofibers and microcapsules as the scaffold for APS fabrication.125 In this APS, the photocatalysis part (eosin Y and M) and biocatalysis part (NADH, ADH, FDH, and ALDH) were in situ encapsulated in the lumen of polyelectrolyte-doped hollow nanofibers and microcapsules by combining co-axial electrospinning/electrospray and layer-by-layer self-assembly (Fig. 8A). The spatial arrangement of the photocatalysis and biocatalysis parts was achieved for the efficient trafficking of photoexcited electrons into the redox center, thus resulting in high methanol production yield in both hollow nanofiber- and microcapsule-based APS's. The APS based on hollow nanofibers exhibited a methanol production yield of 90.6% under visible light illumination, much higher than that of the platform-free system (35.6%). It was considered that the enhancement was attributed to the spatial integration of the photocatalysis and biocatalysis parts on the electroconductive polyelectrolyte-doped hollow nanofibers. Moreover, the integrated system exhibited good repetitive use and thermal stability. The self-assembly of polyelectrolyte polymers in this APS provided a useful strategy for the controllable integration of the photocatalysis and biocatalysis system. However, electrons are inevitably lost in the polyelectrolyte platform during migration,126 which is a challenge to address in the future development of the technology.
 Fig. 8  (A) Illustration of the preparation of polyelectrolyte-doped hollow nanofibers and integration of the APS for CO2 conversion. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (B) Cartoon representation of APS's containing different enzymes and photocatalysts on TiO2. (C) Hierarchical chloroplast mimics fabricated by encapsulating porphyrin and enzyme molecules into the Zn2+-directed assembly of cystine for photoenzymatic reactions. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
To improve the efficiency of electron transfer, carbon-based materials (e.g., graphene, GO (graphene oxide), and carbon nanotube (CNT)) that exhibit high conductivity have been employed as the conductor in the heterogeneous photoreaction.127 Among them, graphene shows high charge carrier mobility due to its abundance of delocalized electrons in the carbon network.128 Moreover, good stability, large specific surface area, and low mass transfer resistance make graphene highly efficient for photoinduced charge separation and electron transfer. Baeg and coworkers built an APS based on chemically-modified graphene.129 The multi-anthraquinone-substituted porphyrin (MAQSP) was covalently immobilized on the modified graphene, and the obtained product was employed as the photocatalyst for NADH photoregeneration and CO2 fixation catalyzed by FDH. Under visible light illumination, the NADH production yield and amount of formic acid generated in this APS were 1.91 times and 2.38 times higher than those of the free MAQSP system, respectively. The researchers suggested that graphene contributed to the efficient photoinduced charge separation and electron transfer of the integrated system. Afterward, they successfully applied the graphene-based system to the fabrications of different APS's for the asymmetric synthesis of chiral alcohols130 and multienzymatic fixation of CO2.131
GO is a graphene derivative functionalized by hydroxyl, epoxide, and carboxylic acid groups. These oxygen-containing functional groups allow GO assembly with APS's components through electrostatic interactions, van der Waals force, and π–π stacking.132 Ji et al. employed GO as the host for integrating and arranging the photocatalysis part on the hybrid hollow nanofiber for CO2 fixation.133 The biocatalysis part (NADH, ADH, FDH, and ALDH) was in situ encapsulated in the hollow lumen of G-fiber by pre-dissolving them in the core-phase solution. Then, the photocatalysis part (eosin Y and M) was assembled onto the surface of GO by π–π stacking interaction and electrostatic attraction. This integrated system exhibited higher methanol production yield than the immobilized biocatalysis with free photocatalysis as well as the free biocatalysis part with the immobilized photocatalysis part. Moreover, the methanol yield of this integrated APS was about 10 times higher than that of the solution-based system. The improvement that the GO-doped platform exhibits on the APS performance was also greater than that of the polyelectrolyte-doped platform in the above study,125 indicating that the GO-doped platform holds great promise for designing an integrated APS containing NAD(P)H regeneration system due to its more efficient electron transfer, as revealed by the significantly increased photocurrent. Therefore, GO has been proved an ideal support carrier for APS's fabrication, especially the integration of the photocatalysis system in the APS's containing NAD(P)H regeneration system. However, it remains a challenge to develop a low-cost GO-based platform for APS's, considering the high costs of graphene and GO at present.134,135
Besides GO, other semiconductors such as TiO2, ZnO, and Fe2O3 can also act as the transmitter for APS's construction. They are popular in photocatalysis due to their low cost and high chemical stability.136 As the first reported photocatalyst semiconductor, TiO2 has become a promising photocatalyst in the fields of photocatalysis, photovoltaic cell, and environmental protection.137 However, a drawback of TiO2 is its wide bandgap (3.2 eV), implying that it only absorbs ultraviolet (UV) light. A common method to broaden the absorption spectrum of TiO2 is sensitization by the photocatalyst with a narrow bandgap. Photosensitization facilitates the injection of photoexcited electrons from the photosensitizer into TiO2 to achieve effective charge separation and inhibit the recombination of electrons and holes in the photosensitizer under visible-light illumination.138 This strategy is usually applied to the fabrication of APS's based on TiO2.139,140 In these systems, TiO2 is employed not only as a supporting matrix but also as a typical transmitter for the transfer of photoexcited electrons.
Armstrong and coworkers have focused on the photosensitization of TiO2 with QDs, organic dyes, and precious metals as photocatalysts to prepare APS's with various catalytic functions, as presented in Fig. 8B. A Ru-bipyridine complex [RuII(bipy)2(4,4′-(PO3H2)2-bipy)]Br2 (RuP; bipy = 2,2′-bipyridyl ruthenium) was chosen to sensitize TiO2 by adsorbing RuP and [NiFeSe]–H2ase onto TiO2.141 The resulting RuP–TiO2–H2ase composite could catalyze H2 evolution under visible-light illumination. After 8 h illumination, the TON of the hybrid composite was 190 times higher than that of the catalysis system without TiO2. Thus, the RuP–TiO2–H2ase system offered exciting opportunities to achieve challenging H2-evolution under mild and ecologically benign conditions. Afterward, the same group compared the performances of three Ru–bipyridine complexes and two platinum–bipyridine complexes in the photosensitizer–TiO2–H2ase system.142 Under optimal conditions, RuP–TiO2–H2ase had the highest TOF due to its widest light absorption range and the strongest binding strength of RuP with TiO2. Later, they realized CO2 reduction under mild conditions using CODH in the RuP–TiO2–oxidoreductase system.143 The same group utilized silver nanoclusters stabilized by polymethacrylic acid to replace RuP in the RuP–TiO2–CODH system for CO2 reduction.144 After 6 h visible-light irradiation, the turnover number (TON) of each CODH reached at least 2.5 × 105. The researchers concluded that the high efficiency was due to the coordination of silver nanoclusters with the cysteine sulfhydryl residues on the enzyme surface, which thereby enhanced the integration of the photocatalyst and biocatalyst in this APS.
Jiang et al. prepared a semiconductor composite, CeO2–TiO2, for P450 immobilization.145 The obtained APS nanoconjugate exhibited the high activity of Cr(VI) reduction under light irradiation, which was higher than the pristine P450 and the free system. Considering that P450 cannot reduce Cr(VI) under irradiation, this was the first study that demonstrated the activation of oxidoreductase by the oxidated active species, which were generated by the semiconductor heterojunction under light irradiation. However, this nanocomposite showed poor repeatability, most possibly due to the inactivation of P450 by the oxidated active species, although they could initially activate the resting enzyme.
Besides the above photocatalysts, polydopamine (PDA) could be employed to extend the light absorption of TiO2 from the UV to the visible region by coating the latter.146 Based on this phenomenon, Lin et al. developed an ADH@TiO2 microreactor based on the PDA-sensitized TiO2 for the photoregeneration of NAD+ and biooxidation of alcohol.147 In this APS, the PDA-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticles were used as building blocks to assemble the APS microcapsule membrane. The simultaneous encapsulation of ADH was achieved during the preparation of microcapsules by the Pickering emulsion method. The microreactor activity remained almost unchanged after 13 repeated uses. The excellent reusability demonstrated PDA as a nice “glue” to tightly combine APS's components on the support matrix.
Another photosensitive organic polymer, carbon nitride, has emerged as a metal-free photocatalyst for various photoreaction systems under visible light.90 Caputo et al. prepared an APS based on the CNx–TiO2–H2ase hybrid system by loading carbon nitride and [NiFeSe]–H2ase onto TiO2.148 The as-synthesized carbon nitride–TiO2–H2ase system was able to catalyze H2 synthesis under visible-light irradiation with a TON of 5.8 × 105, which was 22 times higher than that of the CNx–H2ase system. It proved that using TiO2 as the electroconductive platform can effectively improve the electron transfer efficiency in APS's.
However, in most of the aforementioned APS's studies, the random co-confinement of the photocatalyst and the biocatalyst may cause poor compatibility because the photogenerated holes in the photocatalyst could inevitably deactivate the biocatalyst under light illumination. To improve the catalysts’ compatibility and APS's availability, core@shell heterostructured photocatalysts have been introduced to realize the compartmentalization of the two different catalysts in APS's.149–151 Yang et al. fabricated an APS based on the core@shell structured photocatalyst.149 g-C3N4 acted as the core material for photon harvesting and photoinduced electron–hole separation, while amorphous TiO2 was employed as the nanoshell to facilitate electron transfer and to protect the enzyme from the damage caused by photogenerated holes. The redox enzyme, ADH, in this APS retained over 67% of the initial activity when it was isolated from g-C3N4 by the TiO2 shell, while the enzyme was almost completely inactivated after 1 h incubation with g-C3N4. It demonstrates that the core@shell structure can effectively isolate the photogenerated holes and enzyme, thus significantly improving the compatibility of the two catalysts.
Using polystyrenesulfonate-doped CaCO3 microspheres as the hard template, the same group prepared another core@shell structure by decorating the inner wall of the protamine-titania (PTi) microcapsule with CdS QDs (marked as CdS/Pti) for NADH photoregeneration in an APS.150 Under optimal conditions, this hybrid photocatalyst exhibited higher NADH reduction rate than that of CdS-decorated protamine-silica microcapsules (marked as Pti/CdS). It revealed a rapid electron transfer caused by the strong electronic coupling between CdS and Pti. When the NADH regeneration system was coupled with the CO2 reduction system containing FDH, the hybrid system exhibited 6.65 times and 5.61 times formate yields over those of the CdS-FDH and Pti/CdS microcapsule-FDH coupled systems, respectively. Only about 10% of the initial enzymatic activity was retained for FDH incubated with Pti/CdS microcapsules, while after the compartmentalization of CdS and FDH with the PTi wall, 55.6% of the initial FDH activity was retained, thus proving the protection of PTi on the enzyme protein. The researchers revealed that this remarkable increase in the formate yield in the CdS/PTi microcapsule-FDH coupled system was due to the enhanced NADH regeneration activity and the biocompatibility of the hybrid photocatalyst in comparison with CdS nanoparticles and PTi/CdS microcapsules. Thus, the introduction of the core@shell structure in APS's fabrication was proven as an effective strategy to integrate the photocatalyst and biocatalyst due to the good biocompatibility and efficient charge separation.
Besides, the core@shell heterostructured photocatalyst is capable of designing an APS without NAD(P)H regeneration system. Awad et al. immobilized P450 BM3 on Pt/TiO2–Cu hollow nanoparticles for the degradation of organic pollutants by the compartmentalization and synergetic effect of the two catalysts.151 P450 BM3 was immobilized on hollow nanoparticles by metal–chelate affinity binding. Under light illumination, isopropanol was photodegraded into CO2 and H2O by the holes in Pt/TiO2–Cu nanoparticles, while the photoexcited electrons were transferred to P450 BM3 for the biodegradation of isopropanol to CO2 and H2O. The degradation rate of the integrated catalyst was 1.67 times and 5 times higher than the Pt/TiO2–Cu system and free enzyme, respectively. Moreover, the enzyme's substrate, isopropanol, also worked for the photocatalyst recovery in this APS, thus avoiding the addition of extra electron donors. Hence, this APS provided a novel approach for combining photocatalysts and biocatalysts for pollution remediation.
Organic–inorganic hybrid materials combine the advantages of inorganic and organic carriers and exhibit more potential applications. They exhibit excellent performances in catalyst immobilization.152,153 Inspired by the pathological biomineralization of cystine, Liu et al. constructed a self-assembled zinc/cystine-based APS for H2 evolution by the integration of TPPS, ADH, and Pt nanoparticles, as depicted in Fig. 8C.154 Notably, the as-synthesized hybrid crystals exhibited a hierarchical and porous structure with stacks of nanorods, which showed a similar architectural principle to the natural chloroplast. Under light illumination, the photoexcited electrons from TPPS were transferred to Pt nanoparticles for H+ reduction. Free NADH acted as an electron donor for TPPS recovery and was regenerated by ADH in the biooxidation of ethanol. Under light illumination, the H2 evolution rate was 3.5 times higher than that of the free system. The researchers considered that the improved efficiency of H2 evolution might be attributed to the efficient coupling of photocatalysis and biocatalysis in the hierarchical and porous platform. It is noteworthy that this highly integrated APS's realized ethanol dehydrogenation into aldehyde and H2, which is thermodynamically uphill.155 Therefore, this APS provided a promising example for the conversion of solar energy into renewable fuels.


3.2.4 APS's based on light-harvesting platforms: function of collector. 
As mentioned above, protein–pigment complexes for photoinduced charge separation and electron transfer are highly integrated on the thylakoid membrane. Beyond photosensitizer in natural photosynthesis systems, protein–pigment complexes represent an ideal model for their artificial light-harvesting nanostructure, which helps to improve the understanding of photon-to-electron conversion.156 Taking chlorophyll as an example, its stacking disorder in the assembly often restricts the excitation coherence to small domains, thus resulting in ineffective electron transmission.157 Hence, the prerequisite for a delocalized excited state across the full length of the chlorophyll aggregate represents a major challenge for solar energy capture and conversion.58 Green plants address this challenge by assembling pigments and proteins into highly integrated photosystems, as presented in Fig. 1. These ordered structures are capable of the close coupling of charge separation and electron transfer in photosynthesis by highly organized stacking and cooperation among different units.158 It results in a highly efficient energy-transfer process that involves long-range excitation coherence.159 The photosynthesis system in green plants based on assembled protein–pigment complexes shows a high QE for light capture and conversion.160 Thus, the self-assembly of pigments and proteins provides a facile way to organize large numbers of molecules into supramolecular structures for the generation and migration of photoexcited electrons in APS's.
Biologically inspired organic materials, especially short peptide self-assemblies, show great potential as framework materials due to their inherent advantages of easy preparation and modification, natural biocompatibility, and morphological diversity.160,161 Moreover, they are conducive for controlling the optical properties and current density of adjacent photoelectric units.162,163 Therefore, to further imitate the natural photosynthetic system, some organic self-assembled peptides and proteins have been employed as building blocks of the collector-type APS's platforms, as shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  (A) Illustration of the suppression of free rotation of solvatochromic CR dyes in amyloid-derived hydrogel for light-driven biocatalytic oxidation. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (B) Multiporous supramolecular microspheres for APS fabrication: schematic routine of artificial photosynthesis procedure (B1), photocurrent responses of microspheres, MCpP crystals, FF crystals, and nanovesicles (formed in aqueous solution) (B2), and TOF of NADH in the MCpP-FF/Pt, MCpP/Pt, and FF/Pt systems (B3). Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic illustration of APS based on the ThT-amyloid hybrid nanostructure for biocatalytic photosynthesis. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Amyloid self-assembly is a powerful bottom-up approach to synthesize sophisticated organic nanostructures that possess fascinating structural flexibility. Among the various peptide-based building blocks, diphenylalanine (FF) has been often used as the self-assembled block for synthesizing light-responsive nanostructures because of its simple structure, high biocompatibility, and favorable optical, electrical, and thermal properties.160 Kim et al. fabricated a light-harvesting peptide nanotube by the self-assembly of FF and tetra(phydroxyphenyl) porphyrin (THPP) for APS fabrication.164 Pt nanoparticles were incorporated on the as-synthesized nanotubes for efficient charge separation and electron transfer from THPP to M. The hybrid nanotube was able to reduce NAD+ under visible light. After being coupled to the biocatalysis system containing GDH, the FF/THPP/Pt system exhibited high L-glutamate production yield, which was 48.3 and 2.7 times higher than those of the THPP monomer and the FF/THPP nanotube, respectively. Similarly, Ko et al. employed Fmoc-FF and g-C3N4 to synthesize a hybrid hydrogel as an APS platform through noncovalent interactions between Fmoc-FF nanofibers and g-C3N4 nanosheets.165 Under illumination, the photocurrent density of the hybrid hydrogel was 1.8 times higher than that of pure g-C3N4. When encapsulating M and GDH inside, the obtained hydrogel could catalyze α-ketoglutarate conversion to L-glutamate with twice greater conversion yield than that of the dispersed g-C3N4. Afterward, the same group utilized solvatochromic Congo red (CR) as the substitute of g-C3N4 to prepare another hydrogel, Fmoc-FF/CR hydrogel, for the direct visible light-driven regeneration of NAD+ (Fig. 9A).166 CR was hybridized in the Fmoc-FF nanofiber network through π–π interaction, which made its fluorescence intensity 10 times higher than that of free CR, resulting in a photogenerated photocurrent of 400 nA cm−2. Under light illumination, the regenerated NAD+ was reduced via alcohol biooxidation catalyzed by ADH. The coupled system exhibited a TTN of the enzyme 5.8 times higher than that of the platform-free system. These performance increases were mainly due to the enhanced capture of light energy and the transfer of photoexcited electrons by the light-harvesting platform containing FF or its derivatives. Thus, the use of amyloid assemblies of FF and its derivatives presents an efficient approach for APS's capable of harvesting and converting light energy into valuable chemicals.
Another short peptide, tyrosyl bolaamphiphiles (Tyr-C7), was proved to be able to absorb photons and transfer them to neighboring photocatalyst molecules, resulting in an enhanced photoluminescence emission in its hybrid assembly with a specific photocatalyst.167 This antenna effect makes the Tyr-C7 assembly a promising collector-type matrix for APS's construction. Kwak et al. prepared an APS based on the sophisticated organic nanostructure containing Tyr-C7.168 In this APS, the photocatalyst, Zn(II) deuteroporphyrin IX 2,4 bis-ethylene glycol (ZnDPEG), was bound to the Tyr-C7 assembly to mimic the natural light-harvesting antenna. Under illumination, the assembly of Tyr-C7 and ZnDPEG promoted the transfer of photoexcited electrons to NAD+ in the presence of an electron mediator, Ru(trpy)Cl3. The TOF of ZnDPEG–Tyr-C7–Ru(trpy)Cl3 assembly was higher than those of ZnDPEG, ZnDPEG–Ru(trpy)Cl3, and ZnDPEG–Tyr-C7 self-assembly, leading to increased ethanol production when photocatalysis and biocatalysis were combined. It demonstrated that Tyr-C7 was a feasible peptide-based building block of biomimetic systems for solar energy harvesting and conversion.
Despite the aforementioned remarkable advantages of peptide-based building blocks, the introduction of an external template to load photosensitive dye molecules may lead to the nonhomogeneous distribution of the dye molecules, which would compromise their efficiency of photoelectric conversion. To overcome this drawback, Tao et al. designed a bioinspired building block by the covalent integration of FF dipeptide and 5-mono(4-carboxyphenyl)-10,15,20-triphenyl porphine (MCpP) for APS fabrication (Fig. 9B1).169 The obtained microspheres showed better attenuated fluorescence decay and broader absorption spectrum than free MCpP, leading to enhanced photoelectron conversion and efficient electron transfer performance (Fig. 9B2). After the modification with Pt nanoparticles, the NAD+ reduction yield of the hybrid microspheres was much higher than those of MCpP/Pt and FF/Pt, as shown in Fig. 9B3. This improvement of the APS based on the photosensitizer-doped peptide nanotube is greater than that of the APS based on the photosensitizer-modified peptide nanotube in the above study.164 It indicates that the photosensitizer-conjugated peptide holds great promise for designing integrated APS's considering its high efficiency in light-harvesting and electron transfer. However, the sustainability of the whole reaction system is a significant concern in the bioconversion of α-ketoglutarate, which was mainly attributed to the limited stability of the hybrid microsphere in aqueous solution.
Besides short peptides, Son et al. employed an amyloidogenic protein, insulin, to synthesize self-assembled amyloid nanofibrils as an APS platform (Fig. 9C).170 Amyloid nanofibrils were physically modified with thioflavin T (ThT), which significantly enhanced the photoactivity of ThT. This enhancement is mainly attributed to the inhibition of nonradiative conformational relaxation around the central C–C bonds of ThT molecules and the closer distance between them when they are bound to the β-sheet-rich amyloid structures171 rather than the aforementioned antenna effect. In the presence of M and light illumination, ThT–insulin nanofibrils were able to regenerate NADH and drive α-ketoglutarate bioconversion. After 3 h visible-light illumination, the TOF of ThT–GDH–insulin nanofibrils was 9.39 times higher than that of the platform-free system. The researchers considered that the increased photoactivity of ThT molecules bound on the insulin nanofibril enabled efficient NADH regeneration under visible-light irradiation, thus resulting in the improved performance of the integrated ThT–GDH–insulin nanofibrils. It should be noted that this APS, for the first time, demonstrated that ThT was capable of biocatalytic solar-to-chemical conversion utilizing an amyloid-based scaffold. Thus, it provides a promising choice of a light-harvesting platform for the design of APS's.
In addition, Lee et al. reported that lignin could also play the same role as that of amyloidogenic peptide for light-harvesting in APS's fabrication.172 A light-harvesting synthetic wood (LSW) was made of cellulose, xylan, lignin, and porphyrin. Among the used porphyrins, 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(3-hydroxyphenyl)-21H,23H-porphine (mTHPP) was chosen because of its highest reduction yield of NADH. GDH was employed to consume the regenerated NADH for α-ketoglutarate conversion. The α-ketoglutarate conversion yield increased with increasing lignin ratio. This result illustrated that lignin could not only act as a carrier material for APS's components but also enhance the light-harvesting performance and photoexcited electrons transfer of LSW. This work reveals that renewable natural biopolymers are facile materials for the fabrication of light-harvesting matrices under mild conditions, thus opening up a new avenue in the design of the light-harvesting APS's platforms.


3.2.5 APS's based on platforms for synergistic catalysis: function of motor. 
In most of the aforementioned studies, the photocatalyst and its platform are independent of each other. This photocatalyst-independency has two negative effects on APS's performance. (1) The transfer of photoexcited electrons and substrates to the active sites may be hindered by the nanostructure of the matrix. (2) Partial electrons may be consumed during the transfer or by recombination with photogenerated holes. Therefore, there is still great space for improving the electron transfer and catalytic efficiency by developing higher integration strategies, for instance, employing a highly functionalized photocatalyst that also works as the dominant platform. This highly functionalized photocatalyst is called motor because of the continuous and direct power supply for the biocatalyst under light illumination, as shown in Fig. 10 and 11.
 Fig. 10  (A) Schematic representation of APS based on NU-1006 and the illustration of the primary catalytic cycle. Reproduced with permission.176 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (B) Carbon dots as the photosensitizers for light-driven catalysis with FccA and H2ase. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 11  (A) Light-initiated hydroxylation of lauric acid using hybrid P450 BM3 enzymes. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2011, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) A series of hybrid P450 BM3 enzymes: cartoon representation of the mutated residues Q109C, K97C, Q397C, and L407C (red) in the series of hybrid enzymes adapted from the K97C-1 crystal structure. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (C) Schematic diagram of semi-biological supramolecular system with the coenzyme locked in the ADH catalytic pocket and joined in situ artificial photobiocatalysis. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (D) A genetically encoded photosensitizer protein facilitates the rational design of a miniature photocatalytic CO2-reducing enzyme: schematic diagram of the proposed catalytic mechanism of the hybrid enzyme based on a genetically-encoded photosensitizer protein (D1) and TON for CO formation, catalyzed by various PSP2 single-cysteine mutants (D2). Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 
Employing tantalum sulfide (TaS2) nanosheets as both the photocatalyst and platform, Ji et al. prepared a complex APS containing NAD(P)H-regeneration system by modifying TaS2 nanosheets with lipoic acid-modified polyethylene glycol (PEG), graphene, M, and FDH for CO2 reduction.173 Under light illumination, the NAD+ reduction yield of the photocatalysis part was much higher than the nanoplatelet TaS2, PEG-modified nanoplatelet TaS2, and graphene and PEG co-loaded nanoplatelet layers of TaS2. The regenerated NADH in the integrated system was consumed in CO2 bioconversion to formic acid, and the yield of formic acid was 2.5-fold higher than that of the physically mixed system. It reveals that the high integration of APS's components on the TaS2 nanosheet increased the utilization rate of photoexcited electrons. Recently, they fabricated a similar APS based on black phosphorus (BP) and antimonene (AM) nanosheet for CO2 fixation.174 An “amphiphilic” polymer PEI–PEG-C18 with a positively charged polyethylene imine (PEI) head and a hydrophobic C18 tail was first synthesized, following the grafting of M onto the polymer. Using this PEI–PEG-C18-M polymer as a “double-side tap”, AM and BP were combined via hydrophobic interaction and electrostatic interaction, respectively, to form a Z-scheme photocatalytic system. Finally, NAD(H) and FDH were attracted to the polymers between the AM and BP layers. Under light illumination, the photoexcited electrons generated in BP were transmitted to M through AM, thus allowing NAD+ reduction. Then, FDH fixed CO2 with the participation of NADH. The hybrid APS exhibited higher yields of NADH and formic acid than those of the physically mixed system. Moreover, this AM/M/BP-based Z-scheme APS could catalyze NADH regeneration using H2O as the electron donor, while neither AM nor BP could realize this. It proves that the high integration of the photocatalysis part allows efficient photoexcited electrons transfer and CO2 bioconversion.
MOFs are composed of metal ions or clusters linked by organic ligands. They are a kind of highly crystalline porous material with high specific surface area, ultrahigh and tunable porosity, designable functionality, and good thermal stability,175 which make MOFs an ideal alternative to the APS's platform. Recently, Chen et al. fabricated an integrated APS based on a zirconium-based MOF, NU-1006.176 As presented in Fig. 10A, pyrene-based photosensitizing molecules as struts were incorporated into NU-1006, followed by anchoring M to the nodes of the MOF and encapsulating FDH into the mesopores of the framework. Under visible light illumination, the photoexcited electrons from NU-1006 were utilized for NAD+ reduction. Then, FDH in the scaffold consumed NADH to convert CO2 into formic acid. Upon visible light excitation, M-NU-1006 achieved 28% production yield of NADH after 2 h, which was 3 times more than that of their physical mixture. FDH@M-NU-1006 generated 0.144 M formate in 24 h, while the physical mixture of FDH, NU-1006, and M could not produce formic acid in the first 6 h. The results proved the potent function of the photocatalyst in APS's as the key element in improving the APS's performance.
Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) with high stability and metal-free skeletons possess adjustable pore size, designable crystalline structures, and facile functionality, thus being developed as friendly platforms for biocatalyst immobilization for enhanced enzyme stability and reusability. Chen and coworkers constructed an olefin-linked COF, NKCOF-113, which was capable of harvesting visible light for efficient photoelectric conversion.177 Then, an APS for CO2 reduction to formic acid was fabricated via a stepwise assembly approach of M and FDH on NKCOF-113. In this highly integrated APS, FDH@M-NKCOF-113, the COF skeleton acted as a photocatalyst, a CO2 collector, and a protective shield for FDH. Under visible light illumination, NKCOF-113 was excited to generate free electrons and transported them to the neighboring M for NAD+ reduction. Afterward, FDH in the COF pores utilized the photochemically generated NADH to realize the bioconversion of CO2 to formic acid. The production of formic acid in the FDH@M-NKCOF-113 system was almost 2 times higher than that of the physical mixture, which might be ascribed to the high integration and efficient protection of the enzyme by the COF skeleton. This work demonstrated that the rationally designed and modified COFs with ordered π–π stacking might be a good candidate for the motor-type APS platform for the efficient utilization of solar energy to produce value-added chemicals.
Very recently, it was demonstrated that another energy-bearing intermediate, H2O2, could be utilized in place of NAD(P)H to mediate directional electron transfer from photocatalysts to biocatalysts. Jiang and coworkers developed stacked tubular polymeric carbon nitride (st-PCN*) as both the photocatalyst and carrier for chlorperoxidase (CPO).178 Under irradiation, the obtained st-PCN*@CPO composite could realize the cascade chlorination reaction of monochlorodimedone into dichlordimedone driven by st-PCN*-catalyzed water photooxidation and H2O2 photogeneration. The continuous bioconversion illustrates the great potential of the O2/H2O2 cycle in coupling APS's cascade reactions. However, extending the application of the O2/H2O2 cycle in fabricating APS's might be hindered by the negative effects of H2O2 on the protein conformations/activities of the biocatalysts, especially those oxidoreductases that are very sensitive to H2O2. Nevertheless, the final conversion in the st-PCN*@CPO system was higher than that of the free system due to the shortened diffusion distance of photogenerated H2O2, demonstrating the advantages of the highly integrated APS's in the efficient utilization of photoexcited electrons and energy-bearing intermediate.
The photogenerated H2O2 by graphitic carbon could also be utilized for the activation of peroxidases, which are widely applied for the biodegradation of organic pollutants in water purification. Zhang et al. fabricated a photocatalyst/enzyme nanocomposite by immobilizing horseradish peroxidase (HRP) on mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride (MCN).179 Under irradiation, the photogenerated electrons from MCN were used to reduce O2 to ˙O2 and H2O2. Then, H2O2 was transformed into ˙OH through the Fenton-like reaction via HRP. As a result, ˙OH together with the photogenerated holes and ˙O2 led to the complete degradation of bisphenol A to CO2 and H2O. The obtained HRP@MCN exhibited a degradation rate constant of 0.0348 min−1, which was 2.6 and 62.0 times higher than those of MCN (0.0134 min−1) and HRP (0.00056 min−1), respectively. The improved degradation performance of HRP@MCN was mainly attributed to the photoenzyme synergic catalytic effect based on the high integration.
Besides the use of NAD(P)H or H2O2, some redox enzymes could directly utilize photoexcited electrons from the motor-type photocatalysts to catalyze redox reactions. Taking QD as the motor-type platform and photocatalyst simultaneously, Greene et al. reported a H2ase–QD hybrid assembly for photocatalytic H2 evolution under visible light illumination.180 In this APS, H2ase was directly bound to CdTe QD by electrostatic interaction. With 40 s of illumination, the TON of H2 produced by the H2ase–CdTe system was twice higher than that of the aforementioned RuP–TiO2–H2ase system,141 proving the advantage of the motor-type APS's platform. The production efficiency of H2 in high ionic strength solutions decreased sharply, indicating that a strong electrostatic interaction between the enzyme protein and CdTe QD was beneficial to the catalytic performance of the H2ase-QD system. Similarly, another Cd-based semiconductor, CdS, was utilized for the photoactivation of 2-oxoacid oxidoreductase to catalyze the carbon–carbon bond formation by coupling CO2 with a succinyl group.181 In this APS, the electrostatic interaction between CdS and 2-oxoacid oxidoreductase was used to realize enzyme immobilization and pave an efficient pathway for electron transfer.
This was further confirmed in other APS's with a motor-type platform.182 In those APS's, the positively charged ammonium-terminated carbon dot (CD-NHMe2+) and negatively charged carboxylate-terminated CD (CD-CO2−) were chosen as the photocatalyst to directly activate fumarate reductase (FccA) and [NiFeSe]–H2ase (Fig. 10B). The result showed that the two catalytic systems constructed on CD-CO2− exhibited little catalytic activity, while the other two catalytic systems constructed on CD-NHMe2+ showed good catalytic performance. The surface-exposed electron entry sites of FccA and [NiFeSe]–H2ase were surrounded by negatively charged residues, which allowed FccA and H2ase to be loaded on the positively charged CD-NHMe2+ through electrostatic interactions. It was concluded that this oriented immobilization of the two enzymes on the positively charged photocatalyst was conducive to the direct transfer of photoexcited electrons from QDs to the active site of the enzymes.
To further improve the efficiency of electron delivery, intraprotein electron transfer chains could be constructed using organic and molecular biology methods to integrate the photocatalyst and biocatalyst efficiently.183 Cheruzel and coworkers have focused on fabricating a series of hybrid P450 BM3 (Ru-BM3) enzymes by chemically attaching Ru(II)-based photocatalysts to the heme domain of P450 BM3 (or its mutants), as shown in Fig. 11A and B. In these Ru-BM3s, Ru(II)-based photocatalysts with a long lifetime were covalently linked to non-native single cysteine residues.184 Under light illumination, photoexcited electrons were directly transferred from the Ru(II)-based photocatalyst to the heme domain of P450 BM3 or its mutants through the covalent bond. Then, the activated heme domain was able to catalyze the selective hydroxylation of C–H bond in the presence of O2 without the need for an expensive cofactor (NAD(P)H). The performance of Ru-BM3 could be tuned by optimizing the types of Ru(II)-based photocatalyst and the distance between the photocatalyst and the heme.
In 2011, Cheruzel and coworkers reported two hybrid Ru-BM3 enzymes, Ru-K97C-BM3 and Ru-Q397C-BM3 (Fig. 11A).185 Using sodium diethyldithiocarbamate (DTC) as the electron donor, Ru-K97C-BM3 and Ru-Q397C-BM3 showed 10 and 20 times higher TTN of lauric acid hydroxylation activities than those of the physical mixture of wild type P450 BM3 (hBM3) and photocatalyst, respectively. They demonstrated that the higher hydroxylation activity was attributed to the efficient coupling between the photocatalyst and the heme domains. Afterward, another two non-native single cysteine mutants, Q109C and L407C, were introduced in the Ru-BM3 system.186 As shown in Fig. 11B, the distances between the Fe center of heme to the Cβ carbon atom of the side chain residue (dFe–C) were 10.0, 13.9, 16.2, and 17.9 Å for L407C, Q397C, Q109C, and K97C, respectively. In the presence of light illumination and DTC, owing to the lowest dFe–C, Ru-L407C-BM3 exhibited the highest TON, followed by Q109C-1, Q397C-1, and K97C-1.
To increase the thermodynamic driving force for electron transfer, a triply mutated heme domain tL407C (C62A–C156S–L407C) was introduced.187 Compared with hBM3 and singly labeled L407 (sL407C), Ru-tL407C showed a 60.9-fold increase and 1.7-fold decrease in TTN, respectively. The decrease over sL407C was attributed to the low thermostability of tL407C after reinserting the two native cysteines under optimal reaction conditions. The substituent group of the Ru(II)-based photocatalyst was also the key to optimizing the photocatalytic activity of Ru-BM3. [Ru(4,4′-bpy)2(PhenA)]2+ (PhenA = 5-acetamido-1,10-phenanthroline) with different substituents (i.e., Cl, H, tBu, Me, OPhe, OMe, or NMe2) at the para position of the ancillary bipyridine ligand was covalently linked to the L407C mutant.188 The three-fold improvement of the initial reaction rate was observed when varying the substituent from Cl to tBu, but the reaction rate decreased with increasing electron-donating ability of the group. The summative Brown-Okamoto parameter (Σσp) of these groups was introduced to rationalize these results. For Cl, OPhe, Me, and tBu, the negative slope revealed that the electron transfer step between the photocatalyst and the heme was the rate-limiting step. Hence, enhancing the process of electron transfer resulted in increased photocatalytic activity of the hybrid catalyst. The positive slope on the left side for OMe and NMe2 suggested that DTC quenching might be rate-limiting. Taken altogether, the effects of substituent variation on the aforementioned photophysical properties resulted from the difference of Σσp, hence affecting the initial reaction rate of the hybrid enzyme. Thus, the use of the Ru(II) photosensitizer in these hybrid enzymes for artificial photosynthesis is becoming a valuable approach for performing cofactor-independent bioreactions.
Similarly, the coenzyme regeneration systems containing photocatalysts and coenzymes could also be attached to the enzyme protein to fabricate APS's with high integration. Very recently, via the host–guest approach, Duan and coworkers reported a coenzyme-mediated semi-biological APS for hydrogen evolution from alcohol dehydrogenation.189 As shown in Fig. 11C, the coenzyme photoregeneration system was fabricated by trapping a photosensitizer dye and NADH molecule into a metal–organic cage. Then, the artificial hydrogenase analog was incorporated into the ADH catalytic pocket to facilitate the coupling of NAD+-mediated biocatalytic dehydrogenation and NADH-mediated photochemical hydrogen evolution. Under light illumination, the excited photosensitizer transferred electrons to the cobalt core for H2 evolution and was recovered by the adjacent NADH. Afterward, the obtained NAD+ was generated via alcohol biodehydrogenation. The close proximity of the NADH molecule and the two catalytic sites enhanced the efficacy of photoinduced electron transfer and utilization. Due to the enhanced mass and energy transfers, this APS could produce hydrogen with a TON of 875 without extra electron donors. This attempt to highly integrate an artificial photoenzyme into a natural bioactive platform is conducive for utilizing photoexcited electrons in a more controllable and efficient way, demonstrating the superiority of this host–guest approach for the conversion and storage of solar energy with a synergic combination of photocatalysis and biocatalysis.
Besides post-modified photocatalysts, the endogenous fluorophores in fluorescent proteins could be upgraded for APS's construction. By upgrading the fluorophore of a yellow fluorescent protein and chemically attaching an active group, Ni–terpyridine complex, to the obtained photosensitizer protein (PSP), Liu et al. reported a photocatalyst@redox-center model artificial enzyme that worked as the APS for CO2 reduction,190 as shown in Fig. 11D1. Under visible-light illumination, the hybrid enzyme was able to selectively catalyze CO2 reduction to CO. By optimizing the chromophore/catalytic center distance, the CO2-reducing enzyme reached a maximum TON of ∼75 within 12 h, as presented in Fig. 11D2. However, this TON was much lower than the aforementioned study (the TON of each CODH was over 2.5 × 105 after 6 h).144 Afterward, they developed a miniature photocatalytic CO2-reducing enzyme (mPCE) by replacing the Ni-terpyridine complex with a genetically fused ferredoxin containing two [Fe4S4] clusters in the PSP loop region.191 Under light irradiation, the photochemically reduced chromophore was able to reduce the [Fe4S4] clusters, indicating its competency for efficient CO2 reduction. After optimizing the reduction potential, this APS could continuously operate with a CO2/HCOOH conversion QE of 1.43%, which was much higher than most of the previous APS's that drove the CO2-reducing enzymes by heavy metal-containing photosensitizers.144 However, the photochemical property of the chromophore of the PSP-based artificial enzyme must be fine-tuned by introducing unnatural amino acids, which increases the difficulty of fabrication. Nevertheless, as compared with other APS's with motor-type platforms (even other APS's with intra-protein electron transfer chains) that were constructed by chemical modifications or immobilization of protein molecules, mPCE could be overexpressed in E. coli cells without the need of cofactors, which would make it a great door-opener for the rational design of mini-APS-type photoenzymes for diverse valuable chemical reactions.


3.2.6 APS's based on PECs. 
PEC, which is equipped with heterogeneous semiconductor (photo)electrodes, can convert solar energy directly to storable solar fuels. Compared with the aforementioned homogeneous and heterogeneous artificial systems, the APS's based on PECs exhibits two main advantages besides the minimized back electron transfer in the presence of the external wire.192 Firstly, the spatial isolation of (photo)anode and (photo)cathode reaction centers protect the bioactive substances (i.e., coenzymes and oxidoreductases) from photogenerated holes and extreme reaction conditions, thus providing a more flexible and extensive material selection for APS's construction. Secondly, the Fermi level of the semiconductor electrode material and the band bending of photoelectrodes can be adjusted by applying an external voltage to PEC for efficient charge separation and electron transfer. Hence, APS's based on PECs have wide applications in energy, sensing, and synthesis.193–195 The typical reactions of APS's based on PECs are glucose biosensing, H2 evolution, and CO2 fixation.10
Generally, PECs can be divided into three types according to the electrode, namely, photoanode–cathode PECs, photocathode–anode PECs, and tandem PECs. In the APS's based on the PEC with photoanode–cathode structure, the photoanode absorbs photons to generate photoexcited electrons. Then, the resulting electrons are transferred to the cathode through an external wire to participate in the enzyme-catalyzed reduction reaction. Meanwhile, the photogenerated holes left at the photoanode are annihilated by water or other electron donors. Typical APS's based on photoanode–cathode PECs are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Performances of APS's based on photoanode–cathode PECs




Photoanode
Cathode
Applied bias
PEC performance
Ref.





a LDR, linear detection range.
b LOD, limit of detection.
c PD, photocurrent density.
d 
E
OCV, open-circuit voltage.





Pencil graphite electrode modified with ZnS-CdS QDs and GDH
Pt
0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl
LDRa of 0.2–8.0 mM, LODb of 0.09 mM

201



Macroporous IO-TiO2 modified with sulfonated polyaniline and PQQ-GDH
Pt
−0.315 V vs. g/AgCl
PDc of 44.7 ± 6.5 μA cm−2

202



IO-TiO2 modified with PbS QD, POs, and FAD-GDH
IO-TiO2
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
First signal response of 0.61 ± 0.19 μA cm−2 at 10 μM substrate and 29.2 ± 2.8 μA cm−2 at 100 mM glucose, LDR of 10–200 μM

202



Au nanorod@TiO2 modified with melanin-like L-DOPA polymer, HRP, and GOx
Pt
0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl
LDR of 0.05–10.0 mM, LOD of 0.01 μM, (S/N= 3)

203



ITO modified with PS I
Pt
−0.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl
PD of 2.2 μA cm−2

204



Co3O4–TiO2 nanowire arrays with adenosine triphosphatase
Pt
0.6 V vs. RHE
PD of 0.72 mA cm−2, with LOD of 0.14 nM

205



FTO–In2S3–laccase
Pt
1 V vs. Ag/AgCl
0.93 nmol O2 within 6 min and the ηF of 45%

206



BiVO4 with alcohol oxidase
Pt
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
BA production of 16.1 ± 0.3 μmol and 2-EH production of 3.5 ± 0.3 μmol within 16 h

207



TiO2 modified with graphene, electroconductive polymer nanosponge, and cytochrome C
Pt
−0.11 V vs. Ag/AgCl
LDR of 0.5–9000 mM, LOD of 0.225 mM

208



IO-TiO2 modified with PS II, dpp, and POS
IO-TiO2|W-FDH
0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl
Production of 0.185 ± 0.017 μmol cm−2 with an ηF = 70 ± 6%

209



IO-TiO2 modified with dpp, PS II, and POS
IO-ITO modified with [NiFeSe]–H2ase
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
H2 production of 0.06 μmol cm−2 with an ηF of 76%

200



FeOOH/BiVO4
g-C3N4/reduced GO and peroxygenase
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
H2O2 generation rate of 2.8 mM h−1 cm−2, the (R)-1-phenylethanol TNN of 4.3 × 104 with ee >99%

210



IO-TiO2 modified with PbS QD, POs, and PS II
IO-ATO cathode modified with BOD
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl

E
OCV

 of 1 V, PD of 76 ± 7 mA cm−2

211



Thiolated-Sgc8c aptamer/Au/g-C3N4/ITO
BOD/Au/ITO
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl

E
OCV of 0.508 V, LDR of 20 to 2 × 105 cells mL−1 with a LOD of 10 cells mL−1, (S/N = 3)

212



BiVO4/Co3(PO4)2
PDA/2,2′-azinobis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)/MvBOD or the pyrenebetaine/BOD
0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl

E
OCV of 1V, power outputs of 0.74 and 0.85 mW cm−2

213



ITO/Pt-PS I/POS/GOx
Pt
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
QE of 1%, the overall light-to-electrical power conversion efficiency of 0.12%

214



TiO2 coated ITO modified with CNT, Co3O4, and GOx
Pt
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
LDR of 0–4 mM, sensitivity of 0.3 μA mM−1 cm−2, and LOD of 0.16 μM

215



FeOOH/BiVO4
W-Containing FDH on the 3D TiN nanoshell
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
Formate generated rate of 0.78 μmol h−1 with an ηF of 77.3%

216



Mo-Doped BiVO4 (Mo: BiVO4) modified with peroxygenase
IO-ITO modified with OYE
0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl
(R)-1-Phenyl-1-hydroxyethane conversion rate of 0.51 mM h−1 with 99% ee (R)-levodione conversion rate of 0.5 mM h−1 with 82% ee

217





BiVO4 is regarded as an ideal photoanode semiconductor in the APS's based on the photoanode–cathode PEC because of its visible-light activity, polymorphic nature, ferroelastic, and electronic property.196 Taking FeOOH-deposited BiVO4 (FeOOH/BiVO4) as the hybrid photoanode, Son et al. constructed an APS based on the PEC with protonated g-C3N4 (p-g-C3N4) and CNT (CNT/p-g-C3N4) hybrid cathode for the biosynthesis of chiral alkanes, as presented in Fig. 12A.197 Under light illumination, photoexcited electrons from the FeOOH/BiVO4 photoanode were transferred to the CNT/p-g-C3N4 cathode by the external wire. FMN was regenerated at the hybrid cathode and consumed in the enantioselective bioconversion of ketoisophorone. With an applied bias of 0.5 V, the faradaic efficiency (ηF) of this APS was estimated to be 81.13%, indicating that most of the photoexcited electrons from FeOOH/BiVO4 were utilized in the FMN-mediated biocatalysis. (R)-Levodione was synthesized in this APS with about 1.5 times TOFOYE higher than that of the APS with a similar catalytic function based on the Au–TiO2 photocatalyst.198 It reveals that the APS exhibits a higher efficiency of photo induced charge separation and electron transfer than that of the heterogeneous artificial systems.
 Fig. 12  (A) The APS based on an OYE-catalyzed PEC. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (B) Schematic representation of the enzyme-containing PEC with PS II and H2ase for photoelectrochemical water splitting. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (C) The APS for CO2 photoreduction driven by PS II using a semi-artificial “Z-scheme” architecture: the APS components in the electron-transfer pathway of the semi-artificial tandem PEC system (C1) and UV-vis spectra of dpp and PSII (inset: photographic images of IO-TiO2 (left), IO-TiO2|dpp (middle), and IO-TiO2|PSII (right)) (C2). Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (D) A Z-scheme-inspired photobioelectrochemical H2O/O2 cell by combining PS II and PbS. Reproduced with permission.211 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Besides expensive semiconductors, nature offers an efficient electron-supplying enzyme, PS II, for photoanode fabrication. PS II is the only enzyme discovered in nature for light absorption, charge separation, and water oxidation.11 These functionalities make PS II an ideal photobiocatalyst for the construction of APS's based on photoanode–cathode PECs.
Mersch et al. reported an APS based on the PEC coupling PS II and H2ase for H2 evolution from water.199 As shown in Fig. 12B, PS II and [NiFeSe]–H2ase were integrated onto a photoanode and a cathode, respectively. Under low-intensity red light illumination, the transfer of quantitative electrons from PS II to the hydrogenase in the hybrid PEC was proven by the production of H2 and O2 at a molar ratio of 2, thus realizing an overall splitting of water. The highest light-to-H2 conversion efficiency was 5.4% at an applied bias of 0.8 V, which was 105.9 times higher than the solar-to-FMN reduction efficiency in the above APS based on the FeOOH/BiVO4 photoanode.197 Hence, the direct coupling of PS II to H2ase in PEC was proven as an excellent route for photon-to-H2 conversion. However, it still requires an applied bias to enhance electron transfer due to the low electrochemical potential of photoexcited electrons from PS II.
Further improvement can be expected by introducing other photocatalysts to the PS II-photoanode interface to promote the energetics of the electrons. Sokol et al. developed an APS containing a dye-sensitized PS II-based photoanode, which contained PS II, diketopyrrolopyrrole-based dye (dpp), and poly(1-vinylimidazole-coallylamine)-[Os(bipy)2Cl]Cl (POS) redox polymer.200 As depicted in Fig. 12C1, under light illumination, photoexcited electrons from PS II were transferred to dpp by the supporting POS polymer and experienced re-excitation in dpp. Finally, the electrons were transferred through the external circuit to the H2-evolution bioactive site on the cathode via interfacial electron transfer. The combination of PS II and dpp enlarged the absorption spectrum of the photoanode (Fig. 12C2). After 1 h of light irradiation at an applied voltage of 0.3 V, H2 was detected with an ηF of 82%, while a similar ηF value was obtained for the PEC coupling PS II and H2ase with a higher driving force (applied voltage of 0.9 V).199 It demonstrates that the introduction of another photocatalyst to the PS II-photoanode interface is capable of promoting the energetics of photoexcited electrons. Afterward, the same group successfully wired this hybrid photobioanode to an FDH-containing cathode for CO2 photoreduction catalyzed by W-dependent FDH.209
Riedel et al. applied POS redox polymers loading PS II in water-oxidizing photobioanode for the construction of an H2O/O2 photobioelectrochemical cell, as shown in Fig. 12D.211 In this photobioanode, PbS QD and dpp were utilized to act as an “electron pump” like the natural PS I lifting electrons to higher energetic states under light illumination. Then, the hybrid photobioanode was coupled with an indium tin oxide-antimony tin oxide (ITO–ATO) cathode bearing O2-reducing bilirubin oxidase (BOD). Such a PEC could generate electricity without any fuels or sacrificial agents in a closed system with the production of H2O and O2 only. The photobioanode generated a negative potential of about −0.55 V, which was twice higher than that of the PS II-photoanode. It further demonstrates the advantages of the semi-artificial hybrid photoanode.
Besides, Ran et al. proved that the biooxidation of water in the photobioelectrochemical H2O/O2 cell could be replaced by the biooxidation of other electron donors (e.g., glucose) in the APS for photobiofuel cells.218 In their research, the Ru(II)-tris-bipyridine complex and the glucose oxidase (GOx) monolayer were tethered to an anode. The Au-electrode modified with Pt nanoparticles was used as the cathode for H2 production. Upon illumination, Ru(II)-tris-bipyridine complexes injected photoexcited electrons into the electrode. Then, the resulting oxidized complexes mediated the oxidation of the FAD center of GOx and activated glucose oxidation and H2 evolution in argon. Thus, this photobiofuel cell represents a novel approach for the fabrication of APS's based on the hybrid photoanode for light-to-fuel energy conversions.
Unlike PECs with a photoanode–cathode structure, the PECs with a photocathode–anode structure absorb photons by its photocathode to generate photoexcited electrons. Then, these electrons directly participate in the enzyme-catalyzed reduction. At the same time, the photogenerated holes recombine with electrons from an anode. The holes left in the anode are recovered by water or other electron donors. APS's based on photoanode–cathode PECs are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Performances of APS's based on the photoanode–cathode and tandem PECs




(Photo)anode
Photocathode
Applied bias
PEC performance
Ref.




—
CdS QD sensitized NiO with GOD
0V vs. Ag/AgCl
LDR of 0.05–7.1 mM LOD of 0.01 mM

219



—
GOx-BiOI/NiO/ITO
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
LDR of 0.01–10 mM LOD of 1.6 μM

220



—
GOD/BiVO4/FTO
−0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl
LDR of 1–400 μM with LOD of 0.73 μM

221



TiO2
Carbon cocatalyst on Si photocathode with lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases BtLPMO10A
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
α-Chitin production of 5 mg mL−1, PD of −85 μA cm−2

222



—
GEC modified with xanthine oxidase, polyaniline hydrogels
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
LOD of 0.02 μM LDR of 0.1–80 μM

223



FeOOH/Fe2O3
Black silicon with M, NADH and GDH
1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl
O2 evolution rate of 1.48 μmol h−1, the production of 16%

224



Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3
BiFeO3 with M, NADH and FDH, ADH and ALDH
0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl
Produced concentration of 1.31 mM with an ηF of 31.9% within 6 h

225



BiVO4
Perovskite-[NiFeSe]–H2ase
0 V vs. RHE
PD of −5 mA cm−2, TON of 1.9 × 106, QE of 1.1%

226



FeOOH-coated BiVO4
FDH interfaced with a TiO2-coated CuFeO2 and CuO
0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
0.15 mA cm−2 of the PD, product rate of 0.098 μmol h−1 cm−2 with an ηF of 33.5% and solar-to-formate conversion efficiency of 0.008%

227





Unlike a photoanode–cathode PEC, the intrinsic hole oxidation reaction of a photocathode–anode PEC is expected to be separated from the enzymatic reaction at the photocathode. To validate this concept, Wang et al. synthesized a three-dimensional nanoporous p-type NiO photocathode that was sensitized by CdS QDs and modified by conjugated GOx.219 Based on the as-obtained photocathode, an APS sensor was developed for glucose biosensing. Under illumination, glucose around the anode was biooxidized to glucosamine in the presence of O2. Typical sacrificial chemicals (e.g., H2O2, AA, cysteine, and dopamine) had almost no effect on the cathode photocurrent. It indicates a good separation of the photogenerated holes and the enzyme, which favor the enzyme activity in this biosensor. Testing with six sensors prepared at the same experimental conditions resulted in a relative standard deviation (RSD) of 3.4%, indicating a good repeatability. Similarly, CdS QD was replaced by BiOI for biosensor construction in the above system.220 The RSD was 6.8% in five sensors prepared under the same experimental conditions. They considered that the excellent performance was due to the superior peroxides-like photocatalytic performance of BiOI. By separating the enzyme from the photoregenerated holes, an APS based on a photocathode–anode PEC is able to realize valuable bioreduction reactions by integrating the biocatalysis system on the photocathode. Bachmeier et al. fabricated an APS based on a PEC comprising a dye-sensitized p-type NiO cathode functionalized by the spontaneous adsorption of CODH for CO2 reduction (Fig. 13A1).228 The photocathode was sensitized by (4-[bis(4-[5-[2,2-dicyanovinyl]-thiophene-2-yl]phenyl)amino]) benzoic acid (P1) that can absorb visible light. Under illumination, the excitation of P1 resulted in electron transfer to the CODH adsorbed on NiO for the bioconversion of CO2 to CO. NiO showed a very small photocurrent due to its wide bandgap, while the photocurrent increased after P1 sensitization and further increased with the modification of CODH in the presence of CO2, as shown in Fig. 13A2. The control experiments without CODH showed that the injection of KOCN did not affect the photocurrent. It indicates that the integration of CODH on the electrode enhanced the transfer of photoexcited electrons from the electron donor to the biocatalyst.
 Fig. 13  (A) Selective light-driven CO2 reduction on a dye-sensitized NiO photocathode: scheme showing a photoelectrochemical cell for the selective reduction of CO2 p-type NiO (A1) and linear sweep voltammograms of NiO, NiO-P1, and NiO-P1-CODH (A2). Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (B) Illustration of PEC-based photoelectrochemical NADH regeneration and redox biocatalysis using water as the electron donor. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (C) Integration of an H2ase in a lead halide perovskite photoelectrode for tandem solar water splitting. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The above studies reveal that an external bias voltage is often required to drive the electron transfer and enzymatic reaction in the APS's based on single-photoelectrode PECs because of the insufficient photoinduced potential. Fabricating an APS based on a tandem PEC may be an efficient strategy to address this demerit.229 In tandem PEC, the photoanode is connected to the photocathode by an external wire with a separate operation of two photocatalytic half-reactions of oxidation and reduction. It was highly similar to the Z-scheme in the natural photosynthesis system. The two photoelectrodes could absorb photons together, resulting in a broader absorption spectrum and higher photoinduced potential than those in the single-photoelectrode PEC. Under light illumination, the photoexcited electrons in the photoanode were transferred to the photocathode through the external wire. Afterward, the photoexcited current was further enhanced by electron re-excitation at the photocathode. Then, electrons migrated to an electronic medium or oxidoreductase to drive NAD(P)H regeneration or biocatalysis. Hence, the tandem cell could generate a sufficiently high photovoltage in water splitting with low or even without an applied bias.
Based on the concept of the above tandem PEC, Nam et al. reported an APS with NADH regeneration system for biocatalysis, as shown in Fig. 13B.224 The PEC in this APS was equipped with a black silicon photocathode and an FeOOH-deposited hematite photoanode. Upon visible light irradiation, the photoexcited electrons from the photoanode were transferred to the photocathode for NAD+ reduction in the presence of M. GDH was used as the model enzyme to consume the regenerated NADH. Due to the uncompensated solution resistance; however, a high applied voltage, at least 0.8 V, was required for NAD+ reduction. With an applied voltage of 1.2 V, the NAD+ reduction rate of the tandem system was 13 times and 3.6 times higher than those of the single photoanode and photocathode systems, respectively. After being coupled with the bioconversion system, the hybrid APS exhibited 1.7 times higher L-glutamate production yield than that with bare Fe2O3 photoanode after 6 h light illumination. These results fully indicate the advantage of the tandem PEC over the general PEC with a single electrode in APS's fabrication.
Afterward, the NADH regeneration system driven by the tandem PEC was utilized in a free multienzyme cascade system (i.e., ADH, FDH, and ALDH) for the conversion of CO2 to methanol.225 In this APS, the Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3 photoanode and the ferroelectric BiFeO3 photocathode were employed to split water and generate photoexcited electrons for NADH regeneration in the presence of M. Then, NADH was consumed in the photocathodic compartment for methanol biosynthesis. The tandem system exhibited higher photocurrent response than that of the single photoelectrode. It further proves the advantage of tandem photoelectrode structure in APS's fabrication. When the reduced NADH was utilized in the bioconversion of CO2, methanol was obtained with an ηF of 31.9%. This low ηF may be caused by the low integration degree of the biocatalysis part.
Improving the integration of the biocatalysis system on the electrodes can further enhance the utilization efficiency of the photoexcited electrons in APS's, especially in the APS's containing cofactor-independent oxidoreductases. For higher integration, Nam et al. attached [NiFeSe]–H2ase on a p-type Si photocathode based on the hierarchical inverse opal (IO) TiO2 for H2 evolution.230 This photocathode was coupled with a PS II-modified BiVO4 photoanode for overall water splitting. Without an external voltage, H2 was obtained with an ηF of 98%, indicating that nearly all of the photoexcited electrons generated in the photoelectrode were used in H2 evolution. It demonstrates the significance of the high integration of oxidoreductases and photoelectrodes in the APS's based on a tandem photoelectrode structure.
Recently, the synergistic integration of the photoanode and photocathode with biocatalysts has been attempted to construct a “semi-artificial leaf”. Moore et al. reported a Z-scheme semi-artificial APS leaf based on the tandem PEC without an external wire (Fig. 13C).226 In this study, a perovskite-H2ase-based photocathode was prepared on a hybrid semiconductor scaffold. The photobiocathode was combined with a BiVO4-based photoanode for overall water splitting. Under visible-light illumination, this semi-artificial leaf achieved excellent performance without an applied bias, with a H2ase-based TON of 1.9 × 106, which was much higher than those of all the aforementioned APS's based on other platforms.95,97,108,148,154,180,182,199,230 Afterward, they prepared another “semi-artificial leaf” with a water-oxidizing BiVO4 photoanode and a perovskite/TiO2 photocathode that was utilized for the immobilization of W-dependent FDH.231 The resultant APS-type tandem device exhibited a solar CO2-to-formate energy conversion efficiency of 0.8%, a value comparable to the magnitude of the established annual average for plants and algae. The hybrid system exhibits a huge potential of the highly integrated tandem PEC based on a semi-artificial leaf structure for bias-free fuel production. Thus, these studies provided a new benchmark for the construction of APS's based on the tandem PEC devices for bias-free solar energy conversion and storage.

4. Conclusion and perspective
Natural photosynthesis modules containing PS I and PS II are highly integrated mini-factories in green plants. They utilize solar energy as the driving power to synthesize energy-rich products through efficient photoinduced charge separation and electron transfer. By mimicking the natural photosynthesis system, researchers have been exploiting APS's via coupling photocatalysis and biocatalysis systems to realize green conversion and storage of solar energy into fuels and other value-added chemicals. In addition, the diversity of oxidoreductase enables APS's to be applied in more fields such as chemical sensing, environment protection, and photoelectrochemical cells.
To improve the compatibility, stability, and reusability of the two kinds of catalysts in APS's, a confined environment is necessary to integrate the photocatalysis and biocatalysis systems. Generally, the APS's confined in a platform exhibit improved the operationality and photosynthetic performance by proximity effect. As summarized in this article, APS's platforms are categorized into six types, i.e., whole-cell systems, supporting platforms, electroconductive platforms, light-harvesting platforms, platforms for synergistic catalysis, and PECs. Among the different APS's with these platforms, the APS's based on whole-cell systems have simple integration and have a high product yield. However, whole-cell systems are sensitive to environmental conditions and difficult to be reused, thus costly in the catalytic process and product purification. For APS's with other platforms, increasing the integration degree of APS's components can lead to the improved efficiency of energy conversion and electron transfer, resulting in enhanced product yield as well as system sustainability (stability and reusability). However, an increased integration degree often means a complicated fabrication, leading to a decrease in the APS's availability.
Nevertheless, highly integrated APS's are desired because they have great potential in the conversion and storage of solar energy in the real world. Taking the APS's based on the platform for synergistic catalysis as an example, the overall coupling of electron donor oxidation, electron transfer, and biocatalysis in this platform leads to the high photon-product conversion efficiency, especially for APS's with intraprotein electron transport chains.183,191 However, the poor stability of proteins under extreme conditions seriously hampers its extensive application in the APS's platform. A promising strategy to enhance its availability is to exploit an ideal carrier that can integrate with biocatalysts and complete oxidoreductase activation efficiently at a low cost. Hence, photoreaction in photocatalysts and photoactivation of enzymes are the limiting steps of the tandem reactions for this type of APS's.
Basically, the platform material for photoreaction is expected to be inexpensive, stable, and compatible with biocatalysts. Moreover, it should be able to work with an inexpensive electron source and generate efficient charge separation under visible-light illumination. At present, TEOA and EDTA are often used as sacrificial agents. Their oxidation products are usually accumulated in the reaction system, which is not conducive for the purification of subsequent products. Water is an appropriate electron donor for both natural and artificial photosynthesis because it is easy to use its splitting products (O2 and proton) in subsequent reactions. For the following electron transfer, it should ensure a faster transfer of photoexcited electrons to the acceptor than the reverse processes. This requires the motor-type platform to exhibit high performance on solar energy collection and conversion. Moreover, coupling APS's and other reaction systems can address the problems caused by the oxidation products of electron donors, thus providing a promising approach for the design of multifunctional APS's.
A fact that cannot be ignored is that nature offers tens of thousands of oxidoreductases, while only a few of them have appeared in the APS's studies for photoactivation to date. Most APS's have focused on H2 evolution, CO2 reduction, or L-glutamate production, which means several opportunities for further APS's development. Notably, about 90% of known oxidoreductases are NAD(P)H-dependent. From the perspective of system integration, the introduction of NAD(P)H increases the integration difficulty of APS's. Moreover, due to the formation of NAD(P)H isomers and dimers, the specificity and selectivity of NAD(P)H regeneration by photocatalysts are usually very low. A reasonable strategy for NAD(P)H regeneration in APS's with high specificity and selectivity is to introduce and integrate the electron medium, M, on the motor-type platform for synergistic catalysis. It has been well proven in the above APS's with high integration degrees. Besides, MV and various synthetic nicotinamide cofactor analogs are considered as promising substitutes for natural cofactors because of their low price, good chemical stability, and high biocatalytic efficiency. Moreover, NAD(P)H regeneration can be replaced with NAD(P)+ generation, which often contributes to the production of oxides in the biocatalysis part.166 A recent research has proven H2O2 as a potential alternative to NAD(P)H for photoexcited electron delivery.178 Its further development, however, depends on the solution for overwhelming the negative effects of H2O2 on the enzyme system. In addition, as compared with NAD(P)H-dependent oxidoreductases, NAD(P)H-independent oxidoreductases can be activated directly with low electron loss; hence, they are suitable for easy integration into photocatalysts for high-performance system construction. However, only a few NAD(P)H-independent oxidoreductases have been reported, and most of those enzymes are sensitive to O2, thus exhibiting high application costs and compromising their extensive applications. Moreover, the self-repair capabilities in natural photosynthesis systems should be introduced in smart APS's development, but the research is still at an early stage.
In summary, improvements in the light energy absorption, photoexcited electron transfer, and components integration based on the confined platforms are the main aspects for further boosting the performance of APS's. These improvements require interdisciplinary efforts in different fields such as photochemistry, biochemistry, and materials science. This would provide many possibilities for the fabrication of robust devices with enhanced efficiency of solar energy conversion and broadened synthesis capabilities. Last but not least, the scale-up of lab-scale devices is still in its infancy and faces many challenges for the production of value-added chemicals and fuels. The future direction toward APS's development and applications is the unification of high performance, high stability, and scalability.
Author contributions
All authors contributed to the collection and discussion of the content. Zhenfu Wang wrote the original draft. All authors helped to revise the manuscript before submission.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (grant no. 2021YFC2102801) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21621004).
Notes and references
W. Chu, F. Calise, N. Duić, P. A. Østergaard, M. Vicidomini and Q. Wang, Energies, 2020, 13, 5229–5257 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Sayed, T. Wilberforce, K. Elsaid, M. K. H. Rabaia, M. A. Abdelkareem, K. J. Chae and A. G. Olabi, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 766, 144505–144519 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dell’Anna, Energy Policy, 2021, 149, 112031–112045 CrossRef .
T. P. Yoon, M. A. Ischay and J. Du, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 527–532 CrossRef CAS .
E. Romero, V. I. Novoderezhkin and R. van Grondelle, Nature, 2017, 543, 355–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Ringsmuth, M. J. Landsberg and B. Hankamer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 62, 134–163 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Cogdell, A. T. Gardiner, N. Yukihira and H. Hashimoto, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 353, 645–653 CrossRef CAS .
T. Katagiri and Y. Amao, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 6682–6713 RSC .
M. E. El-Khouly, E. El-Mohsnawy and S. Fukuzumi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2017, 31, 36–83 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, D. S. Choi, S. K. Kuk and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7958–7985 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kornienko, J. Z. Zhang, K. K. Sakimoto, P. Yang and E. Reisner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 890–899 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. A. Shin, J. Lee, K. D. Yang and K. T. Nam, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 342001 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Schmidt, K. Castiglione and R. Kourist, Chemistry, 2018, 24, 1755–1768 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, D. Yang, S. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Cheng, J. Shi and Z. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2020, 11, 476–483 CrossRef .
A. Rodacka, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 2016, 92, 11–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winkler, S. Kawelke and T. Happe, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 8493–8500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kato, Q. Lam, M. Bhandarkar, T. Banh, J. Heredia, U. Andrew and L. Cheruzel, C. R. Chim, 2017, 20, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Evans, B. Siritanaratkul, C. F. Megarity, K. Pandey, T. F. Esterle, S. Badiani and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2039–2052 RSC .
S. Fukuzumi, Y. M. Lee and W. Nam, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2019, 199, 110777–110785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, R. Li and J. Liu, Sol. RRL, 2020, 5, 2000339–2000356 CrossRef .
D. A. Russo, J. A. Z. Zedler and P. E. Jensen, J. Exp. Bot., 2019, 70, 1703–1710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang and K. Castiglione, Catalysts, 2018, 9, 12–36 CrossRef .
K. Jensen, P. E. Jensen and B. L. Moller, Trends Plant Sci., 2012, 17, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gautam, P. M. Gore and B. Kandasubramanian, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 385, 123951 CrossRef .
E. H. Edwards and K. L. Bren, Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem., 2020, 67, 463–483 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lee, J. Zou, J. Bullock and G. G. Wallace, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2019, 39, 142–160 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Lassen, A. Z. Nielsen, B. Ziersen, T. Gnanasekaran, B. L. Moller and P. E. Jensen, ACS Synth. Biol., 2014, 3, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, Y. Okamoto, M. R. Schreier, T. R. Ward and O. S. Wenger, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2020, 1288–1293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Amao, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1928–1950 RSC .
A. Melis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5531–5539 RSC .
I. Bernhardsgrutter, G. M. Stoffel, T. E. Miller and T. J. Erb, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2021, 67, 80–87 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xu, Y. Xiu, F. Liu, Y. Liang and S. Wang, Molecules, 2020, 25, 3653–3675 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, S. Kalathil and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4926–4952 RSC .
X. Ji, C. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Su, G. Ma and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5511–5522 RSC .
Y. V. Lee and B. Tian, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2189–2197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Nixon, F. Michoux, J. Yu, M. Boehm and J. Komenda, Ann. Bot., 2010, 106, 1–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, D. H. Nam and C. B. Park, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2014, 28, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chabi, K. M. Papadantonakis, N. S. Lewis and M. S. Freund, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1320–1338 RSC .
I. McConnell, G. Li and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Biol., 2010, 17, 434–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Schmermund, V. Jurkaš, F. F. Özgen, G. D. Barone, H. C. Büchsenschütz, C. K. Winkler, S. Schmidt, R. Kourist and W. Kroutil, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4115–4144 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, J. H. Lee, H. Ha, S. W. Im and K. T. Nam, Nano Converge., 2016, 3, 19–29 CrossRef .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Ashford, M. K. Gish, A. K. Vannucci, M. K. Brennaman, J. L. Templeton, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 13006–13049 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Seel and T. Gulder, ChemBioChem, 2019, 20, 1871–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Luciani, C. Imparato and G. Vitiello, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 103–158 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, J. H. Kim and C. B. Park, Chemistry, 2013, 19, 4392–4406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, A. R. Mohamed and W. J. Ong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22894–22915 CrossRef CAS .
J. Willkomm, K. L. Orchard, A. Reynal, E. Pastor, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 9–23 RSC .
T. Sakai, D. Mersch and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12313–12316 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zheng, Y. Zhang, X. Liu and J. Wang, Photosynth. Res., 2020, 143, 221–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, C. Tian, X. Song, C. Liu, D. Yang and Z. Jiang, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1773–1789 RSC .
J. A. Macia-Agullo, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Chemistry, 2015, 21, 10940–10959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, R. Yan, D. Zhang and T. Fan, Chemistry, 2016, 22, 9870–9885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Lo, J. D. Ryan, J. B. Kerr, D. S. Clark and R. H. Fish, J. Organomet. Chem., 2017, 839, 38–52 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. E. Huijbers, W. Zhang, F. Tonin and F. Hollmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13648–13651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Rudroff, M. D. Mihovilovic, H. Gröger, R. Snajdrova, H. Iding and U. T. Bornscheuer, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 12–22 CrossRef .
P. D. Frischmann, K. Mahata and F. Wurthner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1847–1870 RSC .
W. Zhang and F. Hollmann, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7281–7289 RSC .
Y. Lee and M. S. Kwon, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2020, 6028–6043 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, D. H. Nam and C. B. Park, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2009, 351, 2589–2594 CrossRef CAS .
T. Higashino and H. Imahori, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 448–463 RSC .
J. Min Park, J. H. Lee and W.-D. Jang, Coordin. Chem. Rev., 2020, 407, 213157–213185 CrossRef .
S. Fukuzumi, Coordin. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1564–1575 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Kalaji, A. Jajoo, A. Oukarroum, M. Brestic, M. Zivcak, I. A. Samborska, M. D. Cetner, I. Łukasik, V. Goltsev and R. J. Ladle, Acta Physiol. Plant., 2016, 38, 102–112 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. S. Lee, M. Lee and C. B. Park, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10227–10229 RSC .
C. B. Park, S. H. Lee, E. Subramanian, B. B. Kale, S. M. Lee and J. O. Baeg, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5423–5425,  10.1039/b808256a .
S. H. Lee, D. H. Nam, J. H. Kim, J. O. Baeg and C. B. Park, ChemBioChem, 2009, 10, 1621–1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Nam and C. B. Park, ChemBioChem, 2012, 13, 1278–1282 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Zadvornyy, J. E. Lucon, R. Gerlach, N. A. Zorin, T. Douglas, T. E. Elgren and J. W. Peters, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2012, 106, 151–155 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, Y. C. Kwon, D. M. Kim and C. B. Park, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2013, 110, 383–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lazarides, I. V. Sazanovich, A. J. Simaan, M. C. Kafentzi, M. Delor, Y. Mekmouche, B. Faure, M. Reglier, J. A. Weinstein, A. G. Coutsolelos and T. Tron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3095–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, D. H. Nam, S. H. Lee and C. B. Park, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 12020–12025 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, D. H. Nam, S. K. Kuk and C. B. Park, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 3584–3588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, M. Antonietti and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7686–7693 RSC .
W. Wang, J. Chen, C. Li and W. Tian, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4647–4654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, R. Cazelles, Z. P. Chen, H. Zhou, A. Galarneau and M. Antonietti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 14699–14705 RSC .
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters, L. C. Seefeldt and P. W. King, Science, 2016, 352, 448–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, B. O. Burek, E. Fernandez-Fueyo, M. Alcalde, J. Z. Bloh and F. Hollmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15451–15455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T. Hofler, E. Fernandez-Fueyo, M. Pesic, S. H. Younes, E. G. Choi, Y. H. Kim, V. B. Urlacher, I. Arends and F. Hollmann, ChemBioChem, 2018, 19, 2344–2347 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Schroeder, M. Frese, C. Müller, N. Sewald and T. Kottke, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 3336–3341 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. C. H. van Schie, W. Zhang, F. Tieves, D. S. Choi, C. B. Park, B. O. Burek, J. Z. Bloh, I. W. C. E. Arends, C. E. Paul, M. Alcalde and F. Hollmann, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7409–7417 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Willot, E. Fernandez-Fueyo, F. Tieves, M. Pesic, M. Alcalde, I. Arends, C. B. Park and F. Hollmann, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 890–894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Son, Y. W. Lee, J. W. Ko and C. B. Park, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 2545–2552 CrossRef .
D. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Zou, S. Zhang, Y. Wu, Z. Cai, J. Shi and Z. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 285–295 CrossRef .
J. Kim, S. H. Lee, F. Tieves, C. E. Paul, F. Hollmann and C. B. Park, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, 0501–0508 Search PubMed .
S. Ikeyama, T. Katagiri and Y. Amao, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 358, 362–367 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, W. Tian, H. Zhang, X. Duan, H. Sun and S. Wang, Energy Fuels, 2020, 35, 7–24 CrossRef .
K. R. Reddy, C. V. Reddy, M. N. Nadagouda, N. P. Shetti, S. Jaesool and T. M. Aminabhavi, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 238, 25–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Huang, H. Zhou and M. Antonietti, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8434–8440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Paul, I. W. C. E. Arends and F. Hollmann, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 788–797 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. H. Lee, F. Tieves, D. S. Choi, F. Hollmann, C. E. Paul and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13825–13828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, D. S. Choi, M. Pesic, Y. W. Lee, C. E. Paul, F. Hollmann and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8681–8685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Amao, S. Takahara and Y. Sakai, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 20771–20776 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Amao, N. Shuto and H. Iwakuni, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 403–407 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Hafenstine, K. Ma, A. W. Harris, O. Yehezkeli, E. Park, D. W. Domaille, J. N. Cha and A. P. Goodwin, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 568–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ren, C. Li, X. Jiao, S. Jia, Y. Jiang, M. Bilal and J. Cui, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 1254–1278 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuchler, M. Yoshimoto, S. Luginbuhl, F. Mavelli and P. Walde, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 409–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Xu and K. Wang, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 10, 368–379 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, B. Sundara Sekar and Z. Li, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 323, 124551–124564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Bommarius and M. F. Paye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6534–6565 RSC .
F. Rudroff, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2019, 49, 84–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, A. B. Wong and P. Yang, Science, 2016, 351, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Larkum, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol, 2010, 21, 271–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, M. Chen, X. Liu, S. Zhou and Z. He, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117916–117923 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. H. Lee, G. S. Cha, D. S. Choi, D. H. Nam, J. H. Lee, J. K. Lee, C. H. Yun, K. J. Jeong and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 969–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Rowe, G. Le Gall, E. V. Ainsworth, J. A. Davies, C. W. J. Lockwood, L. Shi, A. Elliston, I. N. Roberts, K. W. Waldron, D. J. Richardson, T. A. Clarke, L. J. C. Jeuken, E. Reisner and J. N. Butt, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7558–7566 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Le, J. Kim, N. Anh Nguyen, T. Huong Ha Nguyen, E. G. Sun, S. M. Yee, H. S. Kang, S. J. Yeom, C. Beum Park and C. H. Yun, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 3054–3058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Köninger, Á. Gómez Baraibar, C. Mügge, C. E. Paul, F. Hollmann, M. M. Nowaczyk and R. Kourist, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5582–5585 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Chakraborty and P. K. Mascharak, Microporous. Mesoporous. Mater., 2016, 234, 409–419 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maity and V. Polshettiwar, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3866–3913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Tang, Z. Chen, T. Li and J. Wang, Sci. China: Mater., 2020, 63, 2189–2205 CAS .
C. Dong, J. Ji, Z. Yang, Y. Xiao, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 853–862 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, J. Ryu, D. H. Nam and C. B. Park, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4643–4645 RSC .
J. A. Nasir, Z. u Rehman, S. N. A. Shah, A. Khan, I. S. Butler and C. R. A. Catlow, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20752–20780 RSC .
X. Ji, J. Wang, L. Mei, W. Tao, A. Barrett, Z. Su, S. Wang, G. Ma, J. Shi and S. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705083–1705096 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X. Zhou, M. Yu, Y. Wang, L. Han, J. Zhang, P. Yuan, G. Auchterlonie, J. Zou and C. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15992–15993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Y. Shen and S. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7703–7706 RSC .
A. Gennari, A. J. Fuhr, G. Volpato and C. F. Volken de Souza, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 246, 116646–116659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gheorghita Puscaselu, A. Lobiuc, M. Dimian and M. Covasa, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2417–2444 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yoon, S. H. Lee, F. Tieves, M. Rauch, F. Hollmann and C. B. Park, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5632–5637 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Raghuwanshi and G. Garnier, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 535–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Shah and T. Imae, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9691–9701 RSC .
X. Ji, Z. Su, P. Wang, G. Ma and S. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 4753–4762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Skugor Roncevic, D. Krivic, M. Buljac, N. Vladislavic and M. Buzuk, Sensors, 2020, 20, 3211–3272 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hu, Y. Lin, J. W. Connell, H. M. Cheng, Y. Gogotsi, M. M. Titirici and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806128–1806141 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bilal, S. S. Ashraf, L. F. R. Ferreira, J. Cui, W. Y. Lou, M. Franco and H. M. N. Iqbal, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 162, 1906–1923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Yadav, J. O. Baeg, G. H. Oh, N. J. Park, K. J. Kong, J. Kim, D. W. Hwang and S. K. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11455–11461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choudhury, J.-O. Baeg, N.-J. Park and R. K. Yadav, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4389–4400 RSC .
R. K. Yadav, J.-O. Baeg, A. Kumar, K.-J. Kong, G. H. Oh and N.-J. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5068–5076 RSC .
E. P. Cipolatti, A. Valério, R. O. Henriques, D. E. Moritz, J. L. Ninow, D. M. G. Freire, E. A. Manoel, R. Fernandez-Lafuente and D. de Oliveira, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 104675–104692 RSC .
X. Ji, Y. Kang, Z. Su, P. Wang, G. Ma and S. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 3060–3069 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Xue, Y. Shang, J. Li and X. Zeng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000881–2000904 CrossRef CAS .
C. Backes, A. M. Abdelkader, C. Alonso, A. Andrieux-Ledier, R. Arenal, J. Azpeitia, N. Balakrishnan, L. Banszerus, J. Barjon, R. Bartali, S. Bellani, C. Berger, R. Berger, M. M. B. Ortega, C. Bernard, P. H. Beton, A. Beyer, A. Bianco, P. Bøggild, F. Bonaccorso, G. B. Barin, C. Botas, R. A. Bueno, D. Carriazo, A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Christian, A. Ciesielski, T. Ciuk, M. T. Cole, J. Coleman, C. Coletti, L. Crema, H. Cun, D. Dasler, D. De Fazio, N. Díez, S. Drieschner, G. S. Duesberg, R. Fasel, X. Feng, A. Fina, S. Forti, C. Galiotis, G. Garberoglio, J. M. García, J. A. Garrido, M. Gibertini, A. Gölzhäuser, J. Gómez, T. Greber, F. Hauke, A. Hemmi, I. Hernandez-Rodriguez, A. Hirsch, S. A. Hodge, Y. Huttel, P. U. Jepsen, I. Jimenez, U. Kaiser, T. Kaplas, H. Kim, A. Kis, K. Papagelis, K. Kostarelos, A. Krajewska, K. Lee, C. Li, H. Lipsanen, A. Liscio, M. R. Lohe, A. Loiseau, L. Lombardi, M. Francisca López, O. Martin, C. Martín, L. Martínez, J. A. Martin-Gago, J. Ignacio Martínez, N. Marzari, Á. Mayoral, J. McManus, M. Melucci, J. Méndez, C. Merino, P. Merino, A. P. Meyer, E. Miniussi, V. Miseikis, N. Mishra, V. Morandi, C. Munuera, R. Muñoz, H. Nolan, L. Ortolani, A. K. Ott, I. Palacio, V. Palermo, J. Parthenios, I. Pasternak, A. Patane, M. Prato, H. Prevost, V. Prudkovskiy, N. Pugno, T. Rojo, A. Rossi, P. Ruffieux, P. Samorì, L. Schué, E. Setijadi, T. Seyller, G. Speranza, C. Stampfer, I. Stenger, W. Strupinski, Y. Svirko, S. Taioli, K. B. K. Teo, M. Testi, F. Tomarchio, M. Tortello, E. Treossi, A. Turchanin, E. Vazquez, E. Villaro, P. R. Whelan, Z. Xia, R. Yakimova, S. Yang, G. R. Yazdi, C. Yim, D. Yoon, X. Zhang, X. Zhuang, L. Colombo, A. C. Ferrari and M. Garcia-Hernandez, 2D Mater., 2020, 7, 022001–022283 CrossRef CAS .
A. Meng, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807660–1807690 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liras, M. Barawi and V. A. de la Pena O'Shea, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5454–5487 RSC .
S. Chen, Y. Qi, C. Li, K. Domen and F. Zhang, Joule, 2018, 2, 2260–2288 CrossRef CAS .
H. Abdullah, M. M. R. Khan, H. R. Ong and Z. Yaakob, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 22, 15–32 CrossRef CAS .
E. Reisner, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2009, 550–552,  10.1039/b817371k .
E. Reisner, D. J. Powell, C. Cavazza, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18457–18466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Reisner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2132–2133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, M. Can, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2789–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, X. Li, M. Li, P. Niu, T. Wang, D. Chen, P. Chen and J.-P. Zou, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Son, J. H. Kim, K. Kim and C. B. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11179–11202 RSC .
S. Lin, S. Sun, K. Wang, K. Shen, B. Ma, Y. Ren and X. Fan, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 127–135 CrossRef PubMed .
C. A. Caputo, L. Wang, R. Beranek and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5690–5694 RSC .
D. Yang, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Cheng, Y. Wu, Z. Cai, X. Wang, J. Shi and Z. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11492–11501 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Shi, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, Z. Cai, Y. Chen, C. You, P. Han and Z. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3913–3925 CrossRef CAS .
G. Awad and E. F. Mohamed, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 253, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shcharbin, I. Halets-Bui, V. Abashkin, V. Dzmitruk, S. Loznikova, M. Odabasi, O. Acet, B. Onal, N. Ozdemir, N. Shcharbina and M. Bryszewska, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 182, 110354–110362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Nadar, L. Vaidya and V. K. Rathod, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 149, 861–876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, C. Yuan, Q. Zou, Z. Xie and X. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7876–7880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Simon, N. Bouchonville, M. J. Berr, A. Vaneski, A. Adrovic, D. Volbers, R. Wyrwich, M. Doblinger, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. Jackel, J. K. Stolarczyk and J. Feldmann, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1013–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Rochaix, Biochim. Biophys. Acta., 2011, 1807, 375–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Otsuki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6710–6753 RSC .
M. Dokic and H. S. Soo, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6554–6572 RSC .
V. R. I. Kaila, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2018, 15, 20170916–20170931 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zou, K. Liu, M. Abbas and X. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1031–1043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Busseron, Y. Ruff, E. Moulin and N. Giuseppone, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7098–7140 RSC .
S. S. Panda, H. E. Katz and J. D. Tovar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3640–3658 RSC .
C. Chen, K. Liu, J. Li and X. Yan, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 225, 177–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, M. Lee, J. S. Lee and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 517–520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Ko, W. S. Choi, J. Kim, S. K. Kuk, S. H. Lee and C. B. Park, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3551–3556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Son, J. Kim and C. B. Park, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1215–1221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kwak and S. Y. Lee, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 4477–4484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwak, M. C. Kim and S. Y. Lee, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15064–15070 RSC .
K. Tao, B. Xue, S. Frere, I. Slutsky, Y. Cao, W. Wang and E. Gazit, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4454–4460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Son, S. H. Lee, D. Wang and C. B. Park, Small, 2018, 14, 1801396–1801402 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Biancalana and S. Koide, Biochim. Biophys. Acta., 2010, 1804, 1405–1412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, J. H. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. H. Lee and C. B. Park, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 581–586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, C. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Su, G. Ma and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5511–5522 RSC .
X. Ji, Y. Kang, T. Fan, Q. Xiong, S. Zhang, W. Tao and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 323–333 RSC .
C. Doonan, R. Ricco, K. Liang, D. Bradshaw and P. Falcaro, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1423–1432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, P. Li, J. Zhou, C. T. Buru, L. Dordevic, P. Li, X. Zhang, M. M. Cetin, J. F. Stoddart, S. I. Stupp, M. R. Wasielewski and O. K. Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1768–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, D. Zheng, M. Guo, J. Yu, S. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200261 CAS .
J. Jia, Q. Huo, D. Yang, Y. Sun, S. Zhang, S. Li, J. Shi and Z. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 9210–9220 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Wu, J. Han, L. Wang, W. Zhang, H. Dong, C. Li and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 385, 123764–123772 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Greene, C. A. Joseph, M. J. Maroney and R. B. Dyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11108–111011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hamby, B. Li, K. E. Shinopoulos, H. R. Keller, S. J. Elliott and G. Dukovic, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 135–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Hutton, B. Reuillard, B. C. Martindale, C. A. Caputo, C. W. Lockwood, J. N. Butt and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16722–16730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eidenschenk and L. Cheruzel, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2020, 213, 111254–111265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Ozgen, M. E. Runda and S. Schmidt, ChemBioChem, 2021, 22, 790–806 CrossRef PubMed .
N. H. Tran, N. Huynh, T. Bui, Y. Nguyen, P. Huynh, M. E. Cooper and L. E. Cheruzel, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11936–11938 RSC .
N. H. Tran, N. Huynh, G. Chavez, A. Nguyen, S. Dwaraknath, T. A. Nguyen, M. Nguyen and L. Cheruzel, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2012, 115, 50–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. H. Tran, D. Nguyen, S. Dwaraknath, S. Mahadevan, G. Chavez, A. Nguyen, T. Dao, S. Mullen, T. A. Nguyen and L. E. Cheruzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14484–14487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shalan, A. Colbert, T. T. Nguyen, M. Kato and L. Cheruzel, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 6558–6564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cai, L. Zhao, C. He, Y. Li and C. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5092–5102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, F. Kang, C. Hu, L. Wang, Z. Xu, D. Zheng, W. Gong, Y. Lu, Y. Ma and J. Wang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1201–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kang, L. Yu, Y. Xia, M. Yu, L. Xia, Y. Wang, L. Yang, T. Wang, W. Gong, C. Tian, X. Liu and J. Wang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 5628–5635 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Teodor, B. D. Sherman, Z. Y. Ison, E.-J. Ooi, J. J. Bergkamp and B. D. Bruce, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 1016–1045 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Cole, G. Pepe, O. K. Al Bahri and C. B. Cooper, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7279–7327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Niu, D. Wang, F. Li, Y. Liu, S. Shen and T. J. Meyer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1900399–1900421 CrossRef .
G. Yang, Z. Xiao, C. Tang, Y. Deng, H. Huang and Z. He, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 141, 111416–111426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, P. Ravi Anusuyadevi, C. Aymonier, R. Luque and S. Marre, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3868–3902 RSC .
E. J. Son, S. H. Lee, S. K. Kuk, M. Pesic, D. S. Choi, J. W. Ko, K. Kim, F. Hollmann and C. B. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 28, 1705232–1705240 CrossRef .
M. Mifsud, S. Gargiulo, S. Iborra, I. W. Arends, F. Hollmann and A. Corma, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3145–3150 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Mersch, C. Y. Lee, J. Z. Zhang, K. Brinkert, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8541–8549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Sokol, W. E. Robinson, J. Warnan, N. Kornienko, M. M. Nowaczyk, A. Ruff, J. Z. Zhang and E. Reisner, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 944–951 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ertek, C. Akgül and Y. Dilgin, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 20058–20066 RSC .
M. Riedel and F. Lisdat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 267–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Meng, C. Zhang, H. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Tan and Q. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9394–9404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yehezkeli, R. Tel-Vered, D. Michaeli, R. Nechushtai and I. Willner, Small, 2013, 9, 2970–2978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Li, B. Kong, M. Jiang and G. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15752–15757 RSC .
C. Tapia, S. Shleev, J. C. Conesa, A. L. De Lacey and M. Pita, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4881–4889 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Harris, O. Yehezkeli, G. R. Hafenstine, A. P. Goodwin and J. N. Cha, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8199–8204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Muthuchamy, K. P. Lee and A. I. Gopalan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 390–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Sokol, W. E. Robinson, A. R. Oliveira, J. Warnan, M. M. Nowaczyk, A. Ruff, I. A. C. Pereira and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16418–16422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Choi, H. Lee, F. Tieves, Y. W. Lee, E. J. Son, W. Zhang, B. Shin, F. Hollmann and C. B. Park, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10562–10566 CrossRef CAS .
M. Riedel, J. Wersig, A. Ruff, W. Schuhmann, A. Zouni and F. Lisdat, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 801–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gu, T. Hou, S. Zhang, P. Gai and F. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 2277–2283 RSC .
D. Mukha, Y. Cohen and O. Yehezkeli, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2684–2692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Efrati, C.-H. Lu, D. Michaeli, R. Nechushtai, S. Alsaoub, W. Schuhmann and I. Willner, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15021–15028 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cakiroglu and M. Ozacar, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 119, 34–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kuk, Y. Ham, K. Gopinath, P. Boonmongkolras, Y. Lee, Y. W. Lee, S. Kondaveeti, C. Ahn, B. Shin, J. K. Lee, S. Jeon and C. B. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900029–1900038 CrossRef .
D. S. Choi, J. Kim, F. Hollmann and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15886–15890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tel-Vered, H. B. Yildiz, Y. M. Yan and I. Willner, Small, 2010, 6, 1593–1597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Wang, K. L. Liu, Y. M. Dong, X. M. Wu, Z. J. Li and C. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 62, 66–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. F. Ruan, Y. Y. Liang, W. W. Zhao, X. D. Yu, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3372–3379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Chen, L. Miao, Y. Gao and J. Di, J. Solid State Electron., 2019, 24, 411–420 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Zhou, H. Wang, X. Zong, H. Yin and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118558–118586 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qing, S. L. Chen, L. Han, Y. Z. Yang, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 158, 112179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Nam, G. M. Ryu, S. K. Kuk, D. S. Choi, E. J. Son and C. B. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 311–317 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Kuk, R. K. Singh, D. H. Nam, R. Singh, J. K. Lee and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3827–3832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edwardes Moore, V. Andrei, S. Zacarias, I. A. C. Pereira and E. Reisner, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 232–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kuk, J. Jang, J. Kim, Y. Lee, Y. S. Kim, B. Koo, Y. W. Lee, J. W. Ko, B. Shin, J. K. Lee and C. B. Park, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2940–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bachmeier, S. Hall, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13518–13521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, H. Ye, J. Hua and H. Tian, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100015–100059 CrossRef .
D. H. Nam, J. Z. Zhang, V. Andrei, N. Kornienko, N. Heidary, A. Wagner, K. Nakanishi, K. P. Sokol, B. Slater, I. Zebger, S. Hofmann, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, C. B. Park and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10595–10599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edwardes Moore, V. Andrei, A. R. Oliveira, A. M. Coito, I. A. C. Pereira and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 26303–26307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Zhenfu Wang
	Zhenfu Wang received his PhD degree in 2022 from the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, under the supervision of Prof. Yan Sun. He received his Masters degree in 2018 from the National Engineering Technology Research Center for Biotechnology, Nanjing Technological University, under the guidance of Prof. Hanjie Ying. His research focuses on the design of biomimetic hybrid catalysts based on enzyme immobilization and their application in (photo-)chemoenzymatic cascade synthesis.

Yang Hu
	Yang Hu received his MS and PhD degree in the group of Prof. Yan Sun from the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University in 2021. He is currently a postdoctoral research fellow working with Prof. Xiangzhao Mao at Ocean University of China. His research interests include artificial micro/nanorobots and catalytic systems.

Songping Zhang
	Songping Zhang received BS degree in Applied Chemistry (1998) and PhD degree in Biochemical Engineering (2002) from Tianjin University, China. She worked as a post doc at Lund University, Sweden during 2002–2004. Afterward, she joined Institute of Process Engineering, CAS as an assistant professor, and was promoted to a full professor in 2014. She has broad research interests in biocatalysis, bioseparation, and bioformulation. She has prepared hollow nanofiber hosting complex multienzyme systems and developed a series of artificial photosynthesis system platforms based on hybrid nanoparticles, 2-D nanosheets, and polyelectrolyte-doped hollow nanofibers, etc.

Yan Sun
	Yan Sun received his Bachelor of Engineering Degree from Tianjin University in 1983, and Master and Doctor of Engineering Degrees from the University of Tokyo in 1987 and 1990, respectively. From 1991, he started his teaching and research career at Tianjin University and became a full Professor in 1993. In 2000, he obtained the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Outstanding Young Scientists grant and was appointed to the Cheung Kong Professorship by the Ministry of Education (MOE) of China. His research interests include biocatalysis and bioseparation. His work has produced over 400 research papers and one book.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the photoexcited electron transfer pathway (Z-scheme) in the natural photosynthetic system under light illumination. Photons are firstly harvested by pigment-protein complexes around P680 in PS II. Secondly, P680 is photoexcited and the electrons are transferred from PS II to PS I by the electron-transport chain consisting of QB, b6f, and PC. Then, electrons are re-excited in P700. Finally, the excited electrons are transferred through FA or FB to Fd-FNR and used to regenerate NADPH. Protons generated in the water oxidation process are utilized in ATP synthesis by ATPase. Water acts as the electron donor in the natural photosynthetic process.	 

 	Fig. 2  Common photocatalysts, oxidoreductases, and electron donors in APS's. Under light illumination, the photocatalyst generates photoexcited electrons that are transferred to the oxidoreductase(s) to participate in substrate bioconversion. The electron donor recovers the photocatalyst and provides continuous power to APS's operation. Photocatalysts include (1) photosensitive nanoparticles, such as Ag, Au, TiO2, carbon QD, (2) xanthenes, (3) porphyrins, (4) Ru-polypyridyls complex, (5) g-C3N4. Oxidoreductases (redox enzymes) include (1) YqjM, (2) P450 BM3, (3) nitrogenase, (4) laccase, (5) H2ase, (6) FDH, (7) ALDH, (8) ADH. Electron donors: (1) water, (2) formic acid, (3) TEOA, (4) diethyldithiocarbamate, (5) AA, (6) EDTA.	 

 	Fig. 3  APS's containing NAD(P)H-dependent enzymes driven by the indirect transfer of photoinduced electrons in the presence of electron donor, photocatalyst, and M. (A) GDH, (B) OYE, (C) FDH & ALDH & ADH.	 


W2Fe4Ta2O17	EDTA	M, NADH	GDH	NADH TOFa of 0.015 h−1, 15% production of L-glutamate within 24 h	
67

Eosin Y	TEOA	M, NADH	GDH	Initial NADH TOF of 24.23 h−1, 81.4% production of L-glutamate within 40 min	
68

Proflavine	TEOA	M, NADH	GDH	NADH TOF of 127.8 h−1, 65.3% production of L-glutamate within 1 h	
69

[Ru(bpy)2(NH2phen)](PF6)2	EDTA	—	[NiFe]–H2ase	H2 TOF of 0.184 h−1, H2 TON of 11.04	
70

Eosin Y	TEOA	M, NADPH	P450 BM3 Y51F/F87A mutant	TOF of 8.6 h−1	
71

Zinc tetramethylpyridinium porphyrin	EDTA	—	Laccase	TOF of 480 h−1	
72

[Co4(H2O)2(PW9O34)2]10−	Water	M, NADH	GDH	NADH TOF of 0.214 h−1, L-glutamate production of 30% within 12 h	
73


	TEOA	
	
	NADH TOF of 1.414 h−1, L-glutamate production 100% within 12 h	

Rose bengal/Si-NaYF4:Yb,Er	TEOA	M, NADH	GDH	NADH TOF of 0.038 h−1, L-glutamate conversion of 20.25% within 5 h	
74

Carbon nitride mesoporous spheres	TEOA	M, NADH	
L-Lactate dehydrogenase	NADH conversion of 100% within 30 min, L-lactate production of 100% within 6 h	
75

PS II	Water	Fe(CN)64−	Ru/SrTiO3:Rh	TOF of 2489 h−1 (based on PS II)	
76


	
	
	
	TOF of 1000 h−1 (based on PS II)	

Ordered carbon nitride array	TEOA	M, NADH	FDH, ALDH, ADH	0.21 mmol methanol min−1 g−1 enzyme	
77


	
	—	Pt nanoparticles	TOF of 4.878 h−1	

CdSe QD	AA	NADPH	FNR and ADH	NADPH TOF of 1440 h−1 (based on FNR), QE of 5.8%	
78

CdS nanorod	HEPES	—	Nitrogenase	TOF of 4500 h−1, QE of 3.3%	
78

Au–TiO2	MeOH	H2O2	Peroxygenase	(R)-1-Phenylethanol (98.2% ee) with a TON of more than 7.1 × 104, QE of 0.036%	
79

Deazariboflavin	EDTA	NADH	PDR, ADH	NADH TOF of 9 h−1 (based on PDR), ethyl-(S)-3-hydroxybutyrate production of 45% within 24 h	
80

FAD	EDTA	H2O2	Halogenase PyrH	TOF of 0.72 h−1	
81

g-C3N4	HCO2H	H2O2	Peroxygenase	TON of >6 × 104	
82

FMN	HCO2H	NADH, H2O2	FDH and peroxygenase	FDH TON of 135, peroxygenase TON of 6490	
83

Phenosafranine	
	
	
	FDH TON of 520, peroxygenase TON of 25000	

Methylene blue	
	
	
	FDH TON of 832, peroxygenase TON of 39920	

Amorphous carbon nitride	TEOA	M, NADH	GDH	NADH regeneration of 62.3% within 1 h, α-ketoglutarate TOF of 2640 h−1	
84

g-C3N4@red phosphorus	TEOA	M, NADH	ADH	QE of 0.6%, NADH regeneration of 80.45% within 6 min, methanol production of 80.45% within 1 h	
85

NAD+	TEOA	—	OYE	TOF of 1263.4 h−1	
86

Zn-TPPS	TEOA	MV, CV, MCV	FDH	Formic acid TOF with MV, CV, and CMV of 5.469, 7.760, and 8.958 h−1, respectively	
87


 	Fig. 4  (A) The molecular structures of xanthene dyes for light-driven NADH regeneration and photoenzymatic synthesis. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH. (B) Biocatalytic CC bond reduction through the regeneration of NADH analogues: illustration of photoenergy conversion into chemical energy by combining photocatalysis and biocatalysis. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (C) Illustration of the light-driven activation of OYE using rose bengal as a photosensitizer. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (D) Overall reaction scheme for the multicatalytic, light-driven upgradation of butanol to 2-EH and hydrogen. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the photoexcited electron transfer paths of platform-free APS's (1) and APS's with different reaction platforms (2–7). Reaction platforms of APS's include general platforms and functional platforms. General platforms include whole-cell systems (2) and supporting platforms (3). Functional platforms can be further subdivided into the transmitter (4), collector (5), and motor (6). The APS's based on PEC (7) are also presented.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) The fabrication and reaction schematics of self-photosensitization of nonphotosynthetic bacteria for solar-to-chemical production. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2016, AAAS. (B) Light-driven CO2 reduction to methane by M. barkeri-CdS: the reaction schematics (B1) and time curves of the increasing rate of mcrA copies (B2) by M. barkeri-CdS and the deletional control. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (C) Cofactor-free light-driven whole-cell cytochrome P450 catalysis in E. coli. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (D) Recombinant cyanobacteria for asymmetric reduction fueled by the biocatalytic oxidation of water, EWG = electron-withdrawing group. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Fabrication of CdS-coated SiO2 and photoenzymatic synthesis of L-glutamate via light-driven NADH regeneration. (B) Hybrid nanoparticles mimicking chloroplast with enhanced electron transfer for APS: fabrication of the chloroplast-mimicking APS (B1) and schematic diagram showing electron transfer routes of this APS (B2). Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (C) Schematic illustration of the APS encapsulated in alginate capsules for photobiocatalysis. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Illustration of the preparation of polyelectrolyte-doped hollow nanofibers and integration of the APS for CO2 conversion. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (B) Cartoon representation of APS's containing different enzymes and photocatalysts on TiO2. (C) Hierarchical chloroplast mimics fabricated by encapsulating porphyrin and enzyme molecules into the Zn2+-directed assembly of cystine for photoenzymatic reactions. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Illustration of the suppression of free rotation of solvatochromic CR dyes in amyloid-derived hydrogel for light-driven biocatalytic oxidation. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (B) Multiporous supramolecular microspheres for APS fabrication: schematic routine of artificial photosynthesis procedure (B1), photocurrent responses of microspheres, MCpP crystals, FF crystals, and nanovesicles (formed in aqueous solution) (B2), and TOF of NADH in the MCpP-FF/Pt, MCpP/Pt, and FF/Pt systems (B3). Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic illustration of APS based on the ThT-amyloid hybrid nanostructure for biocatalytic photosynthesis. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Schematic representation of APS based on NU-1006 and the illustration of the primary catalytic cycle. Reproduced with permission.176 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (B) Carbon dots as the photosensitizers for light-driven catalysis with FccA and H2ase. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Light-initiated hydroxylation of lauric acid using hybrid P450 BM3 enzymes. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2011, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) A series of hybrid P450 BM3 enzymes: cartoon representation of the mutated residues Q109C, K97C, Q397C, and L407C (red) in the series of hybrid enzymes adapted from the K97C-1 crystal structure. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (C) Schematic diagram of semi-biological supramolecular system with the coenzyme locked in the ADH catalytic pocket and joined in situ artificial photobiocatalysis. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (D) A genetically encoded photosensitizer protein facilitates the rational design of a miniature photocatalytic CO2-reducing enzyme: schematic diagram of the proposed catalytic mechanism of the hybrid enzyme based on a genetically-encoded photosensitizer protein (D1) and TON for CO formation, catalyzed by various PSP2 single-cysteine mutants (D2). Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 


Pencil graphite electrode modified with ZnS-CdS QDs and GDH	Pt	0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl	LDRa of 0.2–8.0 mM, LODb of 0.09 mM	
201

Macroporous IO-TiO2 modified with sulfonated polyaniline and PQQ-GDH	Pt	−0.315 V vs. g/AgCl	PDc of 44.7 ± 6.5 μA cm−2	
202

IO-TiO2 modified with PbS QD, POs, and FAD-GDH	IO-TiO2	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	First signal response of 0.61 ± 0.19 μA cm−2 at 10 μM substrate and 29.2 ± 2.8 μA cm−2 at 100 mM glucose, LDR of 10–200 μM	
202

Au nanorod@TiO2 modified with melanin-like L-DOPA polymer, HRP, and GOx	Pt	0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl	LDR of 0.05–10.0 mM, LOD of 0.01 μM, (S/N= 3)	
203

ITO modified with PS I	Pt	−0.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl	PD of 2.2 μA cm−2	
204

Co3O4–TiO2 nanowire arrays with adenosine triphosphatase	Pt	0.6 V vs. RHE	PD of 0.72 mA cm−2, with LOD of 0.14 nM	
205

FTO–In2S3–laccase	Pt	1 V vs. Ag/AgCl	0.93 nmol O2 within 6 min and the ηF of 45%	
206

BiVO4 with alcohol oxidase	Pt	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	BA production of 16.1 ± 0.3 μmol and 2-EH production of 3.5 ± 0.3 μmol within 16 h	
207

TiO2 modified with graphene, electroconductive polymer nanosponge, and cytochrome C	Pt	−0.11 V vs. Ag/AgCl	LDR of 0.5–9000 mM, LOD of 0.225 mM	
208

IO-TiO2 modified with PS II, dpp, and POS	IO-TiO2|W-FDH	0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl	Production of 0.185 ± 0.017 μmol cm−2 with an ηF = 70 ± 6%	
209

IO-TiO2 modified with dpp, PS II, and POS	IO-ITO modified with [NiFeSe]–H2ase	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	H2 production of 0.06 μmol cm−2 with an ηF of 76%	
200

FeOOH/BiVO4	g-C3N4/reduced GO and peroxygenase	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	H2O2 generation rate of 2.8 mM h−1 cm−2, the (R)-1-phenylethanol TNN of 4.3 × 104 with ee >99%	
210

IO-TiO2 modified with PbS QD, POs, and PS II	IO-ATO cathode modified with BOD	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
E
OCV

 of 1 V, PD of 76 ± 7 mA cm−2	
211

Thiolated-Sgc8c aptamer/Au/g-C3N4/ITO	BOD/Au/ITO	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
E
OCV of 0.508 V, LDR of 20 to 2 × 105 cells mL−1 with a LOD of 10 cells mL−1, (S/N = 3)	
212

BiVO4/Co3(PO4)2	PDA/2,2′-azinobis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)/MvBOD or the pyrenebetaine/BOD	0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
E
OCV of 1V, power outputs of 0.74 and 0.85 mW cm−2	
213

ITO/Pt-PS I/POS/GOx	Pt	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	QE of 1%, the overall light-to-electrical power conversion efficiency of 0.12%	
214

TiO2 coated ITO modified with CNT, Co3O4, and GOx	Pt	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	LDR of 0–4 mM, sensitivity of 0.3 μA mM−1 cm−2, and LOD of 0.16 μM	
215

FeOOH/BiVO4	W-Containing FDH on the 3D TiN nanoshell	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	Formate generated rate of 0.78 μmol h−1 with an ηF of 77.3%	
216

Mo-Doped BiVO4 (Mo: BiVO4) modified with peroxygenase	IO-ITO modified with OYE	0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl	(R)-1-Phenyl-1-hydroxyethane conversion rate of 0.51 mM h−1 with 99% ee (R)-levodione conversion rate of 0.5 mM h−1 with 82% ee	
217


 	Fig. 12  (A) The APS based on an OYE-catalyzed PEC. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (B) Schematic representation of the enzyme-containing PEC with PS II and H2ase for photoelectrochemical water splitting. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (C) The APS for CO2 photoreduction driven by PS II using a semi-artificial “Z-scheme” architecture: the APS components in the electron-transfer pathway of the semi-artificial tandem PEC system (C1) and UV-vis spectra of dpp and PSII (inset: photographic images of IO-TiO2 (left), IO-TiO2|dpp (middle), and IO-TiO2|PSII (right)) (C2). Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (D) A Z-scheme-inspired photobioelectrochemical H2O/O2 cell by combining PS II and PbS. Reproduced with permission.211 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

—	CdS QD sensitized NiO with GOD	0V vs. Ag/AgCl	LDR of 0.05–7.1 mM LOD of 0.01 mM	
219

—	GOx-BiOI/NiO/ITO	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	LDR of 0.01–10 mM LOD of 1.6 μM	
220

—	GOD/BiVO4/FTO	−0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl	LDR of 1–400 μM with LOD of 0.73 μM	
221

TiO2	Carbon cocatalyst on Si photocathode with lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases BtLPMO10A	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	α-Chitin production of 5 mg mL−1, PD of −85 μA cm−2	
222

—	GEC modified with xanthine oxidase, polyaniline hydrogels	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	LOD of 0.02 μM LDR of 0.1–80 μM	
223

FeOOH/Fe2O3	Black silicon with M, NADH and GDH	1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl	O2 evolution rate of 1.48 μmol h−1, the production of 16%	
224

Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3	BiFeO3 with M, NADH and FDH, ADH and ALDH	0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl	Produced concentration of 1.31 mM with an ηF of 31.9% within 6 h	
225

BiVO4	Perovskite-[NiFeSe]–H2ase	0 V vs. RHE	PD of −5 mA cm−2, TON of 1.9 × 106, QE of 1.1%	
226

FeOOH-coated BiVO4	FDH interfaced with a TiO2-coated CuFeO2 and CuO	0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	0.15 mA cm−2 of the PD, product rate of 0.098 μmol h−1 cm−2 with an ηF of 33.5% and solar-to-formate conversion efficiency of 0.008%	
227


 	Fig. 13  (A) Selective light-driven CO2 reduction on a dye-sensitized NiO photocathode: scheme showing a photoelectrochemical cell for the selective reduction of CO2 p-type NiO (A1) and linear sweep voltammograms of NiO, NiO-P1, and NiO-P1-CODH (A2). Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (B) Illustration of PEC-based photoelectrochemical NADH regeneration and redox biocatalysis using water as the electron donor. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (C) Integration of an H2ase in a lead halide perovskite photoelectrode for tandem solar water splitting. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
