Multi-bandgap colloidal quantum dot mixing for optoelectronic devices  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ01987F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ01987F
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 12892-12900Multi-bandgap colloidal quantum dot mixing for optoelectronic devices

        
          
            Santanu 
            Pradhan
          
          
        
      
Centre for Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee-247667, India. E-mail: santanu.pradhan@nt.iitr.ac.in
Received 
      26th April 2022
    , Accepted 8th June 2022First published on 8th June 2022AbstractColloidal quantum dots have emerged as important elements for various optoelectronics applications due to their unique properties of bandgap tuning through quantum confinement, solution processibility, complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) compatibility, etc. Most of these reported devices are based on monodispersed quantum dots corresponding to a particular energy bandgap. Recently, mixing quantum dots with different bandgaps has been reported with exciting modification of the optical and electronic properties, which can influence the performance of several optoelectronic devices – namely, solar cells, light emitting diodes, photodetectors, etc. In this perspective, the effects of optical and electronic property modification due to multi-bandgap quantum dot mixing and their effects on different optoelectronic device performance parameters are discussed. The recent advances and shortcomings of these devices are summarized in detail. Furthermore, the possible areas of concern and future research directions are included in the discussion.
Santanu Pradhan
Dr Santanu Pradhan is currently working as an Assistant Professor at the Centre for Nanotechnology of Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IITR), India. He received his PhD from the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India, in 2016. He was the recipient of a BASE fellowship to avail a short-term internship at the University of Colorado at Boulder, USA. Later, he moved to the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO) as a Post-doctoral fellow and remained there until 2021. His current research interest includes novel nanostructure-based optoelectronic devices.
1. Introduction
Colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) have attracted a lot of attention in the recent past as the building blocks for several optoelectronic devices, namely photovoltaics, photodetectors, light-emitting diodes, lasers, sensors, etc. due to their low-cost solution processibility, the possibility of large area production and most importantly the ability to utilize quantum confinement phenomena to tune the bandgap.1 One of the most striking aspects of CQDs is the quantum confinement – a phenomenon observed in low dimensional materials when the material dimension is significantly lower than its Bohr radius.2 Quantum confinement enables modification of the bandgap from its bulk value through quantized energy levels. Bandgap tuning opens a host of optoelectronic application possibilities and the flexibility of integrating it into new generation smart devices. Moreover, the advancement of synthesis knowledge and ligand chemistry further boost the implementation of these chemically synthesized QDs as the active materials for different optoelectronic devices.3 Several optoelectronic devices based on colloidal quantum dots have already been commercialized or are on the verge of commercialization. Still, the majority of CQD-based devices show device performance much lower than their potential or the performance bar needed for the consideration of commercialization. A variety of difficulties were encountered by researchers during the process of device fabrication utilizing CQDs – namely, the introduction of in-gap traps due to the unwashed remains of the ligands and surface reactions, low charge carrier mobility, device instability, photo-doping, etc, which led to poor performance in different types of CQD-based optoelectronic devices.4 Traps have played an important role in controlling parameters that determine the performance of the devices. Constant advancement in synthesis chemistry, novel ligand treatment methodology, innovative device engineering, and better knowledge of CQD-based systems pave the way for further device performance improvement.5
Recently, a new method of mixing multi-bandgap QDs has been reported to obtain different new and exciting optoelectronic properties.6 Originally, a mono-dispersed CQD solution was highly desirable for preparing different optoelectronic devices as dispersity controls the light absorption/emission, spectral broadening, and most importantly the charge transport in the QD assembly.7 A highly mono-disperse QD ensemble provides closely spaced conduction- and valence band-edges with similar energy, which helps in creating a favorable route for charge transport and consequently results in better charge carrier mobility in the CQD assembly-based solids.8 The mixing of QDs with different bandgaps results in creating a widespread range for conduction and valence band energy levels. The spreading of energy levels degrades the charge transport through reduced carrier hopping length and consequently degrades the device performance. Interestingly, it has been shown recently that mixing QDs with two different bandgaps gives rise to exciting optical and electrical properties, which opens the possibility for high-performance optoelectronic devices and new device design strategies.6,9 In this perspective, different aspects of multi-bandgap CQD mixing and its applications in different optoelectronic devices are discussed. In the beginning, the standard synthesis of widely used CQDs and the mixing procedures are discussed. Next, the different optical and electrical effects of multi-bandgap CQD mixing are enlisted. Following that, a detailed account of different types of device performance is summarized. The challenges faced with this technique and possible ways to overcome these challenges are appended in the last part.
2. CQD preparation and solution phase CQD mixing
Various CQDs with different chemical compositions and variable bandgaps have been reported over the last few decades and some of them have been successfully integrated into devices. For CQD mixing, mostly lead sulfide (PbS)-based systems have been studied so far. PbS CQDs are prepared following the standard hot injection method, where the precursor solution is rapidly injected into a rigorously stirred hot surfactant solution.10 After the reaction, the resultant solution is cooled down, and finally, the QDs are precipitated with the addition of an anti-solvent. The injection temperature and cooling time determine the diameter of the solution-processed QDs.11 In particular, for PbS QD synthesis, lead compound (lead(II) oxide) with oleic acid and 1-octadecene (ODE) are heated and pumped at an elevated temperature of 100 °C. Then, the sulfur-based precursor of hexamethyldisilathiane (HMDS) with ODE was injected rapidly to grow the PbS QDs. The higher control in the reaction parameters results in highly monodisperse CQDs in the solution.10 Once the QDs are prepared, the long-chain ligands attached to the surface of the QDs need to be replaced with short-chain ligands to make these QDs functional in different optoelectronic device applications. Ligand treatment also controls the doping types, carrier concentration, etc. Recently, solution-phase ligand exchange has become more efficient compared to post-synthesis solid-state ligand exchange.12 In this case, the ligands are exchanged during the CQD synthesis. This procedure showed better ligand exchange and time-saving device formation. For mixed QD-based devices, the synthesized CQDs are mixed in solution with an optimized volume ratio and treated with appropriate ligands. In some cases, the QDs are ligand-treated before mixing, which enables the mixing of QDs with different charge concentrations and types. For example, bulk heterojunctions formed with the mixing of n-type and p-type QDs were obtained with the mixing of ligand-treated QDs.13 Some other QDs, like lead selenide (PbSe), mercury selenide (HgSe), mercury telluride (HgTe), etc., have also been reported as the active materials for different types of optoelectronic devices and used in the formation of mixed QD-based ensembles.14 These QDs are also prepared with the hot injection method with appropriate precursor solutions and optimized reaction conditions and mixed afterward as necessary.
3. The effect of multi-bandgap QD mixing
3.1 Optical properties
The optical properties of the CQD assembly are highly affected by multi-bandgap QD mixing. Mixing CQDs with two distinct bandgaps generally forms heterojunctions in the nanoscale region. The heterojunction type depends on the position of the valence and conduction bands of the constituent CQDs. Upon photoexcitation, the electrons from the valence band are excited to the conduction band. Generally, the excited electrons in the conduction band recombine radiatively through band-to-band recombination or non-radiatively through in-gap trap states. In the case of a multi-bandgap mixture, the presence of a heterojunction allows the photo-generated charges to diffuse from higher bandgap QDs to the lower bandgap QDs.15 In this scenario, excited charges face two parallel incidents competing with each other – (a) the radiative band-to-band or trap assisted non-radiative recombination and (b) diffusion of the charges to the adjacent heterojunction. The probability of the occurrence of these two incidents mainly depends on the coupling strength of the QDs influenced by the ligand used to couple them and the diffusion length of the charge carriers in the mixed QD assembly. Ligands that assist in providing better coupling strength between the QDs and hence increase the carrier diffusion length result in better charge transfer from one QD to another. Utilizing the coupling strength of the ligand, one can tune the charge transfer capability of QDs in the assembly. The coupling strength also determines if the charge diffusion dominates over band-to-band or trap-assisted recombination. Zhitomirsky et al. showed the effect of ligand coupling strength on charge transfer efficiency.15 They prepared a QD assembly by mixing 1.3 eV PbS QDs with 0.95 eV PbS QDs as shown in Fig. 1(a). Furthermore, they showed that a low-coupling strength ligand (oleic acid) does not function as an efficient charge transferring agent between adjacent QDs. As a result, even a significant mixing of 0.95 eV QDs in a 1.3 eV QD matrix does not result in the complete suppression of radiative recombination in the donor QDs (1.3 eV QDs). On the other hand, organic cross-linked ligand MPA (3-mercaptopropionic acid) showed much stronger coupling strength. Even a small addition of acceptor QDs to the donor matrix resulted in significant radiation suppression from the donor QDs and improved the band edge radiation corresponding to the acceptor QD bandgap. The coupling strength of the ligand depends on the ligand length, chemical, and physical properties, energy position, etc. Thus, it also influences the diffusion length of the donor QDs (i.e., the efficiency of the photoexcited carrier transfer from the donor to acceptor QDs). Later, Pradhan et al. showed an improved photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) (defined as the probability of radiative recombination in an active material) of a ligand-treated PbS QD solid utilizing the multi-bandgap QD mixing.6b They showed that the PLQY of the single QD assembly (without mixing) can be increased from a mere 2.3% to around 60% by adding 7.5% acceptor PbS QDs (0.9 eV) in the matrix of donor PbS QDs (1.2 eV) by utilizing a mixed ligand of MPA and zinc iodide (ZnI2) showing very high coupling strength (Fig. 1(b)). The study also confirmed the tuning of the optical properties with the variation of acceptor QD mixing in the donor QD assembly. The optical absorption properties completely depend on the amount of QDs present in the mix, as shown in Fig. 1(c). Recently, Alexandre et al. showed theoretically that such kind of QDs in the matrix structure can be used for strong absorption influenced by quantum effects.16 Thus, mixing of the QDs can tune the optical absorption property of the assembly. The absorption property of the active materials plays an important role in optoelectronic applications like photovoltaics and photodetector devices and PLQY plays an important role in deciding the performance of light-emitting devices.
 Fig. 1  The effect of CQD mixing on different physical properties of the active materials: (a) type-I heterojunction formed upon mixing of two PbS QDs with different bandgaps. The higher coupling strength between the QDs enables the transfer of charges from the higher bandgap QDs to lower bandgap QDs. As a result, trap-induced recombination reduces and radiative recombination through the lower bandgap QD increases. (b) The change of PL intensity as a function of smaller bandgap (emitter) QD mixing in the matrix. For optimized mixing, the maximum emission corresponding to the emitter bandgap is observed. (c) Absorption spectra of the mixed CQD based film. Here L stands for the larger bandgap QDs and S stands for the smaller bandgap QDs. The mixed CQD film shows absorption corresponding to the bandgaps of both the QD populations. (d) The variation of electrical charge mobility and trap state as a function of mixing ratio of QDs with different bandgaps. The electrical properties can be tuned as a function of mixing ratios. (e) Effect of mixing on the quasi-Fermi level modification. The quasi-Fermi level (and hence the VOC) changes with the mixing. The modification depends on the energetic overlapping of density of states (DOS) corresponding to different QDs. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2013 American chemical society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 6b. (c–e) Reproduced from ref. 6a under creative common license. 
3.2 Electrical properties
Another important property that is highly affected by the mixing is the electrical property of ligand-exchanged solid-state QD assembly. Generally, the solid film obtained with a chemically synthesized monodispersed QD assembly showed better charge mobility compared to the film formed through QDs with lower degree of monodispersity.17 The presence of QDs with different bandgaps in the assembly results in the spread of condition and valence band-edge positions in the active layer. As a result, the electron and hole transport in the assembly mainly depends on the hopping mechanism, which hinders the charge transport mobility.13 The degree of mono-dispersity results in the spread of conduction and valence band energy position in the assembly and hence dictates the charge transport property of the ensemble. The properties of the ligand also play an essential role in determining the charge transport mobility in the assembly. The length and chemical properties of the ligands and their attachment to the QD surface influence the charge transport mechanism and subsequently the mobility of the QD assembly.18 Sun et al. determined the trap density and mobility of a mixed QD assembly as a function of QD mixing ratio. They showed that while mixing PbS QDs with bandgaps of 1.05 eV and 0.95 eV, the trap density and carrier mobility decreased by nearly one order compared to the only larger bandgap PbS QD-based devices (Fig. 1(d)) (ref. 6a). This suggests that mixing has a strong effect on the carrier mobility, trap density, and overall charge carrier transport phenomena. All these transport properties vary between the limits of pure higher bandgap and pure lower bandgap QD-based devices. Furthermore, Pradhan et al. showed that the photocurrent density of photovoltaic devices varies as a function of the mixing ratio, and it varies in between two extreme cases of only higher/lower bandgap QD-based devices.9 Mixing can be used to tune the electrical properties and hence can be used to optimize the device performance. Nonetheless, the actual mechanism of the change of electrical properties with mixing, particularly the change in the nanoscale, is still not completely uncovered. Further enlightenment in this perspective can lead to better utilization of mixing in tuning the optoelectronic device performance.
3.3 Change in effective electronic density of states (DOS) due to mixing
Effective electronic density of states (DOS) dictates the position of quasi-Fermi levels in the active layer and consequently influences the several optoelectronic properties. The position of the quasi-Fermi level determines the open circuit voltage (VOC) for photovoltaic (PV) devices (a parameter that highly influences the PV performance) and turn-on voltage for light-emitting diodes (defined as the applied voltage at which the light starts to emit). For a particular QD, the quasi-Fermi level position depends on the doping concentration, the effective density of states of the conduction and valence band of the material, and the amount of photogenerated or injected external charges as given by the equations,19  where Efn and Efp are the positions of the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels, respectively, Ec and Ev are the conduction and valence band positions, n and p are the electron and hole densities, and Nc and Nv are the effective densities of states of the conduction and valence bands, respectively. With QD mixing, the effective density of states for the active material changes as the number of active materials (QDs) per unit volume changes. Reduction of the amount of active material with mixing leads to the reduction of associated Nc and Nv and hence influences the change in the number of photogenerated carriers. The total number of carriers is given by,  Here f(E) is the Fermi function and g(E) is electronic DOS of the materials. In the case of mixing, the QDs with different band gaps have different DOSs (corresponding to the positions of the energy levels) as shown in Fig. 1(e). With mixing, the overall shape of g(E) changes depending on the energy difference between two QDs. The overlapped DOS can effectively determine the value of carrier density.6a The degree of overlapping depends on the energy difference between the conduction band-edges of the constituent QDs and mixing ratio. The modified Nc and Nv mixing results in a change of the value of Efn and Efp. The parameters like VOC in solar cells and turn-on voltage in LEDs showed some exciting features with QD mixing due to the change in the values of Efn and Efp. Pradhan et al. demonstrated the variation of VOC in photovoltaics and turn-on voltage in multi-QD-based light emitting devices through modification of DOS with controlled mixing ratio.9
4. The effect of QD mixing on the optoelectronic device performance
4.1 Photovoltaic devices
The success of bulk heterojunction organic solar cells intrigues the possibility of using CQD mixing as active materials.20 In fact, the preliminary QD optoelectronic devices were based on CQDs embedded in a polymer architecture.21 Despite their potential, these architectures showed limited success. Rath et al. first demonstrated all CQD-based bulk heterojunction solar cells.22 They used PbS and bismuth sulphide (Bi2S3) QDs as p-type and n-type materials, respectively. The PV devices with mixed CQDs as active layers showed much higher PV performance compared to the device with PbS and Bi2S3 as bilayer p–n junctions. This improvement of performance mainly comes from the improvement of collected photogenerated charge carriers due to higher interfacial area in the case of the bulk-heterojunction architecture. Later, the same group reported the improvement of the photovoltaic performance, while making nano-heterojunctions of CQDs with ZnO nanocrystals (NCs) (ref. 23). The ZnO NCs are electron-rich and provide electrons to passivate trap states of adjacent PbS CQDs. Trap state passivation improves the open circuit voltage of PV devices by opening up the quasi-Fermi levels. All these reports were based on bulk heterojunctions formed with two different types of CQDs. Recently, bulk-heterojunctions based on mixing similar QDs with different bandgaps were reported. These architectures for PbS-based QDs were introduced to take advantage of the optical and electronic property control through the mixing ratio, as discussed in the previous section. Neo et al. first reported multi-bandgap PbS CQD blend-based PV devices with 1.2 and 1.4 eV CQDs.24 They introduced a thin layer of CdS shell on the blends to reduce the non-radiative recombination. Although it showed a low PV efficiency (∼4.1%), it was a demonstration of improved photocurrent due to better optical absorption corresponding to the excitonic peaks related to the multi-bandgap constituent QDs. Sun et al. first showed multi-bandgap PbS CQD mixing-based solar cells with the solar spectra matched photon absorption6a (Fig. 2(a and b)). Yang et al. then showed that mixing of PbS QDs with different doping can lead to better photovoltaic performance.13 They exchanged the as-synthesized oleic acid ligands of PbS QDs with methyl ammonium lead halide for acceptor (A) type QDs and thioglycerol for donor (D) type QDs (Fig. 2(c)). The optimized mixing ratio of 1:2 (D:A) resulted in a power conversion efficiency in excess of 10.4% as a result of the elevated photocurrent compared to the unmixed device (Fig. 2(d)). Although the photocurrent was improved with this technique, the open circuit voltage (VOC) of the devices remains the same due to the homojunctions formed between the donors and acceptor QDs. The mixing of multi-bandgap QDs results in the variation of the effective quasi-Fermi levels of the active layer. The positions of the quasi-Fermi levels can be controlled as a function of the mixing ratio. Sun et al. showed that mixing of QDs for solar matched photocurrent response can improve the device performance in the infrared beyond silicon absorption spectra.6a They chose QDs with respective bandgaps of 0.95 eV and 1.05 eV and mixed them in different ratios. Mixing ratio dictates the value of VOC due to modified DOS as discussed above. The VOC varies between the value of the unmixed 0.95 eV bandgap-based device and the value of the 1.05 eV bandgap-based device. The optimized device gave the best solar matched photocurrent along with improved VOC. It showed a silicon filtered power conversion efficiency over 1% – paving the way for efficient tandem and infrared PV. Despite the improvement of VOC, the photocurrent collection suffered due to the lower collection efficiency with an unfavourable energy landscape in the ensemble. Furthermore, Choi et al. showed that mixing of multi-bandgap QDs with different doping improves the device performance over a mixed multi-bandgap QD-based device active with constituent QDs having similar doping properties.25 They used lead iodide as a ligand for n-type doping of lower bandgap QDs and mercaptoethanol for p-type doping of higher bandgap QDs and mixed the QDs to prepare bulk-heterojunctions. The mixing of different doping types of multi-bandgap QDs as the photovoltaic active layers improves the photocurrent significantly through improved charge collection. This technique results in the infrared PV efficiency of as high as 7% confirming the potential of CQD-based PV to reach beyond silicon absorption spectra (Fig. 2(e and f)). Pradhan et al. showed that the VOC of the mixed device can further be tuned by utilizing the constituent QDs with higher bandgap difference.6b,9 They prepared the active layer by mixing 0.95 eV and 1.2 eV QDs. The VOC of the device can be tuned with the mixing ratio and with appropriate optimization, the VOC can move close to the theoretical limit. The VOC can be further improved with mixing of ZnO NCs to passivate the in-gap traps associated with PbS QDs and reach an unprecedented value for PbS QD-based solar cells (0.69 V for 0.95 eV QDs). Despite such a VOC improvement, this method still does not offer any improvement in the overall power conversion efficiency due to the lower photocurrent and the reduction in the collection efficiency. The mixing of QDs with different bandgaps and related electronic properties results in poor charge transport and subsequently a lower photo current. Recently, Hosokawa et al. reported solution-processed intermediate band photovoltaics with mixing of PbS QDs with higher bandgap organometallic halide-based perovskites.26 Although the performance of these devices is low, the technique opens a field with a whole range of opportunities to design devices with improved performance.
 Fig. 2  Photovoltaic performance of mixed CQD active layer-based devices: (a) photovoltaic performance of multi-bandgap solar cells based on PbS QDs with two different bandgaps. The VOC of the device can be tuned with the change of CQD mixing ratio. (b) The EQE shows the tuning of solar spectra-matched absorption with CQD mixing ratio. (c and d) Mixing of PbS QDs with different doping improves the photovoltaic performance compared to only one type of QD used as the active layer. The major improvement comes from the photocurrent with better collection efficiency. (e) The schematic of bulk heterojuction (BHJ) CQD-based solar cells. The BHJ was formed utilizing differently doped different bandgap PbS QDs. (f) The collection efficiency and the infrared solar cell performance improve with the BHJ technique. (a and b) Ref. 6a, (c and d) ref. 13, (e and f) ref. 25. All the images are reproduced under a creative common license. 
4.2 Light emitting diodes
The light emitting diodes (LEDs) are probably the most successful optoelectronic devices obtained with mixing solution-processed multi-bandgap QDs. Despite the success of CQD-based LEDs in the visible range using various techniques, the success of lead chalcogenide QD-based LEDs, which showed emission in the near and shortwave infrared (NIR and SWIR) regions, was limited.27 Low PLQY was the major reason behind the lower performance of these QD-based LEDs. The evidence of PLQY enhancement of solid state QD films with mixing encouraged its use as the active material in LEDs. The preliminary PbS CQD-based LEDs showed poor quantum efficiency due to the low PLQY of these films. Several techniques like optimizing ligands,18 core–shell formation,28 and putting QDs in a polymer/perovskite matrix29 were utilized to achieve higher device performance. These techniques improved the device performance through the improvement of PLQY, but the progress was far from the mark to be considered as a candidate for commercial applications. Pradhan et al. reported that the PLQY of the mixed QDs can be increased to 60% compared to a mere 2.3% for emitter-only PbS QDs with optimized mixing. The schematic of LED devices based on a mixed QD active layer is shown in Fig. 3(a). The enhancement of PLQY due to mixing results in the improvement of the external quantum efficiency (EQE) from 0.5% for emitter QD only devices to 4.2% for binary PbS QD-based devices emitting around 1400 nm.6b Furthermore, the addition of ZnO nanocrystals (NCs) in the PbS QD binary mixture improved the PLQY (over 70%) through remote trap passivation. A record EQE performance of 7.8% and peak PCE of 9.3% for LEDs emitting around 1400 nm were observed with these mixtures (Fig. 3(b and c)). Another noteworthy feature of these mixed QD-based devices is the lower than bandgap turn-on voltage that is an important parameter to assess the power consumption. The quasi-Fermi level modification in the active layer with reduced charge carrier density of states (DOS) due to QD mixing leads to the reduction of the turn-on voltage in these devices.9 Furthermore, these devices with optimized band alignment in the active layer showed lower efficiency droop in the high radiance region (Fig. 3(d)) and over 100 h operation stability, while emitting at a constant radiance around 7 W sr−1 m−2 (Fig. 3(e)) (ref. 30). Recently, the same group has reported QD-based broadband light-emitting diodes in the SWIR region utilizing the mixed QD technique. They arranged the stacks of binary QD mixing with different emitters and deposited using the layer-by-layer deposition method, as shown in Fig. 3(f). The binary blends comprising different emitters emit light corresponding to the bandgaps of the respective emitters and result in broadband emission31 (Fig. 3(g)). The spectra cover the wavelength region of 1050–1650 nm with full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 400 nm (Fig. 3(h)). Recently, the same group has reported an EQE of as high as 18% emitting around 1550 nm using a multi-quantum dot matrix instead of the aforementioned single QD matrix-based blends with better PLQY and injection efficiency.32 These reports signify the success of the QD mixing technique, while applying them as the active layers for LEDs. The preliminary results are encouraging, and further optimizations are necessary to reach a height where they can compete with the commercialized III–V compound semiconductor-based LEDs emitting in the SWIR region.
 Fig. 3  Light emission performance of mixed CQD-based devices: (a) the schematic diagram of mixed CQD active layer-based LEDs. The insets show transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the mixed CQD film. CQDs with different diameters are observed in the mixed ensembles. (b) The mixed CQD-based devices have better quantum efficiency compared to the single QD active layer-based devices. (c) The electroluminescence observed in the mixed CQD-based device as a function of applied voltage. Lower than bandgap turn-on voltages are observed in these devices as a result of modified quasi-Fermi levels. (d) The performance and high injection current efficiency droop can be improved with appropriate optimization of the CQD matrix (higher bandgap) in the mix. EgM stands for the matrix bandgap. The 1.75 eV bandgap matrix-based binary CQD mix showed the best performance and the lowest droop. (e) The optimized band offset between the different CQDs in the ensemble improves the device stability. (f–h) CQD mix-based broadband solid state light emitter in the short-wave infrared range. The choice of emitter CQDs (smaller bandgap) can tune the emission spectrum. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 6b, (d and e) reproduced under CTA from ref. 30, Copyright 2020, Wiley, (f and g) reproduced from ref. 31 under a creative common licence. 
4.3 Photodetectors
Although there is a vast scope, the photodetectors with mixed QD techniques are not explored much. The control of the absorption spectra with mixing can lead to a photodetector with better responsivity and spectrum coverage. The preliminary results obtained with PV devices show encouragement for photodetectors, particularly in the SWIR region, and need further investigation. The QD mixing opens another section of photodetector research with intra-band-transition detection. Intra-band transition generally occurs in the mid-IR and higher wavelength regions as the energy difference between the intra-band energy levels is much smaller compared to the band edge energy difference.33 The mixing of smaller bandgap QDs with deeper conduction band-edges in the matrix of higher bandgap QDs can lead to the formation of a quantum well structure. The depth of the well depends on the conduction band offset between the adjacent QDs that form heterojunctions. The depth also influences the formation of inter-sub-bands and consequently the related transitions. Recently, Livache et al. reported intra-band detectors based on the QD mixture of HgSe and HgTe QDs.14c Putting HgSe QDs in the matrix of HgTe opens the intra-band energy difference of 0.28 eV. The intraband energy difference can be tuned by tuning the bandgap (QD diameter) of the HgTe QDs. The optimized device showed a detectivity of 1.5 × 109 Jones at 80 K with a sub-500 ns time response, while detecting at 2500 cm−1. These results confirm that there are several avenues to explore in CQD research utilizing multi-bandgap CQD-based assembly as the active layer of different optoelectronic devices.
5. Outlook
Several exciting prospects of multi-bandgap QD mixing for optoelectronic property modulation and related device performance are discussed above and summarized in Table 1. This opens a new route for high-performance optoelectronic devices with modified optoelectronic properties. Although there are some exciting advantages shown by QD mixing, the device performance in several cases is still not up to the mark due to several challenges. Addressing these challenges will decide the success of this technique in optoelectronic device applications. Some of the challenges that need to be rigorously addressed are summarized below.
Table 1 Summary of different optoelectronic devices based on multi band-gap CQD mixing




Optoelectronic devices
Multi-band gap CQD components
Performance and novelty
Ref.




Photovoltaics
PbS CQDs and ZnO nanocrystals
Improved the performance with trap passivation through electron transfer from ZnO NCs to PbS CQDs

23



PbS CQDs in the matrix of PbS CQDs of different bandgaps
Improved the performance with better light absorption, and Fermi level modification with DOS alteration due to mixing

6, 13 and 25



Light emitting diodes
PbS CQDs in the matrix of PbS CQDs of different bandgaps
Efficient charge transfer between CQDs of different bandgaps to reduce non-radiative recombination and enhance the performance of the SWIR radiation

6b, 30 and 31



PbS CQDs in the matrix of multi-QD matrix
Improved the performance with better PLQY and efficient charge injection

32



Photodetectors
HgSe CQDs in the matrix of HgTe
Opens up intra-band transition in the HgSe CQDs confined in the matrix of HgTe

14c



Intermediate band absorption-based devices
PbS CQDs in perovskite
Solution processed intermediate formation and enhancement of the absorption in the NIR region

26





• The mixing of QDs showed exciting control over the quasi-Fermi levels in the active layers and the absorption spectra. These properties are important factors in deciding the device performance. The solar matched spectra are important in getting better absorption of the solar spectra, hence producing higher photocurrent. On the other hand, the mixing of QDs can be used to tune to get the optimized VOC through modifying the quasi-Fermi levels. Despite these advantages, often the mixed QD-based devices showed lower photo-current densities compared to the single QD-based devices mainly due to lower charge mobility. The mixing of QDs often leads to lower mobility due to the average increment in hopping length. The appropriate ligand treatment strategy, QD deposition, and ideal film deposition can lead to much higher current density with improved charge carrier mobility. Uniform mixing of QDs and ordered arrangement of different QDs in the ensembles can lead to better photocurrent and hence improve the overall device efficiency.
• The mixing can tune the PLQY of the QD film. The highest achieved PLQY with QD mixing is over 60%, which is far from the maximum possible 100% value. Modification in synthesis procedures, ligand treatment and introduction of novel ligands, appropriate core–shell techniques, and atomic layer deposition (ALD)-based deposition to protect QD surfaces can lead to a better PLQY close to the theoretical value. The higher value of PLQY will lead to better device performance for light emitting diodes and it also will open the possibility of high-performance QD-based lasers.
• The mixing also opens up new cutting-edge technologies like intra-band photodetectors or light emitters, hot electron management, bolometers, etc. The uniformity of mixing and appropriate ligand treatment is essential in determining the success of these types of devices. The energy band positions of individual QDs and their behavior in the ensembles govern the operating principles of these devices. One important obstacle in designing these devices is the uniformity of the QD arrangement in the ensemble. With current solution processing techniques, the order of QD arrangement is not always achievable, more so with the mixed QD-based ensembles. A novel deposition technique addressing this difficulty can lead to the design better performed mixed QD-based novel devices.
• Despite the knowledge of the macroscopic change of parameters like absorption coefficient, PLQY, quasi-Fermi levels, etc. as a function of QD mixing, very little knowledge is available on the distribution of physical properties like charge density, density of states, and energy distribution in the nanoscale. This information can further enlighten our understanding regarding mixed QD ensemble energies and can help in devising better design strategies. Nanoscale characterizations with scanning probe microscopy along with structural characterization can reveal more details about the mixed QD-based ensembles and showcase their potential in designing new generation optoelectronic devices.
Conflicts of interest
The author declares no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The author acknowledges the support from IIT Roorkee for initial research (FIG-100944).
References

  (a) C. R. Kagan, E. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2016, 353, aac5523 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) F. P. García de Arquer, D. V. Talapin, V. I. Klimov, Y. Arakawa, M. Bayer and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2021, 373, eaaz8541 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Baskoutas and A. F. Terzis, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 013708 CrossRef ; 
  (d) M. Liu, N. Yazdani, M. Yarema, M. Jansen, V. Wood and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 548–558 CrossRef .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 508–515 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. A. Hines and P. V. Kamat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3041–3057 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. C. Beard, X. Peng, Z. Hens and E. A. Weiss, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 153, 240401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. M. Chuang, A. Maurano, R. E. Brandt, G. W. Hwang, J. Jean, T. Buonassisi, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3286–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Litvin, I. V. Martynenko, F. Purcell-Milton, A. V. Baranov, A. V. Fedorov and Y. K. Gun’ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13252–13275 RSC .

  (a) B. Sun, O. Ouellette, F. P. García de Arquer, O. Voznyy, Y. Kim, M. Wei, A. H. Proppe, M. I. Saidaminov, J. Xu, M. Liu, P. Li, J. Z. Fan, J. W. Jo, H. Tan, F. Tan, S. Hoogland, Z. H. Lu, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4003 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Pradhan, F. Di Stasio, Y. Bi, S. Gupta, S. Christodoulou, A. Stavrinadis and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 72–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1013–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Gilmore, E. M. Y. Lee, M. C. Weidman, A. P. Willard and W. A. Tisdale, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 893–901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pradhan, M. Dalmases and G. Konstantatos, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3029–3034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, D. Y. Kim, S. Baek, H. Yu and F. So, Small, 2016, 12, 1328–1333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, K. Lu, L. Han, Z. Liu, G. Shi, H. Fang, S. Chen, T. Wu, F. Yang, M. Gu, S. Zhou, X. Ling, X. Tang, J. Zheng, M. A. Loi and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704871 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Z. Fan, A. H. Proppe, F. P. G. de Arquer, D. Rossouw, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, M. Liu, G. Walters, R. Quintero-Bermudez, B. Sun, S. Hoogland, G. A. Botton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1325 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) S. Keuleyan, E. Lhuillier, V. Brajuskovic and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 489–493 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. L. Wehrenberg, C. Wang and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10634–10640 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Livache, B. Martinez, N. Goubet, C. Gréboval, J. Qu, A. Chu, S. Royer, S. Ithurria, M. G. Silly, B. Dubertret and E. Lhuillier, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2125 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhitomirsky, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5282–5290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alexandre, H. Águas, E. Fortunato, R. Martins and M. J. Mendes, Light: Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhitomirsky, I. J. Kramer, A. J. Labelle, A. Fischer, R. Debnath, J. Pan, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1007–1012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, J. J. Choi, D. Stachnik, A. C. Bartnik, B.-R. Hyun, G. G. Malliaras, T. Hanrath and F. W. Wise, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 369–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, NJ, 3rd edn,  2007 Search PubMed .

  (a) H. Kang, G. Kim, J. Kim, S. Kwon, H. Kim and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7821–7861 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
E. Strein, A. Colbert, S. Subramaniyan, H. Nagaoka, C. W. Schlenker, E. Janke, S. A. Jenekhe and D. S. Ginger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 769 RSC .
A. K. Rath, M. Bernechea, L. Martinez, F. P. G. de Arquer, J. Osmond and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 529–534 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. K. Rath, F. Pelayo Garcia de Arquer, A. Stavrinadis, T. Lasanta, M. Bernechea, S. L. Diedenhofen and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4741–4747 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Pradhan, A. Stavrinadis, S. Gupta, S. Christodoulou and G. Konstantatos, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1444–1449 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. J. Neo, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, H. E. Assender and A. A. R. Watt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 103902 CrossRef .
M. Choi, S. Baek, S. Lee, M. Biondi, C. Zheng, P. Todorovic, P. Li, S. Hoogland, Z. Lu, F. P. G. Arquer and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hosokawa, R. Tamaki, T. Sawada, A. Okonogi, H. Sato, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase, Y. Okada and T. Yano, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 43 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) F. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Zhu, Y. Bai, Y. Yang, S. Hu, Y. Liu, B. You, J. Wang, Y. Li and Z. Tan, Small, 2021, 17, 2007363 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 13–23 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Jia, F. Wang and Z. Tan, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 13186–13224 RSC .
G. J. Supran, K. W. Song, G. W. Hwang, R. E. Correa, J. Scherer, E. A. Dauler, Y. Shirasaki, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1437–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, Z. Yang, G. Walters, R. Comin, Z. Ning, E. Beauregard, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 253–257 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pradhan, M. Dalmases, A. Baspinar and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pradhan, M. Dalmases and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pradhan, M. Dalmases, N. Taghipour, B. Kundu and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Sci., 2022, 2200637,  DOI:10.1002/advs.202200637 .

  (a) A. Olkhovets, R.-C. Hsu, A. Lipovskii and F. W. Wise, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 3539–3542 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Ramiro, O. Özdemir, S. Christodoulou, S. Gupta, M. Dalmases, I. Torre and G. Konstantatos, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1003–1008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
Table Content:

Santanu Pradhan
	Dr Santanu Pradhan is currently working as an Assistant Professor at the Centre for Nanotechnology of Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IITR), India. He received his PhD from the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India, in 2016. He was the recipient of a BASE fellowship to avail a short-term internship at the University of Colorado at Boulder, USA. Later, he moved to the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO) as a Post-doctoral fellow and remained there until 2021. His current research interest includes novel nanostructure-based optoelectronic devices.

 	Fig. 1  The effect of CQD mixing on different physical properties of the active materials: (a) type-I heterojunction formed upon mixing of two PbS QDs with different bandgaps. The higher coupling strength between the QDs enables the transfer of charges from the higher bandgap QDs to lower bandgap QDs. As a result, trap-induced recombination reduces and radiative recombination through the lower bandgap QD increases. (b) The change of PL intensity as a function of smaller bandgap (emitter) QD mixing in the matrix. For optimized mixing, the maximum emission corresponding to the emitter bandgap is observed. (c) Absorption spectra of the mixed CQD based film. Here L stands for the larger bandgap QDs and S stands for the smaller bandgap QDs. The mixed CQD film shows absorption corresponding to the bandgaps of both the QD populations. (d) The variation of electrical charge mobility and trap state as a function of mixing ratio of QDs with different bandgaps. The electrical properties can be tuned as a function of mixing ratios. (e) Effect of mixing on the quasi-Fermi level modification. The quasi-Fermi level (and hence the VOC) changes with the mixing. The modification depends on the energetic overlapping of density of states (DOS) corresponding to different QDs. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2013 American chemical society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 6b. (c–e) Reproduced from ref. 6a under creative common license.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Photovoltaic performance of mixed CQD active layer-based devices: (a) photovoltaic performance of multi-bandgap solar cells based on PbS QDs with two different bandgaps. The VOC of the device can be tuned with the change of CQD mixing ratio. (b) The EQE shows the tuning of solar spectra-matched absorption with CQD mixing ratio. (c and d) Mixing of PbS QDs with different doping improves the photovoltaic performance compared to only one type of QD used as the active layer. The major improvement comes from the photocurrent with better collection efficiency. (e) The schematic of bulk heterojuction (BHJ) CQD-based solar cells. The BHJ was formed utilizing differently doped different bandgap PbS QDs. (f) The collection efficiency and the infrared solar cell performance improve with the BHJ technique. (a and b) Ref. 6a, (c and d) ref. 13, (e and f) ref. 25. All the images are reproduced under a creative common license.	 

 	Fig. 3  Light emission performance of mixed CQD-based devices: (a) the schematic diagram of mixed CQD active layer-based LEDs. The insets show transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the mixed CQD film. CQDs with different diameters are observed in the mixed ensembles. (b) The mixed CQD-based devices have better quantum efficiency compared to the single QD active layer-based devices. (c) The electroluminescence observed in the mixed CQD-based device as a function of applied voltage. Lower than bandgap turn-on voltages are observed in these devices as a result of modified quasi-Fermi levels. (d) The performance and high injection current efficiency droop can be improved with appropriate optimization of the CQD matrix (higher bandgap) in the mix. EgM stands for the matrix bandgap. The 1.75 eV bandgap matrix-based binary CQD mix showed the best performance and the lowest droop. (e) The optimized band offset between the different CQDs in the ensemble improves the device stability. (f–h) CQD mix-based broadband solid state light emitter in the short-wave infrared range. The choice of emitter CQDs (smaller bandgap) can tune the emission spectrum. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 6b, (d and e) reproduced under CTA from ref. 30, Copyright 2020, Wiley, (f and g) reproduced from ref. 31 under a creative common licence.	 

Photovoltaics	PbS CQDs and ZnO nanocrystals	Improved the performance with trap passivation through electron transfer from ZnO NCs to PbS CQDs	
23

PbS CQDs in the matrix of PbS CQDs of different bandgaps	Improved the performance with better light absorption, and Fermi level modification with DOS alteration due to mixing	
6, 13 and 25

Light emitting diodes	PbS CQDs in the matrix of PbS CQDs of different bandgaps	Efficient charge transfer between CQDs of different bandgaps to reduce non-radiative recombination and enhance the performance of the SWIR radiation	
6b, 30 and 31

PbS CQDs in the matrix of multi-QD matrix	Improved the performance with better PLQY and efficient charge injection	
32

Photodetectors	HgSe CQDs in the matrix of HgTe	Opens up intra-band transition in the HgSe CQDs confined in the matrix of HgTe	
14c

Intermediate band absorption-based devices	PbS CQDs in perovskite	Solution processed intermediate formation and enhancement of the absorption in the NIR region	
26


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
