Tunable ionic conductivity and photoluminescence in quasi-2D CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3 thin films incorporating sulphur doped graphene quantum dots   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP03621A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP03621A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 22733-22742Tunable ionic conductivity and photoluminescence in quasi-2D CH3NH3PbBr3 thin films incorporating sulphur doped graphene quantum dots†

        
          
            Ramesh 
            Kumar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jitendra 
            Kumar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sachin 
            Kadian
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Priya 
            Srivastava
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gaurav 
            Manik
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Monojit 
            Bag
          
        
      *ad
aAdvanced Research in Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy Laboratory, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247667, India. E-mail: monojit.bag@ph.iitr.ac.in
bDepartment of Polymer and Process Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India. E-mail: gaurav.manik@pe.iitr.ac.in
cDepartment of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 1H9, Canada
dCentre of Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247667, India
Received 
      6th August 2021
    , Accepted 18th September 2021First published on 20th September 2021AbstractIon migration in hybrid halide perovskites is ubiquitous in all conditions. However, the ionic conductivity can be manipulated by changing the material composition, operating temperature, light illumination, and applied bias as well as the nature of the interfaces of the devices. There have been various reports on electron ion coupling in hybrid perovskite semiconductors which gives rise to anomalous charge transport behavior in these devices under an applied bias. In this investigation, we have synthesized a mixture of 2D/3D perovskites by incorporating sulphur-doped graphene quantum dots (SGQDs) and demonstrated that the optical and electrical properties of the hybrid system can be tuned by controlling the ion conductivity through the active layer. It has been observed that the recombination resistance in undoped CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskites follows an anomalous behavior while the doped CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite shows a monotonic increase with increasing applied bias due to reduced ionic conductivity. SGQDs at the grain boundaries of 2D/3D perovskites prohibit ion migration through the active layer, and therefore the electronic-ionic coupling is reduced. This results in increased recombination resistance with increasing applied bias.
Introduction
Hybrid halide perovskites (HHPs) have attracted tremendous attention from the scientific community due to their variegated applications in optoelectronics devices including solar cells, light emitting diodes, detectors, scintillators, resistive memory devices, field effect transistors and energy storage devices.1 HHPs have many unique optoelectronic and structural properties such as an ambipolarity,2,3 high photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs),4,5 high color purity,6,7 tunable band gaps,8,9 high absorption coefficients,10 high defect tolerance and solution processability at room temperature.11–13 These unique properties are responsible for the high device performance such as high power-conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs), high external quantum efficiency (EQE) of light emitting diodes (PeLEDs), and high endurance time and ON/OFF ratio of perovskite based resistive memory devices (PRMs).14,15 The device performance (PCE/EQE) of perovskite based photovoltaic and optoelectronic devices (PSCs and PeLEDs) has already skyrocketed. Unfortunately, the poor thermal and chemical stability in ambient air conditions prevent their commercialization on a large scale. In the last few years, the perovskite scientific community has been more concerned about the device stability in the ambient environment rather than device performance.16–18 Therefore, people have made many efforts to improve the stability of perovskite based devices such as compositional engineering,19,20 morphology optimization,12,21 device encapsulation engineering,22 dimensional engineering,23–25 and utilization of energy-down-shift interlayers to improve the UV stability. One of the most critical factors that affects the poor stability is the ion migration or ion redistribution under an external applied bias or light exposure. There are various physical processes in perovskite based optoelectronic/photovoltaic devices due to ion migration or ion redistribution such as photocurrent–voltage hysteresis,26,27 anomalous high negative and positive capacitance at low frequency,21,28,29 self-healing,30 light-soaking effects,31–33 slow open circuit voltage decay (SOCVD),34 and mid-frequency resonant capacitance in PSCs and PeLEDs.35 Despite these crucial features observed in many physical processes, ion migration or ion redistribution in HHPs has inspired many exciting applications, such as energy storage,36,37 resistive switching memory devices38 and switchable optoelectronics.39
Recently several groups have demonstrated that ion migration can be manipulated in mixed cation mixed halide (MCMH) perovskites.19,40–42 We have also demonstrated that by tuning the A-site cation interaction with X-site halide ions the ac ionic conductivity can be manipulated. Therefore, the stability can be improved in MCMH perovskites. Several groups have been able to synthesize low dimensional perovskite materials to prohibit ion/cation migration through the active layer to improve the photo- and thermal stability.25,43–45 The key strategy to prepare 2D layered perovskite materials is to use large organic cations as a spacer.46,47 Although the stability can be improved in layered perovskites, the optical band gap increases and the electronic charge transport and overall device performance decrease significantly compared to 3D perovskites. Therefore, a mixture of 2D/3D perovskites should be the best choice for the optimization of the device stability along with the efficiency.48 Several attempts have been made to reduce or suppress the ion conductivity with improved efficiency of PSCs by using graphene quantum dots (GQDs).49–53 For example, Zhu and co-workers have demonstrated that the PCE and stability of PSCs can be improved by molecularly designed graphite–nitrogen incorporated GQDs (GN-GQDs) in the perovskite active layer.52 Recently, Chen et al. have reported efficient and stable PSCs by incorporating cobalt doped GQDs (Co-GQDs) into the perovskite active layer and charge transport layers.54 Therefore, doped and undoped GQDs as additives in the perovskite active layer have attracted much attention because they enhance the stability of the perovskite layers as well as the charge transport properties. There have been many attempts on structural analysis, optical studies, and device performance improvement of GQD doped PSCs and PeLEDs. However, the literature is still sparse on the investigation of the device kinetics at the interfaces of GQD incorporated perovskite active layers.
In this article, we have shown that graphene quantum dots (GQDs) and sulphur doped graphene quantum dots (SGQDs) can be introduced in the perovskite matrix to prepare a mixture of 2D/3D perovskites with desired optoelectronic properties. Apart from the structural and photophysical characterization we have demonstrated that the electron ion coupling in HHPs can be minimized by introducing SGQDs in the active layer. The doping not only improves the operational stability of the materials by decreasing the unit cell size, but also eliminates the ion-induced field in the perovskite active layer, and therefore no anomalous charge transport behavior is observed in SGQD doped perovskite materials. We have carried out electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) in an ITO/TiO2/perovskite/electrolyte device geometry to demonstrate that the DC ionic conductivity is strongly dependent on the applied bias in SGQD doped perovskite materials. We have chosen an electrolyte-based device geometry to minimize the electronic current contribution while measuring the frequency dependent ionic conductivity.
Results and discussion
Structure and morphology
The structural analysis of pristine MAPbBr3 and SGQD doped MAPbBr3 was performed by XRD measurements. The schematic structures of the pristine 3D perovskite and SGQD treated perovskite (2D/3D mixture) are given in Fig. 1a and b. The XRD pattern of the pristine film shows diffraction peaks at 2θ = 14.96°, 21.21°, 30.12°, and 33.73° which can be assigned to the (100), (110), (200), and (210) reflection planes of cubic MAPbBr3 (see Fig. 1c). On the other side, the XRD pattern of the SGQD doped film depicts low angle peaks at 2θ = 6.13° and 12.1°, which might be attributed to the two-dimensional perovskite structure.37,55,56 As can be seen, the crystallographic plane of the (100) peak shifted towards higher diffraction angle from 14.96° to 15.78° in the SGQD doped perovskite film, suggesting that the associated unit cell volume is reduced from 207.08 to 177.03 Å3.57 Therefore, a strong interaction between MA+ cations and [PbBr6]4− octahedra may occur by the incorporation of SGQDs into the 3D perovskite structure. To better understand the effect of SGQDs in the perovskite crystal structure, the surface morphology of both films was studied by FESEM measurements. The top-view FESEM image of the SGQD treated perovskite film shows a uniform and pinhole free morphology with layered structures that further confirm the formation of a mixed 2D–3D perovskite. The top-view surface morphology of both films is shown in the ESI† (see Fig. S2).
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the (a) pristine 3-dimensional perovskite structure and (b) 2D–3D mixed perovskite structure of the SGQD doped perovskite. (c) XRD pattern of the pristine- and SGQD doped perovskite films. 
Optical characterization
Photoluminescence is a very sensitive and reliable technique to capture small structural or chemical changes in the sample. In lead halide perovskites any structural change that causes a reduction in the metal–halide–metal bond angle produces an increase in the band gap. In this work, we have incorporated SGQDs into MAPbBr3 based perovskite films; the SGQD incorporated perovskite films show a ∼9 nm blue shift as compared to the control 3D perovskite films, and we attribute this blue shift to the substitution of larger size SGQDs at the place of MA+ sites, as shown in Fig. 2. This substitution causes octahedral tilting and reduces the metal–halide orbital overlap, which results in an increased band gap of the 3D perovskite. The SGQD incorporated perovskite shows a major PL peak around 411 nm, which is the characteristic peak of the 2D perovskite with layer number n = 1, and a minor peak around 529 nm, which shows that the majority fraction of the 3D perovskite has crystalized in a 2D phase, which could be due to excessive octahedral tilting and formation of the layered (2D) perovskite. We have also observed the band edge in the absorption spectrum of the SGQD treated perovskite films around 410 nm, which is generally attributed to the 2D perovskite phase (see Fig. S3, ESI†). The wavelength dependent PL measurements show the homogeneous nature of the 2D/3D mixture and the pristine 3D perovskite films, as shown in Fig. S4 and S5 (ESI†).
 Fig. 2  Steady state photoluminescence of (a) sulphur doped graphene quantum dot (SGQD) doped and pristine MAPbBr3 films. The SGQD based films show quasi 2D behaviour with a 2D peak centered around 411 nm and 3D peak around 538 nm. (b) Normalized PL spectrum of both samples. 
Impedance response
The aim of this study is to elucidate the role of SGQDs in the perovskite crystal structure in the electronic-ionic charge carrier kinetics at the perovskite interface. For this, the carrier kinetics at the pristine perovskite–electrolyte and SGQD doped perovskite–electrolyte interface was investigated by performing electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements. The EIS measurement was performed in a two-electrode system with TiO2/MAPbBr3 as a working electrode while a platinum wire was used as a counter electrode. The schematic of the device set-up is given in the ESI† (see Fig. S6). The Nyquist and Bode plots in the frequency range from 100 mHz to 1 MHz are shown in Fig. 3 and 4. It can be noted that there are two types of carrier transport mechanisms corresponding to the high-frequency (HF) semicircle and low-frequency (LF) arch. In general, the HF semicircle is associated with electronic charger transfer/transport and recombination kinetics.40,58 However, the LF arch is related to ion migration/diffusion as well as dielectric relaxation in the perovskite active layer and surface redox reactions at the perovskite/liquid-electrolyte interface.40 The HF semicircle of the pristine perovskite–electrolyte devices shows an anomalous behavior at V = 0.6 V, as shown in Fig. 3b. The anomalous behavior around 0.4–0.7 V in the perovskite based photovoltaic/optoelectronic devices is due to ionic conductivity or redistribution of ions in the perovskite bulk layer.2,34,59,60 Recently, we have observed the transition of low frequency negative capacitance to positive capacitance at 0.6 V in PeLEDs due to flipping of ions at the interface.35 However, this type of anomalous behavior was not observed in the SGQD doped perovskite active layer, which could be attributed to the reduced ionic conductivity in the SGQD doped perovskite active layer. The LF arch of the SGQD treated perovskite devices also shows a blocking nature as compared to the pristine perovskite-based devices. Therefore, incorporation of SGQDs plays a very crucial role in the modulation of the ionic and electronic conductivity of perovskite materials. The recombination resistance of perovskite-based devices is the sum of the HF resistance and LF resistance.58 As can be seen, the recombination resistance of the SGQD treated devices is much higher than that of the pristine devices, suggesting that the non-radiative SRH recombination is much lower in the SGQD doped perovskite devices. The Bode plots show that the SGQD treated perovskite–electrolyte devices have a bias dependent phase along with impedance, as shown in Fig. 4. There is a lateral shift in the high frequency phase indicating that the carrier lifetime increases with increasing bias in the SGQD treated perovskite devices. The amplitude of the impedance increases monotonically with increasing applied bias. Therefore, the applied bias is highly affecting the MA+ and SGQD interactions and enhancing the 2D nature of the mixed perovskite. Also, the low-frequency phase value decreases with increasing applied bias, suggesting that the capacitive nature of the SGQD incorporated perovskite layers is decreasing with the applied bias. The weak or absent bias dependence of the impedance spectra of the pristine MAPbBr3 sample indicates that the migrated ions screen the applied voltage. On the other hand, in the SGQD doped sample the ions are stuck at the grain boundaries containing SGQDs while electrons can easily transport through the quantum dots. Consequently electron–ion coupling is reduced. Therefore, the recombination resistance increases with increasing applied bias in the doped samples.
 Fig. 3  Nyquist spectra of the (a and b) pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and (c and d) SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs). 
 Fig. 4  Bode magnitude plots of the (a) pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and (c) SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs). Bode phase plots of the (b) pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and (d) SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs). The arrow indicates increasing bias voltage. 
Dielectric properties
To get more insight into the electro-ionic dynamics and carrier relaxations of the GQD incorporated perovskite active layer, the dielectric relaxation and AC ionic conductivity were extracted from the impedance spectroscopy according to the following equations (1) (2) σion = ε0ε′′ω(3)where ε′(ω) is the dielectric constant associated with the stored energy, ε′′(ω) is the dielectric loss relating to the dissipation of energy, C0 is the free space capacitance and ε0 is the free space permittivity. Fig. 5a and b depict the typical ε′′–f spectra of both perovskite–electrolyte based devices in the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 10 MHz at different applied potential (0.0–1.0 V). As can be seen, there are two different regions, namely the nearly constant dielectric loss (NCL) regime at low-frequency and an almost linear regime ∼1/f at mid- to high frequency. In the linear regime, the dielectric loss (ImC) decreases in parallel with the increase in frequency following Jonscher's power law (JPL) of ac ionic conduction in mixed electronic-ionic and pure ionic semiconductor materials.61 The JPL regime in halide perovskite materials indicates the presence of hopping conduction for cations and halide anions. The total dielectric loss in the system is due to conduction losses, dipole losses, and vibrational losses.62 In HHPs, the dielectric loss is mainly due to migration of ions (cations and anions) over a potential barrier between defect states. The dielectric loss (ε′′(ω)) is defined as62 (4)where A is a proportionality constant, ω is the angular frequency and Δw is the maximum barrier potential or height. We have estimated the maximum potential barrier (Δw) at room temperature (ΔET = 0.0256 eV) by using eqn (4). Δw for the pristine- and SGQD treated perovskite layers is 0.273 eV and 0.568 eV, respectively. It is evident that the higher value Δw between two defect states is due to incorporation of SGQDs in the active perovskite layer.
 Fig. 5  The variation of the dielectric loss (ImC) as a function of frequency of the (a) pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and (b) SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs). Ionic conductivity as a function of frequency at different applied bias of the (c) pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and (d) SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs). 
The ionic conductivity of both perovskite/electrolyte devices was calculated using eqn (3). The variation of the conductivity as a function of frequency at different applied bias for both devices is shown in Fig. 5c and d. It can be seen that the conductivity pattern follows a dispersive and constant plateau nature at low frequency and high frequency, respectively. The observed conductivity over the entire frequency range of both devices can be fitted by the JPL equation as follows σt = σdc + σac + Aionωn(5)here, the frequency-independent first term σdc is the DC ionic conductivity, Aion is the pre-exponential factor, and n = m + 1 is the power exponent. The value of the power exponent (n) is related to the different types of ion conduction mechanisms. The JPL has successfully explained the conduction mechanisms in most ordered and disordered materials.63–65 Recently, we have explained the ion conduction mechanisms in MCMH perovskites using the hopping conduction model. We have also observed SPL behaviour as n > 1 in the ionic conductivity in the high frequency regime due to the presence of multiple halide ions.57 From Fig. 5c and d, we can see that the ionic conductivity is frequency independent at mid- to high frequency, which is the DC ionic conductivity (σdc), while at lower frequency the ionic conductivity is strongly dependent on frequency, which is the ac ionic conductivity (σac). The low-frequency ionic conductivity in the dispersive regime is decreasing with the decrease in frequency, which could be attributed to the presence of ion–ion correlation and the blocking effects at the perovskite/electrolyte interfaces and grain boundaries. The plateau region in the ionic conductivity at mid to high frequency is due to successful hopping of interstitial halide ions or weak/no ion–ion correlation.40 The frequency at the transition of the plateau region to the dispersive region is known as the hopping frequency (ωH).40,57 The hopping frequency explains the behaviour of cations and halide anions in the perovskite network. As can be seen in Fig. 6a, the hopping conduction of perovskite ions is monotonically decreasing with the increase in the applied bias in the SGQD doped perovskite layer, which might be attributed to the formation of a strong 2D layered structure at higher applied bias due to excessive octahedral tilting. The octahedral tilting might have increased due to migrated SGQDs from the locations of MA+ sites at higher applied bias, decreasing the Br–Pb–Br bond angle. To check this rearrangement of atoms and structural change in the perovskite lattice, we have made XRD measurements before and after the applied bias (V = 1.0 V). Surprisingly, we found that the 2D peak (002) gets stronger after application of the bias. Also, it has been observed that the random orientation of perovskite grains before the application of the bias changes to the preferential/ordered orientation state (Fig. 6c).
 Fig. 6  The variation of different parameters as a function of frequency of the pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs) such as the (a) DC ionic conductivity and (b) hopping frequency. (c) The X-ray diffraction pattern of the SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3 film before and after 0.1 V. 
The ordered state or preferential orientation is supposed to have lower defect density and suppressed ion migration. Therefore, biasing the device results in both the formation of a strong 2D layered structure and ordered perovskite crystals, which could be beneficial for devices with higher operating voltages such as perovskite-based light emitting diodes (PeLEDs). Moreover, the DC conductivity of the pristine perovskite is independent of the applied potential. The hopping frequency of the SGQD treated perovskite–electrolyte devices is also monotonically decreasing with the increase in the applied bias (V). This could be because of the stronger interaction between MA+ ions and SGQDs at higher applied bias, therefore resulting in lower and slower migration of modified MA+ ions at higher applied bias in the SGQD treated perovskite–electrolyte devices. The DC ionic conductivity and hopping frequency can be fitted with an exponential form according to the following eqn (6) and (7). (6) (7)here, V is the applied potential, kT is the thermal energy at room temperature (0.256 eV), and σ0 and ω0 are the pre-factors of the dc ionic conductivity and hopping frequency, respectively. n and m are correction factors of the exponential dc ionic conductivity and hopping frequency equations, respectively, which depend on the ion accumulation/trapping and dominate hopping mechanisms, respectively. The fitted data of the dc ionic conductivity and hopping frequency are given in the ESI† (see Fig. S8 and S9). The values of n and m are 2 and 1 for the SGQD treated perovskite–electrolyte devices. A further theoretical investigation is needed to explain the exact physical meaning of both correction factors.
Conclusions
In summary, we synthesize a 2D/3D mixed perovskite structure by incorporating SGQDs. The SGQDs influence the crystallinity of CH3NH3PbBr3 and improve the surface morphology owing to lots of active S sites. It is found that the SGQD incorporated perovskite active layer shows a ∼9 nm blue shift in the PL emission as compared to the pristine perovskite layer; we attribute this significant blue shift to the substitution of larger size SGQDs in the place of MA+ sites. It has been observed that the recombination resistance in pristine CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskites follows an anomalous behaviour at V = 0.6 V while the doped CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite shows a monotonic increase with increasing applied bias due to reduced ionic conductivity. The potential barrier heights between two defect states for the pristine- and SGQD treated perovskite layers are 0.273 eV and 0.568 eV, respectively. The DC ionic conductivity is monotonically decreasing with the increase in applied bias in the SGQD doped perovskite layer. We believe that the decrement in the DC conductivity is due to the formation of a strong 2D layered structure at higher applied bias due to excessive octahedral tilting.
Experimental section
The experimental section can be found in the ESI.†
Author contributions
M. B. formulated the whole experimental problem and plan, analysed all the experimental data, and wrote and edited the manuscript. R. K. carried out all the measurements, analysed all the data, and wrote the manuscript. J. K. performed and analysed the optical data, wrote the optical part, and edited the manuscript. P. S. synthesized the PDMS, analysed the data and edited the manuscript. S. K. and G. M. synthesized the sulphur-doped graphene quantum dots and contributed to the manuscript preparation.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
MB acknowledges Department of Science and Technology (DST), INDIA, under award no. DST/INT/SWD/VR/P-13/2019 dated 14/12/2020 for partial support to carry out this research work. R. K. P. S. and J. K. acknowledge the Ministry of Education, Government of India, for PhD fellowships. S. K. acknowledges SERB, DST, Government of India, for facilitating an overseas visiting doctoral fellowship (OVDF) and Dean of Resources & Alumni Affairs (DORA), Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, for financial support.
References
W. Zhang, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–8 Search PubMed .
P. Srivastava and M. Bag, Elucidating Tuneable Ambipolar Charge Transport and Field Induced Bleaching at CH3NH3PbI3/Electrolyte Interface, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 11062–11074 RSC .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. Hu, W. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Ambipolar solution-processed hybrid perovskite phototransistors, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(8238), 1–8 Search PubMed .
N. Mondal, A. De and A. Samanta, Achieving Near-Unity Photoluminescence Efficiency for Blue-Violet-Emitting Perovskite Nanocrystals, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
J. Woo Choi, H. C. Woo, X. Huang, W. G. Jung, B. J. Kim, S. W. Jeon, S. Y. Yim, J. S. Lee and C. L. Lee, Organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite quantum dots with high PLQY and enhanced carrier mobility through crystallinity control by solvent engineering and solid-state ligand exchange, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13356–13367 RSC .
Q. Zhang, D. Zhang, L. Gu, K. H. Tsui, S. Poddar, Y. Fu, L. Shu and Z. Fan, Three-Dimensional Perovskite Nanophotonic Wire Array-Based Light-Emitting Diodes with Significantly Improved Efficiency and Stability, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1577–1585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S. H. Jeong, M. H. Park, Y. H. Kim, C. Wolf, C. L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. S. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T. W. Lee, Overcoming the electroluminescence efficiency limitations of perovskite light-emitting diodes, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Kumawat, A. Dey, A. Kumar, S. P. Gopinathan, K. L. Narasimhan and D. Kabra, Band Gap Tuning of CH3NH3Pb(Br(1-x)Clx)3 Hybrid Perovskite for Blue Electroluminescence, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13119–13124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Cation-induced band-gap tuning in organohalide perovskites: Interplay of spin-orbit coupling and octahedra tilting, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3608–3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Ji, R. Liu, C. Zhang, C. H. Mak, X. Zou, H.-H. Shen, S.-Y. Leu and H.-Y. Hsu, A review on morphology engineering for highly efficient and stable hybrid perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12842–12875 RSC .
K. X. Steirer, P. Schulz, G. Teeter, V. Stevanovic, M. Yang, K. Zhu and J. J. Berry, Defect Tolerance in Methylammonium Lead Triiodide Perovskite, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kumar, R. Kumar, K. Frohna, D. Moghe, S. D. Stranks and M. Bag, Unraveling Antisolvent Dripping Delay Effect on Stranski Krastanov Growth of CH3NH3PbBr3 Thin Films: A Facile Route for Preparing Textured Morphology with Improved Optoelectronic Properties, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 26592–26604 RSC .
R. Kumar, J. Kumar and M. Bag, Fusible Low Work Function Top Electrode for Vacuum-Free Perovskite Light-Emitting Diode Application: Role of OH-Terminated Sn Atoms at the Alloy Surface, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2021, 3, 2757–2765 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vashishtha, M. Ng, S. B. Shivarudraiah and J. E. Halpert, High Efficiency Blue and Green Light-Emitting Diodes Using Ruddlesden-Popper Inorganic Mixed Halide Perovskites with Butylammonium Interlayers, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, I. W. Choi, B. P. Darwich, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, J. H. Lee, B. Walker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, A. Hagfeldt, D. S. Kim, M. Grätzel and J. Y. Kim, Pseudo-halide anion engineering for α-FAPbI3 perovskite solar cells, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, L. Meng, T.-B. Song, T.-F. Guo, Y. M. Yang, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Liu, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Improved air stability of perovskite solar cells via solution-processed metal oxide transport layers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 11, 75–81 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Efficient and stable large-area perovskite solar cells with inorganic charge extraction layers, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, M. Wright, N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Stability of perovskite solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 255–275 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, P. Srivastava, M. Bag, R. Kumar and P. Srivastava, Role of A-Site Cation and X-Site Halide Interactions in Mixed-Cation Mixed-Halide Perovskites for Determining Anomalously High Ideality Factor and the Super-linear Power Law in AC Ionic Conductivity at Operating Temperature, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 4087–4098 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ravishankar, S. Gharibzadeh, C. Roldán-Carmona, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, M. Ralaiarisoa, A. M. Asiri, N. Koch, J. Bisquert and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Influence of Charge Transport Layers on Open-Circuit Voltage and Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells, Joule, 2018, 2, 788–798 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, J. Kumar, P. Srivastava, D. Moghe, D. Kabra, M. Bag, R. Kumar, K. Frohna, D. Moghe, S. D. Stranks and M. Bag, Unveiling the Morphology Effect on the Negative Capacitance and Large Ideality Factor in Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34265–34273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, A. Sadhanala, R. L. Z. Hoye, V. Andrei, M. H. Modarres, B. Zhao, J. Rongé, R. Friend and M. De Volder, Triple-Cation-Based Perovskite Photocathodes with AZO Protective Layer for Hydrogen Production Applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23198–23206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Shi, B. Yuan, S. B. Shiring, Y. Gao, Akriti, Y. Guo, C. Su, M. Lai, P. Yang, J. Kong, B. M. Savoie, Y. Yu and L. Dou, Two-dimensional halide perovskite lateral epitaxial heterostructures, Nature, 2020, 580, 614–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, L. Jin, Y. Gao, A. Liang, B. P. Finkenauer, W. Zhao, Z. Wei, C. Zhu, T. F. Guo, L. Huang and L. Dou, Lead-Free Organic-Perovskite Hybrid Quantum Wells for Highly Stable Light-Emitting Diodes, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(4), 6316–6325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Hsu, L. Ji, C. Zhang, C. H. Mak, R. Liu, T. Wang, X. Zou, S.
Y. Leu and E. T. Yu, Ultra-stable 2D layered methylammonium cadmium trihalide perovskite photoelectrodes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11552–11560 RSC .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Defect migration in methylammonium lead iodide and its role in perovskite solar cell operation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 RSC .
Y. Liu, L. A. Renna, H. B. Thompson, Z. A. Page, T. Emrick, M. D. Barnes, M. Bag, D. Venkataraman and T. P. Russell, Role of Ionic Functional Groups on Ion Transport at Perovskite Interfaces, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(1701235), 1–13 Search PubMed .
P. Srivastava, R. Kumar and M. Bag, The Curious Case of Ion Migration in Solid-state and Liquid Electrolyte-based Perovskite Devices: Unveiling the Role of Charge Accumulation and Extraction at the Interfaces, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 10936–10945 RSC .
Q. Yang, K. Wang, H. Yu, X. Zhu, C. Han, L. Deng, H. Yang, F. Zhao, X. Sun, Q. Zhang and B. Hu, Surface polarization and recombination in organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells based on photo- and electrically induced negative capacitance studies, Org. Electron., 2018, 62, 203–208 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bag, S. Banerjee, R. Faust and D. Venkataraman, Self-healing polymer sealant for encapsulating flexible solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 145, 418–422 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, F. Cai, L. Yang, Y. Yan, J. Cai, H. Wang, R. S. Gurney, D. Liu and T. Wang, Eliminating Light-Soaking Instability in Planar Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells by Interfacial Modifications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33144–33152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, S. H. Cheung, X. Meng, L. Zhu, Y. Bai, C. H. Y. Ho, S. Xiao, Q. Xue, S. K. So and S. Yang, Pinning Down the Anomalous Light Soaking Effect toward High-Performance and Fast-Response Perovskite Solar Cells: The Ion-Migration-Induced Charge Accumulation, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5069–5076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Yin, X. Liu, M. Que and W. Que, Multi-Influences of Ionic Migration on Illumination-Dependent Electrical Performances of Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16051–16057 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pockett, G. E. Eperon, N. Sakai, H. J. Snaith, L. M. Peter and P. J. Cameron, Microseconds, milliseconds and seconds: Deconvoluting the dynamic behaviour of planar perovskite solar cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5959–5970 RSC .
R. Kumar, J. Kumar, P. Srivastava, D. Moghe, D. Kabra and M. Bag, Unveiling the Morphology Effect on the Negative Capacitance and Large Ideality Factor in Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34265–34273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Miao, J. Li and Q. Li, Halide Perovskite Materials for Energy Storage Applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–20 Search PubMed .
R. Kumar and M. Bag, Quantifying Capacitive and Diffusion-Controlled Charge Storage from 3D Bulk to 2D Layered Halide Perovskite-Based Porous Electrodes for Efficient Supercapacitor Applications, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125(31), 16946–16954 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, H. Ahn, Y. Song, W. Lee, J. Kim, Y. Kim, D. Yoo and T. Lee, High-Performance Solution-Processed Organo-Metal Halide Perovskite Unipolar Resistive Memory Devices in a Cross-Bar Array Structure, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–9 Search PubMed .
B. Hwang and J. S. Lee, Lead-free, air-stable hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite resistive switching memory with ultrafast switching and multilevel data storage, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8578–8584 RSC .
P. Srivastava, R. Kumar and M. Bag, Discerning the Role of an A-Site Cation and X-Site Anion for Ion Conductivity Tuning in Hybrid Perovskites by Photoelectrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 211–222 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sa, D. Liu, Y. Chen and S. Ying, Mixed-Cation Mixed-Metal Halide Perovskites for Photovoltaic Applications: A Theoretical Study, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 4347–4351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, J. Peng, Y. Chen, Y. Yao and Z. Liang, Triple-cation mixed-halide perovskites: Towards efficient, annealing-free and air-stable solar cells enabled by Pb(SCN) 2 additive, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Banerjee, N. S. Kumar, K. C. B. Naidu, A. Franco and R. Dachepalli, Stability of 2D and 3D Perovskites Due to Inhibition of Light-Induced Decomposition, J. Electron. Mater., 2020, 49, 7072–7084 CrossRef .
J. Cho, J. T. Dubose, A. N. T. Le and P. V. Kamat, Suppressed Halide Ion Migration in 2D Lead Halide Perovskites, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 565–570 CrossRef CAS .
Akriti, E. Shi, S. B. Shiring, J. Yang, C. L. Atencio-Martinez, B. Yuan, X. Hu, Y. Gao, B. P. Finkenauer, A. J. Pistone, Y. Yu, P. Liao, B. M. Savoie and L. Dou, Layer-by-layer anionic diffusion in two-dimensional halide perovskite vertical heterostructures, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 584–591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Two-Dimensional Hybrid Halide Perovskites: Principles and Promises, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1171–1190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. I. Marchenko, S. A. Fateev, A. A. Petrov, V. V. Korolev, A. Mitrofanov, A. V. Petrov, E. A. Goodilin and A. B. Tarasov, Database of Two-Dimensional Hybrid Perovskite Materials: Open-Access Collection of Crystal Structures, Band Gaps, and Atomic Partial Charges Predicted by Machine Learning, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 7383–7388 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cho, A. M. Soufiani, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, D. S. Lee, J. Seidel, X. Deng, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Mixed 3D–2D Passivation Treatment for Mixed-Cation Lead Mixed-Halide Perovskite Solar Cells for Higher Efficiency and Better Stability, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–10 Search PubMed .
X. Fang, J. Ding, N. Yuan, P. Sun, M. Lv, G. Ding and C. Zhu, Graphene quantum dot incorporated perovskite films: Passivating grain boundaries and facilitating electron extraction, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 6057–6063 RSC .
H. Bian, Q. Wang, S. Yang, C. Yan, H. Wang, L. Liang, Z. Jin, G. Wang and S. Liu, Nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots for 80% photoluminescence quantum yield for inorganic γ-CsPbI3 perovskite solar cells with efficiency beyond 16%, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5740–5747 RSC .
J. K. Kim, M. J. Park, S. J. Kim, D. H. Wang, S. P. Cho, S. Bae, J. H. Park and B. H. Hong, Balancing light absorptivity and carrier conductivity of graphene quantum dots for high-efficiency bulk heterojunction solar cells, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7207–7212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gan, S. Yang, J. Zhang, G. Wang, P. He, H. Sun, H. Yuan, L. Yu, G. Ding and Y. Zhu, Graphite-N Doped Graphene Quantum Dots as Semiconductor Additive in Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37796–37803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Bag, R. Kumar and J. Kumar, in Carbon Nanomaterial Electronics: Devices and Applications, ed. A. Hazra and R. Goswami, Emerging Carbon Nanomaterials for Organic and Perovskite based Optoelectronics Device Applications, Springer, Singapore,  2021, pp. 419–444 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, Q. Luo, T. Liu, M. Tai, J. Lin, V. Murugadoss, H. Lin, J. Wang, Z. Guo and N. Wang, Boosting Multiple Interfaces by Co-Doped Graphene Quantum Dots for High Efficiency and Durability Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13941–13949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghimire and C. Klinke, Two-dimensional halide perovskites: synthesis, optoelectronic properties, stability, and applications, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 12394–12422 RSC .
Y.-H. Chang, J.-C. Lin, Y.-C. Chen, T.-R. Kuo and D.-Y. Wang, Facile synthesis of two-dimensional Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite quantum dots with fine-tunable optical properties, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, P. Srivastava and M. Bag, Role of A-Site Cation and X-Site Halide Interactions in Mixed-Cation Mixed-Halide Perovskites for Determining Anomalously High Ideality Factor and the Super-linear Power Law in AC Ionic Conductivity at Operating Temperature, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2(12), 4087–4098 CrossRef CAS .
L. Contreras-Bernal, S. Ramos-Terrón, A. Riquelme, P. P. Boix, J. Idígoras, I. Mora-Seró and J. A. Anta, Impedance analysis of perovskite solar cells: A case study, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12191–12200 RSC .
E. C. Smith, C. L. C. C. Ellis, H. Javaid, L. A. Renna, Y. Liu, T. P. Russell, M. Bag and D. Venkataraman, Interplay between Ion Transport, Applied Bias, and Degradation under Illumination in Hybrid Perovskite p-i-n Devices, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13986–13994 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, J. Kumar, P. Srivastava, D. Moghe, D. Kabra and M. Bag, Unveiling the Morphology Effect on the Negative Capacitance and Large Ideality Factor in Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34265–34273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Jonscher, Analysis of the alternating current properties of ionic conductors, J. Mater. Sci., 1978, 13, 553–562 CrossRef CAS .
P. Maji, A. Ray, P. Sadhukhan, S. Chatterjee and S. Das, Study on charge transfer mechanism and dielectric relaxation of cesium lead bromide (CsPbBr3), J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124(124102), 1–7 CAS .
K. Funke, Jump relaxation model and coupling model - a comparison, J. Non. Cryst. Solids, 1994, 172–174, 1215–1221 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pujaru, P. Maji, P. Sadhukhan, A. Ray, B. Ghosh and S. Das, Dielectric relaxation and charge conduction mechanism in mechanochemically synthesized methylammonium bismuth iodide, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 8670–8679 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Almond and C. R. Bowen, An Explanation of the Photoinduced Giant Dielectric Constant of Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1736–1740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp03621aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the (a) pristine 3-dimensional perovskite structure and (b) 2D–3D mixed perovskite structure of the SGQD doped perovskite. (c) XRD pattern of the pristine- and SGQD doped perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 2  Steady state photoluminescence of (a) sulphur doped graphene quantum dot (SGQD) doped and pristine MAPbBr3 films. The SGQD based films show quasi 2D behaviour with a 2D peak centered around 411 nm and 3D peak around 538 nm. (b) Normalized PL spectrum of both samples.	 

 	Fig. 3  Nyquist spectra of the (a and b) pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and (c and d) SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs).	 

 	Fig. 4  Bode magnitude plots of the (a) pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and (c) SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs). Bode phase plots of the (b) pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and (d) SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs). The arrow indicates increasing bias voltage.	 
	(1)
	(2)
σion = ε0ε′′ω	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  The variation of the dielectric loss (ImC) as a function of frequency of the (a) pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and (b) SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs). Ionic conductivity as a function of frequency at different applied bias of the (c) pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and (d) SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs).	 
σt = σdc + σac + Aionωn	(5)

 	Fig. 6  The variation of different parameters as a function of frequency of the pristine MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr) and SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3–electrolyte device (MABr + SGQDs) such as the (a) DC ionic conductivity and (b) hopping frequency. (c) The X-ray diffraction pattern of the SGQD incorporated MAPbBr3 film before and after 0.1 V.	 
	(6)
	(7)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp03621a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
