Directly imaging the structure–property correlation of perovskites in crystalline microwires   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA03073E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA03073E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13305-13314Directly imaging the structure–property correlation of perovskites in crystalline microwires†

        
          
            Xiao-Wei 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhen-Qian 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jing-Zhen 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Hao 
            Deng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Min 
            Hou
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yi-Fei 
            Mao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Lu
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Ren-Min 
            Ma
          
        
      *acd
aState Key Lab for Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: renminma@pku.edu.cn; jinglu@pku.edu.cn; ymhou@pku.edu.cn
bInstitute of Advanced Materials, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
cCollaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China
dNano-optoelectronics Frontier Center of Ministry of Education (NFC-MOE), Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Received 
      21st March 2019
    , Accepted 1st May 2019First published on 1st May 2019AbstractLead halide perovskites have recently emerged as groundbreaking photovoltaic materials due to their low-cost, solution-processed fabrication and extraordinary performance. Despite the rapid improvement in efficiency, perovskite devices often suffer from degradation and poor reproducibility, which are perhaps the greatest barriers for their commercialization. Fundamental understanding of perovskites' structure–property correlation is of great importance to reveal the origins of the instability and advance their practical utility. However, previous research studies mainly focused on perovskite polycrystalline thin films, a morphology with intrinsic grain boundaries that induce interference in such a direct correlation. Here, we develop a method that allows direct visualization of the structure–property correlation in one-dimensional (1D) crystalline perovskite microwires. In contrast to polycrystalline thin films, 1D microwires with well-defined crystal structures are very conducive to explore the fundamentally intrinsic properties of perovskites due to the absence of grain boundaries and a reduced trap state density. In such a clean system, we reveal the stable coexistence of two crystalline components, a MAPbI3 perovskite phase and a MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase, appearing as axially alternating dark and bright domain patterns along individual microwires. We show that the MAPbI3·DMF phase has inferior optical properties and leads to the degradation and poor reproducibility of perovskites. We further elucidate that laser illumination is an effective method to obtain a homogeneous perovskite structure with high optical quality. Our work provides a new route for fundamental understanding and performance improvement of emerging perovskite materials and devices.
Introduction
Organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites, especially methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3, MA = CH3NH3+), have recently emerged as groundbreaking photovoltaic materials due to their low-cost, solution-processed fabrication and extraordinary performance.1,2 The power conversion efficiency of perovskite-based solar cells has routinely exceeded a certified 22%,3,4 which is approaching that of inorganic GaAs and crystalline silicon cells. Despite the rapid improvement in efficiency, perovskite devices often suffer from problems of degradation and poor reproducibility, which are perhaps the greatest barriers to commercial applications. Since high photovoltaic performance depends primarily on the quality of the active perovskite layers, the fundamental understanding of their structure–property correlation is of great importance.
Notwithstanding systematic studies on the fundamental properties of lead halide perovskites, including the roles of material components, carrier dynamics and ion migration mechanisms which have provided in-depth knowledge of such pristine materials and additionally possible routes for further improving their performance,5–10 the microscopic mechanism underlying the intrinsic instabilities and heterogeneities has not been well resolved. For example, the influence of thermal annealing, illumination and intermediates, three crucial and unavoidable parameters in the fabrication and operation processes, is still ambiguous. Thermal annealing, which utilizes temperature to remove residual solvents and promote the perovskite phase transformation, results in either enhanced efficiency or performance degradation in different individual devices.11,12 Similarly, light illumination can bring about defect healing and PL-efficiency enhancement, but also can induce defect formation and material degradation under some conditions.13,14 Finally, the existence of an intermediate phase15 in pristine perovskites has been well accepted, but its intrinsic properties, distributions and impacts on performance are not fully understood.
Until now, encouraging achievements have been made in perovskite thin film systems. Inhomogeneity at the nanoscale/microscale in perovskites is observed with a combination of photoluminescence (PL), chemical imaging or scanning electron microscopy technologies.16,17 However, it is difficult to ascertain the accuracy of the microstructural properties of one single grain in a large number of adjacent particles, since the grain boundaries induce fundamental interference to probe the direct correlations between the microstructure and properties. Besides, lead halide perovskite itself is an intrinsically complex material, where the existence of structural disorder and a variety of interactions may strongly affect its properties.18 Compared to polycrystalline thin films, one-dimensional (1D) single crystalline nano/microwires have well-defined crystal structures, a reduced trap state density, and more importantly they are free of grain boundaries.19–23 Such a clean system would offer a more direct and clear correlation between the material structure and the corresponding physical properties of perovskites.
Here, we present a one-dimensional crystalline-MAPbI3-microwire system to study the microstructure–property correlation of perovskites, and reveal the stable coexistence of two crystalline components with distinct physical properties. These two components appear as axially alternating dark and bright domains along individual microwires under a bright field microscope. Raman spectra of these two domains exhibit significant difference in Pb–I stretching and MA vibration modes, which has a direct correlation with their PL intensity and peak position. In combination with powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy characterization as well as density-functional-theory (DFT) calculations, the dark domain with a high PL efficiency is revealed as a MAPbI3 perovskite phase, while the low-efficiency bright domain mainly contains a MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase. We also perform in situ PL and Raman spectroscopy of the intermediate phase and track the formation process of the bright and dark domains, which suggests that the existence and incomplete conversion of the intermediate phase are responsible for the material inhomogeneity in morphology, structure and properties, thus inducing the intrinsic instability and hampering the performance improvement of perovskites. We further provide three strategies, namely laser illumination, thermal annealing and room-temperature preservation, to eliminate the structural difference for obtaining homogeneous microwires. Our results show that the laser illumination treatment can fully transform the intermediate phase into the perovskite phase with significantly improved optical quality, while the thermal annealing and room-temperature preservation methods result in the inhomogeneity being retained. Our study establishes a visual and direct relationship between the microstructure and physical properties of perovskite materials. This work also puts forward the possibility of process engineering and the consequent control over structural homogeneity which determine the performance of perovskites in different devices.
Results and discussion
Coexistence of two crystalline components in perovskite microwires
To date, high-performance perovskite-based devices are mainly synthesized using antisolvents to enhance the morphology and crystalline quality of the active perovskite layers.24,25 Here, we synthesize the crystalline MAPbI3 microwires via an antisolvent-assisted one-step solution process (see the ESI† Section 1),26 which has been demonstrated to be an effective approach to grow high-quality perovskite single crystals with low trap state densities.27,28 In this method, as described in Fig. 1(a), a mixture of PbI2, MAI and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) in an appropriate ratio was dripped on a glass substrate, and then the vapor of antisolvent dichloromethane (DCM) was diffused into the solution mixture to induce oversaturation and nucleation of perovskites. Fig. 1(b) shows the photographs of the typical products after 12 hour growth in a sealed beaker. To the naked eye, the sample color changes from the original pale yellow to orange, and finally to dark brown within about 50 minutes after taking the products out from the beaker. The corresponding in situ PL spectra over time of the initial microwires exhibit a continuously red-shifted wavelength from 741 nm to 772 nm, a reduced full width at half maximum (FWHM) from 87 nm to 41 nm and an enhanced intensity of ∼20 times (see the ESI† Section 2). The PL spectra evolution along with the color change of the microwires implies that the material has experienced compositional and/or structural variations during this process, and the enhanced intensity and reduced line broadening suggest the transformation into a better luminescent crystalline component. No further color variation is observed after 50 minutes, indicating that the material has reached a stable state at room temperature, which we refer as the as-grown microwires.
 Fig. 1  Observation of the stable coexistence of two crystalline components in the perovskite microwires. (a) Schematic illustration of the antisolvent-assisted one-step solution procedure for the fabrication of crystalline MAPbI3 perovskite microwires in a sealed beaker. (b) Morphology evolution of the MAPbI3 microwires after taking them out from the sealed beaker within 50 minutes. After 50 minutes, the morphology becomes stable to the naked eye. Scale bars: 6 mm. (c) Bright-field optical image of the as-grown microwires under low magnification, showing their millimeter length. (d) Bright-field optical image under high magnification, revealing alternating dark and bright domain patterns along the microwire axis. 
We then investigate the morphology of the as-grown MAPbI3 microwires under a bright-field microscope [Fig. 1(c) and (d)]. The obtained microwires are highly oriented and have a length of up to 5 mm with a diameter of about 2–3 μm [Fig. 1(c)], and the diameter could be tuned from 8 μm to less than 100 nm by changing the precursor concentration from 0.8 M to 0.025 M (see the ESI† Section 3). Interestingly, in the high-magnification optical image [Fig. 1(d)], the microwires show axially alternating dark (black color) and bright (yellow color) domain patterns along individual microwires, revealing the stable coexistence of two different crystalline structures or components.
Distinct properties of the dark and bright domains
First, we perform spatially resolved microscale Raman spectroscopy to study the local microstructural features of these two distinct domains. To avoid interference from the surrounding microwires, we transfer a single microwire to clean Si/SiO2 substrates using a micromanipulator. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the bright field image of the transferred single microwire exhibits typical alternating dark and bright domain patterns. Fig. 2(b) shows the corresponding Raman spectra of these two domains, and the laser power density was minimized to 2 kW cm−2 to ensure that no degradation of the sample is induced. The Raman spectrum of the dark domain [Fig. 2(b), blue curve] exhibits characteristic peaks corresponding to the previously reported “ordered” MAPbI3 species.29–33 Specifically, the two low-frequency optical modes around 73 and 98 cm−1 correspond to the I–Pb–I bending and Pb–I stretching modes of the PbI6 inorganic cage.29 The broad bands in the range of 150–180 cm−1 and 200–250 cm−1 are associated with the libration and torsional motions of the MA cation within the cage.29,30 A strong band centered at ∼113 cm−1 is assigned to a coupled mode of the inorganic cage and MA libration.30–32 Interestingly, compared to that of the dark domain, the Raman spectrum of the bright domain [Fig. 2(b), red curve] shows very different vibration modes: a significant reduction in the peak intensity of the PbI6 inorganic cage (73 cm−1 and 98 cm−1) along with the vanishing of the characteristic peaks assigned to the MA+ motion (libration motion at ∼150–180 cm−1 and torsional motion at ∼200–250 cm−1), suggesting a lower degree of structural order and a decrease in the coupling between the PbI6 inorganic cage and MA+.29,31–33 These results indicate that the dark domain of the as-grown microwires is an “ordered” perovskite phase while the bright domain refers to a relatively “disordered” phase.
 Fig. 2  Distinct properties of the dark and bright domains. (a) Bright-field optical image of a single microwire with dark and bright domain patterns. (b and c) Local Raman (b) and PL spectra (c) collected in the dark domain and bright domain highlighted in (a). (d and e) Histogram of the PL peak position difference (d) and the intensity ratio difference (e) between the dark and bright domains. 
Subsequently, we have studied the spatially resolved PL spectra of these two distinct domains. As shown in Fig. 2(c), both the bright and dark domains show PL emissions at around 760–770 nm, which is in good agreement with the previously reported MAPbI3 perovskite phase.33,34 However, the PL spectrum of the dark domain exhibits a much higher intensity and red-shifted peak position than those of the bright region. In order to get a quantitative statistic, the PL spectra of over 30 microwires are studied, which results in direct and clear dependencies between the microstructure and properties. As shown in Fig. 2(d) and (e), the dark domains have a longer emission wavelength with a different distribution centered at 10 nm and a higher PL emission intensity spanning from about 3 to 2000 times compared with the bright domains.
In previous research studies, the changes of the PL peak position and the intensity of perovskite microstructures have been observed individually or simultaneously,29–34 but there lacks a clear correlation between the two parameters. The reported red-shifted PL peak position has been attributed to the reduction of the bandgap in lager crystals29,31,34 while the PL intensity changes are ascribed to the combination of trapping, monomolecular and bimolecular recombination17 or structural distortion induced by MA librational motion.32
Here, in the one-dimensional crystalline-MAPbI3-microwire system, we find that (1) the changes of the peak position and the intensity in PL spectra are correlated; (2) the underlying physical mechanism of the changes in PL spectra is related to their distinct material structures sorted out by spatially resolved microscale Raman spectroscopy.
Structural and compositional confirmation of the as-grown microwires
We then investigate the crystalline structure of the as-grown microwires by powder XRD to gain further insight into the origin of the local difference. Unexpectedly, only two weak diffraction peaks at 2θ = 14.4° and 28.7° [Fig. 3(a), red curve] can be assigned to the (110) and (220) reflections of the MAPbI3 perovskite,27,35–40 indicating that the perovskite phase is not the dominant phase in the as-grown microwires. The remaining Bragg peaks, especially at 2θ = 6.8°, 8.3° and 9.8°, correspond to the (020), (011) and (021) reflections of a highly crystalline MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase,15,35,38,40 suggesting an incomplete conversion from the intermediate phase to the perovskite phase. Additionally, the FTIR spectrum of the as-grown microwires (see the ESI† Section 4) shows a stretching vibration of CO (ν(CO)) assigned to the DMF solvent, which further confirms the existence of the intermediate phase.38–40
 Fig. 3  Structure and composition analysis. (a) Powder X-ray diffraction of the as-grown microwires on glass substrates (red curve) and the as-synthesized bulk MAPbI3 crystals (black curve). Inset: photograph of the obtained bulk MAPbI3 crystals, scale bar: 3 mm. (b) Local Raman spectra of the as-grown bulk MAPbI3 single crystals (black curve) and the as-synthesized pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals (blue curve). The Raman excitation wavelength was 532 nm (50× objective, 2 kW cm−2). Inset: photograph of the as-synthesized pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals, scale bar: 20 μm. (c) PL spectra of the pristine pure MAPbI3·DMF crystals on a Si/SiO2 substrate which have just completed the crystallization process. Pumped with a 325 nm laser with a power density of 20 kW cm−2. (d) Side view of the optimized MAPbI3·DMF. The rectangular line indicates the outline of the pristine unit cell. (e) Total density of states (DOS) of MAPbI3·DMF. The Fermi level is set as zero. The DOS of MAPbI3·DMF is calculated based on a primitive unit cell. Eg is the band gap. 
According to the above XRD and FTIR results, the coexistence of the MAPbI3 perovskite phase and the MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase in the as-grown microwires has been proved. Since the Raman spectrum of the dark domain [Fig. 2(b), blue curve] exhibits a perovskite structure, it can be deduced that the MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase mainly exists in the bright domains. In order to verify our inference, we synthesized bulk MAPbI3 crystals and pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals and recorded their Raman spectra under the same test conditions as the as-grown microwires for comparison.
The millimeter-sized bulk MAPbI3 crystals (Fig. 3(a), inset) are synthesized via an inverse temperature crystallization procedure (see the ESI† Section 5)41 and the structure is confirmed by XRD [Fig. 3(a), black curve] as a pure tetragonal perovskite phase with high crystalline quality.27 Then the Raman spectrum of the bulk sample [Fig. 3(b), black curve] is recorded at a cleavage surface to eliminate the negative effects from the outer surface, and the obtained Raman peaks match well with that of the dark domain in the as-grown microwires, which experimentally corroborates that the composition of the dark domain is a well-crystalized MAPbI3 perovskite phase.
We synthesize pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals (see the ESI† Section 6) which shows a needle-like morphology [Fig. 3(b), inset]. The Raman spectrum of these intermediate crystals [Fig. 3(b), blue curve] is in good agreement with that of the bright domains [Fig. 2(b), red curve], suggesting that the main composition of the bright domain in the as-grown microwires is a MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase. Generally, an incomplete conversion of perovskite often contains different intermediates and unreacted raw materials. Hence, we have also recorded the Raman spectra of other possible components (PbI2, PbI2·DMF and MAI) for comparison (Fig. S4(a), ESI† Section 7), which shows that PbI2·DMF and MAI have Raman spectra different from those of the bright and dark domains. Interestingly, the Raman spectrum of PbI2 has overlapping Raman lines with that of MAPbI3 and MAPbI3·DMF, but the interference from this component can be eliminated according to the XRD data of the as-grown microwires [Fig. 3(a)], and the different PL characteristic lines of PbI2 [Fig. S4(b)†] compared to those of the bright and dark domains provide more direct evidence.
The PL spectrum of the pure MAPbI3·DMF crystal sample exhibits a broad and weak luminous peak at around 608 nm [Fig. 3(c)]. We use the DFT method to study the band structure of the intermediate phase (see the ESI† Section 8). The calculated band gap (Eg) of MAPbI3·DMF is 2.06 eV [Fig. 3(d) and (e)], which matches well with the PL result and the previously reported bandgap value of about 2.01 eV.38
Our results indicate that the intermediate phase leads to inferior optical properties of the intermediate-containing bright domains. But here still lies a contradiction: according to the Raman data, we have demonstrated that the MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase mainly exists in the bright domain of the as-grown microwires, but the PL spectrum of the bright domains [Fig. 2(c)] usually exhibits MAPbI3 luminescence at around 760 nm, which is inconsistent with that of the pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase. Therefore, more in-depth and systematic research is conducted and discussed in the subsequent sections to reveal the underlying physics.
Evolution of in situ PL and Raman spectra of the pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals
To gain further insights into the microscopic mechanisms of the structure–property correlations, we perform transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (see the ESI† Section 9). However, the phase separation between MAPbI3 and MAPbI3·DMF is not observed, which could be attributed to the fact that it is difficult for the intermediate phase to be stable under the high energy electron beam of the transmission electron microscope. Then we investigate the in situ PL and Raman spectra of the pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals during the phase transition process. MAPbI3·DMF is recognized as a relatively stable phase under ambient conditions,40 and it takes tens of hours to detect its phase transition process [see the ESI† Section 10]. However, we find that the phase transition time can be reduced to less than an hour when we treat the intermediate materials under laser illumination with an enhanced power density of ∼100 kW cm−2 (Fig. 4). As shown in Fig. 4(a), before illumination, the PL peak at ∼608 nm is assigned to the MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase. After 10 minutes of illumination, the material exhibits a phase transition that leads to the appearance of a lower energy emission peak at ∼720 nm, and as the illumination time increases, the lower energy emission peak gains continuously enhanced intensity and red-shifted wavelength [Fig. 4(a) and (b)].
 Fig. 4  Crystalline phase conversion of the pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals. (a and b) Evolution of in situ PL spectra of the pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals under continuous laser illumination within the first 33 minutes (a) and the corresponding peak position and intensity of the perovskite-related phase extracted from the PL spectra during the laser illumination process starting from 10 to 70 minutes (b), pumped with a 325 nm laser with an enhanced power density of 100 kW cm−2. (c) Evolution of in situ Raman spectra of the pristine MAPbI3·DMF crystals under laser illumination. Pumped with a 532 nm laser with a power density of 2 kW cm−2. 

Fig. 4(c) shows the corresponding Raman spectra of MAPbI3·DMF under continuous laser illumination. In the first 30 minutes, although the PL spectra exhibit a phase transition, the related Raman spectrum is still similar to that of the pristine MAPbI3·DMF as well as that of the bright domain of the as-grown microwires, indicating that the bright domain could not be a pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase, but a mixture of the intermediate phase and the perovskite phase. From 30 to 50 minutes, the Raman spectra show an obvious increase in the Pb–I stretching mode (∼98 cm−1), along with the unchanged PL peak position of ∼760 nm and continuously enhanced luminescent intensity, which may be ascribed to the increase of the perovskite composition. From 50 to 70 minutes, the Raman spectra show two additional peaks at ∼169 and 215 cm−1, which are attributed to the MA libration and torsional motions,29 respectively, indicating a better crystalline perovskite phase, which may ultimately lead to the enhancement of the corresponding PL luminescence. These results provide further insights into the direct correlation between the typical Raman vibrations and the PL intensity and peak positions.
According to the evolution of the in situ PL and Raman spectra of MAPbI3·DMF, the red-shifted peak position and increasing intensity of the perovskite-related emission as well as the intensity of some specific Raman peaks may be attributed to the further increase and/or better crystallinity of the perovskite phase. These phenomena are similar to the structure–property correlation between the bright and dark domains in the as-grown microwires. This indicates that the different optical performance can be attributed to the difference in the content and crystallinity of the perovskite phase.
Formation mechanism of the as-grown microwires with bright and dark domains
We track the formation process of the bright and dark domains in the as-grown microwires (Fig. 5). This investigation is based on the fresh microwire sample obtained after 12 h of growth in a sealed beaker, and then it is taken out quickly and placed in a watch glass covered with a transparent glass sheet to avoid the influence of the surrounding environment and facilitate the observation of the materials. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the fresh microwires in the covered watch glass exhibit an almost uniform morphology without any bright or dark domains, along with a light yellow color visible to the naked eye [Fig. 5(a), inset], and the PL and Raman spectra show typical peaks assigned to a pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase [Fig. 5(e)–(h), black curve], indicating that the initial synthesized fresh microwires are the pure intermediate phase. Then the glass cover is removed and the sample is exposed to air for 10 minutes, a solvent volatilization process is observed which results in transparent microwires with light yellow and brown domains [Fig. 5(b)]. Both the domains show perovskite luminescence (753 nm for site A and 760 nm for site B) [Fig. 5(e) and (g), red curve], indicating a phase transition from the intermediate phase to the perovskite phase. Since the macroscopic color of the sample is still yellow during this process [Fig. 5(b), inset], there could be only a small amount of the intermediate phase that converts to the perovskite phase, and the content of the perovskite phase should be related to the PL peak position and intensity as well as the Raman peaks of the Pb–I stretching mode (∼98 cm−1) and I–Pb–I bending mode (73 cm−1) [Fig. 5(e)–(h), red curve].
 Fig. 5  Formation of the as-grown microwires with bright and dark domains. (a–d) In situ morphology changes of the as-grown microwires at different time intervals. (a) The sample placed in a watch glass covered with a transparent glass sheet to avoid the influence of the surrounding environment and facilitate the observation of the materials. (b–d) The samples after the glass sheet was uncovered. Inset: photographs of the sample grown on the glass substrate. Scale bars: 9 mm. (e and f) In situ PL(e) and Raman (f) spectra of site A. (g and h) In situ PL (g) and Raman (h) spectra of site B. PL and Raman excitation wavelength was 325 nm and 532 nm (50× objective, 2 kW cm−2), respectively. 
As the exposure time increases to 20 minutes [Fig. 5(c)], the sample experiences a macroscopic color change from yellow to black, while the microscopic color of the light yellow and brown regions also gets darker and results in the typically bright and dark domains. In the bright domain, the Raman peak of the I–Pb–I bending (73 cm−1) is further increased [Fig. 5(f), blue curve] and the PL emission is red shifted to 760 nm with an enhanced intensity [Fig. 5(e), blue curve]. In the dark domain, the PL peak is red shifted to 771 nm [Fig. 5(g), blue curve], and the Raman peaks for the MA libration (170 cm−1) are strongly enhanced [Fig. 5(h), blue curve], suggesting the formation of a better crystalline perovskite phase.33 However, when the exposure time is further extended to 120 minutes, no obvious changes in the morphology [Fig. 5(d)] and optical properties [Fig. 5(e)–(h), pink curve] are observed. During the formation process of the bright and dark domains, we found an interesting phenomenon: the dark regions tend to form at wire junctions, which we infer is related to the rate of solvent volatilization during the growth of the microwires (see the ESI† Section 11 for details). All of the above results suggest that the intermediate phase on the outer surface of the microwires can convert into the perovskite phase much faster, and the formed compact perovskite layer outside the microwires can prevent the further evaporation of DMF in the internal intermediates. Finally, the different thickness of the perovskite layers could lead to the formation of the bright and dark domains with distinct properties.
The effects of thickness of the perovskite layer on the luminescence properties are studied by calculating the band structures of bulk MAPbI3 and monolayer MAPbI3 (see the ESI† Section 8 and Fig. 6). As shown in Fig. 6(d), MAPbI3 is a semiconductor with a direct band gap of 1.67 eV, which is well consistent with the previously reported value of 1.3–1.7 eV.42–44 As the thickness decreases to one layer, the band gap of monolayer MAPbI3 changes to 1.74 eV [Fig. 6(e)], which could explain the red-shifted PL peak of the perovskite phase. Moreover, previous research has also demonstrated that the increase in the thickness of perovskite thin films often results in higher photovoltaic performances, which is attributed to the differences in their ability of light absorption.45,46
 Fig. 6  Effect of thickness of the perovskite layers. (a) Top and (b) side view of the optimized MAPbI3. (c) Side view of the optimized monolayer MAPbI3. The rectangular line indicates the outline of the primitive unit cell. Band structures of (d) the bulk MAPbI3 and (e) the monolayer MAPbI3. The Fermi level is set as zero energy. Eg is the band gap. 
Temperature dependent crystalline structure transition
It is well-known that the intermediate phase is a thermally unstable crystalline phase, which converts to the corresponding perovskite phase with heat treatment.7,15,24,25 Here, we monitor the temperature-dependent XRD patterns [Fig. 7(a)] to explore the crystalline phase evolution in the as-grown microwires. This measurement is implemented by heating the fresh microwires from 26 °C to 67 °C and then cooling back to 26 °C by setting a temperature gradient in vacuum, and the data at each holding temperature are collected for 10 minutes. As shown in Fig. 7(a), the phase transformation of the pristine material consists of about four distinct stages. In the first stage (26–57 °C, heating process), the diffraction peaks with a high intensity are mainly assigned to the MAPbI3·DMF intermediate, indicating that the intermediate phase is the dominant phase in the relatively low temperature interval.
 Fig. 7  Temperature dependent crystalline structure transition. (a) In situ XRD spectrum versus temperature for the as-grown microwires. The sample was placed in a vacuum chamber during tests. Horizontal axis is the 2θ angle. Vertical axis shows the treatment temperature (including heating and cooling processes). (b) X-ray diffraction of the MAPbI3 microwires after annealing at 80 °C for 5 min in a N2-filled glovebox. (c and d) Bright-field optical images of the in situ grown microwires on glass substrates (c) before annealing and (d) after annealing at 80 °C for 5 min in a N2-filled glovebox. 
During the second stage (57–63 °C), with increasing temperature, XRD patterns of the intermediate phase have gradually disappeared and new peaks associated with the MAPbI3 perovskite are observed, suggesting a conversion from the intermediate phase into the perovskite phase. The third stage covered the heating (63–67 °C) and cooling (67–53 °C) processes with a high-temperature cubic perovskite phase as the main component. In the fourth stage (53–26 °C, cooling process), the presence of the small (211) diffraction peak at 53 °C is attributed to the splitting of the (220) peaks, indicating a structural transition from the cubic to tetragonal phase.44
The above temperature-dependent XRD results demonstrate that we can control the material phase of the as-grown microwires by heat treatment. However, it is worth noting that a PbI2 phase47 (2θ = 12.9°, 26.2° and 38.9°) has been observed even at a low heating temperature of about 57 °C, suggesting that a slow and long-period heat treatment would lead to decomposition of the perovskite materials.
Rational strategies for highly efficient and homogeneous perovskite materials
To obtain a homogeneous material with high quality, the elimination of the low-efficiency intermediate phase is highly demanded. To this end, we employ three methods, including thermal annealing, laser illumination and room-temperature preservation, to eliminate the structural difference for obtaining homogeneous microwires. In the thermal annealing treatment, we heat the microwires at 80 °C for 5 min in a nitrogen-filled glovebox. As shown in Fig. 7(b), the XRD pattern of the annealed microwires shows typical peaks of the tetragonal MAPbI3 perovskite phase, indicating that the thermal annealing can induce a complete conversion of the MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase into the perovskite phase.37 After annealing, the morphology of the microwires also becomes homogeneous [Fig. 7(c) and (d)]. However, we find that there still exists a PL intensity difference between these two domains of the annealed microwire (see the ESI† Section 12). This result indicates that the thermal annealing has difficulties in precisely controlling the crystallization and transformation processes with the coexistence of the intermediate and perovskite phase, although it is the most widely used technique for quality improvement of the perovskite materials.11,12
Previous research has proved that illumination can affect the crystallization and morphology of the pristine perovskites,48 and can induce ion redistribution and PL enhancement in already formed perovskite films.13,16 In this work, we perform the laser illumination method by illuminating one single microwire using continuous-wave laser scanning along the microwire continuously under a power density of 2 kW cm−2 (see the ESI† Section 13). Fig. 8(a) shows the bright field optical image of the microwire depicted in Fig. 2(a) after laser illumination. We can see that the axially alternating pattern of the dark and bright domains disappears and emerges as an entire dark microwire with homogeneous morphology. More importantly, the Raman and PL spectra of the original bright domain become quite similar to those of the dark domain as shown in Fig. 8(b) and (c). These phenomena indicate that laser illumination is an effective method for achieving high quality perovskites with a homogeneous crystalline structure and optical properties.
 Fig. 8  Obtaining a homogeneous microwire with high quality by laser illumination. (a) Bright-field optical image of the single microwire depicted in Fig. 2(a) after laser illumination treatment, where the marked regions (blue square and red circle) are the same as those in Fig. 2(a). (b and c) The spatially resolved Raman (b) and PL spectra (c) recorded in the highlighted regions in (a). 
We also study the room-temperature preservation method to investigate the spontaneous change of perovskites in an inactive atmosphere. Although a part of the bright domains changes to dark ones, the morphological heterogeneity still exists even after 40 days of storage in a N2-filled glovebox [see the ESI, Section 14, Fig. S8(a)–(c)†]. The PL spectrum of the initial bright domain experiences a luminescence enhancement in short-term preservation (7 days), but a significant degradation after a longer preservation time (40 days) [Fig. S8(d)†], which corresponds to the decomposition of perovskite to PbI2.35,38 After 40 days of storage, the Raman spectrum also shows further increase in Pb–I stretching (∼99 cm−1), which becomes the strongest vibration peak [Fig. S8(e)†]. These results indicate that there is a competition between the perovskite conversion and decomposition processes in the as-grown microwires at room temperature, and perovskite decomposition would be dominant under long-term preservation.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we report a 1D microwire system that allows direct visualization of the structure–property correlation in perovskite materials. We confirm the existence and incomplete conversion of a MAPbI3·DMF intermediate phase in the initial perovskite materials, and the intermediate phase is demonstrated to have inferior optical properties, which leads to heterogeneity and low efficiency in perovskites. According to a systematic study on the evolution of in situ PL and Raman spectra during the intermediate transition process as well as the perovskite microwire formation process, we have established a direct correlation between the typical Raman vibrations and the PL intensity and peak positions, and reveal the microscopic physical mechanisms behind the regularities. Furthermore, we also provide three strategies, namely laser illumination, thermal annealing and room-temperature preservation, to eliminate the structural difference for obtaining homogeneous microwires. We find that the laser illumination treatment can fully transform the intermediate phase into the perovskite phase with significantly improved optical quality, while the thermal annealing and room-temperature preservation methods result in the inhomogeneity being retained especially in PL emission intensities between the two phases. Our research provides direct and visual evidence for fundamental understanding of the structure–property relationship in perovskites, and sparks great interest for ultimate improvements in the efficiency, stability and reproducibility of perovskite-based devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 11574012, 11774014, 61521004, 61575006, 11674005) and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Z180011).
References
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. I. Seok, M. D. McGehee, E. H. Sargent and H. Han, Science, 2018, 361, eaat8235 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. I. Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, S. Xiang, J. Yu and C.-Z. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 929 RSC .
J. Lim, M. T. Hörantner, N. Sakai, J. M. Ball, S. Mahesh, N. K. Noel, Y.-H. Lin, J. B. Patel, D. P. McMeekin, M. B. Johnston, B. Wenger and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 169 RSC .
M. Jung, S.-G. Ji, G. Kim and S. I. Seok, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2011 RSC .
Z. Yang, Y. Deng, X. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Chen, S. Yang, J. Khurgin, N. X. Fang, X. Zhang and R. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704333 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Schelhas, Z. Li, J. A. Christians, A. Goyal, P. Kairys, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, K. H. Stone, J. M. Luther, K. Zhu, V. Stevanovice and J. J. Berry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1341 RSC .
I. Turkevych, S. Kazaoui, N. A. Belich, A. Y. Grishko, S. A. Fateev, A. A. Petrov, T. Urano, S. Aramaki, S. Kosar, M. Kondo, E. A. Goodilin, M. Graetzel and A. B. Tarasov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, O. Durand, J. W. Strzalka, B. Chen, R. Verduzco, P. M. Ajayan, S. Tretiak, J. Even, M. A. Alam, M. G. Kanatzidis, W. Nie and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2018, 360, 67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Feng, M. Li, W. Xu, G. Yin, Z. Wang, B. Sun and X. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 46724 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, K. Appavoo, H. Tsai, M. Chhowalla, M. A. Alam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Katan, J. Even, S. Tretiak, J. J. Crochet, G. Gupta and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Panzer, C. Li, T. Meier, A. Köhler and S. Huettner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700286 CrossRef .
M. Long, T. Zhang, Y. Chai, C. F. Ng, T. C. W. Mak, J. Xu and K. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulovic, H. J. Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, ncomms11683 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Srimath Kandada and A. Petrozza, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, Y. Shao and Q. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3218 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, M. He, J. Peng, Y. Sun and Z. Liang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500392 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, L. Huang, X. Xu, L. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Shang, S. T. Lee and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dobrovolsky, A. Merdasa, E. L. Unger, A. Yartsev and I. G. Scheblykin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 34 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Q. Xu, J. Liu, J. Song, Y. Xue, Z. Wang, J. Zheng, L. Jiang, C. Zheng, F. Huang, B. Sun, Y. B. Cheng and Q. Bao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Paek, P. Schouwink, E. N. Athanasopoulou, K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, Y. Zhang, F. Stellacci, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3490 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 137, 8696 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liao, K. Hu, H. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Yao and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. J. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, I. Dursun, M. Yuan, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, S. Marras, M. Prato, C. Giannini, C. Quarti, F. De Angelis, M. De Bastiani, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, L. Manna and A. Petrozza, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Quarti, G. Grancini, E. Mosconi, P. Bruno, J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, A. R. S. Kandada, J. M. Frost, A. J. Barker, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini, S. Marras, G. Lanzani, A. Walsh and A. Petrozza, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, N. Kornienko, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, M. Lai, J. B. Neaton, P. Yang and R. M. Mathies, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Senanayak, B. Yang, T. H. Thomas, N. Giesbrecht, W. Huang, E. Gann, B. Nair, K. Goedel, S. Guha, X. Moya, C. R. McNeill, P. Docampo, A. Sadhanala, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601935 CrossRef PubMed .
V. D'Innocenzo, A. R. S. Kandada, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini and A. Petrozza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17730 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Petrov, I. P. Sokolova, N. A. Belich, G. S. Peters, P. V. Dorovatovskii, Y. V. Zubavichus, V. N. Khrustalev, A. V. Petrov, M. Grätzel, E. A. Goodilin and A. B. Tarasov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20739 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Pérez-Osorio, R. L. Milot, M. R. Filip, J. B. Patel, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25703 CrossRef .
T. Glaser, C. Müller, M. Sendner, C. Krekeler, O. E. Semonin, T. D. Hull, O. Yaffe, J. S. Owen, W. Kowalsky, A. Pucci and R. Lovrinčić, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, C. McCleese, C. Kolodziej, A. C. S. Samia, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 3806 RSC .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, W. Wu, A. L. Vasiliev, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8178 RSC .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, Z. Liu, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628 RSC .
T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, T. Kondo and A. Nakao, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 67, 155405 CrossRef .
Y. P. Chang, C. H. Park and K. Matsuishi, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2004, 44, 889 CAS .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christians, P. A. Miranda Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ummadisingu, L. Steier, J. Y. Seo, T. Matsui, A. Abate, W. Tress and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2017, 545, 208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta03073eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Observation of the stable coexistence of two crystalline components in the perovskite microwires. (a) Schematic illustration of the antisolvent-assisted one-step solution procedure for the fabrication of crystalline MAPbI3 perovskite microwires in a sealed beaker. (b) Morphology evolution of the MAPbI3 microwires after taking them out from the sealed beaker within 50 minutes. After 50 minutes, the morphology becomes stable to the naked eye. Scale bars: 6 mm. (c) Bright-field optical image of the as-grown microwires under low magnification, showing their millimeter length. (d) Bright-field optical image under high magnification, revealing alternating dark and bright domain patterns along the microwire axis.	 

 	Fig. 2  Distinct properties of the dark and bright domains. (a) Bright-field optical image of a single microwire with dark and bright domain patterns. (b and c) Local Raman (b) and PL spectra (c) collected in the dark domain and bright domain highlighted in (a). (d and e) Histogram of the PL peak position difference (d) and the intensity ratio difference (e) between the dark and bright domains.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structure and composition analysis. (a) Powder X-ray diffraction of the as-grown microwires on glass substrates (red curve) and the as-synthesized bulk MAPbI3 crystals (black curve). Inset: photograph of the obtained bulk MAPbI3 crystals, scale bar: 3 mm. (b) Local Raman spectra of the as-grown bulk MAPbI3 single crystals (black curve) and the as-synthesized pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals (blue curve). The Raman excitation wavelength was 532 nm (50× objective, 2 kW cm−2). Inset: photograph of the as-synthesized pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals, scale bar: 20 μm. (c) PL spectra of the pristine pure MAPbI3·DMF crystals on a Si/SiO2 substrate which have just completed the crystallization process. Pumped with a 325 nm laser with a power density of 20 kW cm−2. (d) Side view of the optimized MAPbI3·DMF. The rectangular line indicates the outline of the pristine unit cell. (e) Total density of states (DOS) of MAPbI3·DMF. The Fermi level is set as zero. The DOS of MAPbI3·DMF is calculated based on a primitive unit cell. Eg is the band gap.	 

 	Fig. 4  Crystalline phase conversion of the pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals. (a and b) Evolution of in situ PL spectra of the pure MAPbI3·DMF intermediate crystals under continuous laser illumination within the first 33 minutes (a) and the corresponding peak position and intensity of the perovskite-related phase extracted from the PL spectra during the laser illumination process starting from 10 to 70 minutes (b), pumped with a 325 nm laser with an enhanced power density of 100 kW cm−2. (c) Evolution of in situ Raman spectra of the pristine MAPbI3·DMF crystals under laser illumination. Pumped with a 532 nm laser with a power density of 2 kW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 5  Formation of the as-grown microwires with bright and dark domains. (a–d) In situ morphology changes of the as-grown microwires at different time intervals. (a) The sample placed in a watch glass covered with a transparent glass sheet to avoid the influence of the surrounding environment and facilitate the observation of the materials. (b–d) The samples after the glass sheet was uncovered. Inset: photographs of the sample grown on the glass substrate. Scale bars: 9 mm. (e and f) In situ PL(e) and Raman (f) spectra of site A. (g and h) In situ PL (g) and Raman (h) spectra of site B. PL and Raman excitation wavelength was 325 nm and 532 nm (50× objective, 2 kW cm−2), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Effect of thickness of the perovskite layers. (a) Top and (b) side view of the optimized MAPbI3. (c) Side view of the optimized monolayer MAPbI3. The rectangular line indicates the outline of the primitive unit cell. Band structures of (d) the bulk MAPbI3 and (e) the monolayer MAPbI3. The Fermi level is set as zero energy. Eg is the band gap.	 

 	Fig. 7  Temperature dependent crystalline structure transition. (a) In situ XRD spectrum versus temperature for the as-grown microwires. The sample was placed in a vacuum chamber during tests. Horizontal axis is the 2θ angle. Vertical axis shows the treatment temperature (including heating and cooling processes). (b) X-ray diffraction of the MAPbI3 microwires after annealing at 80 °C for 5 min in a N2-filled glovebox. (c and d) Bright-field optical images of the in situ grown microwires on glass substrates (c) before annealing and (d) after annealing at 80 °C for 5 min in a N2-filled glovebox.	 

 	Fig. 8  Obtaining a homogeneous microwire with high quality by laser illumination. (a) Bright-field optical image of the single microwire depicted in Fig. 2(a) after laser illumination treatment, where the marked regions (blue square and red circle) are the same as those in Fig. 2(a). (b and c) The spatially resolved Raman (b) and PL spectra (c) recorded in the highlighted regions in (a).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta03073e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
