Colloidal quantum dots for optoelectronics  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA02076G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02076G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13252-13275Colloidal quantum dots for optoelectronics

        
          
            A. P. 
            Litvin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            I. V. 
            Martynenko
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            F. 
            Purcell-Milton
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            A. V. 
            Baranov
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. V. 
            Fedorov
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Y. K. 
            Gun'ko
          
          
        
      *ab
aITMO University, 49 Kronverksky pr., Saint-Petersburg, 197101 Russia
bSchool of Chemistry and CRANN, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. E-mail: igounko@tcd.ie
Received 
      7th March 2017
    , Accepted 22nd May 2017First published on 22nd May 2017AbstractThis review is focused on new concepts and recent progress in the development of three major quantum dot (QD) based optoelectronic devices: photovoltaic cells, photodetectors and LEDs. In each application, we discuss recent champion devices with a range of architectures and discuss in detail the chronological steps taken to produce significant improvements in efficiency. We consider this relative to developments in colloidal quantum dots and their effects on these devices, covering alloyed, doped and core/shell QDs, quaternary Cu–Zn–In–S QDs, graphene and silicon QDs, and the wide range of highly promising NIR QDs. The diverse range of novel device designs is examined, including all-quantum dot devices, ternary hybrid compounds, plasmonic enhancements, and nano-heterojunction architectures. In addition, we analyse recent advances in charge transport layers, blocking layers, nanostructured photoanode fabrication and the importance of QD surface treatments. Throughout, we emphasise the use of hybrid composite materials including combinations of QDs with metal oxides, plasmonic nanoparticles, graphene and others. Finally, this review provides an analysis of prospects of these important selected quantum dot-based optoelectronic devices.A. P. LitvinAleksandr P. Litvin is a researcher at ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia, where he received his Masters degree in Photonics in 2012 and his PhD in Physics in 2015. In 2011 he spent three months at Trinity College Dublin (Ireland) in the group of Prof. Tatiana Perova. His current scientific interests are in the area of the NIR nanophotonics, and his research activity is focused on optical properties, plasmonic phenomena and energy transfer processes in semiconductor nanoparticles, as well as their application in optoelectronics.I. V. MartynenkoDr Irina Martynenko was born in 1989 in the city of Leningrad, and grew up in Saint-Petersburg. Irina is a scientific researcher at the ITMO University, Laboratory for Optics of Quantum Nanostructures. She received her undergraduate and graduate degrees from ITMO University, specializing in laser physics and biomedical optics. She defended her PhD thesis at the end of 2015. The project dealt with energy transfer processes in complexes between quantum dots and functional molecules. Her current scientific interests include physical and physicochemical processes in hybrid structures based on metal-semiconductor nanoparticles and organic and biological molecules.F. Purcell-MiltonDr Finn Purcell-Milton is a research fellow in Trinity College Dublin. He received his BSc in Chemistry from University College Dublin in 2007 and his MSc in Materials Chemistry from the University of Edinburgh in 2010, and his PhD in Chemistry in 2015 from Trinity College Dublin. His research interests are primarily concerned with quantum confined nanomaterials, particularly quantum dots, and their applications in a range of fields including luminescent solar concentrators, photovoltaic cells and chiral sensing. Recently, the development of heavy metal free quantum dots for these applications is of paramount concern.A. V. BaranovAlexander V. Baranov is the Head of the Laboratory for Optics of Quantum Nanocrystals at ITMO University in Saint Petersburg, Russia. He is a graduate of Leningrad State University in Saint Petersburg, Russia, completed his PhD in Quantum Electronics from the Leningrad State University in 1978, received a Doctor of Science degree in Optics from Vavilov State Optical Institute in 1999, and obtained the academic title of Professor in 2012. He joined ITMO University in 2006. His research interests are in research and development in nanoscience and nanotechnology including the physics of semiconductor, metal and dielectric nanostructures.A. V. FedorovAnatoly V. Fedorov is the Head of the International Research and Education Centre for Physics of Nanostructures at ITMO University in Saint Petersburg, Russia. He is a graduate of Leningrad Polytechnic Institute in Saint Petersburg, Russia, completed his PhD in Semiconductor and Dielectric Physics from Leningrad Polytechnic Institute in 1987, received a Doctor of Science degree in Optics from Vavilov State Optical Institute in 2004, and obtained the academic title of Professor in 2010. He joined ITMO University in 2006. His research interests are in research and development in nanoscience, including the physics of low-dimensional solid systems and nanostructures.Y. K. Gun'koYurii Gun'ko graduated from the Chemistry Department of Moscow State University in 1987. He received his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry from Moscow State University in 1990. Then he worked as a lecturer in Chemistry at the Belarusian Institute of Technology (Minsk, Belarus). In 1994 he received a postdoctoral position in the group of Professor M. F. Lappert at the University Sussex (UK). Then in 1995 he was awarded the Alexander von Humboldt fellowship and worked at the University of Magdeburg (Germany) with Professor F. T. Edelmann. After that he returned to the University of Sussex and worked as a postdoctoral researcher. In 1999 he moved to Trinity College Dublin (Ireland) to take up the position of lecturer in Inorganic Chemistry. Currently, he is a Professor (Chair) of Inorganic Chemistry at the School of Chemistry at the University of Dublin, Trinity College. Prof. Gun'ko is an editorial board member of Scientific Reports and Nanomaterials. His main research interests and activities are multimodal nanostructures and quantum dot based nanomaterials.
1. Introduction and overview
Colloidal quantum dots (QDs) are quantum-confined semiconductor nanocrystals which have unique electronic and optical properties, and a range of potential applications.
In particular, QD-based optoelectronics has experienced an extremely rapid development during the last few decades. The first QD-based light-emitting diode (QD-LED) was designed by Colvin and co-workers in 1994, and their invention gave rise to a new area of photonic devices. These original CdSe QD-based LEDs only showed an external quantum efficiency of 0.01%, which is more than three orders of magnitude lower than that found in modern examples of QD based LEDs.1–3 The rapid increase in QD-LED efficiency was caused by the development of efficient QD synthesis techniques, optimization of device architecture, and improvement of charge transport layers' characteristics. This in turn inspired the development of other important QD-based optoelectronic devices, such as photovoltaic cells and photodetectors. Nowadays, QD-based solar cells have become one of the promising candidates in third-generation photovoltaics, while QD-based photodetectors have filled a crucial vacancy in sensitive NIR detection.
In all of these applications, the semiconducting properties of QDs are enormously important, enabling effective charge transfer and the ability to form a range of electronic junctions with metals and dielectrics. Colloidal quantum dots also give access to a huge range of low-cost solution processable device fabrication routes. However, the greatest strength of QDs lies in the enormous flexibility of their optical and semiconductor properties across a wide range, facilitating the design of specific QDs for the extensive scope of different optoelectronic devices being researched today, tailored to the principles underlying the operation of these distinctly different devices.
For LEDs, narrow QD emission and therefore pure color is paramount when applied to display technology, while in contrast, a wide emission spectrum is desired when utilizing QDs as a light source. In both operations, a high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) is fundamental. Therefore, a huge range of core/shell QDs are applied in LEDs. In addition, the softening of the confinement potential of QDs found in alloyed QDs results in Auger recombination and blinking suppression.4 Hence, a combination of an alloyed core synthesis and application of precise shelling produces QDs best fit for LED applications.
A high extinction coefficient in a wide spectral range is fundamental to the design of efficient photovoltaics. Meanwhile photodetection applications normally require a specific sensitivity to important segments of the electromagnetic spectra. Clearing the bandgap from trap states is a critical requirement for efficient QD-based photovoltaics, since midgap states reduce the carrier mobilities and excited state lifetime, which are of paramount importance for device performance.
In contrast, the midgap states present in QDs can effectively act as sensitizing centers for photodetectors, while in photoconductors, large photoconductive gain and sensitivity can be achieved by using such midgap states. The wide adoption of PbS QDs for the creation of sensitive photodetectors is due to this, since they provide both strong absorption in a wide spectral range and offer the presence of sensitizing centers, which can be attributed to oxide species or non-stoichiometry.5,6
No other material can meet these wide-ranging applications so effectively. Here we review the development of colloidal QD-based optoelectronic devices, focusing upon three important devices: LEDs, photodetectors, and photovoltaic (PV) cells. We provide a brief outlook of the history of QD-LED development and underline the key improvements of the device design, including the creation of organic, inorganic, and hybrid organic/inorganic light-emitting structures. Specific focus is placed upon non-toxic QD-LEDs based on Cu–In–Zn–S core/ZnS shell QDs, ZnO QDs, InP QDs etc. We also explore recent attempts to incorporate promising nanomaterials, such as graphene, silicon and carbon QDs into QD-LED designs. In addition, the spectral output of these light sources is considered, with specific consideration of white light and near-infrared (NIR) QD-LEDs.
QD-based photovoltaic cells are considered regarding the device architecture type, using best in class examples, accompanied by detailed analysis of the physical mechanisms underpinning their operation. Next, we have examined new routes to QD-based solar cell performance enhancement, such as QD passivation, QD self-organization, plasmon-enhancement, and hot carrier extraction.
UV, NIR, and MIR QD-based photodetectors are considered with an emphasis on the highest achieved performance characteristics. We have also reviewed new approaches to suppress dark current, improve air stability, increase sensitivity and gain, or decrease response time. The described approaches include the use of additional carrier blocking layers, passivating atomic layer deposition, and creation of hybrid QD structures.
We believe that this review introduces the dynamic and ever-evolving field of colloidal quantum-dot-based optoelectronics and will prove intriguing to the newcomer or expert alike.
2. Spectral tuning and processing of QDs for optoelectronic applications
Spectral tuning and solution processability are important benefits of colloidal quantum dots for application in optoelectronics. As is well known, QDs in a given range related to the Bohr exciton radius show a shift in the band gap energy of the material, therefore allowing the absorption onset to be tuned depending on the specific semiconductor. Therefore, by varying the size of QDs, in addition to the chemical composition, the vast spectral range from UV to NIR can be covered using QDs. Importantly, due to recent developments, it is now possible to achieve this wide range using non-toxic heavy metal-free QDs (Fig. 1) in addition to heavy metal containing QDs.7 This range offers huge advantages to the design of optoelectronic devices, with spectral tuning providing color selection or color mixing in LEDs, absorption onset optimization and more effective tandem cell design in photovoltaics, and eliminates the need for optical filters, which increase costs and cause loss of signal in photo detection.
 Fig. 1  The spectral range from UV to NIR can be covered using both “classic” and heavy metal-free QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
The possibility of solution processing is another important advantage of colloidal semiconductor QDs. This enables low-cost large-scale production of optoelectronic devices at low temperature by several techniques which are compatible with roll-to-roll processing. The reduction of manufacturing expenses can compensate for the resulting lower efficiency of QD-based devices and allows wholesale production and distribution of new devices. In addition, modern protocols for solution-phase ligand exchange enable altering the properties of CQDs before deposition processes. For instance, organic ligands on the QD surface can be replaced by molecular metal chalcogenide complexes and bromide or iodide ligands, providing better stability, superior charge carrier transport and doping control.8 Although the majority of work at present involves small-scale processing techniques, such as dip-coating and spin-coating, much attention is now being focused upon large-scale QD film deposition. Spray-coating is one of the promising techniques which is compatible with roll-to-roll processing.9 Recent work has demonstrated this for photovoltaic cells based on PbS QDs manufactured by the optimized “sprayLD” technique; producing a superior power conversion efficiency of up to 8.1%.10 The supersonic spray-coating technique has also been recently developed, requiring no post-deposition annealing treatment to achieve excellent results.11 Doctor-blading is another technique that is often used for batch processing of QD-based solar cells and photodetectors. This method involves the use of a blade to distribute a solution uniformly over a chosen substrate and allows precise control of film thickness and coverage.12 Importantly, this technology can be easily scaled up and transferred to roll-to-roll knife coating.13 Li et al. have recently applied doctor-blading techniques to produce large-area (up to about 90 × 30 cm2) thin-film luminescent solar concentrators based on the CdSe/Cd1−xZnxS QDs/PVK composite.14 Several other methods such as transfer printing or inkjet printing can also be used for scaling up fabrication of QD-based LEDs, photodetectors and solar cells.15–18
3. QD-based LEDs
The operating principle of a QD-LED is based on the injection of electrons and holes into a thin layer of light-emitting QDs. Under applied bias, electrons and holes move to the QD layer through the corresponding charge transport layers, at which point radiative recombination occurs, leading to the generation of photons with energy equal to the QD bandgap.
3.1 Multi-colour QD-based LEDs
The first QD-based light-emitting diode (QD-LED) was designed by Colvin and co-workers in 1994.19 At this time, some unique properties of semiconductor QDs, such as tunable and sharp fluorescence, photo-stability and soluble-processing, had been explored. The LED consisted of CdSe QDs and p-paraphenylene vinylene (PPV), sandwiched between an indium tin oxide (ITO) and a Mg electrode. Although external quantum efficiency (EQE), defined as the number of emitted photons per number of electrons injected into a LED, did not exceed 0.01%, the work gave rise to a new emerging research area.
Low EQE of the first QD-LEDs reported was caused primarily by a low photoluminescence quantum yield of quantum dots. In these early stages of synthetic technique development, QDs suffered from a range of surface defects, which acted as traps for excitons and reduced photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs). Consequently, the first step to increase the EQE of QD-LEDs was to use core–shell QDs.20,21 Progress in synthetic techniques made it possible to produce QDs with much greater PLQYs and, therefore, to reduce the thickness of the emitting layer in QD-LEDs to provide better charge injection and transport and led to the creation of QD-LEDs with QD emitting monolayers.22 This marked a new stage in QD-LED technologies, since in such a device, only short organic molecules were used as charge transport layers (CTLs). This enabled the elimination of parasitic signals from polymers, which showed electroluminescence and therefore reduced colour purity. In addition, QD excitation was realized by both direct charge injection and energy transfer from organic molecules23 with a maximum EQE for these structures reaching 2.7% in a study by Anikeeva and co-workers.24 This concept was further utilised in a number of devices, including QD-based white LEDs (QD-WLEDs).25–27
Further improvement of the electron and hole transporting layers (ETL and HTL, respectively) led to the next generation of QD-based LEDs, with a completely inorganic structure. This improved QD-LEDs in two aspects; firstly, this enabled overcoming the instability of organic layers under ambient atmosphere and, secondly, this enabled the use of much higher current densities.28 A number of inorganic materials were tested as ETLs and HTLs to improve the EQE of QD-LEDs. Solution-processed copper oxide (CuO) thin films were used by Ding and co-workers as a HTL.29 ZrO2 nanoparticles (NP) have also served as an ETL,30 while a combination of molybdenum oxide and titanium oxide as a CTL has also been demonstrated.31 ZnO nanoparticles were often utilised as an ETL since it was found that they can demonstrate better efficiency than commonly used TiO2.32 The design was further optimised via the incorporation of short ligand surface treatments including a report by Koh et al. utilising 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) which was introduced between the QDs and electron-transfer layers of ZnO nanoparticles to minimize interface defects.33 Also an ethanolamine surface treatment and low temperature annealing was reported to give a 3-fold enhancement of QD-LED efficiency.34
Because sputtering of the overlying oxide layer was considered to damage the QD-emitting layer, the next generation of QD-LEDs adopted a hybrid organic/inorganic combination of CTLs. In these designs, metal oxides usually served as the ETL, while the HTL utilised organic materials such as PEDOT:PSS and its combination with TFB and poly-TPD.35–38 In addition more complex designs began to emerge such as those reported by Jiang et al., which used a double hole organic transport layer, obtaining a twofold improvement in QD-LED characteristics.39 Doping of PEDOT:PSS by graphene oxide was also performed in work by Chen and co-workers, to optimize the band offset between the HTL and the emitting layer,40 with the design shown in Fig. 2, achieving a maximum brightness of 4200 cd m−2 and a power efficiency of 7.5 lm W−1. Interestingly, the use of alloyed ZnCdSeS QDs provided deep-red emission, while graphene oxide-doped PEDOT:PSS HTL enhanced the injection/transfer rate for holes due to the better match of the HOMO level with that of the valence band of the QDs.
 Fig. 2  The schematic (a) and the energy band diagram (b) of the ZnCdSeS QD-based LED with graphene oxide-doped PEDOT:PSS HTL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015, Wiley. 
Simultaneously, with the improving of the CTL structure, the search for more effective QDs took place, with cadmium chalcogenide QDs remaining at the forefront of development.41 The use of a multi-shell quantum dots provided a large increase of QD quantum yield and EQE of Cd-based LEDs.42 It was also shown that the EQE of Cd-based QD-LEDs can be realised approaching those theoretically predicted.1 However, the toxicity of cadmium-based quantum dots remains the main hurdle for their utilization in LEDs. Thus, much work has been done to finding less toxic candidates, with several approaches emerging. For instance, the use of QDs with lower Cd concentration was proposed.43 This concept was applied to produce a ZnCdSeS QD-based flexible red-emitting LED.44 Another approach incorporates cadmium QDs into non-toxic matrices such as silica gel45 or NaCl.46,47 Also an interesting candidate for a QD matrix is Na2B4O7·10H2O, which allows a 3.4-time QD loading increase within the crystals relative to NaCl.48
However, the described approaches only partially tackle the issue of toxicity. A more radical approach is the complete rejection of Cd metal containing QDs. Pure InP quantum dots are regarded as an alternative to Cd-based nanocrystals and have been applied to a number of LED designs.30,49,50 The use of core–shell structures has also shown significant improvements in efficiency. For example, InP/ZnS core–shell nanocrystals have been reported by Yang et al.51 and showed an emission spectrum which can be tuned over the whole visible range with very high quantum yields. They also demonstrated white QD-LEDs with a high CRI of 91. In addition, highly efficient cadmium-free QD-LEDs have been recently developed using InP/ZnSeS heterostructured QDs.52
Another alternative route to Cd-free QDs is to use ternary I–III–VI-based quantum dots, first synthesized by Malik and co-workers.53 These QDs possess some unique physical properties including large Stokes shifts and long photoluminescence lifetimes54 and have been successfully used for cadmium-free QD-LED creation.55–57 When utilized in LEDs, these QDs are usually coated by ZnS or a ZnSe shell to increase their quantum yields. Shell thickness and core/shell interfacial alloying degree can be precisely modulated through synthetic procedures. Kim and Yang prepared a set of different core/shell CuInS/ZnS QDs and achieved an external quantum efficiency of 7.3%, an excellent value for Cd-free QD-LEDs.58 This value was obtained via the growth of a triple shell, performed by stepwise multiple additions of the Zn precursor, providing a smoother core/shell interfacial and a thicker outer shell. This structure in turn has the effect of suppressing Auger recombination and FRET, therefore increasing the efficiency of the QD-LEDs. Interestingly, using these QDs, the colour of the LED can be easily controlled by tuning the Cu/In ratio, and in addition WLEDs can be realized.59 Quaternary compounds such as Cu–Zn–In–S60 or Cu–In–Ga–S61 nanocrystals can also demonstrate bright electroluminescence and are extensively studied for LED applications. The QDs’ emission colours can be varied via the size and in addition by the stoichiometry, allowing them to cover the entire visible range. For instance, Teng and co-workers varied the content of Cu in Cu–In–Zn–S/ZnS QDs to obtain bright green, yellow and red emissions.62 Their devices were composed of quaternary QDs, the PEDOT:PSS/TFB HTL, and the ZnO ETL, sandwiched between Al and ITO electrodes. The maximum efficiency reached was 2.42% for yellow emission, which is, however, an order of magnitude lower than that of Cd-based QD LEDs. Jo et al. showed that quaternary Cu–In–Zn–S core/ZnS shell quantum dots demonstrate an exceptional colour rendering index (CRI) of 95 which was a record value obtained for a single QD colour converter.63 Examples of highly efficient QD-based LEDs for the visible spectral range are presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Highly efficient QD-based LEDs for the visible spectral range




QDs
Wavelength (nm)
EQE (%)
Structure
Reference




CdSe/CdS
640
20.5
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/p-TPD/PVK/QDs/PMMA/ZnO/Ag

116



CdSe@ZnSe/ZnS
455
10.7
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al

35



CdSe@ZnSe/ZnS
537
14.5
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al

35



CdSe@ZnSe/ZnS
625
12.0
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al

35



Zn1–xCdxSe/ZnS
532
16.5
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al

117



CuInS2/ZnS
580
7.3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al

110



InP/ZnSeS/ZnS
545
4.32
ITO/ZnMgO/InP-QDs/TcTa/NPB/HATCN/AI

118



CuInZnS/ZnS
552
2.42
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al

119





Zn-based QDs are a promising environmentally friendly material for QD-based LED creation, which allows the extension of emission to the blue and UV region.64 ZnO nanocrystals have been regarded as an emitting layer for UV-LEDs, with the main obstacle being finding a shell with a suitable bandgap and minimal atomic lattice mismatch.65 Following the reporting of the first synthesis of ZnO QDs with size-dependent photoluminescence in the UV region by Omata et al.,66 substantial progress has been made, and the PLQY of ZnO QDs has reached a value of 60%.67 An additional increase of PLQY has also been reported by covering QDs in a silica nanosphere.68 The interesting combination of ZnO cores wrapped in a shell of single-layer graphene was also reported,69 with the obtained WLED demonstrating a brightness of 798 cd m−2. Vertically aligned ZnO and ZnS quantum dots have also been demonstrated in the design of organic/inorganic heterojunction light emitting devices.70 Au nanoclusters and ZnO complexes (on the surface of ZnS quantum dots) embedded in protein were used for the creation of a bio-friendly, highly luminescent white-light-emitting nanocomposite,71 while ZnSe/ZnS core/shell quantum dots have been recently used for creation of inverted blue and violet LEDs.72,73
Graphene, silicon and carbon quantum dots are novel objects for QD-LED applications.74–77 Electroluminescence from graphene quantum dots was first demonstrated by Gupta et al.78 Since this, several other designs of graphene QD-LEDs have been reported.79–82 In addition, silicon QDs were first applied to obtain LED radiation in the NIR,83 then for the visible region,84–86 and recently white-blue Si QD-based LEDs have appeared.87
QD-based LEDs for the near-infrared spectral region are of great importance because of their possible applications in medicine, military systems, and optical communications.88 Utilization of semiconductor nanocrystals for NIR LEDs is promoted by the fact that there is a lack of organic dyes or polymers with high quantum yield for this spectral region. However, due to the smaller band gap, optical characteristics such as photostability and PLQY of NIR emissive QDs at present do not meet those of larger band gap QDs. Hence, NIR QD-LEDs report lower EQE values. Hybrid organic–inorganic LEDs based on PbS,89 PbSe,90 or InAs–ZnSe91 nanocrystals demonstrated an EQE as high as 0.5–1.15%. Sun et al. used ZnO and PEDOT:PSS as CTLs, and controlled the inter-dot spacing, obtaining an EQE of 2.0%.92 Significant progress was also achieved using core–shell PbS–CdS QDs, sandwiched between 4,4-bis(carbazole-9-yl)biphenyl (CBP) and ZnO CTLs, demonstrating an average EQE as high as 4.3 ± 0.3%.93 The newest emerging concept in NIR QD-LED fabrication is the incorporation of PbS QDs into perovskite matrixes and has produced the record for NIR EQE values of 4.7 ± 0.4%.94 Another new trend is the creation of all quantum dot LEDs, which exploit quantum-tuned materials for each CTL and the light-emitting layers.95 Such a device has been recently fabricated in Sargent's lab, composed of several layers of PbS QDs of different sizes, with the schematic of the device shown in Fig. 3(a). Importantly, a solid-state ligand exchange was applied, using mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) and tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) solutions to obtain the HTL and ETL, respectively. MPA-treated small (2.2 nm) PbS QDs allowed efficient hole injection and transport from the active layer to ITO, and TBAI-treated larger (2.5 nm) PbS QDs provided the correct electron affinity to inject the electrons from the silver electrode. The energy band diagram is shown in Fig. 2(b), with two different sizes used in the absorber layer also. This design produced a novel NIR-emitting active layer, with the champion device demonstrating an EQE of 1.6% at 1350 nm.
 Fig. 3  The schematic presentation of the structure (a) and the energy band diagram (b) for the all quantum dot LEDs. (c) Absorption spectra of PbS colloidal QDs used for CTLs (left) and for active NIR emitting layers (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
3.2 QD-based WLEDs
WLEDs are becoming a superior choice to standard incandescent light bulbs and fluorescent tubes in most lighting applications, offering significant energy savings and much longer operating lifetimes. At present, a range of QD-WLEDs show excellent potential in meeting this need. The conventional approach to generate white light is by applying UV excitation and fluorescent phosphors, which is realized in fluorescent lamps and is now widely used in down-conversion QD-WLEDs.96 Rapid growth of solid-state WLEDs has been supported by the development of blue LEDs, which are now commonly used as an excitation source. Lee and co-workers reported the first down-conversion QD-WLED in 2000.97 Since that time, efforts have been made to avoid using toxic nanocrystals, to obtain pure white light and to increase EQE. The technological progress has led to the creation of reliable and highly efficient “liquid” QD-WLEDs98 or even WLEDs on flexible substrates.99
Electroluminescent WLEDs are a special sub-class, which utilize direct charge carrier injection. They currently demonstrate lower efficiency than WLEDs on LED chips, but have the advantage of not requiring complicated and expensive integrated optical pumping.100 In such devices, either a mixture of QDs with conductive polymers, or exclusively QDs can be used as the active layer. The pure QD approach has the advantage of avoiding the fast degradation of the organic polymer layer and therefore provides better stability for the devices. This was demonstrated by the electroluminescence of a WLED composed of a bilayer of ZnCuInS/ZnS core/shell QDs and poly-TPD. The blue-green emission which comes from the organic poly-TPD, dropped by ∼45% over a period of 8 h, with respect to the red emission, which comes from the ZnCuInS/ZnS QDs.101 Hence, degradation of the layer leads to both decrease of the LED brightness and worsening of the CRI.
Two common approaches to produce white light from QDs stem from either utilizing a set of quantum dots of different sizes,102 or by the specific synthesis of nanocrystals with a wide luminescence band.103 To achieve a broad luminescence peak, purpose trap-related emission can be stimulated104 or nanocrystals can be doped by specific ions such as Mn2+.105 Another emerging technique utilises quantum dots of different compositions. Much success was achieved by Nannen and co-workers, who used orange CuInS2/ZnS together with blue ZnCdSe/ZnS QDs in a mixed approach.106 Broad defect-related orange emission from CuInS2/ZnS QDs and bright blue emission from ZnCdSe/ZnS QDs provide effective colour mixing. The authors showed that the correlated colour temperature can be adjusted between 2200 and 7200 K by varying the ratio of QDs in the mixture. The 1:0.5 ratio corresponded to warm white light and provided a CRI value of 78, while the external quantum efficiency of that device reached 0.37%.
Conductive polymers may also serve as a source of blue emission. In such devices, polymers have a dual role being the source of blue emission and hole-transporting layer. This strategy was realized for several polymers and Cd-based QDs.26,107,108 Liu et al. have recently proposed to use a TFB polymer as a source of blue emission and Cd-free Cu–In–Zn–S/ZnS QDs and demonstrated that the color of the electroluminescence could be tuned by varying the TFB/QD ratio and annealing temperature.109 This WLED was annealed at 95 °C and demonstrated a CRI of 90. Some more important examples of electroluminescent WLEDs with high CRI are presented in Table 2.
Table 2 The electroluminescent WLEDs with a high colour rendering index (CRI)




QDs used
Composition of white spectrum
Structure
CRI
Notes
Reference




CdZnS/ZnS, CdS/ZnS, CdSe/CdS/ZnS
Tetrachromatic blend blue + cyan + yellow + red with 9:1:1:1 ratio of: CdZnS@ZnS QDs for blue (453 nm); CdSe@ZnS for cyan (513 nm), and yellow (562 nm); and CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs for red (624 nm)
ITO/ZnO/QDs/MoO3/Al
92.8
Brightness up to 5340 cd m−2 for CRI = 88.6 and of 3220 cd m−2 for CRI = 92.6, EQE of 0.9%

120



Ultrasmall CdSe
White-light comes from a range of emitting surface trap states in sub-2 nm diameter QDs
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TPD/QDs/Ag
96.6
Correlated color temperatures varied from 5500 to 6000 K

121



CuInS2/ZnS and ZnCdSe/ZnS QDs
Broad defect-related orange emission CuInS2/ZnS and blue emission ZnCdSe/ZnS
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/QDs/ZnO/Al
78
The correlated color temperature (CCT) could be adjusted between 2200 and 7200 K (from warm white to cold white) by changing the volume ratio between orange and blue QDs (1:0.5 and 1:2)

106



CuGaS/ZnS
Single emitter, electroluminescence originated exclusively from Cu–Ga–S/ZnS QDs
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/QDs/ZnO/Al
83–88
1.9% EQE and luminance of 1007 cd m−2 absorption and PL properties can be controlled by varying Cu/Ga ratio and ZnS-shelling conditions. Cu/Ga = 1/8 ratio is found to be the most suitable for white lighting

111



CuInZnS/ZnS
Broad defect-related yellow emission from Cu–In–Zn–S/ZnS QDs and blue emission from TFB polymer
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB + QDs/ZnO/Al
90
The color could be tuned from blue-green to white by varying the thermal annealing temperatures and TFB:QDs mass ratios

109



ZnCuInS/ZnS
Red emission of ZnCuInS/ZnS core/shell QDs and the blue-green emission of poly-TPD
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/QDs/Al
92
EQE of 0.033% and luminance of 450 cd m−2 were obtained

101



InP/ZnSeS
Blue emission from poly-TPD, green emission from QDs, and the red exciplex emission between poly-TPD and TPBi
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/QDs TPBi/LiF/Al
95
Maximum brightness is close to 700 cd m−2 and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) is 0.26%, correlated color temperature (CCT) of 4710 K

122





3.3 Future prospects
Overall, QD-based LEDs for the visible spectral range currently demonstrate superb performance and lifetimes. However, the operational parameters of Cd-free QD-based LEDs still fall short of their Cd-based counterparts with recent advances in heavy-metal-free QD synthesis and precise shelling allowing an increase in their efficiency.110,111
In contrast, to the much success in the production of red and green emitting QD-based LEDs, the performance and lifetime of blue and NIR QD-LEDs still require drastic improvement to gain adoption. Some other important issues also need to be addressed for QD-based LEDs, namely large-scale production and fabrication on flexible substrates which are critical for the development of QD-LED-based large-area displays and lighting.112
Another emerging trend is also the positive effects of alternative quantum confined nanoparticles in LEDs. For instance, recent developments of 2D nanoplatelets demonstrate superior oscillation strength and radiative excitation parameters than 0D semiconductor nanocrystals, and could potentially become the new platform for creation of highly efficient LEDs.113–115
4. QD-based solar cells
Conversion of solar energy to electricity is one of the most developed areas of QD application. Colloidal QDs are ideally suited to the requirements of third-generation photovoltaics, combining low price and comparatively high efficiency. Solution-processed photovoltaics, based on colloidal QDs, can drastically minimize manufacturing expenses, exploiting low-temperature synthesis procedures and roll-to-roll or spray-coating fabrication technologies.9,10,123 The fast growth of power conversion efficiency (PCE) of QD-based solar cells achieved last decade, together with the development of fabrication technologies, foreshadow further expansion of colloidal QDs into the area of renewable energy. Since the first hybrid QD124 and completely inorganic QD125 solar cells were fabricated, the efficiencies of these devices have enhanced drastically and consistently attract significant attention, with constantly evolving designs.
Power conversion efficiency is the characteristic of a photovoltaic cell's ability to convert incident solar radiation to electrical power and enables one to compare the efficiencies of different PV cells. This factor is determined by the photon flux incident upon it, and so is defined relative to a given standard incident spectrum, the most common of which is AM (air mass coefficient) 1.5 standard solar spectrum. All PCE described in this piece have been determined relative to AM1.5 if not stated otherwise. PCE can be defined as follows:  where ISC is the short circuit current of a solar cell, VOC is the open circuit voltage, FF is the fill factor, and Plight is the energy of the incident light. Table 3 compares the PCE of some highly-efficient QD-solar cells of different types.
Table 3 The performance of QD-solar cells of different types. The examples with the highest PCE to date are highlighted in bold for each solar cell type




QDs used
Type
Structure
PCEa, %
Reference





a Certified PCE is listed if available.
b Ternary hybrid photovoltaic cells are not included, see Table 5.





CdTe nanorods
Schottky junction
ITO/p-CdTe/Al
5.0

134




PbS


Schottky junction


ITO/PbS/LiF/Al


5.2


135



PbS[CuS]
QDSSC
FTO/TiO2/PbS[CuS]/P3HT/Au
8.07

253



CdSe0.65Te0.35
QDSSC
Cu2−xS/FTO counter electrode; TiO2/QD/am-TiO2/ZnS/SiO2; polysulfide electrolyte
9.28

156



Cu–In–Ga–Se
QDSSC
Mesoporous carbon–Ti counter electrode; TiO2/QD/ZnS/SiO2; polysulfide aqueous electrolyte
11.49

163



Zn–Cu–In–Se
QDSSC
Mesoporous carbon–Ti counter electrode; TiO2/QD/ZnS/SiO2; polysulfide/sulfide aqueous electrolyte
11.6

162




Zn–Cu–In–Se


QDSSC


Nitrogen doped mesoporous carbon–Ti counter electrode; TiO

2

/QD/ZnS; polysulfide/sulfide aqueous electrolyte


12.07


164



PbS
Hybrid SC
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCPDTBT-QDs/ZnO/Al
4.8

254



PbSxSe1−x
Hybrid SC
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PDTPBT-QDs/LiF/Al
5.5

184



CdS/Sb2S3
Hybrid SC
ITO/ZnO/CdS/Sb2S3/MEH-PPV/PEDOT:PSS/Au
5.01

255



CdTe
Hybrid SC
ITO/TiO2/CdTe/PPV:CdTe/MoO3/Au
5.41

256




CdTe


Hybrid SC




ITO/SnO

2

/CdTe/CdTe:P3HT/P3HT/Au


6.36


257



PbS
Inorganic heterojunction
ITO/ZnO/PbS-TBAI/PbS-EDT/Au
9.9

226



PbS
Inorganic heterojunction
ITO/ZnO/PbS-EMII/PbS-EDT/Au
10.47

258



PbS
Inorganic heterojunction
ITO/ZnO/PbS-TBAI/PbS-EDT/Au
10.6

231




PbS


Inorganic heterojunction


ITO/ZnO/PbS-TBAI/PbS-EDT/Au


10.8


259





4.1 Schottky junction solar cells
The operating circuit of any QD PV cell consists of the absorption of light by the active layer leading to the formation of excitons, followed by their diffusion and dissociation, and then the transport of the charge carriers to the corresponding electrical contacts. To realize this process, different device architectures may be exploited. The simplest example is based on a typical Schottky junction between a metal and a semiconductor. Normally, p-type QDs and low work function metals, such as Al or Mg, are utilized to form this junction, while a transparent conducting electrode (TCE) is placed on the opposite side of the QDs. When such a cell is exposed to incident electromagnetic radiation of the correct energy, excitons are generated and dissociated in the depleted layer, and electrons and holes move to the low work function metal and TCE, respectively. This cell is simple in design and therefore an excellent example of QD based PV cells, though it does harbour a flaw since the interface for exciton dissociation is distant from the exposed transparent electrode; incidentally a large diffusion length of excitons is required to produce an effective device.
Much of this design success was achieved using PbS- and PbSe-based Schottky QD solar cells.126,127 Since the first reported PCE of 1.8% by the Sargent group in 2008,126 many efforts were made to improve the QD layer morphology and stability. Many papers focused on optimization of the cathode material, with Al,128,129 Ag,130 Mg,131 and Al/Ca132 tested as low-work function metals, while organic132,133 and inorganic126,128,130 intermediate layers were examined. However, the efficiency of Schottky-type QD-based solar cells did not exceed much over 5%.134,135 The most effective devices were composed of 3.7 nm PbS QDs sandwiched between ITO and LiF/Al electrodes and are shown in Fig. 4.135 The systematic study of post-synthetic washing of QDs from ligands let the authors achieve a PCE of as high as 5.2%.
 Fig. 4  Absorption spectrum of 3.7 nm PbS QDs dispersed in chloroform used for the Schottky junction solar cell, shown in the inset. QDs are sandwiched between LiF/Al and ITO electrodes, which serve for electron and hole transport, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2 Quantum dot sensitised solar cells
QDs as compared to conventional organic dyes or metal complexes show superior photostability and wider absorption profile, in some cases extending the spectral response to the NIR64 and as such has inspired replacing the dyes utilised in the intensively investigated Grätzel type cells. In QD-sensitized Grätzel cells (also known as QD-sensitized solar cells, QDSSCs),136 QDs replace the high-cost and unstable ruthenium(II) bipyridine dye and act as sensitizers to the TiO2 semiconductor layer. After the light is absorbed by a QD, creating an exciton that is dissociated at the QD/TiO2 interface, electrons are injected into the TiO2 conduction band and move to the TCE. After this, the QD is reduced by the electrolyte and the electrical circuit is closed due to reduction of the electrolyte at the counter electrode. A general QDSSC diagram is shown in Fig. 5,137 in which fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) is used as a TCE.
 Fig. 5  The schematic diagram of a QDSSC utilizing Mn-doped CdS QDs as the light absorber, a FTO/TiO2 photoaniode, FTO/CuS counter electrode, and liquid polysulfide ionic electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
QDs based on a range of semiconductors have been examined as potential sensitizers including CdS,138–140 CdTe,141,142 CdTe/CdS,142 PbS,140,143 InP,144 CuS/CdS,145 PbxCd1−xS/CdS,146etc. Numerous papers reported the investigation of charge carrier transport at the TiO2/QD interface. The size dependence of solar conversion efficiency has been investigated by Yun and co-workers for CdSe QDs of different sizes (2.5, 3.2, 4.2, 6.4, and 7.8 nm).147 They showed that there is a relationship between light absorption and electron injection for CdSe QDs of different sizes: larger CdSe QDs are more effective at light harvesting in a wider spectral range, while smaller CdSe QDs provide enhanced electron injection due to the higher energy level of the CdSe conduction band. Evaluation of carrier transport and recombination in CdSe QD sensitized solar cells by Emin et al. also provided important insights into the underlying photophysical parameters.148 They used intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) and intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) to calculate the electron transport time, recombination lifetimes, effective diffusion constants, and diffusion lengths. Using both optical and electrical measurements, Wang et al. investigated the diffusion of carriers in a cell composed of PbS QDs and ZnO nanowires.149 They showed that band bending of ZnO determined the maximum open circuit voltage and therefore cell efficiency.
Many efforts have been made to improve the morphology of the TiO2/QD interface and the photoanodes in general. The development of novel nanoarray photoanodes is very promising150,151 with Feng and co-workers developing vertically aligned TiO2 nanowires decorated by ZnO nanorods or nanosheets.152 They demonstrated that such a hybrid array photoanode (Fig. 6) improves the short-current density and fill factor of a cell as compared to the pristine TiO2 nanowire arrays. Another important challenge is to prevent surface charge recombination. It has been recently shown that the introduction of ZnS or ZnSe passivation layers results in a high increase of PCE of CdS/CdSe-based sensitized solar cells.153,154 A combination of ZnS/SiO2 recombination blocking layers is often used, with a ZnS/SiO2 double layer treatment allowing Zhao and co-workers to achieve a PCE of 8.55% for CdSexTe1−x sensitized solar cells.155 Ren et al. showed that the additional incorporation of an amorphous TiO2 layer via hydrolysis treatment can sufficiently improve the performance of a ZnS/SiO2 barrier layer.156 They showed that an amorphous TiO2 layer additionally inhibits the charge recombination, which leads to an enhanced device performance, achieving a PCE as high as 9.28% for a CdSe0.65Te0.35 QD-based QDSSC. Zhou et al. used a hybrid (Pb,Cd)S/CdS configuration to improve charge injection and to suppress charge recombination.157 A number of papers have also focused on the use of organic molecules, which allow passivation of QDs and extend the spectral response of the solar cell.158 Blas-Ferrando et al. synthesized a new bisphthalocyanine compound (ZnPcS)21 and utilized it in a QDSSC,159 giving an efficiency improvement of up to 45% for CdSe and 104% for CdS, with QD passivation regarded as the reason for improvement in photocurrent and voltage. Jumabekov et al. investigated the influence of PbS QD passivation in sensitized solar cells by tripeptide L-glutathione (GSH).160 They showed that GSH-treatment more than doubled the short circuit current and conversion efficiency due to the improved charge injection and increased exciton lifetimes.
 Fig. 6  Hybrid array photoanode composed of vertically aligned TiO2 nanowires (TNW) and ZnO nanorods (ZNR) or ZnO nanosheets (ZNS) synthesized by hydrothermal processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The common trend to replacing heavy-metal compounds is observed for QDSSCs as well. Very high solar energy conversion efficiencies were achieved by using ternary and quaternary QDs, achieving a PCE as high as 8.1% for copper–indium–selenide QD sensitized solar cells.161 The authors also pointed out the importance of the additional ZnS overlayer. An extremely high PCE of 11.6% was achieved using Zn–Cu–In–Se alloyed QDs,162 in which the photoanode was composed of a TiO2 mesoporous film sensitized by quaternary QDs and was covered by ZnS and SiO2 layers, and the counter-electrode was prepared from Ti mesh supported mesoporous carbon. The same design as that of a QDSSC with a photoanode sensitized with alloyed Cu–In–Ga–Se QDs produced a PCE of 11.49%.163 This group has recently broken their own record and achieved a certified PCE as high as 12.07%.164 They investigated the incorporation of nitrogen heteroatoms into the carbon counter electrode and found that doped nitrogen heteroatoms improve short-circuit current and provide superior efficiency of the devices.
Interesting concepts of a combination of dye-sensitizers and QDs have also been explored. An exciting example165 of the advantages of this is a two-junction solar cell composed of a PbS:Hg QDSSC and a zinc porphyrin DSSC. In this design, a filter was used to split the incident light to the corresponding cells, providing more efficient solar energy extraction, with an estimated total PCE of 13.1%.
4.3 Hybrid polymer–QD PV cells
The architecture of a hybrid PV cell comes from the combination of a conductive polymer with fullerene derivatives. Since it was found that the introduction of C60 or its functionalized derivatives into MEH-PPV solar cells drastically increases their efficiency,166 numerous studies have been devoted to the concept of donor–acceptor polymer-based photovoltaics. Interestingly, QDs have been shown to be effective replacements for fullerene derivatives in such hybrid solar cells. Despite the lower charge mobility of QDs relative to fullerenes, they do provide the option of fine electronic tuning, surface modification, and, especially importantly, highly effective light absorption extending to the NIR. In addition, in a QD–polymer hybrid PV cell, both QDs and the polymer can participate in light absorption and exciton formation, giving huge flexibility in photon harvesting. In this cell design, exciton dissociation occurs at the QD/polymer interface, with the polymer supporting hole transport, while the QDs provide electron transport, each enabling migration to the corresponding electrodes.
The first hybrid solar cell incorporating QDs was fabricated in Alivisatos's lab in 1996, reporting an estimated solar power conversion efficiency of only 0.1%.124 In their device, pyridine-treated CdSe QDs with diameters of 5 nm were combined with a MEH-PPV conjugated polymer at different weight concentrations. An extension of the spectral response of this cell into the NIR did not provide strong enhancement of PCE either.167 In 2002, the Alivisatos group also first introduced a hybrid solar cell with semiconductor nanorods,168 specifically 7 nm × 60 nm CdSe nanorods, providing much higher solar light conversion efficiencies of 1.7% for a P3HT-based device. Since that time, much attention has been focused on the use of anisotropic colloidal semiconductor nanostructures in hybrid polymer solar cells, since these semiconductor nanostructures with complex morphology and high aspect ratio may provide better charge separation and transport. For example, photophysical properties of CdTe tetrapods169 and hyperbranched CdSe nanocrystals170 with P3HT, and CdSe nanoplatelets with DEH-PPV171 hybrids have recently been investigated.
Other key routes to increase the PCE of hybrid solar cells included a search for appropriate QD–polymer combinations, improvement of QD/polymer interface morphology,172 introduction of additional charge carrier transport layers,173 and QD surface modification.174 QDs of different semiconductors, such as CdS,175,176 CdSe,124,177,178 PbS,167,179–181 PbSe,182,183 PbSxSe1−x,184,185 ZnO,186etc., and a number of conductive polymers, such as P3HT,168,182,183 MEH-PPV,124,167,179 PDTPBT,181 PSBTBT,185,187 PCPDTBT,178,188etc., were examined. Noone et al. studied the combinations of PbS QDs with different conjugated polymers (Table 4) and showed that utilizing PDTPQx produced a one to two order of magnitude increase in PCEs.189 Sun et al. used a series of polymers in the PbSe QDs/polymer blend and achieved an extremely high PCE of 5.31%.190 Their device is shown in Fig. 7 and is composed of ITO and Al electrodes, PEDOT:PSS and LiF charge extraction interlayers for holes and electrons respectively, and a conjugated polymer (10 nm)/PbSe QD (190 nm) planar heterojunction. Yuan et al. analysed the influence of polymer structures and QD size on the device performance,180 designing four new polymers based on DTP and achieved a PCE of as high as 4.23%.
 Fig. 7  Energy levels of PbSe QDs of different sizes (a), energy diagram of the hybrid photovoltaic device with different conjugating polymers studied (b), and the schematic diagram of the photovoltaic device (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Table 4 Abbreviations for conjugating polymers used in hybrid solar cells




Abbreviation
Conjugated polymer




TFB
Poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(4,40-(N-(4-sec-butylphenyl))diphenylamine)]


Poly-TPD
Poly(N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)-benzidine)


MEH-PPV
Poly(2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene)


P3HT
Poly-3(hexylthiophene)


DEH-PPV
Poly(2,5-di(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene)


PDTPBT
Poly(N-octyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole-alt-5,6-bis(octyloxy)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole)


PSBTBT
Poly[2,6-(4,4′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)


PCPDTBT
Poly[2,6-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)]


PDTPQx
Poly(2,3-didecyl-quinoxaline-5,8-diyl-alt-N-octyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole)


PEDOT:PSS
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate


DTP
Dithieno[3,2-b:2,3-d]pyrrole


PFT
Poly(9,9-n-dihexyl-2,7-fluorenylenevinylene-alt-2,5-thienylenevinylene)


PEIE
Polyethylenimine ethoxylated




Ternary systems composed of polymer/fullerene/QDs attract much attention nowadays.191–193 Beginning from the incorporation of plasmonic metal nanoparticles into polymer/fullerene blends, the concept of ternary blends was developed for many ternary hybrid designs.194 De Freitas et al. first systematically analysed the influence of addition of CdSe QDs into the PFT/PCBM blend.195 In such a system, QDs should enhance light absorption and exciton dissociation, while the conjugated polymer and fullerene provide charge carrier transport. In such a ternary system, the efficiency of charge separation and transfer can be significantly enhanced. This is due to electron transfer from the polymers to QDs and fullerenes, and electron and hole transfer from QDs to fullerenes and polymers, respectively, taking place. The processes of charge transfer after excitation of both polymers and QDs are illustrated in Fig. 8 by the example of the P3HT:PbS:PCBM ternary blend.196 In another paper, incorporation of CdTe, CdS, and CdSe QDs of different sizes into the P3HT/PCBM blend has been investigated.197–200 QDs composed of different semiconductors, including Cd-free QDs, have been examined in combination with conjugating polymer/fullerene derivatives.201–203 Lead chalcogenide QDs have also been considered to extend the spectral response of such a hybrid cell into the infrared region.204,205 Itskos et al. studied the optical properties of PbS:P3HT:PCBM ternary blends with different weight fractions of PbS using steady-state and time-resolved optical techniques.206 They showed that interfacial charge transfer is more efficient at the interface with fullerenes, while charge transfer at the QD/polymer interface has the lowest efficiency. However, Jarzab et al. have pointed out the importance of hole transfer from PbS to P3HT (Fig. 8). They also investigated charge-separation dynamics in ternary blends of PbS:P3HT:PCBM and observed a reduction of PL intensity and decay time both for the PbS QDs and P3HT, as compared to their binary blends with PCBM. They pointed out that slow hole transfer from PbS to the P3HT determines the equilibration in the QDs after the fast electron transfer to PCBM and therefore determines their re-excitation and ability to participate in new charge transfer processes.196 Wang et al. have recently shown a 91% efficiency enhancement of organic P3HT/PCBM solar cells after inserting a QD nanocomposite NIR absorption layer.207 In this study, 1–8 layers of TBAI-treated 3–4 nm PbS QDs were introduced between P3HT and PCBM, and the PCE reached 3.02% with 6 PbS layers, giving a much higher efficiency than that of the pure P3HT/PCBM device (1.57%). Some examples of ternary hybrid solar cells with QDs are listed in Table 5.
 Fig. 8  The charge transfer pathways in the P3HT:PbS:PCBM ternary blend. Electron transfer to QDs and fullerene occurs after polymer excitation, while hole and electron transfer to the polymer and fullerene, respectively, occurs after QD excitation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2010, Wiley. 
Table 5 The examples of performance of ternary hybrid photovoltaic cells




QD
Polymer
Fullerene
Position of QDs
Structure
PCE, %
Year
Reference




CdSe
PF-PFT
PC61BM
Blend
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/Al
1.3
2010

195



CdS
P3HT
PC61BM
Blend
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/Al
0.87
2010

198



CdSe
P3HT
PC61BM
Blend
FTO/TiO2/PEDOT:PSS/active/Ag
3.05
2012

200



CdSe tetrapods
P3HT
PC71BM
Blend
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/Al
1.5
2013

250



PbSe
P3HT
PC61BM
Blend
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/Al
3.31
2014

204



CuInS2
P3HT
PC61BM
Blend
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/Al
1.6
2015

202



CuInS2/ZnS
PCDTBT
PC71BM
Blend
ITO/TiO2/active/MoO3/Ag
7.19
2015

201



InP
PTB7
PC71BM
Top of active layer
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/PFN/Al
8.4
2016

251



CdSexTe1−x
pDPP5T-2
PC61BM
Blend
ITO/ZnO/Ba(OH)2/active/MoOx/Ag
5.11
2017

252



PbS
P3HT
PC61BM
Between P3HT and PCBM
ITO/active/Ca/Al
3.02
2017

207





Alternative electron and hole transporting layers for hybrid solar cells are also under consideration. You et al. demonstrated the use of ZnO and TiO2:Cs nanoparticles as an ETL.208 Son and co-workers have recently studied the influence of incorporation of CdSe QDs into P3HT/PCBM solar cells, the design of which included additional PEIE layers, on the resulting PCE.209 PEIE is an excellent interfacial layer, reducing the work function of the cathode.210 The PEIE/QD combination leads to the enhancement of the device PCE, caused by improved absorption and electron transport, as well by surface plasmon resonance (SPR) enhancement.
4.4 Inorganic heterojunction solar cells
The concept of a complete inorganic heterojunction solar cell was inspired by the high efficiency of TiO2-based sensitized solar cells and the simplicity of design of the Schottky cell as compared to QDSSCs. The heterojunction solar cell overcomes the main limitation of the Schottky junction solar cell, because exciton dissociation occurs at the interface of the photoanode and the quantum dot-absorbing layer, therefore reducing the need for long exciton diffusion distances in the QD layer. When compared to the QDSSC design, the issue of sealing a liquid electrolyte is completely eliminated. In the simplest planar heterojunction of this cell type, the absorbing layer of the p-type QD is sandwiched between an electrode and an n-type metal oxide, such as TiO2 or ZnO. A typical planar heterojunction solar cell is illustrated in Fig. 7(a). P-type PbSe QDs and an n-type TiO2 are sandwiched between gold and transparent ITO electrodes, while a α-NPD (N,N′-bis(1-naphthalenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenylbenzidine)) layer serves for hole extraction, electron blocking, and QD film protection between the Au and absorbing layer.211 The main limitation for efficiency of such a device comes from the trade-off between light absorption and charge carrier transport. Namely, the use of a thicker absorption QD layer provides better light harvesting, but cannot support efficient carrier transport, primarily due to the low electron mobility in the colloidal QD layer.
This limitation can be overcome by using the concept of a bulk heterojunction solar cell, which uses an alternatively shaped n-type semiconductor so as to increase the contact area of the p-and n-type layers, therefore reducing the required diffusion mobility of charge carriers to dissociate. The fabrication of the first bulk heterojunction solar cell with QDs was reported by Barkhouse et al. in 2011.212 This device is shown in Fig. 9(b), which is composed of a porous TiO2 layer consisting of large (150–250 nm) nanoparticles, and 3.7 nm PbS QDs, and demonstrated a 5.5% PCE. A drawback of such devices is the same as observed in QDSSCs, which is parasitic interfacial charge recombination. This problem was partially solved by a range of different approaches reported in the literature. Chang et al. used TiO2-coated ZnO nanowires in the photoanode, optimizing the length of the nanowires, and achieved a 6.13% PCE with PbS QDs.213 Sun et al. applied a binary combination of QDs, introducing hole-transporting Zn-doped CuInS2 QDs into the PbS QD matrix.214 They showed that incorporation of Zn–CuInS2 QDs reduces charge recombination and leads to an increase in short-circuit current and PCE.
 Fig. 9  Schematic drawing of the (a) planar heterojunction QD solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society; (b) bulk heterojunction solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2011, Wiley; (c) bulk nanoheterojunction solar cell composed of interpenetrating Bi2S3 and PbS nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. 
The new emerging concept in all inorganic QD-based solar cells is the use of QD nanocrystals as both n- and p-type materials. Rath et al. have recently reported the creation of a solution-processed nanoheterojunction solar cell made with n-type Bi2S3 and p-type PbS quantum dots (Fig. 9(c)).215 The authors produced two devices with planar and bulk heterojunctions between Bi2S3 and PbS. It was found that interpenetration of Bi2S3 and PbS, forming a bulk nanoheterojunction leads to more than a three-fold improvement in device performance in comparison to bulk heterojunctions between Bi2S3 and PbS nanocrystals. First reports of n-type QD solids were reported216,217 in encapsulated designs, while an important step forward was quantum junction devices with an air-stable non-encapsulated n-type QD solid.218 This device was composed of n- and p-types PbS QD solid and demonstrated the record PCE of 8% for this design, while other QDs tested to date include CdS/CdTe219 and CdS/PbS.220
Graded doping architectures extend the concept of a heterojunction, utilizing multilayers of QDs with different doping densities.221 Sargent's group showed that such a graded scheme allows for better operating characteristics,222 and opened the way for further investigation of this graded doping scheme.223,224
The band alignment engineering concept was proposed by Bawendi and co-workers, who employed QD layers treated with different ligands for different functions.225 In this design, the light-absorbing layer is passivated by inorganic ligands, while the electron blocking/hole-extraction layer is passivated by organic ligands. The authors used tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) and 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) as inorganic and organic ligands, respectively, for oleic-acid-capped PbS QD treatment, and obtained a PCE as high as 8.55%. More importantly, the device remained stable for over 150 days of storage in air. The passivation of PbS QDs by molecular iodine led to further increase in efficiency of such devices giving PCEs up to 9.9%.226
4.5 Future prospects for QD-based solar cells
In their recent paper, Carey et al. have emphasized three main directions in which the further development of QD-based solar cells should proceed: (1) QD synthesis, passivation, and QD film improvement; (2) device architecture optimization; and (3) hot carrier utilization.221 QD surface chemistry provides an excellent opportunity to achieve impressive growth of QD based PV cell efficiencies.8,9 It is a multifunctional tool that provides: (a) bandgap cleaning, leading to reduction of trap-state density, longer excited state lifetimes and better charge carrier mobility; (b) band alignment, which is responsible for effective charge transport; (c) doping type and doping density, allowing the creation of completely QD-based solar-cell architectures; and (d) air-stable devices.
Recent trends in QD surface passivation for solar cells focus on ligand exchange with metal chalcogenide complexes and halides. Metal chalcogenide complexes provide excellent environmental stability and high conductivity. Kovalenko et al. first demonstrated the utility of capping Au and CdSe nanoparticles by Sn2S64− in 2009.227 This concept was further adapted for a number of colloidal QD compounds.8 Atomic ligand passivation of colloidal QD photovoltaics by halide anions has been introduced by Sargent's group recently also228 with bromide-capped PbS QD films demonstrating high carrier mobility and stability. Tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) salt treatment in the solution phase was later used for PbS QD passivation.229 TBAI was dissolved in oleylamine and dissolved in a colloidal solution of QDs in toluene (Fig. 10). XPS spectra confirmed partial displacement of oleic acid ligands by halides. Konstantatos and co-workers have recently shown that 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (EMII) treatment demonstrates even better results in comparison to TBAI.230 Lan et al. have presented methylammonium iodide (MAI) treatment in a cosolvent system,231 with a certified PCE of their device reaching 10.6%. Ko and co-workers demonstrated the possibility of a two-step treatment, using a metal-salt (RbCl) and 1,3-benzenedithiol (BDT) ligand exchange procedure in PV cell fabrication.232
 Fig. 10  The solution-phase halide/oleic acid ligand exchange procedure exploits miscibility of oleylamine with toluene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2012, Wiley. 
Control over ligand type and quantity is also important for fabrication of densely-packed QD films. It was demonstrated that the treatment of PbS QD films with acetone and isopropanol removed excess organic ligands and solvents (oleic acid and octadecene, respectively), leading to drastic shortening of the inter-dot distance.233 It was additionally shown that an excess of oleic acid ligand leads to faster degradation of the QD surface.234 QD stability in an ambient atmosphere is an extremely important challenge to be resolved for further development of QD-based photovoltaics. In particular, an understanding of the mechanism, which causes lead chalcogenide QD degradation, is of critical importance. Cation exchange synthesis235,236 and Cd-shell creation237,238 are some of the concepts to increase lead chalcogenide QD film stability and device performance characteristics which look promising.
The optimization of device architecture implies both the selection of appropriate materials for electrodes, and light absorbing and charge transport layers, and creating a structure with enhanced light harvesting. Increased photon absorption can solve the trade-off between light harvesting and charge transport, which usually restricts the thickness of the active layer. Several approaches to reach an enhanced absorption usually deal with plasmon enhancement by metal nanoparticles or creation of highly reflective or structured periodic layers, such as pyramid-patterned239 or grating electrodes.240 Incorporation of plasmonic metal nanoparticles can in principle increase the absorption, exciton dissociation, and charge transport. An example of this is the inclusion of Ag nanocubes to a PbS QDs/ZnO nanowire based heterojunction solar cells, which showed a PCE increase of 1.36 due to the modification.241 Importantly, an enhancement of photocurrent was observed in a spectral region where PbS QD absorption is relatively low.
After absorbing photons with energy larger than the bandgap of a semiconductor, excited electrons and holes relax to the respective band edges, and the excess absorbed energy is converted into heat via phonon emission. Utilization of hot carriers and creation of multi-junction QD solar cells can minimize this heating loss, which is known to be one of the main limitations for solar cell performance.242 Another approach is possible, if a photon energy is twice that of the band gap of the light-absorbing layer, multiple electron–hole pairs can be created. Such a multi-exciton generation (MEG) was observed in bulk and nanoscale semiconductors, and can lead to the external quantum efficiency of the device greater than 100%.243,244 This MEG process was observed in semiconductor QDs of different chemical compounds, in particular, in lead chalcogenide QDs made of PbSe,245–247 PbS,246,247 PbSxSe1−x,247 and PbTe.244,248
Multi-junction or tandem QD solar cells are usually composed of several absorbing layers with different bandgaps. In such a case, photons with different energies are absorbed at the different layers, minimizing thermal losses. QDs are an ideal candidate for the creation of multi-junction solar cells due to the size-tunability of their bandgap. The first colloidal QD tandem solar cell was presented by Wang and co-workers and is composed of two layers of PbS QDs with bandgap energies of 1.6 eV for the visible part of the Sun spectrum, and 1.0 eV for the infrared one, separated by the graded recombination layer.15 A PCE of 4.21% was achieved for a tandem cell, exceeding values for either the visible (2.98%) or infrared (3.04%) single-junction devices, inspiring future work in this field. Santra and Kamat studied CdSexS1−x QDs with a gradient alloy structure and produced several photovoltaic devices, composed of QDs with different Se:S ratios.249 Two- and three-layered devices were compared to the reference devices, composed of QDs of either one type of QD or of a random triple QD mixture. Fig. 11 demonstrates the schematic drawing of this three-layered device (a) and the device with a triple QD mixture (b) with the authors achieving a PCE of 3.2 and 3.0% for the two- and three-layered device, respectively.
 Fig. 11  QD-based solar cells formed by sequential (A) and simultaneous (B) deposition of CdSeS QDs. Sequential deposition forms an energy-aligned multijunction structure, allowing less thermal losses and improved charge carrier transport. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
5. QD-based photodetectors
The extensive development of QD-based photodetectors is mostly motivated by the lack of widespread detectors for the near-infrared spectral region (NIR), such as Si-based avalanche photodiodes (APD) or CCD cameras used in the visible region.64 The photodetectors with high sensitivity in the NIR, such as photomultiplier tubes (PMTs), Ge or InGaAS APD or InGaAs-based arrays, all are highly costly, restricting their wide spread adoption. From this point of view, soluble-processed QDs may replace traditionally used inorganic semiconductors. Bandgap tuning and surface chemistry offer a wide field of possibilities for the development of these QD-based photodetectors.
NIR photodetectors are usually based on narrow-bandgap semiconductors, mostly PbS and PbSe. Recent advances in QD synthesis, improvement of air stability, and new concepts of surface treatment allow fabrication of lead chalcogenide QD-based photodetectors with extremely high operational characteristics.260 They are effectively used in any type of photodetector configuration, such as photoconductors, photodiodes, or phototransistors, demonstrating usually a very high sensitivity and gain or a fast photoresponse. For instance, PbS QD-based photodetectors may be sensitive in an extremely wide spectral range from 350 to 2400 nm,261–263 having detectivity of up to ∼1014 Jones,264,265 and bandwidths of up to 3 MHz.266
5.1 MIR-photodetectors
Nowadays, photodetectors for the mid-infrared range (MIR) are usually based on narrow-bandgap semiconductors, which are grown on the appropriate substrate by chemical vapor deposition or molecular beam epitaxy. These technological processes are complicated and high cost, and therefore restrict the wide application of MIR photodetectors. Solution-based colloidal technologies provide a significant reduction of manufacturing expenses and can provide competitive operational characteristics. PbS QDs, which are commonly used for NIR photodetectors, are ineffective when applied to the spectral region above 2.0 μm. It is also a challenge to synthesize high-quality monodispersed PbS QDs with a large diameter,260 and therefore only a few devices based on PbS QDs operating above 1.6 μm are reported.262,263,266,267
A range of Hg-based compounds have been proposed as excellent substitutes for PbS in MIR detection. Guyot-Sionnest's group has reported HgTe colloidal QD-based photoconductors with photocurrent spectra lying in the spectral range of 1–5 μm.268 The devices formed by drop-casting from colloidal solution were found to be stable under ambient air conditions and demonstrated high detectivities even at room temperature. They further showed that the regrowth process may extend the HgTe QD size up to 20 nm, and the corresponding cutoff wavelength shifts to 8 μm at room temperature and up to 12 μm when cooled using liquid nitrogen.269 A higher detectivity and faster time response can be achieved when HgTe QDs are processed in an air-free atmosphere and embedded into an As2S3 inorganic matrix.270
Chen et al. showed that HgTe QD-based photoconductor devices can demonstrate not only high responsivity but also a very fast temporal response.271 The device fabricated by a spray-coating process and consisting of a HgTe QD monolayer showed up to 1 MHz 3 dB bandwidth. The authors claimed that the time response and the gain of the photodetector can be controlled by tuning the QD size and surface chemistry, which open further possibilities to improve photodetection in the MIR.
Another opportunity to detect MIR radiation by quantum dots is to utilize intraband transitions. This concept has been previously developed for 2D nanostructures, and numerous MIR photodetectors have been designed.272 However, intraband transitions in 0D nanostructures have not been thoroughly studied so far.273 Guyot-Sionnest's group has recently demonstrated photoconductivity in HgSe dots, which were resonantly excited at the 1Se–1Pe wavelength.274 Lhuillier et al. have also recently reported an n-doped HgSe QD-based photodetector for the 3–20 μm region,275 with 5–40 nm QDs assembled into solids and were shown to possess very high charge mobility. This device demonstrated high detectivity and was able to operate effectively at room temperature. Precise control of QD doping and surface chemistry may provide further improvements in MIR detectors based on intraband transitions in colloidal QDs.
5.2 UV-photodetectors
Visible-blind ultraviolet (UV) photodetectors are of great importance for solar astronomy, skin cancer prevention, combustion monitoring, etc.276 Wide-bandgap inorganic semiconductors are the most suitable candidate material for UV photodetector fabrication due to the fact that they do not need additional high cost optical filters and possess high sensitivity. However, fabrication of UV photodetectors using traditional semiconductor technology is highly expensive. Solution-processed QDs of wide-bandgap semiconductors demonstrate higher detectivity and gain, and are now replacing traditionally used bulk semiconductors. A number of different semiconductor compounds, such as ZnS, SnO2, NbO5 and MgO, may be used for UV light detection; however, environmentally friendly ZnO remains the most widespread. Bulk 2D and 1D ZnO-based structures have been previously used for UV detection, but the utilization of ZnO colloidal QDs represents a new generation of UV photodetectors.277
To achieve the highest performance UV photodetectors, a range of materials have been tested in combination with ZnO QDs. For instance, an enhanced carrier separation at the ZnO QD/carbon nanodot interface let the authors of a recent study278 achieve a very high sensitivity for their device which is able to detect signals as weak as 12 nW cm−2. Kim et al. fabricated an all-inorganic p–n heterojunction UV detector using an n-type ZnO QD layer and p-type NiO layer.279 This device possessed a high gain, arising from interfacial trap-induced charge injection, and demonstrated excellent air stability. The extremely high performance of ZnO QD-based photodetector has been recently demonstrated by Guo et al.280 They used a hybrid active layer composed of ZnO QDs and hole-conducting semiconducting polymers (P3HT and PVK) and achieved a room temperature detectivity of 3.4 × 1015 Jones at 360 nm.
Yang et al. also fabricated a device with a hybrid ZnO QD/PVK polymer active layer, but also introduced graphene and PEDOT:PSS layers,281 showing that the graphene layer provided an increase in the photocurrent, while the PVK/PEDOT:PSS combination facilitates the transport of the separated holes. Son et al. used a combination of ZnO QDs and graphene sheets to fabricate a UV photodetector.282,283 This was done using a PMMA/graphene composite which was transferred from SiO2/Si to the poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrate, after which a ZnO QD solution was dropped upon it to then obtain the transparent and flexible photodetector.
It is worth noting that the development of flexible photodetectors is crucial for the fabrication of portable optoelectronic devices and is of great importance for any spectral region, with a number of fabrication approaches under consideration at present. A flexible photodetector was produced by Jiang et al. who mounted a PET substrate onto a hard glass. PEDOT:PSS, PbSe colloidal QDs, poly-TPD, and ZnO nanocrystals were spin-coated on, and an Al layer was deposited using thermal evaporation, after which the hard glass substrate was removed.284 He et al. built a PbS QD/Ag NC photodetector on a flexible stone paper substrate, with its estimated detectivity reaching 1.7 × 1010 Jones.285 They also performed a check of device degradation after hundreds of bending and releasing cycles and noted perfect device stability.
Pure graphene quantum dots (GQDs) may also serve as a high-performance alternative to bulk semiconductors, providing low-cost solution processability. In a recent study,286 a device based on GCDs demonstrated fast response, excellent stability and sensitivity to wavelengths as short as 254 nm. Kim et al. also reported sandwiching GQDs between two graphene sheets and obtaining a photoresponse in a wide spectral range from UV to NIR.287 Cheng and co-workers built an all carbon-based photodetector, which is shown in Fig. 12,288 with graphene sheets transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate, while carbon paste was used to create both source and drain electrodes, and GQDs were spin-cast onto the graphene layer. The authors achieved a photocurrent responsivity of 4 × 107 A W−1 and with a device that is low-cost, non-toxic, and of excellent chemical stability.
 Fig. 12  Schematic of an all carbon-based photodetector. Reproduced with permission from ref. 288. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
5.3 Future prospects for QD-based photodetectors
Many efforts are being made to improve operational characteristics of QD-based photodetectors with numerous approaches being investigated to suppress dark current, improve air stability, increase sensitivity and gain, or decrease response time.
Jiang et al. proposed the use of additional carrier blocking layers, with poly-TPD and n-type ZnO layers serving as the EBL and HTL.289 Using this, they considered five photodetection devices with different layer sequences, as shown in Fig. 13. They showed that the dark current can be greatly suppressed by sandwiching the EBL and HBL in between the two PbSe active layers. Carrier recombination occurs at the intermediate layer, as shown by the dashed arrows, and the photocurrent harvesting and dark current suppression are achieved simultaneously. Moreover, such a device exhibited the highest EQE value of 79%. They later demonstrated that such a tandem structure allows realisation of much higher detectivity (up to 8.6 × 1012 Jones at 300 K and 8.1 × 1013 Jones at 100 K) and responsivity in a device.290 F. Pelayo García de Arquer et al. included Ag nanoparticles into a PbS QD-based photoconductor, which is shown in Fig. 14(a), and observed a high reduction of dark current.267 They examined different ratios of PbS/Ag blends and achieved control over the carrier concentration. They found that an increasing Ag content in the PbS:Ag blend led to reduction of the shot-noise component as shown in Fig. 14(b). A moderate concentration of Ag also provides an enhancement of the device detectivity, thus a compromise between the gain and noise reduction can be achieved. He et al. incorporated 0.5 to 1 wt% Ag nanocrystals into a PbS QD active layer and observed both photocurrent enhancement and dark current suppression.285
 Fig. 13  The band diagrams of the 5 photodetectors with layer sequences. Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing. 
 Fig. 14  The architecture of the PbS:Ag photoconductor (a), and the reduction of the shot-noise component with increase of Ag content in the PbS:Ag blend (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 267. Copyright 2015, Wiley. 
It is extremely important to increase the stability of QD-photodetectors, since it is well known that lead chalcogenides, which are the main platform for NIR QD-based photodetectors, are prone to degradation in an ambient atmosphere.291,292 Numerous techniques have been applied to passivate active QD layers and avoid their rapid oxidation. The most widespread approach is to use atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique to cover the device with a thin Al2O3 film. This method has been used to increase the air stability of pure PbS QDs291 and is now widely used to protect semiconductor QD-based photodetectors.263,293 So et al. additionally showed that deposition of Al2O3 increases hole and electron currents due to the formation of additional electron transport channels.294
An interesting concept in QD-photodetector development is the creation of hybrid structures, which exploit benefits from materials of different types, even enabling the possible aversion of trade-off between high gain and fast photoresponse designs. For instance, the synergism of MoS2 and PbS QDs allows the expansion of the spectral range of a photodetector and to dramatically increase its responsivity, in comparison to the devices based on pure MoS2 or PbS QDs.295 In such a device, the p–n interface between MoS2 and PbS exists, and photoexcited excitons are dissociated into electrons, which circulate through the MoS2 layer under an applied electric field, and holes, which remain within the QD layer. An appropriate back-gate voltage allows the controllable current flow. In another important study,296 the authors fabricated a photojunction field-effect transistor, and integrated PbS QDs and a deep-work-function MoO3, producing a device with very low dark current. In another study,297 PbS QDs were spin-coated onto amorphous InGaZnO active layers to form a QD/metal oxide hybrid NIR detector, in which the long oleic ligands capping the QDs were replaced by EDT so as to increase charge transfer from this light-absorbing layer. This PbS QD-sensitized hybrid phototransistor demonstrated photoresponsivity of over 106 A W−1 and detectivity on the order of 1013 Jones, covering the extended spectral bandwidth from 700 to 1400 nm.
The Konstantatos group has developed a hybrid graphene–quantum dot phototransistor with ultrahigh detectivity of 7 × 1013 Jones.264 The schematic of the device is shown in Fig. 15. In this design, graphene flakes were deposited on a SiO2/Si substrate and covered by PbS QDs, which act as a photosensitive layer. After dissociation of the excitons, holes are transferred into the graphene channel and they drift toward the drain while the electrons remain in the PbS QD layer. Single- and bilayer graphene devices with QDs of different sizes allow coverage of the spectral range up to 1600 nm. In addition, in such a device, one can combine the excellent light absorption of PbS colloidal nanocrystals and the extremely high charge mobility of graphene. Huang et al. also built a graphene/PbS QD hybrid device and measured its photoresponse and resistance at different back gate voltages.298 All these latest studies reveal the advantages of combining QDs with 2D nanomaterials for construction of novel photodetectors, with both high responsivity and excellent temporal responses. Some operational characteristics of these devices, such as detectivity in the NIR, can surpass those for the commercially available Si and InGaAs analogs.299,300Table 6 presents some examples of phototransistors based on the combination of QDs and 2D monolayers of graphene, MoS2, and WSe2.
 Fig. 15  Schematic of the hybrid graphene–quantum dot phototransistor with ultrahigh detectivity of 7 × 1013 Jones. Reproduced with permission from ref. 264. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. 
Table 6 Comparison of characteristics of field-effect phototransistors based on colloidal QDs and a monolayer of 2D nanomaterial




Photoactive material
Spectral range, μm
Temporal response
Responsivity, A W−1
Detectivity, Jones
Year
Reference




PbS QDs/graphene
0.6–1.6

τ
rising = 10 ms, τ1decay = 100 ms (50%) τ2decay = 1 s
107
7 × 1013
2012

264



PbS QDs/graphene
—

τ
rising = 12 ms, τdecay = 198 ms
4.2 × 102
2.1 × 109
2016

306



PbS nanoplates/graphene
—

τ
rising = 24 ms, τdecay = 59 ms
4.2 × 106
—
2016

307



PbS nanoplates/MoS2
0.8–1.34

τ
rising = τdecay = 7.8 ms
4.5 × 104
3 × 1013
2016

299



PbS QDs/MoS2
0.4–1.5

τ
decay = 350 ms
6 × 105
5 × 1011
2015

295



PbS QDs/TiO2/MoS2
0.62–1.1

τ
decay = 12 ms
105
5 × 1012
2016

308



HgTe QDs/TiO2/MoS2
Vis-2.1
Response time ∼ ms
106
1012
2017

300



PbS QDs/WSe2
—
—
2 × 105
1013
2016

309





The responsivity of photodetectors may be also enhanced by exploiting plasmonic effects. For this purpose, a special layer of plasmon nanoparticles can be introduced into the photodetector structure. F. Pelayo García de Arquer et al. fabricated islanded Ag films between a glass substrate and PbS colloidal CQDs.301 Scattering by embedded Ag nanoparticles allowed them to increase the responsivity in a wide spectral range, with a maximum 2.4-fold enhancement observed near the bandgap of PbS QDs. When the authors used a special back reflector, a 3.6-fold enhancement factor was achieved. Introduction of Au nanoparticles can also lead to strong enhancement of the photoconductor responsivity. Heves et al. registered a 2.6- and 6.5-fold increase in responsivity with Au NP addition into PbS films using 0.01 and 0.1 wt% of NPs in citrate solution, respectively.302 Another study303 showed that plasmon-enhanced light absorption in the QD layer improves the overall detectivity. In their investigation, plasmonic gold nanorods were incorporated into a HgTe QDs/ZnO heterojunction photodiode for infrared detection. Periodic metal arrays have also been thoroughly investigated as a means to increase the semiconductor QD-based optoelectronic device performance.304 Beck et al. showed that targeted coupling to the surface plasmon-polariton modes, propagating on the interface between 2D Au grating and PbS colloidal QDs, can provide efficient light trapping and enhancement of optoelectronic device performance.305
6. Conclusions and future outlook
Recent progress in the development of these highly important devices demonstrates the huge potential of QD based materials in optoelectronics. Despite this obvious potential, the vast majority of these devices are still at the early stage of research and development, or remain purely of academic interest at present. Intensive work is still required to bring these devices out of the lab and to market, since a number of important steps still have to be resolved, including large scale production, reproducibility, material safety and long-term stability. For example, LEDs based on CdSe/CdS core–shell nanostructures demonstrated the highest EQE (over 20%) to date, but further efforts are necessary to develop efficient Cd-free QD-based LEDs. Quantum dot sensitised solar cells which are based on Zn–Cu–In–Se ternary QD systems are very promising in terms of efficiency, but stability and durability of these types of cells are limited and require further technological development. Also new phototransistors based on the combination of QDs and 2D nanomaterials such as graphene, MoS2, and WSe2 represent a great opportunity and we expect that these devices will attract significant attention in the near future.
The possible nanotoxicity of various QD based materials still significantly limits their applications, particularly those congruent with everyday uses. Even with the recent advancements in the development of new Cd-free QDs, their toxicity and biological behaviour remain mostly unstudied; therefore, a significant part of any future work on QD development must be focused on the investigation of QD induced toxicity and their biocompatibility.
Environmental stability of many QD-based systems over extended periods of time under ambient conditions still remains a poorly understood and little researched area. New approaches to improve the long-term stability and lifetime of QDs must therefore be explored. This is particularly important with regard to their utilisation in electronic devices, with an eye to their safety and stability, and also to equipment decommissioning and waste, especially in the current climate of increased re-use and recycling.
The cost of QD production and device fabrication also needs to be minimised. This will require easily scalable techniques with access to reasonably priced, non-hazardous precursors, low energy synthetic approaches, inexpensive and eco-friendly solvents and economical processing technologies and facilities. A particular issue at present is device fabrication under ambient atmosphere, a condition which causes severe performance loss in a range of QD devices at present and must be resolved.
Finally, it is our opinion that quantum dot-based optoelectronic devices will play a role in a range of future devices, but it is the ability of present-day researchers to tackle the issues outlined which will define whether it is a side note or a revolution in these various fields.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation (goszadanie no. 16.8981.2017/8.9 and Grant 14.B25.31.0002) and Science Foundation Ireland (Grant SFI 12/IA/1300) for financial support. A. P. L. thanks the Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation for financial support (scholarship of the President of the Russian Federation for young scientists and graduate students, CΠ-1841.2015.1).
References
B. S. Mashford, M. Stevenson, Z. Popovic, C. Hamilton, Z. Zhou, C. Breen, J. Steckel, V. Bulovic, M. Bawendi, S. Coe-Sullivan and P. T. Kazlas, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 407–412 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, W. Cao, N. T. Shewmon, C. Yang, L. S. Li and J. Xue, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1211–1216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. (Michael) Yang, W. Chen, L. Dou, W.-H. Chang, H.-S. Duan, B. Bob, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 190–198 CrossRef .
G. E. Cragg and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 313–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Hwang, D. Kim, J. M. Cordero, M. W. B. Wilson, C.-H. M. Chuang, J. C. Grossman and M. G. Bawendi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4481–4486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, D. Zherebetskyy, N. D. Bronstein, S. Barja, L. Lichtenstein, A. P. Alivisatos, L.-W. Wang and M. Salmeron, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10445–10452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Pietryga, Y. S. Park, J. Lim, A. F. Fidler, W. K. Bae, S. Brovelli and V. I. Klimov, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10513–10622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, Y. Shang, P. Kanjanaboos, W. Zhou, Z. Ning and E. H. Sargent, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1130–1143 CAS .
M. Yuan, M. Liu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16016 CrossRef CAS .
I. J. Kramer, J. C. Minor, G. Moreno-Bautista, L. Rollny, P. Kanjanaboos, D. Kopilovic, S. M. Thon, G. H. Carey, K. W. Chou, D. Zhitomirsky, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 116–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, J.-G. Lee, X. D. Mai, M. C. Beard, S. S. Yoon and S. Jeong, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 622 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Maulu, P. J. Rodríguez-Cantó, J. Navarro-Arenas, R. Abargues, J. F. Sánchez-Royo, R. García-Calzada and J. P. Martínez Pastor, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 80201–80212 RSC .
R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen and F. C. Krebs, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 36–49 CrossRef .
H. Li, K. Wu, J. Lim, H.-J. Song and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16157 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. I. Koleilat, J. Tang, H. Liu, I. J. Kramer, R. Debnath, L. Brzozowski, D. A. R. Barkhouse, L. Levina, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 480–484 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Wood and V. Bulović, Nano Rev., 2010, 1, 5202 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. L. Kong, I. A. Tamargo, H. Kim, B. N. Johnson, M. K. Gupta, T.-W. Koh, H.-A. Chin, D. A. Steingart, B. P. Rand and M. C. McAlpine, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7017–7023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Schlamp, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 82, 5837 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mattoussi, L. H. Radzilowski, B. O. Dabbousi, E. L. Thomas, M. G. Bawendi and M. F. Rubner, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 7965 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe, W.-K. Woo, M. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nature, 2002, 420, 800–803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O. Anikeeva, C. F. Madigan, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 85434 CrossRef .
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2532–2536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2196–2200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, A. Rizzo, M. Mazzeo, L. Carbone, L. Manna, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 113501 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Li, A. Rizzo, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2545–2548 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Burrows, V. Bulovic, S. R. Forrest, L. S. Sapochak, D. M. McCarty and M. E. Thompson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 2922 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ding, X. Yang, L. Bai, Y. Zhao, K. E. Fong, N. Wang, H. V. Demir and X. W. Sun, Org. Electron., 2015, 26, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Kim, Y. J. Park, J. Kim, C. J. Han, J. Lee, Y. Kim, T. Greco, C. Ippen, A. Wedel, B.-K. Ju and M. S. Oh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3454–3461 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Kwack, H.-R. Jang, Y. Ka and W.-S. Choi, J. Nanoelectron. Optoelectron., 2016, 11, 234–238 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ka, H.-R. Jang and W.-S. Choi, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2016, 8, 382–387 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Koh, T. Shin, C. Jung and D.-K.-S. Cho, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 1095–1097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jang, J. Kim, C. J. Park, C. Ippen, T. Greco, M. S. Oh, J. Lee, W. K. Kim, A. Wedel, C. J. Han and S. K. Park, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2015, 11, 1066–1071 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Zheng, W. Cao, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, J. R. Manders, J. Xue, P. H. Holloway and L. Qian, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 259 CAS .
K.-S. Cho, E. K. Lee, W.-J. Joo, E. Jang, T.-H. Kim, S. J. Lee, S.-J. Kwon, J. Y. Han, B.-K. Kim, B. L. Choi and J. M. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 341–345 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, Y. A. Wang, L. S. Li, D. Wang, T. Zhu, J. Xu, C. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 717–722 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Ho, D. Kim, N. Kim, S. M. Cho and H. Chae, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12369–12374 CAS .
C. Jiang, H. Liu, B. Liu, Z. Zhong, J. Zou, J. Wang, L. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Org. Electron., 2016, 31, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Pan, Q. Huang, F. Xu, Z. Zhang, W. Lei and A. Nathan, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2015, 212, 2856–2861 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, D. Yi, H. Sun and H. Zhang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 1409–1424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jang, S. Jun, H. Jang, J. Lim, B. Kim and Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3076–3080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, S. Wang, H. Wang, J. Niu, L. Qian, Y. Yang, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, Y. Zheng and L. S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4260–4265 CAS .
J. Pan, J. Chen, Q. Huang, Q. Khan, X. Liu, Z. Tao, W. Lei, F. Xu and Z. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 82192–82198 RSC .
J. Du, C. Wang, X. Xu, Z. Wang, S. Xu and Y. Cui, Luminescence, 2016, 31, 419–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Hsu, Y. H. Chen, Z. Y. Tu, H. V. Han, S. L. Lin, T. M. Chen, H. C. Kuo and C. C. Lin, IEEE Photonics J., 2015, 7, 1–10 CrossRef .

          S.-C. Hsu, Y.-H. Chen, Z.-Y. Tu, H.-V. Han, S.-L. Lin, T.-M. Chen, H.-C. Kuo and C.-C. Lin, in CLEO: 2015, OSA, Washington, D.C.,  2015, p. SF1G.2 Search PubMed .
M. Adam, T. Erdem, G. M. Stachowski, Z. Soran-Erdem, J. F. L. Lox, C. Bauer, J. Poppe, H. V. Demir, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23364–23371 CAS .
J. P. Park, T. H. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2016, 127, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Lee, K.-H. Lee, J.-H. Jo, B. Park, Y. Kwon, H. S. Jang and H. Yang, Opt. Mater. Express, 2014, 4, 1297 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, D. Zhao, K. S. Leck, S. T. Tan, Y. X. Tang, J. Zhao, H. V. Demir and X. W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4180–4185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lim, M. Park, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, S. Lee, C. Lee and K. Char, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9019–9026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. a. Malik, P. O'Brien and N. Revaprasadu, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1441–1444 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu and X. Su, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 43415–43428 RSC .
W.-S. Song and H. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 183104 CrossRef .
B. Chen, H. Zhong, W. Zhang, Z. Tan, Y. Li, C. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Bando, S. Yang and B. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2081–2088 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aboulaich, M. Michalska, R. Schneider, A. Potdevin, J. Deschamps, R. Deloncle, G. Chadeyron and R. Mahiou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 252–258 CAS .
J.-H. Kim and H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6329–6335 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Song and H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1961–1967 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Q. Lou, W. Ji, J. Zhao and X. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1204–1212 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Song, J.-H. Kim, J.-H. Lee, H.-S. Lee, Y. R. Do and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21901 RSC .
Z. Liu, K. Zhao, A. Tang, Y. Xie, L. Qian, W. Cao, Y. Yang, Y. Chen and F. Teng, Org. Electron., 2016, 36, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Jo and H. Yang, J. Lumin., 2015, 166, 227–232 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Omata, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2015, 123, 1–8 CrossRef .
T. Omata, K. Takahashi, S. Hashimoto, Y. Maeda, K. Nose, S. Otsuka-Yao-Matsuo and K. Kanaori, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 355, 274–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Felbier, J. Yang, J. Theis, R. W. Liptak, A. Wagner, A. Lorke, G. Bacher and U. Kortshagen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1988–1993 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jia and R. D. K. Misra, Mater. Technol., 2013, 28, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Son, B. W. Kwon, D. H. Park, W.-S. Seo, Y. Yi, B. Angadi, C.-L. Lee and W. K. Choi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 465–471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tiwari, V. R. Mehto, K. K. Nishad, R. P. Singh and R. K. Pandey, J. Nanoelectron. Optoelectron., 2015, 10, 28–34 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhandari, S. Pramanik, R. Khandelia and A. Chattopadhyay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1600–1605 CAS .
W. Ji, P. Jing, W. Xu, X. Yuan, Y. Wang, J. Zhao and A. K.-Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 53106 CrossRef .
Q. Lin, H. Shen, H. Wang, A. Wang, J. Niu, L. Qian, F. Guo and L. S. Li, Org. Electron., 2015, 25, 178–183 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, P. Owour, S. Lei and L. Ge, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 20, 439–453 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6921 RSC .
X. Li, M. Rui, J. Song, Z. Shen and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4929–4947 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Veca, A. Diac, I. Mihalache, P. Wang, G. E. LeCroy, E. M. Pavelescu, R. Gavrila, E. Vasile, A. Terec and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 613, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960–9963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Luk, L. B. Tang, W. F. Zhang, S. F. Yu, K. S. Teng and S. P. Lau, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22378 RSC .
W. Kwon, Y.-H. Kim, C.-L. Lee, M. Lee, H. C. Choi, T.-W. Lee and S.-W. Rhee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1306–1311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Song, M.-H. Jang, J. Chung, S. H. Jin, B. H. Kim, S.-H. Hur, S. Yoo, Y.-H. Cho and S. Jeon, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 1016–1023 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tetsuka, A. Nagoya and R. Asahi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3536–3541 RSC .
K.-Y. Cheng, R. Anthony, U. R. Kortshagen and R. J. Holmes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1154–1157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Puzzo, E. J. Henderson, M. G. Helander, Z. Wang, G. A. Ozin and Z. Lu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1585–1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Maier-Flaig, J. Rinck, M. Stephan, T. Bocksrocker, M. Bruns, C. Kübel, A. K. Powell, G. A. Ozin and U. Lemmer, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 475–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Tu, L. Tang, J. Huang, A. Voutsas and L. Y. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 213102 CrossRef .
Y. Xin, K. Nishio and K. Saitow, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 201102 CrossRef .
F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 111–122 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Bourdakos, D. M. N. M. Dissanayake, T. Lutz, S. R. P. Silva and R. J. Curry, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 153311 CrossRef .
K. R. Choudhury, D. W. Song and F. So, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tessler, V. Medvedev, M. Kazes, S. Kan and U. Banin, Science, 2002, 295, 1506–1508 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Sun, J. J. Choi, D. Stachnik, A. C. Bartnik, B.-R. Hyun, G. G. Malliaras, T. Hanrath and F. W. Wise, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 369–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Supran, K. W. Song, G. W. Hwang, R. E. Correa, J. Scherer, E. A. Dauler, Y. Shirasaki, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1437–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, Z. Yang, G. Walters, R. Comin, Z. Ning, E. Beauregard, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 253–257 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, O. Voznyy, M. Liu, M. Yuan, A. H. Ip, O. S. Ahmed, L. Levina, S. Kinge, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12327–12333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu and K. M. Poduska, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 4565–4570 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, V. C. Sundar, J. R. Heine, M. G. Bawendi and K. F. Jensen, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1102–1105 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Sher, C.-H. Lin, H.-Y. Lin, C.-C. Lin, C.-H. Huang, K.-J. Chen, J.-R. Li, K.-Y. Wang, H.-H. Tu, C.-C. Fu and H.-C. Kuo, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1117–1122 RSC .
A. Cosgun, R. Fu, W. Jiang, J. Li, J. Song, X. Song and H. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 257–264 RSC .
L. Su, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang and A. L. Rogach, Top. Curr. Chem., 2016, 374, 42 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Xie, H. Su, J. Liu, S. Pickering, Y. Wang, W. W. Yu, J. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Hahm, N. Dellas, S. E. Mohney and J. Xu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 329–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Lee, C.-Y. Han, H.-D. Kang, H. Ko, C. Lee, J. Lee, N. Myoung, S.-Y. Yim and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10941–10949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Frecker, D. Bailey, X. Arzeta-Ferrer, J. McBride and S. J. Rosenthal, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2016, 5, R3019–R3031 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bowers, J. R. McBride and S. J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15378–15379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nag and D. D. Sarma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13641–13644 CAS .
S. Wepfer, J. Frohleiks, A.-R. Hong, H. S. Jang, G. Bacher and E. Nannen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11224–11230 CAS .
J. H. Park, J. Y. Kim, B. D. Chin, Y. C. Kim, J. K. Kim and O. O. Park, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 1217–1220 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, R. Li, L. Hu and H. Wu, Appl. Phys. A, 2014, 116, 941–945 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, A. Tang, Y. Xie, Z. Guan, Y. Chen and F. Teng, Org. Electron., 2017, 45, 20–25 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim and H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6329–6335 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim, D.-Y. Jo, K.-H. Lee, E.-P. Jang, C.-Y. Han, J.-H. Jo and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5093–5098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, Y. Deng, X. Peng and Y. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607022 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Lhuillier, S. Pedetti, S. Ithurria, B. Nadal, H. Heuclin and B. Dubertret, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 22–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nasilowski, B. Mahler, E. Lhuillier, S. Ithurria and B. Dubertret, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10934–10982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Kershaw, L. Jing, X. Huang, M. Gao and A. L. Rogach, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 155–205 RSC .
X. L. Dai, Z. X. Zhang, Y. Z. Jin, Y. Niu, H. J. Cao, X. Y. Liang, L. W. Chen, J. P. Wang and X. G. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Hu, H. Shen, Q. Lin, L. Wang, H. Wang, W. Zhao and L. S. Li, Laser Photonics Rev., 2017, 11, 1600227 CrossRef .
H. C. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Y. Chen, H. C. Yeh, M. R. Tseng, R. J. Chung, S. Chen and R. S. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1603962 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, K. Zhao, A. Tang, Y. Xie, L. Qian, W. Cao, Y. Yang, Y. Chen and F. Teng, Org. Electron., 2016, 36, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Bae, J. Lim, D. Lee, M. Park, H. Lee, J. Kwak, K. Char, C. Lee and S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6387–6393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Schreuder, K. Xiao, I. N. Ivanov, S. M. Weiss and S. J. Rosenthal, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 573–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Y. Divayana, D. Zhao, K. Swee Leck, F. Lu, S. Tiam Tan, A. Putu Abiyasa, Y. Zhao, H. Volkan Demir and X. Wei Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 233110 CrossRef .
C. R. Kagan, E. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2016, 353, 5523 CrossRef PubMed .
N. C. Greenham, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 17628–17637 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Johnston, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, J. P. Clifford, S. H. Myrskog, D. D. MacNeil, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 151115 CrossRef .
J. M. Luther, M. Law, M. C. Beard, Q. Song, M. O. Reese, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3488–3492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Debnath, J. Tang, D. A. Barkhouse, X. Wang, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, L. Brzozowski, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5952–5953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fu, S.-W. Tsang, Y. Zhang, J. Ouyang, J. Lu, K. Yu and Y. Tao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1805–1810 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, X. Wang, L. Brzozowski, D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Debnath, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1398–1402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. I. Koleilat, L. Levina, H. Shukla, S. H. Myrskog, S. Hinds, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 833–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Kuo, M.-S. Su, Y.-C. Hsu, H.-N. Lin and K.-H. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3555–3560 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, L.-Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer, D. Wanger, M. T. Binda, A. C. Arango, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3743–3752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Olson, Y. W. Rodriguez, L. D. Yang, G. B. Alers and S. A. Carter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 242103 CrossRef .
C. Piliego, L. Protesescu, S. Z. Bisri, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3054 CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
C. V. V. M. Gopi, M. Venkata-Haritha, S.-K. Kim and H.-J. Kim, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 630–638 RSC .
K. Shin, S. il Seok, S. H. Im and J. H. Park, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2385–2387 RSC .
X. Song, Y.-S. Fu, Y. Xie, J.-G. Song, H.-L. Wang, J. Sun and X.-W. Du, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2010, 25, 45031 CrossRef .
H. J. Lee, P. Chen, S.-J. Moon, F. F. Sauvage, K. Sivula, T. Bessho, D. R. Gamelin, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, S. Il Seok, M. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7602–7608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1467–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Yu, B.-X. Lei, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1396 RSC .
R. Plass, S. Pelet, J. Krueger, M. Grätzel and U. Bach, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7578–7580 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Zaban, O. I. Mićić, A. B. A. Gregg and A. J. Nozik,  1998.
M. Kim, A. Ochirbat and H. J. Lee, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 7609–7615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yuan, L. Xiao, J. Luo, Y. Luo, Q. Meng, B.-W. Mao and D. Zhan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18150–18156 CAS .
H. J. Yun, T. Paik, B. Diroll, M. E. Edley, J. B. Baxter and C. B. Murray, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14692–14700 CAS .
S. Emin, M. Yanagida, W. Peng and L. Han, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 5–10 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, T. Kubo, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, Y. Sanehira, J. Nakazaki and H. Segawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27265–27274 CAS .
F. Xu, M. Dai, Y. Lu and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2776–2782 CAS .
H.-S. Rao, W.-Q. Wu, Y. Liu, Y.-F. Xu, B.-X. Chen, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Feng, W.-Q. Wu, H.-S. Rao, Q. Wan, L.-B. Li, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5199–5205 CAS .
F. Huang, Q. Zhang, B. Xu, J. Hou, Y. Wang, R. C. Massé, S. Peng, J. Liu and G. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14773–14780 CAS .
F. Huang, J. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, R. C. Massé, S. Peng, H. Wang, J. Liu and G. Cao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 114–122 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, Z. Pan, I. Mora-Seró, E. Cánovas, H. Wang, Y. Song, X. Gong, J. Wang, M. Bonn, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5602–5609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, J. Wang, Z. Pan, K. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8398–8405 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, H. Niu, F. Ji, L. Wan, X. Mao, H. Guo, J. Xu and G. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 333, 107–117 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mora-Seró, D. Gross, T. Mittereder, A. A. Lutich, A. S. Susha, T. Dittrich, A. Belaidi, R. Caballero, F. Langa, J. Bisquert and A. L. Rogach, Small, 2010, 6, 221–225 CrossRef PubMed .
V. M. Blas-Ferrando, J. Ortiz, V. González-Pedro, R. S. Sánchez, I. Mora-Seró, F. Fernández-Lázaro and Á. Sastre-Santos, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1732–1735 RSC .
A. N. Jumabekov, N. Cordes, T. D. Siegler, P. Docampo, A. Ivanova, K. Fominykh, D. D. Medina, L. M. Peter and T. Bein, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4600–4607 CAS .
J.-Y. Kim, J. Yang, J. H. Yu, W. Baek, C.-H. Lee, H. J. Son, T. Hyeon and M. J. Ko, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11286–11295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, Z. Du, J.-S. Hu, Z. Pan, Q. Shen, J. Sun, D. Long, H. Dong, L. Sun, X. Zhong and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4201–4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Peng, J. Du, Z. Pan, N. Nakazawa, J. Sun, Z. Du, G. Shen, J. Yu, J.-S. Hu, Q. Shen and X. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5328–5336 CAS .
S. Jiao, J. Du, Z. Du, D. Long, W. Jiang, Z. Pan, Y. Li and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 559–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Yum, J.-W. Lee, Y. Kim, R. Humphry-Baker, N.-G. Park and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy, 2014, 109, 183–188 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jung, X. Pang, C. Feng and Z. Lin, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 8086–8092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, C. P. Chen, A. G. Kanaras and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 409–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guzelturk, F. Menk, K. Philipps, Y. Kelestemur, M. Olutas, R. Zentel and H. V. Demir, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3573–3582 CAS .
A. J. MacLachlan, T. Rath, U. B. Cappel, S. A. Dowland, H. Amenitsch, A.-C. Knall, C. Buchmaier, G. Trimmel, J. Nelson and S. A. Haque, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 409–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tan, C. Liu, H. Fu and Y. Zhang, Polym. Bull., 2016, 73, 1761–1773 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lokteva, N. Radychev, F. Witt, H. Borchert, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12784–12791 CAS .
H.-C. Liao, C.-C. Lin, Y.-W. Chen, T.-C. Liu and S.-Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5429 RSC .
S. Ren, L.-Y. Chang, S.-K. Lim, J. Zhao, M. Smith, N. Zhao, V. Bulović, M. Bawendi and S. Gradečak, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3998–4002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, A. Abrusci, H. M. P. Wong, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1789–1793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fu, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, R. Ma, L. Zuo, J. Mai, T.-K. Lau, S. Du, X. Lu, M. Shi, H. Li and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19154–19160 CAS .
S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 233101 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, A. Gallagher, Z. Liu, Y. Sun and W. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2572–2579 CAS .
J. Seo, M. J. Cho, D. Lee, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3984–3988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kim, W. J. Kim, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 191107 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, L. Yan, Z. Wang, J. Zhao, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 17029–17035 RSC .
Z. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Yuan, H. Wei, X. Huang, L. Han, W. Wang, H. Wang and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5772–5778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nam, S. Kim, S. Kim, S.-W. Kim and K. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8202–8209 RSC .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1112–1116 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nam, J. Park, S.-W. Kim and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3978 CAS .
K. F. Jeltsch, M. Schädel, J.-B. Bonekamp, P. Niyamakom, F. Rauscher, H. W. A. Lademann, I. Dumsch, S. Allard, U. Scherf and K. Meerholz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 397–404 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Noone, E. Strein, N. C. Anderson, P.-T. Wu, S. A. Jenekhe and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2635–2639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Z. Liu, J. Yuan, J. Chen, Y. Zhou, X. Huang and W. Ma, Org. Electron., 2015, 24, 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Freitas, A. S. Gonçalves and A. F. Nogueira, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6371–6397 RSC .
T. Ameri, P. Khoram, J. Min and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4245–4266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Chen, C. Y. Hsu, R. Y. Y. Lin, K. C. Ho and J. T. Lin, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 20–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, T. Zheng, Q. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. Zhao and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. de Freitas, I. R. Grova, L. C. Akcelrud, E. Arici, N. S. Sariciftci and A. F. Nogueira, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4845 RSC .
D. Jarzab, K. Szendrei, M. Yarema, S. Pichler, W. Heiss and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1988–1992 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, M. K. F. Lo, G. Yang, H. G. Monbouquette and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 543–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Khan, R. Bhargav, A. Kaur, S. K. Dhawan and S. Chand, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 519, 1007–1011 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Peterson, G. M. Smith, M. Fu, R. D. Adams, R. C. Coffin and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 73304 CrossRef .
H. Fu, M. Choi, W. Luan, Y.-S. Kim and S.-T. Tu, Solid-State Electron., 2012, 69, 50–54 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Zhang, C. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. He, J. Li, L. Shen, W. Guo and S. Ruan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26747–26752 CAS .
A. Lefrançois, B. Luszczynska, B. Pepin-Donat, C. Lombard, B. Bouthinon, J.-M. Verilhac, M. Gromova, J. Faure-Vincent, S. Pouget, F. Chandezon, S. Sadki and P. Reiss, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7768 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Pathak, T. Wagner, T. Adhikari and J. M. Nunzi, Synth. Met., 2015, 199, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, H. Wang, D. Yang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Song, C. Fu, H. Zhang, S. Yang and B. Zou, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 840–847 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, F. Tan, Q. Liu, X. Liu, Q. Jiang, L. Wei, W. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Qu and Z. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 503–509 CrossRef CAS .
G. Itskos, A. Othonos, T. Rauch, S. F. Tedde, O. Hayden, M. V. Kovalenko, W. Heiss and S. A. Choulis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 802–812 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, W. Li, Y. Huang, Y. Wang, S. Yang and B. Zou, Mater. Lett., 2017, 187, 136–139 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, C.-C. Chen, L. Dou, S. Murase, H.-S. Duan, S. A. Hawks, T. Xu, H. J. Son, L. Yu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5267–5272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Moon, S. Cho, K. S. Lee, S. Bae, S. Lee, J. Y. Hwang, B. Angadi, Y. Yi, M. Park and D. I. Son, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401130 CrossRef .
A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, V. Gupta, J. Zhang, S. Chand, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2397–2402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Leschkies, T. J. Beatty, M. S. Kang, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3638–3648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Debnath, I. J. Kramer, D. Zhitomirsky, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, L. Levina, L. Etgar, M. Grätzel and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3134–3138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang, Y. Kuga, I. Mora-Seró, T. Toyoda, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase, J. Bisquert and Q. Shen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5446–5456 RSC .
Z. Sun, G. Sitbon, T. Pons, A. A. Bakulin and Z. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10626 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Rath, M. Bernechea, L. Martinez, F. P. G. de Arquer, J. Osmond and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 529–534 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shim and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Nature, 2000, 407, 981–983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, Science, 2005, 310, 86–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ning, O. Voznyy, J. Pan, S. Hoogland, V. Adinolfi, J. Xu, M. Li, A. R. Kirmani, J.-P. Sun, J. Minor, K. W. Kemp, H. Dong, L. Rollny, A. Labelle, G. Carey, B. Sutherland, I. Hill, A. Amassian, H. Liu, J. Tang, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 822–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Williams, J. D. Major, L. Bowen, L. Phillips, G. Zoppi, I. Forbes and K. Durose, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 31–38 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yao, Y. Chang, G. Li, L. Mi, S. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Yu and Y. Jiang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 137, 287–292 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ning, D. Zhitomirsky, V. Adinolfi, B. Sutherland, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, P. Maraghechi, X. Lan, S. Hoogland, Y. Ren and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1719–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yuan, D. Zhitomirsky, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy, K. W. Kemp, Z. Ning, X. Lan, J. Xu, J. Y. Kim, H. Dong and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5586–5592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-K. Ko, P. R. Brown, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4845–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lan, O. Voznyy, A. Kiani, F. P. García de Arquer, A. S. Abbas, G.-H. Kim, M. Liu, Z. Yang, G. Walters, J. Xu, M. Yuan, Z. Ning, F. Fan, P. Kanjanaboos, I. Kramer, D. Zhitomirsky, P. Lee, A. Perelgut, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 299–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, M. Scheele and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2009, 324, 1417–1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. Wang, R. Debnath, D. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ning, Y. Ren, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, L. Levina, P. Stadler, X. Lan, D. Zhitomirsky and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6295–6299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, A. Stavrinadis, T. Lasanta, D. So and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16035 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lan, O. Voznyy, F. P. García de Arquer, M. M. Liu, J. Xu, A. H. Proppe, G. Walters, F. Fan, H. Tan, M. M. Liu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4630–4634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-K. Ko, A. Maurano, S. K. Suh, D. Kim, G. W. Hwang, J. C. Grossman, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3382–3388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V Baranov, E. V Ushakova, V. V Golubkov, A. P. Litvin, P. S. Parfenov, A. V Fedorov and K. Berwick, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 506–513 CrossRef PubMed .
E. V. Ushakova, S. A. Cherevkov, A. P. Litvin, P. S. Parfenov, D.-O. A. Volgina, I. A. Kasatkin, A. V. Fedorov and A. V. Baranov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 25061–25067 CAS .
S. Kim, A. R. Marshall, D. M. Kroupa, E. M. Miller, J. M. Luther, S. Jeong and M. C. Beard, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8157–8164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Marshall, M. C. Beard and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Phys., 2016, 471, 75–80 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Speirs, D. M. Balazs, H.-H. Fang, L.-H. Lai, L. Protesescu, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1450–1457 CAS .
A. Manjceevan and J. Bandara, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 157–163 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Labelle, S. M. Thon, S. Masala, M. M. Adachi, H. Dong, M. Farahani, A. H. Ip, A. Fratalocchi and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1101–1108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hara, A. Gadisa, Y. Fu, T. Garvey, K. T. Vrouwenvelder, C. W. Miller, J. L. Dempsey and R. Lopez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8005–8013 CAS .
T. Kawawaki, H. Wang, T. Kubo, K. Saito, J. Nakazaki, H. Segawa and T. Tatsuma, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4165–4172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, O. E. Semonin and A. J. Nozik, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1252–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Böhm, T. C. Jellicoe, M. Tabachnyk, N. J. L. K. Davis, F. Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola, C. Ducati, B. Ehrler, A. A. Bakulin and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7987–7993 CrossRef PubMed .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Midgett, J. M. Luther, J. T. Stewart, D. K. Smith, L. A. Padilha, V. I. Klimov, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3078–3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Murphy, M. C. Beard, A. G. Norman, S. P. Ahrenkiel, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Mićić, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Santra and P. V Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 877–885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ahmad, V. Arora, R. Srivastava, S. Sapra and M. N. Kamalasanan, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2013, 210, 785–790 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Han, E. J. Lee, J. Joo, J. Park, T. H. Sung and D. K. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10444–10453 CAS .
R. Soltani, A. A. Katbab, K. Schaumberger, N. Gasparini, C. J. Brabec, S. Rechberger, E. Spiecker, A. G. Alabau, A. Ruland, A. Saha, D. M. Guldi, V. Sgobba and T. Ameri, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 654–662 RSC .
J. P. Park, J. H. Heo, S. H. Im and S.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 785–790 CAS .
H. Lu, J. Joy, R. L. Gaspar, S. E. Bradforth and R. L. Brutchey, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1897–1906 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Qiu, F. Li, W. Meng, W. Yue, F. Zhang, Q. Qiao and M. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 686–697 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, X. Du, G. Jin, Q. Zeng, F. Liu and B. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15791–15797 RSC .
X. Du, Q. Zeng, G. Jin, F. Liu, T. Ji, Y. Yue, Y. Yang, H. Zhang and B. Yang, Small, 2017, 13, 1603771 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Stavrinadis, S. Pradhan, P. Papagiorgis, G. Itskos and G. Konstantatos, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 739–744 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, F. P. G. de Arquer, Y. Li, X. Lan, G.-H. Kim, O. Voznyy, L. K. Jagadamma, A. S. Abbas, S. Hoogland, Z. Lu, J. Y. Kim, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4142–4148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Saran and R. J. Curry, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 81–92 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, M. Luo, L. Hu, Y. Zhou, S. Jiang, H. Song, R. Ye, J. Chen, L. Gao and J. Tang, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 596, 73–78 CrossRef CAS .

          E. J. D. Klem, C. Gregory, D. Temple and J. Lewis, in SPIE Defense + Security, ed. B. F. Andresen, G. F. Fulop, C. M. Hanson and P. R. Norton, International Society for Optics and Photonics,  2015, p. 945104 Search PubMed .
C. Hu, A. Gassenq, Y. Justo, K. Devloo-Casier, H. Chen, C. Detavernier, Z. Hens and G. Roelkens, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 171110 CrossRef .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, D. Y. Kim and F. So, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1233–1238 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Clifford, G. Konstantatos, K. W. Johnston, S. Hoogland, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 40–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. García de Arquer, T. Lasanta, M. Bernechea and G. Konstantatos, Small, 2015, 11, 2636–2641 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Keuleyan, E. Lhuillier, V. Brajuskovic and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 489–493 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Keuleyan, P. Guyot-Sionnest, C. Delerue and G. Allan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8676–8682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lhuillier, S. Keuleyan and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Infrared Phys. Technol., 2013, 59, 133–136 CAS .
M. Chen, H. Yu, S. V. Kershaw, H. Xu, S. Gupta, F. Hetsch, A. L. Rogach and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Levine, K. K. Choi, C. G. Bethea, J. Walker and R. J. Malik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 50, 1092 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guyot-Sionnest and M. A. Hines, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 686 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, K. S. Jeong and P. Guyot-Sionnest, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11707–11714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lhuillier, M. Scarafagio, P. Hease, B. Nadal, H. Aubin, X. Z. Xu, N. Lequeux, G. Patriarche, S. Ithurria and B. Dubertret, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1282–1286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, L. Hu and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5321–5328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, C. Xu and J. Hu, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 103105 CrossRef .
D.-Y. Guo, C.-X. Shan, S.-N. Qu and D.-Z. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Kim, J. Ryu, J. Manders, J. Lee and F. So, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1370–1374 CAS .
F. Guo, B. Yang, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Bi and J. Huang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 798–802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Yang, D. I. Son, T. W. Kim, J. M. Lee and W. Il Park, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1313–1317 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ick Son, H. Yeon Yang, T. Whan Kim and W. Il Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 21105 CrossRef .
D. I. Son, H. Y. Yang, T. W. Kim and W. Il Park, Composites, Part B, 2015, 69, 154–158 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, G. You, L. Wang, J. Liu, W. Hu, Y. Zhang and J. Xu, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 84303 CrossRef .
J. He, K. Qiao, L. Gao, H. Song, L. Hu, S. Jiang, J. Zhong and J. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 936–943 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Jie, S. Diao, Z. Shao, Q. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Deng, W. Hu, H. Xia, X. Yuan and S.-T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1561–1570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. O. Kim, S. W. Hwang, S. Kim, D. H. Shin, S. S. Kang, J. M. Kim, C. W. Jang, J. H. Kim, K. W. Lee, S.-H. Choi and E. Hwang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Cheng, T.-M. Weng, M.-L. Lu, W.-C. Tan, J.-Y. Chen and Y.-F. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2694 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jiang, W. Hu, Y. Liu, W. Zhang, C. Mo, G. You, L. Wang, M. R. M. Atalla, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, K. K. Kurhade and J. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 91115 CrossRef .
Z. Jiang, W. Hu, C. Mo, Y. Liu, W. Zhang, G. You, L. Wang, M. R. M. Atalla, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, K. K. Kurhade and J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16195–16199 RSC .
R. Ihly, J. Tolentino, Y. Liu, M. Gibbs and M. Law, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8175–8186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Litvin, P. S. Parfenov, E. V. Ushakova, A. V. Fedorov, M. V. Artemyev, A. V. Prudnikau, V. V. Golubkov and A. V. Baranov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12318–12324 CAS .
T. Otto, C. Miller, J. Tolentino, Y. Liu, M. Law and D. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3463–3469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-M. So, H. Choi, H. C. Shim, S.-M. Lee, S. Jeong and W. S. Chang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 93507 CrossRef .
D. Kufer, I. Nikitskiy, T. Lasanta, G. Navickaite, F. H. L. Koppens and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 176–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Adinolfi, I. J. Kramer, A. J. Labelle, B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Hwang, Y. T. Lee, H. S. Lee, Y. J. Lee, S. H. Shokouh, J. Kyhm, J. Lee, H. H. Kim, T.-H. Yoo, S. H. Nam, D. I. Son, B.-K. Ju, M.-C. Park, J. D. Song, W. K. Choi and S. Im, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Huang, R. J. Zhu, N. Kang, J. Du and H. Q. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 143119 CrossRef .
Y. Wen, L. Yin, P. He, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. Wang, T. A. Shifa, K. Xu, F. Wang, X. Zhan, F. Wang, C. Jiang and J. He, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6437–6444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huo, S. Gupta and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1606576 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Pelayo García de Arquer, F. J. Beck, M. Bernechea and G. Konstantatos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 43101 CrossRef .
E. Heves, C. Ozturk and Y. Gurbuz, Electron. Lett., 2013, 49, 367–369 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, L. Shao, S. V. Kershaw, H. Yu, J. Wang, A. L. Rogach and N. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8208–8216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Beck, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, M. Bernechea and G. Konstantatos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 41103 CrossRef .
F. J. Beck, A. Stavrinadis, S. L. Diedenhofen, T. Lasanta and G. Konstantatos, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 1197–1205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Che, Y. Zhang, X. Cao, X. Song, H. Zhang, M. Cao, H. Dai, J. Yang, G. Zhang and J. Yao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 263101 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Y. Wen, P. He, L. Yin, Z. Wang, F. Wang, K. Xu, Y. Huang, F. Wang, C. Jiang and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6497–6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kufer, T. Lasanta, M. Bernechea, F. H. L. Koppens and G. Konstantatos, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1324–1330 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, D. Dong, X. Yang, K. Qiao, D. Yang, H. Deng, S. Yuan, J. Khan, Y. Lan, H. Song and J. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603605 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
A. P. Litvin	Aleksandr P. Litvin is a researcher at ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia, where he received his Masters degree in Photonics in 2012 and his PhD in Physics in 2015. In 2011 he spent three months at Trinity College Dublin (Ireland) in the group of Prof. Tatiana Perova. His current scientific interests are in the area of the NIR nanophotonics, and his research activity is focused on optical properties, plasmonic phenomena and energy transfer processes in semiconductor nanoparticles, as well as their application in optoelectronics.
I. V. Martynenko	Dr Irina Martynenko was born in 1989 in the city of Leningrad, and grew up in Saint-Petersburg. Irina is a scientific researcher at the ITMO University, Laboratory for Optics of Quantum Nanostructures. She received her undergraduate and graduate degrees from ITMO University, specializing in laser physics and biomedical optics. She defended her PhD thesis at the end of 2015. The project dealt with energy transfer processes in complexes between quantum dots and functional molecules. Her current scientific interests include physical and physicochemical processes in hybrid structures based on metal-semiconductor nanoparticles and organic and biological molecules.
F. Purcell-Milton	Dr Finn Purcell-Milton is a research fellow in Trinity College Dublin. He received his BSc in Chemistry from University College Dublin in 2007 and his MSc in Materials Chemistry from the University of Edinburgh in 2010, and his PhD in Chemistry in 2015 from Trinity College Dublin. His research interests are primarily concerned with quantum confined nanomaterials, particularly quantum dots, and their applications in a range of fields including luminescent solar concentrators, photovoltaic cells and chiral sensing. Recently, the development of heavy metal free quantum dots for these applications is of paramount concern.
A. V. Baranov	Alexander V. Baranov is the Head of the Laboratory for Optics of Quantum Nanocrystals at ITMO University in Saint Petersburg, Russia. He is a graduate of Leningrad State University in Saint Petersburg, Russia, completed his PhD in Quantum Electronics from the Leningrad State University in 1978, received a Doctor of Science degree in Optics from Vavilov State Optical Institute in 1999, and obtained the academic title of Professor in 2012. He joined ITMO University in 2006. His research interests are in research and development in nanoscience and nanotechnology including the physics of semiconductor, metal and dielectric nanostructures.
A. V. Fedorov	Anatoly V. Fedorov is the Head of the International Research and Education Centre for Physics of Nanostructures at ITMO University in Saint Petersburg, Russia. He is a graduate of Leningrad Polytechnic Institute in Saint Petersburg, Russia, completed his PhD in Semiconductor and Dielectric Physics from Leningrad Polytechnic Institute in 1987, received a Doctor of Science degree in Optics from Vavilov State Optical Institute in 2004, and obtained the academic title of Professor in 2010. He joined ITMO University in 2006. His research interests are in research and development in nanoscience, including the physics of low-dimensional solid systems and nanostructures.
Y. K. Gun'ko	Yurii Gun'ko graduated from the Chemistry Department of Moscow State University in 1987. He received his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry from Moscow State University in 1990. Then he worked as a lecturer in Chemistry at the Belarusian Institute of Technology (Minsk, Belarus). In 1994 he received a postdoctoral position in the group of Professor M. F. Lappert at the University Sussex (UK). Then in 1995 he was awarded the Alexander von Humboldt fellowship and worked at the University of Magdeburg (Germany) with Professor F. T. Edelmann. After that he returned to the University of Sussex and worked as a postdoctoral researcher. In 1999 he moved to Trinity College Dublin (Ireland) to take up the position of lecturer in Inorganic Chemistry. Currently, he is a Professor (Chair) of Inorganic Chemistry at the School of Chemistry at the University of Dublin, Trinity College. Prof. Gun'ko is an editorial board member of Scientific Reports and Nanomaterials. His main research interests and activities are multimodal nanostructures and quantum dot based nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  The spectral range from UV to NIR can be covered using both “classic” and heavy metal-free QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  The schematic (a) and the energy band diagram (b) of the ZnCdSeS QD-based LED with graphene oxide-doped PEDOT:PSS HTL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015, Wiley.	 

CdSe/CdS	640	20.5	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/p-TPD/PVK/QDs/PMMA/ZnO/Ag	
116

CdSe@ZnSe/ZnS	455	10.7	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al	
35

CdSe@ZnSe/ZnS	537	14.5	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al	
35

CdSe@ZnSe/ZnS	625	12.0	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al	
35

Zn1–xCdxSe/ZnS	532	16.5	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al	
117

CuInS2/ZnS	580	7.3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al	
110

InP/ZnSeS/ZnS	545	4.32	ITO/ZnMgO/InP-QDs/TcTa/NPB/HATCN/AI	
118

CuInZnS/ZnS	552	2.42	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnO/Al	
119


 	Fig. 3  The schematic presentation of the structure (a) and the energy band diagram (b) for the all quantum dot LEDs. (c) Absorption spectra of PbS colloidal QDs used for CTLs (left) and for active NIR emitting layers (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

CdZnS/ZnS, CdS/ZnS, CdSe/CdS/ZnS	Tetrachromatic blend blue + cyan + yellow + red with 9:1:1:1 ratio of: CdZnS@ZnS QDs for blue (453 nm); CdSe@ZnS for cyan (513 nm), and yellow (562 nm); and CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs for red (624 nm)	ITO/ZnO/QDs/MoO3/Al	92.8	Brightness up to 5340 cd m−2 for CRI = 88.6 and of 3220 cd m−2 for CRI = 92.6, EQE of 0.9%	
120

Ultrasmall CdSe	White-light comes from a range of emitting surface trap states in sub-2 nm diameter QDs	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TPD/QDs/Ag	96.6	Correlated color temperatures varied from 5500 to 6000 K	
121

CuInS2/ZnS and ZnCdSe/ZnS QDs	Broad defect-related orange emission CuInS2/ZnS and blue emission ZnCdSe/ZnS	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/QDs/ZnO/Al	78	The correlated color temperature (CCT) could be adjusted between 2200 and 7200 K (from warm white to cold white) by changing the volume ratio between orange and blue QDs (1:0.5 and 1:2)	
106

CuGaS/ZnS	Single emitter, electroluminescence originated exclusively from Cu–Ga–S/ZnS QDs	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/QDs/ZnO/Al	83–88	1.9% EQE and luminance of 1007 cd m−2 absorption and PL properties can be controlled by varying Cu/Ga ratio and ZnS-shelling conditions. Cu/Ga = 1/8 ratio is found to be the most suitable for white lighting	
111

CuInZnS/ZnS	Broad defect-related yellow emission from Cu–In–Zn–S/ZnS QDs and blue emission from TFB polymer	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB + QDs/ZnO/Al	90	The color could be tuned from blue-green to white by varying the thermal annealing temperatures and TFB:QDs mass ratios	
109

ZnCuInS/ZnS	Red emission of ZnCuInS/ZnS core/shell QDs and the blue-green emission of poly-TPD	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/QDs/Al	92	EQE of 0.033% and luminance of 450 cd m−2 were obtained	
101

InP/ZnSeS	Blue emission from poly-TPD, green emission from QDs, and the red exciplex emission between poly-TPD and TPBi	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/QDs TPBi/LiF/Al	95	Maximum brightness is close to 700 cd m−2 and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) is 0.26%, correlated color temperature (CCT) of 4710 K	
122


 		 


CdTe nanorods	Schottky junction	ITO/p-CdTe/Al	5.0	
134


PbS
	
Schottky junction
	
ITO/PbS/LiF/Al
	
5.2
	
135

PbS[CuS]	QDSSC	FTO/TiO2/PbS[CuS]/P3HT/Au	8.07	
253

CdSe0.65Te0.35	QDSSC	Cu2−xS/FTO counter electrode; TiO2/QD/am-TiO2/ZnS/SiO2; polysulfide electrolyte	9.28	
156

Cu–In–Ga–Se	QDSSC	Mesoporous carbon–Ti counter electrode; TiO2/QD/ZnS/SiO2; polysulfide aqueous electrolyte	11.49	
163

Zn–Cu–In–Se	QDSSC	Mesoporous carbon–Ti counter electrode; TiO2/QD/ZnS/SiO2; polysulfide/sulfide aqueous electrolyte	11.6	
162


Zn–Cu–In–Se
	
QDSSC
	
Nitrogen doped mesoporous carbon–Ti counter electrode; TiO

2

/QD/ZnS; polysulfide/sulfide aqueous electrolyte
	
12.07
	
164

PbS	Hybrid SC	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCPDTBT-QDs/ZnO/Al	4.8	
254

PbSxSe1−x	Hybrid SC	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PDTPBT-QDs/LiF/Al	5.5	
184

CdS/Sb2S3	Hybrid SC	ITO/ZnO/CdS/Sb2S3/MEH-PPV/PEDOT:PSS/Au	5.01	
255

CdTe	Hybrid SC	ITO/TiO2/CdTe/PPV:CdTe/MoO3/Au	5.41	
256


CdTe
	
Hybrid SC


	
ITO/SnO

2

/CdTe/CdTe:P3HT/P3HT/Au
	
6.36
	
257

PbS	Inorganic heterojunction	ITO/ZnO/PbS-TBAI/PbS-EDT/Au	9.9	
226

PbS	Inorganic heterojunction	ITO/ZnO/PbS-EMII/PbS-EDT/Au	10.47	
258

PbS	Inorganic heterojunction	ITO/ZnO/PbS-TBAI/PbS-EDT/Au	10.6	
231


PbS
	
Inorganic heterojunction
	
ITO/ZnO/PbS-TBAI/PbS-EDT/Au
	
10.8
	
259


 	Fig. 4  Absorption spectrum of 3.7 nm PbS QDs dispersed in chloroform used for the Schottky junction solar cell, shown in the inset. QDs are sandwiched between LiF/Al and ITO electrodes, which serve for electron and hole transport, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  The schematic diagram of a QDSSC utilizing Mn-doped CdS QDs as the light absorber, a FTO/TiO2 photoaniode, FTO/CuS counter electrode, and liquid polysulfide ionic electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Hybrid array photoanode composed of vertically aligned TiO2 nanowires (TNW) and ZnO nanorods (ZNR) or ZnO nanosheets (ZNS) synthesized by hydrothermal processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Energy levels of PbSe QDs of different sizes (a), energy diagram of the hybrid photovoltaic device with different conjugating polymers studied (b), and the schematic diagram of the photovoltaic device (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

TFB	Poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(4,40-(N-(4-sec-butylphenyl))diphenylamine)]
Poly-TPD	Poly(N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)-benzidine)
MEH-PPV	Poly(2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene)
P3HT	Poly-3(hexylthiophene)
DEH-PPV	Poly(2,5-di(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene)
PDTPBT	Poly(N-octyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole-alt-5,6-bis(octyloxy)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole)
PSBTBT	Poly[2,6-(4,4′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)
PCPDTBT	Poly[2,6-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)]
PDTPQx	Poly(2,3-didecyl-quinoxaline-5,8-diyl-alt-N-octyldithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole)
PEDOT:PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate
DTP	Dithieno[3,2-b:2,3-d]pyrrole
PFT	Poly(9,9-n-dihexyl-2,7-fluorenylenevinylene-alt-2,5-thienylenevinylene)
PEIE	Polyethylenimine ethoxylated

 	Fig. 8  The charge transfer pathways in the P3HT:PbS:PCBM ternary blend. Electron transfer to QDs and fullerene occurs after polymer excitation, while hole and electron transfer to the polymer and fullerene, respectively, occurs after QD excitation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2010, Wiley.	 

CdSe	PF-PFT	PC61BM	Blend	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/Al	1.3	2010	
195

CdS	P3HT	PC61BM	Blend	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/Al	0.87	2010	
198

CdSe	P3HT	PC61BM	Blend	FTO/TiO2/PEDOT:PSS/active/Ag	3.05	2012	
200

CdSe tetrapods	P3HT	PC71BM	Blend	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/Al	1.5	2013	
250

PbSe	P3HT	PC61BM	Blend	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/Al	3.31	2014	
204

CuInS2	P3HT	PC61BM	Blend	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/Al	1.6	2015	
202

CuInS2/ZnS	PCDTBT	PC71BM	Blend	ITO/TiO2/active/MoO3/Ag	7.19	2015	
201

InP	PTB7	PC71BM	Top of active layer	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active/PFN/Al	8.4	2016	
251

CdSexTe1−x	pDPP5T-2	PC61BM	Blend	ITO/ZnO/Ba(OH)2/active/MoOx/Ag	5.11	2017	
252

PbS	P3HT	PC61BM	Between P3HT and PCBM	ITO/active/Ca/Al	3.02	2017	
207


 	Fig. 9  Schematic drawing of the (a) planar heterojunction QD solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society; (b) bulk heterojunction solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2011, Wiley; (c) bulk nanoheterojunction solar cell composed of interpenetrating Bi2S3 and PbS nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  The solution-phase halide/oleic acid ligand exchange procedure exploits miscibility of oleylamine with toluene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2012, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  QD-based solar cells formed by sequential (A) and simultaneous (B) deposition of CdSeS QDs. Sequential deposition forms an energy-aligned multijunction structure, allowing less thermal losses and improved charge carrier transport. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of an all carbon-based photodetector. Reproduced with permission from ref. 288. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  The band diagrams of the 5 photodetectors with layer sequences. Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 14  The architecture of the PbS:Ag photoconductor (a), and the reduction of the shot-noise component with increase of Ag content in the PbS:Ag blend (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 267. Copyright 2015, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of the hybrid graphene–quantum dot phototransistor with ultrahigh detectivity of 7 × 1013 Jones. Reproduced with permission from ref. 264. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group.	 

PbS QDs/graphene	0.6–1.6	
τ
rising = 10 ms, τ1decay = 100 ms (50%) τ2decay = 1 s	107	7 × 1013	2012	
264

PbS QDs/graphene	—	
τ
rising = 12 ms, τdecay = 198 ms	4.2 × 102	2.1 × 109	2016	
306

PbS nanoplates/graphene	—	
τ
rising = 24 ms, τdecay = 59 ms	4.2 × 106	—	2016	
307

PbS nanoplates/MoS2	0.8–1.34	
τ
rising = τdecay = 7.8 ms	4.5 × 104	3 × 1013	2016	
299

PbS QDs/MoS2	0.4–1.5	
τ
decay = 350 ms	6 × 105	5 × 1011	2015	
295

PbS QDs/TiO2/MoS2	0.62–1.1	
τ
decay = 12 ms	105	5 × 1012	2016	
308

HgTe QDs/TiO2/MoS2	Vis-2.1	Response time ∼ ms	106	1012	2017	
300

PbS QDs/WSe2	—	—	2 × 105	1013	2016	
309


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
