Emerging washable textronics for imminent e-waste mitigation: strategies, reliability, and perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA09384C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09384C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 2697-2735Emerging washable textronics for imminent e-waste mitigation: strategies, reliability, and perspectives

        
          
            Md Luthfar Rahman 
            Liman
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            M. Tauhidul 
            Islam
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Textile Engineering, Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University, Santosh, Tangail-1902, Bangladesh. E-mail: limanmbstu08@gmail.com
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan-701, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: n56077031@gs.ncku.edu.tw; tauhidmbstu09@gmail.com
Received 
      1st November 2021
    , Accepted 5th January 2022First published on 5th January 2022AbstractThe desire for close human contact with electronic components for portable sensing, energy harvesting, and healthcare has sparked massive advances in wearable textile electronic (textronic) technology. Hierarchical textile assemblies (yarn/fibers or fabrics) infused with various nanoscale electroactive materials have provided perfect conformability, allowing us to transform our bodies into wearable electrical terminals. However, the short-lifespan of textronic devices under repeated washing is reducing the customer adoption and market reliability of these intelligent systems. Thus, without adequate advancement in washable textronic designs, it will be difficult to mitigate the significant threat of a high volume of e-waste in the coming decades. Consequently, herein, we present a comprehensive review on the current state of the art of washable textronic designs concerning different innovative strategies such as unique textile geometries, encapsulation, adhesion behaviors, self-repairability, and standard washing protocols to overcome the common washing stresses. Furthermore, the potential challenges regarding the current processing strategies are presented, and promising outlooks on how to develop realistic washable textronic systems in the future are envisioned. It is hoped that this review will stimulate interest for researchers to pursue further study to aid in the standardization and development of futuristic long-lasting textronics.Md Luthfar Rahman LimanMd Luthfar Rahman Liman received his BS Degree in Textile Engineering from Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University, Bangladesh. Currently, he is working as a researcher and his research interests focus on the development of durable wearable electrodes for realistic sensing, health monitoring, and thermoregulation.M. Tauhidul IslamM. Tauhidul Islam received his Bachelor's in Textile Engineering from Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University (2016). In 2020, he completed a Master's Degree in Materials Science and Engineering from National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan. His Master's research focuses on the synthesis of Na-doped MoO3 electrocatalysts for water-splitting electrodes. His current areas of research interest include bio-inspired 2D conductive materials synthesis for developing flexible wearable electronics, energy harvesters, and biosensors.
1. Introduction
The wave of the fourth industrial revolution (4IR) has made noteworthy strides in wearable technology, such as electronic skins (e-skins) and textile-based electronics.1,2 Wearable textile electronics (textronics) have changed the paradigm of futuristic IoT devices and are likely to revolutionize portable data processing.3 Textile-based electronics have some additional benefits over classic wearable electronics made from elastomeric substrates (e.g., silicone rubber, acrylics, and polyurethane-based materials) due to their inherent characteristics such as breathability, high tolerance to damage, softness, natural abundance, and unobtrusive nature. In addition, the hierarchical assembly (yarn or fiber/fabric) of fibrous textiles makes textronics systems more appropriate for next-generation wearable electronics.4,5 By providing sufficient stretchability and electrical functionalities to the human body using textronics, a myriad of deformable electrodes has been developed, which are highly suitable for application in sensing, biopotential monitoring, energy harvesting and storage, self-powering, actuating, heating, communicating, etc.6,7 Electrical functionality can be introduced in textile insulators using different fabrication processes such as electrospinning,8 polymerization,9 nanopatterning,10 vapor deposition,11 coating,12 and printing13 using conductive polymers,14 nanoscale metals/liquids,15 and carbonaceous materials.16 However, the proper integration of electroactive materials in highly non-planar and rough textile surfaces is very challenging and requires advanced chemistry. With the booming expansion of nanotechnology and electroactive materials chemistry, researchers from multidisciplinary fields have developed soft materials processing. By adopting adroit synthetic processes, the size, shape, thickness, density, and alignment of different electroactive materials can be well-controlled,17–24 allowing textronic devices to become more miniaturized and realistic for high-performance applications. The key elements in the electrical behavior of textronic blocks are the thickness of the electroactive interfaces, dispersion of materials, type of filler, textile structure, and electrochemical behavior between the textile and the filler. To date, numerous novel electroactive materials (e.g., 2D Ti3C2Tx, 2D boron nitride, MoS2, metal–organic frameworks, and Galinstan) have been synthesized using different classic material backbones.25–30 These materials greatly overcome the negative footprint of their predecessor materials due to their unique compatibility and intrinsic properties such as superior flexibility, conductivity, chemical inertness, hydrophilicity, low melting point, thermal stability, and large energy band gap. Thus, due to these outstanding electroactive materials, textronic devices exhibit many merits for large-scale mechanical deformation and applications.
To date, despite the ingenious progress in the methodologies for the development of miniaturized and stretchable textronic devices, there are still some inherent limitations that greatly constrain the widespread use of these systems. The most significant hurdle in the application of textronics is their washability.31 Washing, a common care process for removing soil/dirt, is necessary for advanced textronic structures to ensure their reusability and reliability. However, several mechanical and chemical activities are imposed simultaneously during the washing process, resulting in high wash forces (e.g., hydrodynamic flow, flexion, friction, and micelle formation) that impair the electrical properties of wearable electrodes.32 Moreover, textronics with inadequate washability and weak electroactive interfaces can release a significant amount of toxic organic/inorganic elements in the eco-system and predicted to bring the further threat of a high volume of e-waste in the coming decades.33–35 Thus, to improve the washability of textronics, numerous devices have been developed and some prototypes have been deemed washable, even though they retain electrical functionality for a limited number of washing cycles.36–40 Some studies even claimed excellent hydrophobicity or durability without performing any washing test.41–45 Furthermore, most of the completed research revealed a significant variation in the material choice, fabrication, and pretreatment method and a lack of comparability between different test results when designing washable textronic devices. Although there are signs of progress and more washable devices are becoming available, there remains a large gap between the adopted strategies and the output of wash durability. Hence, to improve the washability of textronics, a proper understanding of the suitable textile designs, pretreatments, material viability, and washing influence, e.g., temperature, duration, rotation speed, program, drum size, and detergent, is highly necessary. By following appropriate strategies and specific standards, it will be easier to interpret the output of the wash durability of different textronic devices.
To date, numerous review articles on textile-based electronics have been published, with the majority of them focusing on the common fabrication procedures, device flexibility, and multi-functional features rather than washability enhancement.46–48 Recently, a few review reports attempted to summarize the effects of various washing actions on electronic textiles,32,49 but they did not map comprehensive guidelines or strategies to promote the washability of the devices. Thus, herein, we comprehensively summarize the recent state-of-the-art advances of washable textronics, and accordingly present fundamental guidance for improving the wash longevity of devices (Scheme 1). Initially, in this review, the basic structure of different textronic blocks and their expansion towards washability is discussed. Subsequently, the most successful strategies for improving the wash durability of textronics are separately elucidated based on the information in the literature. Finally, the remaining challenges, opportunities, and future insights into this rapidly growing area are proposed. We expect that this review will greatly benefit researchers and the scientific community. Our objective is not merely to recap what has been accomplished, but rather present a roadmap for the future development of countless washable textronics.
 Scheme 1  Emerging strategies for developing futuristic washable textronic designs. 
2. Basic structure of textronics
The field of textronics has blossomed due to the convergence of the two discrete areas of electronics and textile technology in the era of the IoT. Due to the technical feasibility of textile processing, the fibers produced from both organic and natural polymers can be converted into one- (1D), two- (2D), and three-dimensional (3D) building blocks. Unlike rigid electronic gadgets with traditional stacking assemblies, these advanced textile-based blocks feature distinctive parallel, coaxial, weaving, interlacing, interloping, and twisted arrangements which are suitable for the nanofabrication and miniaturization of wearable electronics and development of fiber-shaped supercapacitors/batteries (Fig. 1a).50 Practically, multi-dimensional textile insulators can be transformed into a versatile intelligent clothing platform via the integration of electroactive materials on curved fibrous surfaces. To date, numerous techniques have been investigated to integrate electroactive materials with textiles, leading to the invention of wearable batteries,51 sensors,52,53 Joule heaters,54 energy harvesters,55 implants,56 supercapacitors,57 antennas,58 and dry ECG electrodes.59 The electrochemical fabrication of the pristine textile is carried out in diverse textile processing phases (e.g., spinning, winding, and readymade garments) according to the requirement of the textronics pattern and implementation (Table 1).
 Fig. 1  (a) Distinctive fiber-shaped parallel, twisted, and coaxial electrode configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2019, Wiley. (b) Schematic presentation of the triboelectric electric energy generation process using electrospun silk fibroin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65 Copyright 2016, Wiley. (c) Dip coating of cotton yarn for designing Au–Ag core–shell yarn stain sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the textile-centric framework to wearable textronics. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (e) Use of p-doped conjugated polymer to develop face mask humidity sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic diagram of electroluminescent fabric being functionalized via Bluetooth connection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic diagram of a single sheet (top) and cross-sectional magnified view (bottom) of 3D textile dye-sensitized solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 Copyright 2019, Nature. (h) Sandwiched-shaped LC monitoring pressure sensor using 3D penetrated fabric. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 Summary and comparison of the different textronic structure nanofabrication processes and their functionality




Textronic structure
Integrated textile materials
Typical electrofabrication process
Major functionality
Characteristics




1D
Cellulosic fiber
Electrospinning, machine sewing, dip-coating
Tactile sensors, Joule heating, battery, optoelectronics
Scalable, comfortable, water-soluble


Silk/protein fibroin
Electrospinning, thermal drawing
Biomimetic sensing, ultra-thin e-implants, energy harvesting
Biocompatible, lightweight, transparent, soft feel


Elastomeric fiber
Twisting, wet-spinning, dip-coating
Interconnects, strain sensing
Mechanical compliance, and stretchability


2D
Woven fabric (plain/twill/satin)
Sputtering, electroplating, printing, lithography
Self-powering, Joule heating, and sensing
High drapability, stiffness, and thickness


Knitted fabric (weft/warp/rib)

In situ polymerization, coating, or printing
Electrocardiography, strain sensing
Porous, wrinkle-resistant, and elastic


Nonwoven fabric (web/membrane/sheet)
Printing, nano-soldering
Chemical sensing, energy-storing
High porosity and resiliency


3D
Braided/spacer fabric
Sophisticated deposition
Self-powering, strain sensing
Air-permeable, specific surface area




2.1. Preparation of fiber-shaped textronic structures
Given that most textile fibers are insulators, electrically conducting materials are coated on these fibers. Various conducting components, such as intrinsically conductive polymers (ICPs), nanocarbons (graphene and CNTs), and nanosized metallic particles (metallic nanowires and liquid metals), have been used to produce electrical conduction in 1D fibers. Practically, electrospinning,60 sputtering,61 vapor deposition,62 thermal drawing,63 and dip-coating64 are mostly employed for engineering 1D textronic designs (fiber or yarn-shaped) to maintain the flexibility, lightness, and high aspect ratio of the core textile over film-like devices. For instance, cotton yarn decorated with Au–Ag core–shell nanoparticles through a solution-based deposition process was useful for the detection of human motion in real time (Fig. 1b).65
The facile electrospinning technique was adopted to develop a biocompatible 1D silk fibroin triboelectric generator for reliable energy harvesting (Fig. 1c).66 Wet-spinning of MWCNTs on elastic fibers was performed to improve the electrical conductivity of a strain sensor (increased from 10−9 to 10−2 S cm−1) with a low percolation threshold.67 The resistivity of polyacrylonitrile fibers coated with Cu through the deposition technique was 360 Ω cm−1 with an elongation at break of 37.73%.68 Gold sputtering on polyester fibers was performed to manufacture a planar-fashionable circuit board (P-FCB), which could deliver a high stability connection (resistance of ∼0.23 Ω sq−1) with an increase in the thickness of the fiber wire.69 Thermal drawing of liquid metals on 1D fibers was useful for designing a microstructured triboelectric fiber platform with a high electrical output of up to 175 nC (at 490 V).70
2.2. Preparation of fabric-based textronic structures
Fabric-based (2D) textronics are mostly designed via solution-based polymerization,71 coating or printing72,73 on stylistic fabric surfaces (knitted, woven, nonwoven, and embroidered) or direct implantation of 1D conductive fibers at discrete locations of a garment. Furthermore, the most sophisticated 3D fabric-based textronics are constructed via the insertion of extra oriented conductive yarns into a 2D-shaped substrate.74 Structurally, 3D textronics maintain higher compactness and deformability compared to 2D textronics and also have significant potential application in pressure sensing circuits,75 antennas,76 thermoelectric powering,77 and solar cells78 due to their unique structural integrity. For example, a 2D knitted structure constructed via the weft knitting process with the insertion of Ag-coated yarn and nylon spandex could provide strain sensing data for detecting body motions.79 Besides, metallic coatings on knitted textile designs formed a useful framework for wearable transparent electrodes such as light-emitting or lithium-ion batteries (Fig. 1d).80 Cotton fabric coated with a p-doped conjugated polymer could be used as a humidity sensor by mounting it in a face mask for accurate respiration monitoring (Fig. 1e).81 A ZnS-based electroluminescent fabric woven using liquid-metal encapsulated ultra-stretchable fibers could be used as a pixel-based arbitrarily controllable pattern display via a Bluetooth device or mobile phone (Fig. 1f).82 Moreover, a 3D textile with two electrodes and one spacer in a single sheet of cloth could be constructed using a weaving machine for application in dye-sensitized solar cells (Fig. 1g).78 By combining high-density silver nanofiber silk fabric and 3D penetrated fabric, a fast response LC monitoring pressure sensor (sensitivity of 0.283 kPa−1) was developed for wireless human motion transition and detection (Fig. 1h).75 Nevertheless, 3D spacer or shell-like textronics require specialized equipment for their scalable fabrication and processing.
Wearable electronics in the form of 1D (yarn, filaments, and fibers), 2D (knitted, woven, and nonwoven) or 3D (spacer) textronic structure offer significant features such as conformality to non-planar structures, simple integration in various objects, and shapes, and most importantly, wearing comfort due to the various designs (Fig. 2a–c). Earlier, structural textronic devices were categorized based on their electrode output performance in terms of electrical properties and functionality. However, despite the immense advancement in textile-based prototypes and nano-engineering, they have many limitations, such as poor uniformity and reliability, making the acceptability of textronics questionable (Fig. 2d). With the expansion of the 4th industrial revolution, experts from multidisciplinary fields have worked together to develop reliable textronic devices, adopting new ideas in materials chemistry and reinforced nanofabrication. In the last few decades, numerous mechanically durable textronic devices have been invented; however, they are frequently not marketed due to their poor washability.31 This is because the washing of electroactive material-embedded textronics for repeated use without a deterioration in their electrical performance is still a big challenge for researchers in this field (Fig. 2e).
 Fig. 2  (a) Advanced textronic blocks in one-dimensional (1D) filament (i) and zig-zag fiber/yarn (ii). (b) Two-dimensional (2D) non-woven (i), woven (ii), knitted and (iii) fabric. (c) Three-dimensional (3D) spacer/braided fabric pattern. (d) Roadmap towards next-generation wearable textronics and the remaining washability challenges. (e) Impact of the low washability of existing prototype textronics on the future global market. 
3. Progression in washable textronic devices
Textile materials offer fabulous opportunities to design highly compressible wearable electronic devices. A myriad of textronic devices has been developed using conductive materials such as (intrinsically conductive polymers) ICPs, metals and nanocarbons, and fibrous substrates have been successfully proven to exhibit mechanical compliance for thousands to multi-thousands of stress cycles, while retaining high carrier mobility and electrical conductivity. The relentless efforts of researchers in the development of textile-based triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs),83 and strain and pressure sensors84 were successful in reinforcing the mechanical compliance of multidimensional textronics. Similar to the mechanical properties, the washability of textile electrodes is also a crucial factor in making these devices commercially viable. Launderability is the best way to determine the bonding strength between conductive particles and textile substrates. Textronics are anticipated to be used continually, and thus subjected to multiple washings or cleaning. However, one of the major hurdles in textronic devices is the washing of the implanted conductive traces or coating layers in their substrates, while keeping their electrical functionality activated. The enforced mechanical rubbing together with harsh washing chemicals inside the washing machine drum severely damages the electroactive components or conductive traces of textronics, posing a serious threat to the longevity of the targeted devices. In the last two decades, several research groups have been working on the design of washable textronics and some studies successfully reported washing durability in their targeted textile electrodes for multifunctional applications.32 Nevertheless, most of the successful works were accomplished using different fabrication processes, textile geometries, and pretreatment processes, where the material processing and adopted washing methods were not similar. Furthermore, these reports demonstrated the washability of their prototypes for a limited number of washing cycles and did not provide more tactful techniques to extend the lifespan of the prepared electrodes in the washing environment. Table 2 presents the variations in the washability of different textronic designs and the potential damaging factors in the regular washing process. According to the existing research (Table 2), it is obvious that washability was not the key focus in most textronic-related articles. Specifically, there was a wide variation in wash durability from one device to another, which makes the progression of washable textronics still a challenge.
Table 2 Potential challenges in different textronic designs and nanofabrication and probable damaging factors during the washing of textronic devices




Basic structures
Embedded materials
Type of washing
Washing impact
Limitations
Ref.




2D fabric
Ag/Cu/Ni coated yarn
Washing with detergent with 10 rubber balls
Antenna gain dropped by 7 dB after a single wash
Unprotected coating layers to tackle rigorous wash stress

85



2D polyamide fabric
PPy (25%)
Washing with an anionic detergent
Resistance enhanced twofold after a single wash
Inappropriate dopant selection

86



2D cotton fabric
MWCNT/graphene
Washing performed with harsh soaps
Resistance increased fivefold after 9 wash cycles
Soap with higher basicity greatly depleted the coating layers

38



1D polyester fiber
Ag plating (electroless)
Lab-scale wash fastness test
Appx. fourfold increase in resistivity after 10 wash cycles
Thinner or poor adhesion strength of coating layers

87



1D silk yarn
AgNWs
Washing with an anionic detergent
Lost functionality after 2 machine washes
Needs adjacent electroactive materials or enhancers to retain electrical property

88



2D cotton fabric
CB/PVA binder
Vigorous machine washing with 15 stainless steel balls
Resistance increased 11 times after a single wash
Inactivity of water-soluble binder

89



2D cotton fabric
PPy (10%)
Washing with ECE detergent
Resistivity increased 4 times higher after a single wash
Lack of encapsulation

90



1D nylon yarn
Ag/Cu plating
Washing with bleaching detergent
Coating layers completely peeled off and lost conductivity
Required bleach-free detergent washing

91





The washability of textronics is very problematic and case dependent. Besides the hydrodynamic washing stresses and washing environment, there are many aspects directly related to the washing outcome of a textronic. Hence, a thorough understanding of both the issues impacting the washing result and the weak points within the textronic that will inevitably fail if exposed to the washing process is required. To improve the wash longevity of textronics, materials scientists are now trying to develop a suitable standardization for materials synthesis, textile pretreatment, device lamination, and washing procedures to meet the trigger requirements and the market readiness of textronic devices. In the next section, we discuss some useful strategies to systematically improve the wash longevity of textronic devices.
4. Evolving strategies in the design of washable textronics and their functional reliability
4.1. Engineered textile configurations for long-term washability
The wash durability of e-textile relies on the geometry of different fibrous textile interfaces (e.g., 1D: fiber/filament/yarn and 2D: nonwoven, woven, knitted, and embroidery fabrics). Regular textiles embedded with highly conductive threads or materials cannot always maintain an electrical potential under domestic washing. Therefore, e-textiles should be constructed with care, using appropriate textile units or blocks with superior absorption capacity, breathability, robustness, and washable attributes. For the development of washable textronic devices, the following structural textile configurations have been found to be very useful.

4.1.1. Fiber-shaped washable textronic structures. 
The most evident unit of wearable textronics is typically 1D fibers or yarns, which serve as the main construction block. There are many established techniques for the manufacture of 1D fibers from various polymers such as sputtering, wet spinning, dry spinning, and melt spinning. These 1D units are high-aspect-ratio-oriented materials, which can be made from natural and synthetic resources. To create a variety of artistic patterns in wearable textronics, 1D conductive threads are integrated in various positions on a substrate. However, a wide thread with a short length is considered the ideal conductive thread because of its good electrical stability. This type of thread can be integrated into fabric using straight or zigzag stitches with different stitch densities and lengths via embroidery or a sewing machine.92 Multiple line stitching is beneficial for the formation of a strong conductive network between yarns by interconnecting them at multiple places.93 Hence, if a single yarn somehow loses its conductivity due to washing, the adjacent yarns ultimately allow a current to pass through their connecting point. In the case of single-line stitching, the electrical property of a substrate can greatly decrease even after a single washing. By inserting a conductive thread only in the needle or in both the needle and the bobbin of a sewing machine, the electrical functionality of e-textiles can be retained under washing. However, commercial embroiderers typically suggest the use of a zigzag stitch (wide: 1–2 mm), which can be inserted in both the needle and the bobbin to ensure a stable electrical connection under vigorous washing.92 These interlaced threads have contact points and contact surfaces and their pores are usually filled with dielectric air.94 The higher resistivity of conductive textiles is attributed to the lower contact points between the staple fibers in the textile substrate than in yarn. Typically, the coating materials on the surface of smooth filament yarns cannot sufficiently fill the voids or pores on their surface, resulting in poor wash stability. However, in the case of staple filament yarns and fabrics, strong bonding occurs due to the interlocking of both coating surfaces, which ultimately strengthen the wash durability of the conductive substrate.95 SWCNTs were twisted into cotton yarn by Yang et al. during ring spinning, resulting in greater wash durability. After eight laundering processes, the sheet resistance (R/R0) ratio of the SWCNT–cotton substrate was determined to be less than 1.3.96 Bicomponent fiber spinning is also useful for creating durable and washable 1D fiber structures, in which two molten/dissolved disparate polymers meet at the outlet of a spinneret with distinct cross-sections to create desirable textile configurations.97 The core–shell yarn/fiber is the most common type for bicomponent 1D textiles. In the core–shell 1D structure, the polymer employed as the core offers the appropriate physical qualities, while the polymer utilized in the sheath provides the filament with a specific functionality. During the spinning method, fillers with specialized functionalities can also be added in addition to the two core polymers. A core–shell TENG yarn was designed by spinning silicone rubber elastomer tubes over the surface of stainless steel (SS) yarn.98 The warp yarn with a double-plied structure could resist rigorous laundering stresses even after 10 washing cycles without any decay in its electrical properties. The core–shell yarns, with core SS fibers as the electrodes and shell dielectric fibers (spandex) as the covering sheath, showed superior viability as a washable TENG.99 The VOC and resistance value of the prepared TENG yarn were recorded to be ∼32 V and 3.7 kΩ, respectively, even after the 120th machine wash (Fig. 3a). After the extreme washing process, the spandex fibers that were twining the inner SS fibers were securely twined without any visible damage. The pioneering lab of Dr Wang constructed a triboelectric all-textile sensor array by integrating stainless steel yarn and commercial nylon yarn in a full cardigan stitch.100 The conductive hybrid yarns guaranteed their weaving ability on an industrial flat knitting machine to maintain the uniform performance of all sensors even after 40 machine washing cycles.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic presentation of the geometry of the core–shell yarn. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (b) Fabrics made of core–shell yarns with a variety of woven topologies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (c) (i) Schematic diagram of the preparation of weft and warp Cu-PET yarns and assembly of woven t-TENG. Change in (ii) linear resistance in 2-ply Cu-PET conductive yarn after 20 wash cycles and SEM images of (iii) unwashed, (iv) 5 cycle-, (v) 10 cycle-, (vi) 15 cycle-, and (vii) 20 cycle-washed 2-ply Cu-PET conductive yarn. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106 Copyright 2016, Wiley. (d) (i) Schematic illustration of the fabricated PET/AgNW/graphene core–shell textile structure. (ii) SEM images of Ag NWs placed in the air for 240 h without a graphene covering sheet. With varying number of washings, (iii) sheet resistance variations for AgNWs and Ag NW/graphene-coated e-textiles. Water drops on the surfaces of the developed e-textile are photographed in the insets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram of the charge circulation of a single self-powering all-solid-state yarn under short-circuit situations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (f) (i) Structural characteristics of the shape-adaptable 3D TENG structure, which includes an outer braided braced frame and inner axial core column. (ii) Image of the 3D TENG structure (scale bar: 1 cm). (iii) Schematic diagram of 3D four-step rectangular braiding technology. (iv) Yarn carriers are distributed on the machine bed in a random pattern. The “O” and “X” marks identify the braided and axial yarn carriers, respectively. (v) One yarn carrier and traveled paths of its suspended yarn. The orange line and black line depict the movement routes of one braided yarn and its yarn carrier, respectively, while the blue line indicates the walking paths of one axial yarn and its yarn carrier. (vi) Graphical diagram of the working principle of the shape-adaptable 3D TENG structure in vertical contact and separation mode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2020, Nature. 


4.1.2. Fabric-based washable textronic structures. 
For 2D textile blocks such as nonwoven, woven, knitted, and embroidered fabrics, their electrical property is mostly dependent on their volume fraction of pores. Nonwoven textile constructions are often porous, with reduced surface roughness, resulting in a reduction in flexibility, abrasion resistance, and washability. Shahariar et al. demonstrated that polyester fabrics with different constructions (knit, woven, and nonwoven fabrics) have wide variations in washability when coated with silver ink via the inkjet printing process.101 The resistivity of a conductive nonwoven pattern (Evolon®) increased by fifty times (∼2.3 Ω to >100 Ω) after a single wash, whereas that for the knitted pattern increased by two times (>1 kΩ) even after 15 washing cycles. The conductive woven pattern displayed the maximum wash-durability, showing a negligible increment in resistance after 15 washing cycles. The better washability of the 2D woven structure is attributed to its higher surface area and fibers with a larger diameter, which greatly facilitate the adhesion of the conductive silver ink with the polyester interface. For the 2D nonwoven pattern, the concentrated ink portions were loosely attached to the fibers and after washing action, the surface resistivity increased due to the wearing of the silver layer by washing agitation. Consequently, 2D textiles with a compact and nonporous design are extremely useful to prevent the depletion of the electroactive layer during machine washing. Furthermore, due to the differences in the direction of the integration of textile structures, the conductivity of 2D textile electrodes can vary.
Varesano et al. reported that in a woven structure, the warp threads usually remain under tension, resulting in a parallel conformation, while the weft threads spin around the warp threads, which may theoretically result in π/2 times yarn length per fabric length unit.102 Accordingly, the surface resistivity in the weft direction was found to be higher than in the warp direction after coating with PPy. Studies on knitted structures also demonstrated a difference in resistivity between the wale and course directions.103,104 A shape-adaptive and washable self-powered pressure sensor was developed by using different core–shell yarns.105 The weft and warp yarns of the 2D woven textile structure were made of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filaments, whereas the inner electrode layer was made of helical stainless steel thread. The textile sensor showed the ability to keep the output voltage and current constant even after 4 h of continuous washing process (Fig. 3b). Zhao et al. fabricated a machine-washable 2D TENG through plain-weaving of 2-ply Cu-PET yarns as the warp and polyimide-coated Cu-PET yarn as the weft via the PAMD process.106 The prepared TENG device could maintain a stable linear resistance (<0.6 Ω cm−1) under 20 cycles of vigorous mechanical washing process without any structural damage, as shown in the SEM images (Fig. 3c). These results were attributed to the fact that the looser connections from the yarn untwisted, rather than Cu coating being cracked. A transparent core–shell TENG design was made by blade-coating a PET fabric with AgNWs and graphene film (Fig. 3d).107 The protective blade-coating of graphene helped to keep the sheet resistance constant even after washing the TENG device in DI water for 6 wash cycles (rotation time of 20 min). Yang et al. developed a highly conductive 3D helical fiber using elastic PU fiber and thin Cu wires, which was solderable and washable.108 3D helical fibers can be readily integrated with other functional components to build 2D-based textronics. The washability of 3D helical fibers integrated into wearable lighting wristbands was demonstrated by the stable powering of LEDs underwater. Dong et al. developed an all-solid-state yarn self-powering supercapacitor by integrating elastomeric rubber on the surface of 3-ply twisted PET/SS fiber-merged yarn (Fig. 3e).109 The supercapacitor yarn was knitted into a stretchable 2D fabric and the multi-layered yarn design experienced no decrease in electrical outputs even after 15 machine washing cycles. Furthermore, a multilayer textronics pattern (3D block) was reported to be effective in extending the washability of the connected conductive yarn. In a multilayer knitted, braided or woven structure, the upper layer yarns are connected with bottom layer yarns and the corresponding conductive yarns are normally embedded through these insulating layers, which can prevent the conductive substrate from possible short circuits by establishing a highly durable and linked fabric structure.110,111 A shape-adaptable 3D TENG structure was prepared by multiaxial Ag-yarn (nylon) winding and PDMS coating (Fig. 3f).112 The 3D textile with five-directional braiding provided a nearly double short-circuit current value as that of the 2D TENG fabric, demonstrating that the 3D braided structure with greater contact separation gaps can substantially enhance the total power output. Additionally, the electrical output of the 3D-TENG remained stable without substantial degradation even after 20 wash cycles. Another compact and highly washable self-powering textile was fabricated by twisting cotton thread over 8 lacquered Cu wires following the rib stitch technique.113 The reported 3D rib stitch textile design showed a maximum power density of ∼18 mW m−2 and was perfectly capable of withstanding 60 wash cycles without any encapsulation or packaging. The outstanding washability of this device indicated that all 8 lacquered Cu wires worked properly and the mechanical stresses of washing did not exaggerate their electrical properties. A summary of the different textronic structures for developing washable textronics is tabulated in Table 3.
Table 3 Summary of different electroactive materials embedded washable textronic blocks and their wash stability




Textiles
Block shapes
Electroactive materials
Techniques
Initial outputs
Wash stability
Ref.




Blended yarn (3-ply twisted SS/PET fiber blended yarn)
2D knit with all-solid-state yarn
PEDOT:PSS/CF/CNF electrodes
Weft knitting/coating
Power density: 85 mW m−2
No decrease in electrical outputs even after 15 wash cycles

109



Braided nylon yarn
3D braided
Ag-braided yarn
Winding
26 W m−3
Remain stable even after 20 wash cycles

112



Silk
2D knitted
MXene (3 mg mL−1), AgNW
Vacuum-assisted spray coating
∼0.8 Ω sq−1
Resistance remained unchanged even after 20 h of washing

114



Polyester yarn
3D orthogonal woven structure
Stainless steel/PDMS
Stacking/binding
263.36 mW m−2
Maintained powering ability after 10 wash cycles

115



Polypropylene/viscose
2D nonwoven
MWCNT
Nano-soldering
29.9 (G.F at 1% strain)
Conductance increased by only 13.6% after 40 h of washing

116



Polypropylene/viscose
2D nonwoven
MWCNT
Nano-soldering
∼9.7 kΩ
Resistance remained constant even after 48 h of washing

117



Cotton/spandex fabric
2D knitted rib structure
CNT
Dip and dry method
2.38 kΩ cm−1

R/R0 value increased to 1.6 after 10 wash cycles

118



Nylon yarn
2D tubular knit structure (seamless)
Braided PTFE-Ag yarn
Knitting
1484 μW m−2
Acceptable increase in OC voltage (from 40 V to 55 V) after 10 wash cycles

119



Cotton threads
3D rib stitch knitted structure
8 lacquered Cu wires
Rib stitch technique
∼18 mW m−2
Retained electrical properties even after 60 wash cycles

113



Polyester
1D core–shell yarns
AgNW/graphene
Full-solution method
20 Ω sq−1
Retained electrical properties after 6 wash cycles

107



PU fiber
3D helical fiber
Cu fiber
Nano-soldering
29.8 Ω
Stable powering of LEDs under water

108



Cotton
1D core–shell yarns
Stainless steel fiber
Weaving method
∼60 mW m−2
Stable output voltage even after 120 machine wash cycles

99



Nylon
2D helix structure
Stainless steel monofilament
Twisting/weaving
—
Could retain functionality even after 4 h continuous washing

105



Nylon (87%) and spandex (13%)
2D knitted
Cu, AuNPs
Immersion
∼3.6 Ω sq−1
Stable conductivity after 10 times washing

120



Polyester
2D knitted
Ag ink
Inkjet printing
∼0.9 Ω sq−1
Resistance increased to ∼1 kΩ after 20 washes

101



Polyester
1D yarn
Stainless-steel fiber, silicon
Enwrapping
10.79 mV Pa−1 (sensitivity)
Functional even after long-term vigorous machine washing

121






4.2. Conformable electroactive material selection to designing wash-durable textronic interface

4.2.1. Nanoscale metal-integrated washable textronic designs. 
The significant mechanical mismatch between rigid metallic components and textiles has driven researchers to look for nanoscale metallic particles for the development of multifunctional textronic devices. Different low dimensional metallic nanoparticles, nanowires, and nanoflakes/nanosheets/nanoclusters have been used for the proper metalization of textiles via different fabrication techniques including sputtering,122 physical deposition,123 chemical plating,124 and screen printing.125 Undoubtedly, these nanoscale metalization processes can provide excellent conductivity for different structural textiles, but also makes a textile less comfortable to wear after repetitive domestic washing. Moreover, the lack of interfacial bonding between the metal layers and the textile interface is likely to result in poor textronic device longevity, which greatly limits the industrialization process. In this context, researchers are focusing on scalable manufacturing methods for the conformal and homogeneous metalization of textiles to ensure long-term textronic washability and comfort. Researchers from Fudan University are focusing on a scalable industrial metalization process to produce meters of multidimensional washable textronic devices. Their lab successfully produced high-performing 1D fiber-shaped lithium-ion batteries and electroluminescent units that can be woven into large-area textiles through an industrial rapier loom for reliable wireless communication and real-time health monitoring (Fig. 4a).126–128 Gorgutsa et al. integrated metal-glass-polymer fiber composites into textiles in the form of center-fed dipoles and loop antennas via the weaving method.129 To improve the washability of the integrated multi-material fiber electrode, they applied a hydrophobic coating on the textile interconnects, which offered wash durability for 20 cycles. A conformable TENG was developed by embedding three-ply-twisted Ag-coated nylon yarn in a silicone rubber elastomer.130 The device was capable of producing an instantaneous average power density of 230 mW m−2 and showed superior wash durability for long-term use (Fig. 4b). The pioneering Fink's research group of MIT designed a fully functional energy-storage fiber by thermally drawing Cu microwire and conductive polymer current collectors with an encapsulating hermetic cladding.131 Their process produced 100 m of continuous functional supercapacitor fiber (306 μW h cm−2), which could be machine-woven and worked even after 100 washing cycles (Fig. 4c). Ge and coworkers employed a green process to fabricate nylon fabric with Cu nanoparticles through the rapid co-deposition of tannic acid and polyethyleneimine, which greatly promoted the anchoring sites of the grafted textile interface compared to the conventional polymer-assisted metal deposition.132 The grafted textile interface was used as a reliable wearable heater (∼14 to 152 °C under 1.5 V) and remained stable even after 50 standard washing cycles. Recently, eco-friendly triboelectric yarn was designed by spinning Ag conductive yarn with Tencel and chitosan blended yarns (Fig. 4d).133 Owing to the ultra-flexibility, small diameter, and large scalability of the single-yarn electrode, a woven structure TENG was fabricated using the continuously spun yarn, which showed a power density of 15.8 mW m−2. The obtained fabric TENG was extremely washable and exhibited excellent breathability and antibacterial properties. A sandwich structure light/thermal emitting textile electrode was developed by fabricating a surface with AgNW-thermal insulation bilayers.134 The fabricated e-textile showed good stability in both heating and lighting performances even after 50 washing cycles.
 Fig. 4  (a) (i) Industrial-scale fabrication of fiber lithium-ion batteries using a commercial rapier loom machine. (ii) Image of a cotton shirt integrated with fiber lithium-ion batteries. (iii) Photograph of a 6 meter-long display cloth with about 5 × 105 electroluminescent units. (iv) Luminescence of the electroluminescent units after 100 cycles of washing (30 min per cycle) is comparable to that of the original unwashed cloth, as shown in the photographs (top) and emission images (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 126–128 Copyright 2021, Nature. (b) Schematic diagram of a skin-inspired TENG with a fence-shaped (“chain-link”) structure and rhombic unit pattern. The basic repetitive rhombic unit of yarn conductive network increased in the top left. On the right, SEM view of the surface morphology of the 3-ply-twisted Ag-coated nylon yarn. The transparency of the obtained TENG can be seen in the lower right corner. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130 Copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) (i) Capacitance retention of thermally drawn supercapacitor fibers under continuous machine washing (100 cycles) and harsh conditions. (ii) Charge–discharge curves of parallel and serially linked fibers. (iii) Machine-weaving and 3D printing from thermally drawn supercapacitor fiber are depicted in this diagram. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 Copyright 2020, Wiley. (d) (i) Schematic diagram showing the construction of an eco-friendly washable triboelectric yarn. Images presenting the morphologies of (ii) Ag conductive yarn and (iii) Tencel/chitosan yarn. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 


4.2.2. Nanocarbon-embedded washable textronic designs. 
Nanoscale carbon materials have drawn unprecedented attention for establishing embeddable, lightweight, thermal conductivity, large surface area, and ultra-thin features in textile-based electronics. Common carbonaceous materials such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, carbon black, and 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) have been widely explored for the fabrication of high-performance textronic devices for multi-functional applications. However, the physical adsorption of carbonaceous material-based solutions or inks is often found to be weak due to the nonpolar nature of their chemical backbones. Hence, nanosized carbons can easily agglomerate in aqueous solution, especially at higher concentrations, which greatly impede the restacking of carbon sheets and result in poor washability and durability of embedded textronic devices, particularly under harsh environments. These hurdles greatly obstruct the application of carbon-based electrodes as reliable textronic devices. Therefore, e-textile researchers are now focusing their efforts on ensuring the strong adhesion of carbonaceous materials on fibers.
To confirm a homogeneous CNT bonding network, Zu et al. employed a green technique, combining glucaric acid and chitosan with SWCNTs.135 The conductive bio-based composite coating on polyamide fabric showed ultra-high stable electrical properties (8.7 S m−1) even after 20 washing cycles. Du and his research team adopted ultrasonic nano soldering of CNTs on nonwoven fabric to design high-performing wearable strain/pressure sensors.116 The robust attachment of the soldered CNT on the polymer reduced the depletion of CNTs from the fiber surface even after 40 h of mechanical washing. In another study, this research group found that the nanosolding of hybrid nano carbons (CNT/rGO) into textile surfaces could further enhance the washability of textronic devices.136 Different industrial patents have been issued by researchers for the development of highly machine washable hybrid nanocarbon-embedded wearable textile electrodes.137,138
Additionally, a thermoelectric nanogenerator was developed via the fabrication of PEDOT:PSS/rGO nano-hybrids on cotton fabric, which was capable of providing a power factor of (2.5–60 μW m−1 K−1) and showed excellent wash stability (for 20 wash cycles) compared to the typical rGO-coated textile electrode.139 Moreover, the incorporation of MWCNTs in Ag/silicone adhesives could decrease the Ag content to reach the maximum electrical conductivity (1050 S cm−1 to 6450 S cm−1) of a textile electrode for potential ECG monitoring (Fig. 5a).140 The obtained dry electrode or elastic bandage exhibited a stable performance even after repeated machine washing and detachment–reattachment cycles. Xie and coworkers fabricated cotton/elastic threads with hybrid rGO/mesoporous ZnO nanosheets to make a flexible fiber gas sensor (43.5 ppb NO2) with great knittability and wearability.141 The fiber gas sensor integrated into clothes was proven to be highly washable (Fig. 5b). Another washable NO2 gas sensor was designed by Yoon et al., where amyloid nanofibrils were used as a bio-inspired adhesion enhancer between graphene flakes and cotton yarn.142 Compared to other molecular gluing materials (e.g., globular protein, metal ions, and organic molecules), bio-inspired materials can provide sufficient active sites on the embedded textile surface, which improves the performances in gas response time.
 Fig. 5  (a) (i) Processing of conductive MWCNT/Ag/silicone adhesive pastes. The upper images depict the adhesive, while the lower images depict printed adhesives on PDMS and an elastic bandage. (ii) Illustration of the stretchable conductive MWCNT/Ag/silicone adhesive. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (b) (i) Systematic fabrication of rGO/ZnO hybrid fibers. (ii) Optical image of fiber gas sensor fiber woven onto fabric to make a stylistic pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (c) (i) Fabrication of conductive EG/PEDOT:PSS cotton yarns using a two-step dip-coating method. (ii) Image of a wearable electronic circuit consisting of a coin battery, an LED, and conductive yarns as electrical wire. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (d) (i) Scalable modification of PPy-coated knitted fabric with rose-like Ag flowers and adopted (ii) electrochemical deposition process. (iii) Development of wash durable pressure/strain sensor and supercapacitor by stacking electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 


4.2.3. ICP-embedded washable textronic designs. 
Different intrinsically conductive polymers (ICPs) have excellent electrical conductivity, making them an excellent alternative for wearable electronics. The electrical conductivity of common ICPs such as polypyrrole (PPy), polyaniline (PANI), and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) ranges from 10−11 to 105 S cm−1 upon doping. These ICPs are either cation salts formed by electrochemical polymerization/chemical oxidation or anion salts formed from reagents/electrochemical reduction.143 Typically, different fabrication techniques including dip coating,144in situ polymerization,90 vapor polymerization,145 brushing and spray painting146 have been employed to develop polymer-based textronic devices. Nevertheless, the direct fabrication of ICPs on textile substrates has shown limited washability and environmental stability (moisture exposure to atmospheric oxygen) in the developed textronic devices, which is still a big challenge.
Various forms of hydrophobic counter ions have been utilized to alleviate this problem. Organic molecules, which are typically bigger, are used as counter ions in polymer-coated textile substrates.147–150 Moreover, the addition of organic solvents such as glycerol, ethylene glycol (EG), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) can enhance the conductivity and washability of different polymer-embedded textiles surfaces. For example, the treatment of PEDOT:PSS-coated cotton yarn with EG reduced the interaction between the PEDOT and PSS chains, confirming the strong hydrogen bonding between the EG and PSS components, which led to the linear reorientation of the PEDOT chains.151 The developed EG/PEDOT:PSS conductive yarn could retain electrical functionality even after 8 domestic washing cycles, as shown in Fig. 5c. Modification of the PPy chain using sodium 5-sulfosalicylic as a dopant could greatly improve the surface roughness of woven cotton and silk fabric, which could maintain electrical functionality even after 20 washing cycles (dichloromethane solvent).152 A patent was issued by Guangdong Academy of Sciences, China using this fabrication method for the industrial-scale production of the super-washable dual-function textile sensor.153 Moreover, the modification of polymer-coated textiles with adjacent conductive particles such as metals or nanocarbon can promote the wash stability and electrochemical performance of textronic devices. A PPy-polymerized knitted fabric modified with rose-like Ag flowers through electrochemical deposition provided ultra-pressure/strain sensitivity and a high power density of 0.38 mW cm−2 with long-term wash durability (20 wash cycles) (Fig. 5d).154 The deposition of PEDOT:PSS/rGO hybrid ink on the cotton fabric resulted in low impedance (40–150 Hz) and sheet resistance (∼50 kΩ) for the detection of high-quality electrocardiograms. The obtained dry-ECG electrode was used as a wearable sports bra for real-time health monitoring and could retain functionality against 50 washing cycles.155

4.3. Strategic encapsulation and mounting
The embedded electroactive materials in e-textiles can be depleted from the textile surface over repeated use or during the domestic washing process. Thus, to mitigate this issue, different adhesive/elastomeric films have been used, surrounding the textile layer to closely laminate the textiles with coating particles. Adhesive films act as a protective barrier in enclosed textronic blocks, shielding the conductive textile design from external wash stresses. To date, different encapsulant materials such as polyurethanes, silicones, resins, and epoxies have been employed to manufacture washable and stretchable textronic devices. The common encapsulation processes adopted in the fabrication of e-textiles include printing, transfer molding, underfill, potting, and glob-top encapsulation.156 Practically, the encapsulation process can be performed on a single side or double sides of a substrate according to the physical properties of the textile and performance requirements of textronic blocks. For next-to-skin wearable applications, single-sided encapsulation is preferable to ensure easy handle. Double-sided encapsulation appears to protect all surfaces, but it can interfere with handling and heat/moisture transfer. However, the common interference of double-sided encapsulation can be addressed by adjusting the thickness/diameter of encapsulants. Table 4 presents the basic properties of different popular encapsulates utilized in the fabrication of washable textronics.
Table 4 Properties of common encapsulates used in the fabrication of washable textronics




Encapsulates
Glass transition temperature (Tg) (°C)
Water absorption (%) (24 h, 73 °F)
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
Dielectric constant (at 60 Hz)
Tensile strength (MPa)
Viscosity (cP)
Merits
Ref.




TPU
46.7–47.0
0.14% to 0.40%
0.19 to 0.21
5–7
25 to 75
3000 to 100000
Low-temperature flexibility, high resilience, and great versatility

161–163



Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
−125 to −130
10−3 to 10−1
∼0.2
2.32 to 2.40
1.1 to 14.3
500–10000
Optically transparent, low interfacial free energy, good thermal stability

164–168



Polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDDA)
90–143
0.09–0.1
∼01 to 0.2
∼2
27.5 to 32.5
250 to 500
Polymeric sorbent

169–173



Silicon rubber
−70 to −110
∼1
0.15 to 0.2
2.81 to 3.56
4 to 9 MPa
500000 to 2000000
Good temperature cycling, very low modulus

174–177



Epoxy resin
104.85 to 136.85
0.08 to 0.3
∼0.2
3.3 to 4.65
3.40 to 55.1
490 to 3700
Good mechanical strength, solvent resistance

178–181



Ecoflex
35 to 40
0.05 to 0.28
0.16
2.2–2.8
1.1 to 2
3000–4000
Biodegradable, excellent water and tear resistance, printable and weldable

182–186





Polyurethane (PU) is recognized as a common protective film material that can improve the wash durability of textile substrates due to its intrinsic hydrophobic nature.157 Nevertheless, protective PU films require special modification of their structural backbone to improve their water dispersion compatibility. By incorporating hydrophilic monomers into the PU backbone, an aqueous PU binary colloidal system was fabricated, which opens a new paradigm for waterproof wearable textronics.158 A study reported that knitted polyamide fabric treated with waterborne PU dispersed (90%) PEDOT:PSS polymer could retain its electrical property even after ten vigorous washing cycles compared to the fabric treated with PEDOT:PSS.159 The trends of conductivity retention against water washing were found to be proportional to the increase in PU content. Graphene-based cotton fabric was encapsulated with stretchable PU to form an insulating layer on the textile surface.160 The encapsulated device was exposed to 10 vigorous machine washing cycles, showing a low depletion of graphene flakes from the cotton surface and maintained excellent conductivity (Fig. 6a).
 Fig. 6  (a) (i) Resistance of graphene-coated compressed poly-cotton fabric (PU encapsulated), simple graphene-coated (PU encapsulated) poly-cotton fabric, and graphene-coated compressed (without PU) poly-cotton fabric as a function of number of washing cycles. (ii) Graphical diagram of graphene and PU layer on e-textile surface (top), physical appearance of encapsulated PU, and nonencapsulated area of graphene-coated poly-cotton fabric after 10 washes (bottom). (iii) SEM image of graphene-coated poly-cotton fiber, (iv) SEM image of graphene-coated poly-cotton fiber after washing, and (v) SEM image of graphene-coated and encapsulated poly-cotton fiber after 10 washing cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160 Copyright 2020, Wiley. (b) Schematic representation of the fabrication of PU-encapsulated AgNW-coated tricot-weave textile pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188 Copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) Solar cell-embedded fabric demonstrator structure: (i) 10 solar cells are soldered in series on two fine Cu wires. (ii) Soldered solar cells separately encapsulated within cylindrical resin micropods. (iii) Fibrous sheath surrounding the encapsulated solar micropod filament. (iv) Cross-sectional view of the woven fabric with solar cell-embedded yarns. (v) Image of a fabric with a solar cell integrated into it (black box referring to solar cell footprint). (vi) Minimodule constructed with ten solar e-yarns has an electrical circuit diagram. The fabric for the demonstrator was made up of two minimodules. (vii) Solar cell fabric demonstrator schematic depicting the connections between the solar e-yarns and minimodules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 191 Copyright 2019, Wiley. (d) (i) OPVs covered with thick acrylic elastomer are submerged in deionized water. (ii) Normalized PCE of the free-standing OPVs (black circles) and the double-side coated OPVs (red squares) as a function of dipping time. The error bars represent the standard deviation in each structure, normalized by the average of the initial PCE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 194 Copyright 2017, Nature. (e) (i) Diagram of washable textile-based OLED and encapsulation layers. (ii) TEM image of the encapsulation layer. (iii) Chemical structure of each layer, the polymer capping and host-dopant emitting layer (top), and the hole transport and electron injection layer (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 195 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 
In another study, waterborne PU was applied for the construction of graphene-based fabric electrodes through the pad–dry–cure process. The conductivity of the constructed fabric remained unchanged even after 10 rounds of extreme mechanical washing (detergent washing with 10 stainless steel balls).187 Jia et al. developed a machine-washable EMI shielding tricot-weave textile pattern through the drop-casting of AgNWs and PU encapsulation process (Fig. 6b).188 The textile displayed excellent EMI SE with good wash durability (89% retention after 20 machine-wash cycles) without any damage to the electroactive layers. The incorporation of SWCNTs into cotton via a scalable spinning process (CNT–cotton–spandex) strengthened the binding effect between the CNTs and fiber due to the twisting and elongation of the fiber strands during the roving to yarn process.118 The resistivity of the prepared fabric slightly increased (improved to 1.6) after 10 washing cycles, which confirmed the good washability of the wearable heating device. Huang et al. designed a waterproof textile-based embroidered supercapacitor by encapsulating a textile with an Ecoflex film.189 Adopting the AATCC 135 standard washing process, the textile supercapacitor retained 50% of the initial capacitance value even after 20 cycles of high-speed (500 rpm) machine washing and drying. For the further enhancement of the device washability, they laminated TPU fabric over the substrate as an extra protective barrier for the Ecoflex film, which greatly reduced the abrasion between the substrate and ballast pieces. After TPU films, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), rubber elastomers, and poly-diallyl dimethylammonium chloride (PDDA) are the most popular encapsulant materials for designing highly protective e-textile blocks. To date, different patterning techniques have been employed to provide a strong protective barrier for integrated electroactive materials using these waterproof materials. The layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly of textiles is a useful encapsulation strategy that can firmly attach a multilayer coating network with electrostatic attractions, coordination, and hydrogen bonds. Li and co-workers fabricated a highly stretchable waterproof core-sheath structure by combining PU yarn, graphene nanosheets (GNS), and a thin gold film with PDMS solution through the LbL assembly technique.190 The GNS/Au multilayer and PU hydrophobic yarn were linked in the structure via a PDMS film, which encased the surface of the PU/GNS/Au yarn strain sensor. After a continuous water spraying test, no significant increase in resistance was observed at the baseline and peak position of the textile strain sensor, endorsing excellent the waterproofness of the device even in a moist atmosphere.
A washable fabric-based solar cells was designed by soldering ten solar e-yarns in parallel onto two Cu wires (Fig. 6c).191 To protect the embedded conductive materials from washing stress, the soldered solar cells were separately encapsulated with cylindrical resin micropods. The assembled solar cell fabric maintained a stable power output even after 25 hand-washing and 15 machine-washing cycles. Vervust and co-workers used a thin PDMS layer on 2D fabrics (knitted and woven) to laminate the stretchable molded interconnect.192 The interfacial bonding between the modules and textiles was adequate to avoid delamination even after 50 domestic washing cycles in a protective bag at a temperature of 60 °C (ISO 6330:2000). The functionalization of polyester fabrics with CNTs and multi-layer PDDA/PDMS dispersion could create a superhydrophobic hierarchical textile construction that can retain electrical conductivity even after 20 repetitive commercial launderings.193 By coating both sides of a substrate with a thick acrylic elastomer (500 m), Jinno et al. created an ultra-flexible textile-based organic photovoltaic (OPV).194 The efficiency of the double-side encapsulated OPV device was maintained after immersion in DI water for 120 min (only 5.4% loss), whereas the efficiency of the free-standing OPV device (without elastomeric coating) greatly diminished (20.8% decrease) (Fig. 6d). A highly washable textile-based OLED was designed by passivating bilayer encapsulants on both sides of a PET fabric.195 The bilayer-encapsulated OLED maintained its optoelectronic features even after the long-term (1440 min) water immersion process (Fig. 6e). Recently, a superhydrophobic core–shell textile sensor was developed via the functional layering of hydrophobic MXene and protective PDMS.196 The breathability of the textronics was maintained by laminating PDMS layers on the fiber matrix instead of plugging the pores between the fibers. The PDMS–MXene layered textile possessed excellent water contact angles (151.4°) and showed a negligible decrease in hydrophobicity (water contact angles shifted to ∼147°) even after 5 h of ultrasonic washing. A summary of the different encapsulated textile blocks for developing washable textronics is tabulated in Table 5.
Table 5 Summary of the washability of different advanced textronic blocks adopting various encapsulation strategies




Textiles
Electroactive materials
Encapsulants
Technique
Electrical output
Wash stability
Ref.




2D fabric
AgNWs
TPU
Nozzle jet printing
3668 S cm−1
Stable conductivity after 20 washes

197



2D PET fabric
Cu
Epoxy resin
Screen- printing
7.5 Ω
Resistivity shifted to 65.3 kΩ after 10 wash cycles

198



Poly-cotton fabric
Graphene
Fine layer encapsulant (PE773)
Pad–dry–cure/screen printing
11.9 Ω sq−1
Steady conductivity even after 10 washing cycles

160



PET fabric
Stainless steel fiber
TPU
Spinning process
33 nA cm−2, 75 V
No noteworthy change in electrical output after 120 wash cycles

99



PET fabric
CNT
PDDA/PDMS
LbL
37.5 Ω cm−1
Resistance shifted to 57.3 Ω cm−1 after 20 washing cycles

193



Braided 3D fabric
Ag-yarn
PDMS
Winding
26 W m−3
Maintained electrical output after 20 wash cycles

112



Polypropylene fabric
CNT
TPU
Cut and paste method
3.4 × 104 Ω
Durable even after 20 wash cycles

199



PET
MWCNT/Galinstan
Ecoflex film
Spray coating
0.51 mF cm−2
82% capacitance retention even after immersion in water for 4 days

200



2D nylon Lycra fabric
GaInSn
TPU
Screen-printing
1.14 × 105 S m−1
Stable functionality even after 10 wash cycles

201



Polyamide yarn (Madeira)
Ag, AgCl
TPU
Embroidering
34.48 Ω
Stable performance even after 50 wash cycles

202



2D knit/woven fabric
Cu foil
PDMS/silicon
Screen-printing
—
After 50 wash cycles, the performance remained stable

192



PU yarn
Graphene nanosheets/Au
PDMS
LbL
661.59 (GF)
No significant increase in resistance after continuous water spraying

190



Polypropylene (core–shell structure)
MXene-PDA
PDMS
Dip coating
ΔR/R0: ∼3.50
Durable even after 5 h of ultrasonic washing

196



PET fabric
Ag/MoO3/SiO2
Atomic layer deposited-Al2O3
Spin-coating
14.43 mA cm−2
Stable efficiency after 20 times detergent washing

203



Tricot-weave
AgNWs
TPU
Drop-casting
13.6 S m−1
Retained 89% EMI SE value even after 20 times washing

188



Embroidered nonwoven fabric
Ni-cotton yarns/rGO
Ecoflex-TPU
AFEM technique
1.60 mF cm−2
Retained 50% capacitance value after 20 wash cycles

189



Cotton fabric
CB
PVA
Dip coating
∼28 kΩ sq−1
11 cycles

89



Cotton/spandex knit fabric
PPy
Transparent PVA/LiCl gel

In situ polymerization
0.38 mW cm−2
Minimal electrical drift after 20 wash cycles

154



Cotton fabric
AgNWs
TPU
Hot-pressing
1.25 W m−2
Stable performance up to 15 washing cycles

204



Woven Kevlar fabric
Ag@NixCo1−xSe/rGO
PDMS
Hydrothermal process
1.1 mW cm−2
Durable even after 1600 min of continuous washing

205



Woven fabric
Ag yarn
Epoxy resin/hardener
Embroidery and hot melting
500 Ω m−1
No change in performance after 20 wash cycles

156



Knitted fabric
PCB/Ag yarn
Silicon-TPU
Transmission lines
ΔR/R0: ∼1
After 50 wash cycles conductivity decreased 4 times

206





4.4. Strengthening interfacial bonding of embedded interfaces
The embedded materials in textronic substrates are bonded together by different types of intermolecular forces such as van der Waals, covalent, ionic, and hydrogen bonding forces, which determine the strength and adhesion of two or more separate surface materials. Conductive textiles with weaker interfacial bonding can easily lose their electroactive coating layers during regular washing and dry cleaning, which ultimately results in higher resistance. Therefore, robust interfacial bonding (intimate contact between adhering materials) is highly required to prevent the substrates from creasing during laundering. Researchers have developed advanced chemistries and synthesized electroactive materials for the fabrication of e-textiles, which tactfully retain the electrical functionality of myriad wearable devices under wet conditions. The majority of these advanced strategies are executed early in the fabrication process through material synthesis or textile surface modifications.

4.4.1. Tailoring the backbone and anchoring sites of conducting materials. 
Different chemical syntheses have been employed to modify the structural backbone of electroactive materials to achieve better conductive adhesion. Earlier, textile polymerization was performed by immersing the textile into aqueous ICP monomer solutions with different oxidants. Unfortunately, the conductive fabrics prepared using this process showed poor interfacial bonding between two separate surface materials and were less stable in the presence of air due to their reactivity with a wide variety of atmospheric chemicals.207 This is because during polymerization, some positive charge can be formed in the polymer ring, which is ultimately compensated by the anionic sites of oxidants, maintaining the electroneutrality principle. This type of charged structure can easily lose its doping anion by reacting with hydroxides, resulting in a significant loss in conductivity during washing.208 Thus, to solve this problem, dopants are usually added to the polymerization bath due to their higher molecular weight compared to sulfate ions. Nevertheless, without an appropriate choice of dopant, it is impossible to increase the substrate conductivity proportionally with uptake of the conductive solution into the textile, and hence there is no direct correlation between an increase in substrate weight and electrical conductivity. The adhesion and stability of a synthesized electroactive material greatly rely on the hydrogen bond number, counter ion size, and chemical structure of the dopant.102 A textile substrate treated with conductive polymers using single and mixed dopant solutions can display large variations in electrical properties. However, in the case of a mixed dopant solution, the polaron and bipolaron in the polymer chain were found more delocalized which confirmed the ideal conjugation length on the conductive layer.209,210 It was reported that the addition of secondary dopants such as glycerol, D-sorbitol, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), polyethylene glycol (PEG), etc., into the conductive solution can greatly improve the electrical conduction and washing stability of e-textiles. The study reported that cotton fabric coated with PEDOT:PSS exhibited enhanced electrical conductivity after the addition of a secondary dopant (DMSO).211 Secondary dopants usually act as a plasticizer by removing PSS from the PEDOT:PSS structure and can form a thinner PSS barrier by enlarging the PEDOT-rich grains.212 Consequently, textile substrates can easily form a highly conductive percolation network by filling the space between the polymer layers and fiber.213 Other studies also confirmed the strong bonding of PEDOT:PSS with several natural and synthetic fibers in the presence of counter ion dopants and proved the superior wash durability of the resulting e-textiles.159,214,215 Pretreatment of cellulosic fabric by applying NaOH/urea solution can greatly improve the adsorption sites on the surface of the fabric for the greater deposition of PPy.216 The micro-dissolved PPy-coated fabric could maintain a lower resistance value even after 10 consecutive washing cycles. Sodium 5-sulfosalicylic was used as a dopant in the development of another washable PPy-coated textile electrode.152 The sheet resistance of woven cotton and silk fabric was maintained at less than 10 Ω sq−1. Furthermore, the cutting and sewing operations had no significant effect on the electrical properties of the coated fabric, and the coated fabric retained electrical functionality even after 20 washing cycles with organic solvents (dichloromethane). Cotton fabric coated with metal nanoparticles by polydopamine reduction have better wash fastness than glucose reduction. The surface resistance of silver-plated cotton fabric shifted from 12.53 Ω to 17.68 Ω after fifteen washing cycles due to polydopamine reduction, whereas by glucose reduction, the surface resistance significantly increased (0.24 Ω to 1200 Ω) after only five washing cycles.217
Lan et al. confirmed the axial alignment of CNTs in a textile through a capillary-driven self-assembly process using hydrosoluble sodium alginate (Fig. 7a).218 The aligned CNT network delivered an 81-fold increment in conductivity (9.9 Ω sq−1) after fifty assembly cycles, which is nearly equivalent to the conductivity of carbon cloth (11.3 Ω sq−1). Furthermore, the washability of the fabric electrode was improved by immersing the fabric into a CaCl2 solution for 2 min. After washing the Ca2+-induced conductive fabric with sodium dodecyl benzenesulfonate surfactant solution (1 mg mL−1) and normal laundry detergent, a stable EMI SE output was recorded, which demonstrates the reliability of the textronic device. Tian et al. reported that the use of chitosan cotton fabric with graphene deposition can improve the wash durability of textile Joule heaters by employing a facile LbL electrostatic self-assembly technique.219 In their study, the conductivity of the Joule heater remained stable (only shifted from 1.67 × 103 S m−1 to 1.65 × 103 S m−1) after 10 vigorous washing processes, ensuring the adequate attachment of graphene to the fiber surface during the LbL process. By layering the 2D fabric with D-glucaric acid-modified chitosan salt and well-dispersed SWCNTs, a highly cross-linked and durable wearable textronic was created (Fig. 7b).135 The superior adhesion of the polymer composite coatings to the fiber enabled the device to retain good electrical properties even after 20 laundering cycles. Tadesse et al. applied conductive enhancers such as polyethylene glycol, methanol, and ethylene glycol and observed a clear variation in contact angle when a PEDOT:PSS-coated polyester fabric was immersed in these additives.220 The additives removed the hydrophilic PSS from the textile substrate, forming a hydrogen bond with the hydroxyl ion and reorganized the outer fabric surface. Consequently, the PEDOT crystals were oriented and packed together to form a crystalline structure, which reduced the hydrophilic properties of the substrate. With the improvement in the interchain and intrachain charge/ion carrier mobility, the reported fabric became less accessible to liquid detergent or water molecules, and thus could retain electrical functionality even after 10 washing cycles. Guo et al. reported that the functionalization of polyester fabric with CNT and PDDA solution imparted a positive charge on the fiber surface, and after treating this charged surface with PDMS solution, it turned into a hierarchical rough structure with superhydrophobicity (Fig. 7c).193 This hierarchical-shaped fabric could retain its electrical properties against 20 cycles of vigorous washing (washing using ten stainless steel balls and 0.37% detergent). Besides, the contact angle of the treated fabric was reduced by only 7% (166.9° to <155°), which caused water droplets to roll easily over the conductive layer during the washing process. A highly washable sports bra was developed by depositing rGO and PEDOT:PSS on cotton cloth applying DMSO (5%) and EG.155 The PEDOT:PSS/rGO-coated fabric electrode was applied for human ECG monitoring (SNR: 21.6 dB) without any exterior masking and delivered quality ECG signals even after 50 machine washing cycles. Due to the hydrophobic nature of graphene, it also allowed maximum skin contact even when directly exposed to sweat.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the axial CNT alignment in a textile through capillary-driven self-assembly process applying hydro-soluble sodium alginate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the fabrication of SWCNT/D-glucaric acid/chitosan polymer composite coatings and the developed washable e-textiles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) (i) Fabrication process of multifunctional superhydrophobic hierarchical rough structure conductive CNT/PDDA/PDMS-coated PET fabric. (ii) Images of a water droplet on the prepared CNT/PDDA/PDMS fabric surface before and after 20 laundering tests and (iii) changes in the contact angle (CA) and sliding angle (SA) of CNT/PDDA/PDMS fabric as a function of 20 washing cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 193 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Cross-section of cotton yarn (i) pristine and yarn coated with (ii) nanoscale-sized and (iii) large flake size (1 μm) MXene. Cross-section SEM images of (iv) pristine cotton fibers, (v) nanoscale-sized, and (vi) large MXene flake-coated yarn. SEM images of MXene-coated cotton yarn surface (vii) before washing and (viii) after 20 times machine washing process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234 Copyright 2019, Wiley. 
The structural chain reorientation of electroactive materials using an anionic emulsifier is another promising approach for developing high-performance e-textiles. Typically, anionic surfactants consist of numerous functional groups, including phosphate, sulfonate, sulfate, cholate, and ammonium groups. However, surfactants with sulfate and sulfonate groups were found to be the most effective in improving the conductivity of electroactive material solutions due to their improved molecular shape (12-carbon tail attached to a sulfate group). Karim and co-workers developed a washable textile-based ECG electrode using rGO inks followed by an anionic surfactant (sodium dodecyl sulfate: SDS) and a green reducing agent (L-ascorbic acid).221 The inkjet-printed cotton fabric was capable of providing high-quality ECG signals by delivering a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of over 21 dB and a mean beat rate difference of 2.1. The device could survive 10 washing cycles without any interruption in delivering ECG signals. In this work, the SDS surfactant ensured the homogenous dispersion of GO clusters by emulsifying the GO in the textile matrix, which greatly helped to enhance the specific contact area. A high-performing PEDOT:PSS textile Joule heater was made through SDS blending and dipping processes.222 SDS dipping in PEDOT:PSS was found to be advantageous for improving the interchain interactions between the conducting domains. The fabric heater showed a heat capacity of 2 J K−1 without any noticeable change even after the cyclic-aging process. Additionally, the synthesized electroactive material with its intrinsic anchoring sites and configuration could retain its electrical property during the washing process. For example, reduced graphene oxide (rGO) ink showed an appreciable result in terms of washing stability due to the intrinsic hydroxyl or carboxyl sites in the rGO backbone.223 Interestingly, a higher washing durability was observed in a cellulosic rGO-coated fabric compared to an rGO-coated synthetic fabric, indicating the formation of robust hydrogen bonds between the cellulosic hydroxyl groups and the rGO backbone.21,224 Conversely, the fabrication of textiles using multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) resulted in excellent washability compared to that using single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs).225–227 In contrast to SWCNT, the MWCNT structure has a smaller interplanar spacing, which enables the MWCNT-coated textile to form an ordered graphitized conductive layer and also helps to prevent excessive water from passing into the conductive pathway during washing.228,229 A study reported by Du et al. found that soldering of MWCNTs in a highly porous 2D non-woven fabric easily allowed the CNTs to adsorb on the fiber-matrix via van der Waals interactions.116 The washing stability of the CNT-coated substrate was found to be excellent even after 40 h of continuous mechanical washing and its conductance reduced by only 13.6% due to the strong shear force in the water. Makowski et al. reported that cotton fabric treated with MWCNTs and a hydrophobizing agent (methyl trichlorosilane) increased the water contact angle of the cotton fabric from 0° to 170° and formed a superhydrophobic 3D network.230 Here, the MWCNTs bestowed the hydrophilic cotton an additional hydrophobic feature, which enables it to withstand the washing water. CNT nanoparticles mixed with water-based polyacrylates binder could form 3D honeycomb-structured networks on PET fabric, which may be helpful in improving the adhesion of CNT inks to deliver good washability.231
Textile coatings with 2D transition metal carbides or nitrides have several advantages over graphene/CNT-based nanomaterials because of their abundant surface charge, ultrathin thickness, high aspect-ratio morphology, and easy dispersion in H2O.232 For instance, 2D MXenes (Ti3C2Tx) have rich surface chemistry with numerous anchoring sites (–OH, O, and F groups), making them suitable for adorning polar materials with more grounded interfacial adhesions, while maintaining their primary conducting and protective functions.233 Diverse cellulose-based yarns (bamboo, cotton, and linen yarn) coated with MXene solution via a two-step dip-coating process exhibited excellent electrochemical properties.234 The conductivity of the linen yarns with an MXene loading of 77 wt% was found to be 2.2-times higher than that of the MXene-coated cotton and bamboo yarns. The MXene-coated cellulosic yarn/fiber with large flakes sizes (1 μm) greatly covered the textile surface compared to the nanoscale-sized MXene flake-loaded yarn/fiber and provided superhydrophobicity with a minimum decrease in resistance (decreased only 5%) after 45 h of washing (at 30 °C to 80 °C). This result indicates the strong interactions between the negatively charged MXene and hydrophilic cellulosic yarns, as shown in SEM (Fig. 7d). An MXene-filled PET textile heater showed long-time soaking and cleaning aptitude due to the strong hydrogen bonding between MXene nanosheets and PET fabric.235 The electrothermal conversion efficiency of the MXene-filled PET heater changed somewhat after 100 min of machine washing. However, the washability of cellulose/protein-based MXene-coated textiles was found to be significantly better than that of synthetic textiles owing to the availability of anchoring –OH/NH2 sites on the surface of the cellulosic or protein fibers.114,234,236 A highly washable 1D cotton-based gas sensor was fabricated by applying 2D MoS2 transition metal and rGO through electrostatic self-assembly.237 To impart superior washable attributes in the rGO/MoS2-coated 1D electrode, the cotton yarn was pretreated with biological glue (bovine serum albumin: BSA) before electroactive coating (Fig. 8a). Owing to the strong adhesion between the fiber and rGO/MoS2 layers upon BSA pretreatment, the gas sensor could retain its electrical properties (only 6% loss) even after 100 machine washing cycles. Furthermore, conductive calligraphy ink composed of carbon nanoparticles with a diameter ranging from 10 to 50 nm was applied on hybrid cotton textile.238 The collagen-based glue showed strong chemical bonding with the fiber surfaces and ensured thousands of years of longevity for preservation.239 The calligraphy ink-printed textile exhibited almost constant electrical properties even after 10 times of vigorous washing and bending. Jang et al. designed a highly washable micro-structured textile sensor using a printable composite ink composed of PDMS microbeads and conducting polymers (P3HTs, CB) as shown in Fig. 8b.240 The blended PDMS microbeads greatly improved the hydrophobicity (contact angle: ∼112°) of the textile surface with exerted strain and provided stable electrical functionality (change in ΔR/R0 ratio: 50.59 at 130% strain) under prolonged wet conditions.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process for washable bovine serum albumin (BSA)-pretreated MoS2 transition metal/rGO coated cotton yarn gas sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) (i) Schematic diagram of highly washable micro-structured textile sensor composed of printable composite ink (PDMS microbeads/P3HTs/CB mixed) for integrative fiber and fabric-based wearable devices. SEM images of printable composite ink-coated (ii) fiber sensor and (iii) fabric sensor. (iv) Composition of the microbead/P3HT/CB blended composite ink for the production of highly washable textile sensors. (v) Schematic presentation of the change in electrical resistance for composite ink-printed textile strain sensor in water. (vi) Variation in the resistance of composite ink-printed textile strain sensor upon applied strain underwater and wettability study of water droplet contact angle (CA) on a pristine textile (0% strain) and composite ink-printed textile strain sensor (0 and 130% strain). Reproduced with permission from ref. 240 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure of washable AuNPC–MoS2-coated fiber and its application in an e-textile pressure sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 244 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (d) (i) Preparation of hierarchical conductive superamphiphobic cotton fabric electrode and (ii) chemical structures of POTS and F-POSS. (iii) Photo of the prepared hydrophobic cotton fabric electrode as a wire for powering an LED bulb. Different liquids such as (1) H2O, (2) oleic acid, (3) milk, and (4) coffee were dropped on the surface of the prepared hydrophobic cotton fabric electrode. SEM image in the inset represents the change in the morphology of the fabric electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 248 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 


4.4.2. Surface modification of assembled textile interface. 
Surface modification of textiles is an innovative idea to improve the interfacial bonding between interconnected coating layers. Researchers have adopted many strategies to tailor the molecular orientation of different textile substrates, where among them, plasma treatment has been found to be very advantageous. Leroux et al. reported that the oxidation of polyester fabric via plasma treatment could break the ester bonds, creating radicals and forming carboxyl, carbonyl, and hydroxyl polar groups.241 These types of polar groups can easily allow the formation of van der Waals forces, dipole–dipole and hydrogen bonds between the fabric surface and a coating layer, thus enhancing the adhesion property of conductive polymers. Plasma treatment also speeds up the wettability of a conductive textile surface, which determines the attraction or repulsion behavior of conductive surfaces in water and is usually measured in terms of water contact angle (θc). Hydrophobicity can be introduced in e-textiles through atmospheric pressure plasma or graft co-polymerization with novel finishes (e.g., silicones and fluorocarbons).242
Moreover, the application of ambient plasma treatment can help to reduce excessive chemical bond breakage in fibers, while also improving the roughness, oxygen concentration, and detergency of fiber surfaces. Ahmed et al. found that the pre-treatment of PANI/AgNP-deposited cotton fabric with atmospheric pressure plasma resulted in robust chemical bonding and the sample displayed good fastness properties against water, rubbing, and perspiration.243 A double-twisted fiber exhibited an outstanding improvement in hydrophilicity after plasma treatment due to the formation of oxygen-containing groups on the surface of the tiny fibers.244 However, after the in situ growth of Au nanostructures on the double-twisted fibers (MoS2 coated), they developed a popcorn-like structure without applying reducing reagents or heat. The unique structure of the AuNPC–MoS2-coated fiber resulted in a negligible loss in conductivity even after 50 wash cycles (Fig. 8c). Polymer brush is another unique technique to improve the surface energy and interfacial bonding in electro-adhesive textile layers. This strategy is typically regarded as the assembly of macromolecular chains, which can be covalently tethered with one end on the substrate surface and form a brush-like pattern. Compared with the self-assembled monolayer process, polymer brushes can impart a large number of functional groups in the textile structure by tailoring the surface chemistry of the conductive textile surface.245 Liu et al. reported that coating cotton fibers/yarns with Cu particles through electroless deposition (ELD) can cause excessive depletion of the Cu plating layers after the washing process, whereas polymer brush [PMETAC: 2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl trimethyl ammonium chloride]-bridged hierarchical structures can greatly improve the adhesion between Cu and cotton yarn.246 In the hierarchical cotton structure, no noticeable increase in resistivity was found even after five 5 washing and drying cycles. Likewise, with polymer brush, researchers also adopted silanization treatment for developing washable e-textiles. Mosnáčková et al. proved that coating polyamide fabric with PPy-functionalized silane [SP: (1-(3-(triethoxysilyl)propylamino)-3-(1H-pyrrole-1-yl)propan-2-ol)] via the sol–gel process makes it partly washable compared to the typical oxidative polymerized e-textile.86 The conductivity of the PPy-silane-functionalized fabric (1.0 wt% SP) marginally decreased from 10−3 S sq−1 to 2.9 × 10−4 S sq−1 after the washing process, which was one order of magnitude higher than that of typical ICP-coated textiles (e.g., PPy-coated polypropylene and viscose fabric).247 The combination of silanization and polymer brush treatment on the textile surface resulted in the formation of polymer-bridged metal-textile hierarchical structures (Fig. 8d).248 Silanization with ATRP initiator [e.g., 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane (POTS)] and fluorinated-decyl polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (F-POSS) can easily allow the anchoring sites of textiles to react with silane molecules through a condensation reaction. This type of unique hierarchical pattern can provide outstanding hydrophobicity in the developed electrodes, allowing them to maintain their electrical properties despite repeated immersion in various liquids.248,249 A summary of the different advanced electroactive material processing techniques for developing highly interfacially bonded washable textronics is tabulated in Table 6.
Table 6 Summary of different advanced processing strategies for the reinforcement of embedded textile-electroactive materials via interfacial bonding




Textile structures
Electroactive materials
Adhesion enhancer
Technique
Initial electrical output
Washability
Ref.




Cotton yarn
rGO/MoS2
Bovine serum albumin protein
Self-assembly
Sensor reaction to 0.45 ppm NO2 was 28%
Resistance changed only 6% after 100 wash cycles

193



Cotton fabric
PEDOT:PSS
EG, DMSO
LbL
130 Ω
Stable resistance even after 50 wash cycles

176



PET fabric
rGO
Polydopamine
Vacuum filtration
1.7 × 102 Ω sq−1
Resistance reached 6.3 × 103 Ω sq−1 after 10 wash cycles

250



Silk fibroin
MWCNT
Chitin carbon
Electrospinning
∼90 Ω m−1
Steady conductivity even after 50 washing cycles

251



Nylon yarn
rGO
Bovine serum albumin protein
Self-assembly
∼1040 S m−1
Resistance remained constant after 9 washing cycles

252



Spandex fabric
Stainless steel/Cu
(NH4)2PdCl4
ELD deposition
0.02 Ω sq−1
No change in resistance after 100 min continuous washing

253



Polyamide fabric
SWCNT
Glucaric acid/chitosan
Dip/spray-coating
∼7.4 × 102 S m−1
Conductivity decreased only 12.5 S m−1 after 20 times washing

135



Cotton fabric
Graphene/PSS
Chitosan
Self-assembly
1.67 × 103 S m−1
After 10 washing cycles, shifted to 1.65 × 103 S m−1

219



Spandex yarn
MXene
Polydopamine/Ni2+
Dip coating
∼70 kΩ cm−1
Stable conductivity after 20 h washing

254



Cotton fabric
AgNWs
Polydopamine
Dip coating
7.13 Ω sq−1
Unchanged resistance even after 10 wash cycles

255



Popcorn-like PET fiber structure
AuNPC–MoS2
HAuCl4/plasma

In situ growth
∼0.19 kPa−1 (sensitivity)
Maintained conductivity even after 50 wash cycles

244



Cotton fabric
MXene (∼10 mg mL−1)
—
Dip coating
569 Ω sq−1
Resistance remained stable after 24 h washing

236



Silk fabric
MXene (3 mg mL−1), AgNWs
1H,1H,2H,2H-Perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane
Vacuum spray coating
∼0.8 Ω sq−1
Resistance remained unchanged after 20 h of washing

114



Cotton fabric
rGO
Stearic acid/PDA

In situ growth
6769 S m−1
Extremely washable and can deliver motion signal for underwater activities

256



Cellulosic fabric
PPy
Urea/NaOH
Microdissolution and in situ polymerization
1.98 Ω sq−1
Stable resistance even after 10 consecutive washing cycles

216



Nonwoven fabric (polypropylene and viscose)
MWCNT
—
Nano-soldering
∼9.7 kΩ
Resistance remained stable after 48 h of washing

117



Cotton-PET blended fabric
rGO
SDS/L-ascorbic acid
Inkjet-printing
21 dB (SNR)
Stable ECG signal even after 10 wash cycles

221



PET fabric
PEDOT:PSS
PEG
Immersion process
∼2 kΩ sq−1
Retain electrical functionality even after 10 washes

220






4.5. Featuring self-repairability for long-term textronic washing
E-textiles can easily lose their functionality due to the degradation of synthesized coating materials over time upon repeated washing, fatigue, and bending. Therefore, numerous self-healable electroactive materials have been explored for the fabrication of e-textiles adopting clever polymer chemistry. Numerous studies have been reported on the design of self-repairing e-textile devices, including actuators, sensors, Joule heaters, solar cells, and energy devices, mimicking the autonomous wound-healing ability of human skin. Conceptually, self-healing materials are categorized into two groups, i.e., extrinsic and intrinsic materials.257 Extrinsic healing materials do not have the potential to heal themselves. They contain spherical microcapsules or vascular networks filled with healing agents and release healing components in the cracked surface area to prevent damage propagation. Nevertheless, the quantity of accessible healing agents is inadequate owing to the size of microcapsules, limiting the recurrence of healing action at the same locations. Conversely, intrinsic self-healing materials do not require additional healing agents and can be exploited where multiple repair actions are needed. Due to their low elastic modulus and low glass transition temperature, intrinsic self-healing materials can easily expand the mobility of structural polymer chains and possess abundant sites for dynamic interactions. Benefiting from the outstanding self-repairing features of self-healing materials, it is possible to recover the functionality and repair damage in e-textile devices ever after multiple mechanical stresses and washing cycles.
A thin layer of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane (POTS) was applied on PPy-coated cotton fabric to impart adequate self-healing property, as shown in Fig. 9a.258 The protective POTS layers enabled the conductive fabric to fight against the invasion of DI water and corrosive solutions (acidic/basic) without deteriorating its EMI shielding functionality. Besides, the POTS/PPy-treated self-healed fabric maintained its EMI SE value even after washing with liquid detergent (1.5 mg mL−1) for 45 min and water bath sonication (at 49 °C) for 2 h. Zahid et al. designed a self-healable strain sensor by spraying polyvinyl acetate-co-vinyl laurate mixed carbon nanofiber inks onto Lycra fabric.259 The prepared sensor showed complete self-repairing ability and reversible electrical properties (>90%) upon damage and could be utilized to monitor human muscular motions under extreme conditions. A mixture of hierarchical structures with low-surface energy, namely fluorinated-decyl polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane and 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane, endowed superior self-healing ability to a Cu/PdCl42−/poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH)-deposited cotton-based EMI shielding device.248 The produced fabric with superamphiphobic feature could resist corrosive liquids (KOH and H2SO4 solutions) and retained sufficient conductivity (∼0.32 Ω sq−1) even after 100 washing cycles (ISO 105-C10:2006), with the contact angles (CA) of H2O, peanut oil, and DMSO being ∼163°, ∼153°, and ∼154°, respectively, as shown in Fig. 9b. Fiber-shaped supercapacitors were created by coating a self-healing polymer with aligned CNTs, which had a capacitance of 140 F g−1 and 92% restoring capacity due to their self-healing feature.260 A self-repairing nonwoven textile composed of SWCNTs and poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PHEMA) was prepared through an electrospinning process for EMI shielding.261 The fabricated SWCNTs were linked to PHEMA with β-cyclodextrin and Ada-modified 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate host–guest interactions, which allowed the fabric to be stacked together and showed autonomic self-repairing (restored 90.86% ± 3.90% EMI SE). A self-healable organic OLED was designed for long-term e-clothing systems.262 The textile OLED consisted of cross-linked PU with robust bonds and polyvinyl alcohol:agarose (PVA:Agr) nanocomposite with weak bonds (Fig. 9c). The strong bonding of PU delivered elasticity, while the weaker PVA:Agr nanocomposite dissipated the deformation energy, enabling self-healing via efficient reversible bond damage and reformation. Due to the self-healing property of the PVA:Agr nanocomposite and the shape-memory features of the bonded PU, the electroluminescence intensity (at 514 nm) of a damaged device was restored to 95.3% of its initial value. Shuai et al. coated poly(NAGA-co-AAm) (PNA) hydrogel fibers with elastomeric poly(methyl acrylate) (PMA) via a dry–wet spinning process to design a core-sheath self-healable textile strain sensor.263 The PNA/PMA fiber sensor displayed excellent resistance to water evaporation and absorption. Additionally, a TENG textile was also made using the self-healable PNA/PMA fibers to convert the motion of the wearer energy into electricity, demonstrating a power density of ∼88 mW m−2.
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of the POTS self-healing route on a PPy–POTS-coated cotton fabric (i) and immediate recovered water contact angle after plasma damage and microwave self-healing (ii). Reproduced with permission from ref. 258 Copyright 2021, Springer. (b) (i) Resistance of Cu/PAH-coated and FD-POSS/Cu/PAH-coated cotton fabrics as a function of immersion time in aqueous H2SO4 (pH 1) and KOH (pH 14) solutions. (ii) Contact angles of H2O, DMSO, and peanut oil on the FD-POSS/Cu/PAH-coated cotton fabrics after immersion in aqueous H2SO4 solution for different durations. After immersion for 100 h, the fabrics were healed at 135 °C (indicated by arrows). (iii) Resistance of the Cu/PAH-coated and FD-POSS/Cu/PAH-coated cotton fabrics as a function of immersion time in aqueous Na2S solution (1 mg mL−1). (iv) Contact angles of water, DMSO, and peanut oil on the F/Cu/PAH-coated cotton fabrics after immersion in an aqueous Na2S solution for different times. (iv) Recorded contact angles of H2O, DMSO, and peanut oil on FD-POSS/Cu/PAH-coated cotton textiles after immersion in aqueous Na2S solution for various periods. After immersion for 20 h, the fabrics were healed at 135 °C (indicated by arrows). Reproduced with permission from ref. 248 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) (i) Schematic diagram of self-healable organic OLED clothing system. (ii) Image of the patterned electrode (PEDOT:PSS/Ag NWs) on the self-healing electronic textile. (iii) SEM image of the self-healing OLED clothing system. (iv) Molecular assembly of the PU–PVA:Agr nanocomposite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 262 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) (i) Adaptation of vapor-phase polymerization of PEDOT/FD-POSS/FAS coating on PET fabrics. Impact of 500 washing cycles on (ii) contact angle and (iii) surface resistance of the coated fabrics. Reproduced with permission from ref. 266 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A self-healable EMI shielding textile was developed using GO/AgNW films.264 The EMI shielding device showed the capability to recover cracking damage after water spraying and drying and recovered the EMI SE value from 56 dB to 71 dB. In that process, the wetting of the textile caused the GO/AgNW films to swell, and the voids of the micro-cracks were filled with the GO/AgNW-coated textile after subsequent drying. In another study, Chen et al. reported that fabric treated with silica via thiol and thiol–ene click reaction to graft 1H,1H,2H,2H-heptadecafluorodecyl methacrylate could provide good self-cleaning ability.265 The treated fabric could maintain high amphiphobicity even after immersion in corrosive solutions (HCl/NaOH for 12 h) and detergent solutions for 15 washing cycles. Vapor-phase polymerization of PEDOT on PET fabric in the presence of FD-POSS and a fluorinated alkyl silane (FAS) could improve the superamphiphobicity (CA: 169° in water) and self-repairing properties of a conductive surface (Fig. 9d).266 The PEDOT layer with FD-POSS and FAS treatments could withstand 500 standard washing cycles without any noticeable change in its conductivity (resistance only shifted from 1 kΩ to 1.9 kΩ). Thus, these self-repairable textronics have great prospects for the development of underwater intelligent garments.
4.6. Ensuring the standard washer environment
Washing is a complicated process that restores complete serviceability as possible after a use phase in the cyclic lifespan of textiles and garments. This is accomplished by removing soils, odor, and germs, while minimizing undesirable secondary washing effects such as shape and color changes, aging, and wear. The reliability and durability of electronic textiles rely on the influence of different laundering conditions and environments. Typically, cleanable substrates are exposed to two washing stresses during the regular washing process, namely physical stresses such as thermal stress (temperature) and mechanical stress (hydrodynamic flow, flexion, friction, etc.), as well as wetting/chemical stress (Fig. 10).49,267 The magnitude of these washing stresses determines the outcome of a washing process and regulates the secondary washing influences. However, the intricate alignment of textronic makes this considerably more difficult than for textile-only items because all components, with their widely diverse vulnerabilities, must withstand the washing actions. To retain the electrical properties and functionality of textronics under different washing stresses, researchers have adopted different viable washing protocols through proper maintenance of washing parameters (e.g., temperature, duration, rotation, and program).
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation of a regular textronic washing process with different possible factors of physical and wetting stresses. 

4.6.1. Withstanding physical stresses. 
The temperature of a washer, as the most important factor, has the biggest impact on triggering the physical strains during a washing cycle. The heat generated by the washing temperature in a washing bath causes fabric shrinkage, warping, and felting, which result in fading and bleeding of conductive particles from the surface layer. However, the overall stripping or hydrolytic degradation of electroactive materials is more vibrant at higher washing temperatures (above 60 °C).192 Lower washing temperatures must be compensated for by boosting other elements to get equal washing outputs as that at higher washing temperatures. In terms of soil/dirt removal, increasing the wash cycle time is recognized to be an efficient approach to compensate for lower laundry temperatures. To date, different laundering standards have been followed to wash e-textiles using available laboratory-scale laundering machines or user-oriented washing processes. Through precise washing strategies with mild washer stress and hydrophobic e-textile designs, researchers are now tackling the associated pressure, hydrodynamic flow, flexion, and friction of laundry machines. A β-FeOOH-modified PPy-coated textile was prepared for wearable strain sensing and Joule heating applications.268 To promote the washability of the PPy-coated textile, a protective PU strip was also applied and the washing temperature was set at 60 °C for 30 min without following any specific washing standard. Following this high-temperature washing process, the device could maintain its electrical functionality (resistance increased from 0.308 kΩ to 31.543 kΩ) for 10 washing cycles. However, washing of an encapsulated (PDMS) e-textile at higher temperature (above 60 °C) and tumble drying (80 °C) completely reduced the electrical potential even after 5 wash cycles (ISO 6330:2000).192 A washable EMI shielding cotton fabric was designed by adopting NaOH/urea solution pretreatment and a firm PPy deposition process without the use of any protective elastomer.216 The washability of the cotton electrode was proven by immersing the fabric in a detergent bath (2 g L−1) for 10 min with a washing temperature of 40 °C. After 10 washing cycles, the resistance value of the tested fabric remained nearly unchanged (increased by 1.79 times). A machine-washable silk-based textronic was designed utilizing AgNWs and EG-dispersed PEDOT:PSS coating via the dip-coating method.88 To demonstrate the wash durability of the AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS-coated silk yarn, machine washing was performed at a low temperature (30 °C) for 20 min using 30 mL of detergent in 3 L of water. The low-temperature washing allowed the tested sample to retain its electrical properties even after 10 washing cycles. Furthermore, adding EG to the PEDOT:PSS dispersion produced a water-stable layer after drying, probably due to the H-bonding between PSS and EG. Zhu and co-workers developed a highly washable textronic device using AgNWs and PU elastomer (P-ATN).197 To wash the AgNW/PU-integrated textile, the AATCC 135 washing method was employed, where the textile was rinsed with 32 gallons of water at a cool temperature (20 °C) for 6 min at a spin speed of 119 rpm without the use of any detergents. After 10 washing cycles, the tested sample showed a low resistance value of 8 Ω cm−1, which remained unchanged even after 20 washing cycles (Fig. 11a). This result indicates that at a lower washing temperature and shorter duration, the coated AgNWs were buried in the PU matrix, preserving their conductivity regardless of washing machine spinning and mechanical stresses. Cao et al. proved the long-term washability of their multi-layered PU–CNT anchored textile by immersing the textile electrode in water for one week, avoiding heating of the washing bath.269 After immersing the fabric in water for different periods, the resistance of the fabric electrode displayed a negligible change, indicating that the electrode could be immersed for a long duration and repeatedly. The absence of heating greatly removed the kinetic agitation of the wash bath, and as a result the water remained clear and no CNT particles were detached from the layered textile surfaces. In another study, A low-cost ultrasonic nano-soldering process was followed to develop highly washable carbonized fabric.116 In their study, they reported the washability of the textile electrodes for 40 h by adopting a water stirring process (700 rpm stirring rate) without applying additional heat.
 Fig. 11  (a) (i and ii) Phase overturn process and local concentration of AgNWs where P-ATN had different pore structures when the phase was inverted in different polar solvents. (iii) Illustration of the local concentration of AgNWs due to the dissimilar migration rates of AgNWs and TPU macromolecule. (iv) Interface of textile and P-ATN coating. (v) Change in resistance of P-ATN-coated textiles during repeated AATCC 135 standard washing process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197 Copyright 2020, Springer. (b) (i) Accelerated washing approach following the AATCC 61 standard and (ii) change in resistance for knit (red) and woven (black) PET fabric with various washing cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of superhydrophobic HDTMS-assembled MXene–SiNP-coated cotton fabric. Reproduced with permission from ref. 272 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) (i) Resistance retention ratio in knitted FCB device following delicate wash cycle (AATCC 135). (ii) SEM image of one failed metal fiber in the knitted FCB after 30 ‘normal’ washing cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 278 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society Publishing. (e) (i) PDMS-encapsulated conductive fabric inside the washing machine drum (WVD24520 GB, Bosch Exxcel Serie 4). (ii) Microscopic view of a damaged PDMS conformal coating caused by the wire being dragged out of the joint during the washing process. (iii) Microscopic images of conformal PDMS layer on capacitive sensing chip still on the circuit after washing at 400 rpm spin speed (left) and view of the bottom of the circuit to see the chip connection to the solder pads (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 282 Copyright 2019, Springer. 
Moreover, washing textronic devices with additional loads or agitators can increase the rate of mechanical stresses of a washing program. In that case, strong interfacial bonding between the textiles and embedded conductive materials or protective layering is highly recommended to resist structural damage and coating depletions. For example, Rehman et al. attempted to evaluate the washability of their conductive wool fabric according to the ISO 105-C08 standard, where the tested fabric sample was washed for 30 min at 40 °C by adding 25 stainless steel balls to the washing bath (liquor to fabric ratio of 20 mL g−1).270 To withstand the considerable damage by washing, they did not use any encapsulants or hydrophobic layering on the wool fabric and merely treated the fabric with PANI and boron-doped nano-diamonds (BDND). Consequently, the study failed to prove the long-term washability (above 10 cycles) of the PANI/BDND-coated fabric electrodes and only managed to show wash durability for 5 cycles. The study reported by Karim and co-workers followed a scalable pad-dry process for the proper dispersion of rGO in cellulosic cotton fabric.271 To determine the washability of their rGO-coated fabric sensor (36.94 kΩ sq−1), the substrate was washed using 4 g L−1 of ECE reference detergent solution for 30 min at 40 °C with ten stainless steel balls. The sheet resistance of the sensor was enhanced by 90% after the first wash, whereas after ten washes, the sheet resistance increased by 277% due to the vigorous mechanical agitation and abrasion of the steel balls on the rGO coating layers. Shahariar et al. ensured the position-specific coating of particle-free reactive Ag ink on different structural textiles (nonwoven, woven, and knit) through the inkjet printing method.101 Inkjet printing allowed the synthesized Ag inks to reside at the fiber junctions rather than diffusing longitudinally throughout the fiber length. The bonding strength of the printed junctions was challenged by washing the fabric with 50 steel balls at 49 °C for 45 min using 0.24 g of detergent according to the AATCC 61 standard (Fig. 11b). The silver-printed compact textile (woven) electrode showed an acceptable extent of change in resistance value (3.5-times increase) compared to the other textronic structures (nonwoven and knit) even after 25 extreme washing cycles. It is worth noting that one accelerated wash cycle, as defined by the AATCC 61 standard, is equal to five ordinary wash cycles. A conductive polyester fabric (Ag/rGO coated) modified with dopamine was also washed according to the AATCC 61 standard using 10 steel balls.224 After a single washing cycle, the resistance of the Ag/rGO-coated fabric increased by around 2 times (0.678 Ω sq−1 to 2 Ω sq−1). However, this study failed to report the reliability of the conductive fabric for further washing cycles, which indicates the poor adhesion between the fibers and coating layers under agitating wash. Maintaining the same washing protocol, a negligible change in the water contact angle (θc: larger than 130°) was found in an HDTMS-assembled MXene–SiNP-coated cotton fabric.272 This superhydrophobic –Si–O–Si-linked micro–nano structure sensor was extremely washable (even after 40 wash cycles) and exhibited exceptional water repellency, anti-dirty, and corrosion resistance in wet and harsh environments (Fig. 11c). Ryan et al. observed poor washability in PEDOT:PSS coated silk yarn using the “hand-wash” program (maintained 30 °C washing temperature for 50 min at 900 rpm spin speed) after adding extra weight (two towels).214 The electrical conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS silk yarn could not be maintained after more than 4 wash cycles due to the lack of encapsulation.
Schwarz and colleagues reported the washability of different sheath-core metallic yarns (Cu, Ag, and stainless steel), where elastomeric rubber was utilized as the core to endow the yarn with elasticity.273 The conductive sheath-core yarns were washed with a total of 2 kg of cloth load at a washing temperature of 40 °C for 40 min following the ISO 6330:2000 method. The stainless steel-embedded yarns exhibited excellent wash durability compared to the other metal-coated yarns and could maintain their electrical properties even after 25 washing cycles. Ankhili et al. tested the washability of embroidered bands for long-term ECG monitoring using two different types of Ag-plated polyamide conductive threads.274 The Ag-plated polyamide thread was embroidered with non-conductive yarn and TPU film, separately, to protect the conductive yarn layer under washing load. Both conductive threads were washed with an overall machine load of 2.5 kg and 30 mL of detergent solutions at 40 °C for 35 min. After 50 washing cycles, the Ag-plated polyamide thread protected with non-conductive yarn could retain quality ECG signals in comparison to that with TPU protection. The encapsulation of textiles using TPU films is normally performed at high temperature (110–180 °C), which affects the adhesion between the embedded rigid Ag materials and textile surface after long-term washing.275
Besides heat and mechanical stressors, the drum movements (e.g., sliding, tumbling, and rotation) of a washing program play a significant role in determining the washability of a textronic substrate. The mobility of a textronic inside the drum is triggered by the acceleration of the drum during the washing cycle. The overall movements are executed following three major motions such as spinning, sliding, and falling.276 Washing speed settings from various types of washing programs (e.g. cotton, wool, and silk) have been explored by researchers to wash e-textiles. Depending on the washing programs, the rotation speeds of the drum are different such as low-speed rotation, pause (resting time), and high-speed rotation.277 The speed of the drum during low-speed rotation varies from 15 rpm to 38.5 rpm depending on the type of washing program, as shown in Fig. 12. High-speed rotation action occurs primarily during the sliding/tumbling phase and ranges from 400 rpm to 1600 rpm. Li et al. demonstrated the washability of knitted FCB devices through a delicate wash cycle following the AATCC 135 standard.278 The resistance retention ratio was found to be better using the delicate cycle with minimized mechanical agitation (spin speed: 430 rpm and agitation speed: 119 spm) compared to the normal cycle (spin speed: 645 rpm and agitation speed: 179–119 spm), where all 60 samples passed 30 washing cycles without a noticeable change in their resistance and FCB structure (Fig. 11d). Zaman and co-workers evaluated the washability of three different textile-based ECG electrodes through two different washing programs, i.e., “silk” and “express”, with a wash speed of 15 rpm and 38.5 rpm, respectively.279 Both programs were run for 35 min at a temperature of 40 °C following the ISO 6330 standard. After 50 washing cycles, the increase of resistivity was found to be more rapid in the express wash compared to the silk wash due to the higher acting forces and acceleration of the program. Darabi et al. inspected the washability of PEDOT:PSS-coated cellulosic yarn using the wool wash program (800 rpm spinning speed, 30 °C).280 Their cellulosic yarn was sewn onto a multifiber fabric and washed for up to 10 cycles using 20 mL of reference detergent. The increase in resistance was noticeable after the first 5 washing cycles even after double PEDOT:PSS layering on the yarn.
 Fig. 12  Duration (min) rate of stopping, low-speed rotation and high-speed rotation of the machine drum under different e-textile washing program settings (e.g., cotton, delicate, delicate-short, silk, express, and wool). 
Cui and Zhou immersed GO- and MWCNT-coated cotton electrodes in SDS aqueous bath (0.2 wt%, 160 mL) and vigorously stirred the samples at 300 rpm without following any washing standard.281 They washed the prepared electrodes for several hours to prove their durability. The first four washing cycles took two hours each, the fifth cycle took twelve hours, and the sixth wash cycle was bath sonication for one hour. The covalent bonds of the immobilized nanocarbons (GO and MWCNTs) were considerably weakened after a series of long-term washing cycles, severely reducing the electrical conductivity of the textronics. Ojuroye et al. reported the washability of PDMS-encapsulated conductive fabric by varying the spin speed of the washing machine.282 With a spin speed of 800 rpm, the IC chip integrated into the textile with PDMS conformal layers was completely detached from the solder pads on the circuit. After reducing the spin speed to its lowest setting at 400 rpm, the stability of the IC chip adhered to the textile was ensured for 10–15 washing cycles (Fig. 11e). Komolafe and co-workers used molded Kapton to integrate filament circuits inside bespoke pockets.283 The developed textile-based prototype was washed at 40 °C for 58 min with a 1000 rpm spin cycle following the ISO 6330:2000-6A method. After washing the device for 45 cycles, its electrical performance was maintained. A polymer-assisted ELD method was adopted in the design of metalized fabric to tackle the excessive rotation stress of the washing machine drum (1000 rpm).253 The metalized fabric could maintain its low resistance even after 100 min of continuous high-speed washing process. A highly washable EMI shielding cotton textile was designed through sequential Cu and superamphiphobic coatings.248 To determine the wash durability of the textile electrode, the drum spinning rate was kept at 40 rpm with a washing temperature of 40 °C for 30 min according to the ISO 105-C10:2006 standard. Even after 100 washing cycles, the cotton electrode washed at a lower spinning rate retained its functionality. Recently, Vladan and colleagues used an accelerometer to better understand the mechanical damage caused by gravity, centrifugal forces, and other vibrations during the drum spinning process.277 Interestingly, their study revealed that the washing process with a low-speed rotation is more destructive than tumbling with high-speed rotation. For low-speed spinning, continuous falling or frictions of textile is more vibrant due to gravity and could cause great damage to sensitive e-textile parts. In high-speed rotation, the textile substrate could be stuck against the wall of the drum because of the static friction between the drum and textile. A summary of the different washing protocols for tackling hydrodynamic washing stresses is tabulated in Table 7.
Table 7 Summary of the washability of advanced textronic devices under different physical washing stresses




Washing standard
Textronics
Embedded materials
Temperature (°C)
Program duration (min)
Spin speed (rpm)
Agitators/ballast load
Drying
Durability
Ref.




ISO 6330:2000-6A
Woven fabric
Copper tracks (molded with polyimide filament)
40
58
1000
Seven extra clothes
Air
45 cycles

283



—
Polyamide-based ECG electrode
Ag thread/protective (nonconductive) yarn
40
35
600
2.5 kg cloth
Air
50 cycles

274



Stirring in water
Non-woven fabric
SWCNTs
Not set
2400
700
—
Air
Conductance reduced by only 13.6%

116



ISO 6330
Knitted fabric
PEDOT:PSS
40
30
30
—
Air
50 cycles

284



AATCC 135
Knitted fabric
Conductive Cu tracks
40
—
430
Total 1.8 kg, protective bag
Dryer (>75 °C)
30 cycles

278



AATCC-135
2D fabric
Silver-plated-nylon
30
60
400
1.8 kg cloth
Air
30 cycles

285



AATCC- 61-2006
Cotton/spandex yarn
CNT
40
30
—
10 stainless steel balls
Air
10 cycles

118



Beaker washing
Cotton/PET fabric
Stainless-steel yarns
Not set
20
200
—
Dryer (>85 °C for 4 h)
5 cycles

286



—
Cellulose yarn
PEDOT:PSS/EG
30
—
800
—
—
10 cycles

280



ISO 6330:2000
Sheath-core yarn
Cu, Ag, stainless steel
40
40


2 kg of cloth
Air
25 cycles

273



ISO 6330:2012
Woven fabric
PDMS aligned printed circuit
30
42
400
2 kg weight towel
Air
20 cycles

282



ISO 105-C10:2006
Cotton fabric
Cu/(NH4)2PdCl4
40
30
40
—
—
100 cycles

248



AATCC 135
PET yarns
Cu
20
40
430
Total 1.8 kg fabrics, protective bag
Air
20 cycles

106



—
Non-woven fabric
rGO/CNTs
Not set
35
700
1 kg cloth
Air
6 cycles

287



Beaker washing
PET knit fabric
rGO
Not set
3
800
—
Dryer (>60 °Cfor 12 h)
10 cycles

288



AATCC M6
Spandex fabric
TPU-laminated Ni/Cu/Ag-coated yarn
27
21
—
Total 1.8 kg fabric
Dryer (>50 °C)
10 cycles

289



AATCC 61-2a
Blended knit fabric
Ag/AgCl/TPU
49
—
—
50 SS balls
—
20 cycles

290



Stirring in water
Nonwoven fabric
MWCNTs
Not set
2880
700 rpm
—
—
48 h

117



Lab-scale washing
Cotton fabric
Graphene ink/WPU
50
—
—
—
Air
10 cycles

291







4.6.2. Enduring wetting stress/detergency. 
After physical stresses, chemical (detergent) and water stress are considered the most influential factors in e-textile laundering. The method of soil removal from textiles can differ in terms of the forces that retain the particles on the substrate. The most significant elements of detergents are surfactants because they have surface tension-lowering qualities, which allow water to expand on a wet surface, enhancing the washing effectiveness. Chemically, surfactants are amphiphilic molecules with a hydrophilic head and a lipophilic tail.292 Based on the charge present in their hydrophilic head, they are divided into four major groups including anionic, cationic, nonionic, and amphoteric. Surfactants are chemisorbed over soils and fiber matrixes during washing to change the electrical potentials among soils, detergent solution, and fibers, and consequently, soils are transmitted into the washing bath with an anti-redeposition attribute, preventing them from adhering to the textiles again.293 During the e-textile washing process, detergents can have varying levels of coating depletion/redeposition efficacy depending on the backbone of the surfactant, the pH level of the wash bath, the level of micelle formation, and the bonding strength of the electroactive layers. However, e-textiles with weak interfacial bonding can easily lose their coating layers with emulsifying soils during detergent washing. Detergent molecules detach the coating particles by creating micelles around them, attaching their hydrophobic ends to the exposed areas of the textile surface. When the detergent molecules lose the edge of a partial coating layer or a piece of plating, they can deeply edge themselves in the interfacial layer and continue to detach more coating particles until the detergent efficiency levels off and unstable micelles are formed. This type of corrosion in a textronic structure can greatly affect the continuity and integrity of its electroactive layer and increase its surface resistivity.
Gaubert and co-workers investigated the effects of powder detergent (which includes chlorine-based bleaching agents), liquid detergent, and sodium percarbonate (stain remover based on oxygen bleach) on the textronic washing process.285 Detergents containing bleaching agents were found to be more harmful to textronics (Ag-electrode) because the bleaching agent oxidizes the coating layers (Ag), rendering the electroactive layers vulnerable to dynamic wash cycles (30 machine wash) and mechanical rubs. Islam and co-workers reported the washability of CB-coated cotton fabric using an anionic detergent (1 g L−1 non-phosphate ECE) according to the AATCC 61 standard.89 To reduce the expected damage due to washing, a water-soluble binder (PVA) was applied to the CB-coated fabric. After the first anionic detergent wash, the sheet resistance increased by 11 times (34 kΩ to 390 kΩ) due to the excessive micelle formation by the detergent with the loosely adhered surface carbon and higher PVA dissolving. By using a water-insoluble binder (PU), the chemical attack of detergent molecules on the CB coating layers was reduced, as reported by Pahalagedara et al.294 Uzun et al. reported the benefit of neutral detergent to wash MXene-coated cellulosic yarn.234 The conductive yarns were fixed to a mesh and stirred at 500 rpm using 1 mg mL−1 of Synthrapol solution. After 45 h of continuous washing with a temperature ranging from 30–80 °C, both the sheet resistance and the MXene loading amount of the cellulosic yarn remained almost unchanged (<1% decrease), as shown in Fig. 13a. Synthrapol is also highly recommended for washing wool and silk-based electrodes due to its neutral pH level. Ismar and co-workers employed a systematic approach to investigate the influence of water and detergent solutions on textronic washing.295 In their study, metal-coated polyamide yarns were dipped in water and water detergent solutions, separately, for a maximum of 72 h at a low temperature (30 °C) as shown in Fig. 13b. A noticeable change in surface resistance was found in the Ag-coated yarn, which endorses that a conductive surface can be chemically attacked by only water or water-detergent solutions without any help of mechanical force. When the impacts of water and detergent solution were compared, the effect of water was found to be stronger. This could be due to the absence of surfactants in distilled water or its polarity. Surfactants in the detergent solution help to reduce the severity of the Ag coating depletion. In another study, bleach-free domestic detergent was used to wash silver and carbon yarn electrodes.296 A cold washing process was performed with a small machine load to determine the washability of both yarn electrodes. Interestingly, the washing action had a stronger effect on the impedance of the Ag-yarn electrode and ECG signal quality compared to the carbon-yarn electrode (Fig. 13c). The main reason for silver degradation was sulfidation, whereas the carbon electrodes provided higher impedance even after 35 washing cycles. Lin et al. reported the wash durability of a pressure-sensitive TENG textile by immersing the sample in tap water for 20 min without applying detergents.297 To resist the stronger effect of tap water, they used a thermoplastic PET film to provide a wavy-shaped pattern over the TENG textile surface. After continuous washing, no noticeable change was found in the surface morphology of the TENG textile, and its sheet resistance and output voltage remained stable (Fig. 13d).
 Fig. 13  (a) (i) Variation in the MXene loading and the linear resistance under different washing temperatures (ranging from 30 °C to 80 °C) and runtimes (0 to 45 h). XPS spectra of (ii) unwashed and (iii) washed MXene-coated cotton yarn after 3 min of sputtering. The MXene-coated cotton yarns were washed for 20 washing cycles at 30 °C and 5 washing cycles at temperatures ranging from 40 °C to 80 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234 Copyright 2019, Wiley. (b) Schematic representation of the setup for washing Ag-coated polyamide yarns with (i) only water and (ii) water and detergent solutions. SEM images of Ag-coated polyamide yarns (iii) before washing, (iv) after immersion for 72 h in water/detergent solutions, and (v) after immersion for 72 h in water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 295 Copyright 2019, Springer. (c) Skin-electrode impedance and range of impedance for (i) Ag electrode yarn (yarn D: 220 yarn count), and (ii) carbon electrode yarn (yarn D: 640 yarn count) before and after 35 washing cycles. The shaded areas signify the standard deviation. Filtered ECG signals acquired from (iii) Ag electrode yarn and (iv) carbon electrode yarn before and after 35 washing cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 296 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (d) (i) Washing a piece of pressure-sensitive TENG (8 cm × 5 cm) in tap water (without detergents). (ii) Resistance variations in pressure-sensitive TENG as a function of continuous washing time for 10 and 20 min. SEM images in the inset represent the change in textile TENG surface morphology. (iii) Output voltage (VOC) of assembled textile TENG under identical external pressure after various washing durations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 297 Copyright 2017, Wiley. (e) I–V curves representing the electrical response of the PPy-coated woven cotton after 20 times of (i) water washing and (ii) organic solvent washing (dichloromethane). Reproduced with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
To wash polymer-coated textronic devices, neutral/organic washing has been found to be beneficial. A study reported that a PANI coating on cellulosic textile displayed poor washability under alkaline washing.36,208 Anionic detergents caused a developing effect on the PANI film, turning it into a leucoemeraldine form, resulting in a significant reduction in conductivity in PANI-coated textiles. Malhotra et al. demonstrated that anionic surfactants could greatly deplete the coating layers from PPy-embedded silk fabric.298 After a single wash, the sheet resistance of the PPy-coated silk increased from 1.85 kΩ to 32.68 kΩ due to the solvation of the chlorine ions. A nonwoven fabric printed with PEDOT:PSS wires was washed in DI water with and without soap by Guo et al.299 Before the wash, half of the fabric was sprayed with a hydrophobic solution. After three cycles, the addition of alkaline soap increased the resistance by 106% compared to that of approximately 26% for water alone. However, the increment in resistance was negligible with the hydrophobic treatment. Dry cleaning of conductive polymer-coated textiles is advantageous compared to domestic laundering. To wash polymerized conductive textiles, tetrachloroethylene (TTE) is utilized as a dry cleaning agent.
Varesano et al. found that the washability of PPy-coated wool electrodes can be improved by using dry cleaning TTE liquids.40 According to their study, detergent (anionic) and dry cleaning wash increased the surface resistivity of the electrode by 44- and 2-times, respectively. Additionally, dry cleaning (AATCC-132-2004 and 86-2005) of PANI-coated cotton fabric using TTE detergent solution could maintain a stable surface resistance even after 40 dry-wash cycles.300 However, TTE liquid may have limited ability to remove polar dopant anions due to its apolar and organic nature. Lv and co-workers found that PPy-coated fabrics are more stable to organic solvent washing in comparison to water washing.152 The conductivity of the PPy-coated fabric (5 cm × 2 cm) remained unchanged after vigorously stirring the sample for 10 min at 250 rpm and washing with organic solvent (dichloromethane) for 20 wash cycles, as shown in the I–V curve (Fig. 13e). Ryan et al. compared the viability of machine washing and the organic washing process for unencapsulated PEDOT:PSS-coated silk.214 Machine washing with 20 mL of color detergent resulted in wash durability for only 4 wash cycles, whereas dry cleaning using tetrachloroethylene for 1 h followed by drying (130 °C for 10 min) retained electrical conductivity for 5 cycles. The electrical characteristics of the encapsulated PEDOT:PSS-coated cellulosic textile could be maintained for 5 wash cycles using neutral detergent (20 mL).280 However, the addition of waterborne PU greatly improved the washability of the PEDOT:PSS-coated fabric. The prepared polyamide–PU knitted fabric could maintain reasonable conductivity even after 10 cycles of washing (at 30 °C for 15 min) using reference detergents (20 mL).159 A summary of the various washing protocols for tackling wet-wash stresses is tabulated in Table 8.
Table 8 Summary of different chemical washing processes and their impact on the functionality of advanced textronic devices




Washing standards
Washing agents/detergent
Textiles
Embedded materials
Washing conditions
Drying
Washing output
Ref.




AATCC 135
Nonionic detergent (66 g of castle)
Knitted fabric
Circuit boards/Cu fiber/spandex filament
Washing at 40 °C together with ballast (1.8 kg) and protective bag
Dryer (75 °C)
Satisfactory washing capability for 30 cycles

278



ISO 6330:2000
ECE A detergent (2.5 g L−1)
Cotton fabric
Circuit board/PDMS
Washing at 40 °C for 30 min with protective bag
Air, dryer
No structural damage even after 50 wash cycles

192



ISO 6330:2012
20 g of Persil detergent (non-bio powder)
Cotton fabric
Solar yarn/micro-pod filament
Washing with 2 kg wash load for 15 h
Air
Retained 90% of output power after 15 wash cycles

191



ISO 6330:2012
20 g of Persil detergent (non-bio powder)
Nylon yarn
Conductive wire
Washing at 40 °C for 31 min at 800 rpm spin speed
Air, dryer
Survived functionality for 25 wash cycles

301



Lab-scale stirring
Neutral detergent (phosphate free)
PEN fabric
ALD-Al2O3/SiO2
Stirring in detergent-mixed DI water solution at 200 rpm for 10 min
Air
Stable optoelectronic performance after 20 times washing

203



AATCC 61
1 g L−1 ECE (A) non-phosphate detergent
Cotton fabric
CB-PVA
Wash with 15 stainless steel balls at 40 °C for 5 min
Air, dryer (60 °C for 5 min)
Resistance increased by almost 80% after 12 wash cycles

89



—
DI water
PET fabric
MXene
Immersed for 120 min
Air
Stable electrothermal performance

235



ISO 6330:2012
Reference detergent (20 mL)
Polyamide-Lycra fabric
PEDOT:PSS/DMSO/PU
Washing at 30 °C for 23 min with 2 kg of PES load and protective bag
Air
Stable conductivity even after 10 wash cycles

159



Lab-scale stirring
DI water
Non-woven fabric
CNTs/rGO//NWF
Stirring with water at 700 rpm
Air
Resistance increased from 30.3 kΩ to only 36.9 kΩ even after 16 h washing

287



ISO 6330:2012
37 mL of detergent
Cotton/wool fabric
Circuit board/PDMS
Washing at 30 °C for 15 min with 2 kg cotton fabric load
Air
Survived performance for 15 wash cycles

282



37 mL of softener


Lab-scale stirring
Dichloromethane solvent
Knitted cotton fabric
PPy/sodium 5,5-sulfosalicylate (NaSSA)
Stirring at 250 rpm for 10 min
Air
Stable conductivity even after 20 washing cycles

152



AATCC 135
DI water
PET yarn
Cu yarn/vinyltrimethoxysilane
Washing at 20 °C for 40 min with 1.8 kg fabric, 18 gallons of water, and a protective bag
Air
Low increase in resistance after 20 wash cycles

106



—
Anionic detergent (20 mL)
Polyamide fabric
SWCNT, glucaric acid/chitosan
Machine washing for 740 min
Air
Conductivity decreased to 12.5 S m−1

135



ISO 6330
20 g of Persil detergent
PET fabric
Ag thread/protective (nonconductive) yarn
Washing with 2 kg of wash load at 40 °C for 35 min
Air
Provide quality ECG signal even after 50 wash cycles

279



AATCC 132-2004/86-2005
TTE detergent (200 mL solution)
Cotton fabric
PANI
Dry washing at 30 °C for 30 min
Air
Stable resistance after 40 dry–wash cycles

300



Lab-scale stirring
DI water
Nylon–PU blended fabric
rGO/AgNWs
Magnetic stirring at 550 rpm rotation speed
Air
The ratio of ΔR/R0 changed by only 40% after 100 times washing

302





According to the above discussion, it is clear that textronic damage or electrical degradation can be caused by different washer stresses or environments. Therefore, the washing factor levels must be chosen following the prototype adhesion capacity, stress endurance, bonding strength, and textile geometry. The following prerequisites are suggested to ensure the long-term washability of wearable textronic interfaces:
(i) The washing parameters should be carefully fixed according to the adhesion capacity and the hydrophobicity of the embedded electroactive materials in textiles. For the best washing performance, a cold (25–30 °C), short (25–40 min), low-speed (40–400 rpm), and bleach-free wash may be preferable.
(ii) Detergents containing bleaching agents should not be used for textronic washing. This is because the bleaching agent oxidizes the coating layers, rendering the electroactive layers vulnerable to dynamic wash cycles. Moreover, bleaching agent-containing washing baths are also detrimental to the environment.
(iii) It is useful to use anionic detergents to remove the dirt from the surface of textronics rather than washing the device only with water.
(iv) To ensure long-term washability, it is essential to encapsulate the coating layers of textronics with biocompatible materials for the health and safety of users.
(v) The user should follow the standardized washing guidelines provided by the AATCC, and ASTM technical commission to wash a textronic device repetitively.

5. Future direction and conclusion
Washable textronics present breathtaking promises in our quotidian intelligent activities. The revolutionary success of modern IoT devices is to eliminate the predicament associated with solid-state electronic waste (e-waste). As reported in the preceding sections, rapid progress has been achieved in e-textile engineering, nanofabrication, encapsulation, and material innovations to design hydrophobic and washable textronics. Researchers have adopted numerous strategies to improve the wash longevity of e-textile devices for long-term wearable performances. Nevertheless, washability, damage, and process-related challenges persist in textile-based electrodes, limiting their use in mainstream consumer applications. The following are some of the remaining challenges and research gaps linked with the washability of textile-based electronics.
5.1. Reliable encapsulation
The hydrophobic layering of e-textiles is recognized as the best solution to protect the embedded electroactive materials from being damaged during laundering and tumble drying. However, the common encapsulants (TPU, PDMS, epoxy resins, etc.) explored in textronic lamination are not always durable. For instance, rigid metallic wires enclosed in a textronic system may damage the encapsulation layers after repeated washing cycles. Additionally, e-textile encapsulation using different elastomeric materials can limit the unique advantages of raw textiles, such as comfort, breathability, lightness, texture, and long-term wearing. To maintain the structural integrity of textiles, different fluorine-based superhydrophobic polymers (e.g., 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecanethiol: PFDT, 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane: PFOTES) can be used as a substitute for elastomeric encapsulants.303,304 These superhydrophobic polymers can stably operate underwater as interconnects and provide great breathability for e-textiles for long-term wear due to their low surface energy and fluorine-containing surface (Fig. 14a). Nevertheless, the direct application of superhydrophobic fluoropolymers on a wearable device is not sustainable and can have carcinogenic effects on humans.
 Fig. 14  Futuristic highly washable and reliable textronic blocks for application in long-term wearable electronics. (a) Suitable protective layering of textile interconnects. (b) Water-free washing method for reducing the water footprint. (c) Safety for expected washing damage and short-circuits. (d) Self-cleaning ability with fluorine-free superhydrophobic polymers. (e) Computational modeling and simulation method for interpreting the washing actions at the micro dimension. (f) Documentation of standardized washing methods for market acceptability. 
5.2. Water-free washing approaches
Water-based washing of textronics is a very complex process and can discharge a high volume of toxic water during repetitive laundering. To reduce the water footprint, a “waterless” washer can be useful for removing submicron-sized soil particles adhered to textronic devices (Fig. 14b). Researchers at the University of Leeds recently developed a washing machine (Xeros) that only requires a cup of water per load to successfully clean textile dirt/soils, whereas traditional machines require at least a dozen gallons per load.305 Their washing systems replace hot water (thermal stresses) with a small amount of polymer (nylon) laundry beads. These polymer beads come into contact with the dirt on a coated fabric through agitation and gradually absorb the dirt/stain adhered to the textile surface. Besides, the beads can be reused in the machine up to 1000 times, and once replaced, they are put back into the supply chain for plastics. Textronic washing via the Xeros machine can greatly reduce the maintenance and energy consumption cost by eliminating the need for detergent, water, and heated drying. Furthermore, the use of cavitation generators in the laundry machine can shorten the detergent dissolution process (roughly 10 min compared to the conventional machine) and demonstrate possible water and energy savings.306 However, to date, a complete water-free washing technique has not been developed to solve the zero adhesion loss of conductive coatings.
5.3. Safety of assembled devices
Repetitive washing or body sweating can damage the embedded components of e-textiles, which may cause short-circuits, mechanical failures, or malfunctioning of the targeted device. Furthermore, the electroactive compounds exfoliated from the textile surface can readily come into direct touch with the body, causing allergic reactions such as mild tickling (Fig. 14c). Different films, such as encapsulating polymers, have been placed on curvilinear textile surfaces to produce a protective coating to eliminate these difficulties. However, dispersing these hydrophobic films in water is difficult, and there is a risk of e-textiles losing their wearability and output power. In this case, the development of soft biocompatible materials should not be disregarded to completely achieve commercial washable textronics. Squid ring teeth proteins (elastic modulus of 2–4 GPa in water), for example, can be used as an enzymatic coating to reinforce the hydrophobicity and self-healing characteristics of textronics against harsh chemicals and biological warfare.307
5.4. Self-cleaning ability
Protective and self-cleaning textronics are in high demand for long-term wearable applications, which can remove adherent pollutants/soils from textile surfaces without the need for washing (Fig. 14d). Textronic devices with self-cleaning properties can be obtained in two ways, i.e., photocatalytic activity on a hydrophilic surface or superhydrophobicity. To date, different photoactive (e.g., TiO2 and ZnO) and superhydrophobic materials (long carbon chains silanes: POTS, MTCS, PETMP, etc.) with low surface energy have been used to coat conductive interconnects.308 These materials greatly improve the tendency of water droplets rolling over the coated textile surface, allowing them to accumulate any impurities such as soil, dirt, oils, and even bacteria. Similar to washing, self-cleaning treatment can also improve the anticorrosive property and chemical stability of e-textiles.303 Nevertheless, developing sustainable self-cleaning textronics requires a fluorine-free synthesis process, which remains a major issue for materials scientists. It is expected that fluorine-free silicon-containing polymers such as hexadecyltrimethoxysilane, octadecyltrimethoxysilane, polyvinylsilsesquioxane, trichloro(octadecyl)silane, and n-octyltriethoxysilane can be promising alternatives in this case.
5.5. Modelling and simulation for the large-scale manufacture of washable textronics
The importance of modeling and simulation in the e-textile washing process cannot be overstated, given that they can reveal new insights that are difficult to obtain from experimental research alone (Fig. 14e). A well-organized computational modeling system can interpret the washing actions from macro dimensions (dynamic and chemical interactions) to the micro-scale (consecutive damage in textronics) and deliver a pre-washing guideline, which will inevitably increase the reliability of textronic devices in the global market. Moreover, it can also minimize the consumed energy amount, labor, and time of practical washing processes. Textronic researchers have already started using hydrodynamic washing simulations and modeling techniques to verify their analytical results by comparing input mechanical stresses, fabric properties, drum movements, and model geometry.276 Nonetheless, a more realistic microscopic damage model should be constructed to fully realize the washing process in terms of textile yarn/ply geometries, adhesion strength of coatings, dissipation energy, and Martindale movements. It is anticipated that the adoption of a hybrid damage model can make it simple to determine the interaction of major washing influencers on e-textile damage without additional experiments.
5.6. Consensus washing standard and documentation
Despite the prominent advances in washable textronics, the mismatch in materials, structure, and nanofabrication process cannot reach the trigger requirements of futuristic textronics. The washability of existing textile electrodes is determined either by a lab-scale washing process or through a household washing method, leaving the standardization of e-textiles in doubt, hampering their large-scale production. Moreover, to expedite the large-scale production and market readiness of textronics, the targeted devices should retain their electrical functionality for at least 20 to 30 wash cycles. Over the last decade, different regional and international standardization groups have worked to propose standards for the washing of e-textiles. These groups include AATCC with technical commission AATCC RA111,309,310 IEC with technical commission IEC PN 63203–201-2,311 and ASTM International with technical commission ASTM WK61480 (ref. 312) and ASTM WK61479.313 Several organizations have already published protocols or are working on the development of test methods for laundering e-textiles (Fig. 14f). It is anticipated that the textronic market will reach up to 9 billion USD in 2024 if the appropriate standard is maintained in device manufacturing.314 A few prominent documents related to textronic device laundering are tabulated in Table 9.
Table 9 Documentation of some evolving standardized methods for e-textile laundering




Applicable standard
Performance evaluation




AATCC RA11
Change in resistance in e-textile conductive track after washing


ASTM WK61480


IEC PN 63203-201-2


In development
Change in resistance in e-textile conductive parts to steaming/ironing after washing


AATCC RA11
Textile heater or resistive material's electrical resistance to cleaning (washing, dry-cleaning, and drying)


IEC PN 63203-201-2


ASTM WK61480


In development
Change in resistance in e-textile heater after being exposed to various types of liquids (water, soft drinks, and coffee)


IEC PN 63203-201-2
Change in resistance in e-textile heating elements after being exposed to body perspiration


ASTM WK61479


In development
Change in resistance in fasteners (e.g., snaps, switch, and power supply) after washing


In development
Washability for sportswear and leisure textronic systems




The emergence of washable textronics, without a doubt, opens a new door for next-generation durable wearable electronics. Nevertheless, the short-term laundering life expectancy of textronics can risk the adoption of these innovative technologies. Moreover, these challenges have offered enormous opportunities and strong driving forces for a paradigm shift in washable textronics for future research. The foreseeable challenges related to washable textronics can be mitigated through appropriate washing protocols, conductive interconnect design, fabrication, and encapsulation. It is expected that the collaborative effort of interdisciplinary experts from all sectors engaged in the development of washable textronics will result in the appropriate standardization.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
C. García Núñez, L. Manjakkal and R. Dahiya, npj Flexible Electron., 2019, 3, 1 CrossRef .

          S. Y. Kim, Handb. Vocat. Educ. Train., Springer Nature, Switzerland AG,  2019, pp. 177–194 Search PubMed .
T. M. Fernández-Caramés and P. Fraga-Lamas, Electronics, 2018, 7, 405 CrossRef .
M. Kang and T. W. Kim, Appl. Sci., 2021, 11, 6131 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Heo, J. Eom, Y. H. Kim and S. K. Park, Small, 2017, 14, 1703034 CrossRef PubMed .
M. L. R. Liman, M. T. Islam and M. M. Hossain, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2021, 47, 2100578 Search PubMed .
B. Wang and A. Facchetti, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901408 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. X. Wang, B. Zhang, S. Ramakrishna, M. Yu, J. W. Ma and Y. Z. Long, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19863–19870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. A. P. Lima, J. J. A. Espinoza, F. A. G. Da Silva and H. P. De Oliveira, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13783–13795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Seung, M. K. Gupta, K. Y. Lee, K. Shin, J. Lee, T. Y. Kim, S. Kim, J. Lin, J. H. Kim and S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3501–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, M. Baima and T. L. Andrew, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32299–32307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ba, G. Giambastiani, C. Pham-Huu, L. Truong-Phuoc, V. Papaefthimiou, C. Sutter, S. Pronkin, A. Bahouka, Y. Lafue and L. Nguyen-Dinh, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 9771–9783 CrossRef CAS .
O. Nechyporchuk, J. Yu, V. A. Nierstrasz and R. Bordes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4793–4801 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zahid, H. Anwer Rathore, H. Tayyab, Z. Ahmad Rehan, I. Abdul Rashid, M. Lodhi, U. Zubair and I. Shahid, Arabian J. Chem., 2021, 103480 Search PubMed .
A. Ojstršek, O. Plohl, S. Gorgieva, M. Kurečič, U. Jančič, S. Hribernik and D. Fakin, Sensors, 2021, 21, 3508 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Khair, R. Islam and H. Shahariar, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 10079–10101 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kang, G. Y. Lee, J. Lim and S. O. Kim, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 19578–19585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Clevenger, H. Kim, H. W. Song, K. No and S. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabj8958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, R. Guo, S. Lin, J. Lan, S. Jiang and C. Xiang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 14927–14934 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Cho, H. Yu, J. Choi, H. Kang, S. Park, J. S. Jang, H. J. Hong, I. D. Kim, S. K. Lee, H. S. Jeong and H. T. Jung, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9332–9341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Afroj, N. Karim, Z. Wang, S. Tan, P. He, M. Holwill, D. Ghazaryan, A. Fernando and K. S. Novoselov, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3847–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xie, Y. Wang, G. Yin, Z. Qu, W. Wang and D. Yu, Prog. Org. Coat., 2021, 161, 106473 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zhou, J. Fu and Y. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000187 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Su, C. Wang, M. Zhang, M. Jian, K. Xia, X. Liang, H. Lu, S. Li and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3219–3226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, P. Zhang, R. A. Soomro, Q. Zhu and B. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 1–30 Search PubMed .
J. Ren and P. Innocenzi, Small Struct., 2021, 2100068 CrossRef .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. P. Pham and G. Y. Yeom, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9024–9059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhong, L. Kong, K. Zhao, Y. H. Zhang, N. Li and X. H. Bu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 1–22 Search PubMed .
S. Handschuh-Wang, Y. Chen, L. Zhu and X. Zhou, ChemPhysChem, 2018, 19, 1551 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. Zaman, X. Tao, C. Cochrane and V. Koncar, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 459, 1–6 Search PubMed .
S. Rotzler, M. von Krshiwoblozki and M. Schneider-Ramelow, Text. Res. J., 2021, 91, 2401–2417 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Köhler, L. M. Hilty and C. Bakker, J. Ind. Ecol., 2011, 15, 496–511 CrossRef .
P. Veske and E. Ilén, J. Text. Inst., 2021, 112, 1500–1513 CrossRef .
A. R. Köhler, Mater. Des., 2013, 51, 51–60 CrossRef .
L. Zou, C. Lan, L. Yang, Z. Xu, C. Chu, Y. Liu and Y. Qiu, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2020, 104, 107757 CrossRef .
R. Villanueva, D. Ganta and C. Guzman, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 016307 CrossRef .
P. Cataldi, M. Cassinelli, J. A. Heredia-Guerrero, S. Guzman-Puyol, S. Naderizadeh, A. Athanassiou and M. Caironi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1907301 CrossRef .
I. G. Trindade, F. Martins and P. Baptista, Synth. Met., 2015, 210, 179–185 CrossRef CAS .
A. Varesano and C. Tonin, Text. Res. J., 2008, 78, 1110–1115 CrossRef CAS .
D. Maity and R. T. R. Kumar, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 1822–1830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, B. Nitin, S. Remanan, Y. Bhattacharjee, A. Ghorai, T. Dey, T. K. Das and N. C. Das, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17988–18001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Das, T. K. Chaki and S. Chattopadhyay, Carbon, 2017, 116, 1–14 CrossRef .
C. Y. Chen, S. Y. Huang, H. Y. Wan, Y. T. Chen, S. K. Yu, H. C. Wu and T. I. Yang, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Lee, C. Yun and C. H. Park, Text. Res. J., 2019, 89, 1436–1447 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, B. Llerena Zambrano, J. Woo, K. Yoon and T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902532 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Seyedin, T. Carey, A. Arbab, L. Eskandarian, S. Bohm, J. M. Kim and F. Torrisi, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 12818–12847 RSC .
W. Zeng, L. Shu, Q. Li, S. Chen, F. Wang and X. M. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5310–5336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rotzler and M. Schneider-Ramelow, Textiles, 2021, 1, 37–54 CrossRef .
F. Mo, G. Liang, Z. Huang, H. Li, D. Wang and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1–33, 1902151 Search PubMed .
Y. Gao, C. Xie and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002838 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, C. Chen, H. Pan, Y. Yang, G. Chen, X. Zhao, W. Li, Q. Gong, G. Xie, Y. Zhou, S. Zhang, H. Tai, Y. Jiang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2170136 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Fromme, Y. Li, M. Camenzind, C. Toncelli and R. M. Rossi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2021, 7, 2001238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, Polymers, 2020, 12, 189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bairagi, S. Banerjee, A. Chowdhury and S. W. Ali, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 4004–4013 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mathew, A. Chandrasekhar and S. Vivekanandan, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105566 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Ghouri, R. Aslam, M. S. Siddiqui and S. K. Sami, Front. Mater., 2020, 7, 1–7 CrossRef .
F. Nikbakhtnasrabadi, H. El Matbouly, M. Ntagios and R. Dahiya, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2021, 3, 2233–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bansal and B. Gandhi, AIP Conf. Proc., 2019, 2201, 020023 CrossRef CAS .
T. Busolo, P. K. Szewczyk, M. Nair, U. Stachewicz and S. Kar-Narayan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 16876–16886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amberg, K. Grieder, P. Barbadoro, M. Heuberger and D. Hegemann, Plasma Processes Polym., 2008, 5, 874–880 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bashir, M. Skrifvars and N. K. Persson, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2011, 22, 2214–2221 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, C. Dong, Y. Xiang, S. Jiang, A. Leber, G. Loke, W. Xu, C. Hou, S. Zhou, M. Chen, R. Hu, P. P. Shum, L. Wei, X. Jia, F. Sorin, X. Tao and G. Tao, Mater. Today, 2020, 35, 168–194 CrossRef CAS .
L. Maneval, B. Atawa, A. Serghei, N. Sintes-Zydowicz and E. Beyou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 14247 RSC .
H. J. Park, W. J. Kim, C. S. Ah, Y. Jun and Y. J. Yun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 10539 RSC .
H.-J. Kim, J.-H. Kim, K.-W. Jun, J.-H. Kim, W.-C. Seung, O. H. Kwon, J.-Y. Park, S.-W. Kim and I.-K. Oh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502329 CrossRef .
Z. Tang, S. Jia, F. Wang, C. Bian, Y. Chen, Y. Wang and B. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6624–6635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Wang, B. Liu and D. Yu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 45496 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, H. Kim and H. J. Yoo, IEEE Trans. Adv. Packag., 2010, 33, 196–205 CAS .
C. Dong, A. Leber, Y. Qu, T. Nguyen-dang, T. Das Gupta, R. Chandran, M. Volpi, N. Bartolomei, W. Yan and F. Sorin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Mule, B. Dudem, H. Patnam, S. A. Graham and J. S. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16450–16458 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uzun, M. Han, C. J. Strobel, K. Hantanasirisakul, A. Goad, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Carbon, 2021, 174, 382–389 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, N. He, S. V. Patil, Y. Wang, D. Banerjee and W. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14944–14951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Vu and J. Kim, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 314, 112029 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wu, L. Ma, A. Patil, C. Hou, S. Zhu, X. Fan, H. Lin, W. Yu, W. Guo and X. Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33336–33346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Memon, I. L. de Paula, B. Malengier, S. Vasile, P. Van Torre and L. Van Langenhove, Sensors, 2021, 21, 1–17 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wu and J. Hu, Smart Mater. Struct., 2017, 26, 045037 CrossRef .
M. J. Yun, Y. H. Sim, S. I. Cha, S. H. Seo and D. Y. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 2322 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Miao, J. Y. Chen, G. Jiang and Q. Liu, Mater. Des., 2021, 197, 109273 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, S. S. Mechael and T. B. Carmichael, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 4051–4064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Allison, S. Rostaminia, A. Kiaghadi, D. Ganesan and T. L. Andrew, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 31869–31875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mi, L. Zhong, X. Tang, P. Xu, X. Liu, T. Luo and X. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 11260–11267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Paosangthong, R. Torah and S. Beeby, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 401–423 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, N. Chen, H. Zhong, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Yin and B. He, Materials, 2021, 14, 6073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, R. J. Eike, A. Cliett, L. Ni, R. Cloud and Y. Li, Text. Res. J., 2019, 89, 3708–3721 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mosnáčková, M. M. Chehimi, P. Fedorko and M. Omastová, Chem. Pap., 2013, 67, 979–994 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, X. Li, X. Li, T. Xu, C. Song, K. Ogino and Z. Gu, Materials, 2018, 11, 2033 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hwang, A. Lund, Y. Tian, S. Darabi and C. Müller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27537–27544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Islam, N. Khair, D. M. Ahmed and H. Shahariar, Mater. Today Commun., 2019, 19, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. David, D. Anavi, M. Milanovich, Y. Popowski, L. Frid and E. Amir, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 254, 032002 Search PubMed .
J. Slade, M. Agpaoa-kraus, J. Bowman, A. Riecker, T. Tiano, C. Carey and P. Wilson, Mater. Res., 2003, 736, 1–7 Search PubMed .
U. Briedis, A. Valisevskis, I. Ziemele and I. Abele, Key Eng. Mater., 2019, 800, 320–325 Search PubMed .
S. uz Zaman, X. Tao, C. Cochrane and V. Koncar, Fibers Polym., 2019, 20, 2355–2366 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tokarska, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 1497–1503 CrossRef CAS .

          A. K. Sen, Coated Textiles: Principles and Applications, CRC Press,  2007, p. 264 Search PubMed .
M. Yang, C. Fu, Z. Xia, D. Cheng, G. Cai, B. Tang and X. Wang, Cellulose, 2018, 25, 4239–4249 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hufenus, C. Affolter, M. Camenzind and F. A. Reifler, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2013, 298, 653–663 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gong, C. Hou, J. Zhou, Y. Guo, W. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 868 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Yu, X. Pu, R. Wen, M. Liu, T. Zhou, K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Zhai, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12764–12771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fan, Q. He, K. Meng, X. Tan, Z. Zhou, G. Zhang, J. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay2840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shahariar, I. Kim, H. Soewardiman and J. S. Jur, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6208–6216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Varesano, A. Belluati, D. O. Sanchez Ramirez, R. A. Carletto, C. Vineis, C. Tonetti, M. Bianchetto Songia and G. Mazzuchetti, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133, 1–9 CrossRef .

          C. D. Metcalf, S. R. Collie, A. W. Cranny, G. Hallett, C. James, J. Adams, P. H. Chappell, N. M. White and J. H. Burridge, in IET Conf. on Asst. Liv.,  2009, pp. 47–50 Search PubMed .
R. Paradiso, G. Loriga and N. Taccini, IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., 2005, 9, 337–344 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Lou, I. Abdalla, M. Zhu, X. Wei, J. Yu, Z. Li and B. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 19965–19973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, C. Yan, Z. Liu, X. Fu, L. M. Peng, Y. Hu and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10267–10274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, T. W. Kim, F. Li and T. Guo, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6449–6457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Zhai, Z. Song, Y. Wu, J. Liang, Y. Shan, J. Zheng, H. Liang and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dong, Y. C. Wang, J. Deng, Y. Dai, S. L. Zhang, H. Zou, B. Gu, B. Sun and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9490–9499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Bahadir, F. Kalaoglu, S. Thomassey, I. Cristian and V. Koncar, Int. J. Cloth. Sci. Technol., 2011, 23, 232–241 CrossRef .
M. C. Bahadir and S. K. Bahadir, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 2015, 76, 1719–1730 CrossRef .
K. Dong, X. Peng, J. An, A. C. Wang, J. Luo, B. Sun, J. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–11 Search PubMed .
J. Rezaei and A. Nikfarjam, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6, 2000983 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Liu, W. Chen, H. Bin Zhang, Q. W. Wang, F. Guan and Z. Z. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905197 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dong, J. Deng, Y. Zi, Y. C. Wang, C. Xu, H. Zou, W. Ding, Y. Dai, B. Gu, B. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702648 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Du, Z. Tang and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 883–889 RSC .
Z. Tang, D. Yao, S. Hu, D. Du, W. Shao, B. Tang, J. M. Fan, X. G. Tang and J. Gao, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 303, 111710 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cai, M. Yang, J. Pan, D. Cheng, Z. Xia, X. Wang and B. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32726–32735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dong, F. Xu, Y. Sheng, Z. Guo, X. Pu and Y. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105327 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, S. S. Mechael, C. Lerma, R. S. Carmichael and T. B. Carmichael, Matter, 2020, 2, 882–895 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, S. Padgett, Z. Cai, G. Conta, Y. Wu, Q. He, S. Zhang, C. Sun, J. Liu, E. Fan, K. Meng, Z. Lin, C. Uy, J. Yang and J. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 155, 112064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yip, S. Jiang and C. Wong, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2009, 204, 380 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shahidi, B. Moazzenchi and M. Ghoranneviss, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2015, 71, 31302 CrossRef .
S. Q. Jiang, E. Newton, C. W. M. Yuen and C. W. Kan, Text. Res. J., 2006, 76, 57 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lim, H. J. Kim, H. Zhang and S. Lee, Smart Mater. Struct., 2021, 30, 075006 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, C. Lu, H. Jiang, F. Han, X. Shi, J. Wu, L. Wang, T. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Yang, G. Zhang, X. Sun, B. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and H. Peng, Nature, 2021, 597, 57–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, Y. Zuo, P. Zhai, J. Shen, Y. Yang, Z. Gao, M. Liao, J. Wu, J. Wang, X. Xu, Q. Tong, B. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Sun, L. Zhang, Q. Pei, D. Jin, P. Chen and H. Peng, Nature, 2021, 591, 240–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, P. Chen and H. Peng, Nature, 2021 DOI:10.1038/d41586-021-00945-9 .
S. Gorgutsa, K. Bachus, S. LaRochelle, R. D. Oleschuk and Y. Messaddeq, Smart Mater. Struct., 2016, 25, 115027 CrossRef .
K. Dong, Z. Wu, J. Deng, A. C. Wang, H. Zou, C. Chen, D. Hu, B. Gu, B. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804944 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Khudiyev, J. T. Lee, J. R. Cox, E. Argentieri, G. Loke, R. Yuan, G. H. Noel, R. Tatara, Y. Yu, F. Logan, J. Joannopoulos, Y. Shao-horn and Y. Fink, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Du, Z. Guo, Y. Li, J. Zhang, J. Muhammad, Z. Cai and F. Ge, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2021, e52021 CrossRef .
X. Tian and T. Hua, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 13356–13366 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tian, H. Zhang, F. Xiu, M. Zhang, J. Zou, C. Ban, Y. Nie, W. Jiang, B. Hu and J. Liu, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 2475 RSC .
S. Zhu, M. Wang, Z. Qiang, J. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Fan, Z. You, Y. Liao, M. Zhu and C. Ye, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 406, 127140 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yao, Z. Tang, L. Zhang, R. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Zeng, D. Du and J. Ouyang, Composites, Part A, 2021, 149, 106556 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Yuzhou, T. Zhenhua, L. Rulong, Y. Dijie, Uhiro, Z. Hongxin, Z. Li, and Z. X. Yuyun, Preparation method and application of machine-washable electronic textile, Patent no. CN113026348A,  2021 .

          H. Jiyong, J. Xinyu, Y. Xudong, and Z. Bing, Machine-washable and knittable electric heating composite yarn, Patent no. CN113512816A,  2021 .
N. A. Khoso, X. Jiao, X. GuangYu, S. Tian and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 16675 RSC .
Y. Ko, J. Oh, K. T. Park, S. Kim, W. Huh, B. J. Sung, J. A. Lim, S. Lee and H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37043–37050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, R. Chen, W. Qi, L. Cai, Y. Sun, M. Sun, C. Li, X. Yang, L. Xiang, D. Xie and T. Ren, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 2809–2818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, W. Lee, I. Kim, D. Lee, D. Park, W. Kim, J. Park, J. H. Lee, G. Lee and D. S. Yoon, ACS Sens., 2021, 6, 777–785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chatterjee, J. Tabor and T. K. Ghosh, Fibers, 2019, 7, 51 CrossRef CAS .
L. Allison, S. Hoxie and T. L. Andrew, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7182 RSC .
A. Kaynak, S. S. Najar and R. C. Foitzik, Synth. Met., 2008, 158, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kaynak and R. Foitzik, Res. J. Text. Apparel, 2011, 15, 107 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ferrero, L. Napoli, C. Tonin and A. Varesano, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2006, 102, 4121 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dall'Acqua, C. Tonin, A. Varesano, M. Canetti, W. Porzio and M. Catellani, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 379 CrossRef .
D. Kincal, A. Kumar, A. D. Child and J. R. Reynolds, Synth. Met., 1998, 92, 53 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gasana, P. Westbroek, J. Hakuzimana, K. De Clerck, G. Priniotakis, P. Kiekens and D. Tseles, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 201, 3547 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pattanarat, N. Petchsang, T. Osotchan, Y. Kim and R. Jaisutti, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 48053–48060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, P. Zhou, L. Zhang, Y. Zhong, X. Sui, B. Wang, Z. Chen, H. Xu and Z. Mao, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 897–907 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Yinhua, Z. Shaohui, L. Jingchun, X. Xiaobao, and S. Qingshan, Super-washable dual-function wearable electronic fabric and preparation method thereof, Patent no. CN113417157A,  2021 .
J. Lv, Z. Liu, L. Zhang, K. Li, S. Zhang, H. Xu, Z. Mao, H. Zhang, J. Chen and G. Pan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 427, 130823 CrossRef .
M. A. Shathi, M. Chen, N. A. Khoso, M. T. Rahman and B. Bhattacharjee, Mater. Des., 2020, 193, 108792 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Linz, R. Vieroth, C. Dils, M. Koch, T. Braun, K. F. Becker, C. Kallmayer and S. M. Hong, CIMTEC 2008 - Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Smart Mater. Struct. Syst. - Smart Text.,  2008, vol. 60, pp. 85–94 Search PubMed .
H. Honarkar, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2018, 39, 507–516 CrossRef CAS .

          J. W. Nicholson, Waterborne Coatings, in Surface Coatings-2, ed. A. D. Wilson, J. W. Nicholson and H. J. Prosser, Springer, Dordrecht,  1988 Search PubMed .
M. G. Tadesse, D. A. Mengistie, Y. Chen, L. Wang, C. Loghin and V. Nierstrasz, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 9591–9602 CrossRef CAS .
S. Afroj, S. Tan, A. M. Abdelkader, K. S. Novoselov and N. Karim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2000293 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Zhou, K. Wang and Y. H. Wang, Coatings, 2021, 11, 1–14 Search PubMed .

          J. G. Drobny, Handbook of Thermoplastic Elastomers, Elsevier,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. Manap, S. Mahalingam, R. Vaithylingam and H. Abdullah, Polym. Bull., 2021, 78, 5815–5832 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Lötters, W. Olthuis, P. H. Veltink and P. Bergveld, J. Micromech. Microeng., 1997, 7, 145–147 CrossRef .

          P. Du, X. Lin, and X. Zhang, in 16th Int. Solid-State Sens, Act. Micr. Conf.,  2011, pp. 645–648 Search PubMed .
P. F. Cao, B. Li, T. Hong, K. Xing, D. N. Voylov, S. Cheng, P. Yin, A. Kisliuk, S. M. Mahurin, A. P. Sokolov and T. Saito, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26483–26491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. E. Mark, in Polymer Data Handbook, Oxford University Press, USA,  2009 Search PubMed .

          S. Sharma, T. T. Aiswarya, I. Mirza and S. Saha, in Reference Module in Materials Science and Materials Engineering, Elsevier,  2020 Search PubMed .
Á. W. Imre, M. Schönhoff and C. Cramer, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 134905 CrossRef PubMed .

          K. M. Zia, F. Jabeen, M. N. Anjum and S. Ikram, in Bionanocomposites: Green Synthesis and Applications, Elsevier,  2020 Search PubMed .
A. M. Samsudin and V. Hacker, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, M. Wang, X. He and J. Qiao, J. Mater., 2019, 5, 286–295 Search PubMed .

          Sigmaaldrich (PDDA), https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/BD/en/product/aldrich/409022, accessed on  3 September 2021.
Q. Wang, S. Chen, T. Wang and X. Zhang, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2011, 104, 375–382 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Mu, D. Peng, F. Wang, J. Li and S. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2020, 987, 59–63 Search PubMed .
E. Cho, L. L. Y. Chiu, M. Lee, D. Naila, S. Sadanand, S. D. Waldman and D. Sussman, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1–18 Search PubMed .

          D. V. Rosato, D. V. Rosato and M. V. Rosato, in Plastic Product Material and Process Selection Handbook, Elsevier Science,  2004 Search PubMed .
L. Banks and B. Ellis, Polym. Bull., 1979, 1, 377–382 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kulawik, Z. Szeglowski, T. Czapla and J. P. Kulawik, Colloid Polym. Sci., 1989, 267, 970–975 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Ardebili and M. G. Pecht, Encapsulation Technologies for Electronic Applications,  2009, pp. 47–127 Search PubMed .

          S. H. Goodman, in Handbook of Thermoset Plastics: Epoxy Resins,  1998, ch. 6, pp. 193–268 Search PubMed .
I. Vroman and L. Tighzert, Materials, 2009, 2, 307–344 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Ebnesajjad, Handbook of Biopolymers and Biodegradable Plastics: Properties, Processing and Applications,  2012 Search PubMed .
S. Bhanushali, P. C. Ghosh, G. P. Simon and W. Cheng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700387 CrossRef .
J. Vaicekauskaite, P. Mazurek, S. Vudayagiri and A. L. Skov, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1273–1279 RSC .
H. Devaraj, T. Giffney, A. Petit, M. Assadian and K. Aw, Robotics, 2018, 7, 1–13 CrossRef .
X. Hu, M. Tian, L. Qu, S. Zhu and G. Han, Carbon, 2015, 95, 625–633 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Jia, K. Q. Ding, R. J. Ma, H. L. Wang, W. J. Sun, D. X. Yan, B. Li and Z. M. Li, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800503 CrossRef .
Q. Huang, D. Wang, H. Hu, J. Shang, J. Chang, C. Xie, Y. Yang, X. Lepró, R. H. Baughman and Z. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910541 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, K. H. Koh, M. Farhan and K. W. C. Lai, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4110–4118 RSC .
A. Satharasinghe, T. Hughes-Riley and T. Dias, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2020, 28, 578–592 CAS .
T. Vervust, G. Buyle, F. Bossuyt and J. Vanfleteren, J. Text. Inst., 2012, 103, 1127–1138 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Guo, C. H. Xue, M. Li, X. Li and J. Z. Ma, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 25560–25565 RSC .
H. Jinno, K. Fukuda, X. Xu, S. Park, Y. Suzuki, M. Koizumi, T. Yokota, I. Osaka, K. Takimiya and T. Someya, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 780–785 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Jeong, H. R. Shim, Y. Na, K. S. Kang, Y. Jeon, S. Choi, E. G. Jeong, Y. C. Park, H. E. Cho, J. Lee, J. H. Kwon, S. G. Im and K. C. Choi, npj Flexible Electron., 2021, 5, 15 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, S. Gao, H. Luo, L. Wang, X. Huang, Z. Guo, X. Lai, L. Lin, R. K. Y. Li and J. Gao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 406, 126898 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Zhu, H. L. Gao, H. Y. Zhao, J. Ge, B. C. Hu, J. Huang and S. H. Yu, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2879–2884 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ojstršek, N. Virant, D. Fox, L. Krishnan and A. Cobley, Polymers, 2020, 12, 1277 CrossRef PubMed .
B. M. Li, O. Yildiz, A. C. Mills, T. J. Flewwellin, P. D. Bradford and J. S. Jur, Carbon, 2020, 168, 673–683 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. Yoon, G. Lee, S. H. Paik, G. Choi, D. Kim, B. M. Kim, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16016–16025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ou, W. Qiu, K. Huang, H. Feng and S. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7673–7678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ankhili, S. U. Zaman, X. Tao, C. Cochrane, V. Koncar and D. Coulon, IEEE Sens. J., 2019, 19, 11995–12002 CAS .
E. G. Jeong, Y. Jeon, S. H. Cho and K. C. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1878–1889 RSC .
D. Doganay, M. O. Cicek, M. B. Durukan, B. Altuntas, E. Agbahca, S. Coskun and H. E. Unalan, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106412 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hazarika, B. K. Deka, C. Jeong, Y.-B. Park and H. W. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1903144 CrossRef .
D. Matsouka, S. Vassiliadis, X. Tao, V. Koncar, S. K. Bahadir, F. Kalaoǧlu and S. Jevšnik, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 459, 012017 Search PubMed .
J. Wu, D. Zhou, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Synth. Met., 2005, 155, 698–701 CrossRef CAS .
N. Onar, A. C. Akşit, M. F. Ebeoglugil, I. Birlik, E. Celik and I. Ozdemir, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 2003–2010 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yin and E. Ruckenstein, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 1129–1131 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, J. H. Seong and K. W. Oh, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2002, 83, 2245–2254 CrossRef CAS .
F. Alhashmi Alamer, N. M. Badawi, A. Alodhayb, R. M. Okasha and N. A. Kattan, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 531–543 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Otley, F. A. Alamer, Y. Guo, J. Santana, E. Eren, M. Li, J. Lombardi and G. A. Sotzing, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2017, 302, 1–8 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, J. H. Jung, D. E. Lee and J. Joo, Synth. Met., 2002, 126, 311–316 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Ryan, D. A. Mengistie, R. Gabrielsson, A. Lund and C. Müller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9045–9050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gong, C. Meng, J. He and X. Dong, Prog. Org. Coat., 2018, 121, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, J. Lv, H. Xu, L. Zhang, Y. Zhong, X. Sui, B. Wang, Z. Chen and Z. Mao, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47515 CrossRef .
H. Liu, L. Zhu, J. Xue, L. Hao, J. Li, Y. He and B. Cheng, J. Nanomater., 2016, 2016, 2375836 Search PubMed .
C. Lan, M. Guo, C. Li, Y. Qiu, Y. Ma and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7477–7485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tian, M. Du, L. Qu, S. Chen, S. Zhu and G. Han, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 42641–42652 RSC .
M. Getnet Tadesse, C. Loghin, Y. Chen, L. Wang, D. Catalin and V. Nierstrasz, Smart Mater. Struct., 2017, 26, 065016 CrossRef .
N. Karim, S. Afroj, A. Malandraki, S. Butterworth, C. Beach, M. Rigout, K. S. Novoselov, A. J. Casson and S. G. Yeates, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11640–11648 RSC .
C. Yeon, G. Kim, J. W. Lim and S. J. Yun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 5888–5897 RSC .
A. M. Abdelkader, N. Karim, C. Vallés, S. Afroj, K. S. Novoselov and S. G. Yeates, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 035016 CrossRef .
C. Wang, C. Xiang, L. Tan, J. Lan, L. Peng, S. Jiang and R. Guo, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 40452–40461 RSC .
K. Wang, P. Zhao, X. Zhou, H. Wu and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16373–16378 RSC .
Z. I. Lin, C. W. Lou, Y. J. Pan, C. T. Hsieh, C. H. Huang, C. L. Huang, Y. S. Chen and J. H. Lin, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 141, 74–82 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, Y. G. Yoo, I. Nam, S. Bae and J. Yi, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 677–684 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Li, E. Gao, M. Jian, K. Xia, Q. Wang, Z. Xu, T. Ren and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6640–6648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, W. Yi, D. Li, P. Zhang, S. Yoo, L. Bai, J. Hou and X. Hou, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 3558–3569 RSC .
T. Makowski, D. Kowalczyk, W. Fortuniak, D. Jeziorska, S. Brzezinski and A. Tracz, Cellulose, 2014, 21, 4659–4670 CrossRef CAS .
F. Govaert and M. Vanneste, J. Nanomater., 2014, 2014, 651265 Search PubMed .
S. Qin, K. A. S. Usman, D. Hegh, S. Seyedin, Y. Gogotsi, J. Zhang and J. M. Razal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 36655–36669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uzun, S. Seyedin, A. L. Stoltzfus, A. S. Levitt, M. Alhabeb, M. Anayee, C. J. Strobel, J. M. Razal, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905015 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Jin, L. Li, J. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Cao and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12526–12537 RSC .
R. Liu, J. Li, M. Li, Q. Zhang, G. Shi, Y. Li, C. Hou and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 46446–46454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Yun, W. G. Hong, D. Y. Kim, H. J. Kim, Y. Jun and H. K. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 248, 829–835 CrossRef CAS .
D. Van Lam, K. Jo, C. H. Kim, S. Won, Y. Hwangbo, J. H. Kim, H. J. Lee and S. M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4082–4088 RSC .
J. R. Swider, V. A. Hackley and J. Winter, J. Cult. Herit., 2003, 4, 175–186 CrossRef .
S. Jang, J. Y. Choi, E. S. Yoo, D. Y. Lim, J. Y. Lee, J. K. Kim and C. Pang, Composites, Part B, 2021, 210, 108674 CrossRef CAS .
F. Leroux, C. Campagne, A. Perwuelz and L. Gengembre, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2009, 203, 3178–3183 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gotoh and A. Yasukawa, Text. Res. J., 2011, 81, 368–378 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ahmed, T. A. Khattab, H. M. Mashaly, A. A. El-Halwagy and M. Rehan, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 2913–2926 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lan, F. Zhao, Y. Yao, J. Ping and Y. Ying, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10689–10696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ulman, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1533–1554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, H. Chang, Y. Li, W. T. S. Huck and Z. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 529–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mičušík, T. Nedelčev, M. Omastová, I. Krupa, K. Olejníková, P. Fedorko and M. M. Chehimi, Synth. Met., 2007, 157, 914–923 CrossRef .
X. Li, Y. Li, T. Guan, F. Xu and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12042–12050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Y. Zhang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902987 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cheng, X. Bai, J. Pan, J. Ran, J. Wu, S. Bi, G. Cai and X. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 241, 122371 CrossRef .
M. Sala de Medeiros, D. Goswami, D. Chanci, C. Moreno and R. V. Martinez, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Yun, W. G. Hong, W. J. Kim, Y. Jun and B. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5701–5705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, W. Shang, G. Chen, H. Wang, P. Tan, X. Deng, H. Song, Z. Xu, J. Huang and X. Zhou, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2021, 3, 1477–1488 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, L. Yue, J. Kong, X. Lin, L. Zhang, J. Wang and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 9053–9063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, Y. Gao, X. Di and H. Luo, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 67771–67777 RSC .
Y. Ni, J. Huang, S. Li, X. Wang, L. Liu, M. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Li and Y. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 4740–4749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Heyse, I. De Vilder and M. Vanneste, Smart Durable and Self-Healing Textile Coatings, Elsevier Ltd,  2016, pp. 55–80 Search PubMed .
L. Zou, C. Lan, S. Zhang, X. Zheng, Z. Xu, C. Li, L. Yang, F. Ruan and S. C. Tan, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zahid, A. Zych, S. Dussoni, G. Spallanzani, R. Donno, M. Maggiali and A. Athanassiou, Composites, Part B, 2021, 220, 108969 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, X. You, Y. Jiang, G. Guan, X. Fang, J. Deng, P. Chen, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9526–9531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, K. Guo, S. L. Zeng, L. Xu, C. Y. Xing, S. Zhang and B. J. Li, Carbon, 2020, 162, 445–454 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim and T. W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106481 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shuai, Z. H. Guo, P. Zhang, J. Wan, X. Pu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105389 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Sim, D. W. Lee, H. Kim, Y. Jang, G. M. Spinks, S. Gambhir, D. L. Officer, G. G. Wallace and S. J. Kim, Carbon, 2019, 155, 499–505 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Z. Liu, X. Wen, S. Xu, F. Wang and P. Pi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 5490–5500 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. Zhou, A. Gestos, J. Fang, H. Niu, J. Ding and T. Lin, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 277–282 RSC .

          M. M. Hossain and P. D. Bradford, Durability of Smart Electronic Textiles, Elsevier Inc,  2021, pp. 27–53 Search PubMed .
B. Wang, K. Yang, H. Cheng, T. Ye and C. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126393 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cao, X. Pu, X. Du, W. Yang, J. Wang, H. Guo, S. Zhao, Z. Yuan, C. Zhang, C. Li and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5190–5196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rehman, S. Houshyar, P. Reineck, R. Padhye, X. Wang and S. Houshyar, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 4848–4855 CrossRef CAS .
N. Karim, S. Afroj, S. Tan, P. He, A. Fernando, C. Carr and K. S. Novoselov, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12266–12275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, X. Du, Y. Luo, S. Lin, M. Zhou, Z. Du, X. Cheng and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 408, 127363 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schwarz, I. Kazani, L. Cuny, C. Hertleer, F. Ghekiere, G. De Clercq, G. De Mey and L. Van Langenhove, Mater. Des., 2011, 32, 4247–4256 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ankhili, S. uz Zaman, X. Tao, C. Cochrane, V. Končar and D. Coulon, Text. Leather Rev., 2019, 2, 126–135 CrossRef .
X. Tao, V. Koncar, T. H. Huang, C. L. Shen, Y. C. Ko and G. T. Jou, Sensors, 2017, 17, 673 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Tetik, R. A. Yildiz, A. R. Labanieh, B. Yoruk, S. Kursun Bahadir, F. Kalaoglu and V. Koncar, Text. Res. J., 2021, 91, 1117–1131 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. Zaman, X. Tao, C. Cochrane and V. Koncar, Sensors, 2021, 21, 1–16 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li and X. M. Tao, Proc. R. Soc. A, 2014, 470, 20140472 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Uz Zaman, X. Tao, C. Cochrane and V. Koncar, Sensors, 2020, 20, 1272 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Darabi, M. Hummel, S. Rantasalo, M. Rissanen, I. Öberg Månsson, H. Hilke, B. Hwang, M. Skrifvars, M. M. Hamedi, H. Sixta, A. Lund and C. Müller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 56403–56412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui and S. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12273–12282 RSC .
O. Ojuroye, R. Torah and S. Beeby, Microsyst. Technol., 2019 DOI:10.1007/s00542-019-04455-7 .
A. Komolafe, R. Torah, Y. Wei, H. Nunes-Matos, M. Li, D. Hardy, T. Dias, M. Tudor and S. Beeby, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900176 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ankhili, X. Tao, C. Cochrane, D. Coulon and V. Koncar, Materials, 2018, 11, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Gaubert, H. Gidik, N. Bodart and V. Koncar, Sensors, 2020, 20, 1–16 Search PubMed .
X. Guan, B. Xu, M. Wu, T. Jing, Y. Yang and Y. Gao, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105549 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, D. Yao, D. Du and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 2741–2748 RSC .
T. Sun, Y. D. Jiang, Z. H. Duan, Z. Yuan, Y. Wang and H. L. Tai, Sci. China: Technol. Sci., 2021, 64, 441–450 CrossRef .
J. C. B. Lee, W. Liu, C. H. Lo and C. C. Chen, Proc. - Electron. Compon. Technol. Conf., 2019, 1826–1832 Search PubMed .
M. A. Yokus, R. Foote and J. S. Jur, IEEE Sens. J., 2016, 16, 7967–7976 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Ren, H. Chen, Q. Chen, L. Jin, W. Peng, S. Xin and Y. Bai, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 9709–9720 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Rustemeyer, P. Elsner, S. M. John and H. I. Maibach, Kanerva's Occup. Dermatology, 2nd edn,  2012, vol. 1–3, pp. 1–2019 Search PubMed .
E. Koohsaryan, M. Anbia and M. Maghsoodlu, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 104287 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Pahalagedara, I. W. Siriwardane, N. D. Tissera, R. N. Wijesena and K. M. N. De Silva, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 19174–19180 RSC .
E. Ismar, S. uz Zaman, X. Tao, C. Cochrane and V. Koncar, Fibers Polym., 2019, 20, 2604–2610 CrossRef CAS .
L. Eskandarian, E. Lam, C. Rupnow, M. A. Meghrazi and H. E. Naguib, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 1554–1566 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wu, W. Wei, J. Liu, J. Chen and J. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704112 CrossRef .
U. Malhotra, S. Maity and A. Chatterjee, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 132, 41336 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, M. T. Otley, M. Li, X. Zhang, S. K. Sinha, G. M. Treich and G. A. Sotzing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26998–27005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu, B. Zhang, J. Wu, Z. Wang, H. Ma, M. Yu, L. Li and J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11255 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Hardy, Z. Rahemtulla, A. Satharasinghe, A. Shahidi, C. Oliveira, I. Anastasopoulos, M. N. Nashed, M. Kgatuke, A. Komolafe, R. Torah, J. Tudor, T. Hughes-Riley, S. Beeby and T. Dias, Materials, 2020, 13, 1–21 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kim, C. Park, E. P. Samuel, S. An, A. Aldalbahi, F. Alotaibi, A. L. Yarin and S. S. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 10013–10025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Niu, S. Yang, T. Hua, X. Tian and M. K. Koo, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 1043–1052 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, Q. Zhao, Y. Zhou, P. He, H. Pu, B. Song, S. Pan, Y. Wang and C. Wang, Polym. Test., 2021, 100, 107240 CrossRef CAS .
C. Conway, Int. J. Entrepreneurship Innov., 2016, 17, 73 CrossRef .
T. S. Perdih, B. Širok and M. Dular, J. Mech. Eng., 2017, 63, 83–91 CrossRef .
D. Gaddes, H. Jung, A. Pena-Francesch, G. Dion, S. Tadigadapa, W. J. Dressick and M. C. Demirel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20371–20378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pakdel, J. Wang, S. Kashi, L. Sun and X. Wang, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 277, 102116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Draft AATCC RA111(a) (2019) Electrical resistance of electronically integrated textiles.
Draft AATCC RA111(b) (2019) Electrical resistance changes of electronically-integrated textiles after home laundering.
Draft IEC 63203-201-2 Wearable electronic devices and technologies – part 201-2: electronic textile – measurement methods for basic properties of conductive fabric and insulation materials.
Draft ASTM WK61480 (2018) New test method for durability of smart garment textile electrodes after laundering.
Draft ASTM WK61479 (2018) New test method for durability of smart garment textile electrodes exposed to perspiration.

Smart Textiles Market to 2024, https://www.ameriresearch.com/product/smart-textiles-market/, accessed on  3 September 2020 Search PubMed.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Md Luthfar Rahman Liman	Md Luthfar Rahman Liman received his BS Degree in Textile Engineering from Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University, Bangladesh. Currently, he is working as a researcher and his research interests focus on the development of durable wearable electrodes for realistic sensing, health monitoring, and thermoregulation.
M. Tauhidul Islam	M. Tauhidul Islam received his Bachelor's in Textile Engineering from Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University (2016). In 2020, he completed a Master's Degree in Materials Science and Engineering from National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan. His Master's research focuses on the synthesis of Na-doped MoO3 electrocatalysts for water-splitting electrodes. His current areas of research interest include bio-inspired 2D conductive materials synthesis for developing flexible wearable electronics, energy harvesters, and biosensors.

 	Scheme 1  Emerging strategies for developing futuristic washable textronic designs.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Distinctive fiber-shaped parallel, twisted, and coaxial electrode configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2019, Wiley. (b) Schematic presentation of the triboelectric electric energy generation process using electrospun silk fibroin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65 Copyright 2016, Wiley. (c) Dip coating of cotton yarn for designing Au–Ag core–shell yarn stain sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the textile-centric framework to wearable textronics. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (e) Use of p-doped conjugated polymer to develop face mask humidity sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic diagram of electroluminescent fabric being functionalized via Bluetooth connection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic diagram of a single sheet (top) and cross-sectional magnified view (bottom) of 3D textile dye-sensitized solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 Copyright 2019, Nature. (h) Sandwiched-shaped LC monitoring pressure sensor using 3D penetrated fabric. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

1D	Cellulosic fiber	Electrospinning, machine sewing, dip-coating	Tactile sensors, Joule heating, battery, optoelectronics	Scalable, comfortable, water-soluble
Silk/protein fibroin	Electrospinning, thermal drawing	Biomimetic sensing, ultra-thin e-implants, energy harvesting	Biocompatible, lightweight, transparent, soft feel
Elastomeric fiber	Twisting, wet-spinning, dip-coating	Interconnects, strain sensing	Mechanical compliance, and stretchability
2D	Woven fabric (plain/twill/satin)	Sputtering, electroplating, printing, lithography	Self-powering, Joule heating, and sensing	High drapability, stiffness, and thickness
Knitted fabric (weft/warp/rib)	
In situ polymerization, coating, or printing	Electrocardiography, strain sensing	Porous, wrinkle-resistant, and elastic
Nonwoven fabric (web/membrane/sheet)	Printing, nano-soldering	Chemical sensing, energy-storing	High porosity and resiliency
3D	Braided/spacer fabric	Sophisticated deposition	Self-powering, strain sensing	Air-permeable, specific surface area

 	Fig. 2  (a) Advanced textronic blocks in one-dimensional (1D) filament (i) and zig-zag fiber/yarn (ii). (b) Two-dimensional (2D) non-woven (i), woven (ii), knitted and (iii) fabric. (c) Three-dimensional (3D) spacer/braided fabric pattern. (d) Roadmap towards next-generation wearable textronics and the remaining washability challenges. (e) Impact of the low washability of existing prototype textronics on the future global market.	 

2D fabric	Ag/Cu/Ni coated yarn	Washing with detergent with 10 rubber balls	Antenna gain dropped by 7 dB after a single wash	Unprotected coating layers to tackle rigorous wash stress	
85

2D polyamide fabric	PPy (25%)	Washing with an anionic detergent	Resistance enhanced twofold after a single wash	Inappropriate dopant selection	
86

2D cotton fabric	MWCNT/graphene	Washing performed with harsh soaps	Resistance increased fivefold after 9 wash cycles	Soap with higher basicity greatly depleted the coating layers	
38

1D polyester fiber	Ag plating (electroless)	Lab-scale wash fastness test	Appx. fourfold increase in resistivity after 10 wash cycles	Thinner or poor adhesion strength of coating layers	
87

1D silk yarn	AgNWs	Washing with an anionic detergent	Lost functionality after 2 machine washes	Needs adjacent electroactive materials or enhancers to retain electrical property	
88

2D cotton fabric	CB/PVA binder	Vigorous machine washing with 15 stainless steel balls	Resistance increased 11 times after a single wash	Inactivity of water-soluble binder	
89

2D cotton fabric	PPy (10%)	Washing with ECE detergent	Resistivity increased 4 times higher after a single wash	Lack of encapsulation	
90

1D nylon yarn	Ag/Cu plating	Washing with bleaching detergent	Coating layers completely peeled off and lost conductivity	Required bleach-free detergent washing	
91


 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic presentation of the geometry of the core–shell yarn. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (b) Fabrics made of core–shell yarns with a variety of woven topologies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (c) (i) Schematic diagram of the preparation of weft and warp Cu-PET yarns and assembly of woven t-TENG. Change in (ii) linear resistance in 2-ply Cu-PET conductive yarn after 20 wash cycles and SEM images of (iii) unwashed, (iv) 5 cycle-, (v) 10 cycle-, (vi) 15 cycle-, and (vii) 20 cycle-washed 2-ply Cu-PET conductive yarn. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106 Copyright 2016, Wiley. (d) (i) Schematic illustration of the fabricated PET/AgNW/graphene core–shell textile structure. (ii) SEM images of Ag NWs placed in the air for 240 h without a graphene covering sheet. With varying number of washings, (iii) sheet resistance variations for AgNWs and Ag NW/graphene-coated e-textiles. Water drops on the surfaces of the developed e-textile are photographed in the insets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram of the charge circulation of a single self-powering all-solid-state yarn under short-circuit situations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (f) (i) Structural characteristics of the shape-adaptable 3D TENG structure, which includes an outer braided braced frame and inner axial core column. (ii) Image of the 3D TENG structure (scale bar: 1 cm). (iii) Schematic diagram of 3D four-step rectangular braiding technology. (iv) Yarn carriers are distributed on the machine bed in a random pattern. The “O” and “X” marks identify the braided and axial yarn carriers, respectively. (v) One yarn carrier and traveled paths of its suspended yarn. The orange line and black line depict the movement routes of one braided yarn and its yarn carrier, respectively, while the blue line indicates the walking paths of one axial yarn and its yarn carrier. (vi) Graphical diagram of the working principle of the shape-adaptable 3D TENG structure in vertical contact and separation mode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2020, Nature.	 

Blended yarn (3-ply twisted SS/PET fiber blended yarn)	2D knit with all-solid-state yarn	PEDOT:PSS/CF/CNF electrodes	Weft knitting/coating	Power density: 85 mW m−2	No decrease in electrical outputs even after 15 wash cycles	
109

Braided nylon yarn	3D braided	Ag-braided yarn	Winding	26 W m−3	Remain stable even after 20 wash cycles	
112

Silk	2D knitted	MXene (3 mg mL−1), AgNW	Vacuum-assisted spray coating	∼0.8 Ω sq−1	Resistance remained unchanged even after 20 h of washing	
114

Polyester yarn	3D orthogonal woven structure	Stainless steel/PDMS	Stacking/binding	263.36 mW m−2	Maintained powering ability after 10 wash cycles	
115

Polypropylene/viscose	2D nonwoven	MWCNT	Nano-soldering	29.9 (G.F at 1% strain)	Conductance increased by only 13.6% after 40 h of washing	
116

Polypropylene/viscose	2D nonwoven	MWCNT	Nano-soldering	∼9.7 kΩ	Resistance remained constant even after 48 h of washing	
117

Cotton/spandex fabric	2D knitted rib structure	CNT	Dip and dry method	2.38 kΩ cm−1	
R/R0 value increased to 1.6 after 10 wash cycles	
118

Nylon yarn	2D tubular knit structure (seamless)	Braided PTFE-Ag yarn	Knitting	1484 μW m−2	Acceptable increase in OC voltage (from 40 V to 55 V) after 10 wash cycles	
119

Cotton threads	3D rib stitch knitted structure	8 lacquered Cu wires	Rib stitch technique	∼18 mW m−2	Retained electrical properties even after 60 wash cycles	
113

Polyester	1D core–shell yarns	AgNW/graphene	Full-solution method	20 Ω sq−1	Retained electrical properties after 6 wash cycles	
107

PU fiber	3D helical fiber	Cu fiber	Nano-soldering	29.8 Ω	Stable powering of LEDs under water	
108

Cotton	1D core–shell yarns	Stainless steel fiber	Weaving method	∼60 mW m−2	Stable output voltage even after 120 machine wash cycles	
99

Nylon	2D helix structure	Stainless steel monofilament	Twisting/weaving	—	Could retain functionality even after 4 h continuous washing	
105

Nylon (87%) and spandex (13%)	2D knitted	Cu, AuNPs	Immersion	∼3.6 Ω sq−1	Stable conductivity after 10 times washing	
120

Polyester	2D knitted	Ag ink	Inkjet printing	∼0.9 Ω sq−1	Resistance increased to ∼1 kΩ after 20 washes	
101

Polyester	1D yarn	Stainless-steel fiber, silicon	Enwrapping	10.79 mV Pa−1 (sensitivity)	Functional even after long-term vigorous machine washing	
121


 	Fig. 4  (a) (i) Industrial-scale fabrication of fiber lithium-ion batteries using a commercial rapier loom machine. (ii) Image of a cotton shirt integrated with fiber lithium-ion batteries. (iii) Photograph of a 6 meter-long display cloth with about 5 × 105 electroluminescent units. (iv) Luminescence of the electroluminescent units after 100 cycles of washing (30 min per cycle) is comparable to that of the original unwashed cloth, as shown in the photographs (top) and emission images (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 126–128 Copyright 2021, Nature. (b) Schematic diagram of a skin-inspired TENG with a fence-shaped (“chain-link”) structure and rhombic unit pattern. The basic repetitive rhombic unit of yarn conductive network increased in the top left. On the right, SEM view of the surface morphology of the 3-ply-twisted Ag-coated nylon yarn. The transparency of the obtained TENG can be seen in the lower right corner. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130 Copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) (i) Capacitance retention of thermally drawn supercapacitor fibers under continuous machine washing (100 cycles) and harsh conditions. (ii) Charge–discharge curves of parallel and serially linked fibers. (iii) Machine-weaving and 3D printing from thermally drawn supercapacitor fiber are depicted in this diagram. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 Copyright 2020, Wiley. (d) (i) Schematic diagram showing the construction of an eco-friendly washable triboelectric yarn. Images presenting the morphologies of (ii) Ag conductive yarn and (iii) Tencel/chitosan yarn. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) (i) Processing of conductive MWCNT/Ag/silicone adhesive pastes. The upper images depict the adhesive, while the lower images depict printed adhesives on PDMS and an elastic bandage. (ii) Illustration of the stretchable conductive MWCNT/Ag/silicone adhesive. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (b) (i) Systematic fabrication of rGO/ZnO hybrid fibers. (ii) Optical image of fiber gas sensor fiber woven onto fabric to make a stylistic pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (c) (i) Fabrication of conductive EG/PEDOT:PSS cotton yarns using a two-step dip-coating method. (ii) Image of a wearable electronic circuit consisting of a coin battery, an LED, and conductive yarns as electrical wire. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (d) (i) Scalable modification of PPy-coated knitted fabric with rose-like Ag flowers and adopted (ii) electrochemical deposition process. (iii) Development of wash durable pressure/strain sensor and supercapacitor by stacking electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

TPU	46.7–47.0	0.14% to 0.40%	0.19 to 0.21	5–7	25 to 75	3000 to 100000	Low-temperature flexibility, high resilience, and great versatility	
161–163

Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)	−125 to −130	10−3 to 10−1	∼0.2	2.32 to 2.40	1.1 to 14.3	500–10000	Optically transparent, low interfacial free energy, good thermal stability	
164–168

Polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDDA)	90–143	0.09–0.1	∼01 to 0.2	∼2	27.5 to 32.5	250 to 500	Polymeric sorbent	
169–173

Silicon rubber	−70 to −110	∼1	0.15 to 0.2	2.81 to 3.56	4 to 9 MPa	500000 to 2000000	Good temperature cycling, very low modulus	
174–177

Epoxy resin	104.85 to 136.85	0.08 to 0.3	∼0.2	3.3 to 4.65	3.40 to 55.1	490 to 3700	Good mechanical strength, solvent resistance	
178–181

Ecoflex	35 to 40	0.05 to 0.28	0.16	2.2–2.8	1.1 to 2	3000–4000	Biodegradable, excellent water and tear resistance, printable and weldable	
182–186


 	Fig. 6  (a) (i) Resistance of graphene-coated compressed poly-cotton fabric (PU encapsulated), simple graphene-coated (PU encapsulated) poly-cotton fabric, and graphene-coated compressed (without PU) poly-cotton fabric as a function of number of washing cycles. (ii) Graphical diagram of graphene and PU layer on e-textile surface (top), physical appearance of encapsulated PU, and nonencapsulated area of graphene-coated poly-cotton fabric after 10 washes (bottom). (iii) SEM image of graphene-coated poly-cotton fiber, (iv) SEM image of graphene-coated poly-cotton fiber after washing, and (v) SEM image of graphene-coated and encapsulated poly-cotton fiber after 10 washing cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160 Copyright 2020, Wiley. (b) Schematic representation of the fabrication of PU-encapsulated AgNW-coated tricot-weave textile pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188 Copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) Solar cell-embedded fabric demonstrator structure: (i) 10 solar cells are soldered in series on two fine Cu wires. (ii) Soldered solar cells separately encapsulated within cylindrical resin micropods. (iii) Fibrous sheath surrounding the encapsulated solar micropod filament. (iv) Cross-sectional view of the woven fabric with solar cell-embedded yarns. (v) Image of a fabric with a solar cell integrated into it (black box referring to solar cell footprint). (vi) Minimodule constructed with ten solar e-yarns has an electrical circuit diagram. The fabric for the demonstrator was made up of two minimodules. (vii) Solar cell fabric demonstrator schematic depicting the connections between the solar e-yarns and minimodules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 191 Copyright 2019, Wiley. (d) (i) OPVs covered with thick acrylic elastomer are submerged in deionized water. (ii) Normalized PCE of the free-standing OPVs (black circles) and the double-side coated OPVs (red squares) as a function of dipping time. The error bars represent the standard deviation in each structure, normalized by the average of the initial PCE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 194 Copyright 2017, Nature. (e) (i) Diagram of washable textile-based OLED and encapsulation layers. (ii) TEM image of the encapsulation layer. (iii) Chemical structure of each layer, the polymer capping and host-dopant emitting layer (top), and the hole transport and electron injection layer (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 195 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 

2D fabric	AgNWs	TPU	Nozzle jet printing	3668 S cm−1	Stable conductivity after 20 washes	
197

2D PET fabric	Cu	Epoxy resin	Screen- printing	7.5 Ω	Resistivity shifted to 65.3 kΩ after 10 wash cycles	
198

Poly-cotton fabric	Graphene	Fine layer encapsulant (PE773)	Pad–dry–cure/screen printing	11.9 Ω sq−1	Steady conductivity even after 10 washing cycles	
160

PET fabric	Stainless steel fiber	TPU	Spinning process	33 nA cm−2, 75 V	No noteworthy change in electrical output after 120 wash cycles	
99

PET fabric	CNT	PDDA/PDMS	LbL	37.5 Ω cm−1	Resistance shifted to 57.3 Ω cm−1 after 20 washing cycles	
193

Braided 3D fabric	Ag-yarn	PDMS	Winding	26 W m−3	Maintained electrical output after 20 wash cycles	
112

Polypropylene fabric	CNT	TPU	Cut and paste method	3.4 × 104 Ω	Durable even after 20 wash cycles	
199

PET	MWCNT/Galinstan	Ecoflex film	Spray coating	0.51 mF cm−2	82% capacitance retention even after immersion in water for 4 days	
200

2D nylon Lycra fabric	GaInSn	TPU	Screen-printing	1.14 × 105 S m−1	Stable functionality even after 10 wash cycles	
201

Polyamide yarn (Madeira)	Ag, AgCl	TPU	Embroidering	34.48 Ω	Stable performance even after 50 wash cycles	
202

2D knit/woven fabric	Cu foil	PDMS/silicon	Screen-printing	—	After 50 wash cycles, the performance remained stable	
192

PU yarn	Graphene nanosheets/Au	PDMS	LbL	661.59 (GF)	No significant increase in resistance after continuous water spraying	
190

Polypropylene (core–shell structure)	MXene-PDA	PDMS	Dip coating	ΔR/R0: ∼3.50	Durable even after 5 h of ultrasonic washing	
196

PET fabric	Ag/MoO3/SiO2	Atomic layer deposited-Al2O3	Spin-coating	14.43 mA cm−2	Stable efficiency after 20 times detergent washing	
203

Tricot-weave	AgNWs	TPU	Drop-casting	13.6 S m−1	Retained 89% EMI SE value even after 20 times washing	
188

Embroidered nonwoven fabric	Ni-cotton yarns/rGO	Ecoflex-TPU	AFEM technique	1.60 mF cm−2	Retained 50% capacitance value after 20 wash cycles	
189

Cotton fabric	CB	PVA	Dip coating	∼28 kΩ sq−1	11 cycles	
89

Cotton/spandex knit fabric	PPy	Transparent PVA/LiCl gel	
In situ polymerization	0.38 mW cm−2	Minimal electrical drift after 20 wash cycles	
154

Cotton fabric	AgNWs	TPU	Hot-pressing	1.25 W m−2	Stable performance up to 15 washing cycles	
204

Woven Kevlar fabric	Ag@NixCo1−xSe/rGO	PDMS	Hydrothermal process	1.1 mW cm−2	Durable even after 1600 min of continuous washing	
205

Woven fabric	Ag yarn	Epoxy resin/hardener	Embroidery and hot melting	500 Ω m−1	No change in performance after 20 wash cycles	
156

Knitted fabric	PCB/Ag yarn	Silicon-TPU	Transmission lines	ΔR/R0: ∼1	After 50 wash cycles conductivity decreased 4 times	
206


 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the axial CNT alignment in a textile through capillary-driven self-assembly process applying hydro-soluble sodium alginate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the fabrication of SWCNT/D-glucaric acid/chitosan polymer composite coatings and the developed washable e-textiles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) (i) Fabrication process of multifunctional superhydrophobic hierarchical rough structure conductive CNT/PDDA/PDMS-coated PET fabric. (ii) Images of a water droplet on the prepared CNT/PDDA/PDMS fabric surface before and after 20 laundering tests and (iii) changes in the contact angle (CA) and sliding angle (SA) of CNT/PDDA/PDMS fabric as a function of 20 washing cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 193 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Cross-section of cotton yarn (i) pristine and yarn coated with (ii) nanoscale-sized and (iii) large flake size (1 μm) MXene. Cross-section SEM images of (iv) pristine cotton fibers, (v) nanoscale-sized, and (vi) large MXene flake-coated yarn. SEM images of MXene-coated cotton yarn surface (vii) before washing and (viii) after 20 times machine washing process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234 Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process for washable bovine serum albumin (BSA)-pretreated MoS2 transition metal/rGO coated cotton yarn gas sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) (i) Schematic diagram of highly washable micro-structured textile sensor composed of printable composite ink (PDMS microbeads/P3HTs/CB mixed) for integrative fiber and fabric-based wearable devices. SEM images of printable composite ink-coated (ii) fiber sensor and (iii) fabric sensor. (iv) Composition of the microbead/P3HT/CB blended composite ink for the production of highly washable textile sensors. (v) Schematic presentation of the change in electrical resistance for composite ink-printed textile strain sensor in water. (vi) Variation in the resistance of composite ink-printed textile strain sensor upon applied strain underwater and wettability study of water droplet contact angle (CA) on a pristine textile (0% strain) and composite ink-printed textile strain sensor (0 and 130% strain). Reproduced with permission from ref. 240 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure of washable AuNPC–MoS2-coated fiber and its application in an e-textile pressure sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 244 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (d) (i) Preparation of hierarchical conductive superamphiphobic cotton fabric electrode and (ii) chemical structures of POTS and F-POSS. (iii) Photo of the prepared hydrophobic cotton fabric electrode as a wire for powering an LED bulb. Different liquids such as (1) H2O, (2) oleic acid, (3) milk, and (4) coffee were dropped on the surface of the prepared hydrophobic cotton fabric electrode. SEM image in the inset represents the change in the morphology of the fabric electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 248 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

Cotton yarn	rGO/MoS2	Bovine serum albumin protein	Self-assembly	Sensor reaction to 0.45 ppm NO2 was 28%	Resistance changed only 6% after 100 wash cycles	
193

Cotton fabric	PEDOT:PSS	EG, DMSO	LbL	130 Ω	Stable resistance even after 50 wash cycles	
176

PET fabric	rGO	Polydopamine	Vacuum filtration	1.7 × 102 Ω sq−1	Resistance reached 6.3 × 103 Ω sq−1 after 10 wash cycles	
250

Silk fibroin	MWCNT	Chitin carbon	Electrospinning	∼90 Ω m−1	Steady conductivity even after 50 washing cycles	
251

Nylon yarn	rGO	Bovine serum albumin protein	Self-assembly	∼1040 S m−1	Resistance remained constant after 9 washing cycles	
252

Spandex fabric	Stainless steel/Cu	(NH4)2PdCl4	ELD deposition	0.02 Ω sq−1	No change in resistance after 100 min continuous washing	
253

Polyamide fabric	SWCNT	Glucaric acid/chitosan	Dip/spray-coating	∼7.4 × 102 S m−1	Conductivity decreased only 12.5 S m−1 after 20 times washing	
135

Cotton fabric	Graphene/PSS	Chitosan	Self-assembly	1.67 × 103 S m−1	After 10 washing cycles, shifted to 1.65 × 103 S m−1	
219

Spandex yarn	MXene	Polydopamine/Ni2+	Dip coating	∼70 kΩ cm−1	Stable conductivity after 20 h washing	
254

Cotton fabric	AgNWs	Polydopamine	Dip coating	7.13 Ω sq−1	Unchanged resistance even after 10 wash cycles	
255

Popcorn-like PET fiber structure	AuNPC–MoS2	HAuCl4/plasma	
In situ growth	∼0.19 kPa−1 (sensitivity)	Maintained conductivity even after 50 wash cycles	
244

Cotton fabric	MXene (∼10 mg mL−1)	—	Dip coating	569 Ω sq−1	Resistance remained stable after 24 h washing	
236

Silk fabric	MXene (3 mg mL−1), AgNWs	1H,1H,2H,2H-Perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane	Vacuum spray coating	∼0.8 Ω sq−1	Resistance remained unchanged after 20 h of washing	
114

Cotton fabric	rGO	Stearic acid/PDA	
In situ growth	6769 S m−1	Extremely washable and can deliver motion signal for underwater activities	
256

Cellulosic fabric	PPy	Urea/NaOH	Microdissolution and in situ polymerization	1.98 Ω sq−1	Stable resistance even after 10 consecutive washing cycles	
216

Nonwoven fabric (polypropylene and viscose)	MWCNT	—	Nano-soldering	∼9.7 kΩ	Resistance remained stable after 48 h of washing	
117

Cotton-PET blended fabric	rGO	SDS/L-ascorbic acid	Inkjet-printing	21 dB (SNR)	Stable ECG signal even after 10 wash cycles	
221

PET fabric	PEDOT:PSS	PEG	Immersion process	∼2 kΩ sq−1	Retain electrical functionality even after 10 washes	
220


 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of the POTS self-healing route on a PPy–POTS-coated cotton fabric (i) and immediate recovered water contact angle after plasma damage and microwave self-healing (ii). Reproduced with permission from ref. 258 Copyright 2021, Springer. (b) (i) Resistance of Cu/PAH-coated and FD-POSS/Cu/PAH-coated cotton fabrics as a function of immersion time in aqueous H2SO4 (pH 1) and KOH (pH 14) solutions. (ii) Contact angles of H2O, DMSO, and peanut oil on the FD-POSS/Cu/PAH-coated cotton fabrics after immersion in aqueous H2SO4 solution for different durations. After immersion for 100 h, the fabrics were healed at 135 °C (indicated by arrows). (iii) Resistance of the Cu/PAH-coated and FD-POSS/Cu/PAH-coated cotton fabrics as a function of immersion time in aqueous Na2S solution (1 mg mL−1). (iv) Contact angles of water, DMSO, and peanut oil on the F/Cu/PAH-coated cotton fabrics after immersion in an aqueous Na2S solution for different times. (iv) Recorded contact angles of H2O, DMSO, and peanut oil on FD-POSS/Cu/PAH-coated cotton textiles after immersion in aqueous Na2S solution for various periods. After immersion for 20 h, the fabrics were healed at 135 °C (indicated by arrows). Reproduced with permission from ref. 248 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) (i) Schematic diagram of self-healable organic OLED clothing system. (ii) Image of the patterned electrode (PEDOT:PSS/Ag NWs) on the self-healing electronic textile. (iii) SEM image of the self-healing OLED clothing system. (iv) Molecular assembly of the PU–PVA:Agr nanocomposite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 262 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) (i) Adaptation of vapor-phase polymerization of PEDOT/FD-POSS/FAS coating on PET fabrics. Impact of 500 washing cycles on (ii) contact angle and (iii) surface resistance of the coated fabrics. Reproduced with permission from ref. 266 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation of a regular textronic washing process with different possible factors of physical and wetting stresses.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) (i and ii) Phase overturn process and local concentration of AgNWs where P-ATN had different pore structures when the phase was inverted in different polar solvents. (iii) Illustration of the local concentration of AgNWs due to the dissimilar migration rates of AgNWs and TPU macromolecule. (iv) Interface of textile and P-ATN coating. (v) Change in resistance of P-ATN-coated textiles during repeated AATCC 135 standard washing process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197 Copyright 2020, Springer. (b) (i) Accelerated washing approach following the AATCC 61 standard and (ii) change in resistance for knit (red) and woven (black) PET fabric with various washing cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of superhydrophobic HDTMS-assembled MXene–SiNP-coated cotton fabric. Reproduced with permission from ref. 272 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) (i) Resistance retention ratio in knitted FCB device following delicate wash cycle (AATCC 135). (ii) SEM image of one failed metal fiber in the knitted FCB after 30 ‘normal’ washing cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 278 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society Publishing. (e) (i) PDMS-encapsulated conductive fabric inside the washing machine drum (WVD24520 GB, Bosch Exxcel Serie 4). (ii) Microscopic view of a damaged PDMS conformal coating caused by the wire being dragged out of the joint during the washing process. (iii) Microscopic images of conformal PDMS layer on capacitive sensing chip still on the circuit after washing at 400 rpm spin speed (left) and view of the bottom of the circuit to see the chip connection to the solder pads (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 282 Copyright 2019, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 12  Duration (min) rate of stopping, low-speed rotation and high-speed rotation of the machine drum under different e-textile washing program settings (e.g., cotton, delicate, delicate-short, silk, express, and wool).	 

ISO 6330:2000-6A	Woven fabric	Copper tracks (molded with polyimide filament)	40	58	1000	Seven extra clothes	Air	45 cycles	
283

—	Polyamide-based ECG electrode	Ag thread/protective (nonconductive) yarn	40	35	600	2.5 kg cloth	Air	50 cycles	
274

Stirring in water	Non-woven fabric	SWCNTs	Not set	2400	700	—	Air	Conductance reduced by only 13.6%	
116

ISO 6330	Knitted fabric	PEDOT:PSS	40	30	30	—	Air	50 cycles	
284

AATCC 135	Knitted fabric	Conductive Cu tracks	40	—	430	Total 1.8 kg, protective bag	Dryer (>75 °C)	30 cycles	
278

AATCC-135	2D fabric	Silver-plated-nylon	30	60	400	1.8 kg cloth	Air	30 cycles	
285

AATCC- 61-2006	Cotton/spandex yarn	CNT	40	30	—	10 stainless steel balls	Air	10 cycles	
118

Beaker washing	Cotton/PET fabric	Stainless-steel yarns	Not set	20	200	—	Dryer (>85 °C for 4 h)	5 cycles	
286

—	Cellulose yarn	PEDOT:PSS/EG	30	—	800	—	—	10 cycles	
280

ISO 6330:2000	Sheath-core yarn	Cu, Ag, stainless steel	40	40	
	2 kg of cloth	Air	25 cycles	
273

ISO 6330:2012	Woven fabric	PDMS aligned printed circuit	30	42	400	2 kg weight towel	Air	20 cycles	
282

ISO 105-C10:2006	Cotton fabric	Cu/(NH4)2PdCl4	40	30	40	—	—	100 cycles	
248

AATCC 135	PET yarns	Cu	20	40	430	Total 1.8 kg fabrics, protective bag	Air	20 cycles	
106

—	Non-woven fabric	rGO/CNTs	Not set	35	700	1 kg cloth	Air	6 cycles	
287

Beaker washing	PET knit fabric	rGO	Not set	3	800	—	Dryer (>60 °Cfor 12 h)	10 cycles	
288

AATCC M6	Spandex fabric	TPU-laminated Ni/Cu/Ag-coated yarn	27	21	—	Total 1.8 kg fabric	Dryer (>50 °C)	10 cycles	
289

AATCC 61-2a	Blended knit fabric	Ag/AgCl/TPU	49	—	—	50 SS balls	—	20 cycles	
290

Stirring in water	Nonwoven fabric	MWCNTs	Not set	2880	700 rpm	—	—	48 h	
117

Lab-scale washing	Cotton fabric	Graphene ink/WPU	50	—	—	—	Air	10 cycles	
291


 	Fig. 13  (a) (i) Variation in the MXene loading and the linear resistance under different washing temperatures (ranging from 30 °C to 80 °C) and runtimes (0 to 45 h). XPS spectra of (ii) unwashed and (iii) washed MXene-coated cotton yarn after 3 min of sputtering. The MXene-coated cotton yarns were washed for 20 washing cycles at 30 °C and 5 washing cycles at temperatures ranging from 40 °C to 80 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234 Copyright 2019, Wiley. (b) Schematic representation of the setup for washing Ag-coated polyamide yarns with (i) only water and (ii) water and detergent solutions. SEM images of Ag-coated polyamide yarns (iii) before washing, (iv) after immersion for 72 h in water/detergent solutions, and (v) after immersion for 72 h in water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 295 Copyright 2019, Springer. (c) Skin-electrode impedance and range of impedance for (i) Ag electrode yarn (yarn D: 220 yarn count), and (ii) carbon electrode yarn (yarn D: 640 yarn count) before and after 35 washing cycles. The shaded areas signify the standard deviation. Filtered ECG signals acquired from (iii) Ag electrode yarn and (iv) carbon electrode yarn before and after 35 washing cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 296 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (d) (i) Washing a piece of pressure-sensitive TENG (8 cm × 5 cm) in tap water (without detergents). (ii) Resistance variations in pressure-sensitive TENG as a function of continuous washing time for 10 and 20 min. SEM images in the inset represent the change in textile TENG surface morphology. (iii) Output voltage (VOC) of assembled textile TENG under identical external pressure after various washing durations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 297 Copyright 2017, Wiley. (e) I–V curves representing the electrical response of the PPy-coated woven cotton after 20 times of (i) water washing and (ii) organic solvent washing (dichloromethane). Reproduced with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

AATCC 135	Nonionic detergent (66 g of castle)	Knitted fabric	Circuit boards/Cu fiber/spandex filament	Washing at 40 °C together with ballast (1.8 kg) and protective bag	Dryer (75 °C)	Satisfactory washing capability for 30 cycles	
278

ISO 6330:2000	ECE A detergent (2.5 g L−1)	Cotton fabric	Circuit board/PDMS	Washing at 40 °C for 30 min with protective bag	Air, dryer	No structural damage even after 50 wash cycles	
192

ISO 6330:2012	20 g of Persil detergent (non-bio powder)	Cotton fabric	Solar yarn/micro-pod filament	Washing with 2 kg wash load for 15 h	Air	Retained 90% of output power after 15 wash cycles	
191

ISO 6330:2012	20 g of Persil detergent (non-bio powder)	Nylon yarn	Conductive wire	Washing at 40 °C for 31 min at 800 rpm spin speed	Air, dryer	Survived functionality for 25 wash cycles	
301

Lab-scale stirring	Neutral detergent (phosphate free)	PEN fabric	ALD-Al2O3/SiO2	Stirring in detergent-mixed DI water solution at 200 rpm for 10 min	Air	Stable optoelectronic performance after 20 times washing	
203

AATCC 61	1 g L−1 ECE (A) non-phosphate detergent	Cotton fabric	CB-PVA	Wash with 15 stainless steel balls at 40 °C for 5 min	Air, dryer (60 °C for 5 min)	Resistance increased by almost 80% after 12 wash cycles	
89

—	DI water	PET fabric	MXene	Immersed for 120 min	Air	Stable electrothermal performance	
235

ISO 6330:2012	Reference detergent (20 mL)	Polyamide-Lycra fabric	PEDOT:PSS/DMSO/PU	Washing at 30 °C for 23 min with 2 kg of PES load and protective bag	Air	Stable conductivity even after 10 wash cycles	
159

Lab-scale stirring	DI water	Non-woven fabric	CNTs/rGO//NWF	Stirring with water at 700 rpm	Air	Resistance increased from 30.3 kΩ to only 36.9 kΩ even after 16 h washing	
287

ISO 6330:2012	37 mL of detergent	Cotton/wool fabric	Circuit board/PDMS	Washing at 30 °C for 15 min with 2 kg cotton fabric load	Air	Survived performance for 15 wash cycles	
282

37 mL of softener
Lab-scale stirring	Dichloromethane solvent	Knitted cotton fabric	PPy/sodium 5,5-sulfosalicylate (NaSSA)	Stirring at 250 rpm for 10 min	Air	Stable conductivity even after 20 washing cycles	
152

AATCC 135	DI water	PET yarn	Cu yarn/vinyltrimethoxysilane	Washing at 20 °C for 40 min with 1.8 kg fabric, 18 gallons of water, and a protective bag	Air	Low increase in resistance after 20 wash cycles	
106

—	Anionic detergent (20 mL)	Polyamide fabric	SWCNT, glucaric acid/chitosan	Machine washing for 740 min	Air	Conductivity decreased to 12.5 S m−1	
135

ISO 6330	20 g of Persil detergent	PET fabric	Ag thread/protective (nonconductive) yarn	Washing with 2 kg of wash load at 40 °C for 35 min	Air	Provide quality ECG signal even after 50 wash cycles	
279

AATCC 132-2004/86-2005	TTE detergent (200 mL solution)	Cotton fabric	PANI	Dry washing at 30 °C for 30 min	Air	Stable resistance after 40 dry–wash cycles	
300

Lab-scale stirring	DI water	Nylon–PU blended fabric	rGO/AgNWs	Magnetic stirring at 550 rpm rotation speed	Air	The ratio of ΔR/R0 changed by only 40% after 100 times washing	
302


 	Fig. 14  Futuristic highly washable and reliable textronic blocks for application in long-term wearable electronics. (a) Suitable protective layering of textile interconnects. (b) Water-free washing method for reducing the water footprint. (c) Safety for expected washing damage and short-circuits. (d) Self-cleaning ability with fluorine-free superhydrophobic polymers. (e) Computational modeling and simulation method for interpreting the washing actions at the micro dimension. (f) Documentation of standardized washing methods for market acceptability.	 

AATCC RA11	Change in resistance in e-textile conductive track after washing
ASTM WK61480
IEC PN 63203-201-2
In development	Change in resistance in e-textile conductive parts to steaming/ironing after washing
AATCC RA11	Textile heater or resistive material's electrical resistance to cleaning (washing, dry-cleaning, and drying)
IEC PN 63203-201-2
ASTM WK61480
In development	Change in resistance in e-textile heater after being exposed to various types of liquids (water, soft drinks, and coffee)
IEC PN 63203-201-2	Change in resistance in e-textile heating elements after being exposed to body perspiration
ASTM WK61479
In development	Change in resistance in fasteners (e.g., snaps, switch, and power supply) after washing
In development	Washability for sportswear and leisure textronic systems

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
