Nanophotonic design of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA00628H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA00628H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3625-3633Nanophotonic design of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells†

        
          
            Mohammad I. 
            Hossain‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Wayesh 
            Qarony‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Vladislav 
            Jovanov
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yuen H. 
            Tsang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dietmar 
            Knipp
          
        
      *bc
aDepartment of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
bResearch Center for Functional Materials and Nanomolecular Science, Jacobs University Bremen, 28759 Bremen, Germany
cGeballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. E-mail: dknipp@stanford.edu
Received 
      15th December 2017
    , Accepted 26th January 2018First published on 7th February 2018AbstractThe perovskite material system allows for the realization of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells with high energy conversion efficiencies at low cost. To realize such solar cells, the device geometry, the device processing, and the contact materials have to be modified in comparison to single junction perovskite solar cells. In this study, perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells are designed allowing for the generation of short-circuit current densities and energy conversion efficiencies exceeding 20 mA cm−2 and 30%, while using realistic device structures. High short-circuit current densities can be achieved by minimizing reflection losses and optical losses of the contact layers. A hybrid approach is used to investigate the optics by combining finite-difference time-domain simulations with experimental measurements. Details on the nanophotonic design will be provided and discussed.
1. Introduction
Current commercial solar cell technologies are based on single junction solar cells. Record energy conversion efficiencies of 26.3% and 28.8% have been demonstrated for silicon and gallium arsenide.1,2 Different approaches have been proposed to overcome the single junction detailed balance limit.3,4 Based on the proposed approaches multi-junction solar cells have been the most promising approach. Detailed balance limit calculations reveal that tandem solar cells can reach energy conversion efficiencies exceeding 40% if an ideal material combination is selected.5 The highest energy conversion efficiency can be reached if the bandgap of the top cell is equal to 1.7 eV, while the bandgap of the bottom solar cell is equal to 1.1 eV.5 Hence, crystalline silicon with a bandgap of 1.1 eV seems the optimal choice for the bottom solar cell. In order to allow for the low-cost fabrication of tandem solar cells, both diodes have to be integrated on the same substrate including a series connection of the top and bottom solar cell. Other approaches based on separately fabricated top and bottom solar cells using spectrally selective beam splitter or mechanically stacking do not allow for the large area realization of high-efficiency solar modules.6 Several material systems with a bandgap of 1.7 eV have been investigated in terms of its applicability as top solar cell and its compatibility with a silicon wafer-based bottom solar cell. Amorphous silicon is the optimal material system in terms of its bandgap of 1.7 eV. However, the high density of electronic defects in the materials prevents the realization of a top solar cell with a high open-circuit voltage.7 Silicon-based quantum dot or quantum well solar cells have shown encouraging results.8,9 However, solar cells with record energy conversion efficiencies have not been implemented. And finally, the combination of silicon with III/V or II/VI compound semiconductors has been studied.10 However, most of the materials require the deposition at high temperatures, which limits the integration on top of an already processed silicon wafer. In recent years, the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) material system has gained a lot of attention as an alternative material because of its low absorption depth and high diffusion lengths allowing for the realization of solar cells with high energy conversion efficiency.11–14 Perovskite single junction solar cells have reached energy conversion efficiencies exceeding 20%.11,15–18 Furthermore, promising results have been achieved for two-terminal and four-terminal perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells reaching energy conversion efficiencies of up to 23.6% and 26.4%, respectively.19,20 However, two-terminal perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells with energy conversion efficiency exceeding the values of record single junction silicon solar cells have not been demonstrated experimentally.
In this study, a perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell will be proposed, which provides energy conversion efficiencies exceeding 30%. The optimization of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells will be discussed taking realistic device structure into consideration. Strategies will be described to reach high energy conversion efficiencies. The realization of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells with high energy conversion efficiencies requires several modifications of the solar cell design compared to conventionally fabricated single junction perovskite solar cells. Commonly used deposition processes and contact/charge transport materials have to be replaced. In this study, we will mainly focus on the optical design of the tandem solar cell using nanophotonic approaches to reach high short-circuit current densities.
The design of the integrated tandem solar cell using nanophotonics is described in Section 2. The optical materials used in this study are introduced in Section 3. The optical method used to study the optical wave propagation is described in Section 4, the results are presented and discussed in Section 5. Finally, a summary is presented in Section 6.
2. Design of perovskite/crystalline silicon tandem solar cells
The short-circuit current density of record silicon single junction solar cells ranges from 40 to 42 mA cm−2, while the theoretical upper limit is equal to 46 mA cm−2.1–3,21 Hence, the realized solar cells exhibit energy conversion efficiencies very close to the theoretical limit, while losses are very low accounting for only 9–13% of the short-circuit current density. Losses can be attributed to absorption losses of contact layers and charge transport materials, which do not contribute to the short-circuit current. Furthermore, the theoretical limits require a charge collection efficiency of 100%. In the case of a tandem solar cell, the short-circuit current has to be matched. In other words, both solar cells have to provide an equal short-circuit current. Otherwise, the short-circuit current is limited by matching losses.
This leads to an upper theoretical limit for a perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell of 23 mA cm−2. In order to reach an integrated perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell with a short-circuit current density close to the theoretical limit, several device processing and material aspects have to be considered. A potential design of a perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell reaching the required short-circuit current is shown in Fig. 1. A solar cell with very low reflection losses has to be designed. Such low reflection losses can only be reached by texturing the front interface of the solar cell. A planar front contact interface leads to distinct reflection losses and a lowering of the short-circuit current density (described in Section 3). Hence the perovskite top cell has to be prepared on a textured silicon solar cell. However, perovskite single junction solar cells are commonly prepared on planar glass substrates coated with a transparent conductive oxide. Most authors use spin coating to prepare the complete solar cell or at least the contact/charge transport layers of the solar cell. But, spin coating is not compatible with the fabrication of perovskite solar cell on a textured silicon solar cell. Hence some material and fabrication processes have to be replaced. In the following, it is assumed that all layers of the perovskite solar cell are prepared by physical or chemical vapor deposition (PVD or CVD) techniques. Perovskite films have been prepared by thermal evaporation, allowing for the realization of single junction solar cells with high energy conversion efficiency.22 Recently, promising results have been presented for perovskite films grown by chemical vapor deposition.23,24 Perovskite solar cells with high energy conversion efficiencies have been realized using NiO and ZnO as a hole transporting/electron blocking and an electron transporting/hole blocking layers.25,26 In both cases, the films have been prepared by spin coating of nanoparticle films. In this study, it is assumed that the metal oxide films are prepared by sputtering. NiO films exhibit a high work function, while the charge carrier mobility and the conductivity of the films are rather low.27 Doping the film leads to a distinct increase in the conductivity. However, the increased doping concentration causes a drop in the optical transmission of the film leading to high absorption losses of the NiO film and limiting the short-circuit current. In order to overcome the limitations, the NiO film has been replaced by an ITO/NiO double layer, in which a very thin NiO film allows for an efficient hole injection and electron blocking. The much thicker ITO layer is responsible for the lateral conductivity of the screen printed front contact grid. Both metal oxides are highly doped, which allows for the formation of an efficient tunnel junction. ITO films exhibit typical electron charge carrier mobilities in the range of 10 to 20 cm2 V−1 s−1.28,29 High doping concentrations are required to reach high conductivities of the films. This is not a problem for a single junction perovskite solar cell, which exhibits a bandgap of 1.6 eV. However, the situation is different for a tandem solar cell which exhibits high quantum efficiencies up to almost 1.05 eV (1200 nm). The high doping concentration causes high free carrier absorption, which limits the quantum efficiency of the bottom solar cell. The charge carrier mobility of the transparent conductive oxide has to be increased to keep the front contact sheet resistance constant while decreasing the free carrier absorption losses. Hence the ITO film is replaced by a hydrogen doped indium oxide (IOH) film. Hydrogen doped indium oxide exhibits a distinctly higher electron charge carrier mobility.28,29 Hence the doping concentration of the IOH film can be reduced while maintaining a constant sheet resistance. Consequently, the free carrier absorption is reduced and the quantum efficiency of the bottom cell is increased. The electron transporting and a hole blocking layer of the solar cell is formed by sputtering or chemical vapor deposition of zinc oxide films doped by aluminum or boron.7,30 The bottom solar cell consists of a heterojunction silicon solar cell, allowing for high open-circuit voltages. In order to allow for the generation of a high short-circuit current, the front interface of the bottom solar cell has to be textured. In this study, it is assumed that the front and back contacts are textured. It is also assumed that the back side of the silicon wafer is covered with a surface texture comparable with conventional silicon single junction solar cells. The dimensions of the back-contact texture are described by hback and pback. The function of the texture is to refract the light that reaches the back contact. The front side of the silicon wafer is covered with a surface texture with the dimensions of hfront and pfront. The function of the front contact texture is to minimize reflection losses, while efficiently coupling light in the top and bottom solar cells.
 Fig. 1  Schematic cross-section of the unit cell of an optically optimized perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell. 
The integration of the perovskite solar cell on the silicon wafer is getting more difficult with increasing roughness of the front contact. In this study, a front contact texture is selected that allows for an efficient light incoupling while keeping the roughness of the front contact low. Hence the dimensions of the front surface texture are distinctly smaller than the texture of the back contact (hfront ≪ hback and pfront ≪ pback). The front and back contact textures are formed by anisotropic etching of a silicon wafer with a {111} crystal orientation. The anisotropic etching is characterized by the formation of a pyramidal surface texture, which can be described by an etching angle of 54.7° relative to the surface of the silicon wafer. It is considered that the front and back sides of the wafer are covered by such pyramidal textures, so that hfront/(2 × pfront) = hback/(2 × pback) = tan(54.7°) = √2. In this study, the period of the front surface texture is varied from 0 nm to 1000 nm, while keeping the etching angle constant. A period of 0 nm corresponds to a planar surface.
Perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells with high short-circuit current densities can be reached by following three guidelines:
• Firstly, minimizing the reflection losses by improving the light incoupling in the solar cell. An improved incoupling is achieved by texturing the solar cell.
• Secondly, the light has to be efficiently coupled from the top solar cell in the bottom solar cell. The perovskite material exhibits a rather low refractive index of approx. 2, while silicon exhibits a high refractive index of approx. 4, so that an efficient coupling of light in the bottom solar cell is required.
• And thirdly, the optical losses by the contact layers have to be minimized, without negatively affecting the electrical properties of the solar cell.
3. Optical material properties
Several studies on the optical properties of perovskite films have been published.31,32 The published data exhibits a large variation of the extracted absorption coefficient and bandgap. The variations are mainly caused by the high surface roughness of perovskite films compared to other semiconductor films. Hence the extracted absorption coefficient is overestimated and the optical bandgap is underestimated. A very detailed analysis of the influence of the surface roughness on the optical constants has been published by Shirayama et al.32 In our study, we use the optical data published by Löper et al.31 The adapted complex refractive index of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite material is provided in ESI Fig. S1† for the spectral range from 300 nm to 1200 nm. The extinction coefficient is assumed to be zero for optical bandgaps larger than 1.6 eV. The refractive index and extinction coefficient of ITO and IOH are shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), respectively.
 Fig. 2  (a) Refractive index and (b) extinction coefficient of contact and transparent conductive layers of IOH, ITO, and ZnO. 
As mentioned in Section 2, the front transparent conductive oxides have three functions. The material has to allow for an efficient charge injection in the solar cell while exhibiting a low specific resistivity to minimize the series resistance. At the same time, optical absorption losses by the transparent conductive oxide should be low. A Drude Lorentz model is used to describe the dielectric function of ITO and IOH.33,34 The Lorentz term is used to describe the optical properties close to the bandgap of the metal oxide, while a Drude model is used to describe the free carrier absorption. An extended Drude model with a modified expression for the damping frequency is used.34 The model considers the drop of the charge carrier mobility as the wavelength is approaching the plasma wavelength.34 The dielectric functions are determined by modeling the transmission, absorption, and reflection of experimentally realized ITO and IOH films with equal sheet resistance. The samples are prepared and measured by Koida et al.28 The IOH film exhibits an electron mobility of μe = 140 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is 5–10 times higher than the electron mobility of ITO. Consequently, the doping concentration of ITO films is 5–10 times lower, which leads to a shift of the plasma wavelength to longer wavelengths. The parameters used to determine the optical constants are provided in the ESI.† In this study, the two materials are compared in terms of the influence of the free carrier absorption on the quantum efficiency and short-circuit current of the tandem solar cell.
Furthermore, Fig. 2 exhibits the optical constants of the ZnO electron transporting/hole blocking layer. Again, a Drude Lorentz model is used to model the complex refractive index. The parameters were determined by modeling the transmission, absorption, and reflection of Low-Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposited (LPCVD) films published by Steinhauser.30 The parameters used to model the ZnO are provided in the ESI.†
4. Optical simulation method
To determine a realistic description of the solar cells, the optical wave propagation has to be rigorously simulated. However, the thickness of the tandem solar cell is distinctly larger than the wavelength of the incident light, so that a rigorous simulation is very complex and time-consuming. Hence, a hybrid approach is used to model the wave propagation. A finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) approach is used to model the optical wave propagation in the top cell and the coupling of light in the bottom solar cell. The top cell consists of the ITO or IOH front contact, the perovskite material, and a ZnO back contact. The NiO hole transporting layer is not considered by the optical calculations because the layer is very thin, hence the absorption by the layer is neglected. The silicon bottom solar cell is described by an infinitely thick silicon substrate with a surface texture (hfront, pfront). In order to determine the quantum efficiency of the bottom solar cell, the light transmitted by the perovskite top solar cell is calculated. It is assumed that light entering the bottom solar cell is effectively coupled in by the textured front side of the silicon wafer and refracted by the textured back side of the silicon wafer.
The quantum efficiency of the top and bottom solar cell is calculated by QETop ≈ Aperovskite(1) QEBot ≈ TTop × QEc-Si(2)where Aperovskite is the absorption of the perovskite layer. It is assumed that the collection efficiency of the perovskite layer is 100%. Light absorbed by the contact and hole/electron transporting layers does not contribute to the quantum efficiency. The quantum efficiency of the bottom solar cell is determined by multiplying the transmission of the top cell, TTop, with the QE of a single junction solar cell from literature.2,35 Based on the quantum efficiency the short-circuit current for the top and bottom solar cell was calculated. Details on the calculation of the quantum efficiency and short-circuit current are given in literature.36 In this study, only results for matched solar cells are presented. The thickness of the top diode is adjusted until matching of the short-circuit current of the top and bottom solar cell is achieved. All finite-difference time-domain simulations are carried out in three dimensions (3D) for incident light are ranging from 300 nm to 1200 nm.
5. Results and discussion
The schematic cross-section of a perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell with a flat front contact is depicted in Fig. 3(a). The cell consists of a 70 nm ITO/NiO transparent front contact followed by a perovskite layer with a thickness of 225 nm, and a 70 nm thick ZnO as a transport layer. The NiO film is assumed to be very thin relative to the thickness of the ITO layers, so that the layer is not considered by the optical calculations. The calculated quantum efficiency under current matched conditions is given in Fig. 3(b). The quantum efficiency of the top and bottom solar cell was calculated according to eqn (1) and (2). The solar cell exhibits a short-circuit current of 17.2 mA cm−2. The short-circuit current represents the highest current for a perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell with a flat front contact without anti-reflection coating. The results are in very good agreement with the recently published experimental results by Bush et al.19 However, the low short circuit current of the tandem solar cell prevents the realization of a solar cell with energy conversion efficiencies exceeding silicon single junction solar cells with record energy conversion efficiency. Therefore, an efficient light incoupling concept is needed to reduce the reflection losses. In the next step, the silicon wafer was textured before adding the perovskite top solar cell. By texturing the top solar cell the incoupling of the light is improved and the quantum efficiency and short-circuit current density are enhanced. The dimensions of the surface texture are described by a pyramidal texture. The dimension of the pyramids is determined by hfront and pfront. The texture is formed by anisotropic etching of a silicon wafer with a {111} crystal orientation. The pyramidal surface texture is described by a constant hfront/(2 × pfront) ratio of √2 corresponding to an etching angle of 54.7° relative to the surface of the silicon wafer.
 Fig. 3  (a) The schematic cross-section of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell with a flat front contact. (b) Corresponding external quantum efficiency for the top, bottom, and tandem solar cells. The NiO film is assumed to be very thin relative to the thickness of the ITO layers so that the layer is not considered by the optical calculations. 
The time average power loss map of a tandem solar cell with a period of 450 nm is shown in Fig. 4 under monochromatic illumination with wavelengths of 400 nm, 700 nm, and 1000 nm. The top and bottom diodes in Fig. 4 are visualized separately because of the distinctly different absorption coefficient of the perovskite top cell and the silicon bottom cells. Due to the high absorption coefficient of perovskite for short wavelengths, all photons are absorbed by the top diode (Fig. 4(b)). For a wavelength of 700 nm, most of the incident light is still absorbed by the top diode, but a smaller fraction of light is already absorbed by the bottom diode. For a wavelength of 1000 nm, no light is absorbed by the perovskite layer as shown in Fig. 4(c). The light penetrates deep into the silicon bottom solar cell. A distinct fraction of the light is absorbed by the ITO front contact because of the high free carrier absorption. The light absorbed by the ITO does not contribute to the short-circuit current density.
 Fig. 4  (a) The schematic cross-section of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell with a pyramid textured front contact. Simulated power loss map of perovskite/silicon tandem solar for monochromatic illumination of (b) 400 nm, (c) 700 nm, (d) and 1000 nm. The NiO films are assumed to be very thin, so that the layer is not considered by the optical calculations. 
In the next step, the influence of the period of the surface texture on the quantum efficiency and short-circuit current density is studied. For each period the short-circuit current density of the top and bottom solar cell were matched by adjusting the thickness of the top solar cell. Fig. 6(a) shows the relationship between the perovskite layer thickness of the top cell and period of the front texture for matched short-circuit current conditions. The period is varied from 0 nm to 1000 nm leading to an increased perovskite layer thickness from 225 nm to 370 nm. The influence of the period of the surface texture on the quantum efficiency of the top and bottom diode is shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). Texturing the front surface leads to an improved incoupling of light in the solar cell. Therefore, the quantum efficiency of the top cell is increased for short wavelengths (300–500 nm). Furthermore, more light is coupled to the bottom solar cell. As a consequence, the short-circuit current of the top and bottom solar cells is increased. In order to match the short-circuit current of the bottom solar cell by the top solar cell, the thickness of the top cell has to be increased. The increased thickness of the top cell lowers the transmission of the top cell and the quantum efficiency of the bottom solar in the spectral range between 500 nm and 800 nm. The small absorption of the top solar cell for wavelengths larger than 900 nm is caused by small inaccuracies in fitting the optical constants of perovskite by the FDTD simulation tool. However, the absorption for wavelengths > 900 nm has no influence on the short-circuit current. The short circuit current is only calculated for photon energies larger than the bandgap. Hence the absorption for wavelengths > 780 nm represents parasitic optical losses.
 Fig. 5  Influence of the period of the surface texture on the quantum efficiency of the (a) top and (b) bottom solar cell under current matching conditions. 
The thickness of the top solar cell is increased until the short-circuit current of the top and bottom solar cells are matched. A maximum matched short-circuit current density of 20 mA cm−2 is achieved for periods of the surface texture of 450 nm or larger. In this case, the thickness of the top cell is equal to 285 nm. The matched short-circuit current density as a function of the period of the surface texture is shown in Fig. 6(b). For periods of the surface texture larger than 450 nm the matched short-circuit current remains almost unchanged. It should be mentioned that the etching angle of the substrate relative to the surface of the silicon wafer remains constant at 54.7°, so that an increased period results in an increased height of the surface texture. The root means square roughness of the substrate is directly proportional to the height of the pyramids. Hence it can be concluded that for a constant etching angle the period is directly proportional to the root mean square roughness of the substrate. With increasing roughness, the integration of the top cell on the textured substrate is getting more complex. Furthermore, the diffraction of the incident light decreases with increasing surface period. For larger periods the light is only refracted by the surface of the solar cell. This leads to a drop of the short-circuit current of the top solar cell. To compensate for the drop of the short-circuit current the thickness of the top solar cell has to be increased from 285 nm to 370 nm for a surface period of 1000 nm. So, an optimum period of the surface texture and perovskite layer thickness of 450 nm and 285 nm is obtained.
 Fig. 6  (a) Relationship between the period of surface texture and perovskite layer thickness of the top solar cell of a perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell under short-circuit current matching conditions. (b) Short-circuit current density as a function of the period of the surface texture. 
In the following, the optical incoupling of the light in the bottom diode is investigated. The perovskite and metal oxide contact layers exhibit refractive indices of approximately 2, while silicon exhibits a refractive index of 4. Hence a distinct reflection at the interface can be expected. However, the used structure exhibits very good coupling of the light from the top to the bottom diode. In order to illustrate the good incoupling of the light the refractive index is plotted as a function of the height of the solar cell. The effective medium approach is used to calculate the effective refractive index as a function of the height, where nper and nSi are the refractive index of perovskite and silicon (nper ≈ nZnO ≈ nITO ≈ nIOH ≈ 2, nSi ≈ 4). The effective medium approach is applicable if the surface texture is distinctly smaller than the incident wavelength. This assumption might not be fulfilled. However, the approach provides a reasonable approximation. For a pyramidal surface texture, a parabolic change of the refractive index is calculated. If the pyramids would be replaced by cones with a parabolic surface profile a linear change of the refractive index as a function of the height would be observed. A cone-like surface texture allows for an almost perfect incoupling of the light in the solar cell. The pyramidal structure is very close in terms of the incoupling. If the perovskite solar cell would be prepared on a flat silicon bottom cell an abrupt change of the refractive index would be observed, which leads to maximum reflection losses as shown in Fig. 2.
The incoupling of light in the flat bottom cell could be improved by introducing an optical matching (OM) layer with a refractive index of nOM = (nZnO × nSi)0.5 ≈ 3.5, a low extinction coefficient and the thickness of the OM-layer to be equal to an odd multiple of the quarter wavelength of the light that should be coupled in the bottom diode. In the case of a textured perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell, the situation is different. Both interfaces of the textured solar cell (air/perovskite and perovskite/silicon) in Fig. 7 can be approximated by a parabolic refractive index gradient, allowing for an excellent incoupling in the top and bottom solar cells. In case of the red curve (Fig. 7), it is assumed that the refractive index of the OM-layer is 2, while in the case of the purple curve the refractive index is set to 3.5. It can be seen that the OM-layer has only a small effect on the effective refractive index. This is confirmed by FDTD simulations of the solar cell structure with and without an OM-layer. Introducing an OM-layer does not lead to an increased total quantum efficiency and short-circuit current. Hence, no additional optical matching layer is required. Two reasons are responsible for the good incoupling of the light in the bottom diode. Firstly, the top cell is prepared on a textured surface. Secondly, the refractive index of the contact/charge transporting layers of the top cell is almost equal to the refractive index of the perovskite layer.
 Fig. 7  Cross-section of textured perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell and effective refractive index as a function of the height of the solar cell. 
In the third step of the optimization process, the parasitic absorption of the solar cells is minimized by replacing the indium tin oxide front contact with hydrogen doped indium oxide. ITO films exhibit rather a low electron charge carrier mobilities (10–25 cm2 V−1 s−1), so that high doping concentrations are required to realize front contacts with high conductivity. The high doping concentration causes high free carrier absorption, which limits the quantum efficiency of the silicon bottom solar cell.28,29 In the following calculations, the sheet resistance of the front contact was assumed to be 35 Ω. The sheet resistance is consistent with data published in the literature for highly efficient silicon heterojunction solar cells.28,29 The charge carrier mobility of the transparent conductive oxide has to be increased to keep the front contact sheet resistance constant while decreasing the free carrier absorption losses. Hence the ITO film is replaced by a hydrogen doped indium oxide (IOH) film. Hydrogen doped indium oxide exhibits a distinctly higher electron charge carrier mobility.29 Sputtered hydrogen doped indium layers exhibit 5 to 10 times higher electron mobility than ITO layers. Consequently, the doping concentration of IOH films is 5–10 lower, which leads to a shift of the plasma wavelength to longer wavelengths. Hence the absorption loss of the front contact for long wavelengths is distinctly reduced and the quantum efficiency of the bottom solar cell is increased for wavelengths larger than 800 nm. Subsequently, the thickness of the top cell is slightly increased to reach a matched short-circuit current density of 20.6 mA cm−2. Fig. 8(a) shows the calculated quantum efficiency under current matching conditions.
 Fig. 8  (a) Calculated quantum efficiency of top, bottom and, total perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell using a hydrogen doped indium oxide front contact (b) calculated quantum efficiency and absorption of front contact of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell with hydrogen doped indium oxide and indium tin oxide front contacts. 
Replacing the ITO by the IOH leads to a gain of the short-circuit current density of 0.6 mA cm−2 due to the lower optical losses of IOH front contact, which is seen in Fig. 8(b). The theoretical limit of the short-circuit current density for an ideal tandem solar cell is 23 mA cm−2. The experimentally measured bottom solar cell has imposed an upper limit of the short-circuit current density of 21.4 mA cm−2 on the studied solar cell. Hence, the achieved short-circuit current density is very close to this limit.
A potential energy conversion efficiency of the perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell can be estimated by combining the calculated short-circuit current density with open circuit voltages and fill factors measured for single junction perovskite and silicon solar cells. The best experimentally realized perovskite single junction solar cells exhibit an open circuit voltage and fill factors of 1.105 V and 80.3%, while the best silicon solar cells exhibit an open circuit voltage and fill factor of 0.74 V and 85%.1 By considering a reduction of the open circuit voltage of the bottom solar cell due to the reduced short-circuit current an energy conversion efficiency of 31.4% can be estimated for a perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell. In order to reach higher energy conversion efficiency, the open circuit voltage of the perovskite top cell has to be further increased.
6. Summary
The manuscript aims at providing guidelines for the realization of perovskite/silicon solar cells with high energy conversion efficiency. Perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells have been designed with short-circuit current densities exceeding 20 mA cm−2 while taking realistic device structures into considering. A realistic set of input parameters was selected, which involves the material properties and geometry of the tandem solar cell. The high short-circuit current density allows for the realization of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells with conversion efficiencies exceeding 30%. To allow for a realistic description of the optical wave propagation a hybrid approach was used, which combines finite-difference time-domain simulations with experimentally measured data of the bottom solar cell. The perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell has to be textured to minimize reflection losses. Hence the perovskite top cell has to be prepared on top of the textured silicon bottom cell. This requires the use of materials and deposition techniques compatible with the fabrication on a textured substrate. In this study, ITO/NiO and IOH/NiO hole and ZnO electron transporting layers were used, which can be prepared by sputtering. Optimal dimensions of the surface texture were derived assuming that the top solar cell is prepared on an anisotropic etched silicon solar cell. For a period of the surface texture of approximately 500 nm or larger the short-circuit current is maximized. Furthermore, the textured silicon solar cell allows for an almost perfect incoupling of the longer wavelengths light in the bottom cell. In the next step, the contact layers were optimized by minimizing the free carrier absorption losses. The ITO/NiO front contact was replaced by an IOH/NiO layer which exhibits 5–10 times higher electron mobility. The higher charge carrier mobility allows for using a lower doping concentration while keeping the sheet resistance of the contact layer constant. The use of hydrogen doped indium oxide allows for the gain of the short-circuit current of 0.6 mA cm−2, resulting in a total short circuit current of 20.6 mA cm−2.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Asman Tamang (Jacobs University Bremen) for support in analyzing the optical properties of the metal oxide films and developing the Drude Lorentz model used for the modeling the metal oxide films.
References
M. A. Green, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi, J. Hohl-Ebinger and A. W. H. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2017, 25, 668–676 Search PubMed .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Green, Third generation photovoltaics: Advanced Solar Energy Conversion, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2003 Search PubMed .
S. P. Bremner, M. Y. Levy and C. B. Honsberg, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 225–233 Search PubMed .
M. Filipič, P. Löper, B. Niesen, S. De Wolf, J. Krč, C. Ballif and M. Topič, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A263–A278 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Rech and H. Wagner, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1999, 69, 155–167 CrossRef CAS .
E.-C. Cho, S. Park, X. Hao, D. Song, G. Conibeer, S.-C. Park and M. A. Green, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 245201 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Conibeer, I. Perez-Wurfl, X. Hao, D. Di and D. Lin, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 193 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Sun, W. Liu and J. Yaob, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15400–15410 RSC .
C. Zuo, H. J. Bolink, H. Han, J. Huang, D. Cahen and L. Ding, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500324 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Wolff, F. Zu, A. Paulke, L. P. Toro, N. Koch and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700159 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-S. Rao, B.-X. Chen, X.-D. Wang, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5163–5166 RSC .
M. van Eerden, M. Jaysankar, A. Hadipour, T. Merckx, J. J. Schermer, T. Aernouts, J. Poortmans and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700151 CrossRef .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding and C. Zuo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9063–9066 Search PubMed .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duong, Y. L. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs, E. C. Wang, T. C. Kho, K. C. Fong, M. Stocks, E. Franklin, A. Blakers, N. Zin, K. McIntosh, W. Li, Y. B. Cheng, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700228 CrossRef .
K. Masuko, M. Shigematsu, T. Hashiguchi, D. Fujishima, M. Kai, N. Yoshimura, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Ichihashi, T. Mishima, N. Matsubara, T. Yamanishi, T. Takahama, M. Taguchi, E. Maruyama and S. Okamoto, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 1433–1435 CrossRef .
P. Fan, D. Gu, G.-X. Liang, J.-T. Luo, J.-L. Chen, Z.-H. Heng and D.-P. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Leyden, L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, Y. Kato, S. Wang and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18742–18745 CAS .
M. Spina, E. Bonvin, A. Sienkiewicz, B. Náfrádi, L. Forró and E. Horváth, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, Z. Liu, Z. Zuo, M. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Y. Shen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Yang and M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2402–2408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Meng, X. Zhang, X. Tao, Z. Zhang, J. Hu, C. Wang, Y. Li and S. Yang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 802–806 RSC .
U. Kwon, B. G. Kim, D. C. Nguyen, J. H. Park, N. Y. Ha, S. J. Kim, S. H. Ko, S. Lee, D. Lee and H. J. Park, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Koida, H. Fujiwara and M. Kondo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 851–854 CrossRef CAS .
L. Barraud, Z. C. Holman, N. Badel, P. Reiss, A. Descoeudres, C. Battaglia, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 115, 151–156 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Steinhauser, Low pressure chemical vapor deposited zinc oxide for thin film silicon solar cells, Univ. Neuchatel,  2008 Search PubMed .
P. Löper,, M. Stuckelberger, B. Niesen, J. Werner, M. Filipic, S.-J. Moon, J.-H. Yum, M. Topic, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 66–71 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Shirayama, H. Kadowaki, T. Miyadera, T. Sugita, M. Tamakoshi, M. Kato, T. Fujiseki, D. Murata, S. Hara, T. N. Murakami, S. Fujimoto, M. Chikamatsu and H. Fujiwara, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2016, 5, 14012 CrossRef .
P. Drude, Ann. Phys., 1900, 306, 566–613 CrossRef .
P. Drude, Ann. Phys., 1900, 308, 369–402 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2017, 25, 3–13 Search PubMed .
R. Dewan, M. Marinkovic, R. Noriega, S. Phadke, A. Salleo and D. Knipp, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 23058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta00628h‡ M. I. H. and W. Q. contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic cross-section of the unit cell of an optically optimized perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Refractive index and (b) extinction coefficient of contact and transparent conductive layers of IOH, ITO, and ZnO.	 
QETop ≈ Aperovskite	(1)
QEBot ≈ TTop × QEc-Si	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) The schematic cross-section of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell with a flat front contact. (b) Corresponding external quantum efficiency for the top, bottom, and tandem solar cells. The NiO film is assumed to be very thin relative to the thickness of the ITO layers so that the layer is not considered by the optical calculations.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The schematic cross-section of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell with a pyramid textured front contact. Simulated power loss map of perovskite/silicon tandem solar for monochromatic illumination of (b) 400 nm, (c) 700 nm, (d) and 1000 nm. The NiO films are assumed to be very thin, so that the layer is not considered by the optical calculations.	 

 	Fig. 5  Influence of the period of the surface texture on the quantum efficiency of the (a) top and (b) bottom solar cell under current matching conditions.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Relationship between the period of surface texture and perovskite layer thickness of the top solar cell of a perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell under short-circuit current matching conditions. (b) Short-circuit current density as a function of the period of the surface texture.	 

 	Fig. 7  Cross-section of textured perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell and effective refractive index as a function of the height of the solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Calculated quantum efficiency of top, bottom and, total perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell using a hydrogen doped indium oxide front contact (b) calculated quantum efficiency and absorption of front contact of perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell with hydrogen doped indium oxide and indium tin oxide front contacts.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta00628h
‡ M. I. H. and W. Q. contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
