Recent progress on polyvinylidene difluoride-based nanocomposites: applications in energy harvesting and sensing  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ00002D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ00002D
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 18613-18646Recent progress on polyvinylidene difluoride-based nanocomposites: applications in energy harvesting and sensing

        
          
            Saloni 
            Sharma
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shashank Shekhar 
            Mishra
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Rajesh 
            Kumar
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Ram Manohar 
            Yadav
          
          
        
      *ae
aDepartment of Physics, VSSD College, Kanpur-208002, India. E-mail: rmanohar28@gmail.com
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur-208016, India
cDepartment of Physics, Jagran College of Arts, Science & Commerce, Kanpur-208014, India
dDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur-208016, India. E-mail: rajeshbhu1@gmail.com
eDepartment of Physics, University of Allahabad, Prayagraj-211002, India
Received 
      1st January 2022
    , Accepted 29th August 2022First published on 30th August 2022AbstractDiscovered in 2006, nanogenerators have attracted much attention as promising energy-harvesting devices. They harness energy utilizing piezoelectric, pyroelectric, and thermoelectric properties of nanomaterials to produce electricity and have the potential to be used in self-driven flexible devices. Due to their exceptional properties, poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVDF)-based nanocomposites are attracting remarkable interest for their use in piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs) with some other potential applications. Filler incorporation improves the piezoelectric and dielectric properties of PVDF nanocomposites and is being explored in the development of sensors, micro-electric-mechanical devices, electromechanical actuators, transducers, and energy harvesters. Due to the ease of arranging their dipoles, PVDF and various kinds of filler made composites with innumerable properties are being used to fabricate PENGs to solve real-world energy problems. The present review has been devoted to addressing and exploring the various aspects of PVDF and its copolymer/inorganic filler composites, with particular reference to piezoelectric and dielectric properties based on experimental findings, and the data/results are available in the literature. We hope that this PVDF-based specific review article offers a useful starting point for researchers entering this field, providing an overview of PVDF-based composite synthesis approaches, the effect of fillers on the dielectric and piezoelectric properties of composites, and their applications in energy harvesting and sensing.
Saloni Sharma
Saloni Sharma received her Master's degree in Physics from Chatrapati Sahu ji Maharaj University, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India in 2007. She is pursuing PhD program in Physics at Chatrapati Sahu ji Maharaj (CSJM) University, Kanpur. She is also working as a Senior Research Associate at Center for Nanotechnology, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India. Her research area includes polymer nanocomposites-based devices for various sensor applications.
Shashank Shekhar Mishra
Shashank Shekhar Mishra is Assistant Professor at Jagran College of Arts Science and Commerce, Kanpur, UP, India. He received his PhD in Physics from Banaras Hindu University Varanasi, India in 2018. Before joining the Jagran College of Arts Science and Commerce, he was National Postdoctoral Fellow at the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. His research is focused on the functional, magnetic, and hydrogen storage properties of metallic alloys (quasicrystals, Heusler alloys, high entropy alloys), polymer composites.
Rajesh Kumar
Dr Rajesh Kumar is recipient of Ramanujan fellowship award from Department of Science and Technology (DST), New Delhi, India to work in Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur, India. He did his BSc/MSc (Physics) from University of Allahabad. He earned his PhD (Physics-Nanoscience) from Department of Physics, Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Varanasi, India. He is recipient of the prestigious international JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science) fellowship (FY 2018–2020) to work in the Toyohashi University of Technology (TUT), Aichi, Japan. He has worked in the State University of Sao Paulo (UNESP) (Sao Paulo Research Foundation Fellowship: 2018), Presidente Prudente, and University of Campinas (UNICAMP) (CNPq postdoctoral fellow/visiting scientist: 2015–2017), Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil. He has also worked in Yonsei University (Brain Korea 21+ Research Professor: 2014), Seoul and Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) (Graphene Research Centre; Postdoctoral researcher: 2012–2014), Daejeon, South Korea. His main research interests are the synthesis, modifications, and assemblies of carbon nanomaterials with different dimensionalities (graphene derivatives, graphene-based materials, and CNTs) and inorganic layered materials for application in energy, electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding, sensors, etc. He has published over 95 international highly-ranked papers with more than 5200 citations and an H-index of 43.
Ram Manohar Yadav
Dr Ram Manohar Yadav is Professor in the Department of Physics, University of Allahabad, Prayagraj, India. He completed his MSc (Condensed Matter) in 1999 and PhD (Physics-Nanoscience) in 2008 under the supervision of Padma Shri Prof. O. N. Srivastava from Banaras Hindu University. During May–June 2013, he visited University of Santiago, Santiago, Chile as a visiting researcher in the Department of Physics, and his visit was funded by the project FONDICYT of Government of Chile. The Raman Fellowship for Postdoctoral Studies was awarded to him in July 2013 for one year duration to visit Rice University, Houston USA by UGC India under Indo-US 21st Century Knowledge Initiative. Fulbright Nehru Academic and Professional Excellence Fellowship was awarded to Dr Yadav in 2019, and he was at George R. Brown School of Engineering, Rice University Houston USA since Sept 2019 to June 2020 as a Fulbright visiting faculty. He has published more than 45 research papers in highly reputed international journals such as Nature Communications, Advanced Materials, ACS Nano, Nano Letters, and Materials Today. Presently, he is working on renewable energy applications of nanomaterials, specially carbon nanostructures (e.g., CNT, Graphene, and quantum dots), polymer composites, and mesoporous carbon nitride.
1. Introduction
Piezoelectric materials used to design piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs) show electrical potential when an external force is applied to it or vice versa, i.e., when these polymers are subjected to an electric field, a mechanical movement occurs.1–5 Therefore, their response to an applied field or force gives the potential to use them for communicating, responding, controlling, and sensing applications. In poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF)-based PENGs, mechanical perturbation results in the change in molecular dipoles, which induces piezoelectricity.6 As compared to other piezoelectric polymers, PVDF and its copolymers show incredible performance. The processed PVDF is semi-crystalline, having a β phase responsible for electroactive properties.7 It has a successive replica of –(CH2CF2)n– and shows good thermal stability, excellent aging resistance, good chemical resistance, and high mechanical strength. Besides, PVDF and its copolymers can be molded into the desired shape (flat sheet, tubular membranes, or hollow fiber) by many routes. Furthermore, the ferroelectric and pyroelectric properties make PVDF and its copolymers (homo-, co-, and ter-polymers) significant materials for applications in various fields.8–10 Zhu et al. explained the origin of negative piezoelectricity by molecular simulation in β-phase PVDF crystals.11 In PVDF, the dipoles are aligned due to spontaneous polarization and attribute better ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties. In addition, phase transition characteristics were also examined.12,13 These fluorine-based polymers possess the highest dielectric constant, electroactive response, low thermal conductivity,14 and high permittivity.15 Due to these properties, polymers are extensively used as ferroelectric devices,12,16 batteries,17,18 energy harvesters,10,19 energy conversion devices,20,21 tactile sensors,22 shock sensors,23 dust sensors,24 actuators,25 thermal and optical property measurement devices,26 and other many devices.27,28 With new scaffolds and polymer separators, these materials can also be used in tissue engineering for filtration membranes.29,30
For dipole aligning, mechanical or temperature stretching,31,32 ultrafast cooling, high pressure,33,34 and other methods35,36 have also been suggested. These approaches are used to increase the β-phases fraction in the PVDF. Similarly, employing a similar approach on copolymers, PVDF with trifluoroethylene (P(VDF–TeFE))37 and PVDF with hexafluoropropylene (HFP),38 the electroactive phase was obtained. Hence, they have also been tested and used in a growing number of applications. The β-phase fraction can also be enhanced by stretching the prepared film via a strong electric field of the order of several kV by electrospinning techniques at different temperatures (80–150 °C) along with varying stretching speeds (1 mm s−1, 50 mm s−1, 100 mm s−1, 200 mm s−1, 1000 mm s−1).39–41 It has been observed that the combination of both methods, as mentioned above, improves the phase fraction of β.42 Electrospinning is a similar approach where fiber mats were prepared by applying a strong electric field.43,44
Moreover, to enhance the β-phase fraction, the admixture of a variety of fillers is also being used. The integration of these nanostructure fillers with PVDF and in its copolymers gives rise to the resultant composite with enhanced electroactive properties. The inclusion of various types of fillers has been seen in recent years to increase the resilience between semiconducting and piezoelectric capabilities.45,46 Piezoelectric composites are self-powered and can be utilized to extract energy from the environment, such as chimneys, automobile exhaust, other sources, as well as from everyday activities (e.g., in running and other body moment/activity). In recent years, the requirement of wireless sensors and portable electronic gadgets has been significantly increased, which in turn upsurges to the necessity for the development of the energy harvesters, generators, and storage devices.20,47–49 It has been found that the human body and animal bones also show the piezoelectric effect; hence, it can be a good alternative for the bone material.50
Significant progress has been summarized for PVDF-based PENG in recent years toward improving the performance. Various types of fillers were utilized to modify and enhance the characteristics of PVDF and copolymers. These fillers enable PVDF and copolymer properties to be modified as needed for specific applications. We summarized the recent advancement in the piezoelectric and dielectric properties of PVDF and co-polymers-based composites, and reviewed the role of fillers on these properties and their reported PENGs and sensing applications. Among several types of fillers, the main novel fillers as carbon-based, ceramic-based, composite/hybrid, and other fillers, were discussed in the proceeding sections in light of the available literature and recent experimental findings. Fig. 1 shows the schematic representation of different types of fillers as used for incorporation in PVDF and its co-polymers to improve the performance of PVDF-based PENGs for energy harvesting.
 Fig. 1  Schematic presentation of PVDF-based PENGs with various fabrication methods, fillers, properties, and relevant applications. 
2. Piezoelectricity
In 1880, Pierre and Jacques Curie discovered piezoelectricity.51 The piezoelectric materials show a reversible and linear relationship between the induced current and applied stress. The word “piezoelectricity” comes from the Greek words piezein and ēlektron, which means press or squeeze and amber (fossilized tree resin, an old source of electric charge). The piezoelectric effect is a linear effect, which is generated only in non-centrosymmetric materials. A non-centrosymmetric material that has no center of symmetry is essential to arrange dipole directions in piezoelectric materials. The piezoelectric coupling equations for direct and converse piezoelectric effect are used to describe the piezoelectric effect and are designated as.52 Di = diJσJ + ε0εσijEi(1) δI = SEIJσJ + dIiEi(2)where Di is electrical displacement, d is piezoelectric constant, σ is Stress, εo is Material's electric permittivity in free space, Ei is electric field, δ is strain, SE is mechanical compliance, εσ is dielectric constant (electric relative permittivity), i & j indices from 1–6, and I & J indices from 1–3.
The ordering of ionic charges within the crystal structure of a dielectric material leads to piezoelectricity. The piezoelectric strain coefficient “diJ” is a (3 × 6) tensor that quantifies the change in the electric polarization (generated in direction “i” in the material) when per unit mechanical stress (of index J) is applied to it. Usually, there exist three or four piezoelectric constants for any piezoelectric material. The most common elements are d31 and d33, which present the direction of electric polarization, which are perpendicular and parallel to the applied stress, respectively (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Representation of (a) the d33 mode presents the direction of electric polarization parallel to stress and (b) the d31 mode d33 presents the direction of electric polarization perpendicular to stress. 
Also, ε′ is called dielectric constant or relative permittivity. When an electric field is applied to a material, the potential energy stored in a specific volume acts as induced polarization. The measure of such potential energy is called the dielectric constant. It is nothing but the ratio of the permittivity of the material in medium ε′ to the permittivity ε in vacuum or air. Piezoelectric voltage constant g and inverse piezoelectric constant h are also interrelated and can explain the piezoelectric properties. However, to get deep understanding, this review is restricted to piezoelectric constant d33 and dielectric constant ε′ only. Dielectric tangential loss angle tanδ is also taken into consideration. Dielectric loss or dissipation factor is the amount of energy loss during the reversal of electric polarization.
3. Piezoelectricity in polyvinylidene difluoride
Due to good mechanical strength, excellent piezo, pyro, ferroelectric properties, chemical resistance, and ability to withstand higher temperatures, PVDF and its copolymers have gained much interest among researchers. Tao et al. reported five crystalline phases, namely, the α, β, γ, δ, and ε phase(s) in PVDF, but generally, α, β, and γ phases were observed in PVDF.53 On the other hand, the α-phase is the non-polar phase present in PVDF, and the β and ϒ phases are the polar phases responsible for most polymer crystallinity.53 However, the ϒ phase shows weaker electroactive behavior due to the presence of the gauche bond (T3GT3G′) (Fig. 3) simultaneously due to the trans-planar zigzag structure (TTTT), the β-phase has the most considerable spontaneous polarization per unit cell to that of the other crystalline phases. With 8 × 10−30 C m dipole moment, the β phase of PVDF offers a highly ordered crystalline lamellae.45,54 Due to the electrically active behavior of PVDF and its copolymers, they are gaining high attention6,7,11 in industries for various advanced applications as sensing materials,55 hydrophobic filter membrane,56 separator in Li-ion batteries, and aircraft insulation coatings. According to Salimi et al. and Mistral et al., strong electrical dipole arises due to the higher value of electronegativity of fluorine atoms than that possessed by the hydrogen and carbon atoms.57,58
 Fig. 3  Different phases (α, β, and ϒ) of the PVDF polymer.59 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2014), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
The dielectric response of any polymer is originated due to the five polarization states initiated by electrons, atoms, ions, dipoles, and space charge or interface.60,61 All these polarizations occur at different frequency ranges and display a range of dielectric constant and loss, as shown in Fig. 4. As the frequency goes from the optical range to the radiowave region, the dielectric constant increases at the cost of dielectric loss, which also increases. A response induced by a positive nucleus and negative electrons within an atom is due to the opposite displacements generated by electronic polarization. Ionic polarization occurs due to ion displacements (positive and negative). The orientation of –CF2–CH2– dipoles or other asymmetric functional groups is responsible for dipolar polarization. However, after adding fillers, interfacial polarization becomes active, and the dielectric constant started responding just before the percolation threshold of fillers. Interfacial polarization occurs at a relaxation regime, as shown in Fig. 4. Apart from the interfacial properties of polymer and fillers, polarization in polymer nanocomposites also depends on polymer phase transitions and the nature of dipoles present in the polymer. Curing temperature also affects the electroactive properties of composites. Cured composites at various temperatures show variation in crystallinity due to the change in the porosity, and consequently, it affects the dipole density in the prepared films. Usually, low porosity leads to high dipole density that results in high dielectric constants.62
 Fig. 4  Polymer polarization: Pint: interfacial, Pion: ionic, Pdip: dipolar, Pvib: vibrational, electronic polarization.60 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2014), American Chemical Society, All rights reserved. 
Among the various kind of polarizations, dielectric polarization is primarily responsible for enhancing the β phase without adding any filler to the polymer. However, other polarization also contributed to β phase formation. As discussed in the previous section, the novel ferroelectric, piezoelectric, and pyroelectric properties are caused mainly by the β-phase in the material. Therefore, several methods, such as melting under specified conditions, mechanical stretching of α phase, ultrafast cooling, application of external electric field, and fillers incorporation were used to increase the β-phase fraction in PVDF and its copolymers, and hence the electroactive properties. In mechanical stretching/drawing, stress was applied to the film at a particular temperature. The stress in any direction of the film leads to the alignment of the polymer chains to (TTTT) all-trans conformation. Polymer chain orientation places dipoles normal to the applied stress, hence changing the crystallinity of the polymer.31 The additional poling of the samples at various temperatures also improves β-phase transformation.32
Matsushige et al. proposed that the high pressure (>4000 kg cm−2) quenching from the melt also promoted the increase in the β-phase fraction.34 Film formation techniques such as solvent casting, spin coating, electrospinning, and Langmuir–Blodgett solution depositions are suitable for the growth of the β-phase. Utilizing the spin coating technique, very thin (few nanometers thick) films can be prepared at room temperature. The enhanced β-phase can further be developed into a more considerable extent by post-heating treatment at several temperatures.22,63 In the electrospinning technique, the polymer–solvent mixture is exposed by the high electric field and fiber formed by stretching. These fibers were accumulated at the rotator collector. According to Ribeiro et al., the parameters such as flow rate, applied voltage, and diameter of needle influences the crystallinity and β-phase content of the fiber membrane.36 The fraction of the electroactive phase improves by decreasing the diameter of the needle and/or increasing the rotation speed.36 The ultrathin films of the PVDF polymer can be synthesized by the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) deposition method. In the LB process, the grown film's molecular chains were aligned parallelly, and the dipoles become perpendicular to the substrate.35,64
Due to the structural deformation of the polymers, the abovementioned methods were not sufficient to utilize the piezo properties for specific application such as non-volatile memories, flexible devices, transducers, and electro-optical sensors.65,66 The integration of the fillers with the PVDF and copolymers significantly improves the electroactive phases and provides potential to use them in numerous applications. Piezoelectric investigations were carried out employing piezoelectric force microscopy, piezometer, coaxial probe, LCR meter, etc. Piezoelectric force microscopy is an application mode of atomic force microscopy. When a conductive probe passes through the piezoelectric material surface, applied AC voltage introduces the electromechanical response in the material. Depending on the orientation of the surface domains, piezoresponse show a phase variation in the scanned image. For quantitative analysis, piezoelectric force microscopy can be utilized by phase/amplitude vs. voltage curve.67 A piezometer is an instrument that directly measures the capacitance, d33, and dielectric loss of the thin films. Clamped films are subjected to force/pressure. It generates charge per unit force in the direction of polarization.67 Coaxial probes also work on a similar principle. Characterizations are done with coaxial dielectric probes at various microwave frequency range.67 The LCR meter gives direct piezoelectric measurements by applying voltage to the material.
Kaura et al. synthesized 50 and 100 μm thick PVDF films and observed that at an elevated temperature, the stretching and corona poling significantly improves the piezo (d31) and pyroelectric constants. Poling in the optimum condition shows a value of d31 ∼ 60 pC N−1 and the value of pyroelectric constant at 30 °C and ∼6 nC cm−2 K−1.42 Roh et al. investigated the piezoelectric, dielectric, and elastic properties of uniaxially oriented poled PVDF over a wide frequency range. They reported the value of piezoelectric constant in the range of −0.46 to 0.05 and a dielectric constant of 7.8 at 200 °C.68 In the same sequence, Gomes et al. probed into the piezoelectric response of PVDF synthesized by drawing and stretching, and observed that the stretching ratio and temperature play a crucial role in the β-phase formation. At a temperature of 80 °C and the stretching ratio of 5, the maximum estimated value of d33 was 34 pC N−1 (Fig. 5).69
 Fig. 5  Piezoelectric constant and β phase content F(β)% with respect to the stretching ratio R at 80 °C.69 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 69. Copyright (2010), Institute of Physics, All rights reserved. 
Several researchers have paid tremendous attention to sensing, memory, and electronics-related applications, and fulfilling these requirements, the nanoscale patterning of the ferroelectric or piezoelectric polymers (PVDF with trifluoroethylene (P(VDF–TrFE)) has become very important. Such nanoscale process leads to material behavior that completely differs from the bulk counterpart due to the confinement effect. The solution-cast film of P(VDF–TrFE) was melt wetted into an anodized aluminum oxide membrane with a various pore size (15 nm, 40 nm, and 200 nm), and the piezoelectric constant shown by the film was −38 pC N−1.70
The bulk film reveals better performance compared to the thin film of the identical composition, as grown by the LB method.71,72 Generally, the films synthesized by the LB technique possess high crystallinity due to the arrangement of dipoles perpendicular to the plane. A piezoelectric constant of −20 pm V−1 and dielectric constant of 8 has been reported for P(VDF/TrFE) films.71 In order to produce flexible force sensors, PVDF electrospun nanofibers (NFs) were prepared. The sensor fabricated by these NFs exhibits excellent sensitivity of 42 mV N−1.73 It has been found that the copolymer P(VDF–TrFE) film developed by the spin-coating method shows the enhanced piezoelectric constant of 72.2 pC N−1,74 which was higher than the previously reported values. Gaur et al. reported that at elevated temperature, the β-phase content increases by the uniaxial stretching of the sample with the rectangular shape and used this material for the fabrication of energy harvesting device. After poling at an electric field of 10 kV cm−1, the sample with a high β-phase fraction gives a high value of the piezoelectric coefficient −30 pC N−1.75 Whang et al. investigated the phase transformations and morphologies of poly(vinylidene fluoride–hexafluoropropylene) [P(VDF–HFP)] copolymer in different processing conditions. They have prepared a thin film of P(VDF–HFP) by the solution casting method, followed by melt-pressing and quenching, and then uniaxially stretched the films at 90 °C. The piezoelectric coefficient (d33) for the melt-quenched sample was found to be less (12 pC N−1) than that estimated from the melt-quenched and stretched sample (18 pC N−1).76
Composite materials with 10 wt% of P(VDF–HFP) display high performance piezoelectric response under quasi-static conditions.77 The same copolymer reveals unusual behavior, i.e., higher value of d31 coefficient than the d33 coefficient due to a reversible transformation between the poled α-like and β-like structures. Also, the dielectric constant was found to increase to 16 after poling.77 Lu et al. studied the same material [P(VDF–HFP)] with varying concentrations (5% and 15%) of HFP. They found that the 5% P(VDF–HFP) copolymer shows the highest strain response (>4%) and dielectric constant 13.6.78 Jayasurya et al. synthesized P(VDF–HFP) films via three different routes (solvent casting, melt-pressed quenched, and melt-pressed slow cooling), in two different concentrations (85/15 and 95/5 mol% P(VDF–HFP)). It has been found that the molar content of HFP and method of synthesis significantly affect the ferroelectric properties. A very high electrostrictive strain response and a low crystallinity were found in the ice-water quenched samples. In addition, the 15% HFP molar content ice-water quenched samples gives the largest piezoelectric constant of 2.30 pC N−1 and dielectric constant 13.3.79 The electrostrictive behavior of poly(vinylidene-fluoride–chlorotrifluoroethylene) [P(VDF–CTFE)] copolymers have been also investigated and found that CT-12% at ambient temperature gives a better electrostatic response (>5%) and piezoelectric constant (d33) of 140 pC N−1.80
4. Fillers for piezoelectric composites
The interfacial properties between the polymer matrix and nanofillers play an essential role. The various properties of the fillers help in the surface modifications of the polymer, and hence the properties of the polymer nanocomposites. The nanofillers are primarily categorized into two groups, namely, organic81 and inorganic.82 The organic fillers consist of natural findings such as the wood of different species and plant residues. Metallic nanoparticles, ceramic particles, metal oxides, carbon fillers, and nanoclay fall in the inorganic fillers category. The composition and chemical nature of these fillers cause unprecedented changes in the properties of the composites. To fall into the category of nanofillers, it is a prerequisite that the geometrical size in at least any one dimension should be less than 100 nm. As the nanofillers have size-dependent physical properties and large interfacial area, thus, the integration with polymers improves the various properties such as mechanical, thermal, optical, dielectric, electric, and magnetic. Based on their conductive nature, the fillers can be further classified into two groups—conductive and non-conductive fillers. These conductive and non-conductive fillers could be carbon-based, ceramic-based, hybrid, or any other filler. The next section deals with the discussion of the effect on polymer nanocomposites based on their geometry and conductive nature.
Our main focus is to describe new kinds of different fillers that are frequently used to improve the performance of PENGs as carbon-based fillers, ceramic-based fillers, hybrid fillers, and other fillers. Carbon-based fillers83 mainly comprise carbon nanotubes (CNT),84 graphene oxide (GO),85 reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/functionalized rGO,86 carbon dots,87 carbon nitride (C3N4),88 and carbon black.89 Introducing them in a polymer matrix in a minimal amount yields a very remarkable change in their functional properties.90,91 Another factor that influences the functional response is the aspect ratio of these carbon-based fillers.92 Ceramic-based fillers are sodium potassium niobate (KNN),93 BaTiO3 (BT),94 and lead zirconate-titanate (PZT).95 These fillers are nonmetallic solid material.
4.1. Carbon nanotubes- and graphene derivatives-based conducting fillers
The best example of the one-dimensional carbon-based filler is CNTs, which contains very high mechanical strength as well as good conductivity. Adding up the CNTs as fillers with the polymer matrix leads to a remarkable improvement in the piezo and dielectric constants.96,97 Andrews et al. reported that in the case of one-dimensional fillers, the aspect ratio plays a crucial role as it helps in obtaining high electrochemical coupling.98 The graphene, GO, and rGO are idealized examples of the two-dimensional fillers. Microcapacitors are formed when the conductive filler is reinforced with polymers. It also leads to enhance the piezoelectric and dielectric properties. In addition, it also helps in stabilizing the β-phase. Due to its unique properties (higher electrical, thermal, and mechanical properties) and a very high surface area, graphene attracted the science community's attention in a tremendous amount. It consists of a single atomic sheet of conjugated sp2 carbon atoms. It also has a wide-open double-sided surface that can endure several organic reactions. These conjugated systems on graphene sheets are 100–1000 times higher than any other organic molecule, making them available to functionalizing. The one dimensional structure of graphene facilitates its functionalizing on either side.99 For the activation of the vibration modes, the conversion of sp2 to sp3 and the non-covalent modification of graphene can easily be achieved.100 Instead of an atomically-thin film of graphene, it exhibits a very high electronic transport behavior at a sub-micrometer distance.101 According to Loh et al., the conjugate tracks (zig-zag or armchair) found on the graphene plane are considered to be responsible for exhibiting a specific class of reactions.99 Geometrically, strained regions in the graphene lattice are responsible for initial reactivity because of the displacement of electron density above the plane of the ring.102 These unusual properties of graphene are utilized when it is reinforced as a filler with the polymer matrices. Generally, it is observed that the α-phase is the primary phase in PVDF, and when the graphene is incorporated with it, the graphene works as a nucleating agent and helps in the formation of the β-phase. The addition of conductive fillers increases the magnitude of piezoelectric and dielectric constant, reducing the drive voltage while maintaining high electromechanical conversion coefficients when used as a pressure sensor. Over a certain period, it becomes challenging to disperse graphene because the presence of strong van der Waals’ interactions cause the re-agglomeration of the graphene sheets. To increase the fraction of the β-phase content, the filling agent (graphene) must be uniformly dispersed in the PVDF composites. It has been found that the functionalization of graphene supports the dispersion in the composite matrix. GO and rGO are the derivatives of graphene. Graphene shows excellent electrical conductivity, while due to oxygen bond, GO shows very high dispersion in polymer composites.84
The three-dimensional or spherical fillers possessed a higher surface area. Due to the higher contact area of the fillers to the polymer surface, the properties of the composite improved. The shape of fillers influences the composite properties due to the interfacial area between the fillers and polymers. The area at the interfacial region also defined the various properties. With larger particle size, this region is relatively smaller than that in smaller particles. Therefore, the availability of more significant volume fractions at the interfaces reactivity between the polymer and nanofillers increases.
4.2. Non-conducting fillers
The size and shape effects of the non-conducting fillers (ceramic/clay materials) with PVDF and its copolymers were investigated by several research groups.103,104 The ceramic/clay materials have high charge accumulation and band gap, which allow them to be used as fillers with a polymer to tune into desired properties. Hence, they become attractive for electroactive devices. Mao et al. synthesized composites consist of BT nanocrystallites (particle size: 25–500 nm) as fillers and PVDF as a polymer matrix. They observed that as the particle size increases, the remnant polarization also increases. A complex variation in the dielectric constant was observed.103 Very similar results were reported by Dang et al.105 Utilizing high-energy ball-milling, BaSnF4 nanowires were synthesized. BaSnF4 nanowires possess the cubic-fluorite-type structure and a high aspect ratio that makes them suitable for establishing contact with the surface of the polymer matrix. It has been observed that in comparison to the aggregated nanoparticles, the BaSnF4 nanowires at 30 vol% exhibit two to three times enhanced dielectric constant and AC conductivity.103 With this observation, it can be stated that the particle size distribution plays a vital role in the modification of the piezo and dielectric properties of the composites. The properties of the composites can be significantly improved by the homogeneous distribution of the filler in the matrix of the polymer composite. One of the most widely used methods is ultrasonication.
Polymer ceramic composites are heterostructured materials. Their relatively high dielectric permittivity, polymer flexibility, levity, cheap processing facility, and breakdown strength make them ideal for the fabrication of composites with high capacitance, high storage energy, along with high piezoelectric constant.106 Even though they show very good electroactive behavior, the brittleness and poor shape ability of ceramic-based fillers restrict their use in different applications, particularly in multiphasic and wearable devices. Because of the synergistic effect, the hybrid fillers also have attracted great attention. Due to the cumulative effect of two or more fillers, electroactive properties of composites enhanced manifold.107,108 The inclusion of a polymer filler and carbon or ceramic-based fillers to the piezo polymer leads to crystal structure twisting, making the composites more suitable to get the β phase. PMMA has been widely used with ceramic109 or carbon-based fillers110 to get the maximum electroactive phase. Metal nanoparticles (e.g., Cu and Co),111,112 metal oxides such as zinc oxide (ZnO),113 titanium dioxide (TiO2),114 ferrites, and iron oxide (Fe3O4)115 are discussed as other fillers. SEP or sepiolite (Mg4Si6O15(OH)2·6H2O),116 micro-CaCO3 + montmorillonite (MMT),45 and organically-modified silicate-like organosilicate (OS),117 are a few of other fillers, which are also being used due to the ease of processing and low cost. Cao et al. investigated the effect of the integration of TiO2 nanofillers of various particle sizes (26–30 nm) with the PVDF membrane.118 The as-prepared composites with smaller-sized nanoparticles shows an enhanced antifouling property. In another investigation, the PbTiO3 fillers with a range of 5–125 μm were incorporated with the polymer.119 It exhibits that the piezoelectric coefficient and dielectric constant rises proportionally with an increase in the particle size. These all possess low density, thermal/electrical conductivity, and remarkably high stiffness.
5. Piezoelectric constant of polyvinylidene difluoride and its copolymer nanocomposites
5.1. Carbon-based fillers
Several carbon-based fillers are used to tailor the material for the functional application.83 The PVDF/PFOES–rGO composite films were synthesized using a solution-casting method with various PFOES–rGO loadings.120 From Fig. 6, it can be observed that the dispersion of PFOES–rGO having fluorine ended-groups was much better than the dispersion of pristine graphene in the composite. Therefore, PFOES–rGO works as an agent that helps in the evolution of nearly all the β-phase. It is noticeable that the magnitude of the piezoelectric and dielectric constants of the PVDF/PFOES–rGO nanocomposite films (at 0.3 wt% PFOES–rGO) is enhanced in a large amount (370%) in comparison to the bare PVDF polymer. The piezoelectric coefficient (d33) of the 0.3 wt% PFOES–rGO composite was found to be nearly two times (39.8 pC N−1) than that obtained by neat PVDF (22 pC N−1).
 Fig. 6  SEM images of the fracture surface of (a) PVDF/rGO (red arrows pointed toward aggregated rGO) and (b) PVDF/PFOES–rGO (red arrows pointed toward dispersed PFOES–rGO).120 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2016), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
For the synthesis of the rGO polymer composite films, Huang et al. developed a two-step process. Initially, drop-wise GO suspension was mixed with the PVDF solution. This PVDF/GO composite was then immersed into hydrobromic acid (reducing agent) to get the PVDF/rGO composite. The PVDF/rGO films were prepared using the solution-casting method. The advantage of the present process is that it does not need any modification of GO and is a simple way to scale up the fabrication of PVDF/rGO composites. The piezoelectric coefficient d33 improves remarkably to 39.3 pC N−1, comparable to that of the PVDF/CNTs composites.84 Compared to PVDF, the P(VDF–TrFE) composite shows a different β-phase because P(VDF–TrFE) changes its phase by the addition of TrFE. The crystal structure and phase transition behavior are highly affected by the ratio of PVDF and TrFE in composite and synthesis conditions.121 The copolymer contains a highly crystalline structure as compared to PVDF. P(VDF–TrFE) achieved the β crystalline phase by heating between the Curie transition temperature and melting temperature.122–124 In the P(VDF–TrFE) composite, the difference in the electronegativity of fluorine and hydrogen atoms supports the arrangement of these atoms in a highly polarized structure. Habibur et al. synthesized various P(VDF–TrFE)/rGO composites by varying the rGO concentration (0–0.2 wt%) in the P(VDF–TrFE) matrix. They reported that the P(VDF–TrFE)/rGO composite exhibits the better value of the piezoelectric constant (−23 pC N−1) than the pristine P(VDF–TrFE) (−14 pC N−1).125
Liu et al. proposed a method for synthesizing core–shell-structured PVDF/GO NFs by the electrospinning technique where the PVDF NFs was chemically wrapped with the GO lamellae. In fiber formation, the nanocrystals of the β-phase grow uniaxially self-oriented due to the chemical interactions, high voltage alignment, and mechanical stretching. In addition to GO by 1.0 wt%, the PVDF/GO NFs give a high value of piezoelectric constant d33 of −93.75 pm V−1, which is more than 400 times that observed in conventional pure PVDF NFs.126 CNTs possess several unique properties, and when it is integrated with a polymer, it becomes ideal for many applications such as electrochemical sensing and gas sensing. Kim et al. reported that the physical properties of the PVDF can be modified by changing the microstructure of the polymer. They incorporated multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs) with PVDF and found that the fraction of the β-phase increases up to the addition of a certain amount (0.2%) of MWCNTs, and if more MWCNTs were integrated, an induced depolarization happen that leads to the decrease in the β-phase content. The drawn and poled 0.2% PVDF/MWCNT composite shows the maximum piezoelectric constant of 23 pC N−1.127 Khalifa et al. fabricated flexible nanogenerators by electrospinning. PVDF and C3N4 were mixed and electrospun with various concentrations of C3N4 in the range from 1.25 to 2%. The piezoelectric performance was found to be the best at 0.75% with the highest d33 value of 5.5 pC N−1.88
5.2. Ceramic-based fillers
Jia et al. synthesized the PVDF, P(VDF–TrFE) films by the solvent casting method and studied the crystallization and the piezoelectric response. An increase in the P(VDF–TrFE)(PT) content leads to higher crystallization activation energy (ΔE). However, due to the hindrance of fluorine atoms, the films demonstrate a significant decrease in the piezoelectric constant d33 after a certain limit of PT wt% incorporation. The piezoelectric characteristics were investigated by AFM in the piezoresponse force microscopy mode. The morphological changes were observed with atomic force microscopy (AFM), and the magnitude-voltage butterfly curve are presented in Fig. 7. At 50 wt% PT, the highest d33 value was achieved to be 51.2 ± 5.0 pm V−1. The d33 value was calculated by the following formula.128 (3)
 Fig. 7  AFM microstructures and corresponding 3D microstructures of PVDF with P(VDF–TrFE) ratio of 1:0 (a), 9:1 (b), 1:1 (c), 1:9 (d), and 0:1 (e) samples. Piezoresponce force microscopy mode magnitude-voltage butterfly curve (f) and magnitude vs. displacement curve (g) of PVDF.128 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 128. Copyright (2017), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
One of the most widely investigated piezoelectric ceramic materials is lead zirconate titanate (Pb[ZrxTi1−x]O3). It is also known as PZT and can be used as a filler. PZT has a perovskite crystal structure. In each unit cell, the tetravalent metal ions occupy the lattice of the divalent metal ions. The PZTs have an antiferroelectric property that leads greater storage density.129 Due to the toxic nature of Pb, it cannot be used in wearable and other biotechnical devices. However, excellent piezoelectric properties were observed in La-doped PZT. This composite shows a very high piezoelectric constant d33 (372 pC N−1).129 The exceptional properties of PVDF–PZT-based transducers make them ideal for high-energy storage capacitors, acoustic emission detection, biomedical imaging ultrasound, hydrophones, and pressure sensors. Jain et al. also examined the as-purchased PVDF and PZT composites. They further checked the piezoelectric properties at various concentrations of PZT. It was seen that the prepared films were extremely sensitive during “Auto-Sensor Testing” due to the enhanced crystallized phase. The highest vol% recorded for the d33 value was 40 pC N−1.130 Dietze et al. reported that the integration of the PZT nanostructure within the P(VDF–TrFE)–PZT composites significantly increased the dielectric properties, as shown in Fig. 8a. It has been noticed that the addition of PZT up to a certain amount leads to an enhanced d33 value, further increasing the PZT content, and the amplitude of d33 decreases. The maximum value of d33 ∼ 10 pm V−1 was found at 30% PZT content.131
 Fig. 8  (a) d33vs. P(VDF–TrFE)/PZT composite curve,131 (b) piezoelectric constant d33 of the composite at various concentrations in the range of 0.948 KNN–0.052 LS in air and de-ionized water.132 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 132. Copyright (2014), Springer. All rights reserved. 
It has been reported that the Terfenol-D (Tb–Dy–Fe) alloys, Terfenol-D/PZT, Terfenol-D/PVDF, and copolymers Terfenol-D/[P(VDF–TrFE)] composites reveal excellent magnetoelectric sensitivity.133–135 Therefore, these magnetoelectric sensitive materials are suitable for microwave electronics, radio-electronics, optoelectronics, magnetic–electric sensors, and transducer applications. The dispersion of Terfenol-D particles into the PZT/PVDF matrix significantly improves the dielectric and piezoelectric properties. With the addition of Terfenol-D up to 0.07 volume fraction, a minimal change in the dielectric and piezoelectric properties was observed, and on further increasing the Terfenol-D content, the magnetoelectric and piezoelectric responses drop sharply. At 0.07 volume fraction, the values of dielectric and piezoelectric constants were e33 ≈ 200, d33 ≈ 62 pC N−1. A dramatic variation was found in the composites having a Terfenol-D fraction greater than 0.07. Further, with the more incorporation of Terfenol-D, the piezoelectric properties vanished because of the formation of the percolation path for Terfenol-D particles through the composites.135 Ploss et al. investigated the effect of controlled poling of the PZT/P(VDF–TrFE) composites on the pyroelectric and piezoelectric properties. They found that for piezoelectric coefficients, both the components possess the opposite sign, whereas it is not valid for pyroelectric coefficients. It has been observed that the integration of 60% (by volume) PZT in the P(VDF–TrFE) matrix give rise to a maximum d33 value of 30 pC N−1.136
The alkaline niobate K0.5Na0.5NbO3 (KNN), is a ferroelectric compound. It has an orthorhombic perovskite structure and favorable electromechanical properties (kp = 0.36, d33 = 80 pC N−1).137 It was widely investigated as a filler in place of lead-based piezoelectric materials. Utilizing the hot-pressing technique, the KNN/PVDF composites in nanometer and micron scales were synthesized, where KNN was used as a filler in various volume fractions with the PVDF polymer. The evolution of the polar β-phase of PVDF takes place by the incorporation of KNN as a filler at 10 vol%. A significant difference in the dielectric coefficients was observed for the nano and microscaled 40% KNN/PVDF composites. The nanocomposite (40% KNN/PVDF) exhibits more than 13 times enhanced dielectric coefficient (εr = 3273 at 100 Hz) than the microcomposite (εr = 236 at 100 Hz). This huge difference between the dielectric properties of nano and microcomposites arises due to the increase in the ion–dipole interaction and dipole–dipole interactions between the KNN and β-PVDF nanocrystallites. Opposite behavior was revealed for the piezoelectric constant of 70% KNN/PVDF composites, i.e., the microcrystallites have a d33 value (35 pC N−1), while the nanocrystal composites did not show piezoresponse.138
Similarly, several other polymer composites consisting of KNN as a filler were also found to reveal interesting dielectric and piezoelectric properties.132,139 The piezoelectric properties observed in the lead free composites with different volumes of 0.948 KNN–0.052LS/PVDF-based piezoelectric composite (90/10, 80/20, & 70/30) along with 0.95KNN–0.05LS, KNLN [0.942(K0.480Na0.535)NbO3–0.058LiNbO3], and KNN [(K0.48Na0.52)NbO3]. They were added and explained by an interfacial percolation model. The piezoelectric properties 0.948KNN–0.052LS/PVDF (90/10) was investigated in two different mediums (in air and deionized water) and observed that d33 was remarkably higher (107 pC N−1) after the composite sample was immersed in deionized water in comparison to that observed in air (70 pC N−1) (Fig. 8b).132
Seol et al. prepared modified sodium-potassium niobate [(K0.44Na0.52Li0.04) (Nb0.86Ta0.10Sb0.04)O3]/PVDF composites with different concentrations of the lead-free filler [(K0.44Na0.52Li0.04) (Nb0.86Ta0.10Sb0.04)O3. With an increase in the fraction of sodium potassium niobate, the dielectric and piezoelectric response increases. They have reported the piezoelectric constant d33 = 35 pC N−1 for the PVDF + 80% (K0.44Na0.52Li0.04) (Nb0.86Ta0.10Sb0.04)O3 composite. SEM was employed for the morphological analysis of the composite to observe the distribution of the fillers at various concentrations (Fig. 9).139 ZnO nanoparticles were added with the (K0.475Na0.495Li0.03) NbO3–0.003ZrO2 (KNNL-Z) and PVDF in various volume fractions. The piezoelectric coefficient d33 for the 10 wt% ZnO2-integrated KNNL-Z/PVDF/ZnO2 composite was found to be 55 pC N−1, which was 1.5 times greater than observed in the KNNL-Z/PVDF composite.140 It indicates that ZnO plays a crucial role in enhancing the electroactive properties of the composites due to the lattice distortion induced by Zn2+.
 Fig. 9  (a–d) SEM micrographs of KNNLST–PVDF composites.139 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 139. Copyright (2012), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
Zhang et al. synthesized an NKN-based piezoelectric material (NKNS-LT-BZ) with a solid-state reaction method and incorporated it into PVDF. The prepared films were fully rollable and possessed significant change in the piezoelectric constant at d33 = 53 pm V−1. Due to flexibility and biocompatibility, it becomes an ideal solution for low frequency human movement such as typing, walking, or elbow/knee joint movement.141 The lead titanate (PT) 5–30% (of volume fraction) was embedded with P(VDF–TrFE). In order to get the polarized β-phase, the composite was poled at 120 °C. The composite having 30% PT, after poling for 5 minutes, reveals that the pyroelectric constant reaches 90% of its maximum value.142 Venkatragavaraj et al. prepared PZT/PVDF composites via two different routes (solvent casting and hot-pressed method), in which the wt% of PZT was used as the filler. They investigated the changes in the piezoelectric coefficient with the variation of the volume fraction of the PZT. The maximum value of the piezoelectric constant was achieved (13.8 pC N−1) in the sample having 50% of filler and 50% PVDF. The stretching direction and morphological changes are well observed in SEM (Fig. 10).143
 Fig. 10  The SEM images of the PVDF/PZT composite film at various PZT concentrations.143 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2001), Institute of Physics, All rights reserved. 
5.3. Hybrid fillers
Sharma et al. employed two methods to explore the structural and piezoelectric properties of PVDF and its composites. It has been observed that the transformation of α-phase to electroactive β-phase was strongly dependent on the processing method. The d33 for bare PVDF was found to be 33 pm V−1. To further enhance the piezoelectric response, two different fillers, MWCNTs and Ag-decorated CNTs, were incorporated with PVDF. A better piezoelectric response was shown by the Ag–CNTs-decorated PVDF electrospun fibers (54 pm V−1), whereas the d33 for PVDF/CNT fiber was 35 pm V−1.107
Yang et al. used different three-dimensional nanofiber (3D-NF) (graphene, CNTs, and MnO2) to prepare the composites with PVDF. All these fillers were found to be compatible with PVDF due to their high specific area (80–100 m2 g−1) and better surface interaction with PVDF, thus eliminating the step of surface modification. Fillers were mixed with PVDF, and electrospinning was done at 18 kV. After hot pressing, several layers were stacked together with compression. The fabricated generator generates a d33 of 52 pC N−1 compared to bare PVDF-based generators that give 28 pC N−1.144 Patil et al. prepared PVDF/BT/polyaniline (PANI) composite films with varying concentrations of BT and found that the poled films showed higher piezosensitivity compared with other films. Piezosensitivity has been measured in terms of piezoelectric constant, which was 50 pC N−1 at 40% BT.108 The combination of different dimensional fillers such as TiO3/rGO/SrTiO3 with PVDF–HFP was also studied.145 The composite having 1% TiO2 nanotubes grown rGO and 2% SrTiO3 in PVDF–HFP showed the highest d33 value of 7.52 pC N−1. PANI works as a good dispersion medium when blended with PVDF. The PANI/PVDF blend electrospun with C3N4 showed a better piezoelectric property to fabricate nanogenerators. Khalifa et al. also found that at 10% C3N4 concentration, as high as 17 pC N−1 piezoelectric constant can be generated.146 In contrast, only 7.5% fraction of C3N4 was enough to create output voltage in a nanogenerator sufficient to light 70 LEDs.
5.4. Other fillers
For energy storage and conversion devices, the material should possess suitable dielectric and piezoelectric properties. SEP or sepiolite has the chemical formula Mg4Si6O15(OH)2·6H2O and consists of octahedral and tetrahedrons sheets of magnesium and silica, respectively, with apical end inversion every after six units. Zhang et al. synthesized the Li+- and H2O-modified sepiolite (SEP)/P(VDF–HFP) (LiSEP–H2O/PVDF–HFP) composite films. Since Li+-modified SEP has a shorter radius than that of Mg2+, the smaller ionic structure polarization in SEP is enhanced. Also, H+ (SEP-H2O) and fluorine (PVDF–HFP) bond improved the β phase significantly. Subsequently, Li-modified SEP contributes noteworthily in an increase in the piezoelectric and dielectric properties. The polymer composite having 13 wt% H2O exhibits high dielectric and piezoelectric constants (48, 32 respectively) and is attributed to absorbed H2O (increases the β-phase fraction) and Li+ (enhances the polarization).147
Zhang et al. synthesized the composites in which the montmorillonite (MMT) was embedded with PVDF in different concentrations. It has been observed that in the PVDF/MMT composite, the β-polymorph increases with the expense in α-polymorph because the MMT works as a good nucleating agent. Both dielectric and piezoelectric response enhances with the increase in the MMT content. The maximum d33 was found to be 5.8 pC N−1 with 2.0 wt% MMT.116 A co-rotating twin-screw extrusion technique was utilized to synthesize the hybrid nanocomposites (PVDF/micro-CaCO3 + MMT) and was subjected to uniaxial stretching. The composites consist of varying amounts of CaCO3 (30–40 wt%). The hybrid nanocomposite having 3 wt% MMT and 40 wt% CaCO3 shows the highest piezoelectric coefficient of 7.4 pC N−1. The stretched nanocomposite with the same composition exhibits a reduction in the dielectric properties and volume resistivity. The converse is true for piezoelectric properties, i.e., the d33 was 30 pC N−1.45
Similarly, an inorganic or organically-modified silicate, e.g., organosilicate (OS) is a cost-effective filler and great scope for improvement. The introduction of OS in the PVDF matrix significantly enhances the β-phase fraction due to interfacial interaction. By stretching, the β-phase content was further increased. The stretched composite having 4 wt% OS fractions reveals the value of piezoelectric coefficient to be as high as −22.2 ± 1.6 pC N−1.117 The ZnO nanorod is filler that can be used to modify the piezoelectric properties of the PVDF. The improved piezoelectric response of PVDF–ZnO composite is attributed due to the increased electroactive β-phase. The incorporation of 15 wt% ZnO nanorods with a PVDF matrix (PVDF–ZnO composite) reveals the piezoelectric constant to be −1.17 pC N−1.148
Based on the above report, low amount (as low as 0.1%) of carbon fillers is able to transform the piezoelectric constant significantly. However, that is not true for ceramic fillers; a high concentration of ceramic fillers is needed to generate a high piezoelectric constant. While the maximum d33 value calculated due to the inclusion of GO was −93.75 pm V−1 at 0.1% vol, it was 107 pC N−1 for the ceramic filler-integrated composite when 0.948KNN–0.052LS/PVDF(90/10) was added to PVDF, and the device was submerged in deionized water. These values are much higher than the d33 value of pure PVDF (−21 ± 2 pm V−1). The mixing of metal or metal oxide or any other hybrid filler does not match the d33 value obtained by the ceramic filler. Hence, this d33 value is the highest recorded for ceramic fillers among carbon-based, ceramic-based, hybrid, or other metal or metal-based fillers.
It can be also be concluded that even though the highest d33 (107 pC N−1) value was obtained by Zhang et al. with the inclusion of 0.948KNN–0.052LS into PVDF132 after poling, however, due to its constraint in fabricating flexible devices, the application of these fillers is limited to non-flexible devices. However, Zhang et al.141 reported a relatively low piezoelectric constant (53 pm V−1), fabricated using highly flexible wearable device with the NKNS-LT-BZ NP/PVDF composite. Other lead-free fillers, such as KNN-based fillers, also showed an increase in the electroactive phases significantly, and the maximum d33 value was within the 30–50 pC N−1 range. Lead-based fillers also showed a good amount of enhanced properties, primarily used in pyroelectric detectors, transducers, and actuators. Due to their toxicity, their use is restricted to non-biological applications. Nonetheless, ceramic fillers are always required in a considerable amount, while the integration of a very small volume fraction of carbon-based fillers126 can significantly enhance in the piezo-properties, simultaneously leading to the property of flexibility.
Among carbon-based fillers, GO always shows better improvement in d33 than CNT;127 however, when CNT is coated with Ag,107 it enhances the d33 (54 pm V−1) drastically. Lu et al. hybridized the 3D NFs synthesized using graphene/CNT/MnO2 and PVDF, and found that the thinner sheet of fibers shows a better d33 value than the thicker one because of the polarization and coupling between electromagnetic strain gradient, which make the piezoelectric constant more dependent on the fiber diameter.144 This theory justified the concept of increasing polar phase with decreasing diameter, particle size, or film thickness. Since filler concentration has never gone more than 1%, it is convenient to fabricate nanodevices with more strength. Polymer nanocomposite with various fillers vs. d33 comparison are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 
d
33 value of PVDF and copolymer composites with filler volume concentration




Composite

d
33

Vol%
Preparation method
Application
Ref.




Carbon-based fillers


PFOES-rGO/PVDF
39.8 pC N−1
0.3
Solution casting/annealing
Piezoelectric energy transfer and ferroelectric storage materials

120



rGO/PVDF
39.3 pC N−1
0.1
Solution casting/annealing
Piezoelectric energy transfer and ferroelectric storage materials

84



rGO/P(VDF–TrFE)
−23 pC N−1
0.2
Solution casting/annealing
PENG

125



GO/PVDF
−93.75 pm V−1
0.1
Electrospinning
Nanofiber-based generators

126



MWCNT/PVDF
23 pC N−1
0.2
Hot pressed/drawnpoled
β-Phase enhancement

127



C3N4/PVDF
5.5 pC N−1
0.75
Electrospinning
Wearable, self-powered devices

88







Ceramic-based fillers


P(VDF–TrFE)/PVDF

51.2 ± 5.0 pC N−1
50
Solution casting/annealing
Electroactive property enhancement

128



PZT/P(VDF–TrFE)
10 pm V−1
30
Screen printed/annealed/poled
Pyroelectric detectors

131



PZT/PVDF
40 pC N−1
50
Solution casting/annealing
Auto sensor testing

130



Tb–Dy–Fe/PZT/PVDF
62 pC N−1
0.07
Simulated by green function technique
As magnetoelectronic material in electronics application

135



PZT/P(VDF–TrFE)
30 pC N−1
60
Hot pressed/poled
Poling effect study

136



KNN/PVDF
35 pC N−1
70
Hot pressed pallets/poled
Lead free medical testing and transducers

138



0.948KNN–0.052LS/KNLN/KNN/PVDF
107 pC N−1
90
Normal pressed pallets/poled
Lead-free devices

132



(K0.44Na0.52Li0.04) (Nb0.86Ta0.10Sb0.04)O3/PVDF
35 pC N−1
80
Normal pressed pallets
Lead-free piezodevices

139



KNNL-Z/ZnO2/PVDF
55 pC N−1
10
Hot pressed
Lead free electronic devices/sensors

140



NKNS-LT-BZ NP/PVDF
53 pm V−1
—
Solvent casting/annealing
Flexible nanogenerator, tubular nanosensor, wearable devices

141



PZT/PVDF
13.8 pC N−1
50
Solvent casting/hot pressed
Transducers

143







Hybrid fillers


Ag–CNT/PVDF
54 pm V−1
1
Electrospinning
β phase enhancement

107



Graphene/CNT/MnO2/PVDF
52 pC N−1
0.8–0.4–0.8
Electrospinning
Flexible self-powered devices

144



BT/PANI/PVDF
50 pC N−1
40
Powder blending/mechanical mixing
Enhancement of electroactive properties

108



(TiO3/rGO)/(SrTiO3)/PVDF–HFP
7.52 pC N−1
1:2
Casting/hot-pressing
Wearable devices

145



PANI/C3N4/PVDF
17 pC N−1
10
Electrospinning
Wearable, self-powered devices

146







Other fillers


LiSEP–H2O/PVDF–HFP
32 pC N−1
13
Solvent casting/annealing
Enhancement of electroactive properties

147



MMT/PVDF
5.8 pC N−1
2
Solvent casting/poling
Phase transformation study

116



Micro-CaCO3 + MMT
30 pC N−1
43
Solvent casting/drawing/poling
Transducers

45



Organosilicate (OS)/PVDF
−22.2 pC N−1
4
Hot pressed/stretched
Thermal detector, self-powered devices

117



ZnO/PVDF
1.17 pC N−1
15
Solvent casted/annealed
Nanogenerators

148





6. Dielectric constant of polyvinylidene difluoride and its copolymer nanocomposites
6.1. Carbon-based fillers
The PVDF/GO composite films were prepared using the solvent N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and a mixture of deionized water with DMF by a co-solvent method. The PVDF/GO composites films show the evolution of the β-phase, which enhances the dielectric response. With an increase in the GO (0.1%) content, the dielectric constant (24) (Fig. 11a) and dielectric loss both increase. However, in PVDF/GO composites synthesized using the co-solvent method, the formation of the β-phase fraction improves. Higher dielectric constant but low dielectric loss (4.5) was revealed by these films.149 For P(VDF–TrFE) and P(VDF–TrFE)/rGO thin film, a 0.2% rGO exhibits the maximum dielectric constant 72 at 1 kHz at this concentration, and the rGO was well-dispersed. A maximum dielectric loss of 0.13 was also recorded at the same concentration of rGO.125
 Fig. 11  (a) Dielectric permittivity under frequency range of 10−2–107 Hz with GO concentration of (A) 0, (B1) 0.04, (B2) 0.06, (B3) 0.08, (B4) 0.10, and (C) 0.10 (DMF with water) in the PVDF/GO composite.149 Dielectric constant of PVDF with GO content up to 5% under various frequency ranges of (b) neat sample, (c) stretched, and (d) recrystallized.150 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 149 and 150. Copyright (2012, 2014), Elsevier B. V. and John Wiley and Sons Inc., All rights reserved. 
The PVDF possess several exciting properties and it is assumed that the addition of nanofillers would improve the dielectric response, which strongly depends on the crystalline and/or phase structure. Tang et al. integrated carbon nanofibers (CNFs) with PVDF and investigated mechanical stretching and heating treatment on the phase transformation, microstructure, electric, and dielectric properties. For the neat samples, the dielectric response increases with an increase in the CNFs content. This enhanced dielectric constant was attributed to the improvement in the electroactive phase and Maxwell–Wagner–Sillars (MWS) polarization. The observed dielectric constant was 40 at 5% GO content. In the case of stretched composites, a dramatic reduction in the dielectric response caused by secondary agglomeration and the degree of depletion follows the opposite trend with the CNF additive fractions. The isothermally recrystallized composite with CNFs < 1 wt% shows reduced dielectric response. On further increasing the CNF concentration (>1 wt%), an improvement in the dielectric response was observed. However, it could not match the permittivity of a neat sample (Fig. 11b–d).150
The PVDF/graphite composites were fabricated by the solution precipitation method. The incorporation of graphite improves the crystallization behavior and proportionally increases the graphene content. 10 wt% loading of graphene enhances the dielectric constant from 9 for pure PVDF to 17.151 In another investigation, the effect of rGO incorporation with PVDF on the structure, ferroelectric, and dielectric piezoelectric properties was studied. The presence of a 100% electroactive phase was found in the composite having 0.3 wt% rGO. At the same rGO content (0.3 wt%), the dielectric coefficient was enhanced by more than four times (from 16 to 69). This improved the dielectric response at a lower frequency, which came into the picture because of Maxwell-Wagnar-Sillars interfacial polarization (arises due to the heterogeneous conductivity of PVDF and rGO).152
Wang et al. mixed PVDF with differently functionalized exfoliated graphene (EG) and modified the graphene surface with fluorine, ozone, and ϒ irradiation. The authors calculated the dielectric constant at 102 to 107 Hz frequency range. As the frequency increased, dielectric permittivity was reduced to 4 from 9.8 for PVDF. However, for ϒ-irradiated and PMMA-grafted graphene, composite dielectric permittivity increased to 18. CO content, which is maximum in grafted graphene in comparison to other functionalized graphene, is responsible for such enhancements (Fig. 12a).153 Wang et al. studied the effect of integration of MWCNT in the PVDF/MWCNT composites in various volume fractions on the dielectric properties. In the low-frequency region, the composite with 2.0 vol% MWCNT reveals a significant enhancement in the dielectric response (300). The high conductivity and large aspect ratio give rise to a low percolation threshold of PVDF/MWCNT composites, which indicates that the dielectric properties can be improved without the chemical functionalization of MWCNT.97
 Fig. 12  (a) Dielectric constant under different frequency ranges from 102 to 107 Hz of PVDF, EG, F-EG, O3-EG, and PMMA-g-EG,153 (b–d) dielectric constant of (b) pristine, (c) carboxylic-functionalized, and (d) ester-functionalized MWCNT. Graphs were shown as a function of vol% of MWCNT. The inset plots shows the log value of dielectric constant as a function of pc-pMWCNT, where pc is the percolation threshold and PMWCNT is the MWCNT volume fraction.154 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 153 and 154. Copyright (2008, 2015), Elsevier B. V. and Taylor and Francis Ltd. All rights reserved. 
In another study, the electrical and dielectric properties of the PVDF/MWCNT composite were studied, where the pristine, ester, and carboxylic-functionalized MWCNTs were used as the filler.154 In this processing condition, the PVDF/MWCNT composite percolation threshold was higher (3.8 vol%) than the previously reported study.97 Near the percolation threshold of the MWCNT content, the dielectric response improved significantly and then decreased dramatically at a frequency greater than 104. The different functionalization of the MWCNT is attributed to the different values of the dielectric constant. At 6 vol% MWCNT, the pristine composite gives the dielectric constant of 1700, whereas for the composite with 6 vol% ester-functionalized MWCNT, the dielectric constant reaches 2400. The largest dielectric constant of 3600 was observed for the composite having 8 vol% carboxylic-functionalized MWCNT, as shown by Fig. 12b–d.
6.2. Ceramic-based fillers
As stated previously in this review, Dietze et al. prepared thin films by mixing PZT/PVDF with several concentrations of PZT in the range of 20–50%. PZT leads to dielectric properties with improved porosity. The highest dielectric constant of 71 and a dielectric loss as low as 0.022 at 1 kHz frequency was observed at 50% PZT.131 Ferroelectric ceramics also show outstanding dielectric properties. However, increased dielectric values lead to an inadequate mechanical response, making such materials unsuitable for flexible devices. Ferroelectric ceramics, when mixed with polymers, show enhanced flexibility as well as low dielectric loss. Several ferroelectric ceramic fillers such as BT, Pb(Zr,Ti)O3(PZT), and CaCu3Ti4O12 (CCTO) play a vital role in imparting high permittivity and low losses. They also provide good dielectric attributes.
Phosphonic acid surface-modified BT nanoparticles show enhanced dielectric constant when incorporated with PVDF–HFP. The literature states that the dielectric constant was about 35 at 1 kHz frequency at 50% filler concentration. A comparison was also made between the collected results and the self-consistent effective medium theory (SC-EMT). Statistical particle packing simulations and finite difference calculations were also done to design the dielectric properties of the nanocomposites with a wide range of nanoparticle volume fractions. Air voids, possibly present in the films, were also included in the study. Interestingly, the data generated through simulation was in complete agreement with the experimental data. Hence, the role of nanoparticle percolation and porosity of composites in determining their dielectric properties was verified.155 The dielectric properties of any material are immensely dependent on the grain size. BT exhibits a transition from a tetragonal to a cubic crystal structure as the grain size reduces to the nanometer range. Li et al. mixed calcined BT powder in PVDF. They demonstrated that the dielectric properties were significantly impacted by the calcination temperature. Owing to the evaporation of impurities at high temperatures, the purity of the ceramic particles increases, and hence, the dielectric properties are improved (Fig. 13). The maximum dielectric constant of 166.38 was found at 950 °C calcination temperature.156
 Fig. 13  Dielectric constant as a function of calcined BT at various temperatures.156 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 156. Copyright (2017), American Scientific Publishers, All rights reserved. 
It has been reported that coated BT/PVDF with an insulated polyimide (PI) interlayer leads to high dielectric constant owing to the good interfacial interaction between the outer layer of PI and PVDF. The flexible PVDF/PI@BT composites showed a larger dielectric constant and a reduced dielectric loss. When the concentration of PI@BT in PVDF reaches 40%, the dielectric constant (ε′) is increased to 60.4, the highest among the reported compositions and concentrations (Fig. 14h).157 The interfacial interaction between the materials is well defined in Fig. 14a–g.
 Fig. 14  Schematic representation of (a) BT agglomeration in the PVDF/BT composite, (b) well dispersed PI@BT nanoparticles in the composite, (c) core shell-structured PI@BT nanoparticles, (d and e) BT & PI interfacial interaction, (f and g) PI and PVDF interfacial interaction. The graphical illustration well explains the mechanism of generation of the dielectric property in the PVDF/PI@BT composite, (h) dielectric constant, and (ε′) and dielectric loss (tanδ) of PI-coated BT/PVDF and pristine BT/PCDF composites.157 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 157. Copyright (2019), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
Kum-onsa et al. incorporated Na1/3Ca1/3Bi1/3Cu3Ti4O12 (NCB) nano and micron-sized particles within the PVDF matrix to enhance the dielectric permittivity. The polymer nanocomposite PVDF/NCB containing 50 vol% of NCB-NPs nanoparticles displays good dielectric properties of ∼210.8 and low dielectric loss (0.83) at 103 Hz frequency. This increase happens due to low porosity and more uniform film, resulting in a better dielectric constant than NCB-MPs, as shown in Fig. 15a–d. An enhanced dielectric constant observed in the present case is much larger (20 times) than that observed with the PVDF polymer. Fig. 15e shows that the NCB-NPs/PVDF nanocomposites having lower concentrations (≤0.2%) of PVDF are only slightly dependent on the frequency when in the range of 40–107 Hz. Different behavior is observed at a higher concentration of PVDF. This suggests that the dielectric response of the nanocomposites depends on the interfacial polarization effect.158
 Fig. 15  SEM micrographs of NCB-NPs/PVDF at (a) 0.2%, (b) 0.5%, and the NCB-MPs/PVDF composite at (c) 0.2 and (d) 0.5 wt%. (e) Dielectric constant (ε′) of NCB-NPs/PVDF composite at various filler concentrations as a function of frequency.158 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 159. Copyright (2016), Springer, All rights reserved. 
Thomas et al. incorporated the CCTO in a PVDF polymer matrix using melt-mixing and hot-pressing methods. They observed that the temperature difference causes a variation in the dielectric constant. However, at room temperature and 100 Hz, the recorded dielectric constant was 95; an increase in temperature up to 150 °C caused the dielectric constant to reach the values proposed by theoretical models such as Maxwell's, Clausius–Mossotti, effective medium theory, logarithmic law, and Yamada.159
Srivastava et al.160 explained interfacial polarization between CCTO and 115 CCTO (LaCCTO)-reinforced PVDF composites synthesized by the melt extrusion process. The authors determined that 10% CCTO and 10% LaCCTO with PVDF lead to enhanced dielectric and mechanical properties. The study was also proved using X-ray diffraction, and it explained that d-spacing increased in LaCCTO because of an increase in the interaction between the filler and PVDF. The PVDF/CCTO- and PVDF/LaCCTO-reinforced composites reveal a better dielectric response (8.2 and 30.0, respectively) than PVDF (5.2) measured at 1 Hz and 40 °C. In addition, LaCCTO showed a low dielectric loss in comparison with CCTO-doped PVDF composites. The Young's modulus of the film was calculated using the linear region of the stress–strain curve (Fig. 16) and was found to be 964 and 886 MPa for PVDF/LaCCTO and PVDF/CCTO, respectively, proving the idea of more significant interaction between PVDF and LaCCTO. The Young's modulus for pristine PVDF was estimated to be 860 MPa.160
 Fig. 16  Strain vs. stress curve of PVDF, PVDF/CCTO, and PVDF/LaCCTO.160 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 160. Copyright (2014), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
In past several years, CCTO has been found to display a high dielectric constant through studies by various researchers. Arbatti et al. showed that the high dielectric value remains constant over wide temperatures and frequencies. The P(VDF–TrFE)/CCTO composite films were prepared using the solution-casting and hot-pressing techniques. The hot-press films were found to exhibit a more uniform and even morphology. Moreover, it was observed that hot-pressed films also show better dielectric constant values. The improved homogeneity of the composites is the primary reason for the increase in the dielectric constant, which was further increased through thermal annealing. At room temperature, CCTO/P(VDF–TrFE) with 50% filler volume reported a dielectric constant of 610 at 100 Hz and 330 at 1 kHz. However, at temperature ∼70 °C, a significantly improved dielectric constant (>1210) was observed. These composites are extensively used in capacitor applications.161
Yang et al. investigated the effect of particle size on CCTO/PVDF composites. On mixing 40% nanosized CCTO, the dielectric constant was greater than 106 at room temperature and 102 Hz. It was also noticed that the conductivity and dielectric constant of the nanosized filler-PVDF composite was enhanced substantially due to the interfacial polarizability. However, this leads to more dielectric loss. In the case of 52% microsized CCTO/PVDF composite, the maximum dielectric constant recorded was 49, with the value of the dielectric loss at 100 Hz and room temperature being 0.23. The 40% nanosized CCTO/PVDF had a dielectric constant of 2.49 × 106, exhibiting a dielectric loss of 48.162 Morphological characterization was performed using scanning electron microscopy (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  SEM microstructures of (a) PVDF, (b) PVDF/CCTO (nanosized) 20%, (c) PVDF/CCTO (nanosized) 40%, (d) PVDF/CCTO (microsized) 20%, (e) PVDF/CCTO (micro sized) 52%.162 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 162. Copyright (2011), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
Ba(Fe0.5Nb0.5)O3 (BFN) shows large dielectric constant values for a wide range of temperatures and frequency intervals. Fang et al. used BFN as a filler for the fabrication of PVDF/BFN nanocomposite films. BFN nanoparticles were synthesized through the solid-state reaction route. Thin films were prepared using the cold press technique. As BFN concentration was increased in the range of 10–60%, the dielectric constant also increased progressively. At 60% BFN, the highest value for the dielectric constant of 57 was recorded at 100 Hz and room temperature.163 Wang et al. also reported similar observations for similar compositions. However, they used the oxalate co-precipitation method for BFN synthesis and obtained smaller sized particles than conventional solid-state reaction processing. At 60% concentration of BFN, the dielectric permittivity of the composites was observed to be as high as 93.164
Wang et al. mixed nanosized BFN powder with microsized Na1/3Ca1/3Bi1/3Cu3Ti4O12 (NCBCTO) powder.165 NCBCTO has attracted much attention due to low dielectric loss, high dielectric constant, and high-temperature stability.166 The La-doped Na1/2Bi1/2Cu3Ti4O12 ceramics exhibited fascinating dielectric properties with a high dielectric constant of about 1.02 × 104 at 10 kHz and low tanδ values (0.022 at 10 kHz). The composites were prepared by physical mixing and cold pressing, followed by heat treatment. The maximum dielectric constant recorded was 38.96 at 100 Hz.167 Micro and nanosized La1.5Sr0.5NiO4 (LSNO) particles were integrated with PVDF to obtain a higher dielectric constant. The dielectric calculations were performed by determining the particle sizes, resultant interfacial area, and the interparticle distances between the LSNO particles. It was observed that the percolation threshold of the μLSNO/PVDF composite is higher than that of the nLSNO/PVDF nanocomposite.168
The interparticle distance was calculated by the formula d = r[(4π/3f)1/3 − 2)], where f and r are the volume fraction and the average radius of LSNO particles, respectively. It has been estimated that as the LSNO concentration increases to 0.05%, the interparticle distance d of μLSNO/PVDF and nLSNO/PVDF composites decreases from 2.24 to 0.18 μm and from 213 to 16.9 nm, respectively. The decrease in the particle size is also associated with an increase in the particle density. This shorter distance between nLSNO particles offers high interfacial interaction between the polymer and the filler, resulting in less porous films, which influences the dielectric properties of the composite. Increased dielectric response of ε′ ≈ 565.9 at 1 kHz was recorded for nanosized LSNO.168 Particle size variation, interparticle distance, and dielectric constant with respect to volume fraction are shown in Fig. 18.
 Fig. 18  SEM micrographs of (a) PVDF, (b) nLSNO/PVDF with the inset image of the prepared flexible film, (c) interparticle distance in μLSNO/PVDF and nLSNO/PVDF composite as the filler volume fraction, (d) dielectric constant of μLSNO/PVDF and nLSNO/PVDF as a function of the volume fraction from 0.05 to 0.2%.168 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2020), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
6.3. Hybrid fillers
Fakhri et al.169 introduced the Au and Cu nanoparticles with GO in the matrix of the PVDF polymer and synthesized (GO/Au and GO/Cu)/PVDF nanocomposite films by the solution casting method. The electroactive phase fraction for the composite having 1% GO/Au nanofiller was improved. The composite showed an improved dielectric constant of 31. The composite consisting 5% GO/Cu filler exhibited a dielectric constant of 45. The relative permittivity also improves with the addition of nanofillers, and the explanation is based on MWS polarization effect. This effect is generally found in heterogeneous systems. According to the MWS theory, the enhanced permittivity is attributed to the trapped free charges between the interfaces of two heterogeneous materials. The MWS effect is noticed mainly at a low frequency range, where interfacial polarization effects are much intense.
The addition of Fe3O4 introduces ferromagnetism and induces dielectric coupling, resulting in an increased β phase.170 By the solvent casting method, the self-standing PVDF films consist of ZnO, rGO, Fe3O4 nanoparticles were prepared, and their dielectric properties were studied. The bare PVDF and PVDF/rGO films have the polar β-phase in a significant proportion (∼80%), whereas ZnO, Fe3O4, and nanofiller with PVDF reduce the electroactive phase fraction (∼50%) of the composite films. In comparison to the pure PVDF film (∼6), the PVDF–ZnO and PVDF–rGO nanocomposite films reveal improved dielectric constant (25–30) whereas, the remaining composites (PVDF–rGO–Fe3O4 and PVDF–rGO–Fe3O4–ZnO) exhibit a reduced dielectric response of 12.171
Few hybrid-containing NFs were hierarchically designed by the incorporation of BTNF (10 wt%) and BT-BN NFs (10 wt%) into PVDF. Fan et al. synthesized hierarchical hybrid NF by introducing the boron nitride nanosheet (BNNS) into the grain boundary interspace of the BT nanofiber (BTNFs), as shown in Fig. 19. The nanocomposites decorated with hybrid NFs exhibited improved energy storage density, larger breakdown strength, and enhanced dielectric constant compared to the conventional nanofiller-decorated composites. By adding a fixed amount (10 vol%) of hybrid nanofillers (BTNF and BT-BN NFs) with PVDF, the nanocomposites were synthesized and labeled as BTNF-10/PVDF and BT-BN NF-10/PVDF, respectively. All the nanocomposites show a stable dielectric performance up to 105 Hz, that then decreases sharply. The dielectric constant of BT-BN10NF10/PVDF and BTNF-10/PVDF composites are higher (19.6 and 16.3, respectively) than that of PVDF (10.8). These observations indicate that the dielectric response depends on both the quality of the composites and the filler's polarization capacity.172
 Fig. 19  Schematic diagram for BTNF and BT-BN NF hybrid fiber preparation.172 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 172. Copyright (2020), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
Sahoo et al. prepared Fe-doped ZnO nanocomposite films [P(VDF–TrFE)/(Z1−xFxO)] with a fixed polymer/filler ratio using the solvent-casting method. No remarkable difference in the electroactive β-phase was noticed with the variation in Fe content; however, an improvement in the dielectric and ferroelectric behavior was found in the composites. The higher dielectric permittivity of the composite film with x = 0.05 was 21.03. Among various types of polarizations that occur in PVDF, dipole-oriented polarization is responsible for the dielectric properties. Also, space charge polarization originated by the inclusion of different conductive phases in the same polymer matrix. Therefore, after the incorporation of various concentrations of ZnO nanoparticles, the created surface or interface polarization leads to a higher dielectric constant of the composites.173 On mixing the X-type hexaferrite C3N4 binary nanofiller into PVDF, an enhanced electrostatic interaction occurs between the polymer and the composite walls. All-trans-planer (TTTT) conformation is observed and is responsible for enhanced β-phase, and hence a higher dielectric constant of 53 at 100 °C.174
The binary and ternary PVDF nanocomposites [PVDF/BT and PVDF/BT/GN (GN: nanographite)] were prepared via solution casting, followed by a compression molding technique. For the PVDF/BT composites, the dielectric permittivity increases with an increase in the BT concentration, and at 2:3 concentration, the dielectric constant was 31.4. A significant improvement in the dielectric response was found for the PVDF/BT/GN hybrid with a lower content of nanosized graphite. Adding 2.5 GN to the 4:1 mixture dielectric, the constant found was 50 with the lowest dielectric loss (Table 2).175 Another ternary PVDF–HFP nanocomposite having hexagonal boron nitrate (h-BN) and BT nanolayer was fabricated. The hybrid composites having 1 wt% h-BN and 3 wt% BT show higher dielectric constant (45) and lower dielectric loss (7.8) in comparison to individual PVDF–HFP/BT and PVDF–HFP/h-BN nanocomposites.176
Table 2 Dielectric constant and dielectric loss values over the variation of filler type and concentration (at 1 kHz)175




Specimen

ε′
tanδ




Neat
9.7
0.018


PVDF/BT (80/20)
11.6
0.019


PVDF/BT (40/60)
31.4
0.026


PVDF/BT/GN (80/20/2.5)
50.0
0.072


PVDF/BT/GN (80/20/3.0)
492.0
49.1




One conductive graphene quantum-dot filler (GQD) and one magnetic non-conducting cobalt ferrite (CFO) fillers were added to PVDF by Chen et al.87 Small size and high electric performance of quantum dots and high dielectric properties of cobalt ferrite were calculated. A space charge effect was introduced between the polymer and filler interfaces. This induced filler generates microcapacitors responsible for enhancing the dielectric constant. The dielectric constant was read in the 0.1 Hz to 10 MHz frequency range and at 20% CFO + 1% GQD concentration. Dielectric constant as high as 1200 was recorded, which was much higher than that of the CFO–PVDF composite (∼57).
6.4. Other fillers
Excellent dielectric response was observed in PVDF/Ag@Ale (Ale: aloe vera plant-extract) composite synthesized by hot pressing, followed by liquid phase-assisted dispersion. Ag nanoparticles (Ag@Ale-NPs) were prepared by the hydrothermal method using the aloe vera plant extract. Good dielectric properties (dielectric constant ≈92.5 and dielectric loss 0.049) were found in the composite having a low fraction (0.18 vol%) of the Ag@Ale-NPs filler. On further increasing the filler fraction by 0.22 vol%, the dielectric permittivity increased to ≈257.2 and dielectric loss to ≈0.26. This excellent dielectric response of the composite was attributed to the microcapacitor formation and interfacial polarization in the PVDF/Ag@Ale composite.177 The PVDF/ZnO composite thin film prepared by the solution casting method was examined by Devi et al.113 The dielectric properties were measured at room temperature, and it was concluded that it increased with an increase in ZnO. Interfacial space charge polarization contributes to the highest dielectric constant value of 13.01 at 30 vol% ZnO content.
Li et al. synthesized PVDF composites, where Fe3O4-decorated rGO were used as the filler. The uniform distribution of rGO@ Fe3O4 nanoparticles was assisted by a small amount of poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate) (PSSNa), which also hinders the development of the electrically conductive network within the composite. It leads to an excellent dielectric response. The PVDF/rGO@Fe3O4 composite at 100 Hz shows a high dielectric constant 1297 and a slight dielectric loss 0.258, attributed to the synergetic effect of the organic compounds (rGO and Fe3O4). The composite also exhibits novel superparamagnetic behavior due to the magnetic Fe3O4 particles.178 Recently, Park synthesized the nanocomposite fibers with enhanced magnetic properties and applied it for the fabrication of a nanogenerator using electret (magnetite) as a filler.179 The electroactive and dielectric properties can be improved using the electret as it facilitates charge storage temporarily. The addition of 5 wt% magnetite nanoparticles (MNPs) with PVDF polymer improves the dielectric response remarkably. The electroactive phase was enhanced 4 times and a higher dielectric constant of 24 was obtained.180
Many other results have also been reported where direct piezoelectric and dielectric constant have not been calculated, but other properties such as β phase and piezoresponse voltages have been improved.181 It signifies that the piezoelectric properties became better with the inclusion of various fillers such as BiCl3 in the PVDF polymer. The inclusion of BiCl3 with PVDF helps in the development of the β-phase at the expense of the α-phase in the PVDF/BiCl3 NF film.181 Chinya et al. investigated the PVDF–metal oxide-decorated nanocomposites and found that it was potentially suitable for the fabrication of flexible nanogenerators. They utilized the three constituents, namely, zinc ferrite nanorods (ZF-R), PVDF, and PANI, for the preparation of the nanocomposites. PANI is an excellent dispersing agent, and its addition reduces local dielectric variance by the formation of conduction pathways. It also stabilizes the polar PVDF. Hence, the piezoresponse and electromechanical behavior of the nanocomposite improve. It was noticed that with an increase in the filler fraction, the dielectric response is modified. This improvement in the dielectric response was observed for a certain limit of ZF-R loading content and was reduced after that. The percolation theory helps to explain this anomaly. This phenomenon can be explained in terms of the percolation theory for a heterogeneous system. As the filler concentration reached the percolation threshold, a further increase in the filler concentration leads to reduced particle distance. Reduced particle distances result in agglomerations that lead to reduced dielectric response. The PVDF/ZF-R composite having 3 wt% ZF-R content exhibits the maximum dielectric constant (32).182 The incorporation of conductive fillers can improve the dielectric properties of a polymer composite. Triphasic percolative composite, having metallic inclusion (Ni) and ferroelectric phase (BT) incorporated with the PVDF matrix, was prepared by Dang et al.183 The maximum dielectric response (800) was observed for the composite possessing Ni content close to its percolation threshold.
Several efforts and research works have been carried out to get high dielectric constant. Likewise, using the piezoelectric constant, the dielectric constant was attempted to be improved by integrating various fillers. For carbon fillers, CNTs show a much noticeable improvement in the dielectric constant than GO. Among all, carboxylic-functionalized MWCNT/PVDF composite films showed the highest dielectric constant (ε′) of 3600 at 8% MWCNT composition; however, the loss lies at about 8–10 at 1 kHz frequency.154 GO/PVDF can give the highest dielectric constant of 72 with 0.2% concentration but a rather low dielectric constant of 0.13.125 The lowest 0.1% GO composite film generates a dielectric constant of 24,149 while when CCTO ceramic was mixed at 50% in the PVDF, the highest dielectric value of 2.49 × 106 was achieved. However, dielectric loss for the CCTO composite (48) was always much higher than the overall concentration of CNTs (0–10). CCTO always shows a much higher ε′ value even when mixed with P(VDF–TrFE). Even at room temperature, the highest recorded value was 610 with a dielectric constant of 0.43 at 100 Hz, which later shoots up to 1210 when heated at 70 °C with no change in loss (0.14).161 Some hybrid fillers also showed enhanced dielectric constant at a sufficient amount. Fe3O4-Decorated rGO/PSSNa for dispersion/PVDF also showed a dielectric constant as high as 1297 and that also with low loss (0.26) and low filler (1%) concentration.178 BT/GN3/PVDF also showed an upsurge in ε′ of 492 with loss of 49.1; however, at BT/GN2.5/PVDF, the loss decreases to 0.072 with dielectric constant of 50 at 1 kHz frequency.175 Larger breakdown strength has also been reported in hybrid fillers. The good interfacial interaction of the ceramic filler with the polymer surface along with high bandgap made charge flow conditional. It is very much dependent on the external electric field. Stretching also results in the decay of dielectric permittivity due to filler agglomeration.150 It destroys the previously made interfacial path. However, low dielectric loss was noted due to the increased packing density and higher polarity. It has also been observed that a positive change in the Young's modulus occurred due to external doping.160 The temperature effect was also there in composites, and an increase in temperature leads to a high dielectric constant with a low dielectric loss.161 However, at higher frequencies, the dielectric constant was always low.161,163 Due to the small size and high conductive property of graphene, quantum dot-decorated cobalt ferrite fillers showed anomalous enhancement in hybrid filler-based composites and showed a dielectric constant of 1200 when incorporated with PVDF.87 Ni-Decorated BT/PVDF showed the highest value of 800 among all the BT/PVDF composites.183 Spherical and metal particles are never a good choice as fillers due to poor breakdown strength except for Ag-nPs/PVDF, which generates a dielectric constant of 257 due to microcapacitor formation using modified Ag-nPs surfaces with protein capping.177 Metal particles displayed lower dielectric constant due to the disappearance of the Coulomb blockage effect,184 specifically in bigger particles (>2 nm), resulting in reduced conduction current. Somehow, to overcome these problems, surface modifications have been done to nanoparticles. However, these agents used for alteration worked as impurities and increased the dielectric loss, which was not the ultimate goal. Thus, ceramics or graphene, which have a flake-like structure or CNTs with higher strength, will be the best choice as fillers due to their high aspect ratio, whereas high dielectric constant and low loss can be achieved. Dielectric properties, dielectric loss with volume fraction, and the application field are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Dielectric constant and respective dielectric loss of PVDF and copolymer composites




Polymer composite
Dielectric constant (ε′)
Dielectric loss
Frequency
Vol%
Preparation method
Application
Ref.




Carbon-based filler


GO/PVDF
24
4.5–5
1 Hz
0.1
Solvent casting/co-solvent approach
Crystalline phase, dielectric properties

149



rGO/PVDF
72
0.13
1 kHz
0.2
Solution casted
Energy harvesting device

125



GO/PVDF
40
0.01
1–103 Hz
5
Solution casted/stretched
Energy applications, robotics

150



Graphite/PVDF
17
0.002
102 Hz
10
Solution casted/annealing
Dielectric and crystallization behavior study

151



rGO/PVDF
69
1.33
1 kHz
0.3
Solution casted/annealing
Broadband sensing, flexible energy scavenging

152



ϒ-Irradiated PMMA-grafted graphene/PVDF
18
0.7
102 Hz
0.5
Solution casted/annealing
Dielectric and crystallization behavior study

153



MWCNT/PVDF
300
∼0.4
104 Hz
2
Hot pressed pallets
High charge storage capacitor

97



Carboxylic functionalized CNT/PVDF
3600
8–10
1 kHz
8
Solution casted
Dielectric and ac conductivity study for sensor application

154



Easter functionalized CNT/PVDF
2400
6


Pristine CNT/PVDF
1700
6






Ceramic-based filler


PZT/PVDF
71
0.022
1 kHz
50
Solution casted/annealing/poling
Low cost pyroelectric detectors

131



BT phosponic acid modified/PVDF–hfp
35
0.03
1 kHz
50
Spin coated
Energy storage

155



Calcinate BT/PVDF
166.38
0.02
1 kHz


Hot pressed/poling
Electroactive property

156



KNN/PVDF
3273
0.65
100 Hz
40
Hot pressed
Electroactive property

138



PI@BT/PVDF
60.4
0.044
100 Hz
40
Compressed molding
Dielectric constant enhancement for energy storage application

157



NCB-nps/PVDF
210.8
0.83
103 Hz
50
Hot pressed
Dielectric constant enhancement for energy storage and sensor application

158



CCTO/PVDF
190
0.2
100 Hz
55
Hot pressed
Capacitor

159



LaCCTO/PVDF
30
0.022
1 Hz
10
Compressed molding
Capacitor

160



CCTO/P(VDF–TrFE)
1210 (70)
0.41
100 Hz
50
Hot pressed/annealed
By pass capacitor

161



610 (RT)
0.43


740 (70 °C)
0.21
1 kHz


330 (RT)
0.26


CCTO nps/PVDF
2.49 × 106
48
100 Hz
40
Hot pressed
Temperature sensor field

162



738
1.8
20


CCTO mps/PVDF
35
0.23
40
Embedded capacitor


16.5
0.14
20


BFN/PVDF
57 (RT)
0.23
100 Hz
60
Cold pressed
Embedded capacitor

163



62 (140 °C)
0.25
40


BFN/PVDF
93
0.20
100 Hz
60
Cold pressed/annealed
Embedded capacitor

164



LSNO-nps/PVDF
565
0.28
1 kHz
30
Hot pressed
Dielectric charge storage capacitor

168



LSNO-nps/PVDF
56
0.07






Hybrid filler


GO/Au/PVDF
31
0.1
1 kHz
1
Solvent casting/annealing
Flexible nanoelectronics

169



GO/Cu/PVDF
45
0.1
1 kHz
5


BTNF/PVDF
16.3
0.035
1 kHz
10
Solvent casting/annealing
Energy storage

172



BT-BN nf/PVDF
19.6
0.02
10


Fe-Doped ZnO/P(VDF–TrFE)
21.03
0.1
1 kHz
0.05
Solvent casting/annealing
Low power electronic application

173



BT/GN2.5/PVDF
50
0.072
1 kHz
20/2.5/80
Compression molding
Energy storage

175



BT/GN3/PVDF
492
49.1
20/3/80


BT/PVDF–HFP
18
1.6
100 Hz
3
Solvent casting/annealing/poling
Energy harvester

176



Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)/PVDF–HFP
25
5
1


BT/hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)/PVDF–HFP
45
7.8
3:1


X type hexaferrite C3N4/PVDF
18 (30 °C)
0.4
10 Hz
20 (70:30):80
Solution casted/Annealed
Electromagnetic pollution shield

174



16 (50 °C)
0.5


52 (100 °C)
1.7


Graphene quantum dot/cobalt ferrite/PVDF
1200
1
0.1 Hz
20:1
Solution casted
Microelectronic field

87







Other filler


Ag@Ale-NPs/PVDF
92.5
0.049
1 kHz
0.18
Compression molding
Dielectric constant enhancement for high-density electronic packaging technology

177



257.2
0.26
0.22


ZnO/PVDF
13.01
0.056
10 kHz
30
Solvent casted
Sensor, solar cell

113



Fe3O4-Decorated rGO/PSSNa for dispersion/PVDF
1297
0.26
100 Hz
1
Compression molding
Supercapacitor

178



Magnetite nanoparticles Fe3O4/PVDF
24
0.7
104 Hz
5
Solvent casted
Sensor, solar cell

180



Zinc ferrite nanorod/PANI/PVDF
32
0.18
100 Hz
3
Solvent casting, annealing
Piezoelectric energy harvester

182



Ni decorated BT/PVDF
800
0.05
100 Hz
0.2
Hot molding
Capacitor, energy storage device

183





7. PVDF and its copolymer composites applications
A number of polymers modified via various methods to enhance their properties has been utilized as energy harvesters.182–189 Due to enhanced piezoelectric constant and dielectric constant value of PVDF and copolymers, the nanocomposites possess enormous possibilities in energy harvesting.190–193 Many researchers have fabricated PVDF-based devices and reported high output voltage.194 PVDF and its composites are mainly utilized in nanogenerators, capacitors, and physical sensors with some newly reported biosensing and biomedical applications.195 The mixing of fillers in PVDF improves the performance of the application. Few biosensor-based applications are also reported, and chemical sensing capabilities were also observed in these composites due to surface modifications.
7.1. Piezoelectric nanogenerators
PENGs harvest the mechanical energy utilizing the piezoelectric behavior of materials.196 PENGs would be the key components in self-powered smart wearable devices used in various applications.197 As well-known piezoelectric materials, PVDF-based PENGs have attracted much attention of researchers.194 P(VDF–TrFE)–rGO, 0.1% PENG showed the highest output voltage and current of 2.4 V and 0.8 μA, and maximum output power of 3.2 μW at 1.8 MΩ resistive loads for an applied force of 2 N.125 The nanogenerators fabricated by the PVDF/GO composites also showed an enhanced output voltage. These embedded devices were prepared by the electrospinning process (Fig. 20).126 The flexible PVDF–ZnO (15 wt%) nanogenerator showed the maximum output voltage of ∼1.81 V with an output power density of ∼0.21 μW cm−2. This flexible nanogenerator has potential for biomedical devices and flexible wearable small-scale electronic devices because of its lead-free piezoelectric property.148 Pal et al. fabricated a nanogenerator with PLZT–PVDF–MWCNT and found that the prepared device showed enough capacitance to light up to 50 LEDs. The maximum o/p power calculated was 2 mW.198 An embedded polymer composite device made with BT-MoS2-PVDF showed excellent electrical conductivity. It also generated the highest output voltage when the NMP was used as a mixing solvent. They did an endurance test as well and tapped the device for 5 days. Even after 5000 cycles of tapping, the nanogenerator showed a stable output voltage.199 When dopamine-modified Ba0.85Ca0.15Zr0.1Ti0.9O3 (BCZT) filled with PVDF–HFP and fabricated film was exposed to different types of periodic loads, the prepared nanogenerator device showed a power density of ∼2.91 μW cm−3.200
 Fig. 20  (a) Output voltage generated by the PVDF/GO NF-based nanogenerator,126 (b) power density variation in the PVDF/ZnO composite-based nanogenerator,148 (c) stored power over time in the PLZT/PVDF/MWCNT composite nanogenerator (50% CNT),198 and (d) endurance cycles test (5 days) for the BT/MoS2/PVDF-based nanogenerator.199 The PVDF–HFP/BCZT composite nanogenerator: (e) output voltage vs. time by mechanical tapping and (f) output voltage vs. time by finger tapping.200 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 126, 148 and 198–200. Copyright (2017, 2018, 2020), Elsevier B. V; John Wiley and Sons Inc.; Springer and American Chemical Society. All rights reserved. 
Kar et al. prepared a piezoelectric energy harvester device with 2D sheets of SnO2. These fillers were mixed with PVDF, and the prepared nanogenerators exhibit a high power density of 4900 W m−3. The devices also showed an additional property of self-cleaning due to excellent hydrophobicity.201 ZnO NPs/PVDF and ZnO NRs/PVDF sensors prepared by the electrospinning technique. Nanogenerators made out of ZnO NRs/PVDF composites quickly become charge capacitors and light up a maximum of 40 LEDs with a 5% ZnO concentration.202 The P(VDF–TrFE)/GO composites also displayed exceptional qualities. A small amount of graphene (0.15%) increased the power density and output voltage for AC and DC circuit. At 0.15% graphene content, the power density for AC circuit improved 302% and for the DC circuit, 359% pure P(VDF–TRFE) due to 60% enhancement in crystallinity.203 Flexible nanogenerators made of ZnO/Co–PVDF–HFP composites were fabricated by Parangusan et al. As a mechanical force of 2.5 N was applied to the film, a voltage (2.8 V) was generated due to the dipole moments, which is much larger than that generated with PVDF–HFP (120 mV).204 Electrospun piezoelectric hybrid nanogenerator made of BT nanoparticles (15%), graphene nanosheets (0.15%), and PVDF with output voltage durability up to 1800 cycles and a peak voltage of 112 V were able to light 15 LEDs (Fig. 21a).205 Jella et al. fabricated a high-performance nanogenerator with methylammonium lead iodide perovskite (MAPbI3)/PVDF with various thicknesses. A mechanical pushing method was used to check the performance of the device. They found that the thicker composite films with 25% filler content performed the best with VOC = 45.6 V.206 The graphene/BT/PVDF composite-based nanogenerators also performed excellently and exhibited an output power of 5.8 μW. It has also been found that this 3-layered as-prepared nanogenerators was very stable over time (Fig. 21b).207 Formamidinium lead halide perovskite (FAPnBr3) nanoparticles and PVDF-based nanogenerators also showed power density as high as 27.4 μW cm−2. A high output voltage generated at 0.5 MPa stress was applied to the generator.208 Karan et al. used AlO–rGO as a filler and the nanogenerators prepared with PVDF showed enormous performance capacity and retained energy even after ≈158400 compression cycles (Fig. 21c). They observed 12.47% energy conversion efficiency of the device when 31.19 kPa stress was applied to it.209
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic representation of a nanogenerator made of graphene–BT/PVDF,205 (b) schematic representation and working mechanism of a trilayer nanogenerator made of graphene/BT/PVDF,207 (c) durability test of the AlO–rGO–PVDF-based generator when tapped by a sewing machine.209 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 205, 207 and 209. Copyright (2016, 2017, 2018), Elsevier B. V; John Wiley and Sons Inc. All rights reserved. 
Nanogenerators have also been used as pressure sensors for energy harvesting. PDA-modified BT/PVDF composites were tested as a pressure sensor by installing them in shoe soles. Various output voltage readings were collected during various activities, and it was found that the device responded well in as low as 61 ms in any condition (Fig. 22a–d).210 Lead-based fillers (PZT) incorporation with PVDF leads to high-pressure response in sensors. It significantly shows a very high power density of 36 μW cm−2.211 Physical sensor-based piezoresponse devices were prepared by a hybrid combination of PVDF and nanoclay. The energy conversion response in various activities was recorded and a high output voltage of 70 V was found. A very high power density of 68 μW cm−2 was also calculated due to a 90% increase in the electroactive phase (Fig. 22e and f).212 A flexible nanogenerator made up of electrospun PVDF polycarbazole was utilized for human motion to generate electricity.213 This nanogenerator was proven to generate electricity by wrist bending and movements of heel, finger, and toe, as shown in Fig. 23, thus having potential to be used as wearable electronic devices. By gentle toe and heel pressure, it generates 0.5 and 0.2 V as well as 0.12 V and 0.1 V from wrist bending Fig. 23a(i–iii) and fingers movements Fig. 23b(i–iii). Their study reveals the applicability of polycarbazole as a suitable additive to make PVDF-based nanogenerators.
 Fig. 22  (a) Pressure sensor installed in shoe sole and the output voltage generated by (b) jumping, (c) walking, and (d) running.210 In PVDF/nanoclay, (e) output voltage and (f) power.212 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 210.and 212. Copyright (2019, 2020), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 
 Fig. 23  Voltage generated by the nanogenerator in (a) under (i) heel movement, (ii) toe movement, and (iii) wrist bending, and (b) under twisting motions of index, middle, and ring fingers by the fabricated left-handed monitoring system.213 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 213. Copyright (2021), American Chemical Society, All rights reserved. 
Yadav et al.214 synthesized hBN–PVDF NF mat and utilized it for PENG. Their results revealed the enhancement of piezoelectric coefficient and Young's modulus by hBN addition, and the resulting device generates up to 68 V of the open circuit voltage and up to 0.1 μA with a high power density of 53.2 μW cm−1 (Fig. 24). These nanogenerators were robust and stable, and the performance was repeated up to 45 days and 1500 cycles. As shown in Fig. 24d, by human walking, the nanogenerator generates a maximum piezopotential of ∼98 V and charges a capacitor of 2.2 up to ∼3 V, as shown in Fig. 24b.
 Fig. 24  (a) Output voltage across a 10 MΩ load resistance when connected to the hBN–PVDF NF mat-based PENG, (b) photograph depicting the setup for charging a 2.2 μF capacitor, and (c and d) graphs of piezopotential generated through human motions such as (c) finger bending and (d) foot stepping/walking.214 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 214. Copyright (2020), American Chemical Society, All rights reserved. 
Soleymani et al.215 synthesized the sausage-like PVDF nanowire by template wetting methods and shows their enhanced nanogenerator performance than up to 280% compared to simple PVDF nanowires, which are due to the deformed morphology of sausage-like PVDF. They found an open circuit voltage of 3.12 V and a short circuit current of 1.36 A with sausage-like PVDF nanogenerators, as shown in Fig. 25a and b, with an output power of 5.6 μW cm−2, as shown in Fig. 25c.215 By Ag and ZnO doping, Zhou et al.216 increased the β phase content and microspores in P(VDF–TrFE), which is attributed to the enhanced piezoelectric performance of the composites. The nanogenerator based on this composite attains a power density up to 7.1 μW cm−2 and is able to convert even weak physiological signals to electricity. Pusty et al.217 studied piezoelectric energy conversion of PVDF-based nanocomposites with rGO–Ag nanoparticles fillers. The piezoelectric generator developed by them produced VOC ∼ 18 V and ISC of about 1.05 mA having a power density up to 28 W m−3. Yu et al.218 developed a composite piezoelectric materials using in situ doped conductive PANI, P(VDF–TrFE) and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (SCMC) with hot pressing and subsequent nitrogen quenching. This nanogenerator provides voltage up to 246 V and current up to 122 μA with a power density of 6.69 W m−2.
 Fig. 25  (a) VOC and (b) ISC of sausage-like nanowire and nanowire nanogenerators. All NF layers experienced the same excitation with a mechanical force of 20 N. The cyclic response of the nanogenerators, VOC and ISC, are given in a impact frequency of 5 Hz. (c) Power density of PVDF sausage-like nanowires and nanowires nanogenerators measured across a range of load resistances.215 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 215. Copyright (2021), John Wiley and Sons Inc., All rights reserved. 
7.2. Humidity/gas sensor
The BT/TiO2–PVDF composites-based humidity sensors suggested by Malik et al.219,220 Mallick et al.220 designed the BT/PVDF composite-based humidity sensor and observed that due to increase in the RMS roughness, the sensitivity improved to 0.2416 pF/%RH. In another study, Mallick et al.219 used PVDF/TiO2-based nanocomposite for a humidity sensor and showed a response time of 45 s and recovery time of 11 s (Fig. 26a).219 Motion-powered sensors can also be used as humidity, gas, and tactile sensors, as fabricated by He et al., who prepared e-skin out of T-ZnO/PVDF composites. The photocatalytic property of T-ZnO films also displayed self-cleaning property.221 The PVDF/ZnO composite was used to fabricate the humidity sensor. The prepared spin-coated composite films display high roughness as compared to pristine PVDF. This results in more vapor absorption to the device. These humidity sensors were found sensitive to 5–98% RH humidity. The recorded response time was 30 s, while within 51 s, it was recovered.222 Wu et al. checked the gas sensitivity of devices prepared with GP-PANI/PVDF. For 100 ppb NH3, the sensor recorded 10% response and due to graphene incorporation, high flexibility was also observed (Fig. 26b).223 Deshmukh et al. also prepared an NH3 sensor out of the PVDF/CeO2/GO composite. The variation of resistance on the gas diffusion to the sensor was recorded by changing RH in the range of 30–60%. Apart from NH3, other volatile gas fumes were also checked with the sensor; however, sensitivity toward NH3 was found to be the best with 57% (1232). With PVDF/CeO2/GO(90/7.5/2.5), 106 s rise time and 11 s fall time were verified (Fig. 26c and d).224 Self-powered temperature sensors combined with humidity sensors were fabricated by Xia et al. At 20 °C and 90% humidity, 20 V output voltage with 0.01 s response time and 3.5 s reset time were found. The response was calculated in a 10–90 °C temperature range, as shown in Fig. 26e and f.225 For H2 gas detection, Punetha et al. fabricated flexible composite film with the hot-pressing technique. Films were prepared by mixing rGO/SnO2/PVDF. They found that at 1000 ppm H2 concentration, the sensor responds very well, and within 52 s, it detects the gas, while it can detect 100 ppm gas within 34 s (Fig. 27).226
 Fig. 26  (a) Response recovery cycle capacitive humidity sensor made of PVDF/TiO2 (20–95% RH).219 (b) Response recovery cycle of the NH3 sensor made of GP-PANI/PVDF.223 (c) Response recovery cycle of the NH3 sensor made of PVDF/CeO2/GO (90/7.5/2.5) and (d) selectivity with various volatile gas.224 (e) Output voltage vs. temperature at 10 MΩ load. (f) Output voltage vs. time at 10 MΩ load when the temperature increased to 90 °C.225 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 219 and 223–225. Copyright (2018, 2019, 2021), Elsevier B.V; Taylor & Francis and Springer. All rights reserved. 
 Fig. 27  (a) rGO, SnO2, and PVDF molecular interaction. (b) Gas sensing response in PVDF and its composites. (c) Sensor response of 0.90(PVDF)–0.10[0.75(SnO2)–0.25rGO] at various H2 gas concentrations. (d) Sensor response vs. relative humidity at 100 ppm (H2 exposure with varying humidity).226 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 226. Copyright (2020), Nature Research. All rights reserved. 
7.3. Biosensors
Using electrospinning Ag-doped PVDF fiber, a web was prepared by Jin et al. and the bending response with pristine PVDF was compared. They blew the air across the prepared device and recorded very high sensitivity. The peak-to-peak voltage for light breathing, rapid breathing, and shorter breathing was ∼2.5 V, ∼1.3 V, and ∼5 V, respectively. These responses made this device ideal for biosensors such as respiratory protective equipment.227 An economical viable and environment-friendly biosensor based on PVDF film was developed by Zhao et al.228 for nucleic acid detection. They monitored the nucleic acid hybridization on the diaphragm of the biosensor and the sensitivity of the sensor was 0.185 kHz μg−1.
Lu et al.229 studied the pressure sensing behavior of a flexible PVDF film, and found excellent output response and negligible noise as compared to the signal for this PVDF-based sensor. They reported a linear variation of output voltage with applied pressure having a slope of 12 mV kPa−1, and the recovery time for hold and release was 2.5 μs. Hu et al.230 developed a P(VDF–TrFE)/BT NF-based supersensitive pressure sensor using a PI-based substrate and VDF–TrFE/BT with Ag nanowires as the top electrode. They found the low-pressure detection limit of 0.6 Pa best suited for human machine interface applications. Maity et al.231 demonstrated a skin-friendly piezoelectric sensor based on PANI–PVDF NF. Their sensor shows excellent pressure-sensitive performance up to 12000 cycles and enables the sensing of human finger touch. It also generates electricity to charge a 1 μF capacitor quickly, and thus, it can work as a self-powered device. It also senses small human physiological movements such as wrist bending, neck stretching, arm compressions, throat movements during drinking water, coughing actions, and swallowing. Yu et al.232 developed a super-flexible self-powered sensor for monitoring movement using PVDF and BaTi0.88Sn0.12O3 (BTS) with glass fiber fabrics (GFF). It shows outstanding sensing performance in the 1–9 N force region with a voltage sensitivity of 1.23 V N−1 and current sensitivity of 41 nA N−1, as shown in Fig. 28.
 Fig. 28  Output performance and stability of BTS-GFF/PVDF sensors. (a) Voltage sensitivity of the BTS-GFF/PVDF sensors, (b) current sensitivity of the BTS-GFF/PVDF sensors, (c) VOC and (d) ISC of BTS-GFF/PVDF sensors with different applied forces (2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, and 50 N, 0.5 Hz). (e and f) ISC of BTS-GFF/PVDF sensors under 5000 pressing cycles (force: 40 N, 0.5 Hz).232 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 232. Copyright (2021), Springer, All rights reserved. 
8. Conclusion and future prospective
The development and progress in nanocomposite materials for the fabrication of nanogenerators as renewable energy sources have become very promising in recent years. The energy harvesting competency and flexibility of these nanogenerators can be practically applied in various research areas, such as in human health monitoring sensors. Piezoelectric composites materials have numerous possibilities in transducers, actuators, energy storage devices, and wearable sensors. In this literature review, we reviewed how a combination of various types of fillers, their physical, chemical property, and volume fractions affect the piezoelectric and dielectric properties of PVDF and its copolymers for use in nanogenerators. The main fillers such as carbon materials, ceramic materials, hybrid materials, and other are described in detail on the basis of use in nanogenerators. The highest piezo and dielectric properties were reported by authors for nanosized ceramic filler incorporation. However, changes due to the preparation techniques such as annealing and poling were not considered as the surface was already modified with fillers. PVDF and its copolymer composites showed exceptional improvements in the design of nanogenerators. Systems with higher electroactive properties and high strength were attempted to be prepared. However, their flexibility has always been a restriction to use in wearable devices; hence, it is required to improve their elasticity to mold them in the desired shape. Higher constants are found with ceramic fillers, which are very brittle and always have a very high tangential loss. However, this problem can be solved by synthesizing and incorporating smaller ceramic nanoparticles. Carbon-based fillers possessing high mechanical properties show a slightly low value of electroactive constants compared to ceramic, which can be a good replacement with improved techniques. Hence, more work is needed to prepare systems with higher piezo and dielectric constants and low dielectric loss. Significant work has been done in this area but more research is still needed for its practical applications, and hybrid fillers can play a crucial role.
A better quality energy-harvesting device gives high output voltages, high power densities, and long compression cycles while a minimal load is applied. The properties of various fabricated nanogenerator devices depend on the electroactive properties of the polymer nanocomposites. The higher values of piezoelectric and dielectric constants confirm the improved device performance due to the more β phases. Other properties such as mechanical strength, toughness, and flexibility play an important role in designing the nanogenerators. Due to this reason, many researchers have tested various electroactive, mechanical, and physical properties separately for improving the performance, and few of them have been found to have very high piezoelectric and dielectric constants. As a promising energy harvesting technology, nanogenerators still have numerous key problems to be explained in the future. Despite such kind of problems and challenges, the development of PVDF with filler nanocomposite-based designed nanogenerators is gaining more and more attention. The PVDF-based PENG review article provided a wide ranging view of the current state-of-the-art regarding the design and fabrication of nanogenerators for application in energy harvesting. By discussing the advantages of the various parameters and approaches, we hope that this review might be particularly beneficial for new researchers working in this important interdisciplinary research field.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
R. Kumar acknowledges the financial assistance from the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science & Technology (DST), New Delhi under Ramanujan Fellowship Award (SB/S2/RJN-159/2017).
References
A. Alagumalai, O. Mahian, M. Aghbashlo, M. Tabatabaei, S. Wongwises and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105844 CrossRef CAS .
P. Biswas, N. A. Hoque, P. Thakur, M. M. Saikh, S. Roy, F. Khatun, B. Bagchi and S. Das, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 4801–4813 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, P. Wu, X. Wan, Q. Wang, C. Xu, M. Yang, J. Feng, B. Hu and Z. Luo, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106123 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, W. Fan, S. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang and K. Dong, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2021, 3(6), 2449–2467 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, J. Shao, Y. He, F. F. Yun, K. W. See, Z. L. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 8706–8714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fukada and T. Furukawa, Ultrasonics, 1981, 19, 31–39 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Kim, R. J. T. Lin, S. Fakirov, K. Aw and D. Bhattacharyya, Int. J. Polym. Mater. Polym. Biomater., 2014, 63, 23–32 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bera and M. Das Sarkar, IOSR J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 9(3), 95–99 CrossRef .
G. M. Sessler, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 1981, 70, 1596–1608 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and T. C. M. Chung, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 9391–9397 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Zhu, Z. G. Zeng, L. Zhang and X. J. Yan, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2008, 44, 224–229 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, K. Yao and B. K. Gan, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 084101 CrossRef .
F. Guan, J. Wang, J. Pan, Q. Wang and L. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6739–6748 CrossRef CAS .
W. N. dos Santos, C. Y. Iguchi and R. Gregorio, Polym. Test., 2008, 27, 204–208 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia and Z. Zhang, IET Nanodielectrics, 2018, 1, 17–31 CrossRef .
S. Anwar and K. Asadi, ACS Macro Lett., 2019, 8, 525–529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Costa, M. M. Silva and S. Lanceros-Méndez, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11404–11417 RSC .
X. Jia, Y. Ge, L. Shao, C. Wang and G. G. Wallace, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14321–14340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qian and D. J. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32281–32288 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Yamuna and K. Shanmukha Sundar, Int. J. Adv. Res. Electr. Electron. Instrum. Eng., 2014, 3(8), 10945–10953 Search PubMed .
Y. Shi and G. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2466–2477 CrossRef CAS .
V. F. Cardoso, G. Minas, C. M. Costa, C. J. Tavares and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Smart Mater. Struct., 2011, 20, 087002 CrossRef .
H. Salazar, A. C. Lima, A. C. Lopes, G. Botelho and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Colloids Surf., A, 2015, 469, 93–99 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Tuzzolino, T. E. Economou, R. B. McKibben, J. A. Simpson, J. A. M. McDonnell, M. J. Burchell, B. A. M. Vaughan, P. Tsou, M. S. Hanner, B. C. Clark and D. E. Brownlee, J. Geophys. Res.: Planets, 2003, 108, 1–5,  DOI:10.1029/2003je002086 .
L. Engel, S. Krylov and Y. Shacham-Diamand, J. Micro/Nanolithogr., MEMS, MOEMS, 2014, 13, 033011 CrossRef .
S. M. Pawde and K. Deshmukh, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 2169–2179 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ribeiro, C. M. Costa, D. M. Correia, J. Nunes-Pereira, J. Oliveira, P. Martins, R. Gonçalves, V. F. Cardoso and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Nat. Protoc., 2018, 13, 681–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Martins, A. C. Lopes and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 683–706 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ribeiro, D. M. Correia, S. Ribeiro, V. Sencadas and G. Botelho, Eng. Life Sci., 2015, 15, 351–356 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dagdeviren, P. Joe, O. L. Tuzman, K. Il Park, K. J. Lee, Y. Shi, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Extrem. Mech. Lett., 2016, 9, 269–281 CrossRef .
B. E. El Mohajir and N. Heymans, Polymer, 2001, 42, 7017–7023 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sencadas, R. Gregorio and S. Lanceros-Méndez, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 2009, 48, 514–525 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Doll and J. B. Lando, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 1970, 4, 889–896 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matsushige, K. Nagata and T. Takemura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1 Regul. Pap. Short Notes Rev. Pap., 1978, 17, 467–472 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, X. Li, K. Yao, F. E. H. Tay, A. Kumar and K. Zeng, Polymer, 2012, 53, 1404–1408 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ribeiro, V. Sencadas, J. L. G. Ribelles and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Soft Mater., 2010, 8, 274–287 CrossRef CAS .
G. Teyssèdre and C. Lacabanne, Ferroelectrics, 1995, 171, 125–144 CrossRef .
P. Raghavan, X. Zhao, C. Shin, D. H. Baek, J. W. Choi, J. Manuel, M. Y. Heo, J. H. Ahn and C. Nah, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6088–6094 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, M. Zhang, M. Rong and W. Ruan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 3938–3943 RSC .
G. Liu, K. Schneider, L. Zheng, X. Zhang, C. Li, M. Stamm and D. Wang, Polymer, 2014, 55, 2588–2596 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sharma, G. Madras and S. Bose, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 14792–14799 RSC .
T. Kaura, R. Nath and M. M. Perlman, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1991, 24, 1848–1852 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lei, X. Cai, X. Wang, L. Yu, X. Hu, G. Zheng, W. Lv, L. Wang, D. Wu, D. Sun and L. Lin, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 24952–24958 RSC .
J. Fang, X. Wang and T. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11088–11091 RSC .
N. Jahan, F. Mighri, D. Rodrigue and A. Ajji, Appl. Clay Sci., 2018, 152, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
D. He, Y. Wang, S. Song, S. Liu, Y. Luo and Y. Deng, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 151, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Sodano, D. J. Inman and G. Park, Shock vibr. dig., 2004, 36(3), 197–205 CrossRef .
Y. Su, Q. Li, J. Amagat and M. Chen, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106578 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Zhang, F. Zhang, M. Zhang, D. Li, G. Deng, L. Guan and M. Dong, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2021, 46, 79 CrossRef PubMed .
S. B. Lang, Phase Transitions, 2016, 89, 678–694 CrossRef CAS .
J. Curie and P. Curie, Bull. Minéralogie, 1880, 90–93 Search PubMed .
A. American and N. Standard, IEEE Trans. Sonics Ultrason., 1984, 31, 8–10 Search PubMed .
M. M. Tao, F. Liu, B. R. Ma and L. X. Xue, Desalination, 2013, 316, 137–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Bharath, T. Chakraborthy, H. Nhalil, B. Masin, K. Ashok, H. Sreemoolanadhan, C. Oommen and S. Elizabeth, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4484–4496 RSC .
G. Du, Z. Li and G. Song, Sensors, 2018, 18, 1682 CrossRef .
E. Elnabawy, A. H. Hassanain, N. Shehata, A. Popelka, R. Nair, S. Yousef and I. Kandas, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1634 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jean-Mistral, S. Basrour and J. J. Chaillout, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 085012 CrossRef .
A. Salimi and A. A. Yousefi, Polym. Test., 2003, 22, 699–704 CrossRef CAS .
P. Martins, A. C. Lopes and S. Lanceros-mendez, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 683–706 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3677–3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu and Q. Wang, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 2937–2954 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, H. Ji, J. Qiu, K. Zhu and B. Shao, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2014, 25, 858–864 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ramasundaram, S. Yoon, K. J. Kim and J. S. Lee, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 2516–2526 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Y. Ye, J. Yu, Y. Yang, J. Xu and Z. Wu, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2007, 88, 21–26 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Dahiya, D. Cattin, A. Adami, C. Collini, L. Barboni, M. Valle, L. Lorenzelli, R. Oboe, G. Metta and F. Brunetti, IEEE Sens. J., 2011, 11, 3216–3226 Search PubMed .
K. Henkel, I. Lazareva, D. Mandal, I. Paloumpa, K. Müller, Y. Koval, P. Müller and D. Schmeißer, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct., 2009, 27, 504 CrossRef CAS .
E. Soergel, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 464003 CrossRef .
Y. Roh, V. V. Varadan and V. K. Varadan, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 2002, 49, 836–847 Search PubMed .
J. Gomes, J. S. Nunes, V. Sencadas and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 065010 CrossRef .
J. L. Lutkenhaus, K. McEnnis, A. Serghei and T. P. Russell, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3844–3850 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bune, C. Zhu, S. Ducharme, L. M. Blinov, V. M. Fridkin, S. P. Palto, N. G. Petukhova and S. G. Yudin, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 85, 7869–7873 CrossRef CAS .
T. Furukawa and N. Seo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1990, 29, 675–680 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Wang, J. M. Zheng, G. Y. Ren, P. H. Zhang and C. Xu, Smart Mater. Struct., 2011, 20, 045009 CrossRef .
C. C. Hong, S. Y. Huang, J. Shieh and S. H. Chen, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1580–1586 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gaur, C. Kumar, S. Tiwari and P. Maiti, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3019–3024 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Wang, P. Friibing, W. Wirges, R. Gerhard and M. Wegener, Proceedings – International Symposium on Electrets, 2008.
B. Neese, Y. Wang, B. Chu, K. Ren, S. Liu, Q. M. Zhang, C. Huang and J. West, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 242917 CrossRef .
X. Lu, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 2000, 47, 1291–1295 CAS .
A. C. Jayasuriya, A. Schirokauer and J. I. Scheinbeim, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2001, 39, 2793–2799 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Wang and Z. Y. Cheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 062904 CrossRef .
F. P. La Mantia, M. Morreale and Z. A. M. Ishak, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2005, 96, 1906–1913 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, P. Belleville, M. Popall and L. Nicole, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 696–753 RSC .
J. Vicente, P. Costa, S. Lanceros-Mendez, J. M. Abete and A. Iturrospe, Materials, 2019, 12, 3545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, C. Lu, F. Wang and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 45220–45229 RSC .
Y. Y. Zhang, S. L. Jiang, Y. Yu, Y. K. Zeng, G. Z. Zhang, Q. F. Zhang and J. G. He, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 125, E314–E319 CrossRef CAS .
E. Thangavel, S. Ramasundaram, S. Pitchaimuthu, S. W. Hong, S. Y. Lee, S. S. Yoo, D. E. Kim, E. Ito and Y. S. Kang, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2014, 90, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen and B. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2017, 209, 163–166 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khalifa, A. Mahendran and S. Anandhan, J. Polym. Res., 2019, 26, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shintake, E. Piskarev, S. H. Jeong and D. Floreano, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700284 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Ying and J. Ping, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 167, 112495,  DOI:10.1016/j.bios.2020.112495 .
P. Costa, J. Nunes-Pereira, J. Oliveira, J. Silva, J. A. Moreira, S. A. C. Carabineiro, J. G. Buijnsters and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 153, 241–252 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, A. A. Abdala and C. W. MacOsko, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6515–6530 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Kang, C. S. Han, J. C. Pyun, W. H. Ryu, C. Y. Kang and Y. S. Cho, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2015, 111, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jia, Q. Xing, G. Xia, J. Sun, R. Song and W. Huang, Mater. Lett., 2015, 139, 212–215 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khan, Z. Abas, H. Soo Kim and I. K. Oh, Smart Mater. Struct., 2016, 25, 053002 CrossRef .
S. Barrau, A. Ferri, A. Da Costa, J. Defebvin, S. Leroy, R. Desfeux and J. M. Lefebvre, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13092–13099 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang and Z. M. Dang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 042903 CrossRef .
C. Andrews, Y. Lin and H. A. Sodano, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 025018 CrossRef .
K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, P. K. Ang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2277–2289 RSC .
S. Niyogi, E. Bekyarova, J. Hong, S. Khizroev, C. Berger, W. de Heer and R. C. Haddon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2487–2498 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Mao, S. Y. Mao, Z. G. Ye, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 014102 CrossRef .
H. Tang, Y. Lin and H. A. Sodano, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 451–456 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Dang, H. Y. Wang, B. Peng and C. W. Nan, J. Electroceram., 2008, 21, 381–384 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Mehra, L. Mu, T. Ji and J. Zhu, Polymer-Based Multifunctional Nanocomposites and Their Applications, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 77–110 Search PubMed .
M. Sharma, V. Srinivas, G. Madras and S. Bose, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 6251–6258 RSC .
R. Patil, A. Ashwin and S. Radhakrishnan, Sens. Actuators, A, 2007, 138, 361–365 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Mofokeng, A. S. Luyt, V. P. Pavlovic, V. B. Pavlovic, D. Dudic, B. Vlahovic and V. Djokovic, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 084109 CrossRef .
K. Y. Fang, F. Fang, S. W. Wang, W. Yang, W. Sun and J. F. Li, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 265305 CrossRef .
B. Jaleh, P. Fakhri, M. Noroozi and N. Muensit, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2012, 22, 878–885 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vasundhara, B. P. Mandal and A. K. Tyagi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 8591–8597 RSC .
P. I. Devi and K. Ramachandran, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2011, 6, 281–293 CrossRef CAS .
N. An, H. Liu, Y. Ding, M. Zhang and Y. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 3831–3835 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, S. Liang, A. Ferri, W. Huang, D. Rouxel, X. Devaux, X. G. Li, H. Yang, M. Chshiev, R. Desfeux, A. Da Costa, G. Hu, M. Stoffel, A. Nachawaty, C. Jiang, Z. Zeng, J. P. Liu, H. Yang and Y. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 152905 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Zhang, S. L. Jiang, Y. Yu, G. Xiong, Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Guang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 123, 2595–2600 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. He, K. Lin, D. L. Shi, H. J. Wu, H. K. Huang, J. J. Chen, F. Chen and K. H. Lam, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2016, 137, 138–147 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, J. Ma, X. Shi and Z. Ren, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 253, 2003–2010 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Reed, T. T. Srinivasan, Q. C. Xu and R. E. Newnham, Publ. IEEE, 1992, 324–327 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, C. Lu, F. Wang and X. Dong, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 688, 885–892 CrossRef CAS .
R. I. Mahdi, W. C. Gan and W. H. Abd Majid, Sensors, 2014, 14, 19115–19127 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia, Z. Wang, J. Xing, C. Cao and Z. Xu, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 2016, 63, 1674–1680 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhuang, S. Han, W. Liu, X. Wei and Z. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 831, 154657 CrossRef CAS .
T. Furukawa, Phase Transitions, 1989, 18, 143–211 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Habibur, U. Yaqoob, S. Muhammad, A. S. M. I. Uddin and H. C. Kim, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 215, 46–55 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Ma, X. Wu, L. Lin and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1901–1910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Kim, S. M. Hong and Y. Seo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10506–10512 RSC .
N. Jia, Q. He, J. Sun, G. Xia and R. Song, Polym. Test., 2017, 57, 302–306 CrossRef CAS .
M. Siddiqui, J. J. Mohamed and Z. A. Ahmad, J. Aust. Ceram. Soc., 2020, 56, 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain, S. J. Kumar, M. R. Kumar, A. S. Ganesh and S. Srikanth, Mech. Adv. Mater. Struct., 2014, 21, 181–186 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dietze and M. Es-Souni, Sens. Actuators, A, 2008, 143, 329–334 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, M. Wang, J. Zhu and X. Zhu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 4225–4229 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ryu, S. Priya, K. Uchino and H. E. Kim, J. Electroceram., 2002, 8, 107–119 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Nan, M. Li and J. H. Huang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 144415 CrossRef .
C. W. Nan, M. Li, X. Feng and S. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2527–2529 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ploss, W. Y. Ng, H. L. W. Chan, B. Ploss and C. L. Choy, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2001, 61, 957–962 CrossRef CAS .

          D. T. Le, N. B. Do, D. U. Kim, I. Hong, I. W. Kim and J. S. Lee, Ceramics International, Elsevier,  2012, vol. 38, pp. S259–S262 Search PubMed .
B. Ponraj, R. Bhimireddi and K. B. R. Varma, J. Adv. Ceram., 2016, 5, 308–320 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Seol, J. S. Lee, H. N. Ji, Y. P. Ok, G. P. Kong, K. S. Kim, C. Y. Kim and W. P. Tai, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, S263–S266 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu, S. Hu, J. Tan and W. Yu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 1367–1381 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Fan, H. Li, Y. Li, L. Zhang, S. Cao, S. Kuang, Y. Zhao, A. Chen, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4803–4811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Or, B. Ploss, F. G. Shin, H. L. W. Chan and C. L. Choy, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2002, 47, 19–28 CrossRef CAS .
E. Venkatragavaraj, B. Satish, P. R. Vinod and M. S. Vijaya, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2001, 34, 487–492 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Q. Zhao, K. Chen, Y. Ma, Y. Wu, H. Ji and J. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11045–11054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ponnamma, A. Erturk, H. Parangusan, K. Deshmukh, M. B. Ahamed and M. Al Ali Al-Maadeed, Emergent Mater., 2018, 1, 55–65 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khalifa and S. Anandhan, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 7328–7339 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, W. Tong, J. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Wang and Y. Zhang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2020, 137, 48412 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Singh, S. Singh and N. Khare, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2018, 29, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
N. An, S. Liu, C. Fang, R. Yu, X. Zhou and Y. Cheng, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 41577 CrossRef .
C. W. Tang, B. Li, L. Sun, B. Lively and W. H. Zhong, Eur. Polym. J., 2012, 48, 1062–1072 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, J. Fan and S. Lau, Polym. Test., 2008, 27, 964–970 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Rahman and G. S. Chung, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 581, 724–730 CrossRef .
S. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Zeng, B. Zhou, K. Teng, M. Ma, L. Chen and Z. Xu, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2015, 29, 678–690 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Q. Xue, L. Hao, X. Gao and Q. Zheng, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2008, 68, 2290–2296 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kim, N. M. Doss, J. P. Tillotson, P. J. Hotchkiss, M. J. Pan, S. R. Marder, J. Li, J. P. Calame and J. W. Perry, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2581–2592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, Z. Zhao, Z. Chen and J. Pei, Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 536–540 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, C. Yang, X. dong Qi, J. hui Yang, Z. wan Zhou and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 366, 378–389 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kum-onsa, P. Thongbai, S. Maensiri and P. Chindaprasirt, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 9650–9655 CrossRef CAS .
P. Thomas, K. T. Varughese, K. Dwarakanath and K. B. R. Varma, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2010, 70, 539–545 CrossRef CAS .
A. Srivastava, P. Maiti, D. Kumar and O. Parkash, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2014, 93, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arbatti, X. Shan and Z. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1369–1372 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, S. Yu, R. Sun and R. Du, Acta Mater., 2011, 59, 5593–5602 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fang, Z. Wang, H. Li and Y. Wen, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, S387–S392 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, M. Fang, H. Li, Y. Wen, C. Wang and Y. Pu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2015, 117, 410–416 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Wang and Y. J. Xiao, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, S239–S243 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kum-onsa, P. Thongbai, B. Putasaeng, T. Yamwong and S. Maensiri, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 35, 1441–1447 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, H. Ren, X. Chao and P. Liang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 1273–1277 CrossRef CAS .
K. Meeporn and P. Thongbai, Composites, Part B, 2020, 184, 107738 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fakhri, H. Mahmood, B. Jaleh and A. Pegoretti, Synth. Met., 2016, 220, 653–660 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ben-Dor, E. Fischbein and Z. Kalman, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1976, 32, 667 CrossRef .
E. H. Abdelhamid, O. D. Jayakumar, V. Kotari, B. P. Mandal, R. Rao, V. M. Naik, R. Naik and A. K. Tyagi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 20089–20094 RSC .
L. Fan, D. Yang, L. Huang, M. Fan, C. Lei and Q. Fu, Polymer, 2020, 201, 122608 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sahoo, S. Mishra, L. Unnikrishnan, S. Mohanty, S. Mahapatra, S. K. Nayak, S. Anwar and A. Ramadoss, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2020, 117, 105173 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chakraborty, S. Sharma, A. Ghosh, A. S. Mahapatra, S. Chakrabarti and S. Sutradhar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 19396–19405 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Li, S. C. Tjong and R. K. Y. Li, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2011, 5, 526–534 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ponnamma and M. A. A. Al-Maadeed, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 774–785 RSC .
N. Phromviyo, N. Chanlek, P. Thongbai and S. Maensiri, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 446, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, D. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. Zhan, J. Yin, X. Tao, X. Ge, S. C. Tjong, H. Y. Liu and Y. W. Mai, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 171, 152–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Im and I. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(30), 25660–25665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhattacharjee, S. Mondal, A. Banerjee and K. K. Chattopadhyay, Mater. Res. Express, 2020, 7, 044001 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Z. Bai, Y. Cao, M. Dong, K. Jiang, Y. Zhou, Y. Tao, S. Gu, J. Xu, X. Yin and W. Xu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 192, 108100 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chinya, A. Sasmal and S. Sen, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 815, 152312 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Dang, Y. Shen and C. W. Nan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 81, 4814–4816 CrossRef .
R. Negishi, T. Hasegawa, H. Tanaka, K. Terabe, H. Ozawa, T. Ogawa and M. Aono, Surf. Sci., 2007, 601, 3907–3911 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, Y. Yang, Y. Chen and Q. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, Y. Yang, R. Chen, G. Lu, R. Li, D. Li, M. S. Humayun, K. K. Shung, J. Zhu, Y. Chen and Q. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 216–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Blumberga, R. Vanaga, R. Freimanis, D. Blumberga, J. Antužs, A. Krastiņš, I. Jankovskis, E. Bondars and S. Treija, Energy, 2020, 202, 117485 CrossRef .
S. Bairagi, S. Ghosh and S. W. Ali, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 12121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Wang and W. Tong, IET Nanodielectrics, 2021, 1–10 Search PubMed .
C. Xu, Y. Song, M. Han and H. Zhang, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2021, 7, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Lee, J. W. Lee and J. M. Baik, Micromachines, 2018, 9, 532 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, B. Yang, J. Liu, Y. Zhu, C. Yang and Q. He, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef .
J. Hafner, S. Benaglia, F. Richheimer, M. Teuschel, F. J. Maier, A. Werner, S. Wood, D. Platz, M. Schneider, K. Hradil, F. A. Castro, R. Garcia and U. Schmid, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lu, W. Ding, J. Liu and B. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105251 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, X. Gao, S. Zhao, Y. Liu, D. Zhang, K. Zhou, H. Khanbareh, W. Chen, Y. Zhang and C. Bowen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 30, 2008452 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zi and Z. L. Wang, APL Mater., 2017, 5, 074103 CrossRef .
A. Pal, A. Sasmal, B. Manoj, D. P. Rao, A. K. Haldar and S. Sen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 244, 122639 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Ng, P. C. Ooi, M. A. Shazni Mohammad Haniff, B. T. Goh, C. F. Dee, W. S. Chang, M. F. M. Razip Wee and M. A. Mohamed, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 820, 153160,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2019.153160 .
K. S. Chary, V. Kumar, C. D. Prasad and H. S. Panda, J. Aust. Ceram. Soc., 2020, 56, 1107–1117 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kar, N. Bose, B. Dutta, S. Banerjee, N. Mukherjee and S. Mukherjee, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 184, 600–608 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Chen, W. Liu, R. Fu, S. Tu, Y. Zhao, L. Dong, B. Yan and Y. Gu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 11378–11387 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, M. Jing, Y. Liu, H. Ning, X. Liu, S. Liu, L. Lin, N. Hu and L. Liu, Composites, Part B, 2019, 164, 703–709 CrossRef CAS .
H. Parangusan, D. Ponnamma and M. A. A. Al-Maadeed, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–11 CAS .
K. Shi, B. Sun, X. Huang and P. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
V. Jella, S. Ippili, J. H. Eom, J. Choi and S. G. Yoon, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 46–56 CrossRef CAS .
U. Yaqoob, A. S. M. I. Uddin and G. S. Chung, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 405, 420–426 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ding, X. Zhang, G. Chen, H. Wang, R. Kishor, J. Xiao, F. Gao, K. Zeng, X. Chen, X. W. Sun and Y. Zheng, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 126–135 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Karan, R. Bera, S. Paria, A. K. Das, S. Maiti, A. Maitra and B. B. Khatua, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601016 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, H. Pan, G. Xie, Y. Jiang, C. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Wang and H. Tai, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 301, 111789 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Wankhade, S. Tiwari, A. Gaur and P. Maiti, Energy Rep., 2020, 6, 358–364 CrossRef .
S. Tiwari, A. Gaur, C. Kumar and P. Maiti, Energy, 2019, 171, 485–492 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sengupta, S. Das, S. Dasgupta, P. Sengupta and P. Datta, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 7(4), 1673–1685 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yadav, T. D. Raju and S. Badhulika, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 1970–1980 CrossRef CAS .
H. Soleymani, M. Noormohammadi, M. A. Kashi, M. H. Amiri, J. J. Michels, K. Asadi and M. M. Abolhasani, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2001734 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, X. Du, J. Luo, L. Yao, Z. Zhang, H. Yang and Q. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105895 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pusty, L. Sinha and P. M. Shirage, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 284–294 RSC .
S. Yu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yu, J. Zheng, Y. Wang and H. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105519 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallick, Z. Ahmad, F. Touati and R. A. Shakoor, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 288, 408–413 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallick, Z. Ahmad, K. W. Qadir, A. Rehman, R. A. Shakoor, F. Touati and S. A. Al-Muhtaseb, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 2949–2953 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, Y. Fu, W. Zang, Q. Wang, L. Xing, Y. Zhang and X. Xue, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 37–48 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Arularasu, M. Harb, R. Vignesh, T. V. Rajendran and R. Sundaram, Surf. Interfaces, 2020, 21, 100780 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, W. Shen, D. Lv, W. Chen, W. Song and R. Tan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 334, 129630 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deshmukh and S. K. K. Pasha, Polym. Technol. Mater, 2020, 59, 1429–1446 CAS .
K. Xia, Z. Zhu, H. Zhang and Z. Xu, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2018, 124, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
D. Punetha, M. Kar and S. K. Pandey, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jin, Y. Zheng, Z. Liu, J. Li, H. Zhai, Z. Chen and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1359–1367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, J. Hu, W. Ren, F. Xu, X. Wu, P. Shi and Z. G. Ye, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, S602–S606 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lu, W. Huang, J. Guo, T. Gong, X. Wei, B. W. Lu, S. Y. Liu and B. Yu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 0–5 CAS .
X. Hu, Y. Jiang, Z. Ma, Q. He, Y. He, T. Zhou and D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 4399–4404 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maity, S. Garain, K. Henkel, D. Schmeißer and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 862–878 CrossRef .
D. Yu, Z. Zheng, J. Liu, H. Xiao, G. Huangfu and Y. Guo, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
Table Content:

Saloni Sharma
	Saloni Sharma received her Master's degree in Physics from Chatrapati Sahu ji Maharaj University, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India in 2007. She is pursuing PhD program in Physics at Chatrapati Sahu ji Maharaj (CSJM) University, Kanpur. She is also working as a Senior Research Associate at Center for Nanotechnology, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India. Her research area includes polymer nanocomposites-based devices for various sensor applications.

Shashank Shekhar Mishra
	Shashank Shekhar Mishra is Assistant Professor at Jagran College of Arts Science and Commerce, Kanpur, UP, India. He received his PhD in Physics from Banaras Hindu University Varanasi, India in 2018. Before joining the Jagran College of Arts Science and Commerce, he was National Postdoctoral Fellow at the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. His research is focused on the functional, magnetic, and hydrogen storage properties of metallic alloys (quasicrystals, Heusler alloys, high entropy alloys), polymer composites.

Rajesh Kumar
	Dr Rajesh Kumar is recipient of Ramanujan fellowship award from Department of Science and Technology (DST), New Delhi, India to work in Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur, India. He did his BSc/MSc (Physics) from University of Allahabad. He earned his PhD (Physics-Nanoscience) from Department of Physics, Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Varanasi, India. He is recipient of the prestigious international JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science) fellowship (FY 2018–2020) to work in the Toyohashi University of Technology (TUT), Aichi, Japan. He has worked in the State University of Sao Paulo (UNESP) (Sao Paulo Research Foundation Fellowship: 2018), Presidente Prudente, and University of Campinas (UNICAMP) (CNPq postdoctoral fellow/visiting scientist: 2015–2017), Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil. He has also worked in Yonsei University (Brain Korea 21+ Research Professor: 2014), Seoul and Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) (Graphene Research Centre; Postdoctoral researcher: 2012–2014), Daejeon, South Korea. His main research interests are the synthesis, modifications, and assemblies of carbon nanomaterials with different dimensionalities (graphene derivatives, graphene-based materials, and CNTs) and inorganic layered materials for application in energy, electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding, sensors, etc. He has published over 95 international highly-ranked papers with more than 5200 citations and an H-index of 43.

Ram Manohar Yadav
	Dr Ram Manohar Yadav is Professor in the Department of Physics, University of Allahabad, Prayagraj, India. He completed his MSc (Condensed Matter) in 1999 and PhD (Physics-Nanoscience) in 2008 under the supervision of Padma Shri Prof. O. N. Srivastava from Banaras Hindu University. During May–June 2013, he visited University of Santiago, Santiago, Chile as a visiting researcher in the Department of Physics, and his visit was funded by the project FONDICYT of Government of Chile. The Raman Fellowship for Postdoctoral Studies was awarded to him in July 2013 for one year duration to visit Rice University, Houston USA by UGC India under Indo-US 21st Century Knowledge Initiative. Fulbright Nehru Academic and Professional Excellence Fellowship was awarded to Dr Yadav in 2019, and he was at George R. Brown School of Engineering, Rice University Houston USA since Sept 2019 to June 2020 as a Fulbright visiting faculty. He has published more than 45 research papers in highly reputed international journals such as Nature Communications, Advanced Materials, ACS Nano, Nano Letters, and Materials Today. Presently, he is working on renewable energy applications of nanomaterials, specially carbon nanostructures (e.g., CNT, Graphene, and quantum dots), polymer composites, and mesoporous carbon nitride.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic presentation of PVDF-based PENGs with various fabrication methods, fillers, properties, and relevant applications.	 
Di = diJσJ + ε0εσijEi	(1)
δI = SEIJσJ + dIiEi	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Representation of (a) the d33 mode presents the direction of electric polarization parallel to stress and (b) the d31 mode d33 presents the direction of electric polarization perpendicular to stress.	 

 	Fig. 3  Different phases (α, β, and ϒ) of the PVDF polymer.59 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2014), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 4  Polymer polarization: Pint: interfacial, Pion: ionic, Pdip: dipolar, Pvib: vibrational, electronic polarization.60 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2014), American Chemical Society, All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 5  Piezoelectric constant and β phase content F(β)% with respect to the stretching ratio R at 80 °C.69 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 69. Copyright (2010), Institute of Physics, All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of the fracture surface of (a) PVDF/rGO (red arrows pointed toward aggregated rGO) and (b) PVDF/PFOES–rGO (red arrows pointed toward dispersed PFOES–rGO).120 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2016), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 7  AFM microstructures and corresponding 3D microstructures of PVDF with P(VDF–TrFE) ratio of 1:0 (a), 9:1 (b), 1:1 (c), 1:9 (d), and 0:1 (e) samples. Piezoresponce force microscopy mode magnitude-voltage butterfly curve (f) and magnitude vs. displacement curve (g) of PVDF.128 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 128. Copyright (2017), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) d33vs. P(VDF–TrFE)/PZT composite curve,131 (b) piezoelectric constant d33 of the composite at various concentrations in the range of 0.948 KNN–0.052 LS in air and de-ionized water.132 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 132. Copyright (2014), Springer. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–d) SEM micrographs of KNNLST–PVDF composites.139 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 139. Copyright (2012), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 10  The SEM images of the PVDF/PZT composite film at various PZT concentrations.143 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2001), Institute of Physics, All rights reserved.	 

Carbon-based fillers
PFOES-rGO/PVDF	39.8 pC N−1	0.3	Solution casting/annealing	Piezoelectric energy transfer and ferroelectric storage materials	
120

rGO/PVDF	39.3 pC N−1	0.1	Solution casting/annealing	Piezoelectric energy transfer and ferroelectric storage materials	
84

rGO/P(VDF–TrFE)	−23 pC N−1	0.2	Solution casting/annealing	PENG	
125

GO/PVDF	−93.75 pm V−1	0.1	Electrospinning	Nanofiber-based generators	
126

MWCNT/PVDF	23 pC N−1	0.2	Hot pressed/drawnpoled	β-Phase enhancement	
127

C3N4/PVDF	5.5 pC N−1	0.75	Electrospinning	Wearable, self-powered devices	
88



Ceramic-based fillers
P(VDF–TrFE)/PVDF	
51.2 ± 5.0 pC N−1	50	Solution casting/annealing	Electroactive property enhancement	
128

PZT/P(VDF–TrFE)	10 pm V−1	30	Screen printed/annealed/poled	Pyroelectric detectors	
131

PZT/PVDF	40 pC N−1	50	Solution casting/annealing	Auto sensor testing	
130

Tb–Dy–Fe/PZT/PVDF	62 pC N−1	0.07	Simulated by green function technique	As magnetoelectronic material in electronics application	
135

PZT/P(VDF–TrFE)	30 pC N−1	60	Hot pressed/poled	Poling effect study	
136

KNN/PVDF	35 pC N−1	70	Hot pressed pallets/poled	Lead free medical testing and transducers	
138

0.948KNN–0.052LS/KNLN/KNN/PVDF	107 pC N−1	90	Normal pressed pallets/poled	Lead-free devices	
132

(K0.44Na0.52Li0.04) (Nb0.86Ta0.10Sb0.04)O3/PVDF	35 pC N−1	80	Normal pressed pallets	Lead-free piezodevices	
139

KNNL-Z/ZnO2/PVDF	55 pC N−1	10	Hot pressed	Lead free electronic devices/sensors	
140

NKNS-LT-BZ NP/PVDF	53 pm V−1	—	Solvent casting/annealing	Flexible nanogenerator, tubular nanosensor, wearable devices	
141

PZT/PVDF	13.8 pC N−1	50	Solvent casting/hot pressed	Transducers	
143



Hybrid fillers
Ag–CNT/PVDF	54 pm V−1	1	Electrospinning	β phase enhancement	
107

Graphene/CNT/MnO2/PVDF	52 pC N−1	0.8–0.4–0.8	Electrospinning	Flexible self-powered devices	
144

BT/PANI/PVDF	50 pC N−1	40	Powder blending/mechanical mixing	Enhancement of electroactive properties	
108

(TiO3/rGO)/(SrTiO3)/PVDF–HFP	7.52 pC N−1	1:2	Casting/hot-pressing	Wearable devices	
145

PANI/C3N4/PVDF	17 pC N−1	10	Electrospinning	Wearable, self-powered devices	
146



Other fillers
LiSEP–H2O/PVDF–HFP	32 pC N−1	13	Solvent casting/annealing	Enhancement of electroactive properties	
147

MMT/PVDF	5.8 pC N−1	2	Solvent casting/poling	Phase transformation study	
116

Micro-CaCO3 + MMT	30 pC N−1	43	Solvent casting/drawing/poling	Transducers	
45

Organosilicate (OS)/PVDF	−22.2 pC N−1	4	Hot pressed/stretched	Thermal detector, self-powered devices	
117

ZnO/PVDF	1.17 pC N−1	15	Solvent casted/annealed	Nanogenerators	
148


 	Fig. 11  (a) Dielectric permittivity under frequency range of 10−2–107 Hz with GO concentration of (A) 0, (B1) 0.04, (B2) 0.06, (B3) 0.08, (B4) 0.10, and (C) 0.10 (DMF with water) in the PVDF/GO composite.149 Dielectric constant of PVDF with GO content up to 5% under various frequency ranges of (b) neat sample, (c) stretched, and (d) recrystallized.150 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 149 and 150. Copyright (2012, 2014), Elsevier B. V. and John Wiley and Sons Inc., All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Dielectric constant under different frequency ranges from 102 to 107 Hz of PVDF, EG, F-EG, O3-EG, and PMMA-g-EG,153 (b–d) dielectric constant of (b) pristine, (c) carboxylic-functionalized, and (d) ester-functionalized MWCNT. Graphs were shown as a function of vol% of MWCNT. The inset plots shows the log value of dielectric constant as a function of pc-pMWCNT, where pc is the percolation threshold and PMWCNT is the MWCNT volume fraction.154 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 153 and 154. Copyright (2008, 2015), Elsevier B. V. and Taylor and Francis Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 13  Dielectric constant as a function of calcined BT at various temperatures.156 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 156. Copyright (2017), American Scientific Publishers, All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic representation of (a) BT agglomeration in the PVDF/BT composite, (b) well dispersed PI@BT nanoparticles in the composite, (c) core shell-structured PI@BT nanoparticles, (d and e) BT & PI interfacial interaction, (f and g) PI and PVDF interfacial interaction. The graphical illustration well explains the mechanism of generation of the dielectric property in the PVDF/PI@BT composite, (h) dielectric constant, and (ε′) and dielectric loss (tanδ) of PI-coated BT/PVDF and pristine BT/PCDF composites.157 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 157. Copyright (2019), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM micrographs of NCB-NPs/PVDF at (a) 0.2%, (b) 0.5%, and the NCB-MPs/PVDF composite at (c) 0.2 and (d) 0.5 wt%. (e) Dielectric constant (ε′) of NCB-NPs/PVDF composite at various filler concentrations as a function of frequency.158 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 159. Copyright (2016), Springer, All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 16  Strain vs. stress curve of PVDF, PVDF/CCTO, and PVDF/LaCCTO.160 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 160. Copyright (2014), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM microstructures of (a) PVDF, (b) PVDF/CCTO (nanosized) 20%, (c) PVDF/CCTO (nanosized) 40%, (d) PVDF/CCTO (microsized) 20%, (e) PVDF/CCTO (micro sized) 52%.162 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 162. Copyright (2011), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 18  SEM micrographs of (a) PVDF, (b) nLSNO/PVDF with the inset image of the prepared flexible film, (c) interparticle distance in μLSNO/PVDF and nLSNO/PVDF composite as the filler volume fraction, (d) dielectric constant of μLSNO/PVDF and nLSNO/PVDF as a function of the volume fraction from 0.05 to 0.2%.168 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2020), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic diagram for BTNF and BT-BN NF hybrid fiber preparation.172 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 172. Copyright (2020), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

Neat	9.7	0.018
PVDF/BT (80/20)	11.6	0.019
PVDF/BT (40/60)	31.4	0.026
PVDF/BT/GN (80/20/2.5)	50.0	0.072
PVDF/BT/GN (80/20/3.0)	492.0	49.1

Carbon-based filler
GO/PVDF	24	4.5–5	1 Hz	0.1	Solvent casting/co-solvent approach	Crystalline phase, dielectric properties	
149

rGO/PVDF	72	0.13	1 kHz	0.2	Solution casted	Energy harvesting device	
125

GO/PVDF	40	0.01	1–103 Hz	5	Solution casted/stretched	Energy applications, robotics	
150

Graphite/PVDF	17	0.002	102 Hz	10	Solution casted/annealing	Dielectric and crystallization behavior study	
151

rGO/PVDF	69	1.33	1 kHz	0.3	Solution casted/annealing	Broadband sensing, flexible energy scavenging	
152

ϒ-Irradiated PMMA-grafted graphene/PVDF	18	0.7	102 Hz	0.5	Solution casted/annealing	Dielectric and crystallization behavior study	
153

MWCNT/PVDF	300	∼0.4	104 Hz	2	Hot pressed pallets	High charge storage capacitor	
97

Carboxylic functionalized CNT/PVDF	3600	8–10	1 kHz	8	Solution casted	Dielectric and ac conductivity study for sensor application	
154

Easter functionalized CNT/PVDF	2400	6
Pristine CNT/PVDF	1700	6


Ceramic-based filler
PZT/PVDF	71	0.022	1 kHz	50	Solution casted/annealing/poling	Low cost pyroelectric detectors	
131

BT phosponic acid modified/PVDF–hfp	35	0.03	1 kHz	50	Spin coated	Energy storage	
155

Calcinate BT/PVDF	166.38	0.02	1 kHz	
	Hot pressed/poling	Electroactive property	
156

KNN/PVDF	3273	0.65	100 Hz	40	Hot pressed	Electroactive property	
138

PI@BT/PVDF	60.4	0.044	100 Hz	40	Compressed molding	Dielectric constant enhancement for energy storage application	
157

NCB-nps/PVDF	210.8	0.83	103 Hz	50	Hot pressed	Dielectric constant enhancement for energy storage and sensor application	
158

CCTO/PVDF	190	0.2	100 Hz	55	Hot pressed	Capacitor	
159

LaCCTO/PVDF	30	0.022	1 Hz	10	Compressed molding	Capacitor	
160

CCTO/P(VDF–TrFE)	1210 (70)	0.41	100 Hz	50	Hot pressed/annealed	By pass capacitor	
161

610 (RT)	0.43
740 (70 °C)	0.21	1 kHz
330 (RT)	0.26
CCTO nps/PVDF	2.49 × 106	48	100 Hz	40	Hot pressed	Temperature sensor field	
162

738	1.8	20
CCTO mps/PVDF	35	0.23	40	Embedded capacitor
16.5	0.14	20
BFN/PVDF	57 (RT)	0.23	100 Hz	60	Cold pressed	Embedded capacitor	
163

62 (140 °C)	0.25	40
BFN/PVDF	93	0.20	100 Hz	60	Cold pressed/annealed	Embedded capacitor	
164

LSNO-nps/PVDF	565	0.28	1 kHz	30	Hot pressed	Dielectric charge storage capacitor	
168

LSNO-nps/PVDF	56	0.07


Hybrid filler
GO/Au/PVDF	31	0.1	1 kHz	1	Solvent casting/annealing	Flexible nanoelectronics	
169

GO/Cu/PVDF	45	0.1	1 kHz	5
BTNF/PVDF	16.3	0.035	1 kHz	10	Solvent casting/annealing	Energy storage	
172

BT-BN nf/PVDF	19.6	0.02	10
Fe-Doped ZnO/P(VDF–TrFE)	21.03	0.1	1 kHz	0.05	Solvent casting/annealing	Low power electronic application	
173

BT/GN2.5/PVDF	50	0.072	1 kHz	20/2.5/80	Compression molding	Energy storage	
175

BT/GN3/PVDF	492	49.1	20/3/80
BT/PVDF–HFP	18	1.6	100 Hz	3	Solvent casting/annealing/poling	Energy harvester	
176

Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)/PVDF–HFP	25	5	1
BT/hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)/PVDF–HFP	45	7.8	3:1
X type hexaferrite C3N4/PVDF	18 (30 °C)	0.4	10 Hz	20 (70:30):80	Solution casted/Annealed	Electromagnetic pollution shield	
174

16 (50 °C)	0.5
52 (100 °C)	1.7
Graphene quantum dot/cobalt ferrite/PVDF	1200	1	0.1 Hz	20:1	Solution casted	Microelectronic field	
87



Other filler
Ag@Ale-NPs/PVDF	92.5	0.049	1 kHz	0.18	Compression molding	Dielectric constant enhancement for high-density electronic packaging technology	
177

257.2	0.26	0.22
ZnO/PVDF	13.01	0.056	10 kHz	30	Solvent casted	Sensor, solar cell	
113

Fe3O4-Decorated rGO/PSSNa for dispersion/PVDF	1297	0.26	100 Hz	1	Compression molding	Supercapacitor	
178

Magnetite nanoparticles Fe3O4/PVDF	24	0.7	104 Hz	5	Solvent casted	Sensor, solar cell	
180

Zinc ferrite nanorod/PANI/PVDF	32	0.18	100 Hz	3	Solvent casting, annealing	Piezoelectric energy harvester	
182

Ni decorated BT/PVDF	800	0.05	100 Hz	0.2	Hot molding	Capacitor, energy storage device	
183


 	Fig. 20  (a) Output voltage generated by the PVDF/GO NF-based nanogenerator,126 (b) power density variation in the PVDF/ZnO composite-based nanogenerator,148 (c) stored power over time in the PLZT/PVDF/MWCNT composite nanogenerator (50% CNT),198 and (d) endurance cycles test (5 days) for the BT/MoS2/PVDF-based nanogenerator.199 The PVDF–HFP/BCZT composite nanogenerator: (e) output voltage vs. time by mechanical tapping and (f) output voltage vs. time by finger tapping.200 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 126, 148 and 198–200. Copyright (2017, 2018, 2020), Elsevier B. V; John Wiley and Sons Inc.; Springer and American Chemical Society. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic representation of a nanogenerator made of graphene–BT/PVDF,205 (b) schematic representation and working mechanism of a trilayer nanogenerator made of graphene/BT/PVDF,207 (c) durability test of the AlO–rGO–PVDF-based generator when tapped by a sewing machine.209 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 205, 207 and 209. Copyright (2016, 2017, 2018), Elsevier B. V; John Wiley and Sons Inc. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Pressure sensor installed in shoe sole and the output voltage generated by (b) jumping, (c) walking, and (d) running.210 In PVDF/nanoclay, (e) output voltage and (f) power.212 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 210.and 212. Copyright (2019, 2020), Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 23  Voltage generated by the nanogenerator in (a) under (i) heel movement, (ii) toe movement, and (iii) wrist bending, and (b) under twisting motions of index, middle, and ring fingers by the fabricated left-handed monitoring system.213 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 213. Copyright (2021), American Chemical Society, All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Output voltage across a 10 MΩ load resistance when connected to the hBN–PVDF NF mat-based PENG, (b) photograph depicting the setup for charging a 2.2 μF capacitor, and (c and d) graphs of piezopotential generated through human motions such as (c) finger bending and (d) foot stepping/walking.214 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 214. Copyright (2020), American Chemical Society, All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) VOC and (b) ISC of sausage-like nanowire and nanowire nanogenerators. All NF layers experienced the same excitation with a mechanical force of 20 N. The cyclic response of the nanogenerators, VOC and ISC, are given in a impact frequency of 5 Hz. (c) Power density of PVDF sausage-like nanowires and nanowires nanogenerators measured across a range of load resistances.215 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 215. Copyright (2021), John Wiley and Sons Inc., All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Response recovery cycle capacitive humidity sensor made of PVDF/TiO2 (20–95% RH).219 (b) Response recovery cycle of the NH3 sensor made of GP-PANI/PVDF.223 (c) Response recovery cycle of the NH3 sensor made of PVDF/CeO2/GO (90/7.5/2.5) and (d) selectivity with various volatile gas.224 (e) Output voltage vs. temperature at 10 MΩ load. (f) Output voltage vs. time at 10 MΩ load when the temperature increased to 90 °C.225 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 219 and 223–225. Copyright (2018, 2019, 2021), Elsevier B.V; Taylor & Francis and Springer. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) rGO, SnO2, and PVDF molecular interaction. (b) Gas sensing response in PVDF and its composites. (c) Sensor response of 0.90(PVDF)–0.10[0.75(SnO2)–0.25rGO] at various H2 gas concentrations. (d) Sensor response vs. relative humidity at 100 ppm (H2 exposure with varying humidity).226 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 226. Copyright (2020), Nature Research. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 28  Output performance and stability of BTS-GFF/PVDF sensors. (a) Voltage sensitivity of the BTS-GFF/PVDF sensors, (b) current sensitivity of the BTS-GFF/PVDF sensors, (c) VOC and (d) ISC of BTS-GFF/PVDF sensors with different applied forces (2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, and 50 N, 0.5 Hz). (e and f) ISC of BTS-GFF/PVDF sensors under 5000 pressing cycles (force: 40 N, 0.5 Hz).232 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 232. Copyright (2021), Springer, All rights reserved.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
