Product integration of compact roll-to-roll processed polymer solar cell modules: methods and manufacture using flexographic printing, slot-die coatin ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM01178A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM01178A
(Application)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8994-9001Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsProduct integration of compact roll-to-roll processed polymer solar cell modules: methods and manufacture using flexographic printing, slot-die coating and rotary screen printing

        
          
            Frederik C. 
            Krebs
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jan 
            Fyenbo
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Mikkel 
            Jørgensen
          
          
        
      a
aRisø National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy, Technical University of Denmark, Frederiksborgvej 399, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark. E-mail: frkr@risoe.dtu.dk
bMekoprint Electronics A/S, Hermesvej 4, DK-9530, Støvring, Denmark
Received 
      23rd April 2010
    , Accepted 21st May 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      8th July 2010
    AbstractThe improvement of the performance of roll-to-roll processed polymer solar cell modules through miniaturization of the device outline is described. The devices were prepared using full roll-to-roll processing comprising flexographic printing, slot-die coating and rotary screen printing to create 5 mm wide lines of ZnO, P3HT:[60/70]PCBM, PEDOT:PSS and silver on an ITO-PET substrate. The lines were spaced by 1 mm and the devices were completed by encapsulation using roll-to-roll lamination on both sides using a pressure sensitive adhesive and a multilayered barrier material having a UV-filter with a cut-off at 390 nm, oxygen and water vapor transmission rates of respectively 0.01 cm3 m−2 bar−1 day−1 and 0.04 g m−2 day−1. The final modules comprised 16 serially connected cells. The technical yield was 89% based on the criterion that the Voc had to be larger than 7.2 V. This set of modules gave respectively a voltage, current, fill factor and power conversion efficiency of 8.47 ± 0.41 V, −23.20 ± 4.10 mA, 35.4 ± 2.8% and 1.96 ± 0.34% in the case of modules based on P3HT:[60]PCBM. A total of 1960 modules were prepared for each run and the best power conversion reached was 2.75% for devices based on P3HT:[70]PCBM. The solar cell modules were used to demonstrate the complete manufacture of a small lamp entirely using techniques of flexible electronics. The solar cell module was used to charge a polymer lithium ion battery through a blocking diode. The entire process was fully automated and demonstrates the capacity of polymer solar cells in the context of flexible and printed electronics. Finally a comparison was made between the learning curve for OPV and crystalline silicon solar cells in terms of the cost per watt peak and the cumulative watt peak. OPV as a technology was found to have a significantly steeper learning curve.Frederik C. KrebsFrederik Christian Krebs received his PhD from the Technical University of Denmark in 2000 and has since then worked in the field of polymer solar cells at Risø National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy. He is currently professor at Risø DTU within areas of research that include new materials with low band gap and novel processing capability, large area processing and manufacture of polymer solar cells, stability and lifetime testing, degradation mechanism studies, outside testing and demonstration.Jan FyenboJan Fyenbo is an engineering constructor and has been working at Mekoprint since 1999. His areas of expertise lies within R2R and other high volume production techniques including process optimization. Currently he is working in Quality Assurance and prototype construction. He has experience with a broad variety of products going from flexible printed circuits to keyboard design. Jan is involved in new products from the design phase in close cooperation with the customer to release and supervision of final product and production processes. Jan has been working with polymer solar cells since 2007.Mikkel JørgensenMikkel Jørgensen did his Master of Science in chemistry at the University of Copenhagen and a PhD in organic chemistry at the University of Copenhagen (1990). He worked as an industrial chemist at NycoMed (1987–1990) during his PhD studies and later as an industrial chemist at PNA Diagnostics (1990–1993). He then became employed as a Senior Scientist at Risø National Laboratory (1994–present). His scientific interests include synthetic chemistry, NMR, chemistry of materials, carrier mobilities in organic materials, energy levels and energy level alignment in organic materials by UPS studies, solar cells, polymers, fluorine chemistry and supramolecular chemistry.
1. Introduction
Roll-to-roll processing1 is likely to be a prerequisite for the successful manufacture of polymer solar cells2–4 at sufficiently low cost for the technology to be competitive with other thin film solar cell technologies such as amorphous silicon, CdTe and CIGS.5 The strength of polymer solar cells is the potential for use of high speed printing and coating techniques at low temperatures while the weaknesses are currently a significant materials cost6 and poor operational stability.7 The technology has seen some remarkable developments and has essentially emerged in about 10 years from sporadic laboratory reports to an existing technology with several commercial companies8 and many reported public demonstrations9,10 of the technology. As often happens the marvels of an emerging technology are compared to existing and well proven technologies and this is often not a balanced comparison. As an example the power conversion efficiency of polymer solar cells that has increased dramatically to levels of around 8%11 is often compared to crystalline silicon power conversion efficiencies of 20% without mention of the fact that the 8% polymer solar cell result is for a small laboratory result (square millimeters) whereas the 20% FZG silicon result is the industrially manufactured large area module efficiency (square meters). In addition this is not even taking the long lifetime of the silicon solar cell and the in comparison rather short lifetime of the polymer solar cell into account. A conservative view of the polymer solar cell is thus that it is a potentially revolutionizing technology faced with some serious challenges that without efficient solutions renders the technology suitable for only niche products or reduction to a scientific curiosity that prevailed during the first decades of the new millennium.
In this application article we highlight the manufacturing processes for polymer solar cells and describe how compact polymer solar cell modules can be prepared using full roll-to-roll processing with implementation as a sub-component in a flexible electronic product. We employ the knowledge of processing cost to describe the learning curve for polymer solar cells in terms of the cumulative number of produced watt peak.
2. Roll-to-roll coating methods for polymer solar cells
The vision of polymer solar cell manufacture is through the use of scalable printing and coating techniques that enable very high speed production.1,6 The printing and coating techniques available cover a large range of application methods and currently there is no definitive answer as to which techniques will be the best suited. Many of the available techniques have been attempted and all of them have been shown to be of use. It should be stressed that the polymer solar cell comprises a multilayer structure and some printing and coating techniques are more suited than others for a given type of layer. While one can envisage making the multilayer solar cell using a single film forming technique9 it is most likely that the final multilayer solar cell will be manufactured by using a series of printing and coating techniques that have been judiciously chosen. In order to categorize film forming techniques it is useful to define them according to the ability that the technique has in the context of patterning the printed or coated layer, the nature of the master, the nature of the ink and the manner in which the ink is transferred to the substrate. This is illustrated in Fig. 1 where some of the most relevant printing and coating techniques are categorized.
 Fig. 1  Some of the coating and printing techniques relevant to polymer solar cells categorized according to their dimensionality and mode of image formation. 
Of particular relevance to polymer solar cells is the inherent dimensionality that the printing or coating technique gives access to and the mode of ink transfer to the substrate as this is highly influential on the performance of the device in the case of the active layer. It is noteworthy that the contact techniques all give access to full 2-dimensional patterning of the printed material achieved through both the surface topography and the chemistry at the surface. In the context of polymer solar cells spin coating12 has been used almost exclusively and until recently the only other reported technique was doctor blading.13,14 The need for scalable printing and coating techniques have led to interest in the use of other printing and coating techniques as illustrated in Fig. 1. Of the techniques shown, spray coating,15,16 knife coating,17 slot-die coating,6,17–22 gravure printing,23 pad printing,24 screen printing9,25–28 and ink jet printing29,30 have been used for the formation of the active layer and of electrodes. Some techniques that are deemed suitable (but not explored yet in the context of polymer solar cells) are curtain and slide coating, off-set printing and magneto/electrographic printing. Pad printing24 employs a gravure plate while transfer of ink to the substrate is made via a rubber stamp that as such makes the ink transfer to the substrate a planographic process. Some of the printing and coating techniques have a digital master (ink jet and magneto/electrographic) and this can be considered a considerable advantage as the cost and complexity of procuring a master range from relatively low cost in the case of slot-die and screen printing to medium cost for rotary screen and flexographic printing and a very high cost for gravure printing. Printing and coating techniques uniquely relevant to polymer solar cells are slot-die, curtain and slide coating. Slot-die coating has been used successfully for coating the active layer in polymer solar cells and interestingly it is the only technique that gives inherent access to a 1-dimensional pattern (stripes). This is particularly suited for polymer solar cell modules as those are most rationally made by serially connecting cells (stripes). Both slot-die, curtain and slide coating all allow for the simultaneous processing of multilayer films while this has not been explored in the context of polymer solar cells to this date. While spin coating is the most explored film forming technique it is possibly the least suited for efficient manufacture of polymer solar cell products as the patterning has to be achieved post film formation. Spin coating still remains the most useful laboratory technique due to the simplicity in use.
3. Module design and performance
It is a considerable challenge to go beyond the single laboratory device and prepare polymer solar cells in large numbers reproducibly. In order to successfully achieve this one has to consider the final application of the polymer solar cell and carefully choose the process. The integration of polymer solar cells into flexible electronic circuits has been envisaged for a long time and it has often been contemplated that circuitry and solar cell could all be printed in one process. This was attempted earlier in the context of a flexible simple lamp for the Lighting Africa initiative.10 In that case the solar cell modules were first prepared followed by printing electronic circuitry on top of the solar cell followed by semiautomatic mounting of discrete components to complete the application. While feasible it was found that this approach was inefficient as long as the cost of the solar cell makes up a significant fraction of the final product cost. The technical losses in each step subsequent to polymer solar cell preparation lead to accumulated technical loss and the major conclusion was to consider the polymer solar cell as a discrete component. In this work we chose to follow these lines and design the process accordingly. The product example is a small LED based pocket lamp with a thin outline that comprises a lithium ion battery that is charged by a polymer solar cell. One aim was to keep the outline of the lamp small so as to minimize the cost of the final product. Since a lithium ion battery is involved the polymer solar cell voltage at the maximum power point should ideally be approximately 4.7 V to enable charging of the battery through a blocking diode and this implies that many polymer solar cells must be connected in series. It has been found empirically that an efficient number of individual solar cells is sixteen.
The solar cell modules were based on ProcessOne18 and this implies the use of slot-die coating for the preparation of individual solar cells in the form of stripes that are then serially connected in the final screen printing step where the back electrode is formed. Since the final module outline should be small this implies the slot-die coating of narrow stripes with a short separation to maximize the usage of area. Several experiments were made and it was found that the practical limit to separation between slot-die coated stripes is 1 mm. Narrow stripes down to 2 mm could be coated but in order to achieve a reasonable active area for the final device a stripe width of 5 mm was chosen.
Since the R2R equipment available has a web width of 305 mm this enabled the simultaneous slot-die coating of two 16-stripe modules (32 lines coated simultaneously). This has been illustrated in Fig. 2 where both the roll and device layout are shown along with a zoom on the device stack. All the processing was done in ambient air using solution processing. The slot-die coating proved to work even for such small gaps (1 mm) and thin stripes (5 mm) and while it was more critical to slot-die coat and screen print electrodes the technical yield was not affected significantly. The performance typically obtained when using P3HT:[60]PCBM as the active layer was 1.6–2.1% with module open circuit voltages in the range of 7.5–8.5 V and module short circuit currents in the 16–22 mA range. The current at the maximum power was in the range of 9–13 mA and represents the charging current for the battery. The battery had a nominal capacity of 105 mAh and this thus implied a charging time of around 10 h. It was of some interest to see how high a performance could be reached with these modules and for this purpose devices based on P3HT:[70]PCBM were prepared. The performance reached when using [70]PCBM was only marginally better than [60]PCBM and the best performance reached for a single module was 2.75% as shown in Fig. 3. The devices were tested with thermographic imaging to establish if the variation in performance could be rooted in short circuits as this technique is known to reveal hot/cold spots. The result showed variation in the local temperature over the active areas of the device but few hot spots and we conclude that the modules perform quite evenly over the active areas of the device as shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 2  A roll of the printed modules showing how two parallel sets of modules were prepared simultaneously. The zoom-in shows the layer stack which is PET-ITO-ZnO-P3HT:PCBM-PEDOT:PSS-printed silver. The device stack was encapsulated using roll-to-roll lamination post production. 
 Fig. 3  IV curve for a printed module comprising 16 serially connected solar cells with a total active area of 35.5 cm2. The photograph shows the solar module that has outside dimensions of 79 mm × 84 mm. The performance was determined using solar simulation at 1000 W m−2, 85 ± 2 °C, AM1.5G, PCE = 2.75%, Voc = 8.61 V, Isc = 22.08 mA, FF = 51.4%. 
 Fig. 4  Thermographic image for a module at the maximum power point under solar simulation (AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2). The hottest spot (red triangle) is 101 °C and the coldest spot (blue triangle) is 27 °C. The temperature of the surface on which the solar cell rests was 66 °C (cross). 
4. The steep learning curve for polymer solar cells
Several projections have highlighted polymer solar cells as a potentially very low cost technology with watt peak (Wp) costs of significantly less than 1 €. There has until now been no firm documentation of how this low cost potential can be realized. A few reports have detailed the cost structure for polymer solar cells when manufactured using full roll-to-roll methods and common to the most detailed analyses are a critical view of the possibilities that underline the possibility as existing while requiring significant developments before it can be realized.1,5,6,9,10 The most well documented example of a fully roll-to-roll coated polymer solar cell is ProcessOne18 that employs a PET-ITO substrate.
The lowest cost achieved with ProcessOne on the scale of up to 60 m2 per batch is ∼8.1 € Wp−1 and while this may seem promising it should be emphasized that more than 80% of the total cost is from materials and before any further cost reductions can be realized the technology must evolve further to eliminate the use of the most expensive components such as indium-tin-oxide.6 In addition the electricity cost should ideally be quoted as the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE). Currently the operational lifetime of polymer solar cells is too short to meaningfully compare with well proven technologies such as crystalline silicon. Further work in the area of cost analysis and life cycle analysis (LCA) is urgently needed.31,32 In terms of the learning curve for the manufacturing cost it is possible to make a comparison between crystalline silicon33 and polymer solar cells while neglecting the problem of the operational lifetime. The result is shown in Fig. 5 and compares the cumulative produced Wp of respectively crystalline silicon and polymer solar cells (based on the ProcessOne technology). Even though only 10 kWp has been produced for ProcessOne at Risø DTU it is possible to make a quite conservative estimate of the reduction in manufacturing cost as a function of time. One of the surprising findings is that polymer solar cells exhibit a much steeper learning curve than crystalline silicon solar cells with the possibility to manufacture at quite low cost on a very small scale. Based on the findings and assuming linearity it should be possible to achieve a manufacturing cost of 1 € Wp−1 with a cumulative produced Wp of around 100 kWp. Polymer solar cells have thus demonstrated a decrease from around 35 € Wp to 8.1 € Wp in around 1 year whereas this took the crystalline silicon technology more than 10 years to achieve the same progress. In terms of investment it only required the production of around 10 kWp to reach a cost of 8.1 € Wp for polymer solar cells whereas it required the production of around 50 MWp of crystalline silicon solar cells to reach the same cost. This could imply that development of the polymer solar cell technology is inherently much faster and much cheaper (with reservations regarding the operational lifetime).
 Fig. 5  A comparison between the cumulative produced MWp for crystalline silicon solar cells33 and polymer solar cells based on ProcessOne18 manufactured at Risø DTU. 
5. An application example of polymer solar cells
The route that a novel technology has to follow from inception to widespread consumption has many phases including scientific discovery, technical development, demonstration, upscaling, commercialisation, business development, marketing and widespread use and consumption.
In the case of polymer solar cells the focus has so far been on the science and technical development while demonstration, upscaling and commercialisation are emerging. It is too early to say anything about the business of OPV and how it performs in a real setting. In order to reach a stage where this becomes possible it must be anticipated that the technology has to be tested in several applications with feedback of the results to the technological developers. It is expected that such cycles are the natural way for the technology to prove its worth or to be dismissed as a failed technology. There have been a few examples of public polymer solar cell demonstrations that have proven extremely useful in establishing a realistic view of the cost structure and the capacity of the polymer solar cell. The first example was a simple all screen printed solar cell that charged a battery for a small FM radio. The application was demonstrated by handing it out freely at the Roskilde Festival in Denmark (in 2008).9 The second public example was a small reading lamp for school children in Zambia, Africa (in 2009).10 Since then several public examples have been demonstrated. Examples are the Suntiles34 and the San Francisco bus shelter.35 There is however a big difference between simply testing a solar cell publicly in a given setting and testing a product that fully integrates a polymer solar cell. There is also a significant difference between testing the solar cell in a public setting where the user is reduced to a spectator (as was the case for the Suntiles,34 the San Francisco bus shelter35 and the worlds first electricity grid connected polymer solar cell panels at Risø DTU.36) and testing by putting the solar cell application into the hands of the user. So far only the solar hat and the lamp for Lighting Africa have documented the latter.9,10 In this demonstration we chose to manufacture a small lamp as shown in Fig. 6 while taking the experiences gained earlier into account. The main findings from the earlier demonstrations were that the polymer solar cell module is too expensive to use as a substrate in the manufacture of the product and it is most rationally handled as a discrete component.
 Fig. 6  A front, back and side view of the lamp showing the solar cell and the printed electronic circuit along with the position of components and battery. 
Also during the Lighting Africa demonstration it was observed that the flexible and thin outline of the solar cell resulted in unwanted mechanical degradation and destruction of the solar cell. We thus chose to make a compact lamp comprising a rigid structure to give a durable application. The result is shown in Fig. 7 where the simple lamp is shown in operation. The charging in natural sunlight could be accomplished in less than 10 h.
 Fig. 7  Photograph showing the lamp in operation in a completely dark room (top) along with photographs of the lamp as seen from the front (lower left) and back (lower right). 
6. Future challenges
The successful demonstration that polymer solar cells can be manufactured consistently and that they can be integrated in practical applications confirms the commercial possibilities for this technology. It is beyond reasonable doubt that polymer solar cells will become an industrially available product and that it houses an important potential for upscaling that is unparalleled by other solar cell technologies. The interesting question to ask is what it takes for this technology to claim a significant share of the competitive thin film solar cell field that it currently operates in and what it would take for it to claim new areas of application. It is clear from the work presented here that the learning curve is exceptionally steep enabling fast progress. To answer the questions above the following challenges must be addressed:
– Operational lifetime: this must be improved through both materials development and device technology. It is anticipated that a lot can be gained by developing efficient and low cost methods of encapsulating devices. The materials however need to have a significant intrinsic stability.
– Materials cost: the cost of the active materials must be brought down through identification of simple materials that meet the criteria of intrinsic stability and performance.
– Low cost electrodes: transparent and back electrode technologies (preferably printable) must be developed that present a significantly reduced cost compared to the presently available materials. Most importantly ITO must be efficiently replaced and following on from this possibly also printed silver.
– Low cost manufacturing techniques: single-step multilayer formation and fast manufacturing techniques must be developed and/or accommodated to OPV.
– Environmentally friendly manufacturing: all the above must be arrived at through environmentally friendly processes. Currently used organic solvent based printing technologies will have to be replaced with aqueous processes and substrate materials and components must be environmentally friendly and safely disposable.
Experimental
Materials and components
The substrate was a 130 μm thick PET foil in a width of 305 mm fully covered by ITO and a nominal sheet resistance of 60 Ω square−1. The MEA (methoxyethoxyacetic acid) stabilized ZnO nanoparticle solution was prepared in acetone at a concentration of 45 mg mL−1. P3HT (Sepiolid P200, BASF) and [60]PCBM (fullerene mix, Solenne B. V.) were dissolved in chlorobenzene at concentrations of respectively 15 mg mL−1 and 12 mg mL−1. The PEDOT:PSS (EL-P 5010, Agfa) was diluted with isopropanol to a viscosity of 270 mPa s. The silver electrode was a screen printable formulation (PV410, Dupont). The screen printable silver employed for the electronic circuit was a slightly different formulation (5007E, Dupont). The packaging barrier was a 90 μm thick multi-laminate with a UV-filter (Alcan) with a pressure sensitive adhesive (467MPF, 3M). The spacer PET had a thickness of 1.5 mm. The button contact employed a nickel free spring. The blocking diode was a 1N4148W-V from Vishay Semiconductors in a SOT123 case style. The white light LED was a Micro SIDELED LW Y87C from OSRAM. The white LED had a colour temperature of 6200 K, a colour reproduction index of 80, a Lembertian viewing angle of 120° and an optical efficiency of 14 lm W−1. The battery was a lithium polymer battery with a nominal capacity of 105 mAh. All components were RoHS compliant and lead (Pb) free.
Coating and printing equipment
An inline coating and printing machine from Grafisk Maskinfabrik A/S as shown in Fig. 8 comprising unwinder, edge guide/splicing table, double sided web cleaning (TekNek), a 4-roller flexographic printer, slot-die coating head with automatic registration, a first vertical double pass oven (2 metre length), a rotary screen printer (STORK, RSI compact), a second vertical double pass oven (2 metre length), a cutter and rewinder. The system has three tension zones where the web tension can be set individually. Zone 1 is from the unwinder to the flexographic printer, zone 2 is between the flexographic printer and the cutter, zone 3 is between the cutter and the rewinder.
 Fig. 8  Inline printing machine with two ovens and three different coating and printing methods. The system has three independent web tension zones. 
Module manufacture and lamination
The patterned PET-ITO substrate was prepared as described earlier starting from PET foil fully covered by ITO (60 Ω square−1) by screen printing a UV-curable etch resist on a Klemm line at Mekoprint Electronics A/S, followed by etching (CuCl2), stripping, washing and drying. The PET-ITO substrate comprised two parallel sets of 16 stripes (5 mm wide separated by 1 mm) with a length of 285.5 mm and a repetition length of 305 mm. The PET-ITO substrate was washed with isopropanol on the back while printing a unique label in each side at the position where each solar cell module would be prepared for later identification. The front side of the foil was then washed with isopropanol prior to coating. Firstly a layer of MEA stabilized zinc oxide nanoparticles was slot-die coated on top of the ITO at a web speed of 2 m min−1 while pumping the 0.45 μm filtered 45 mg mL−1 ZnO nanoparticle solution at a rate of 1.1 mL min−1 giving a wet layer thickness of 3.44 μm and a dry layer thickness of 28 nm. This was followed by slot-die coating a layer of P3HT:PCBM at a web speed of 2 m min−1 while pumping the 27 mg mL−1 P3HT:PCBM solution at a rate of 1.7 mL min−1 giving a wet layer thickness of 5.31 μm and a dry layer thickness of 129 nm. The layer of n-octanol was then applied to the film by flexographic printing wetting the entire surface prior to slot-die coating PEDOT:PSS on top. This pre-wetting is necessary for proper coating of the high surface tension PEDOT:PSS on the low energy surface of P3HT:PCBM. The PEDOT:PSS was slot-die coated at a web speed of 0.3 m min−1 using a static pressure of 1.3 bar. Finally the devices were completed by rotary screen printing the silver back electrode. The screen printed 6 modules per revolution and also printed registry marks for later characterization and cutting. The screen was an 80 μm thick nickel screen with 215 mesh. The rotary screen printing was performed at 1 m min−1 and is limited in speed by the drying time. The drying temperature employed in all experiments was 140 °C. The completed modules were laminated in the full width with the barrier material on the front and with two stripes of barrier material covering the active layer and part of the electrodes while leaving 5 mm of the silver contacts free for contacting.
Module testing and cutting
The modules were tested using a roll-to-roll solar simulator (Steuernagel KHS1200) calibrated for AM1.5G. The system uses a Hamamatsu SL-833 photodiode to record the relative intensity during characterization of each module. The system employs pneumatic cylinders for making contact to the devices during testing. The procedure is fully automated and allows for elaborated test procedures of the modules and statistical analysis of the results. After characterization the devices were laser cut into individual modules in a full roll-to-roll process.
Lamp manufacture and assembly
The printed circuit shown in Fig. 6 was printed on one side of a 90 μm PET foil. The other side had screen printed text with product description and instructions for use. The electrical components (blocking diode, white LED and battery) were mounted on the back using a fully automated SMD (surface mount device) process line. A thick (1.5 mm) laser cut PET spacer making room for the lithium polymer ion battery was sandwiched between the solar cell foil and the printed circuitry. Contact between the solar cell and the circuit was established through crimping after sealing the three layers with adhesive.
 Fig. 9  Exploded view of the lamp showing all the different layers that were laminated together in the final manufacturing step. 
Conclusions
The use of different printing and coating techniques for the manufacture of polymer solar cells has been briefly described and a justification of the choice of coating and printing techniques employed for the manufacture of small modules in this study was given. The module design process, manufacture and resulting performance were detailed and presented in the context of the possibilities for cost reductions. The learning curve for the underlying ProcessOne18 technology was demonstrated to be very steep compared to crystalline silicon in terms of cumulative produced MWp. This is concluded to be one of the large advantages of polymer solar cells since the investment required to mature the technology is likely to be significantly smaller than all other solar cell technologies by orders of magnitude. Finally the manufactured solar cell modules were fully integrated into a flexible electronic product comprising fully automated manufacture using both discrete and flexible electronic components. The demonstrator was a small solar charged lamp operated by a simple bubble contact. The technical yield of the lamp assembly was demonstrated to be exceptionally high (>98%) when employing this approach where the solar cell is handled as a discrete component in contrast to earlier studies where the solar cells served as substrate for printed electronic circuitry leading to some technical loss of material. The future challenges of the OPV technology were briefly outlined and found to present significant challenges that must be overcome before this technology can be expected to claim large market shares.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Danish Strategic Research Council (DSF 2104-05-0052 and 2104-07-0022), EUDP (j. nr. 64009-0050) and PV ERA-NET transnational POLYMOL project PolyStaR. We thank Hanne Lauritzen for helpful discussion. Vu Ngyen and Lasse Gorm Jensen are thanked for preparing graphic illustrations. We thank Jan Alstrup for taking photographs of the lamp.
References and notes
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
M. Helgesen, R. Søndergaard and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 36–60 RSC .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347–363 RSC .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 19–34 RSC .
T. D. Nielsen, C. Cruickshank, S. Foged, J. Thorsen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010 DOI:10.1016/j.solmat.2010.04.074 .
F. C. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jørgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873 RSC .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
Some polymer solar cell companies: http://www.konarka.com, http://www.plextronics.com, http://www.solarmer.com.
F. C. Krebs, M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, O. Hagemann, J. Alstrup, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, K. Larsen and J. Kristensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 422–441 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, M. Wadstrøm and M. S. Pedersen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 512–525 RSC .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649–653 Search PubMed .
K. Norrman, A. Ghanbari-Siahkali and N. B. Larsen, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C, 2005, 101, 174–201 RSC .
R. Mens, P. Adriaensens, L. Lutsen, A. Swinnen, S. Bertho, B. Ruttens, J. D'Haen, J. Manca, T. Cleij, D. Vanderzande and J. Gelan, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1669–1672 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Steirer, M. O. Reese, B. Rupert, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 447–453 CrossRef CAS .
C. Girotto, B. P. Rand, J. Genoe and P. Heremans, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 454–458 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 465–475 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC .
L. Blankenburg, K. Schultheis, H. Schache, S. Sensfuss and M. Schrödner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 476–483 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1636–1641 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 761–768 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs and K. Norrman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 877–887 Search PubMed .
J. M. Ding, A. F. Vornbrock, C. Ting and V. Subramanian, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 459–464 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 484–490 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, R. Radspinner, N. Peyghambarian and G. E. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2996–2998 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, J. Alstrup, H. Spanggaard, K. Larsen and E. Kold, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 293–300 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aernouts, P. Vanlaeke, J. Poortmans and P. Heremans, Proc. SPIE, 2004, 5464, 252 .
F. C. Krebs, H. Spanggaard, T. Kjær, M. Biancardo and J. Alstrup, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2007, 138, 106–111 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Hoth, S. A. Choulis, P. Schilinsky and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3973–3978 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aernouts, T. Aleksandrov, C. Girotto, J. Genoe and J. Poortmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033306 CrossRef .
A. L. Roes, E. A. Alsema, K. Blok and M. K. Patel, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2009, 17, 372–393 Search PubMed .
R. García-Valverde, J. A. Cherni and A. Urbina, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2010 DOI:10.1002/pip.967 .
W. G. J. H. M. van Sark, E. A. Alsema, H. M. Junginger, H. H. C. de Moor and G. J. Schaeffer, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2008, 16, 441–453 Search PubMed .

          http://www.astridkrogh.com/html/suntiles.html
        .

          http://www.interiordesign.net/article/CA6678576.html
        .
A. J. Medford, M. R. Lilliedal, M. Jørgensen, D. Aarø, H. Pakalski, J. Fyenbo and F. C. Krebs, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A286–A292 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Frederik C. Krebs	Frederik Christian Krebs received his PhD from the Technical University of Denmark in 2000 and has since then worked in the field of polymer solar cells at Risø National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy. He is currently professor at Risø DTU within areas of research that include new materials with low band gap and novel processing capability, large area processing and manufacture of polymer solar cells, stability and lifetime testing, degradation mechanism studies, outside testing and demonstration.
Jan Fyenbo	Jan Fyenbo is an engineering constructor and has been working at Mekoprint since 1999. His areas of expertise lies within R2R and other high volume production techniques including process optimization. Currently he is working in Quality Assurance and prototype construction. He has experience with a broad variety of products going from flexible printed circuits to keyboard design. Jan is involved in new products from the design phase in close cooperation with the customer to release and supervision of final product and production processes. Jan has been working with polymer solar cells since 2007.
Mikkel Jørgensen	Mikkel Jørgensen did his Master of Science in chemistry at the University of Copenhagen and a PhD in organic chemistry at the University of Copenhagen (1990). He worked as an industrial chemist at NycoMed (1987–1990) during his PhD studies and later as an industrial chemist at PNA Diagnostics (1990–1993). He then became employed as a Senior Scientist at Risø National Laboratory (1994–present). His scientific interests include synthetic chemistry, NMR, chemistry of materials, carrier mobilities in organic materials, energy levels and energy level alignment in organic materials by UPS studies, solar cells, polymers, fluorine chemistry and supramolecular chemistry.

 	Fig. 1  Some of the coating and printing techniques relevant to polymer solar cells categorized according to their dimensionality and mode of image formation.	 

 	Fig. 2  A roll of the printed modules showing how two parallel sets of modules were prepared simultaneously. The zoom-in shows the layer stack which is PET-ITO-ZnO-P3HT:PCBM-PEDOT:PSS-printed silver. The device stack was encapsulated using roll-to-roll lamination post production.	 

 	Fig. 3  IV curve for a printed module comprising 16 serially connected solar cells with a total active area of 35.5 cm2. The photograph shows the solar module that has outside dimensions of 79 mm × 84 mm. The performance was determined using solar simulation at 1000 W m−2, 85 ± 2 °C, AM1.5G, PCE = 2.75%, Voc = 8.61 V, Isc = 22.08 mA, FF = 51.4%.	 

 	Fig. 4  Thermographic image for a module at the maximum power point under solar simulation (AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2). The hottest spot (red triangle) is 101 °C and the coldest spot (blue triangle) is 27 °C. The temperature of the surface on which the solar cell rests was 66 °C (cross).	 

 	Fig. 5  A comparison between the cumulative produced MWp for crystalline silicon solar cells33 and polymer solar cells based on ProcessOne18 manufactured at Risø DTU.	 

 	Fig. 6  A front, back and side view of the lamp showing the solar cell and the printed electronic circuit along with the position of components and battery.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photograph showing the lamp in operation in a completely dark room (top) along with photographs of the lamp as seen from the front (lower left) and back (lower right).	 

 	Fig. 8  Inline printing machine with two ovens and three different coating and printing methods. The system has three independent web tension zones.	 

 	Fig. 9  Exploded view of the lamp showing all the different layers that were laminated together in the final manufacturing step.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
