Hybrid polymer –metal oxide solar cells by in situ chemical polymerization    - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B902271F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B902271F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5377-5380Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHybrid polymer–metal oxide solar cells by in situ chemical polymerization†‡

        
          
            Pedro 
            Atienzar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Thilini 
            Ishwara
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Masaki 
            Horie
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            James R. 
            Durrant
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Jenny 
            Nelson
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Physics, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK
bDepartment of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK
cSchool of Chemistry, OMIC, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK
Received 
      3rd February 2009
    , Accepted 18th May 2009First published on 17th June 2009AbstractWe present a new approach for improving the infiltration of a conjugated polymer into the pores of a nanostructured metal oxide electrode, whereby the polymer is prepared directly inside the porous oxide film by in situ chemical polymerization. We apply this method to the polymerisation of poly[2-methoxy-5-(2 ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene (MEH-PPV) inside a nanostructured porous TiO2 layer by adapting the synthetic route based on the Gilch reaction. Transient and steady state optical studies show that the light absorption and emission properties of the polymer so produced are similar to those of the polymer synthesised ex situ, while the photoinduced charge separation yield is improved by in situpolymerisation. The photocurrent generated by hybrid polymer/metal oxide solar cells prepared by this methodology is enhanced by a factor of two to three relative to devices prepared with pre-synthesised polymer. The improved photocurrent and charge separation yield for the polymer produced in situ are attributed to improved infiltration of the polymer into the metal oxide film.
Introduction
Hybrid organic/inorganic solar cells, composed of an organic donor material such as a conjugated polymer combined with an inorganic n-type semiconductor nanostructure, are of interest as alternatives to all-organic bulk heterojunction structures because of the potential to control the nanostructure through synthesis, and so achieve high physical as well as chemical stability. Currently, one of the major challenges is achieving infiltration of macromolecular materials into the pores of the semiconductor nanostructure while still maintaining good electrical connectivity of the nanostructure.1 Conventional methods of infiltration are based mainly on application of the soluble polymer to a porous nanostructured film by dipping and/or spin-coating, possibly followed by thermal treatments. However, these methodologies do not appear to achieve complete infiltration, resulting in unfilled voids within the films and the consequent loss of interfacial area.
Ravirajan et al. used a polyfluorene polymer possessing a liquid crystalline phase and attempted to “melt process” the polymer into the film by heating to the liquid crystal phase transition temperature.2 Also, some groups have attempted to ease infiltration by using vertically oriented nanorods with ‘open’ pores3–5 rather than randomly oriented nanoparticles, in some cases using thermal treatment to assist polymer infiltration.5 An alternative strategy is the modification of the oxide surface by using amphiphilic dye molecules that modify the surface energy and improve compatibility with non-polar organic molecules.4,6 Others have designed conjugated oligomers or polymers with carboxylate or other side groups that enable chemical attachment to the oxide surface;7 in some cases the attached molecular layer can be used as an initiator for further polymer growth.8 In addition, there are some examples of hybrid materials prepared using the polymerization of poly(1-methoxy-4-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene) (MEH-PPV) within an inorganic matrix such as active layer of LEDs9–11 or as structure-directing agents for the preparation of microporous molecular sieves with conductive properties.12 Other alternative approaches consist of the electrochemical method used to produce conducting polythiophene13 or solvent-less direct deposition such as plasma polymerization or chemical vapour deposition;14 however these methodologies in general result in defect incorporation in the final product. Most of these approaches rely on the insertion from solution of a high molecular weight polymer into pores some 20–50 nm in diameter, which is clearly a challenge. In this paper we present an alternative route, whereby we prepare the polymer within the oxide pores by chemical in situpolymerisation of a soluble, low molecular weight monomer.

        Poly-para-phenylenevinylene (PPV) polymers are a well studied group of polymers with well understood light absorption, emission and processing properties. Alkyl or alkoxy substituents on the aromatic ring are often used to impart solubility to the PPV. Of these polymers, poly(1-methoxy-4-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene) (MEH-PPV) is of particular interest due to the high solubility of this polymer. MEH-PPV synthesis can be carry out via two main routes: the Wessling route15 and the Gilch route.16 The Wessling route involves treatment of p-xylene sulfonium salts with a stoichiometric amount of base to form a soluble precursor polymer. The precursor polymer is then thermally treated to give the conjugated PPV. The Gilch route employs the treatment of R,R-dihalo-p-xylenes with potassium tert-butoxide in organic solvents. This route give high molecular weight and high yield, and also permits very good control of the molecular weight and microgel formation under certain conditions.17,18
In this paper, we present the growth of the organic donor material inside a connected nanostructured TiO2 film via in situpolymerization as a new strategy to achieve interconnection of the organic and inorganic phases and so improve the performance of hybrid devices.
Experimental
Synthesis of MeH-PPV
We adapted the Gilch synthetic route16 for the in situpolymerization of MEH-PPV. Briefly a porous TiO2 film on ITO prepared as described in detail elsewhere19 was introduced into a solution of between 0.02 M and 0.01M of the monomer precursor 2,5-bis(bromomethyl)-1-methoxy-4-(2-ethylhexyloxy)benzene in dry THF for two hours. After this, a solution of potassium tert-butoxide in dry tetrahydrofuran (THF) (8.9 equiv. of ButOK, 1.0 M in dry THF)) was added slowly. After complete addition of the base, the reaction was stirred for an additional 16 h under nitrogen atmosphere. The film was washed by dipping in isopropanol for two hours. Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the adapted route for the preparation of the polymer directly within the pores of the porous oxide films. Pure MEH-PPV was synthesized for comparative measurements according to the approach described above, and then washed with methanol. The polymer was purified by two additional precipitations, from THF into methanol. The polymer was then collected and dried under reduced pressure. This is referred to as ex situMEH-PPV. The good quality of the polymer was confirmed by 1H NMR analysis. Its molecular weight was found using gel permeation chromatography to be Mn = 62 kDa, similar to commercially available polymers. See ESI‡ for more details.
 Scheme 1  Synthetic route to MEH-PPV. 
 Fig. 1  Adapted synthetic route to MEH-PPV for the preparation of hybrid solar cells. 
Preparation of photovoltaic devices
All samples were prepared on ITO-coated glass substrates of area ∼1 cm2 from Psiotec Ltd. which were first cleaned by ultrasonic agitation in acetone and isopropanol. The cleaned substrate was then covered with a dense TiO2 layer about 50 nm thick using spray pyrolysis.20 Then, the dense layer was sintered at 450 °C during 30 min. This dense layer prevents direct contact between the polymer and the substrate, and is referred to as a “hole-blocking layer”. Then, a thin (∼100 nm) porous layer of nanocrystalline TiO2 (Dyesol) was deposited by spin coating a dilute solution of the colloidal paste in THF onto the dense TiO2 layer. The layers were then sintered at 450 °C for 30 min in air. Then was infiltrated with the polymer, as described above. As a reference, similar samples consisting of dense and porous layers were dip coated with polymer by immersing in a solution (∼2 mg/ml) of MEH-PPV made ex situ in chlorobenzene at 50 °C overnight. Then, a thin layer (∼20 nm) of MEH-PPV was deposited on the top of all the samples including the reference. Finally, a layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate), PEDOT:PSS (BAYTRON P, HC Stark, standard grade) was deposited on the top of the MEH-PPV before depositing gold by thermal evaporation. The thickness of all the films was measured by a Tencor Alpha-Step 200 profilometer.
Transient absorption studies were carried out as described in ref. 21. Devices were fabricated as described in ref. 22 and measured in vacuum under simulated AM1.5 solar illumination.
Results and discussion
Absorption and emission measurements

Fig. 2A compares the absorption spectrum for the reference, ex situMEH-PPV polymer applied on top of a nanocrystalline TiO2 layer with that of the polymer prepared chemically by in situpolymerization in the pores of a nanocrystalline TiO2 film. Both polymer samples demonstrate maximum absorption at ∼500 nm, characteristic of high molecular weight MEH-PPV. The slight blue shift in absorption for the in situ relative to the ex situpolymer suggests that a somewhat shorter distribution of conjugation lengths is obtained for the in situ process. Fig. 2B shows the emission spectra of a series of polymers prepared in situ in nanocrystalline TiO2 from solutions of different monomer concentration, in comparison with the spectrum for the ex situpolymer applied on top of the porous film. In all cases the emission is quenched strongly up to approximately 50–60% relative to that of a polymer film in the absence of TiO2. The dissociation of photoinduced excitons at the donor–acceptor interface leads to quenching of the polymer emission and the degree of emission quenching is therefore often used as an indicator of the degree of charge separation in hybrid structures. The data in Fig. 2B show that a similar degree of emission quenching—suggesting a similar degree of charge separation—can be obtained using the in situ route as for the reference case. Moreover, the degree of emission quenching (and hence of charge separation) can be optimised by varying the monomer concentration. In addition, the position of the emission maximum (λmax = 590 nm) indicates the high conjugation length achieved within the pores.14,23 The blue shoulder present for the in situ samples indicates the presence of some shorter conjugation lengths. We propose that analysis of the emission spectra could in fact be used to determine the effective size of conjugated species that can be accommodated within nanostructures of any given type.
 Fig. 2  A) Comparative UV-Vis spectra of a sample prepared using in situpolymerization of MEH-PPV within the porous TiO2 layer at a monomer concentration of 0.01M (a) and a reference MEH-PPV:TiO2 sample where the polymer was prepared ex situ (b). B) Comparative fluorescence spectra (λex = 500 nm) of a sample of ex situMEH-PPV polymer film as a reference (a), on a porous TiO2 layer (b), and in situ samples prepared at different monomer concentrations: 0.02 M (c), 0.015 M (d), 0.012 M (e) and 0.01 M (f). 
Transient absorption spectroscopy measurements
Charge generation yield and recombination lifetime were measured using transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS).24Fig. 3A shows the transient absorption spectrum 1 µs after photoexcitation of a sample of the structure glass/ITO/dense TiO2/porous TiO2/MEH-PPV where the polymer was produced in situ. The spectrum shows a broad band with a maximum around 900 nm, characteristic of the cation radical of this polymer,25 while the kinetics indicate long-lived photoexcited charges (half life of ∼1 ms) characteristic of the MeH-PPV/TiO2 system. The charge-separation yield, indicated by the amplitude of the TAS signal at short times, is higher for the samples prepared by in situpolymerization than the reference polymer, indicating that a higher degree of infiltration has been achieved by this method. Moreover, the in situ sample shows slower decay dynamics, indicating a higher survival probability for the photogenerated charges in this case. Although the origin of the different kinetics is not known, it is likely to result from different interfacial chemistry in the two cases.26
 Fig. 3  A) Transient absorption spectra of a glass/ITO/dense TiO2/porous TiO2/in situMEH-PPV sample recorded 1 µs after 520 nm laser excitation. B) Transient absorption decay kinetics, monitored at 900 nm, for front side and back side illumination comparing the polymers prepared in situ and ex situ. 
In addition, comparison of TAS amplitude for illumination from the back (polymer side) and front (ITO side) of a high optical depth sample allows us to estimate the extent of polymer penetration into the film, since poor polymer penetration would leave a layer of polymer on the back side of the film and lead to a lower charge separation yield due to the filtering of pulse light by that layer. Fig. 3B shows the comparative transient absorption kinetics for a glass/ITO/dense TiO2/porous TiO2/in situMEH-PPV sample under front side and back side excitation with pulses of intensity 40µJ pulse−1 cm−2. The shape and magnitude of the transient absorption signals are almost identical for illumination from the back and front, indicating that polymer penetration is excellent.2 In contrast, the sample prepared ex situ shows lower amplitude when is excited from the back compared with the front. Such behaviour is attributed to the filtering of the incident light by a layer of polymer not absorbed into the pores and is characteristic of conventional methods of infiltration.2 These results clearly indicate that this methodology is a promising alternative to the conventional methods of infiltration. The good infiltration achieved can be explained in terms of the molecular size: due to its small size (estimated from the chemical structure to lie in the range 0.8–1.4 nm) the monomer precursor can fill better the pores of the nanostructured TiO2 (typically 10 nm in diameter) more easily than the large chain of the polymer prepared ex situ.
Device current–voltage characterization

Fig. 4 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics under simulated AM1.5 equivalent illumination (100 mW cm−2) of a typical photovoltaic device prepared using in situpolymerization in comparison with a reference device prepared by applying the presynthesised polymer to the porous TiO2 layers. Short-circuit current densities (Jsc) are higher by a factor of two to three in all the devices prepared by in situpolymerization, in agreement with the higher charge separation yield. This is attributed to better infiltration of the MeH-PPV into the TiO2pores and the consequent increase of the polymer–oxide interfacial area when using in situpolymerisation. The open circuit voltage (Voc), however, decreases significantly. This is consistent with the larger dark current density for the in situ device that may result from a higher active area for charge injection or from different interfacial charge transfer dynamics. An additional reason for the reduced Voc may be a shift in the TiO2 Fermi level towards the conduction band, resulting from reduction of the oxide film after the polymerisation reaction. Such effects have been observed in dye sensitised solar cells, e.g. upon addition of lithium ions.27
 Fig. 4  Current density–voltage characteristics measured under simulated AM1.5 solar irradiation (100 mWcm−2, 1 sun) for glass/ITO/dense TiO2/porous TiO2 (100 nm)/MEH-PPV/PEDOT-PSS/Au multilayer devices made with MEH-PPV prepared in situ (solid grey line) and ex situ (solid black line). The dark current density–voltage curves are also shown for the in situ (open circles) and ex situ (filled triangles) cases. 
In the case shown, power conversion efficiency is increased from 0.038% for the reference device to 0.063% for the device prepared using in situpolymerisation. Higher efficiencies should be achievable with better control of the interfacial properties and of the position of the Fermi level in the TiO2 film.
Conclusions
To summarize, we have used steady state and transient optical spectroscopy to demonstrate that in situpolymerization is a clear strategy to obtain good intimate infiltration of a conjugated polymer into a nanostructured metal oxide film. Moreover, we observed an improvement in the performance of a hybrid polymer/TiO2 photovoltaic device upon using in situpolymerisation, which we attribute to an increase in the active interface area for exciton dissociation due to better filling of the pores. We argue that this strategy opens the door to the use of other in situ polymeric synthetic routes towards new methodologies to improve the active interfacial area in binary nanostructured materials.
Acknowledgements
PA acknowledges the Spanish Ministry of Education, Science and Technology for its financial support with a postdoctoral grant, TI acknowledges the Dorothy Hodgkin postgraduate awards and JN acknowledges support of the EPSRC through research grants GR/T26559 (Excitonic Supergen Consortium) and EP/E036341 (High-efficiency Hybrid Solar Cells for Micro-generation).
References
J. Boucle, P. Ravirajan and J. Nelson, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3141 RSC .
P. Ravirajan, S. A. Haque, J. R. Durrant, D. Poplavskyy, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Journal of Applied Physics, 2004, 95, 1473 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Shankar, G.K., H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 14321 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ravirajan, A. M. Peiro, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel, D. D. C. Bradley, J. R. Durrant and J. Nelson, Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2006, 110, 7635 Search PubMed .
K. M. L. Coakley, Y.X., M. D. McGehee, K. L. Frindell and G. D. Stucky, Advanced Functional Materials, 2003, 13, 301 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schmidt-Mende, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Applied Physics Letters, 2005, 86, 013504 CrossRef .
J. S. K. Liu, E.N., Y. X. Liu, M. D. McGehee and J. M. J. Frechet, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2004, 126, 9486 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Zhang, C.W., L. Rothberg and M. K. Ng, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3721 RSC .
M. Alvaro, J. F. Cabeza, A. Corma, H. Garcia and E. Peris, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2007, 129, 8074 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jing, L. Chen, Y. Shi and X. Jin, European Polymer Journal, 2005, 41, 2388 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Carter, J. C. Scott and P. J. Brock, Applied Physics Letters, 1997, 71, 1145 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. Harbuzaru, A. Corma, F. Rey, P. Atienzar, J. L. Jorda, H. Garcia, D. Ananias, L. D. Carlos and J. Rocha, Angewandte Chemie-International Edition, 2008, 47, 1080 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Lin, L. Wang and W.-Y. Chiu, Thin Solid Films EMSR 2005-Proceedings of Symposium F on Thin Film and Nanostructured Materials for Photovoltaics - EMRS 2005- Symposium F, 2006, 511–512, 199 Search PubMed .
S. Natarajan and S. H. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 606 CrossRef CAS .

          R. A. Wessling and R. G. Zimmerman, US Patent 3,401,152,  1968 .
W. L. W. H. G. Gilch, Journal of Polymer Science Part A-1: Polymer Chemistry, 1966, 4, 1337 Search PubMed .
C. J. Neef and J. P. Ferraris, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 2311 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Hsieh, Y. Yu, A. C. VanLaeken and H. Lee, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 8094 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ravirajan, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Advanced Functional Materials, 2005, 15, 609 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Ravirajan, S.A., J. R. Durrant, D. Poplavskyy, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Journal of Applied Physics, 2004, 95, 1473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tachibana, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Journal of Physical Chemistry, 1996, 100, 20056 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishwara, D. D. C. Bradley, J. Nelson, P. Ravirajan, I. Vanseveren, T. Cleij, D. Vanderzande, L. Lutsen, S. Tierney, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Applied Physics Letters, 2008, 92 Search PubMed .
D. Wasserberg, S. P. Dudek, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Chemical Physics Letters, 2005, 411, 273 CrossRef CAS .
I. Montanari, A. F. Nogueira, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, C. Winder, M. A. Loi, N. S. Sariciftci and C. Brabec, Applied Physics Letters, 2002, 81, 3001 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. J. Janssen, M. P. T. Christiaans, C. Hare, N. Martin, N. S. Sariciftci, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, The Journal of Chemical Physics, 1995, 103, 8840 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, B. Julian, P. Belleville and M. Popall, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3559 RSC .
S. A. Haque, E. Palomares, B. M. Cho, A. N. M. Green, N. Hirata, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2005, 127, 3456 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† This paper is part of a Journal of Materials Chemistry theme issue on solar cells. Guest editors: Michael Grätzel and René Janssen.‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: 1H NMR spectrum of ex situMeH-PPV; molecular weights of MEH-PPV determined by GPC. See DOI: 10.1039/b902271fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Synthetic route to MEH-PPV.	 

 	Fig. 1  Adapted synthetic route to MEH-PPV for the preparation of hybrid solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 2  A) Comparative UV-Vis spectra of a sample prepared using in situpolymerization of MEH-PPV within the porous TiO2 layer at a monomer concentration of 0.01M (a) and a reference MEH-PPV:TiO2 sample where the polymer was prepared ex situ (b). B) Comparative fluorescence spectra (λex = 500 nm) of a sample of ex situMEH-PPV polymer film as a reference (a), on a porous TiO2 layer (b), and in situ samples prepared at different monomer concentrations: 0.02 M (c), 0.015 M (d), 0.012 M (e) and 0.01 M (f).	 

 	Fig. 3  A) Transient absorption spectra of a glass/ITO/dense TiO2/porous TiO2/in situMEH-PPV sample recorded 1 µs after 520 nm laser excitation. B) Transient absorption decay kinetics, monitored at 900 nm, for front side and back side illumination comparing the polymers prepared in situ and ex situ.	 

 	Fig. 4  Current density–voltage characteristics measured under simulated AM1.5 solar irradiation (100 mWcm−2, 1 sun) for glass/ITO/dense TiO2/porous TiO2 (100 nm)/MEH-PPV/PEDOT-PSS/Au multilayer devices made with MEH-PPV prepared in situ (solid grey line) and ex situ (solid black line). The dark current density–voltage curves are also shown for the in situ (open circles) and ex situ (filled triangles) cases.	 
Footnotes
† This paper is part of a Journal of Materials Chemistry theme issue on solar cells. Guest editors: Michael Grätzel and René Janssen.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: 1H NMR spectrum of ex situMeH-PPV; molecular weights of MEH-PPV determined by GPC. See DOI: 10.1039/b902271f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
