Graphene for energy solutions and its industrialization  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR03312K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR03312K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10108-10126Graphene for energy solutions and its industrializationDi Wei* and Jani KiviojaNokia Research Center, Broers Building, 21 J. J. Thomson Avenue, Cambridge, CB3 0FA, UK. E-mail: di.wei@nokia.com;   Tel: +44 (0)7826871586Received 27th June 2013, Accepted 26th August 2013First published on 29th August 2013AbstractGraphene attracts intensive interest globally across academia and industry since the award of the Nobel Prize in Physics 2010. Within the last half decade, there has been an explosion in the number of scientific publications, patents and industry projects involved in this topic. On the other hand, energy is one of the biggest challenges of this century and related to the global sustainable economy. There are many reviews on graphene and its applications in various devices, however, few of the review articles connect the intrinsic properties of graphene with its energy. The IUPAC definition of graphene refers to a single carbon layer of graphite structure and its related superlative properties. A lot of scientific results on graphene published to date are actually dealing with multi-layer graphenes or reduced graphenes from insulating graphene oxides (GO) which contain defects and contaminants from the reactions and do not possess some of the intrinsic physical properties of pristine graphene. In this review, the focus is on the most recent advances in the study of pure graphene properties and novel energy solutions based on these properties. It also includes graphene metrology and analysis of both intellectual property and the value chain for the existing and forthcoming graphene industry that may cause a new ‘industry revolution’ with the strong and determined support of governments and industries across the European Union, U. S., Asia and many other countries in the world.1. IntroductionGraphene is one of the most popular topics that attracts scientists and industry researchers from different scientific backgrounds. With the introduction of graphene to the public by the BBC, it has wider implications. What is graphene? What differentiates graphene from other materials? What special features can graphene bring when it is used in energy devices? These questions are interesting not only to the scientific community across chemistry, physics, materials science and engineering but also to the general public.There are reviews on the electrochemical1 and mechanical2 properties of graphene and analysis on the relationship between its properties and functionalization.3–5 Different tailored physicochemical properties can be produced when graphene is made from reduction of graphene oxide (GO).6–10 Both small molecules and polymers can be covalently attached to the reactive oxygen functionalities of GO, or non-covalently attached to the graphitic surfaces. The functional entities themselves will also cause the ballistic transport of charge carriers effectively scattered or spatially confined to be used as nanoelectronic memory devices.11 Graphene has been making a profound impact in the development of solar cells, photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic applications.12,13 Many published reviews have emphasized use of graphene in energy conversion devices (mainly solar cells).14,15 Dimensionally-tailored (0D, 1D, 2D, 3D) functional graphene structures for energy harvesting and storage (graphene–quantum dot solar cells, actuators, fuel cells, supercapacitors) have also been reviewed.16,17 It was found that free standing 3D graphene foam gives rise to beneficial electrochemical signatures in ionic liquids in contrast to its poor voltammetric responses in aqueous solutions, due to the quasi-super-hydrophobicity created by the material and the structure.18 Since a considerable number of publications on graphene were not dealing with pristine graphene, but with reduced graphene from GO, reviews14,15,19 based on these publications actually did not discuss the unique properties that intrinsic graphene can offer to existing energy devices. With the significant progress of graphene research in recent years, it is necessary to review this important topic with a focus on the intrinsic properties of pristine graphene for energy solutions and its scaling up protocols. This review will discuss what real differentiations graphene can bring to energy devices and its value chain for the existing and forthcoming graphene industry.2. Conjugation from Nobel Prize to Nobel PrizeGraphene is the fundamental building unit for fullerene, carbon nanotubes and graphite. The sp2 hybrid carbon atoms are arranged in a hexagonal configuration within a planar sheet. Like the conjugation in conjugated polymers,20 such sp2 electron hybridization leaves a free electron per carbon atom in the p-orbital located perpendicular to the hexagonal plane, which means that graphene has huge potential in various applications.21–23 There are indeed intrinsic correlations between conjugated polymers (2000 Nobel Prize in Chemistry) and graphene (2010 Nobel Prize in Physics), since both Nobel prizes involve the same structure chemistry of the sp2 hybridization bonding of carbon in either 1 or 2 dimensions. The single and double bond alternation (π bond) makes the polymer conducting because the perpendicular p-electrons can move freely in the 1D linear structure. In the case of graphene, it has a structure analogous to benzene and can be considered as a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon of quasi-infinite size24 with the p-electrons moving freely on a 2D plane. Both ‘organic’ conjugated polymers and ‘inorganic’ graphene materials have unique electric, thermal and electrochromic properties.Fig. 1a is an example of simple π bonding in polyacetylene. This conjugation exists in many materials, from small organic molecules such as 1,3-butadiene, larger polymers like polyacetylene, to graphene and its derivatives. Fig. 1b shows details of the conjugation (π bonds) across the 2D graphene. Using the π–π interaction of graphene, ultra-light and super-elastic graphene-based cellular monoliths (with high elasticity in 3D graphene networks) can be made through a cost-effective freeze casting process.25 The interaction of graphene with small molecules can be as strong as the inter-sheet interaction in graphite.26,27 It is not only small molecules that can interact with graphene, but also larger ones, sometimes with dramatic results. As an example, insulin, which is a key regulator for the synthesis of fatty acids, can be denatured upon π–π adsorption on graphene, in contrast to GO, which instead binds with insulin electrostatically.28 The chemical bonding and electronic structure of graphene–metal contacts have been studied as well.29 Strong covalent metal-d–graphene-p hybridization and hole doping of graphene is observed upon deposition of Ni and Co metal contacts onto graphene/SiO2. Of single-crystalline substrates, the most commensurate (111) facets exhibit the strongest interactions with the graphene lattice. At the same time, the anion–π interactions on graphene flakes were also found to be unexpectedly strong compared to those on simple aromatic compounds.30 The unexpectedly large adsorption energies of the halide anions on the graphene flake are ascribed to the effective donor–acceptor interactions between the halide anions and the graphene flake. These favourable interactions of anions with electron-deficient graphene flakes may be applicable to the design of a new family of neutral anion receptors and detectors. They can also be applied in a novel energy generation device.31 Fig. 1  (a) Conjugation along 1D conjugated polymer, (b) conjugation along 2D graphene. In the semiconductor and organic electronics industry, not only is the band gap important, but the type of charge carriers present in the substrate are essential to the device. Pristine graphene displays ambipolar behaviour in its FET devices with a neutrality point at zero.32 For silicon, the dopants (usually phosphorus or boron atoms) provide an excess of electrons or holes as the charge carriers, producing both n-type and p-type semiconductors. Similarly, substitution of the carbon atoms in the structure of graphene with heteroatoms could produce a material with either electrons or holes, exhibiting both n-type and p-type behaviours. In general, p-type graphene is easily obtained by the adsorption of water molecules from air and n-type graphene is a bit more difficult but can be made using several nitrogen-doped methods.33–35 In addition to physical doping, there are some similarities in electrochemical doping and photon dopings between graphene derivatives and conjugated polymers. For example, both polyaniline (type of conjugated polymer)36–39 and graphene oxide40,41 are pH sensitive (i.e. both color and conductivity change with pH), sensitive to humidity42,43 and flash light.44,452.1 Graphene propertiesA lot of materials will become unstable on the nanoscale. Graphene, being only a few atoms thick, is however, very stable under ambient conditions. The typical size of graphene is monoatomic (ca. 0.33 nm) in one dimension, and up to tens of mm in the other two. Thus, while being one-atom thick, a sheet of graphene has a lateral size which is 102–105 times larger than the size of typical small molecules. This provides graphene with lots of unique properties.46Graphene has extremely high Young's modulus (1 TPa) and highest intrinsic strength (∼130 GPa).47,48 It can act effectively as nano-fillers in polymers to reinforce the elastic modulus of the polymer composite.49 Loading of graphene in a matrix can be as high as >75% by weight and its low inter-platelet friction promotes reduced matrix viscosity. Graphene can reduce fiber entanglements, thus allowing higher than normal carbon nanotube and carbon nanofiber loadings, and it improves processability of nanocomposites. Graphene also has a high breaking strength of 42 N m−1,50–53 which is ideal to be used in the blades of wind turbines to generate electricity.The high electric conductivity and electron mobility in monolayer graphene results from a very small effective mass. Since the electronic structure of a monolayer graphene overlaps between two conical points in the Brillouin zone, the charge carriers can be understood as mass-less electrons or Dirac fermions.46,54 Thus electrons in a single layer graphene behave like massless relativistic particles, travelling at a speed of around 106 m s−1. This electronic behavior of graphene was theoretically studied by local density of states.55 Graphene has exceptional in-plane electrical conductivity (up to ∼20000 S cm−1) and charge mobility of ≈200000 cm2 V−1 s−1,56 which is more than 100 times higher than that of silicon and over 20 times higher than gallium arsenide (∼1500 and 8500 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively). Atomically thin carbon films exhibit such a strong ambipolar electric field effect that electrons and holes in concentrations up to 1013 cm−2 can be induced by applying a gate voltage and the films have an anomalous quantum hall effect46,50 with ballistic transport (negligible electrical resistivity).46,57 In addition, graphene can be readily surface-functionalizable and dispersible in many polymers and solvents with high loading in nanocomposites. This is not only useful to enhance the mechanical properties of the composites but also to use its high conductivity and charge carrier mobility as electrode materials in batteries, supercapacitors and bipolar plates in fuel cells.Graphene also has outstanding resistance to gas permeation and a large surface area (2630 m2 g−1).58 Such a high surface area is an essential criteria for porous electrodes in batteries and supercapacitors, catalyst supports for fuel cells and for hydrogen storage. Graphene also has a highest thermal conductivity of ∼5300 W m−1 K−1 (ref. 59) and is an ideal material to facilitate heat dissipation for highly efficient power management systems.Regarding the optical properties of graphene, it nearly has total transparency. Graphene can absorb a 2.3% fraction of light with a very wide spectral width (optical transparency of 97.7%).47,60 Moreover, the absorption range can be modified in double-layer graphene by tuning the electrical gating.60,61 Therefore, by means of an external gate field, the Fermi energy levels of graphene can be changed resulting in modified absorption properties. Photodetectors and plasmonic devices are application examples that are based on these electrical and optical properties.62,63The correlation between the properties of graphene and its use in different energy devices are summarized in Fig. 2. Energy solutions can not only be enhanced by the existing physicochemical properties (optical, electrical and mechanical etc.) of graphene, but also from its special nano-properties. For example, energy can be harvested from water flow through a graphene layer and voltage can be generated by mechanical strain. These details will be discussed in the latter part of this review. Fig. 2  Relationship between graphene properties and their applications in energy solutions. 2.2 Electrochemical properties of pure graphene (monolayer graphene)In spite of many reports on graphene applications in numerous devices,2–4 very few results were shown on the electrochemical property of monolayer graphene,64,65 which is essentially important in understanding the function of graphene in different devices. Quantitative interface-specific thermodynamic information on how aqueous phase species interact with monolayer graphene was studied within the electrical double layer over the single-atom thick layer of graphene.66 The kinetics of interfacial electron transfer at single layer graphene electrodes in solutions show that mechanical imperfections and chemical modifications/impurities of graphene give rise to enhanced electrochemical activity or cause large kinetic effects at the monolayer graphene.67–70 This may explain why some suggested that if there are no defects introduced in the graphene sheet, the basal plane of graphene is almost electrochemical inert,71 and on the other hand, some observed monolayer graphene to have anomalously large reactivity compared to bi- or multilayer graphenes.72 Electrochemical studies of monolayer graphene sheets from both mechanically exfoliated graphene and chemical vapour deposition (CVD) graphene were carried out and it was found that the electron transfer rates of graphene electrodes are more than 10 fold faster than the basal plane of bulk graphite, likely due to the presence of corrugations in the graphene sheets.73,74 All these studies involve the transfer of the grown CVD graphene to other substrates such as silicone, and these may introduce contaminants and corrugations that can dramatically affect electrochemical processes.75 Elegant work by Compton and co-workers has allowed the electrochemical characteristics of highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) to be fully understood and confirms that edge-plane sides/defects are the predominant origin of electrochemical activity.76 Defects in graphene are supposed to enhance electrochemical77 and hydrogen storage78 ability of graphene sheets.3. Graphene synthesis and its relationship to propertiesThe different methods used to produce graphenes influence them with different properties. Firstly, graphene can be prepared by a scotch tape method, i.e. micromechanical exfoliation of HOPG.32,79,80 These processes can obtain pristine graphene flakes for basic scientific research. However, they are not suitable for volume production and the flake size is limited to the micrometer range. Many efforts have been made to produce graphene in bulk including epitaxial growth on silicon carbide.81–84 Although high quality graphene film can be grown on silicon carbide, it requires costly substrate materials and ultrahigh vacuum conditions, which significantly limit its usage. Other synthesis methods include solvothermal synthesis (a pyrolysis of an alcohol, usually nano-dispersed ethanol, and an alkali metal (Na) that gives fused monoatomic sheets of graphene);69,85 the unzipping of carbon nanotubes; electron beam irradiation of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) nanofibres, arch discharge of graphite, thermal annealing of GO and organic synthesis etc.86Fig. 3 summarizes some of these synthesis schemes, among which the solution based methods (chemical reduction of GO, electrochemical exfoliation and liquid phase exfoliation) and CVD methods are currently the only ones that can be used for scaled-up graphene production. Fig. 3  Synthesis methods for graphene with controlled sizes, shapes, edges, layers, doping and assembly. (Reproduced from ref. 87 with copyright permission.) In a mass production and cost-effective manner, graphene can be prepared via chemical reduction from GO,10,88–91 electrochemical exfoliation92 or liquid phase exfoliation starting from graphite.93–97 Chemical modifications of graphene would help tackle the problems regarding its production, storage, handling and processing as the modified graphene composites can have synergistic properties resulting from both the graphene and the modifiers.98 Stability, solubility, electrical, thermal, mechanical and magnetic properties of graphene-related materials could be tuned by chemical functionalization.5 A detailed discussion on the relationship of graphene synthesis to its properties was reviewed by Edwards and Coleman.99 However, the defects created during reactions in solution-based methods increase the sheet resistance and it is also relatively challenging to make a monolayer graphene device from these methods. Defects in graphene planes and residual oxygen groups from GO result in tens of thousands ohms per square of sheet resistance with a transparency of 60–80% at 550 nm, which fails to meet the requirements for high-quality transparent conductors.100CVD is perhaps one of the most popular techniques to grow high quality graphene on metal substrates.101,102 It has been shown to produce monolayer graphene sheets of the order of 30 inches.103,104 Because the electrical properties of graphene are closely related to its thickness, controlling the thickness is as important as controlling the width. For example, bilayer graphene has a tuneable band gap, while monolayer graphene does not.105 It is possible to use CVD synthesized monolayer graphene as building block to produce the required thickness through layer-by-layer transfer and stacking. Properties of graphene from CVD methods and solution-based methods (chemical reduction of GO, liquid phase exfoliation and electrochemical exfoliation) are compared in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparison of the performance of CVD graphene with graphene inks from solution-based methods

Synthesis methodSheet resistance (ohm sq−1)Transparency (%)ReferencesChemical reduction of GO1000–70000, 31000–19 M80–95%106 and 107Liquid-phase exfoliation520–3110, 5000–800063–90%106 and 108Electrochemical exfoliation of graphite210–43000 (210 after thermal annealing at 450 C)96%106 and 109CVD graphene and micromechanical cleavage graphene8.8–60084–97.7%110–112Table 1 depicts the state of the art performance values of graphene inks from the three different solution-based synthesis methods. Clearly, graphene inks have to improve their performance significantly in order to aspire to replace indium tin oxide (ITO) at the highest end of the spectrum (10–30 Ω sq−1 at over 85%). CVD graphene has by far the best performance in terms of transparency with the lowest sheet resistance, and is as good as, if not even better than, the widely used ITO in industries. CVD methods can produce high quality graphene with decent sheet sizes, and it can also make controlled, perfect monolayer graphene to replace ITO as a conductive transparent material. Currently industries will likely be more interested in growing huge areas of graphene using CVD-type processes113 even though its cost is high and it often involves complicated processes to transfer the substrate. Due to higher sheet resistance, current solution-cast graphene films may be suitable for some cost-effective applications such as electrostatic dissipation, electromagnetic interference shielding etc. which do not require excellent values of transmittance and sheet resistance. However, the chemical reduction of GO and liquid phase exfoliation offer the optimum mix of throughput, cost, electronic quality and versatility in terms of chemical functionalization for potential applications in printable electronics.1144. Graphene for energy devices4.1 Graphene for solar cellsWidespread concern about energy sources has created a surge in efforts to explore solar cells. Graphene has an optical transmission rate of over 98% in the visible bandwidth region, an improvement on its closest competitor, ITO,104,115,116 that make it a highly viable option in optoelectronic devices.62,117,118Optical transparent conductors (OTCs) in the industry currently are mainly ITO and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO). For ITO and FTO, the transmittance decreases in the IR (>1200 nm) regions (Fig. 4A). Fig. 4B compares the constant resistivities of different OTCs, and graphene has the smallest constant resistivity among all OTC materials. It exhibits the astounding properties of a two-dimensional electron gas at room temperature i.e. very high electron mobility combined with high transmittance. Bae et al. demonstrated a sheet resistance of ≈30 Ω □−1 for graphene layers grown by CVD and layer-transferred to a polymer foil, which provided a transmittance of T ≈ 90%.104 This gives graphene the potential for use in photovoltaic cells.62 Fig. 4  (A) Transmittance of a ca. 10 nm thick graphene film (red), in comparison with that of ITO (black) and FTO (blue). (B) Sheet resistance Rs as a function of film thickness d for different transparent conducting films: Ag, Al and Cu metal grids; PEDOT–PSS; ITO films; SWNTs; Ag nanogrid; oxide–Ag–oxide films; and graphene. The dotted lines correspond to constant resistivities ρ of 1 × 10−5, 5 × 10−5, 1 × 10−4, 5 × 10−4, 1 × 10−3 and 1 × 10−2 Ω cm (from left to right). (Reproduced from ref. 119 and 120 with copyright permission.) One of the simplest photovoltaic cells is from Schottky junctions. The Schottky junction, formed by contacting a metal with a moderate doped semiconductor, is a promising structure for solar-to-electric energy conversion. Compared to the p–n junction, the Schottky junction has the merits of material universality, low cost, and easy fabrication. However, in a conventional Schottky junction solar cell, the metal layer, which should be thick enough to form a continuous film, will absorb most of the solar radiation and hence limit the energy conversion efficiency. In order to overcome this drawback, researchers have used ITO films to replace the metal film in the Schottky junction solar cell. However, the limited resources of indium will lead to high production costs. Besides, the diffusion of indium ions will cause a degradation of the device performance and the brittle nature of ITO will limit its application for flexible devices. Graphene sheds new light on the Schottky junction solar cell, owing to its fascinating physical properties, such as a near-zero band-gap, high electrical conductivity, ultrahigh mobility, high elasticity and transparency.121Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) could potentially replace traditional silicon solar cells in the future since they have high photon-to-electron efficiencies and low costs.122 Generally, a DSSC has a film of dye-sensitized TiO2, a conductive transparent electrode, a counter electrode and an electrolyte. The dyes are photoexcited and produce an injection of an electron to the semiconductor film.12 The conversion rate achieved so far with TiO2 electrodes with ruthenium-based dyes is approximately 12%. This low rate is caused by the trapping of electrons and random pathways. The high specific area and electron mobility of graphene allows for longer lifetimes and better conversion rates. Kim et al.122 embedded graphene on the top layers of an inverse opal TiO2 structure. C–Ti bonds enhance electron transport, and therefore, electron injection and collection efficiencies. Besides, graphene improved the visible light absorption and, as a consequence, reduced the energy absorption by the dyes. The incorporation of graphene sheets improved the electron lifetime by increasing the chemical capacitance and decreasing the resistance. At the moment, a 55% enhancement in conversion rate for a DSSC with graphene was obtained over a DSSC with pure TiO2.122 In addition, the work function of graphene is 4.42–4.5 eV,12 much lower than the TiO2, making the electron transport easier. Tang et al. has reported on the use of graphene/TiO2 on top of ITO as a photoanode for a DSSC. The increase in electron transport manifested itself in an increase of the short-circuit current density. They achieved a power conversion five times higher than pure TiO2 and a conductivity with two orders of magnitude improvement.123 Surface wettability, work function alignment and carrier transport are the greatest challenges in using pure graphene in both organic photovoltaics and DSSCs. Thus the majority of the work on such applications is focused on using more solvent-processable GO58,124–126 instead of pure graphene. The pre-reduction of GO has been required to fabricate TiO2–graphene based DSSCs.127 A simple approach without pre-reduction of GO was demonstrated to be effective as well.126 Incorporation of graphene into a TiO2-based DSSC increases the short current density and power conversion efficiency by 52.4% and 55.3% respectively. However, there is an optimal concentration of GO, beyond which the efficiency will decrease due to the light absorbance of GO.126 Monolayer graphene has been modified by an Al–TiO2 composite as an efficient transparent cathode for organic photovoltaics. This gives rise to enhanced power conversion efficiency of 2.58%, which is a 2-fold improvement on the best efficiency reported for graphene cathode organic photovoltaics, reaching ∼75% of the performance of the control devices using indium tin oxide.128 The excellent conductivity of graphene, mobility of electrons, transparency, wide band tenability and flexibility provided by graphene may improve the state-of-the-art devices.12 Continuous, transparent and highly flexible CVD graphene was made and used in organic photovoltaics.129 CVD graphene offers a comparable performance to the ITO substrate but an outstanding capability to operate under bending conditions up to 138°, whereas ITO cracks under bending of 60°. Both Wang et al. and Park et al. also showed the feasibility of using graphene/doped graphene as substitutes for ITO in organic photovoltaics.130,131 Organic photovoltaics based on solution-processable GO and P3HT were also made.125 The GO was functionalized by organic isocyanate to change its hydrophilic nature to a hydrophobic one to tailor the organic solvents used. Similar to DSSCs, the device efficiency increases first and then decreases with further increases in the GO content.Quantum dots solar cells (QDSCs) have the same structure as DSSCs but with inorganic quantum dots (QDs), for example, CdS, CdSe, PbS, and ZnS, instead of organic dyes. The advantages of QDs in comparison to organic dyes are the high extinction coefficients, tunable band gaps, large intrinsic dipole moments and good stability.12 Therefore, the enhancements made with graphene/TiO2 have the same characteristics as in DSSCs and the main point would be to improve the electron transport between those QDs and graphene/TiO2. Graphene–QDs material for energy-related applications were heavily studied132 due to its large surface area, high carrier transport mobility, superior mechanical flexibility and excellent thermal/chemical stability. 0D QDs are interesting materials and the development of new types of QDs will allow the control of the fundamental properties of materials through size/shape effects, which will further allow new devices to be developed with distinctive properties and functions for numerous optoelectronic applications. Graphene–CdSe hybrids composed of CdSe quantum dot arrays directly grown on CVD graphene have ultrafast carrier dynamics.133 The original fabrication and performance of a photocurrent device was reported using directly grown CdSe QDs on a graphene basal plane. The junction between the QDs and graphene and the high quality of the graphene grown by CVD enables highly efficient electron transfer from the QDs to the graphene. Therefore, the hybrids show large photocurrent effects with a fast response time. A lot of QDSCs were also made from reduced GO functionalized with CdSe etc.124 Cu2S–GO composites exhibit significant improvement in the fill factors of quantum dot solar cells and benchmark efficiencies in range of 4.4–5.4% were achieved.134,1354.2 Graphene for supercapacitorsThere are two types of supercapacitors: electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudo-capacitors based on the charge storage mechanism. In EDLCs, a purely electrostatic attraction occurs between the ions accumulated at the electrode–electrolyte interface, and the resulting double layer is the origin of the capacitance. This is the mechanism relevant for carbon-based electrodes. The second type of supercapacitor is a pseudo-capacitor that uses fast and reversible surface, or near-surface reactions for charge storage. Reported specific capacities for graphene in EDLCs range from 62.6 F g−1 to 215 F g−1.136–139 Galvanostatic charge–discharge analysis was performed on both graphene and graphite-modified electrodes (under identical conditions) where the specific capacities of 62.6 F g−1 and 5.4 F g−1 were obtained respectively at a discharge current of 67 nA.136 It appears that although graphite has a larger portion of edge plane sites than that of graphene, it is a ‘bulk’ material where tightly stacked layering leads to the reduced accessibility of available surface area.136 The larger capacitance of graphene can be attributed to a combination of capacitance due to available edge plane sites and surface area, where enhanced layer spacing results in the superior accessibility of these available components in flexible graphene sheets as opposed to bulk graphite, consequently leading to the higher capacitance values observed.136 It is known that surfactants and additives to graphene will add Faradaic reactions that bring a pseudo-capacitor response. Graphene-based hybrid materials involving various metals, oxides and polymers were used to further improve the energy and power density of the supercapacitors.140–145 Among them, a graphene–polyaniline composite synthesized by in situ polymerization obtained the highest specific capacitance of 1046 F g−1.140 Supercapacitors were also made from the reduced GO. Porous carbon with a surface area of up to 3100 m2 g−1 was made by the chemical activation of exfoliated GO.146 Such carbon electrodes yield high values of gravimetric capacitance and energy density with organic and ionic liquid electrolytes. GO can also be reduced using lasers and a scalable fabrication of graphene micro-supercapacitors over large areas by direct laser writing on GO was achieved.147,148 These micro-supercapacitors demonstrate a power density of ∼200 W cm−3, which is among the highest values for any supercapacitor.The advantage of using graphene in EDLCs is not only to increase the specific capacity. EDLCs are essentially DC devices, i.e. they take several seconds to fully charge and then several seconds to fully discharge again. They operate efficiently at frequencies below about 0.05 Hz and are therefore good for applications like hybrid vehicles, which can take up to a few seconds to charge (when braking) and a few seconds to discharge (when accelerating). However, at higher frequencies, they become much less efficient and start to behave like resistors rather than capacitors due to the porous carbon used in EDLC electrodes. An EDLC that contains vertically oriented high-surface-area graphene electrodes that aren't porous at all can overcome this problem. EDLCs made from graphene push the operating frequency of an EDLC to well beyond 5000 Hz, which is a factor of 105 better than commercial EDLCs. What's more, graphene supercapacitors can be six times smaller than low-voltage aluminium electrolytic capacitors and can be charged and discharged at high efficiency in times much shorter than 1 ms.Fig. 5 shows the high-frequency AC “supercapacitors” containing graphene electrodes. The thickness of the supercapacitor is as thin as a human hair. EDLCs from graphenes can minimize electronic and ionic resistance and produce capacitors with an RC time constant of less than 200 mS, in contrast with ∼1 s for typical EDLCs.149 Fig. 5  SEM micrograph of a coated Ni electrode (left), and capacitance versus frequency for the graphene electrode prototype evaluated using an organic electrolyte comprised of 1 M TEATFB salt in PC solvent (right). (Reproduced from ref. 149 with copyright permission.) 4.3 Graphene for batteriesThere is a dilemma between energy density and power density in current energy storage devices as the Ragone plot shows in Fig. 6. Supercapacitors that usually have high power density can release the energy in a very short time but their capacity for energy storage (energy density) is low. On the other hand, batteries can store more energy but they can not release energy quickly due to their relatively lower power density. One of the most challenges for current batteries is the low power density. With the advances of electrical vehicles and modern smart devices, electrochemical energy storage devices that have both high power density and high energy density are needed. Graphene is one of the few materials that can enable these combined battery–supercapacitor properties.23 Fig. 6  Ragone plot for energy storage devices. Ref. 23 reported an approach based on the exchange of lithium ions between the surfaces (not the bulk) of two nanostructured electrodes, completely obviating the need for lithium intercalation or deintercalation as Fig. 7 shows. In both electrodes, massive graphene surfaces in direct contact with the liquid electrolyte are capable of rapidly and reversibly capturing lithium ions through surface adsorption and/or surface redox reactions. An energy density of 160 W h per kg cell was obtained that is 30 times higher than that (5 W h per kg cell) of conventional symmetric supercapacitors and comparable to that of Li-ion batteries. They are also capable of delivering a power density of 100 kW per kg cell, which is 10 times higher than that (10 kW per kg cell) of supercapacitors and 100 times higher than that (1 kW per kg cell) of Li-ion batteries. Fig. 7  The structure of a fully surface enabled, Li ion-exchanging cell when it is made, containing an anode current collector and a nanostructured material at the anode, a Li ion source (e.g., pieces of Li foil or surface-stabilized Li powder), a porous separator, liquid electrolyte, and a nanostructured functional material at the cathode. The lower left portion shows the structure of this cell after its first discharge (Li is ionized with the Li ions diffusing through the liquid electrolyte to reach surface-borne functional groups in the nanostructured cathode and rapidly reacting with these groups). Lower right portion shows the structure of this cell after being recharged (Li ions are rapidly released from the massive cathode surface, diffusing through liquid electrolyte to reach the anode side, where the huge surface areas can serve as a supporting substrate onto which massive amounts of Li ions can electrodeposit concurrently. The Ragone plot of graphene surface-enabled Li ion-exchanging cells with different electrode thicknesses is shown left. (Reproduced from ref. 23 with copyright permission.) An ultrathin battery made from pristine monolayer graphene was reported.150 It was shown that a battery made of only one atom layer of carbon can even light up an LED. Currently the anode material employed for lithium-based batteries is usually graphite because of its high coulombic efficiency which means it can be reversibly charged and discharged under intercalation potentials with a reasonable specific capacity.151 To improve battery performances, the relatively low theoretical capacity associated with graphite batteries (372 mA h g−1) and the long diffusion distances of the Li-ions, need to be overcome.151,152 Enhanced interlayer spacing, increased availability of the surface area and fewer layers of graphene samples that are disordered/porous in nature exhibit superior characteristics for applications in battery electrodes.153,154 Lian et al.155 report the first reversible specific capacity of a graphene electrode to be as high as 1264 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1. After 40 cycles, the reversible capacity was retained at 848 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1; note that this is higher than general values reported at both CNT and graphite electrodes.155 This favorable performance is most likely due to the increased flexibility and degree of accessible surface area at the graphene structure.155 Additionally the graphene nanostructures utilized in the above study were thought to have significant disorder and defects, which, as verified by comparable reports, is beneficial for Li-ion storage where highly disordered graphene nano-sheets exhibit high reversible capacities (794–1054 mA h g−1) and good cycling stability.156 Doped graphene sheets as anode materials also demonstrated super-high rates and large capacities for lithium ion batteries.157 The doped graphene shows a high reversible capacity of >1040 mA h g−1 at a low rate of 50 mA g−1. A very high capacity of ca. 199 and 235 mA h g−1 was obtained for the N-doped graphene and B-doped graphene at 25 A g−1 (about 30 s to full charge).151 The unique 2D structure, disordered surface morphology, hetero-atomic defects, better electrode/electrolyte wettability, increased sheet distance, improved electrical conductivity and thermal stability of the doped graphene are beneficial to rapid surface lithium ion absorption and ultrafast lithium ion diffusion and electron transport. In terms of modifying the graphene as to improve its performance, work by Bhardwaj et al.158 confirmed that oxidized graphene nano-ribbons (ox-GNRs) outperformed CNTs and pristine graphene, presenting a first charge capacity of about 1400 mA h g−1 and a reversible capacity of about 800 mA h g−1. In this case it is likely that both the large edge plane surface area possessed by the ox-GNRs, favourable interlayer spacing (porosity, disorder) and the oxygenated species contributed beneficially towards the enhanced performance of the device in terms of favourable Li-ion intercalation. It is no surprise therefore that the majority of research is focused on achieving greater disorder of the graphene utilised or on enhancing other contributing factors, which can be achieved via a variety of methods including electron-beam irradiation156 and, of course, the fabrication of hybrid graphene composite materials.A lot of efforts have also been focused on using graphene–nanoparticle composites159–165 or graphene–polymer composites166,167 to enhance the energy density of the batteries. Ordered metal oxide–graphene composites can be made by self-assembly methods using graphene as building block. A graphene–Fe3O4 composite was shown to exhibit a reversible specific capacity of 1026 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles at 35 mA g−1 and 580 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 700 mA g−1.159 NiO nanosheets can also be bonded strongly to graphene through oxygen bridges that mainly originate from the pinning of hydroxyl/epoxy groups from graphene onto the Ni atoms. At a current density of 50 mA g−1, the graphene–NiO composite exhibits a discharge capacity of 1478 mA h g−1.162 When the discharge and charge current density increase to as high as 2.5 A g−1, the specific capacity of the graphene–NiO composite remains at 550 mA h g−1. SnO2 is a good high-capacity electrode for lithium ion batteries, but usually shows rapid capacity fading during discharge–charge cycles because of a phase transformation and a large volume expansion upon lithiation.168 Graphene sheets prevent the aggregation of nanoparticles during the Li ion charge–discharge process and SnO2–graphene nano-composites form a stable 3D architecture.169 A steady specific capacity of 625 mA h g−1 from graphene–SnO2 was obtained at current density of 10 mA g−1.164 Other graphene–nanoparticle composites such as a TiO2–graphene composite were synthesized scalably and exhibited high rate performances for lithium ion batteries.160 A graphene–TiO2 composite is able to deliver a capacity of 230 mA h g−1 at 17 mA g−1.160 The specific capacity of the graphene–TiO2 composite at a high discharge rate can remain at 97 mA h g−1, 6 times higher than that of the reference TiO2.163 Studies have shown that inorganic–graphene intercalated nanosheets are an effective solution to optimize the transport property of graphene using ultrathin lithium vanadate–graphene hybrid nanosheets.170 Thus graphene–inorganic composites may have synergistic effects between graphene and inorganic nano-materials to improve the energy capacity of batteries. A percolated graphene network can increase electrode conductivity and the dimensional confinement of active material particles by the surrounding graphene sheets limiting the volume expansion upon lithium insertion. Graphene foam, a three dimensional, flexible and conductive interconnected network can be used as current collectors loaded with Li4Ti5O12 as the anode and LiFePO4 as the cathode.171 No metal current collectors, conducting adhesives or binders are need in such a structure. Such batteries with ultrafast charge and discharge rates exhibits about 100 mA h g−1 at 200 C, equivalent to a full discharge in 18 s, and it also retains over 95% energy capacity when repeatedly bent to a radius of 5 mm without structural failure.171 Conducting polymers can contribute by enhancing both the mechanical flexibility and electric conductivity of the graphene batteries. Hierarchically nanostructured graphene–MnO2–poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT) was used in batteries. The battery exhibits a large discharge capacity of 1835 mA h g−1 at the first cycle with rate of 50 mA g−1. The discharge capacity drops to 1105 mA h g−1 on the second cycle but remains at 948 mA h g−1 after 15 cycles.165 As for the pure graphene–conducting polymer composites, the graphene–polypyrrole composite delivers a discharge capacity of 1013 mA h g−1 in the first cycle and a reversible capacity of 493 mA h g−1 in the second cycle at rate of 100 mA h g−1.167 A good review on graphene–conducting polymer composites can be found in ref. 166. Flexible graphene paper electrodes made from reduced GO show enhanced rate capabilities for energy storage172 and batteries made from such graphene inks can be printable.173,174 A highest energy capacity for such batteries of 819 mA h g−1 was obtained at rate of 25 mA g−1, and it remained 178 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1.172 In summary, batteries based on graphene and its derivatives can provide both high energy density and high power density. i.e. when using graphene, a hybrid battery and supercapacitor device with robust mechanical flexibility becomes feasible.4.4 Fuel cellsThe performance of a fuel cell is strongly dependent on its catalytic efficiency. For example, proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells will convert chemical energy to electrical energy and an appropriate catalyst is required to initiate and promote the electrochemical reaction. Platinum (Pt) is the most efficient catalyst used for fuel cells. However, the high price and the poor utilization efficiency of Pt catalyst loading per unit area limits its practical applications. Graphene can be used in fuel cells as in the following applications.Firstly, graphene can act as a catalytic support (bipolar plate) for enhanced electro-catalytic activity. The requirements of catalyst support materials are (1) high specific area for dispersion of the catalyst, (2) high electrochemical stability under the operating conditions, (3) chemical stability at the relevant temperature and (4) high electrical conductivity.14 Graphene is an ideal candidate for this application due to its high electrical and thermo-conductivity and high surface area. The bipolar plate is one of the most costly components in a PEM fuel cell (typically amounting to 33% of the stack cost) and typically accounts for more than 80% of the weight and 95% of the volume of the stack, determining the gravimetric and volumetric power density of a fuel cell stack. A high surface area and light weight make graphene an ideal catalyst support and its use results in a significant improvement in electro-catalytic activity, long term durability, and CO tolerance.175 Graphene as a supporting material for metal catalysts provides anchoring sites to obtain a uniform distribution of nano-sized metal particles, which results in high catalytic activity. Nitrogen-doped graphene,176 microwave-heating of graphene in a NH3 atmosphere,177 the chemical reduction of graphene178 and functionalized graphene sheets179–181 all can be used as such catalyst supports.Secondly, graphene can be used effectively to reduce the Pt loading and so reduce the cost. In other words, graphene acts as catalyst for an enhanced oxygen reduction reaction. Replacing precious and nondurable Pt catalysts with cheap and commercially available materials to facilitate cathodic oxygen reduction reactions is a key issue in the development of fuel cell technology. 2D graphene materials from both N-doped CVD graphene182 and S-doped graphene from the annealing of GO183 can be used in this application as metal-free catalysts. There is a good review article on nanostructured metal free electrochemical catalysts based on graphene.184 Last but not least, graphene can be used as a filler in polymer electrolyte membranes for enhanced charge transport properties due to its high mechanical strength and electrical conductivity.4.5 Graphene for novel energy generating devicesThe nano-properties of high-surface area and conjugation in 2D can make graphene useful in many novel energy generating devices.It was reported that energy can be harvested from water flow over few-layered graphene.31 The surface ions can efficiently glide or drift on the surface of flat sheets of graphene leading to the induced voltage and current. This has aroused much interest in the study of electrochemistry at graphene interfaces. Fig. 8 shows that water flowing over multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) can produce only a small electric current in the direction of the flow. Adding HCl to water and streaming it over flat sheets of graphene can generate 85 nW of power using a few hundred micrometers of graphene film. It is suggested that the voltage is generated by chloride ions that hop along the surface of the graphene interacting with and dragging the material's electrons along. The graphene sheets boosted power generation because of their high electron mobility and continuous surface for efficient ion gliding.31 It has also been noticed that chemically induced charge carriers were generated in single-layer graphene exposed to different concentrations of gas molecules such as NO2, NH3 and CO etc. The adsorbed molecules change the local carrier concentration in graphene one by one electron, which leads to step-like changes in resistance.185 Fig. 8  Harvesting energy from water flowing over graphene31 which induced voltage as a function of fluid flow velocity over the graphene film (exposed to ∼0.6 and ∼0.3 M HCl solutions) and a multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWNT) film exposed to a ∼0.6 M HCl solution. (Reproduced from ref. 31 with copyright permission.) The electrochemical properties of the graphene–PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) substrate and pure PDMS under uniaxial strain are very different. A strain-induced chemical potential difference between monolayer graphene sheets was reported.186 Monolayer graphene sheets were deposited on a transparent and flexible polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate, and a tensile strain was loaded by stretching the substrate in one direction. It was found that an electric potential difference between stretched and static monolayer graphene sheets reached 8 mV when the strain was 5% as Fig. 9 shows. Theoretical calculations for the band structure and total energy revealed an alternative way to experimentally tune the band gap of monolayer graphene, and induce such a generation of electricity. Fig. 9  The electrochemical properties of the graphene–PDMS substrate and pure PDMS under uniaxial strain. (Reproduced from ref. 186 with copyright permission.) Graphene, as a transparent conducting material, can also be embedded in fully rollable transparent nano-generators based on transparent piezoelectric ZnO materials.187 An energy scavenging nano-generator using a piezoelectric ZnO nanowire was developed in 2006.188,189 CVD-grown large scale graphene sheets could be used as transparent electrodes to realize fully rollable transparent piezoelectric energy harvesting nano-devices (nano-generators), which consist of a heterogeneous 3D nanostructure composed of 1D ZnO nanorods on a 2D graphene electrode. By applying a pushing force of 1 kgf to the top of the nano-generator in the vertical direction, a current density of 2 μA cm−2 was generated by such a graphene based nano-generator.1875. Technology transfer and industrializationNature has provided us with large amounts of high-quality graphene sheets, stacked inside the graphite mineral. Differently from carbon nanotubes, graphene can be produced on a ton scale without any high temperature processes, and without the need for metal catalysts; at the same time, differently from organic materials, it can be produced at high temperatures, in a clean vacuum, with no exposure to the solvents needed for organic synthesis. Graphene research is where science meets business.5.1 Industry metrologySince graphene made from different methods will have different properties, quality control is vital in all scalable material productions. Wafer scale transferable silicon and silicon carbide nanowire arrays with improved electrical contact have been successfully grown directly on graphene and transferred onto arbitrary substrates for their applications as robust supercapacitor electrodes.190 With recent advances in synthesizing large area graphene sheets, engineers have begun investigating variable methodologies for conducting graphene metrology and quality control at industrial scales, to understand a variety of reliability issues including defects, patternability, electrical and physical properties.191 Standardization and metrology will be fundamental to benchmark different results published on this topic, allowing a clear and objective distinction between various graphene materials from different synthesis methods and the quality of materials produced in different labs. This is particularly essential in evaluating graphenes made from CVD methods.The following tables (Tables 2 and 3)191 summarize the different characterization techniques for graphene and their industrial metrology capabilities.
Table 2 Industrial metrics measured by graphene characterization techniques (reproduced from ref. 191 with copyright permission)

 LayersEdge structureDefectsFermi levelThermal conductivityTEM (transmission electron microscopy)Cross-section of cut of fold192–194Atomic edge structure imaged directly195Variations in lattice structure imaged directly196,197  SEM (scanning electron microscopy) Identified in extended edges of high quality exfoliated flakes50   LEEM (low energy electron microscopy)Oscillations in the electron reflection spectrum198–200 Reciprocal lattice structure determined from diffraction pattern198,201,202  AES (Auger electron spectroscopy)Ratio of element peak intensities203–205 Relative peak height/positions203  AFM (atomic force microscopy)Sharp height variations at edges32,206–208    STM (scanning tunnelling microscopy) Scanning bias voltage209Density of state measurements193,210–213Scanning bias voltage211,214 Raman spectroscopyRelative peak height (G and 2D) and location (2D)215–219D peak height using horizontal polarization220,221D peak height101,222–225G peak position210,226–229Relationship between G peak position and dissipated power59,230XPS (X-ray photoemission spectroscopy)  Relative peak height/positions204,206,215,216,219,231Determined from dopant type and concentration17 Optical transmission2.3% attenuation per layer94,104,115,232    EllipsometryAmplitude of polarization angle shift233–235    Reflection microscopyColour contrast, depends on substrate206,216,236–238    FQM (fluorescence quenching microscopy)Intensity contrast, customized by dye layer thickness239,240    
Table 3 Industrial metrology capabilities provided by graphene metrology techniques (reproduced from ref. 191 with copyright permission)

 ThroughputCharacterization areaSubstrate/environment requirementsQualified resultsTEM (transmission electron microscopy)Very low, a great deal of sample preparation is required and image formation is slowVery smallSupport substrate with large holes/vacuum environment SEM (scanning electron microscopy)Mediocre, sample preparation required but image formation is fast500 × 500 μm2 regions demonstrated.101 Limited by desired resolutionConductive substrate/vacuum environment LEEM (low energy electron microscopy)Somewhat high, parallel image formation but high resolution means small regions are imaged50 × 50 μm2 regions demonstrated.202 Limited by desired resolution and image objectiveReflection spectrum altered by substrate/vacuum environment AES (Auger electron spectroscopy)Low, spatial mapping is rare. Requires extensive calibration steps100 × 100 μm2 regions demonstrated (5 μm2 resolution)203Vacuum environment AFM (atomic force microscopy)Low, data acquisition speed limited by probe scanning controlSmall, limited by throughput, scan size and feedback driftAtomically flat substrate STM (scanning tunnelling microscopy)Very low, data acquisition speed limited by probe scanning controlSmallAtomically flat, conductive substrate/vacuum, low temperature environment Raman spectroscopyVery low, 0.5–1 minute per collection pointSmall, limited by throughputVery low substrate and environment sensitivity XPS (X-ray photoemission spectroscopy)Extremely low, usually only one or two points are measured Vacuum environment Optical transmissionMediocre, fast data collection but limited resolutionLarge. Resolution is limited by contrastSubstrate must exhibit high, uniform transmittance EllipsometryMediocre, data points are collected sequentially. Industrial implementations typically average over large areas using wide illumination spots or generalize from a small number of points1 cm2 regions demonstrated (250 μm2 resolution)234Polarization change affected by substrate Reflection microscopyVery high, thousands of data points collected simultaneously120 × 120 μm2 regions demonstrated.237 Limited by contrastSubstrate stacking and refractive index determine contrastImage segmentation according to layers (exfoliated graphene, calibration required)FQM (fluorescence quenching microscopy)Very high, thousands of data points collected simultaneously1 cm2 regions demonstrated.239 Unlimited due to high contrastVery low substrate and environment sensitivityHighly repeatable image segmentation according to layers (CVD graphene, no calibration required)Ref. 191 covered currently available graphene metrology techniques. It should be noticed that Raman spectroscopy generally has very low environment sensitivity but in the case of graphene Raman measurements can be sensitive to temperature or the substrate. To increase the use of graphene in industry, high-throughput metrology techniques still need to be developed. Metrology techniques based on fluorescence quenching allow the quick and easy identification of graphene layers on arbitrary substrates and are well-suited for many industrial applications.191 Unfortunately, it was found that they can not meet all of the criteria for industrial applications. Some industrial applications may require information about the graphene sheets other than the layer thickness and uniformity. Therefore, the incorporation of graphene in industry could be improved by the development of additional high-throughput metrology techniques. The development of new industrial metrology techniques may involve a combination of creating new optical methods for probing the characteristics of graphene and employing advanced digital image processing techniques. It is well known that even monolayer graphene can be observed with a conventional optical microscope when deposited on a silicon substrate, due to a weak interference-like contrast.32 This method, which currently is the most practical way of identifying graphene sheets adsorbed on surfaces, works only on substrates having a suitable interference layer, like 300 nm thick SiO2 and 67 nm thick Si3N4, and thus cannot be utilized to visualize floating graphene sheets in solution. In 2009, Palermo et al.241 described a new technique with which they were able to visualize single graphene sheets on substrates such as glass and quartz, exploiting the quenching of the light emitted by a fluorescent layer of molecules, achieving an optical contrast of up to 0.8. Such a technique241–243 did not depend on light interference, and could also be used to visualize single sheets of solvated graphene, allowing people to follow its dynamics in solution in a fast and versatile way using a simple fluorescent microscope. The evaluation of large-scale quantification of CVD graphene surface coverage has also been enabled by electrochemical methods. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of graphene on Cu and Ni substrates is one of the most promising procedures to synthesize large-area and good quality graphene films. Parallel to the fabrication process, a large-scale quality monitoring technique is equally crucial. A rapid and simple methodology was developed to probe the effectiveness of the growth process over a large substrate area for both Ni and Cu substrates.244 This method is based on inherent electrochemical signals generated by the underlying metal catalysts when fractures or discontinuities of the graphene film are present. It can be applied immediately after the CVD growth process without the need for any graphene transfer step and represents a powerful quality-monitoring technique for the assessment of the large-scale fabrication of graphene by the CVD process. The good sensitivity of the electrochemical method may facilitate a rapid and large-scale quantification of graphene surface coverage after the CVD growth process on Ni and Cu catalysts. It was also demonstrated that the signal generated by the underlying Ni or Cu metal in an alkaline solution can be directly correlated to fractures, holes or discontinuities in the graphene films.244 This provides an opportunity to rapidly evaluate the efficiency of the CVD growth process right after the cooling step without the need for any mechanical transfer of graphene. Quality control during graphene growth and after transfer is also extremely important and ideally non-destructive techniques will be favored. In situ optical methods can enable both in-line (graphene flakes in solvent) and off-line (graphene flakes on a substrate) quality control. Electrochemical methods can also enable efficient off-line monitoring. It will be ideal for analytical methods in the metrology technique to be coupled to industrial fabrication processes, for example, to roll-to-roll graphene electrode fabrication. This will become more important for automating these techniques into a production-line of graphene.5.2 Patent analysis for grapheneTannock245 observed a surge in patent filings on graphenes around the world in recent years and the contribution of multinational corporations to the graphene patent landscape is and remains significant. Among these patents, graphene has been used in various devices. Graphene transistors are evolving at a rapid pace and are being considered as an option for post-Si electronics.246 It is also considered as an outstanding candidate for electrode materials in supercapacitors and batteries due to its properties of high surface area, excellent conductivity and high intrinsic capacitance.247 The most near-term demand is for composites and electrodes for application in the automotive, plastics, metals, aerospace and energy markets.248 For instance, graphene can be used to make lighter and more efficient aircraft and automobile parts, stronger wind turbines, and better medical implants. It could also serve as a transparent conductive coating for solar cells. Spreading one sheet of graphene throughout polymers makes both strong and lightweight materials, and the electrical conductivity and thermal stability in the composite material is even better than in the polymers alone. Graphene is also reported to be an excellent material for solid-state gas detection for toxic or harmful gases.185 In addition, graphene has huge potential in the printable electronics industry. Research has shown flexible graphene-based chemical sensors printed on paper substrates are possible 249 and high performance energy devices like supercapacitors have also been made from flexible graphene–polyaniline composite papers.250 It was discovered that after the publication of the Novoselov paper,32 new themes that become visible in the patent applications are Li-ion batteries, transistors and biosensors.251 There has been a rapid rise in the number of graphene patents since 2004 when the material was discovered to 2010 at a CAGR (Compound Annual Growth Rate) of 35%.251 The rapid growth in the rise of patent applications suggests that graphene is on the upward curve of the hype cycle. The total graphene market was $196000 in 2008 and was expected to rise to $59 M in 2015.252 A most recent analysis from Lux Research reveals that the aggregate graphene market will grow from a base of $9 million in 2012 to a modest $126 million in 2020 (ref. 253) in contrast to a more ambitious forecast made in 2011.254 Composites and energy storage will duke it out for graphene supremacy, while conductive opaque inks and anti-corrosion coatings also provide meaningful volumes.253Fig. 10 shows the value chains of the current graphene industry. The scaling up of graphene production can be realized either by solution-based methods (liquid exfoliation) or the CVD method. The raw material for liquid exfoliation is from graphite ore and the CVD method relies on the production of a CVD machine. Various academic research institutes, industry labs and start-up companies are heavily involved in commercializing different graphene products. With the exception of Samsung, the top corporations have a narrower technology focus than the top academic research institutes. For example, despite SanDisk's large company size they have a narrow interest in graphene's applications in memory devices. Likewise IBM, Xerox, McAlister Technologies and Bayer etc. are likely to have focused interests, whereas the academic institutions are likely to be interested in a wider range of potential applications by exploring different potential research directions. The exception to this is Rice University's concentrated interest in graphene for antenna-related uses, presumably reflecting the areas of interest of their research programmes.255 Fig. 10  Value chains in graphene industry. A map of different stages in the production of graphene and the companies involved in each. Science-based innovations generally originate in academia and graphene is no exception. Since most graphene inventions will cite directly or indirectly the original graphene work made by Novoselov and Geims' that lead them to the Nobel Prize, it has been discovered that there is a correlation between filed patent families and scientific publications, and citations to the Novoselov paper.251The vertical (red) bar in the Fig. 11 marks the publication of the Novoselov paper. It had an immediate and large impact on the R&D community: a sharp rise in the number of scholarly publications and at the same time as an increase in the number of filings for patent applications. This suggests that the number of patent applications is strongly related to the number of scholarly publications. An updated number of patent publications in 2012 is 3500 (ref. 255) and it follows the exponential growth trend predicted in Fig. 11. Taken into account the time needed for publication and the time needed for developing an invention there seems to be an almost instantaneous effect on R&D, an explosion of activity.251 The correlation indicates that graphene R&D is currently still science-based. Fig. 11  Scholarly publications, patent filings and citations to the Novoselov-paper.251 Based on the worldwide patent application record, the discovery of pristine graphene, not graphene oxide, was dated back to at least 2002.256 The number of published graphene patent applications worldwide between 2010 and 2012 has more than tripled and there has been an order of magnitude difference in the yearly publication figures over the last five years. With a huge array of potential applications, there is no doubt that firms, state enterprises and research institutes are filing patents to protect potential product and market shares. Firms in China, the U. S. and South Korea lead the way in the number of patents filed over the past five years in potential applications of graphene. By the beginning of 2013, Chinese firms and institutes filed 2204 patents (30% of the filed patents), followed by U. S. entities with 1754 (23% of the filed patents), then South Korea with 1160 (15% of the filed patents) and finally the UK owning 54 filed patents, which is less than 1%.257 This means that 68% of all global patents filed on graphene related materials and applications have been taken out by firms and institutes in just three countries, even though graphene was discovered in the UK. Fig. 12 demonstrates this using the patent data focusing on four countries. Fig. 12  Number of graphene patent publications up to 2013 vs. nationality. Data source from BBC news.257 UK applicants currently hold the 6th largest number of patent families after Chinese, American, Korean, Japanese and German applicants. The Relative Specialisation Index (RSI) suggests that despite relatively low levels of patenting, the UK is still outperforming its major European competitors (France and Germany) when it comes to graphene patenting.255 It is also interesting to note that when the number of academic publications from all European Union countries are combined, the EU comes out on top with more academic publications related to graphene than China or the USA; when considering the EU as a whole, this could be considered a more accurate measure for comparison against China and the USA in terms of size and population.In addition to the £50 million grant announced by the UK's Chancellor of the Exchequer to support UK-based graphene research in 2011,245 another £21.5 million was invested in 2012258 to fund a national research programme that will take this Nobel Prize-winning discovery from the British laboratory to the British factory. Currently both Manchester and Cambridge universities have tried and tested successful technology transfer capabilities. The European Commission is also boosting graphene research this year by launching one billion Euros funding in the Graphene Flagship. These will help Europe face the global competition and create early roadmaps that will ultimately become new products in high-tech markets.6. ConclusionsAs the thinnest material ever known in the universe, graphene has been attracting tremendous amounts of attention in multi-disciplinary subjects since its successful isolation a few years ago. This one-atom-thick pseudo-infinite nano-crystal consists of sp2-hybridized aromatic carbon atoms covalently packed into a continuous hexagonal lattice. Graphene exhibits a range of unique properties, like a high 3D aspect ratio and large specific surface area, superior mechanical stiffness and flexibility, remarkable optical transmittance, extraordinary thermal response and excellent electronic transport properties, which means it has great promise for applications in the next generation electronics. With respect to other nanocarbon materials like CNTs and fullerenes, graphene and its derivatives are quickly gaining ground for large scale applications and have already established a position in academia and in the industry, thanks to the disruptive innovation their peculiarities might bring. In the field of energy harvesting and storage, the implementation of graphene into solar cells, supercapacitors, batteries and fuel cells is still at the developmental stage, but some performance enhancements have already been observed in a few specific areas.As well as being used as an additive to many functional materials, graphene can enable special applications for various energy devices. The high frequency response from supercapacitors made of graphene as thin as human hair can release the energy in milliseconds, and improvement of thousands of times over conventional supercapacitors that respond in seconds. Graphene is the one of the only materials that can potentially enable a hybrid battery and supercapacitor device (both high energy density and power density). Graphene can act as a special load in fuel cells to facilitate the catalysis as well as to improve efficiencies of solar cells due to its optical transparency and highly conductive properties. Scientists have proven the material's technical superiority in the replacement of rare and expensive materials like platinum and ITO as well as the synergistic effect brought about by the synthesis of graphene composites obtained with metals, semiconductors or polymers. With the highest Young's modulus, graphene can be used in wind turbines and its high thermo-conductivity can make it useful in heat dissipating materials for efficient power management systems. Different manufacturing methods will give different properties to graphene. CVD and solution-based methods (liquid-phase exfoliation) are currently the two options to scale up graphene production. The former can grow the best transparent conducting graphene directly on metal substrates and transfer it to other substrates and the latter can be enabled by printing technology. The CVD method can produce a perfect layer of graphene with less defects (preserving all the superlative physical properties), lower sheet resistance and tailored layers, but the cost is high and it usually needs the transfer of a substrate for specific applications. Solution-based methods are very cost-effective and functional groups can be added directly onto graphenes during physiochemical reactions and formed as inks in the formula directly. However, such methods will create a lot of defects resulting in higher sheet resistance. On the other hand, graphene can be easily mixed into composites for functional materials and tailored to different applications from liquid-based methods. The global printed electronics market is expected to grow rapidly in the future. Graphene-based conductive inks have the potential to play a key role in specific parts of the overall market. These inks offer reasonably good functionality at very competitive costs along with the element of flexibility. They are also compatible with all existing printing technologies. The inks are likely to enter the market in stages – gradually moving from low cost low functionality to high cost high functionality applications. This will enable energy solutions to be scaled up in an effective printable way. In summary, the distinctive electronic, thermal and mechanical properties of graphene make it a potentially disruptive technology across a range of industries.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to acknowledge the EU Graphene Flagship project. We also acknowledge J. J. Winnink from Leiden University for kindly providing Fig. 11 with up-to-date data analysis.Notes and referencesD. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6944 RSC .R. J. Young, I. A. Kinloch, L. Gong and K. S. Novoselov, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 12, 1459 CrossRef .M. H. Rummeli, C. G. Rocha, F. Ortmann, I. Ibrahim, H. Sevincli, F. Borrnert, J. Junstmann, A. Bachmatiuk, M. Potschke, M. Shiraishi, M. Meyyappan, B. Buchner, S. Roche and G. Cuniberti, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4471 CrossRef PubMed .V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4541 RSC .X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, P. K. Ang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2277 RSC .D. R. Dreyer, R. S. Ruoff and C. W. Bielawski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Chen, B. Zhang, G. Liu, X. Zhuang and E. T. Kang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4688 RSC .D. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1362 CAS .K. C. Kemp, H. Seema, M. Saleh, N. H. Le, K. Mahesh, V. Chandra and K. S. Kim, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3149 RSC .N. G. Sahoo, Y. Pan, L. Li and S. H. Chan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Ago, Y. Ito, M. Tsuji and K. Ikeda, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5178 RSC .L. Zhang, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, N. Chen and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3112 RSC .D. A. C. Brownson, L. C. S. Figueiredo-Filho, X. B. Ji, M. Gomez-Mingot, J. Iniesta, O. Fatibello-Filho, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5962 CAS .L. Grande, V. T. Chundi, D. Wei, C. Bower, P. Andrew and T. Ryhänen, Particuology, 2012, 10, 1 CrossRef CAS .The Nobel Prize in Chemistry, Conductive Polymers, http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/2000/advanced-chemistryprize2000.pdf,  2000.D. W. Wang, I. R. Gentle and G. Q. Lu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1423 CrossRef CAS .J. Yao, Y. Sun, M. Yang and Y. Duan, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 22, 14313 RSC .B. Z. Jang, C. Liu, D. Neff, Z. Yu, M. C. Wang, W. Xiong and A. Zhamu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Fitzer, K. H. Kochling, H. P. Boehm and H. Marsh, Pure Appl. Chem., 1995, 67, 473 CrossRef .L. Qiu, J. Z. Liu, S. L. Y. Chang, Y. Wu and D. Li, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1241 CrossRef PubMed .L. A. Girifalco and R. A. Lad, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 25, 693 CrossRef CAS .Q. H. Wang and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. C. Lee, C. Lim, H. Shi, L. A. L. Tang, Y. Wang, C. T. Lim and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. J. Schultz, C. Jaye, P. S. Lysaght, D. A. Fischer, D. Prendergast and S. Banerjee, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 494 RSC .G. Shi, Y. Ding and H. Fang, J. Comput. Chem., 2012, 33, 1328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Dhiman, F. Yavari, X. Mi, H. Gullapalli, Y. Shi, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Yoon, P. K. Weber, H. Wang, J. Guo and H. Dai, Science, 2009, 324, 768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Jin, J. Yao, C. Kittrel and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Petr, D. Wei, C. Kvarnstroem, A. Ivaska and L. Dunsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 12395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Wei, A. Petr, C. Kvarnstroem, L. Dunsch and A. Ivaska, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16571 CAS .D. Wei, T. Lindfors, P. Espindola, C. Kvarnstroem, J. Heinze and A. Ivaska, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 602, 203 CrossRef CAS .D. Wei, T. Lindfors, C. Kvarnstroem, L. Kronberg, R. Sjoholm and A. Ivaska, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 575, 19 CrossRef CAS .Y. Guo, B. Wu, H. Liu, Y. Ma, Y. Yang, J. Zheng, G. Yu and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. M. Dimiev, L. B. Alemany and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Yao, X. Chen, H. Guo, Z. Wu and X. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 161, 1053 CrossRef CAS .S. Jain, S. Chakane, A. B. Samui, V. N. Krishnamurthy and S. V. Bhoraskar, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 96, 124 CrossRef CAS .L. J. Cote, R. Cruz-Silva and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. X. Huang and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Choi, I. Lahiri, R. Seelaboyina and Y. S. Kang, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 35, 52 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Falko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. W. Schaefer and R. S. Justice, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 8501 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. A. C. Brownson and C. E. Banks, Analyst, 2010, 135, 2768 RSC .Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Soldano, A. Mahmood and E. Dujardin, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2127 CrossRef CAS .A. H. Castro Neto, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109 CrossRef CAS .W. Schwalm, M. Schwalm, J. Wagner and B. Z. Jang, Am. Phys. Soc., 2004, 3, C1.157 Search PubMed .J. H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Xiao, M. Ishigami and M. S. Fuhrer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Kuila, S. Bose, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 1061 CrossRef CAS .L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y. M. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia and P. Avouris, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Tian, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. Crommie and Y. R. Shen, Science, 2008, 320, 206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611 CrossRef CAS .M. Freitag, T. Low, F. Xia and P. Avouris, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 53 CrossRef CAS .E. Lee and K. A. Persson, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Pollak, B. Geng, K. J. Jeon, I. T. Lucas, T. J. Richardson, F. Wang and R. Kostecki, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. L. Achtyl, I. V. Vlassiouk, P. F. Fulvio, S. M. Mahurin, S. Dai and F. M. Geiger, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2013, 135, 979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. L. Ritzert, J. Rodriguez-Lopez, C. Tan and H. D. Abruna, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Tan, J. Rodriguez-Lopez, J. J. Parks, N. L. Ritzert, D. C. Ralph and H. D. Abruna, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Ambrosi, A. Bonanni, Z. Sofer, J. S. Cross and M. Pumera, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Banerjee, J. Shim, J. Rivera, X. Jin, D. Estrada, V. Solovyeva, X. You, J. Pak, E. Pop, N. Aluru and R. Bashir, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Pumera, Chem. Rec., 2011, 12, 201 CrossRef PubMed .R. Sharma, J. H. Baik, C. J. Perera and M. S. Strano, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Li, C. Tan, M. A. Lowe, H. D. Abruna and D. C. Ralph, ACS Nano, 2013, 5, 2264 CrossRef PubMed .A. T. Valota, I. A. Kinloch, K. S. Novoselov, C. Casiraghi, A. Eckmann, E. W. Hill and R. A. W. Dryfe, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. A. Brownson, J. P. Metters, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, Electrolysis, 2011, 23, 894 CrossRef CAS .T. J. Davies, R. R. Moore, C. E. Banks and R. G. Compton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. D. Roy-Mayhen, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203 CrossRef PubMed .H. C. Wu, Y. Y. Li and A. Sakoda, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 4123 CrossRef CAS .S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Berger, Z. Song, X. Li, X. Wu, N. Brown, C. Naud, D. Mayou, T. Li, J. Hass, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2006, 312, 1191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Rollings, G. H. Gweon, S. Y. Zhou, B. S. Mun, J. L. McChesney, B. S. Hussain, A. V. Fedorov, P. N. First, W. A. de Heer and A. Lanzara, Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 2172 CrossRef CAS .W. A. de Heer, C. Berger, X. Wu, P. N. First, E. H. Conrad, X. Li, T. Li, M. Sprinkle, J. Hass, M. L. Sadowski, M. Potemski and G. Martinez, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143, 92 CrossRef CAS .K. V. Emtsev, A. Bostwick, K. Horn, J. Jobst, G. L. Kellogg, L. Ley, J. L. McChesney, T. Ohta, S. A. Reshanov, J. Rohrl, E. Rotenberg, A. K. Schmid, D. Waldmann, H. B. Weber and T. Seyller, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Choucair, P. Thordarson and J. A. Stide, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. R. Cooper, B. D'Anjou, N. Ghattamaneni, B. Harack, M. Hilke, A. Horth, N. Majlis, M. Massicotte, L. Vandsburger, E. Whiteway and V. Yu, ISRN Condens. Matter Phys., 2012, 1 CrossRef .D. Wei and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Fan, W. Peng, Y. Li, X. Li, S. Wang, G. Zhang and F. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4490 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Gilje, S. Han, M. Wang, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558 CrossRef CAS .D. Wei, L. Grande, V. Chundi, R. White, C. Bower, P. Andrew and T. Ryhanen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1239 RSC .Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Sun, X. Wang, E. Wang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 9, 538 CrossRef PubMed .A. B. Bourlinos, V. Georgakilas, R. Zboril, A. Steriotis and A. K. Stubos, Small, 2009, 5, 1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. Wang, I. T. McGovern, G. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 3611 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Hernandez, Y. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gunko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Liu, J. Tang and J. J. Gooding, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12435 RSC .R. S. Edwards and K. S. Coleman, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 38 RSC .S. De and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 2713 CrossRef PubMed .X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. H. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. D. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. W. Sutter, J. I. Flege and E. A. Sutter, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Sun, D. K. James and J. M. Tour, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2425 CrossRef CAS .S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim and Y. I. Song, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhang, T. T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. R. Shen and F. Wang, Nature, 2009, 459, 820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Y. Su, A. Y. Lu, Y. Xu, F. R. Chen, A. N. Khlobystov and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Y. Bae, I. Y. Jeon, J. Yang, N. Park, H. S. Shin, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Liu, F. Luo, H. Wu, Y. Liu, C. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1518 CrossRef CAS .J. Ye, M. F. Cracium, M. Koshino, S. Russo, S. Inoue, H. Yuan, H. Shimotani, A. F. Morpurgo and Y. Iwasa, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 13002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. Khrapach, F. Withers, T. H. Bointon, D. K. Polyushkin, W. L. Barnes, S. Russo and M. F. Cracium, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zhang, P. Hu, X. Wang, Z. Wang, D. Liu, B. Yang and W. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18283 RSC .S. Ashley, Sci. Am., 2009, 20 CrossRef .M. Taghioskoui, Mater. Today, 2009, 12, 34 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Valentini, M. Cardinali, S. B. Bon, D. Bagnis, R. Verdejo, M. A. Lopez-Manchado and J. M. Kenny, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 995 RSC .V. Yong and J. M. Tour, Small, 2010, 6, 313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. C. Elias, R. R. Nair, T. M. G. Mohiuddin, S. V. Morozov, P. Blake, M. P. Halsall, A. C. Ferrari, D. W. Boukhvalov, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2009, 323, 610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Mullen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Ellmer, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 809 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ye and L. Dai, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24224 RSC .H. N. Kim, H. Yoo and J. H. Moon, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4200 RSC .Y. B. Tang, C. S. Lee, J. Xu, Z. T. Liu, Z. H. Chen, Z. B. He, Y. L. Cao, G. D. Yuan, H. S. Song, L. M. Chen, L. B. Luo, H. M. Cheng, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. V. Lightcap and P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013 DOI:10.1021/ar300248f .Q. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, L. Yang, N. Zhang, G. Pan, S. Yin, Y. Chen and J. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 894 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, S. L. Leonard and Y. F. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 10613 CrossRef CAS .N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Zhang, F. Xie, P. Lin and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Gomez de Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Park, J. A. Rowehl, K. K. Kim, V. Bulovic and J. Kong, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 505204 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Wang, S. W. Tong, X. F. Xu, B. Ozyilmaz and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, N. Chen and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8869 CAS .Y. T. Kim, H. W. Shin, Y. S. Ko, T. K. Ahn and Y. U. Kwon, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1483 RSC .P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. G. Radich, R. Dwyer and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2453 CrossRef CAS .D. A. C. Brownson and C. E. Banks, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1425 RSC .Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103 CAS .X. Du, P. Guo, H. Song and X. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4812 CrossRef CAS .X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang, X. Shen and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 487 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Chen, X. Zhang, P. Yu and Y. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3031 CrossRef CAS .K. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, X. S. Zhao and J. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1392 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Stroller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498 CrossRef PubMed .Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao and E. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. F. EI-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .M. F. EI-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326 CrossRef PubMed .J. R. Miller, R. A. Outlaw and B. C. Holloway, Science, 2010, 329, 1637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Wei, S. Haque, P. Andrew, J. Kivioja, T. Ryhanen, A. Pesquera, A. Centeno, B. Alonso, A. Chuvilin and A. Zurutuza, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3177 CAS .M. Liang and L. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5871 RSC .D. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4873 CrossRef CAS .T. Takamura, K. Endo, L. Fu, Y. Wu, K. J. Lee and T. Matsumoto, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 53, 1055 CrossRef CAS .E. J. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Hosono, H. S. Zhou, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Lian, X. Zhu, S. Liang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3909 CrossRef CAS .D. Pan, S. Wang, B. Zhao, M. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Wang and Z. Jiao, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3136 CrossRef CAS .Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Bhardwaj, A. Antic, B. Pavan, V. Barone and B. D. Fahlman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Zhou, D. W. Wang, F. Li, L. Zhang, N. Li, Z. S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306 CrossRef CAS .X. Xin, X. Zhou, J. Wu, X. Yao and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 11035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. C. Dong, H. Xu, X. W. Wang, Y. X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Zhou, D. W. Wang, L. C. Yin, N. Li, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Li, G. Liu, C. Zhen, F. Li, L. Zhang and H. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1717 CrossRef CAS .D. Wang, R. Kou, D. Choi, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, J. Li, L. V. Saraf, D. Hu, J. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu, M. A. Pope and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. X. Guo, M. Wang, T. Chen, X. W. Lou and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 736 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sun and G. Shi, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 231 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yang, C. Wang, B. Yue, S. Gambhir, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 266 CrossRef CAS .I. A. Courtney and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2045 CrossRef CAS .A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Graphene Platelet-Based Composite Anode Compositions for Lithium Ion Batteries, US Patent Appl. No. 11/982,672,  2007 .H. Zhu, X. Qin, X. Sun, S. Yan, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1246 Search PubMed .N. Li, Z. Chen, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Wei, P. Andrew, H. Yang, J. Jiang, W. Ruan, D. Han, L. Niu, C. Bower, T. Ryhanen, M. Rouvala, G. A. J. Amaratunga and A. Ivaska, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9762 RSC .D. Wei, H. Li, D. Han, Q. Zhang, L. Niu, H. Yang, C. Bower, P. Andrew and T. Ryhänen, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245702 CrossRef PubMed .S. H. Hur and J. N. Park, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2013, 8, 218 CrossRef CAS .Z. Shen, L. Shao, J. Chen, W. Bao, F. Wang and X. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4350 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Xin, J. Liu, X. Jie, W. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Yin, J. Gu and Z. Zou, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 60, 354 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, L. Tang and J. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 846 CrossRef CAS .D. He, K. Cheng, H. Li, T. Peng, F. Xu, S. Mu and M. Pan, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Shao, S. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Nie, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4600 CrossRef CAS .R. Kou, Y. Shao, D. Wang, M. Engelhard, J. Kwak, J. Wang, V. Viswanathan, C. Wang, Y. Lin, Y. Wang, I. Aksay and J. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 954 CrossRef CAS .L. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec, Y. Jin and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2012, 8, 3550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhang, C. Luo, W. Li and C. Pan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2616 RSC .D. Choi, M. Y. Choi, W. M. Choi, H. J. Shin, H. K. Park, J. S. Seo, J. Park, S. M. Yoon, S. J. Chae, Y. H. Lee, S. W. Kim, J. Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee and J. M. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. D. Wang, J. Zhou, J. H. Song, J. Liu, N. S. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. D. Wang, J. H. Song, J. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. P. Alper, A. Gutes, C. Carraro and R. Maboudian, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4114 RSC .J. R. Kyle, C. S. Ozkan and M. Ozkan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3807 RSC .R. Colby, Q. Yu, H. Cao, S. S. Pei, E. A. Stach and Y. P. Chen, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2010, 19, 143 CrossRef CAS .H. L. Cao, Q. K. Yu, R. Colby, D. Pandey, C. S. Park, J. Lian, D. Zemlyanov, I. Childres, V. Drachev, E. A. Stach, M. Hussain, H. Li, S. S. Pei and Y. P. Chen, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 044310 CrossRef .J. C. Meyer, A. K. Geim, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth and S. Roth, Nature, 2007, 446, 60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. O. Girit, J. C. Meyer, R. Erni, M. D. Rossell, C. Kisielowski, L. Yang, C. H. Park, M. F. Crommie, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie and A. Zettl, Science, 2009, 323, 1705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. C. Meyer, C. O. Girit, M. F. Crommie and A. Zettl, Nature, 2008, 454, 319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. C. Meyer, C. Kisielowski, R. Erni, M. D. Rossell, M. F. Crommie and A. Zettl, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Locatelli, K. R. Knox, D. Cvetko, T. O. Mentes, M. A. Nino, S. Wang, M. B. Yilmaz, P. Kim, R. M. Osgood and A. Morgante, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Hibino, H. Kageshima, F. Maeda, M. Nagase, Y. Kobayashi and H. Yamaguchi, e-J. Surf. Sci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 6, 107 CrossRef CAS .H. Hibino, H. Kageshima, F. Maeda, M. Nagase, Y. Kobayashi and H. Yamaguchi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 075413 CrossRef .M. S. Altman, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 084017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Sutter, J. T. Sadowski and E. Sutter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 245411 CrossRef .M. Xu, D. Fujita, J. Gao and N. Hanagata, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Ferralis, R. Maboudian and C. Carraro, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 156801 CrossRef PubMed .C. Berger, Z. Song, T. Li, X. Li, A. Y. Ogbazghi, R. Feng, Z. Dai, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19912 CrossRef CAS .A. Reina, S. Thiele, X. T. Jia, S. Bhaviripudi, M. S. Dresselhaus, J. A. Schaefer and J. Kong, Nano Res., 2009, 5, 509 CrossRef .K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Kobayashi, K. Fukui, T. Enoki, K. Kusakabe and Y. Kaburagi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 193406 CrossRef .L. Zhao, R. He, K. T. Rim, T. Scgiros, K. S. Kim, H. Zhou, C. Gutierrez, S. P. Chockalingam, C. J. Arguello, L. Palova, D. Nordlund, M. S. Hybertsen, D. R. Reichman, T. F. Heinz, P. Kim, A. Pinczuk, G. W. Flynn and A. N. Pasupathy, Science, 2011, 333, 999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Cockayne, G. M. Rutter, N. P. Guisinger, J. N. Crain, P. N. First and J. A. Stroscio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 195425 CrossRef .N. M. R. Peres, L. Yang and S. W. Tsai, New J. Phys., 2009, 11, 095007 CrossRef .H. I. Rasool, E. B. Song, M. Mecklenburg, B. C. Regan, K. L. Wang, B. H. Weiller and J. K. Gimzewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Li, A. Luican and E. Y. Andrei, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 176804 CrossRef PubMed .J. S. Park, A. Reina, R. Saito, J. Kong, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1303 CrossRef CAS .Z. H. Ni, H. M. Wang, J. Kasim, H. M. Fan, T. Yu, Y. H. Wu, Y. P. Feng and Z. X. Shen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Graf, F. Molitor, K. Ensslin, C. Stampfer, A. Jungen, C. Hierold and L. Wirtz, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Gupta, G. Chen, P. Joshi, S. Tadigadapa and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. You, Z. Ni, T. Yu and Z. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 163112 CrossRef .C. Casiraghi, A. Hartschuh, H. Qian, S. Piscanec, C. Georgi, A. Fasoli, K. S. Novoselov, D. M. Basko and A. C. Ferrari, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. M. Lucchese, F. Stavale, E. H. M. Ferreira, C. Vilani, M. V. O. Moutinho, R. B. Capaz, C. A. Achete and A. Jorio, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1592 CrossRef CAS .A. Jorio, M. M. Lucchese, F. Stavale, E. H. M. Ferreira, C. Vilani, M. V. O. Moutinho, R. B. Capaz, C. A. Achete and A. Jorio, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 334204 CrossRef PubMed .A. Guermoune, T. Chari, F. Popescu, S. S. Sabri, J. Guillemette, H. S. Skulason, T. Szkopek and M. Siaj, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4204 CrossRef CAS .L. G. Cancado, A. Jorio, E. H. M. Ferreira, F. Stavale, C. A. Achete, R. B. Capaz, M. V. O. Moutinho, A. Lombardo, T. Kulmala and A. C. Ferrari, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Yan, Y. Zhang, P. Kim and A. Pinczuk, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 166802 CrossRef PubMed .A. Das, S. Pisana, B. Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K. Saha, U. V. Waghmare, K. S. Novoselov, H. R. Krishnamurthy, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari and A. K. Sood, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Casiraghi, S. Pisana, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim and A. C. Ferrari, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 233108 CrossRef .D. M. Basko, S. Piscanec and A. C. Ferrari, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 165413 CrossRef .S. Ghosh, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, E. P. Pokatilov, D. L. Nika, A. A. Balandin, W. Bao, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 151911 CrossRef .V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S. I. Khondaker and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 1178 CrossRef CAS .K. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Lee, J. Kim, K. Kim, J. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Choi and B. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Meera and G. S. Setlur, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 033525 CrossRef .W. A. de Heer, C. Berger, M. Ruan, M. Sprinkle, X. Li, Y. Hu, B. Zhang, J. Hankinson and E. H. Conrad, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 16900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. E. Gaskell, H. S. Skulason, W. Strupinski and T. Szkopek, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 3336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Casiraghi, A. Hartschuh, E. Lidorikis, H. Qian, H. Harutyunyan, T. Gokus, K. S. Novoselov and A. C. Ferrari, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. M. Nolen, G. Denina, D. Teweldebrhan, B. Bhanu and A. A. Balandin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Roddaro, P. Pingue, V. Piazza, V. Pellegrini and F. Beltram, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. R. Kyle, A. Guvenc, W. Wang, M. Ghazinejad, J. Lin, S. Guo, C. S. Ozkan and M. Ozkan, Small, 2011, 7, 2599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Kim, L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Treossi, M. Melucci, A. Liscio, M. Gazzano, P. Samori and V. Palermo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Saga, K. Kern and K. Balasubramanian, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 015303 CrossRef PubMed .J. Kim, L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Ambrosi, A. Bonanni, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2379 RSC .Q. Tannock, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 2 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Schwierz, 10th IEEE International Conference on Solid-State and Integrated Circuit Technology (ICSICT),  2010 Search PubMed .C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .The World Market for Graphene to 2017, Future Markets Inc.,  2011 Search PubMed.G. Yang, C. Lee, J. Kim, F. Ren and S. J. Pearton, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1798 RSC .H. P. Cong, X. C. Ren, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1185 CAS .J. J. Winnink, Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Science and Technology Indicators,  2012, p. 837 Search PubMed .Growth Potential Looms Large for Graphene Nanomaterials, Lux Research,  2009 Search PubMed.R. Kozarsky, E. Hime and M. Holman, Is Graphene the Next Silicon… Or Just the Next Carbon Nanotube?, Lux Research,  2012 Search PubMed .Graphene: Technologies, Applications, and Markets, BCC Research,  2011 Search PubMed.UK Intellectual Property Office, Graphene: The worldwide patent landscape in 2013,  2013 Search PubMed .B. Z. Jang and W. C. Huang, Nano-scaled graphene plates, US7071258 B1  2002 .http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-20975580,  2013.http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-20846282,  2012.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Conjugation along 1D conjugated polymer, (b) conjugation along 2D graphene.	 

 	Fig. 2  Relationship between graphene properties and their applications in energy solutions.	 

 	Fig. 3  Synthesis methods for graphene with controlled sizes, shapes, edges, layers, doping and assembly. (Reproduced from ref. 87 with copyright permission.)	 

Chemical reduction of GO	1000–70000, 31000–19 M	80–95%	106 and 107
Liquid-phase exfoliation	520–3110, 5000–8000	63–90%	106 and 108
Electrochemical exfoliation of graphite	210–43000 (210 after thermal annealing at 450 C)	96%	106 and 109
CVD graphene and micromechanical cleavage graphene	8.8–600	84–97.7%	110–112

 	Fig. 4  (A) Transmittance of a ca. 10 nm thick graphene film (red), in comparison with that of ITO (black) and FTO (blue). (B) Sheet resistance Rs as a function of film thickness d for different transparent conducting films: Ag, Al and Cu metal grids; PEDOT–PSS; ITO films; SWNTs; Ag nanogrid; oxide–Ag–oxide films; and graphene. The dotted lines correspond to constant resistivities ρ of 1 × 10−5, 5 × 10−5, 1 × 10−4, 5 × 10−4, 1 × 10−3 and 1 × 10−2 Ω cm (from left to right). (Reproduced from ref. 119 and 120 with copyright permission.)	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM micrograph of a coated Ni electrode (left), and capacitance versus frequency for the graphene electrode prototype evaluated using an organic electrolyte comprised of 1 M TEATFB salt in PC solvent (right). (Reproduced from ref. 149 with copyright permission.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Ragone plot for energy storage devices.	 

 	Fig. 7  The structure of a fully surface enabled, Li ion-exchanging cell when it is made, containing an anode current collector and a nanostructured material at the anode, a Li ion source (e.g., pieces of Li foil or surface-stabilized Li powder), a porous separator, liquid electrolyte, and a nanostructured functional material at the cathode. The lower left portion shows the structure of this cell after its first discharge (Li is ionized with the Li ions diffusing through the liquid electrolyte to reach surface-borne functional groups in the nanostructured cathode and rapidly reacting with these groups). Lower right portion shows the structure of this cell after being recharged (Li ions are rapidly released from the massive cathode surface, diffusing through liquid electrolyte to reach the anode side, where the huge surface areas can serve as a supporting substrate onto which massive amounts of Li ions can electrodeposit concurrently. The Ragone plot of graphene surface-enabled Li ion-exchanging cells with different electrode thicknesses is shown left. (Reproduced from ref. 23 with copyright permission.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Harvesting energy from water flowing over graphene31 which induced voltage as a function of fluid flow velocity over the graphene film (exposed to ∼0.6 and ∼0.3 M HCl solutions) and a multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWNT) film exposed to a ∼0.6 M HCl solution. (Reproduced from ref. 31 with copyright permission.)	 

 	Fig. 9  The electrochemical properties of the graphene–PDMS substrate and pure PDMS under uniaxial strain. (Reproduced from ref. 186 with copyright permission.)	 

TEM (transmission electron microscopy)	Cross-section of cut of fold192–194	Atomic edge structure imaged directly195	Variations in lattice structure imaged directly196,197	 	 
SEM (scanning electron microscopy)	 	Identified in extended edges of high quality exfoliated flakes50	 	 	 
LEEM (low energy electron microscopy)	Oscillations in the electron reflection spectrum198–200	 	Reciprocal lattice structure determined from diffraction pattern198,201,202	 	 
AES (Auger electron spectroscopy)	Ratio of element peak intensities203–205	 	Relative peak height/positions203	 	 
AFM (atomic force microscopy)	Sharp height variations at edges32,206–208	 	 	 	 
STM (scanning tunnelling microscopy)	 	Scanning bias voltage209	Density of state measurements193,210–213	Scanning bias voltage211,214	 
Raman spectroscopy	Relative peak height (G and 2D) and location (2D)215–219	D peak height using horizontal polarization220,221	D peak height101,222–225	G peak position210,226–229	Relationship between G peak position and dissipated power59,230
XPS (X-ray photoemission spectroscopy)	 	 	Relative peak height/positions204,206,215,216,219,231	Determined from dopant type and concentration17	 
Optical transmission	2.3% attenuation per layer94,104,115,232	 	 	 	 
Ellipsometry	Amplitude of polarization angle shift233–235	 	 	 	 
Reflection microscopy	Colour contrast, depends on substrate206,216,236–238	 	 	 	 
FQM (fluorescence quenching microscopy)	Intensity contrast, customized by dye layer thickness239,240	 	 	 	 

TEM (transmission electron microscopy)	Very low, a great deal of sample preparation is required and image formation is slow	Very small	Support substrate with large holes/vacuum environment	 
SEM (scanning electron microscopy)	Mediocre, sample preparation required but image formation is fast	500 × 500 μm2 regions demonstrated.101 Limited by desired resolution	Conductive substrate/vacuum environment	 
LEEM (low energy electron microscopy)	Somewhat high, parallel image formation but high resolution means small regions are imaged	50 × 50 μm2 regions demonstrated.202 Limited by desired resolution and image objective	Reflection spectrum altered by substrate/vacuum environment	 
AES (Auger electron spectroscopy)	Low, spatial mapping is rare. Requires extensive calibration steps	100 × 100 μm2 regions demonstrated (5 μm2 resolution)203	Vacuum environment	 
AFM (atomic force microscopy)	Low, data acquisition speed limited by probe scanning control	Small, limited by throughput, scan size and feedback drift	Atomically flat substrate	 
STM (scanning tunnelling microscopy)	Very low, data acquisition speed limited by probe scanning control	Small	Atomically flat, conductive substrate/vacuum, low temperature environment	 
Raman spectroscopy	Very low, 0.5–1 minute per collection point	Small, limited by throughput	Very low substrate and environment sensitivity	 
XPS (X-ray photoemission spectroscopy)	Extremely low, usually only one or two points are measured	 	Vacuum environment	 
Optical transmission	Mediocre, fast data collection but limited resolution	Large. Resolution is limited by contrast	Substrate must exhibit high, uniform transmittance	 
Ellipsometry	Mediocre, data points are collected sequentially. Industrial implementations typically average over large areas using wide illumination spots or generalize from a small number of points	1 cm2 regions demonstrated (250 μm2 resolution)234	Polarization change affected by substrate	 
Reflection microscopy	Very high, thousands of data points collected simultaneously	120 × 120 μm2 regions demonstrated.237 Limited by contrast	Substrate stacking and refractive index determine contrast	Image segmentation according to layers (exfoliated graphene, calibration required)
FQM (fluorescence quenching microscopy)	Very high, thousands of data points collected simultaneously	1 cm2 regions demonstrated.239 Unlimited due to high contrast	Very low substrate and environment sensitivity	Highly repeatable image segmentation according to layers (CVD graphene, no calibration required)

 	Fig. 10  Value chains in graphene industry. A map of different stages in the production of graphene and the companies involved in each.	 

 	Fig. 11  Scholarly publications, patent filings and citations to the Novoselov-paper.251	 

 	Fig. 12  Number of graphene patent publications up to 2013 vs. nationality. Data source from BBC news.257	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
