X-ray and neutron reflectivity and electronic properties of PCBM-poly(bromo)styrene blends and bilayers with poly(3-hexylthiophene)   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM14967B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM14967B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4364-4370Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsX-ray and neutron reflectivity and electronic properties of PCBM-poly(bromo)styrene blends and bilayers with poly(3-hexylthiophene)†

        
          
            Stuart B. 
            Kirschner
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nathaniel P. 
            Smith
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kevin A. 
            Wepasnick
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Howard E. 
            Katz
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Brian J. 
            Kirby
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Julie A. 
            Borchers
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Daniel H. 
            Reich
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. E-mail: reich@jhu.edu;   Tel: +1 410 516-7899
bDepartment of Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
dNIST Center for Neutron Research, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA
Received 
      3rd October 2011
    , Accepted 2nd December 2011First published on 20th December 2011AbstractWe used neutron reflectivity to complement X-ray reflectivity characterization of PCBM-based layers formed on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). Single-layer analyses were used to provide reliable scattering length density values for bilayer fitting. Atomic force microscopy analyses showed trends similar to the reflectivity experiments when observing upper surfaces. Styrene polymers added to PCBM in small concentrations (ca. 10%) led to processing advantages while retaining substantial electron mobility, about 0.001 cm2/V s. The further introduction of a relatively heavy bromo substituent on the styrene rings greatly increased the film smoothness, as revealed by increases of the oscillation amplitudes in the reflectivity. In addition, the bromine heavy atom increased the X-ray reflectivity scattering length density of the upper layer. Finally, we present data consistent with PCBM becoming partially mixed with the P3HT as the PCBM is spin coated from a solution with poly(bromostyrene) to form an overlying film, consistent with predictions based on published phase diagrams of the P3HT-PCBM system.
1. Introduction
Devices composed of organic and polymer pn junctions are of great current interest as part of the growing suite of organic electronics technologies based on organic semiconductors (OSCs). Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) are already employed commercially,1 and organic diodes are under widespread development for solar cells. The power conversion efficiency of OSC-based solar cells now exceeds 8%, with blends of polymers with phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) and higher fullerenes giving the best performance.2 The prototypical polymer for such studies has been regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). Organic diodes have been largely studied in two geometries: distinct bilayers and bulk heterojunctions (BHJs). BHJs have shown the best performance to date, but the complex morphology of the BHJ makes it hard to study detailed properties of the crucial pn interface where charge separation happens. Therefore, layered structures have significant advantage in studies of interface properties. In addition, as pointed out recently,3 there is a natural crossover from bilayer to BHJ as the boundary between layers becomes rougher, and therefore the study of bilayers can also potentially inform understanding of BHJs.
The layered architecture of a bilayer introduces the opportunity to use the powerful scattering technique of reflectometry to probe device structure. However, the most common approach, X-ray reflectometry (XRR), is hampered because atomic X-ray scattering cross sections increase with atomic number, and thus the scattering contrast between different materials on which reflectometry depends is generally small between different OSCs, which typically contain atoms with similar charge density. One approach is to use neutron reflectometry (NR), where the scattering contrast between PCBM and other OSC materials is large.4–6 Here we introduce another approach: incorporating high-atomic number atoms into one component to enhance the scattering contrast. We illustrate this “heavy atom” approach by blending poly(4-bromostyrene) (PBrS) with PCBM in P3HT/PCBM bilayers.
As we show in this paper, in addition to the improvement in XRR scattering contrast, the PBrS additive enables the production of smooth films that retain reasonable electronic performance, despite the insulating properties of PBrS. The addition of inert polymers, including polyethylene and polystyrene, to the semiconducting organics in bulk heterojunction solar cells is now being considered, and in some cases, substantial photoconversion efficiency is retained.7 Interestingly, substitution of polystyrene (PS) for PBrS in our structures does not yield smooth films.
We also find via NR studies that there is significant mixing from the top PBrS:PCBM layer into the P3HT underlayer in our bilayer structures. Such mixing in P3HT/PCBM bilayers has been observed previously by NR,4 and this effect appears to be a general consequence of the miscibility of PCBM in P3HT.8–10 Indeed, production of bulk heterojunctions from bilayer precursors may be an attractive route to device fabrication.3,11 With the concept of employing polymer blends in OSC devices gaining momentum, our results may point new directions for improving OSC device characterization and controlling the structure and ultimately the performance of such devices.
2. Experimental
2.1 Film deposition and sample fabrication

          OSC thin films were fabricated by spin coating. Bilayer samples for structural studies were made on conductive silicon wafer substrates with 300 nm thermal oxide grown on top. Prior to deposition, the substrates were cleaned by sequential sonication in acetone and isopropanol, followed by 20 min UV-ozone treatment. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) P3HT (4002-E, Rieke Metals, Inc.12) was deposited from 7 mg/mL solutions in chlorobenzene at spinning speeds of 2,000 RPM, conditions that were determined by atomic force microscopy measurements to minimize surface roughness.13 The resulting films were characterized as single layers and were also used for bilayers. To make bilayers, films of phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (Nano-C, Inc.12), poly(4-bromostyrene) (Sigma-Aldrich,12 average molecular weight 65,000) and polystyrene (Sigma-Aldrich,12 average molecular weight 70,000) and blends of the polymers and PCBM in the range 1:9 to 1:1 by weight were deposited on top of the P3HT layers from 5 mg/mL solutions in dichloromethane (DCM) at spinning speeds of 2,000 RPM. DCM is a very poor solvent for P3HT,14 and has been suggested as a means to deposit PCBM layers on P3HT films.15 All OSC solutions were passed through 0.45 μm poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PFTE) filters prior to deposition.
For single films of PCBM and PCBM/polymer blends, prior to deposition, the Si/SiO2 wafers were cleaned in 3:1 H2SO4/H2O2 (Piranha) solution, followed by treatment with hexamethyldisilazane to enable good adhesion of the OSC films. Deposition solutions for these films ranged from 5 mg/mL to 10 mg/mL, and spinning speeds between 1,000 and 4,000 RPM were used.
Field-effect transistors (FETs) were fabricated on conductive silicon wafer substrates with 300 nm thermal oxide grown on top. OSC films, containing PCBM alone or blended into a polymer, were spin coated. Gold source and drain electrodes were vapor-deposited through a shadow mask, to define channels of width W = 6 mm and length L = 250 μm.
Diodes with active area 0.1 cm2 were fabricated on glass with patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes. P3HT was spin coated, followed by a polymer-PCBM mixture. Aluminum was vapor-deposited to form top electrodes, completing the devices.
2.2 Characterization


Atomic force microscopy
          . 
The morphology of the surfaces of the OSC films was measured using an atomic force microscope (AFM). The surface roughness as measured by this technique was parametrized via Gaussian fits to histograms of the pixel height distribution in tapping mode images of the form N = N0 exp((z − z0)2/wA2), where z is the height, and wA is the AFM roughness parameter, averaged over the field of view of the AFM.


Spectroscopic composition analysis. 
Film composition was verified by ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy. Composition depth profiling was done viaX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), using MgKα radiation in conjunction with 4 keV argon ion sputtering.


X-ray and neutron reflectometry (XRR and NR). 

Reflectometry measurements were made on samples with typical dimensions 25 × 25 mm2. XRR measurements were carried out using diffractometers with Cu X-ray sources at Johns Hopkins University and at the NIST Center for Neutron Research. Curved graphite monochromators were used to select CuKα radiation with wavelength λ = 1.54 Å. Ω-2θ scans were performed, where Ω is the angle between the incident beam and the sample surface and 2θ is the scattering angle. In a typical specular reflectivity scan, 2θ varied from 0° up to 11°, with resolution better than 0.01°. Background data were obtained using a 0.1° offset in Ω. NR measurements were carried out using the NG1 neutron reflectometer at the NIST Center for Neutron Research. A vertically focusing pyrolytic graphite monochromator was used to select neutrons with wavelength λ = 4.75 Å and a wavelength divergence of 0.05 Å. The neutron beam had an angular divergence δθ = 0.018°. Specular reflectivity scans were made over the range of 0° ≤ 2θ ≤ 5.2°. Background scans were made with a 0.3° offset in Ω and covered the same range in 2θ as used in the specular scans, but with a lower density of data points. Both the XRR and NR data were corrected for instrumental background and the footprint of the beam, using the Reflpak software suite.16


Analysis of reflectivity data. 

XRR and NR give composition information through their dependence on the depth profile of their respective scattering-length densities (SLDs), ρx(z) and ρn(z), where z is the coordinate perpendicular to the film plane, which we measured relative to the top surface of the substrate wafer. To describe the XRR and NR data, we modeled our films as composed of multiple layers, with each layer parameterized by its thickness, its neutron or X-ray SLD, and its neutron or X-ray absorption coefficient. The boundary at each interface was approximated by an error function that interpolates between the two adjacent layers, and is of the form erf((z − zi)/wx,n), where zi is the location of the interface, and wx (wn) is a parameter characterizing the full-width of the interfacial mixing, originating from roughness and/or interdiffusion, averaged across the sample plane. The data were fit to this model with Reflpak and/or Refl1D17 software using refinement procedures to find the set of model parameters that best describe the data. The XRR data and the NR data were fit separately.


Electrical property measurements. 
Transistor characteristics of FET devices were recorded using the conducting Si substrate as the gate, and pairs of adjacent gold electrodes as source and drain. The gate voltage Vg was held constant as the drain voltage Vd was swept and the drain current Id was recorded. Families of output curves were generated at different Vg using a vacuum probe station. Mobilities μ were calculated in the saturation regime, by fitting data to the standard equation Id = (W/2L)(C/A) μ (Vg − Vt)2,(1)where C/A is capacitance per unit area and Vt is the threshold voltage.
For diode devices, current–voltage curves were recorded between laterally coincident ITO and Al regions.

3. Results
3.1 Structural studies

3.1.1 Single layers. 
We characterized single-layer films of P3HT by AFM and XRR to determine their surface roughness prior to deposition of the PCBM and PCBM/polymer blends. The XRR together with NR measurements were used to determine the scattering length densities of these films. Fig. 1a shows AFM data for a P3HT film. The film is quite smooth, with surface roughness over the 10 × 10 μm2 scan area of wA = 10 Å. Fig. 2 shows XRR and NR data for this same film. The reflectivities are plotted as a function of the wavevector transfer perpendicular to the film plane Qz = (4π/λ)sin(θ). Fits used to determine composition profile information are shown as solid lines, and are discussed in more detail in Section 4. The XRR data in Fig. 2 show multiple oscillations with spacing ΔQz ∼ 0.027 Å−1, which corresponds to the film's thickness of ∼225 Å, as determined from the fit. The presence of multiple peaks indicates that the surface of this film is relatively smooth. The fit indicated that the P3HT-air interface had average surface roughness of wx = 6.6(5) Å. We note that while our AFM roughness parameter wA and the interface widths wx and wn measured with reflectivity in principle measure the same quantity for the top surface of a film, quantitative comparison can be problematic, since AFM is a more local measurement, while reflectivity averages interface structure over the entire film, and hence is sensitive to effects such as minor thickness variations across the sample and substrate warping. There are also effects such as difference in illuminated sample area that can complicate quantitative comparison between XRR and NR in this respect. Nonetheless, qualitative comparisons can be made.
 Fig. 1  
              AFM images of (a) a P3HT single film and bilayers of (b) PCBM, (c) 1:1 PBrS:PCBM and (d) PBrS on P3HT. 
 Fig. 2  X-ray (XRR) and neutron (NR) reflectivity data for a P3HT film. The error bars for the XRR data are smaller than the symbol size. Here and throughout the paper, error bars shown on scattering data represent ±1 σ deviation. The solid lines are fits as described in the text. The film had thickness 224.9(5) Å and surface roughness 6.6(5)Å, as determined from the XRR data. The X-ray and neutron scattering length densities determined for our P3HT samples from such measurements are ρx = 9.6(1) × 10−6 Å−2 and ρn = 6.9(3) × 10−7 Å−2, respectively, in comparison to the calculated values ρx = 10.1 × 10−6 Å−2 and ρn = 6.8 × 10−7 Å−2 based on the bulk density of 1.1g/cm3 for P3HT.25 
The NR data shown in the inset to Fig. 2 were taken over a more restricted range of Qz. Although the data range does not extend far enough to observe many film-thickness oscillations, these low-Q measurements are an efficient way to determine the SLD of the film for comparison to that of bulk. Similar XRR and NR measurements were made on single layer films of PCBM, PBrS, and a 1:9 blend of PBrS:PCBM. These data are shown in Figures S1–S3 in the Supplementary Material.


3.1.2 Bilayers. 

Fig. 1b shows AFM data for the top surface of a P3HT/PCBM film. Such surfaces are rougher than single P3HT layers, with typical roughnesses of wA = 15 Å. Fig. 3a shows XRR for three such samples. While UV-Vis spectroscopy confirmed the presence of both P3HT and PCBM in such samples (See Figure S4 in Supplementary Material), it was generally very difficult to produce films that showed bilayer structure when PCBM was used without the polymer blends. The characteristic feature expected for distinct OSC bilayers in XRR is the presence of two spatial frequencies (i.e., “beating”) in the reflectivity data. While beating was observable in the cleanest samples, as in the upper trace of Fig. 3a where intensity modulation of the dominant oscillations at ΔQz ∼ 0.012 Å−1 (arising from the total OSC thickness) can be seen at 2ΔQz, far more common were results such as the lower two traces in Fig. 3a, where such features were absent. Neutron reflectivity data are shown in Fig. 3b for the “clean” sample from Fig. 3a. Modulation corresponding to bilayer structure in this exceptional sample is also observed in the NR data.
 Fig. 3  (a) X-ray reflectivity (XRR) for three P3HT/PCBM samples. The top trace (open circles) shows modulations indicative of bilayer structure, as discussed in the text. The middle (open squares) and bottom (open triangles) traces are more representative of such samples, and do not show evidence of bilayer structure. The middle and bottom traces have been offset by 2 and 4 decades, respectively, for clarity. The solid line is a fit to a bilayer model, as discussed in the text. (b) Neutron reflectivity (NR) data for the same sample as the top trace in (a). The solid line is a fit described in the text that yields the SLD profile ρn(z) shown in the inset. z = 0 corresponds to the top of the substrate (the SiO2 – OSC interface). The values of ρx and ρn from the (PBrS:PCBM) layers determined from these fits are shown in Fig. 10. Note that the SLD for the bottom layer (0 < z < 285 Å) is much larger than that of P3HT, indicating intermixing of PCBM from the upper layer. 
When PBrS was added, the structure of the layered films changed significantly. The AFM scan in Fig. 1c for a P3HT/(1:1 PBrS:PCBM) sample shows the top surface is notably smoother than that of P3HT/PCBM samples (e.g.Fig. 1b), with roughness of wA = 5 Å. The surface structure of these films with PCBM-polymer blended layers is comparable to that in a P3HT/PBrS bilayer, as shown in Fig. 1d. Fig. 4 shows the effect of the addition of PBrS on the bilayer XRR data. For PBrS:PCBM blends as low as 1:9 and as large as 1:1, we consistently observed clear evidence of beating in the XRR modulations indicative of bilayer structure. The beating is emphasized in the inset to Fig. 4, which shows the data normalized to the Q-dependent reflectivity of pure Si. Neutron reflectivities are shown in Fig. 5 for the same PBrS blended films shown in Fig. 4. As discussed in Section 4 below, these data all show strong oscillations, indicative of complex structure characteristic of bilayers, although the relative amplitudes are more pronounced compared to those in the XRR due to differences in the scattering contrast between the two layers.
 Fig. 4  
X-ray reflectivity (XRR) for P3HT/(PBrS:PCBM) bilayers for three PBrS:PCBM ratios, 1:9, 1:3, and 1:1. The 1:3 and 1:1 traces have been offset by 2 and 4 decades, respectively, for clarity. All three samples show modulation indicative of bilayer structure. The solid lines are fits as described in the text. The values of ρx for the (PBrS:PCBM) layers determined from these fits are shown in Fig. 10b. The (bottom layer/top layer thickness) determined from these fits were (305 Å/268 Å), (271 Å/295 Å), and (271 Å/236 Å) for the 1:9, 1:3, and 1:1 samples, respectively. Inset: The same data and fits plotted as reflectivity R divided by the reflectivity of silicon R(Si). These “Fresnel” plots emphasize the modulation in the peak amplitudes produced by the bilayer structure. The 1:9 and 1:3 traces have been offset by +2.25 and +1, respectively, for clarity. 
 Fig. 5  
Neutron reflectivity (NR) for P3HT/(PBrS:PCBM) bilayers for three PBrS:PCBM ratios, 1:9, 1:3, and 1:1. The 1:3 and 1:1 traces have been offset by 2 and 4 decades, respectively, for clarity. The solid lines are fits described in the text that yield the SLD profiles ρn(z) shown in the inset. z = 0 corresponds to the top of the substrate (the SiO2 – OSC interface). The values of ρn for the (PBrS:PCBM) layers determined from these fits are also shown in Fig. 10a. 
Interestingly, films with PS:PCBM blends behaved very differently from the PBrS:PCBM blends. As shown by the AFM scans in Fig. 6, P3HT/(PS:PCBM) films were much rougher than the P3HT/(PBrS:PCBM) films (Fig. 1), with wA = 30–60 Å.
 Fig. 6  
AFM scans of P3HT/(PS:PCBM) for (a) 1:9 and (b) 1:3 PS:PCBM ratios. The scan ranges are 10 μm × 10 μm, and the z (color) scale spans 30 nm. The PS layers were deposited at (a) 3,000 RPM and (b) 1,000 RPM from 5 mg/mL solutions. These samples with polystyrene are significantly rougher than the corresponding PBrS-based structures, with roughnesses of (a) w = 3.0 (1) nm and (b) w = 5.4(6) nm. 

Fig. 7 shows XPS depth profiling for a 1:1 P3HT/(PBrS:PCBM) film. As Fig. 7a shows, the signal from the film is dominated by carbon until the SiO2 layer of the underlying wafer is reached. Fig. 7b shows the same data on an expanded scale, where the sulfur signal from the P3HT and the bromine signal from the PBrS can be seen. The rise in the sulfur signal around 14 h etching time shows the top boundary of the P3HT layer. An important observation is that the bromine signal extends beyond this boundary into the P3HT. This suggests that there was intermixing between the (PBrS:PCBM) layer and the underlying P3HT. This point will be discussed in more detail in Section 4 below. Note also that the sulfur signal does not extend throughout the upper layer to the surface of the film, in contrast to what has been reported previously for P3HT/PCBM bilayers, where XPS showed evidence for sulfur at the film surface.4
 Fig. 7  
XPS
elemental analysis of a P3HT/(PBrS:PCBM) sample with 1:1 PBrS:PCBM ratio vs.sputtering etch time. The P3HT was spin-coated from a 7 mg/mL solution in chlorobenzene at 2,000 RPM, and the (PBrS:PCBM) blend was spin-coated from a 5 mg/mL solution in DCM at 2,000 RPM. The rise in the Si and O signals in (a) indicate the edge of the SiO2 layer on the substrate at the bottom of the OSC film. The rise in the S signal in (b) indicates the beginning of the P3HT layer. The Br signal extends into the P3HT layer, indicating that the PBrS is mixing into the P3HT layer. Note that no S is seen near the top surface of the film (etch time = 0). 

3.2 Electron transport properties
We verified that the addition of polymer to the PCBM preserves a substantial amount of electron transport capability. Fig. 8a shows the output characteristics for a FET made using the 1:9 PBrS:PCBM blend as the semiconductor layer. The magnitude of Id becomes contact limited at Vg > 60 V, and evidence of slow trapping or bias stress in the form of a slightly negative slope is seen at that voltage as well. However, the device clearly behaves as a FET. The mobility determined from measurements of six such devices was μ = 1.0(3) × 10−3 cm2/Vs in the Vg range of 20–60 V. While only low-to-moderate for a FET intended for logic function, this mobility is adequate for the electron-transporting domain in a bulk heterojunction solar cell.3,18,19 FETs using spin coated PCBM alone gave higher but less reproducible mobilities in the 10−3 to 10−2 cm2/Vs range, with the greater uncertainty consistent with the morphological variations discussed above. (See Figure S5 in Supplemental Material). A mobility of 10−2 cm2/Vs is consistent with recently reported values for PCBM spincoated directly onto SiO2 gate dielectric,20–23 although mobilities are higher on organic dielectrics.20,24Fig. 8b shows the output characteristics for a 1:9 PS:PCBM blend. This blend gave mobility of μ = 8(4) × 10−4 cm2/Vs, somewhat lower than for PBrS. At the least, we can conclude that the bromine atom does not lead to diminished blend mobility.
 Fig. 8  Drain current Idvs. drain voltage Vd at fixed gate voltage Vg for FETs made from blended films of (a) 1:9 PBrS:PCBM and (b) 1:9 PS:PCBM. 
We also found that the PCBM blends can function as the electron-injecting layer of a diode. Fig. 9 shows the rectification behavior of an ITO-P3HT-(1:9 PBrS:PCBM)-Al diode, which gave a rectification ratio of about 9 at 1 V vs. −1 V.
 Fig. 9  Current density j vs. voltage V for a diode with structure ITO-P3HT-(1:9 PBrS:PCBM)-Al under ambient (room) illumination. 
4. Analysis and discussion of structural data
We used the modeling procedure described in Section 2.2 to fit our reflectivity data. The best-fit curves to the XRR and NR data for single-layer samples of P3HT, PCBM, PBrS, and a 1:9 PBrS:PCBM blend are shown in Fig. 2 and in the Supplementary Material (Figures S1–S3). The X-ray and neutron SLDs determined for these single layer films are listed in the figure captions, and shown as black circles in Fig. 10 for PCBM and PBrS. These results were used as starting points for the fits to the bilayer samples. Both the XRR and NR SLD parameters for P3HT and PCBM were close to calculated SLDs based on published densities for these materials.25,26 The X-ray SLD for pure PBrS was somewhat lower than the calculated value; while the neutron SLD for this material was closer to the calculated value, this discrepancy suggests that the density of these spin coated films may differ slightly from the literature values. We note that porosity, or free volume, has already been reported to lower SLD in P3HT-PCBM systems.27 The calculated SLDs for PCBM and PBrS are shown as green triangles in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  (a) Neutron SLDs ρn and (b) X-ray SLDs ρx for (PBrS:PCBM) layers and single films. Solid black circles: single-layer (PBrS:PCBM) films (Supplementary Figs. S1–S3). Open red squares: P3HT/PCBM bilayer (Fig. 3). Solid red squares: P3HT/((PBrS:PCBM) blended bilayers (Fig. 4 and 5). Green triangles: calculated PCBM and PBrS SLDs based on published bulk densities. Black lines: interpolation between measured values for pure PCBM and PBrS single films. Error bars not shown are smaller than the symbol sizes. 
The best-fit curves for bilayer samples are shown in Fig. 3, 4, and 5, and the resulting NR SLD profiles are shown in the insets to Fig. 3b and 5. A decrease in SLD with increasing PBrS concentration in the (PBrS:PCBM) blend in the top layer is clearly visible in the inset to Fig. 5. The SLDs of the top layers of the bilayer samples are also shown in Fig. 10 (red symbols). Fig. 10a shows that the decrease in neutron SLD with PBrS blending in the bilayers is generally consistent with that expected based on the measured SLDs of the pure materials in single layers. It is possible, however, that the slope of this decrease is larger than a straight interpolation at small PBrS concentration.
As shown in Fig. 10b, the X-ray SLD of the top layer increases with PBrS concentration, although the smaller difference between the SLDs for X-rays as compared to neutrons makes this change more modest than that seen in Fig. 10a. Nonetheless, this indicates that the “heavy atom” approach of adding bromine is able to influence the X-ray SLD contrast in such systems. (We note that the calculated ρx = 9.6 × 10−6 Å−2 for PS, so PS without bromine could not produce this effect.)
The scattering data also give information about the surface roughness of the films. Surface roughness parameters determined from the fits to the blended bilayer samples are shown in Fig. 11. Both XRR and NR results show a trend toward decreased roughness with increasing PBrS concentration, indicating that the polymer has an impact on film morphology.
 Fig. 11  Surface roughness wx (XRR, square symbols) and wn (NR, circles) vs. PBrS concentration for blended films. Error bars estimated from the fits are smaller than the symbol sizes. 
As described above, the XPS results (Fig. 7) showed the presence of Br in the P3HT bottom layer of a bilayer with a 1:1 PBrS:PCBM top layer, suggesting that there may be intermixing between the layers in these systems. As we now discuss, the NR data show a degree of mixing between the layers as formed, and the depth-dependent XPS data therefore seem to corroborate this observation, but it is possible that the sputter process used in the XPS depth profiling could cause a further mixing of Br atoms into the lower film for the data in Fig. 7. As shown in the SLD profiles in Fig. 3b and 5, for all of the bilayer samples measured, the NR SLD for the bottom layer is significantly larger than the value of ρn = 6.9 × 10−7 Å−2 that we obtained for a single layer of P3HT (Fig. 2). Since both PBrS (ρn = 1.8 × 10−6 Å−2) and PCBM (ρn = 4.3 × 10−6 Å−2) have larger SLDs than P3HT, this indicates that material from the top layer becomes mixed in the P3HT layer. This is consistent with mixing noted recently in pure P3HT/PCBM bilayers by Lee et al.4 The SLD of the bottom layer (ρn ∼ 2.4 × 10−6 Å−2) is lower in the blended bilayers with PBrS in Fig. 5 than in the bilayer with pure PCBM (ρn ∼ 3 × 10−6 Å−2) in Fig. 3b, but it is interesting to note that the SLD of the bottom layer does not change linearly with increasing PBrS concentration in the blended bilayer samples, as one would expect if the PBrS and PCBM mixed equally well in the P3HT. Since the observed SLD of the bottom layer in the blended films is larger than that of PBrS, this suggests that, while some PBrS may mix in, as indicated by the XPS data, the mixing species is predominantly PCBM. The Br profile in the XPS data suggests that the PBrS may be non-uniformly distributed through the P3HT layer, and may be concentrated near the interface. The association of at least some PCBM with PBrS could inhibit PCBM diffusion into the P3HT under our processing conditions, accounting for the drop in SLD from the pure to the blended bilayers. Also, PBrS, analogous to PS, is likely to be less miscible in P3HT than is PCBM.28,29
5. Conclusions
We have employed NR to reinforce XRR characterization of PCBM-based layers formed on P3HT. Single-layer analyses were used to provide reliable SLD values for bilayer fitting. AFM analyses of the surface roughness showed trends similar to those obtained from the reflectivity experiments. In addition, the fits to the reflectivity data provided a full depth profile of the sample composition, with particular sensitivity to the intermixing of layers at the “buried interface.” Styrene polymers added to PCBM in small concentrations (ca. 10%) led to processing advantages while retaining substantial electron mobility. The further introduction of the relatively heavy bromo substituent on the styrene rings greatly increased the film smoothness, leading to more pronounced oscillations in the reflectivity measurements. In addition, the predicted increase in XRR SLD contrast between the layers was observed, demonstrating the concept of “heavy atom labeling” to increase the scope of XRR for multilayer structural characterization. Finally, we presented data consistent with PCBM becoming partially mixed with the P3HT as the PCBM is spin coated from a solution with poly(bromostyrene) to form an overlying film, consistent with predictions based on published phase diagrams of the P3HT-PCBM system.8–10
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by NSF grant ECCS-0823947. NPS was supported by the JHU MRSEC REU program (DMR-0520491). The XPS measurements were carried out in the surface analysis laboratory at Johns Hopkins University, and XRR measurements at JHU made use of JHU MRSEC central facilities. We thank Yaohua Liu and Ming-Ling Yeh for fruitful discussions.
References
E. Holder, B. M. W. Langeveld and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1109–1121 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551–1566 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Moon, C. J. Takacs, Y. M. Sun and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1036–1039 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Lee, P. E. Schwenn, A. R. G. Smith, H. Cavaye, P. E. Shaw, M. James, K. B. Krueger, I. R. Gentle, P. Meredith and P. L. Burn, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 766–770 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kiel, M. E. Mackay, B. J. Kirby, B. B. Maranville and C. F. Majkrzak, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 074902 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kiel, B. J. Kirby, C. F. Majkrzak, B. B. Maranville and M. E. Mackay, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 641–646 RSC .
T. A. M. Ferenczi, C. Muller, D. D. C. Bradley, P. Smith, J. Nelson and N. Stingelin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4093–4097 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, A. Swinnen, G. Van Assche, J. Manca, D. Vanderzande and B. Van Mele, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1587–1591 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Treat, M. A. Brady, G. Smith, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 82–89 Search PubMed .
P. E. Hopkinson, P. A. Staniec, A. J. Pearson, A. D. F. Dunbar, T. Wang, A. J. Ryan, R. A. L. Jones, D. G. Lidzey and A. M. Donald, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2908–2917 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, F. Liu, C. Wang, A. Nakahara and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2071–2078 CrossRef CAS .
Any mention of commercial products is for information only; it does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST.

          S. B. Kirschner, Ph.D. Thesis, Johns Hopkins University,  2011 .
H. H. Yang, S. W. LeFevre, C. Y. Ryu and Z. N. Bao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 172116 CrossRef .
A. L. Ayzner, C. J. Tassone, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20050–20060 CrossRef CAS .

          P. A. Kienzle, K. V. O'Donovan, J. F. Ankner, N. F. Berk and C. F. Majkrzak, Reflpak software suite, http://www.ncnr.nist.gov/reflpak.

          P. A. Kienzle, J. Krycka, N. Patel and I. Sahin, Refl1D software suite (Version 0.6.19), http://reflectometry.org/danse.
Y. J. Cheng, J. S. Wu, P. I. Shih, C. Y. Chang, P. C. Jwo, W. S. Kao and C. S. Hsu, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2361–2369 Search PubMed .
J. A. Mikroyannidis, A. N. Kabanakis, S. S. Sharma and G. D. Sharma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 746–755 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wei, J. H. Oh, G. F. Dong and Z. N. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8852–8853 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Nam, E. Y. Park, T. D. Kim, S. Cho, J. G. Park and K. S. Lee, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, E44–E48 Search PubMed .
T. Morita, W. Takashima and K. Kaneto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, L256–L258 Search PubMed .
S. P. Tiwari, E. B. Namdas, V. R. Rao, D. Fichou and S. G. Mhaisalkar, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2007, 28, 880–883 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Wobkenberg, D. D. C. Bradley, D. Kronholm, J. C. Hummelen, D. M. de Leeuw, M. Colle and T. D. Anthopoulos, Synth. Met., 2008, 158, 468–472 CrossRef CAS .
W. Geens, T. Martens, J. Poortmans, T. Aernouts, J. Manca, L. Lutsen, P. Heremans, S. Borghs, R. Mertens and D. Vanderzande, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 498–502 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Liu, U. S. Jeng, N. L. Yamada, A. C. Su, W.R.W., C. J. Su, S. J. Lin, K. H. Wei and M. Y. Chiu, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 9276–9282 RSC .
Y. M. Lee, J. K. Kim, C. H. Chiu, Y. K. Lan and C. I. Huang, Polymer, 2009, 50, 4944–4949 Search PubMed .
L. Z. Qiu, X. Wang, W. H. Lee, J. A. Lim, J. S. Kim, D. Kwak and K. Cho, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4380–4386 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm14967bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Id = (W/2L)(C/A) μ (Vg − Vt)2,	(1)

 	Fig. 1  
              AFM images of (a) a P3HT single film and bilayers of (b) PCBM, (c) 1:1 PBrS:PCBM and (d) PBrS on P3HT.	 

 	Fig. 2  X-ray (XRR) and neutron (NR) reflectivity data for a P3HT film. The error bars for the XRR data are smaller than the symbol size. Here and throughout the paper, error bars shown on scattering data represent ±1 σ deviation. The solid lines are fits as described in the text. The film had thickness 224.9(5) Å and surface roughness 6.6(5)Å, as determined from the XRR data. The X-ray and neutron scattering length densities determined for our P3HT samples from such measurements are ρx = 9.6(1) × 10−6 Å−2 and ρn = 6.9(3) × 10−7 Å−2, respectively, in comparison to the calculated values ρx = 10.1 × 10−6 Å−2 and ρn = 6.8 × 10−7 Å−2 based on the bulk density of 1.1g/cm3 for P3HT.25	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) X-ray reflectivity (XRR) for three P3HT/PCBM samples. The top trace (open circles) shows modulations indicative of bilayer structure, as discussed in the text. The middle (open squares) and bottom (open triangles) traces are more representative of such samples, and do not show evidence of bilayer structure. The middle and bottom traces have been offset by 2 and 4 decades, respectively, for clarity. The solid line is a fit to a bilayer model, as discussed in the text. (b) Neutron reflectivity (NR) data for the same sample as the top trace in (a). The solid line is a fit described in the text that yields the SLD profile ρn(z) shown in the inset. z = 0 corresponds to the top of the substrate (the SiO2 – OSC interface). The values of ρx and ρn from the (PBrS:PCBM) layers determined from these fits are shown in Fig. 10. Note that the SLD for the bottom layer (0 < z < 285 Å) is much larger than that of P3HT, indicating intermixing of PCBM from the upper layer.	 

 	Fig. 4  
X-ray reflectivity (XRR) for P3HT/(PBrS:PCBM) bilayers for three PBrS:PCBM ratios, 1:9, 1:3, and 1:1. The 1:3 and 1:1 traces have been offset by 2 and 4 decades, respectively, for clarity. All three samples show modulation indicative of bilayer structure. The solid lines are fits as described in the text. The values of ρx for the (PBrS:PCBM) layers determined from these fits are shown in Fig. 10b. The (bottom layer/top layer thickness) determined from these fits were (305 Å/268 Å), (271 Å/295 Å), and (271 Å/236 Å) for the 1:9, 1:3, and 1:1 samples, respectively. Inset: The same data and fits plotted as reflectivity R divided by the reflectivity of silicon R(Si). These “Fresnel” plots emphasize the modulation in the peak amplitudes produced by the bilayer structure. The 1:9 and 1:3 traces have been offset by +2.25 and +1, respectively, for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 5  
Neutron reflectivity (NR) for P3HT/(PBrS:PCBM) bilayers for three PBrS:PCBM ratios, 1:9, 1:3, and 1:1. The 1:3 and 1:1 traces have been offset by 2 and 4 decades, respectively, for clarity. The solid lines are fits described in the text that yield the SLD profiles ρn(z) shown in the inset. z = 0 corresponds to the top of the substrate (the SiO2 – OSC interface). The values of ρn for the (PBrS:PCBM) layers determined from these fits are also shown in Fig. 10a.	 

 	Fig. 6  
AFM scans of P3HT/(PS:PCBM) for (a) 1:9 and (b) 1:3 PS:PCBM ratios. The scan ranges are 10 μm × 10 μm, and the z (color) scale spans 30 nm. The PS layers were deposited at (a) 3,000 RPM and (b) 1,000 RPM from 5 mg/mL solutions. These samples with polystyrene are significantly rougher than the corresponding PBrS-based structures, with roughnesses of (a) w = 3.0 (1) nm and (b) w = 5.4(6) nm.	 

 	Fig. 7  
XPS
elemental analysis of a P3HT/(PBrS:PCBM) sample with 1:1 PBrS:PCBM ratio vs.sputtering etch time. The P3HT was spin-coated from a 7 mg/mL solution in chlorobenzene at 2,000 RPM, and the (PBrS:PCBM) blend was spin-coated from a 5 mg/mL solution in DCM at 2,000 RPM. The rise in the Si and O signals in (a) indicate the edge of the SiO2 layer on the substrate at the bottom of the OSC film. The rise in the S signal in (b) indicates the beginning of the P3HT layer. The Br signal extends into the P3HT layer, indicating that the PBrS is mixing into the P3HT layer. Note that no S is seen near the top surface of the film (etch time = 0).	 

 	Fig. 8  Drain current Idvs. drain voltage Vd at fixed gate voltage Vg for FETs made from blended films of (a) 1:9 PBrS:PCBM and (b) 1:9 PS:PCBM.	 

 	Fig. 9  Current density j vs. voltage V for a diode with structure ITO-P3HT-(1:9 PBrS:PCBM)-Al under ambient (room) illumination.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Neutron SLDs ρn and (b) X-ray SLDs ρx for (PBrS:PCBM) layers and single films. Solid black circles: single-layer (PBrS:PCBM) films (Supplementary Figs. S1–S3). Open red squares: P3HT/PCBM bilayer (Fig. 3). Solid red squares: P3HT/((PBrS:PCBM) blended bilayers (Fig. 4 and 5). Green triangles: calculated PCBM and PBrS SLDs based on published bulk densities. Black lines: interpolation between measured values for pure PCBM and PBrS single films. Error bars not shown are smaller than the symbol sizes.	 

 	Fig. 11  Surface roughness wx (XRR, square symbols) and wn (NR, circles) vs. PBrS concentration for blended films. Error bars estimated from the fits are smaller than the symbol sizes.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm14967b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
