Recent progress in layered transition metal carbides and/or nitrides (MXenes) and their composites: synthesis and applications   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA06772G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA06772G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3039-3068Recent progress in layered transition metal carbides and/or nitrides (MXenes) and their composites: synthesis and applications†

        
          
            Vincent Ming 
            Hong Ng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Huang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kun 
            Zhou
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Pooi See 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenxiu 
            Que
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Jason Zhichuan 
            Xu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Ling Bing 
            Kong
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798. E-mail: xuzc@ntu.edu.sg; elbkong@ntu.edu.sg
bSingapore Institute of Manufacturing Technologies (SIMTech), 71 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 638075
cSchool of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
dElectronic Materials Research Laboratory, School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, P. R. China. E-mail: wxque@xjtu.edu.cn
Received 
      8th August 2016
    , Accepted 12th December 2016First published on 13th December 2016AbstractSince their inception in 2011, from the inaugural synthesis of multi-layered Ti3C2Tx by etching Ti3AlC2 with hydrofluoric acid (HF), novel routes with a myriad of reducing agents, etchants and intercalants have been explored and many new members have been added to the two-dimensional (2D) material constellation. Despite being endowed with the rare combination of good electronic conductivity and hydrophilicity, their inherent low capacities, for instance, temper their prospect for application for electrodes in energy storage systems. MXene-based composites, however, with a probable synergistic effect in agglomeration prevention, facilitating electronic conductivity, improving electrochemical stability, enhancing pseudocapacitance and minimizing the shortcomings of individual components, exceed the previously mentioned capacitance ceiling. In this review, we summarise the development and progress in the synthesis of various multi-layered carbides, carbonitrides and nitrides, and intercalants, as well as the subsequent processing in order to delaminate them into single- and/or few-layered and incorporate into MXene-based composites, focusing on their performance and application as transparent conductive films, environmental remediation, electromagnetic interference (EMI) absorption and shielding, electrocatalysts, Li-ion batteries (LIBs), supercapacitors and other electrochemical storage systems.
1. Introduction
In 2011, a new two-dimensional (2D) early transition metal carbide, Ti3C2, was first synthesized by selectively etching the Al atoms in layered hexagonal (space group P63/mmc) ternary carbide, Ti3AlC2, with the use of aqueous hydrofluoric acid (HF) at room temperature (RT).1 Ti3AlC2 is one of the 70-plus different known ternary carbides and nitrides with the general chemical composition Mn+1AXn, where M is an early transition metal, A is primarily a group 13 or 14 (i.e. group IIIA or IVA) element, X is C and/or N, and n = 1, 2, or 3.2 Additionally, Mn+1AXn can also be synthesized with solid solutions of M, A and X atoms, such as (Mo2Ti)AlC2, Ti3(Al0.5Si0.5)C2 and Ti2Al(C0.5N0.5), respectively, potentially augmenting the 2D material constellation by quite a large number, when the A layers are selectively extracted, leaving the Mn+1Xn layers intact.3–5
These layered hexagonal Mn+1AXn phases are composed of two formula units per unit cell, where M layers are nearly closely packed with X atoms filling between the octahedral sites and the Mn+1Xn layers are interleaved with layers of A atoms.6 These laminated structures have anisotropic properties for the M–X bond which has an assortment of ionic/covalent/metallic characteristics, while the M–A bond is purely metallic in nature. The strong bonds between the layers in Mn+1AXn phases, unlike the weak van der Waals interactions present in other layered materials such as graphite and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), are unsurmountable by mere mechanical exfoliation into 2D layers.7 However, by exploiting the varied characteristics and relative strengths between M–X and M–A bonds, the relatively weakly bound and reactive A layers can be selectively etched with suitable chemical(s) leaving behind the chemically more stable closely packed Mn+1XnTx layers. Tx refers to surface-terminating functional groups such as oxygen (O), hydroxyl (–OH) or fluorine (–F) that are attached to the surface M atoms after the etching procedure. The thickness of the Mn+1XnTx is dependent on the value of n. For example, when n = 1, the layer will consist of a single block of octahedra, when n = 2 and 3, there will be two and three blocks, respectively. These new materials have been termed as MXenes in recognition of the loss of the A element from the parent Mn+1AXn phase and 2D morphology reminiscent of graphene.
Cumulatively, extensive studies have indicated that there are certain constraints in the synthesis of the parent Mn+1AXn phases and selective extraction of the A element from the parent phase. In the synthesis of parent Mn+1AXn phases with Al, the M components are observed to be limited to only Ti, V, Cr, Nb, Ta, Zr and Mo. Selective removal of the A element from parent Mn+1AXn phases at elevated temperature is possible; however structural transformation and subsequent partial loss of layering are inevitable.8 High temperature chlorination causes the removal of both M and A components and yields porous carbide derived carbons (CDCs) instead.9
Although two existing reviews have been dedicated extensively to the synthesis and potential applications of MXenes, and a few others to their energy storage applications, none covers their progress as composite materials.10–13 In this review, the advancement of MXenes and their composites, encompassing both theoretical and experimental studies of relevance to their synthesis, properties and potential applications in the field of transparent conductors, environmental remediation and energy storage, will be detailed and discussed.
2. Synthesis and characterization
Since the pioneering synthesis of multi-layered Ti3C2Tx through HF etching at RT, much work has been channelled towards discovering novel routes to preparing existing and new MXenes. To date, even with the myriad of synthesis conditions and reagents identified, fluoride-based compounds remain an impediment to effective preparation of these 2D transition metal carbides. Intuitively, the synthesis route adopted will be influential over their surface chemistries and consequential behaviour. Characterization of these materials has shed light on some of their properties and prompted further investigations, studies, and processing to optimally exploit the advantages of MXenes, especially so in the case of composites.
2.1 Multi-layered stacked MXenes
The inaugural synthesis of multi-layered Ti3C2Tx was reported by Naguib et al. Ti3AlC2 powders, prepared by using a typical route of heating a pre-ball milled mixture of Ti2AlC and TiC (with a molar ratio of 1:1) at 1350 °C for 2 h in argon (Ar), were immersed and kept under stirring in a 50% concentrated HF solution at RT for 2 h, followed by filtration to separate residues from the supernatant and repeated washing of the residue with deionized (DI) water.1 This simple selective etching of the parent Mn+1AXn phases with Al was then successfully extended and yielded multi-layered Ti2CTx, Ta4C3Tx, (V0.5Cr0.5)3C2Tx, (Ti0.5Nb0.5)2CTx, Ti3CNxTx, Nb2CTx, V2CTx, Nb4C3Tx, Mo2TiC2Tx (Fig. 1c–g), Mo2Ti2C3Tx, Cr2TiC2Tx and (Nb0.8Ti0.2)4C3Tx.14–18 This preferential etching of the M–A bond in Mn+1AXn phases with Al may be summarized as: Mn+1AlXn + 3HF → Mn+1Xn + AlF3 + 1.5H2(1) Mn+1Xn + 2H2O → Mn+1Xn(OH)2 + H2(2) Mn+1Xn + 2HF → Mn+1XnF2 + H2(3)
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the structure of –OH-terminated Ti3C2 after selective etching of Ti3AlC2; yellow, black, red and white circles represent Ti, C, O and H atoms, respectively. (b) STEM image of the first two Ti3C2Tx layers after applying the Wiener filter; scale bar is equivalent to 1 nm, atoms are shown with the same colors as (a) [reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society]. (c) Schematic of the structures of the parent Mo2TiAlC2 phase and exfoliated HF-etched Mo2TiC2Tx phase, respectively; red, green, blue and black circles represent Mo, Ti, Al and C atoms, respectively. (d) XRD patterns of Mo2TiAlC2 (red), HF-etched Mo2TiC2Tx (green) and delaminated HF-etched Mo2TiC2Tx (blue). In the delaminated sample, only c-direction peaks, (00l) peaks, are visible, corresponding to a c lattice parameter of 30.44 Å; the (110) peak is no longer observed, indicating loss of order in non-basal directions. (e and f) HRSTEM images of Mo2TiAlC2 and Mo2TiC2Tx, respectively. Atoms are shown with the same colors as (c). Atomic ordering is verified by EDX mapping. No Al was observed in EDX of Mo2TiC2Tx. (g) Low magnification TEM image of the layered structure throughout the sample of exfoliated HF-etched Mo2TiC2Tx [reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society]. 

Eqn (2) and (3) indicate that the surface terminations by a combination of –OH and –F as aqueous etching of Al do not result in bare M layers.1 Meshkian et al. demonstrated that this selective etching by HF can be applicable beyond parent Mn+1AXn phases with Al, as the Mo2CTx layers were formed by HF-etching of Ga in Mo2Ga2C.19 Interestingly, Zhou et al. recently managed to synthesize the first layered Zr3C2Tx by extending this HF-etching protocol to Zr3Al3C5, an alternative layered ternary and quaternary transition metal carbide beyond the Mn+1AXn phases.20
Notably, essential etching conditions such as HF concentration, duration of immersion and temperature necessary to completely convert various parent Mn+1AXn phases into multi-layered Mn+1XnTx vary widely.15,21,22 For instance, the very conditions that yield Ti3C2Tx from Ti3AlC2 (50% HF, 2 h, RT) completely dissolve Ti2AlC. The less stable (lower n value in Mn+1AlXn) Ti2CTx is instead obtained by immersing Ti2AlC in a 10% concentration HF at RT for 2 h. The divergences in M–A bond energies from Ti2AlC (ca. 0.98 eV) to Nb2AlC (ca. 1.21 eV) result in the longer etching duration (ca. 90 h) and higher HF concentration (50% HF, RT), in order to eliminate Al from Nb2AlC than that from Ti2AlC.14,15,23 Precariously, complete dissolution or recrystallization of Mn+1XnTx layers may occur under excessive heating.14,24 As smaller particle sizes of the parent Mn+1AXn can effectively reduce the required etching duration and/or HF concentration, the as-synthesized Mn+1AXn powders are usually subjected to attrition or ball milling and/or sieved prior to chemical exfoliation.
Halim et al. introduced a less hazardous and milder etchant, i.e., 1 M ammonium bifluoride (NH4HF2) solution at RT albeit a longer immersion duration, which could concomitantly intercalate ammonium species such as –NH3 and –NH4+ and effectively etch the Al layers in epitaxial Ti3AlC2 films (Fig. 1a and b).25 Such observation of spontaneous intercalation of cations (Li+, Na+, Mg2+, K+, NH4+ and Al3+) in between Ti3C2Tx layers was also reported by Mashtalir et al., with implications that were far-reaching and influential in the later development of delaminating stacked MXenes (to be discussed under Section 2.2 single/few-layered MXenes), preparation of various MXene composites (to be discussed under Section 2.3 MXene-based composites) and potential applications (to be discussed under Chapter 3. Properties and applications).26 Feng et al. detailed the influence of temperature and etching duration for the synthesis of Ti3C2Tx in 1 M of various bifluoride solutions (e.g., NaHF2, KHF2, or NH4HF2). The minimum etching duration for the onset of exfoliating Ti3AlC2 in 1 M of bifluoride solution at 60 °C was observed to be 8 h. Based on the existence of corresponding by-products ((NH4)3AlF6, NH4AlF4 and AlF3·3H2O in a ratio of 10:1:1 for reaction with NH4HF2), a probable reaction mechanism between Ti3AlC2 and bifluoride etchant solution has been proposed.27
Wang et al. reported a novel hydrothermal synthesis of multi-layered Ti3C2Tx by using only Ti3AlC2 and NH4F, where the influence of reactants' ratio, reaction duration and temperature on the yield of Ti3C2Tx was detailed. The optimal conditions to produce multi-layered Ti3C2Txvia this hydrothermal synthesis route were established to maintain the reaction mixture, with 5.0 g of NH4F and 0.5 g of Ti3AlC2 in 60 mL of DI water, isothermally at 150 °C for 24 h.28
Xie et al. attempted a fluoride-free reaction via immersing Ti3AlC2 in a solution of 1 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH) at 80 °C for 100 h, followed by a hydrothermal treatment in 1 M H2SO4 at 80 °C for 2 h. However, it was only partially successful with merely the surface Al, but not bulk, leached from the parent Ti3AlC2 phase.29
Ghidiu et al. then introduced another high-yield but safer alternative synthesis route to multi-layered Ti3C2Tx by immersing Ti3AlC2 powders in a milder etchant solution of 6 M hydrochloric acid (HCl) with a certain amount of lithium fluoride (LiF) under constant stirring at 35 °C for 24 h (Fig. 2a–f).30 Interestingly, a clay-like paste of Ti3C2Tx with intercalated water and ions was collected after repeated washing with DI water, which could be conveniently shaped to desired forms or rolled to produce flexible, free-standing films (Fig. 2c inset) in lieu of the tedious sequence of procedures for HF-etched samples as reported elsewhere.31 To varying degree of success, other fluoride salts, such as sodium fluoride (NaF), potassium fluoride (KF), caesium fluoride (CsF), tetrabutylammonium fluoride, calcium fluoride (CaF2), could be added in place of LiF into either HCl or sulphuric acid (H2SO4) to prepare the etchant solution. It is highly conceivable that a delicate balance of etching conditions for different combinations with as mentioned acid and salt can potentially bring about a myriad of applicable multi-layered early transition metal carbide compositions and properties, due to modified surface chemistries and diverse pre-intercalated ions. This one-step method has been successfully applied to produce multi-layered Nb2CTx, Ti2CTx, Cr2TiC2Tx, Mo2TiC2Tx, Mo2Ti2C3Tx, Mo2CTx and (Nb0.8Zr0.2)4C3Tx as well.17,18,30,32
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of Ti3C2Tx ‘clay’ synthesis by HCl/LiF etching and preparation into a free-standing and desired shape electrode. (b) XRD plots of Ti3AlC2 and Ti3C2Tx. (c) SEM image of cross-section of rolled Ti3C2Tx. TEM images of (d) several flakes of Ti3C2Tx with lateral sizes up to a few hundred nanometres, (e) single-layered Ti3C2Tx, and (f) double-layered Ti3C2Tx [reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group]. 
Although selective etching with aqueous acid solutions at RT has been capably used to produce various carbide and carbonitride MXenes, nitride MXenes such as Ti4N3Tx remain hitherto elusive as nanosheets of Ti4AlN3 are collected instead after immersion in HF solution at RT.33 Two factors have been conjectured for the above phenomenon. Firstly, more energy may be necessary for extraction of the strongly bound Al from Tin+1AlNn than from Tin+1AlCn as indicated by the higher formation energies of Tin+1Nn than those of Tin+1Cn. Secondly, Tin+1Nn is less stable as compared with Tin+1Cn as suggested by the lower calculated cohesive energies of Tin+1Nn, so that the as-prepared Tin+1Nn could have probably been dissolved in concentrated HF solution.10,34 Urbankowski et al. reported an ingenious synthesis of multi-layered Ti4N3Tx by thermally treating a mixture with equal mass of Ti4AlN3 powders (>37 μm) and fluoride salt at 550 °C for 0.5 h in Ar at an identical ramping and cooling rate of 10 °C min−1.35 In order to proceed at lower temperature, the ternary eutectic composition in this salt system, which consisted of 59 wt% KF, 29 wt% LiF and 12 wt% NaF, was purposefully selected.36
As expected, some differences were observed between the different preparation routes (using HF or solution of HCl with LiF). For instance, accordion-like Ti3C2Tx samples are obtained from HF treatment, whereas laterally larger flakes of Ti3C2Tx with negligible nanoscale defects are yielded by using HCl plus LiF.30
A complete transformation from Mn+1AXn phases to multi-layered Mn+1XnTx could be identified by the remnant (000l) X-ray diffraction (XRD) peaks, while all other peaks are weakened or vanish. Evidence of a small quantity of unreacted Ti3AlC2 has been picked up by XRD, in addition to the shift in the (0002) peak to lower angles, a consequence of the crystal structure parameter that is directly proportional to the distance between individual MXene layers, with a c lattice parameter of ca. 25 Å, for the HCl/LiF-derived multi-layered Ti3C2Tx as compared with the HF-etched counterpart (c lattice parameter of ca. 20 Å).37 A number of caveats that concern the validity of quantifying unreacted Mn+1AXn phases for XRD intensities tend to fade with an increased degree of exfoliation and coexistence of Mn+1AXn phase peaks with Mn+1XnTx (000l) peaks.10 Correspondingly, exfoliated Ti3C2Tx stacks by etching Ti3AlC2 at 35 °C for 24 h with 6 M HCl with LiF have persistent Mn+1AXn phase peaks in the XRD patterns, even though they are readily delaminated upon sonication.30
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characterization is generally able to identify the presence of negatively charged O, –OH and –F terminations, indicative of Mn+1Xn surfaces having a fixed net positive charge, as an overall neutrality has to be maintained.31,38 In fact, the distribution of these surface terminations (Fig. 3a) is dependent on parameters such as the number of layers, the identity of M and X element and so on. For instance, in Ti3C2Tx, Ti2CTx and Ti3CNTx, with varying number of layers, n, or X element, the proportion of –F terminations remains invariant while the –O to –OH ratio increases as n is increased. Conversely for Nb2CTx and Nb4C3Tx, the –O to –OH ratio decreases as n is increased.38
 Fig. 3  (a) Side view schematic of a M3X2Tx structure showing various M atoms and their terminations. I refers to a M atom bonded to an O atom; II, to OH; III, to a M atom directly bonded to a F-atom; IV, to a M atom bonded to OH, that, in turn, is strongly bonded to a H2O molecule; M atoms only bonded to C atoms are designated, M*. Yellow, black, red, white and blue circles (not to scale) represent M, X, O, H and F atoms, respectively [reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2016 Elsevier]. (b) 1H NMR (11.7 T) spectra of HF and HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx recorded at 60 kHz MAS. (c) 19F NMR (11.7 T) spectra of HF and HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx recorded at 60 kHz MAS. (d) Graphical comparison of the differences in composition of the Ti3C2Tx surface functional groups when synthesized by HF and HCl/LiF etching respectively [reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016 the Owner Societies]. 
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) experiments have been employed to quantify their proportions, although EDS is unable to differentiate –O and –OH, because various factors, such as the presence of adsorbed water and etching by-products, could complicate the signal collection.1,30
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, with high sensitivity towards 1H and 19F nuclei, has been employed in two recent studies to determine sample compositions with increased confidence and to provide insights into surface functionalization of V2CTx and Ti3C2Tx, respectively.37,39 In the study of HF-etched V2CTx, Harris et al. through 1H NMR experiments distinguished that –OH groups are directly bonded to V2CTx, with a layer of –H (from H2O) bonded to the –OH surface, while 19F NMR experiments evidently indicated that the –F groups are indeed directly bonded to V2CTx surfaces.39 Hope et al. reaffirmed direct connection of both the –OH and –F groups to Ti3C2Tx surfaces. Furthermore, quantitative NMR experiments demonstrated that the majority of the surface terminations are present as an intimate mixture of –O and –F, while –OH is in the minority. More importantly, it is established that the proportion of the surface terminations is highly sensitive to the synthesis route adopted (Fig. 3b and c). For example, there is an about fourfold –F termination in HF-etched Ti3C2Tx as compared with that in the HCl/LiF-prepared Ti3C2Tx (Fig. 3d).37
These results are significant because they highlight useful strategies towards manipulating morphologies and surface chemistries, choice of etchant solution, etchant concentration, temperature and duration of immersion. For electronic and optical applications, where defect-free and large sheets are more desirable, the use of HCl/LiF etchant solution may be more preferential to HF solution. Conversely, for energy storage and catalysis applications, where higher ion accessibility and edge effects may be more valued, the route with HF solution which produces defective and nanoporous/pitted flakes may be of more relevance. Evidently, more work is needed to develop a fluoride-free MXene synthesis protocol as well.
2.2 Single/few-layered MXenes
With the strong M–A bonds to be replaced with weak bonds, such as hydrogen and van der Waals forces, intercalation and delamination of multi-layered stacked MXenes into single or few layers were possible. Advantageously, the as-synthesized multi-layered Ti3C2Tx and Mo2CTx from the HCl/LiF etchant solution route as initially proposed by Ghidiu et al., can be fully and easily delaminated by mere sonication in water.30,32 This significantly effective delamination has been attributed to intercalated water and possibly cations between the multi-layered MXenes acting as a spacer and lubricant that facilitated shearing. It is noted that although etching Ti3AlC2 at higher temperature for a longer duration (40 °C for 45 h) yields Ti3C2Tx with lower Al content as verified by EDS, the ease of delamination and dispersion by mere sonication are not as readily obtained as that of Ti3C2Tx ‘clay’ under reaction conditions of 35 °C for 24 h.30 Zhang et al. observed a larger c lattice parameter of ca. 31 Å and a significant increase in the delamination ratio of HCl–LiF etched Ti3C2Tx from 6.5% to 29.2% after 1 h of sonication, which can be achieved by prior washing of the exfoliated products with ethanol instead of DI water. It was suggested that ethanol could have acted as a co-intercalant, together with impurity ions, which improved the yield of the delaminated HCl–LiF etched Ti3C2Tx.40
Shahzad et al. presented a modified procedure with an increased molar ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2 of 7.5:1 (instead of 5:1), to have more Li+ ions available for intercalation and thus double the molar ratio of HCl to LiF to facilitate the etching of aluminium. Consequently, while all other aspects of the procedure (35 °C for 24 h) remained identical to those reported by Ghidiu et al., Ti3C2Tx could be delaminated without sonication.41 Noticeably, using a more concentrated HCl of 9 M (instead of 6 M) increased the concentration of delaminated Ti3C2Tx further, as more protons (H+) were available to exchange with Li+.
Lipatov et al. evaluated the quality of Ti3C2Tx flakes synthesized with different molar ratios of LiF to Ti3AlC2 (5:1 and 7.5:1) in 6 M HCl solution at 35 °C for 24 h.42 Exfoliated Ti3C2Tx flakes, with a molar ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2 of 5:1, are observed to be 200–500 nm in diameter and have uneven edges decorated with TiO2 nanoparticles and numerous pin holes (Fig. 4a), whereas exfoliated Ti3C2Tx flakes, with a molar ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2 of 7.5:1, are 4–15 μm laterally, have well-defined and clean edges and no visible pin holes (Fig. 4b) under high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). As expected, the larger exfoliated Ti3C2Tx flakes are mechanically more robust (coarse shiny flakes after grinding) than smaller ones (fine black powders after grinding). Exfoliated Ti3C2Tx flakes, with a molar ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2 of 5:1, are less ordered and have varied thicknesses (Fig. 4e), in accordance with the XRD pattern with only (001) reflection and some remnant peaks of the parent Mn+1AXn phase (not exfoliated) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) height profiles. Exfoliated Ti3C2Tx flakes, using a 7.5:1 molar ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2, are more orderly stacked, with a uniform height of ca. 2.7 nm (single layer with surface adsorbates) (Fig. 4f) as indicated by the series of (00l) XRD peaks and AFM height profile measurement.
 Fig. 4  TEM images of Ti3C2Tx flakes produced by using: (a) Route 1 (ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2 is 5:1), and (b) Route 2 (ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2 is 7.5:1), respectively. Small panels in (a) and (b) show HRTEM images and SAED patterns of monolayer 2D crystals of Ti3C2Tx. AFM images of the Ti3C2Tx flakes deposited on Si/SiO2: (c) Route 1, and (d) Route 2. (e) AFM height profiles measured along the dashed lines in (c). The colors of the height profiles in (e) correspond to the colors of the dashed lines in (c). (f) AFM height profile measured along the dashed line in (d) [reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. 
Unfortunately, to date, only Ti3C2Tx and Mo2CTx have been reported to demonstrate concurrent delamination by mere HCl/LiF etching of parent Mn+1AXn phases. Therefore, much more work is necessary to validate if this method can be extended to other MXenes. Attempts for hydrate HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx and Mo2CTx to replicate the above results have previously been futile, necessitating the consideration of other intercalants.30 Importantly, Ghidiu et al. experimentally investigated cation substitutions and related their effect on interlayer spacing of HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx. It was noted that only when the intercalant source, LiCl, was present as part of the etchant solution—rather than as a later addition—the Li+ ions and a dynamic layer of H2O can lead to greater structural ordering in the HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx (higher crystallinity as evidenced by the sharp (002) XRD peak), which demonstrated clay-like (hydrated) behaviour. As evidenced by the XRD pattern, a discontinuous structural expansion in the direction normal to the basal plane of Ti3C2Tx as H2O molecules intercalate, and the variance of intercalated cations (with different hydration enthalpy) as expected cause quite different structural changes in response to relative humidity.43
Although only weak residual forces hold and prevent HF-etched multi-layered MXenes from readily separating into individual layers (hence the accordion-like morphologies), a sonication procedure without preceding intercalation of species between the layers can only result in a low yield of single/few-layered MXenes. This was illustrated by the pioneering work by Naguib et al., where accordion-like HF-etched Ti3C2Tx was exfoliated upon sonication in methanol for 300 s, which however resulted in low yield of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and scrolls, approximately ten-layer thick and even lower yield of single-layer Ti3C2Tx.1
Mashtalir et al. reported the first high yield delamination of accordion-like Ti3C2Tx into a mixture of narrow sized distributed single and few-layered Ti3C2Tx by intercalation of dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) between the multi-layered Ti3C2Tx at RT for 18 h under constant stirring, followed by sonication in DI water for 6 h.31 Other organic intercalants such as thiophene, ethanol, acetone, tetrahydrofuran, formaldehyde, chloroform, toluene and hexane were found to be unsuitable with the exceptions of hydrazine monohydrate (HM), N2H4·H2O, dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and urea as evident by the observed shift in major XRD peaks towards lower angles. This same group in a later study utilized inelastic neutron scattering (INS) analysis, highly sensitive to 1H atoms, to characterize pristine and HM intercalated HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx. It was concluded that HM intercalation into Ti3C2Tx led to substantial reduction of water content, as well as the quantity of –OH and –F terminations.44 However, the prospect of intercalating DMSO is severely limited by its exclusive effectiveness towards delaminating Ti3C2Tx and probable difficulty with thorough removal of high boiling point solvents used. Furthermore, lamellar thickness can be undesirably increased by remnant DMSO molecules, which joined the delaminated sheets together. To date, the exact mechanism to explain how and why DMSO only interacts with multi-layered Ti3C2Tx remains unclear.
Naguib et al. introduced another simple and scalable approach towards delamination of HF-etched multi-layered Ti3CNTx, V2CTx and Nb2CTxvia intercalation of relatively large basic organic molecules such as tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH), choline hydroxide or n-butylamine at RT over some duration, followed by mechanical agitation (shaking or sonication) (Fig. 5c and d).45 The surface chemistry of these MXenes was concomitantly altered, since most of the –F terminations were eliminated. Similarly, by using TBAOH as the intercalant, with the aid of sonication, Urbankowski et al. managed to delaminate multi-layered Ti4N3Tx into a mixture of single- and few-layered sheets (Fig. 5a and b).35
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of an individual Ti4N3Tx flake. The inset shows the SAED pattern of the Ti4N3Tx flake, inheriting the hexagonal basal plane symmetry of the parent Ti4AlN3 phase. (b) Raman spectra of Ti4AlN3 (red curve) and delaminated Ti4N3Tx (blue curve), with corresponding vibrational peaks identified through fitting with a product of Gaussian and Lorentzian functions [reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. XRD patterns of (c) Ti3CNTx before TBAOH intercalation, and after mixing with TBAOH for 2, 4, and 21 h (black, red, blue and green curves, respectively); (d) V2CTx before TBAOH intercalation, and after mixing with TBAOH for 2, and 4 h (black, red, and blue curves, respectively). The peaks denoted by * are from remnant Mn+1AXn phases. The insets are schematics of the Mn+1XnTx unit cells prior to, and after, TBAOH intercalation accompanied by the corresponding change in the c lattice parameter [reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
Mashtalir et al., on the other hand, delaminated HF-etched multi-layered Nb2CTx by first intercalating isopropylamine (i-PrA) between the layers in DI water at RT for 18 h and then mildly sonicating in deaerated DI water. The HF-etched multi-layered Nb2CTx, which is negatively charged at the surface and acidic, is as expected intercalated with ammonium cations (R-NH3+) in i-PrA dissolved in water, presumably due to the electrostatic forces.26,46 An increase in the efficiency of delamination of Nb2CTx layers is anticipated as i-PrA molecules, having three alkyl groups, are sufficiently small to overcome the steric hindrance, so as to push the Nb2CTx layers apart, thus further weakening the interlayer interactions. When applied to Ti3CTx and Nb4C3Tx, it is noteworthy that, prior to sonication, multi-layered Ti3CTx has been already found to partially delaminate after 18 h, which is in contrast to the lengthy (up to two weeks) period of immersion required for Nb4C3Tx.47
Wang et al. developed another alternative method that involved addition of dilute NaOH and maintaining stirring at RT for 2 h to intercalate Na+ between HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx, followed by using sulfanilic acid diazonium salts as a surface modifier in an ice bath for 4 h and finally mild sonication.48 The intercalation of Na+ is essential, as it further weakens the interlayer cohesive forces and allows the accommodation of aryl diazonium salts. Unreacted diazonium salts, being water-soluble, are relatively easier to remove as compared with the unreacted organic precursor(s) as used in other methods. Dispersion of Ti3C2Tx in water can be improved with the grafting of aryl groups, while further surface modifications are made possible by the increased active sites on the surface, due to the attached reactive functional groups of p-phenyl-SO3H from the aryl diazonium salts.48,49 However, the applicability of this method towards other MXenes remains to be demonstrated.
Zhang et al. first demonstrated the feasibility of a substitutional solid solution based exfoliation to obtain parent Mn+1AXn nanosheets, about 4 nm thick and 100 to 200 nm wide, with ultrasonication in various organic solvents. It is suggested that only when the A layer in Mn+1AXn phases consists of different atoms and is in accordance with the Hume-Rothery rules, the effectiveness of breaking the bonds between A and MX layers can be significantly enhanced.50 However, it is necessary to reemphasize that this low yield approach produces doped Mn+1AXn nanosheets but not MXenes. Thus, further treatments could be inclined towards complete conversion from these Mn+1AXn nanosheets to MXene and/or composite nanosheets, in addition to extending the approach beyond Ti3Si0.75Al0.25C2 and Ti3Al0.9Si0.1C2.
2.3 MXene-based composites
Ling et al. fabricated the first conductive, flexible, and free-standing Ti3C2Tx/polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) composite by using vacuum filtration of colloidal solutions of delaminated HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx with DMSO as the intercalant, in the presence of varied amounts of PVA (Mr = 115000). The Ti3C2Tx/PVA composite was established, because the PVA matrix had a strong interaction (hydrogen bonding) with the negatively charged surface of the Ti3C2Tx fillers. Because of the film fabrication process, the Ti3C2Tx layers were highly oriented and mostly parallel to the film surface. With 10 wt% and 60 wt% PVA, tensile strength of the Ti3C2Tx/PVA composite, as compared with pure Ti3C2Tx, was synergistically improved by about 34% and 100%, respectively. However, its electronic conductivity was greatly compromised by a factor of 101 and 108 accordingly. A hollow, 6 mm in diameter and 10 mm tall, made with 4–5 μm thick 90 wt% Ti3C2Tx/PVA film was able to sustain 2.9 MPa as compared with the 1.3 MPa by its pure Ti3C2Tx counterpart.51 Restacking of single- and few-layered Ti3C2Tx flakes remained an unresolved issue.
Naguib et al. prepared a Ti3C2Tx/polyacrylamide (PAM) nanocomposite by casting a well-mixed solution of Ti3C2Tx/PAM onto a Teflon tray, followed by air-drying at room temperature over several days. A well dispersed Ti3C2Tx/PAM composite was formed as the DMSO-intercalated Ti3C2Tx was swelled considerably and spontaneously attracted PAM (Mw 600000–1000000 g mol−1) solution when mixed, so that the hydroscopic PAM was favourably infiltrated and in situ polymerized in between the Ti3C2Tx layers.52 In a 6 wt% Ti3C2Tx film, a large quantity of PAM was available to intercalate into Ti3C2Tx. Thus, few-layered Ti3C2Tx sheets were dispersed and randomly oriented. In comparison, in the 31 wt% Ti3C2Tx film, multi-layered Ti3C2Tx flakes were predominantly observed (TEM). With the incorporation of a mere 6 wt% Ti3C2Tx, the insulating polymer matrix of PAM became semi-conducting, with an electrical conductivity of 3.3 × 10−2 S m−1. As the loading level of Ti3C2Tx was further increased to 31 wt%, the electrical conductivity behaviour of the Ti3C2Tx/PAM nanocomposite became metal-like, indicating that the electrical percolation threshold of the PAM matrix had been overcame. Such composites may find applications in radio frequency (RF) shielding or static charge dissipation. Although no detailed quantitative characterization of mechanical properties of the Ti3C2Tx/PAM nanocomposite was conducted, it was generally observed that the addition of Ti3C2Tx as expected increased the stiffness of PAM.
Wu et al. incorporated DMSO-intercalated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx fillers into a hydrophilic polyethyleneimine (PEI) matrix through solution mixing to prepare a hybrid active layer. Sequential drop-casting of homogeneous Ti3C2Tx/PEI and a mixture of trimesoyl chloride (TMC) and n-hexane solution onto the surface of the commercial polyacrylonitrile (PAN) ultrafiltration membrane and subsequent heat treatment at 60 °C for 2 h to remove residual solvent and complete the cross-linking reaction conclude the fabrication of composite solvent resistant nanofiltration (SRNF) membranes.53 Ti3C2Tx additives acquire good compatibility with the PEI polymeric matrix, as driven by hydrogen-bonding interaction, with noticeably weakened Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) characteristic band intensity for PEI in the Ti3C2Tx/PEI composite. Intuitively, these fillers hinder polymer chain motion and enhance structural stability and solvent resistance of the PAN/PEI–Ti3C2Tx membrane. Consequential of their large lateral area and small thickness, most Ti3C2Tx nanosheets are horizontally aligned and well dispersed within the PEI matrix, as observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). With 2 wt% Ti3C2Tx, the rejection ability of the PAN/PEI–Ti3C2Tx membrane for polyethylene glycol (PEG) solute is greatly improved, with a molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) of approximately 200 Da. As expected, the inclusion of hydrophilic Ti3C2Tx fillers slightly decreases the permeate flux for weak- or non-polar solvents, such as ethyl acetate, butanone and n-heptane, whereas the transfer ability for polar isopropanol is enhanced (ca. 30%). It is proposed that the –OH groups on the Ti3C2Tx surface function as adsorption sites and facilitate the storage of isopropanol molecules through hydrogen bonding interaction, which provide an additional pathway for isopropanol molecules to transport along the surface and the inter-lapped gap. The PAN–PEI SRNF membrane with 2 wt% Ti3C2Tx exhibits concurrent enhancement in membrane flux and rejection ability, overcoming the trade-off between membrane flux and rejection ability (i.e. increment in membrane flux will lead to a decrease in rejection ability, and vice versa) as demonstrated by other inorganic or graphene oxide fillers. Similarly, DMSO-intercalated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx fillers were added into a hydrophobic polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) matrix to prepare a different hybrid active layer for modifying the SRNF membrane. (3-Aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES) and dibutyltin dilaurate (DBTDL) were used instead of TMC. Although the Ti3C2Tx additives are less compatible and weakly interact with the PDMS matrix in the PAN/PDMS–Ti3C2Tx membrane, as evidenced by SEM, FTIR and XRD, the PAN/PEI–Ti3C2Tx membrane exhibits concurrent enhancement in membrane flux for alcohol and rejection ability.
Aïssa et al. prepared a highly conductive Ti3C2Tx/graphene sandwich-like nanocomposite by alternatively depositing Ti3C2Tx and graphene layers on a glass substrate, by using an electrohydrodynamic atomization (EHDA) deposition method.54 These composite films were then annealed under vacuum at 200 °C for 2 h. The subsequent absence of the F peak in XPS spectra suggested that this thermal treatment probably passivated the –F terminations. Both structural and electronic properties of the Ti3C2Tx composite thin films are shown to be positively affected by the integration of graphene.
Zhao et al. proposed a repeated procedure of alternating vacuum filtration of the delaminated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx suspension and carbon nanotube (CNT) dispersion to prepare a flexible, free-standing sandwich-like 95 wt% Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite film (Fig. 6a). For comparison, a randomly mixed 95 wt% Ti3C2Tx/CNT was prepared by direct vacuum filtration of mixed 95 wt% Ti3C2Tx/CNT dispersion. The sandwich-like 95 wt% Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite was observed to have a more ordered structure, whereby sandwich-like superposition of Ti3C2Tx and CNT layers (Fig. 6b) can be clearly identified to be unlike the randomly mixed Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite. This elucidates the effect of CNT dispersion conditions during the preparation and the implication on the arrangement of fillers, electronic percolation threshold and subsequent enhancement of overall electronic transport properties as noted in the superior conductivity of the sandwich-like Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite (385 S cm−1) to that of randomly mixed Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite (286 S cm−1). It was generally observed that the inclusion of CNTs enlarged the interlayer space (i.e., c lattice parameter revealed by XRD) between the Ti3C2Tx flakes, prevented the restacking of delaminated Ti3C2Tx sheets (Fig. 6b) and improved both the overall conductivity and available active surface area within the composites and thus electrochemical performance in electrochemical capacitors (ECs), as compared with those of the pure Ti3C2Tx film.55 This alternating vacuum filtration method is also advantageous for its simplicity, because no functionalization of the materials is required. It could be used to quickly fabricate a several micrometres thick film, although it lacks the more controlled structures that can be realized by using the layer-by-layer (LBL) deposition method.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the preparation of free-standing, sandwich-like Ti3C2Tx/CNT paper. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of Ti3C2Tx/MWCNTs [reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (c) Cross-sectional TEM images of aligned PPy chains (bright) between Ti3C2Tx layers (dark) [reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (d) Zeta potential of HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, CTAB-grafted CNTs (CNT-CTAB), and self-assembled Ti3C2Tx/CNT-CTAB (Ti3C2Tx/CNT-SA). The inset shows digital photographs of the pristine Ti3C2Tx suspension, CNT-CTAB in water, and Ti3C2Tx/CNT-SA composites [reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2016 Elsevier]. 
Similarly, Mashtalir et al., used i-PrA as the intercalant to delaminate HF-etched multi-layered Nb2CTx, and produced a flexible and free-standing randomly mixed 90 wt% Nb2CTx/MWCNT composite “paper”. A suspension of MWCNTs dispersed by 0.03 mol L−1 sodium dodecylsulphate (SDS) was added into the colloidal mixture of mono- and few-layered Nb2CTx, followed by direct vacuum filtration.47
Boota et al. introduced a simple strategy to prepare a free-standing but brittle film of a self-assembled layered structure, with aligned and doped pyrrole (PPy), C4H4NH, confined between the Ti3C2Tx single layers (Fig. 6c). The solution for vacuum filtration to obtain the composite film was prepared by adding the as-received PPy to a dispersion of HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx, and constant stirring at 1000 rpm for 12 h at RT. Exploiting the acidic nature of Ti3C2Tx, PPy molecules may be protonated and proceed to form longer chains. Similarly, with the presence of O, –OH and –F terminations on Ti3C2Tx surfaces, hydrogen bonds may be established with the N–H group in PPy oligomers, so that the polymerized chains are self-aligned instead of being randomly aggregated. Concurrently, the PPy chains can be doped by –F to become conductive. Simultaneous intercalation, alignment, and metal free polymerization of PPy on Ti3C2Tx were demonstrated. By optimizing the content of PPy, which provides directional paths for charge percolation between the Ti3C2Tx layers, the obtained composites with enhanced electronic conductivity demonstrated exceptional performance as electrodes of supercapacitors.56
Xie et al. proposed another electrostatic self-assembly method to prepare flexible free-standing composite films of 90 wt% Ti3C2Tx/MWCNTs and Mo2CTx/MWCNTs from negatively charged delaminated HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx and Mo2CTx and positively charged MWCNTs as spacers. Self-assembly was only possible with MWCNTs grafted with cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), a cationic surfactant (Fig. 6d). If the MWCNTs were modified with an anionic surfactant, such as SDS, the self-assembly was not successful and Ti3C2Tx and MWCNTs would be randomly and separately deposited on the filter paper, while restacking of single- and few-layered Ti3C2Tx flakes remained unresolved. Consequently, the 90 wt% Ti3C2Tx/MWCNTs–CTAB composite displays encouraging volumetric capacity and rate performance as Na-ion storage, because the CTAB-modified MWCNTs efficiently reduced the restacking of the single and few-layered Ti3C2Tx, thus improving the accessibility of the electrolyte to the active material, Ti3C2Tx. The CTAB-modified MWCNTs also formed a conductive network and enhanced the overall electronic conductivity of the composites.57
Lin et al. alternatively improved the electronic conductivity of HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx, by growing conductive carbon nanofibers (CNFs) within the spaces of each accordion-like Ti3C2Tx particle and between the particles (Fig. 7a). The CNFs within the void of Ti3C2Tx provide conductive pathways to enhance charge transportation in the vertical-to-layer direction of each individual Ti3C2Tx particle and maintain the open accordion-like structure which is favourable for electrolyte ions to access. Isolated Ti3C2Tx particles are connected by a conductive network of CNFs, thereby drastically reducing the contact resistance between the adjacent sheets.58 By using liquid-phase impregnation, a cobalt(II) nitrate (Co(NO3)2) catalyst precursor and poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) dispersant were introduced into the multi-layered Ti3C2Tx, while the succeeding heat treatment at 600 °C in Ar for 0.5 h led to the carbonization with acetylene as the carbonaceous source, and synchronous passivation of surface functional groups of Ti3C2Tx. The growth of CNFs followed the tip growth mechanism as evidenced by a pit produced on the top of the CNF when the Co catalyst was removed.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of the HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx–CNT composite. The inset shows that some CNFs grew within the interlayer spaces of Ti3C2Tx flakes [reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. (b) TEM image of PVP–Sn4+@Ti3C2Tx. The inset shows the lateral size distribution of the anchored Sn4+ nanocomplex particles. (c) STEM image of PVP–Sn4+@Ti3C2Tx. The inset shows the corresponding elemental mapping of Ti, O, and Sn. (d) Close-up XRD patterns of three different samples (Ti3C2Tx, alk-Ti3C2Tx, and Sn4+@Ti3C2Tx) [reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. 
Similarly inspired by the ion exchange occurring at the hydroxyl (–OH) groups on Ti3C2Tx surfaces, Luo et al. synthesized a PVP–Sn4+@Ti3C2Tx nanocomposite (Fig. 7b). By adding HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx into 1 M of lithium hydroxide (LiOH), the interlayer spaces could be enlarged and the –F surface terminations were converted to –OH ones. Through a subsequent liquid-phase impregnation of a tin(IV) chloride (SnCl4) precursor with a PVP dispersant, Sn4+ ions were anchored on negatively charged Ti3C2Tx surfaces as an amorphous Sn(IV) complex, due to ion exchange and electrostatic interactions (Fig. 7c). The 2D conductive Ti3C2Tx matrix serves varyingly as ion exchange sites, buffer layer to accommodate the volumetric change during the electrochemical reaction, partial capacity of the entire composite and endowment of excellent rate performance. Interestingly, a synergistic “pillar effect”, i.e., spontaneous expansion of anchored Sn (Fig. 7d) and alloying with Li+, which concurrently pushed the Ti3C2Tx interlayers further apart to allow more Li+ ions to intercalate, was proposed to significantly contribute to its overall exceptional electrochemical capacity of the composite that far exceeds that of pure Ti3C2Tx.59
Naguib et al. actualized and proved the concept of oxidizing HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx in air, CO2, or pressurized DI water. Hampered by uncontrolled synthesis conditions, anatase TiO2 nanocrystals, with divergent morphologies and sizes, embedded in amorphous carbon sheets (TiO2–C hybrid structure), were formed when Ti3C2Tx powders were flash oxidized in air at 1150 °C for 30 s. However, when subjected to either isothermal oxidation in pure CO2 between 150 and 300 °C for 1 h or hydrothermal treatment at 150–250 °C at 1 to 5 MPa for various durations, a hybrid structure with a low content of unreacted Ti3C2Tx (as evidenced by remnant XRD peaks) and varied shaped and sized anatase TiO2 nanocrystals embedded in amorphous carbon sheets was formed instead. Hydrothermal oxidation of HF-etched multi-layered Nb2CTx at 150 °C for 2 h yielded a hybrid structure of Nb2CTx, coupled with feather-like non-crystalline Nb2O5, with a low content of amorphous carbon.60 Amongst these three synthesis routes, hydrothermal synthesis offers the most convenient control over morphology of the oxide particles, together with the requirement of generally low temperatures albeit a longer duration. Ghassemi et al. investigated the Ti3C2Tx oxidation mechanism by using in situ TEM analysis.61 They found that TiO2 nanoparticles were formed from the top and bottom of the Ti layers during flash oxidation, whereas nanocrystalline TiO2 sheets were formed instead during slow oxidation.
Coincidentally, Li et al. also identified that Ti3C2Tx could be partially oxidized by O2 at a low temperature of 200 °C for an accumulated period of 40 min to form evenly distributed anatase TiO2 nanoparticles on Ti3C2Tx sheets, variant to that of the TiO2–C hybrid structure by Naguib et al.; at higher temperature, the synthesized anatase TiO2 nanoparticles would then be transformed to rutile TiO2 nanoparticles.62
Zhang et al. synthesized a layered hierarchical structure composite of orthorhombic Nb2O5 nanoparticles, which were uniformly decorated on the surface of the Nb4C3Tx flakes and intertwined with amorphous carbon, by using a facile one-step oxidation of HF-etched Nb4C3Tx powders in CO2 at 850 °C for 0.5 h (Fig. 8a). Similarly, hierarchical composites of Nb2O5@Nb2CTx and TiO2@Ti3C2Tx were derived from Nb2CTx and Ti3C2Tx, respectively by using the CO2 partial oxidation method.63 Such a hierarchical design is advantageous for electrochemically active and high rate-response metal oxide nanocrystals, i.e., Nb2O5 or TiO2, which are at the edges (Fig. 8b) and interlayers and directly exposed to the electrolyte, so that ion diffusion paths are effectively shortened. Meanwhile, the internal network of the highly conductive carbon and unoxidized MXenes promotes the overall electronic conductivity of the composites. Additionally, the carbon can probably also function similarly to that of a binder and strengthen the interaction between the metal oxide and MXene particles.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the structure of Nb4C3Tx and its hierarchical composite structure after oxidation. (b) TEM image of oxidized Nb4C3Tx at 850 °C for 0.5 h under a CO2 flow rate of 75 sccm. The inset shows a higher resolution TEM image [reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (c) Pore size distribution comparison of Nb2CTx before and after CO2 oxidation at 800 °C for 1 h at a CO2 feed rate of 150 sccm, the formation of 1.0–1.5 nm pores is indicative of the formation of voids between the layers of Nb2CTx after CO2 oxidation [reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. 
In a separate study, the same group explored the influences of oxidation temperature, time and CO2 feed rate on the phase composition, particle size of Nb2O5, constitutions of the hierarchical composites and the corresponding electrochemical performances (Fig. 8c).64 A similar phenomenon for Ti2CTx was reported, laying the groundwork for modification and/or elimination of surface groups by using heat treatment or post-etch annealing in various gas environments to structurally alter the morphology of Ti2CTx, partially oxidize Ti2CTx to form TiO2 under certain conditions and thus favourably impact its electrochemical performance.65,66 In the latter, it was noted that annealing Ti2CTx in various controlled atmospheres, such as Ar, N2 or N2/H2, retained its initial chemical structure but caused slight thinning of the layers (i.e., larger interplanar distance and higher surface areas), thus leading to a favourable mesoporous structure to allow more access to the aqueous electrolyte. Noticeably, annealing in the N2/H2 atmosphere removed more functional groups on Ti2CTx, as inferred from the highest carbon content and lowest fluorine concentration, than in Ar or N2, and consequently exhibited the highest specific capacitance.66 Lai et al. also reported the preservation of the initial Ti2CTx layered framework and modifications to surface functional groups and carrier transport properties (from metallic to semiconducting) after subjecting mechanically exfoliated Ti2CTx sheets to thermal annealing.67
Ahmed et al. demonstrated a scalable, cost efficient and rapid method at RT to obtain a TiO2/Ti2CTx hybrid. By immersing HF-etched multi-layered Ti2CTx in hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) with various concentrations for different durations at RT, the amount of anatase TiO2 nanoparticles formed and embedded on the surface of multi-layered Ti2CTx could be well controlled. The surface defects of HF-etched Ti2CTx acted as nucleation sites for TiO2 formation. For instance, after a brief (5 min) immersion in 30 wt% H2O2, TiO2 nanoparticles were formed at the expense of Ti2CTx and the Ti2CTx layers were swelled, thus leading to a five-fold increment in the specific surface area (SSA) and more active sites for Li+ ions to intercalate. This hybrid has a molar composition of one Ti2CTx and four TiO2. Comparatively, for an extended period of immersion of 5 h, Ti2CTx was completely converted into TiO2.68
A myriad of particulate TiO2/Ti3C2Tx composites have been hydrothermally synthesized, with or without additional variant Ti precursors, at various heating temperatures for various durations. Gao et al. prepared TiO2/Ti3C2Tx composites with promising photocatalytic activity by heating a mixture of HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx, different amounts of titanium(II) sulfate (TiSO4) and DI water at 180 °C for 18 h.69 Through an in situ hydrolysis of tetrabutyl titanate (TBOT) within a mixture of HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx, followed by either a microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis or heat treatment in a vacuum, Wang et al. synthesized another two types of TiO2/Ti3C2Tx composites for potential applications in electrochemical biosensors and supercapacitor electrodes.70,71 The organ-like and conductive Ti3C2Tx structure, with a high SSA, capably channels a large quantity of enzymes towards the interior and immobilizes them between the interlayers. Additionally, biocompatible TiO2 nanoparticles present a protective and conducive environment for these enzymes to remain active and collide with each other for a long period.
Another group hydrothermally synthesized rutile TiO2/Ti3C2Tx composites with various contents of HF-etched delaminated Ti3C2Tx but a fixed amount of titanium(IV) chloride (TiCl4) at 95 °C for 4 h. TiO2 strategically encapsulated the Ti3C2Tx, and this intimate contact allowed efficient charge transfer from TiO2 to Ti3C2Tx. The variation of Ti3C2Tx content in the composites was reportedly influential towards deviation in both optical properties and photocatalytic performance as excessive Ti3C2Tx scattered light and prevented TiO2 from efficiently capturing light. This synthesis was extended to prepare TiO2/Ti2CTx and TiO2/Nb2CTx composites.72
Exceptionally, without an additional Ti source, Peng et al. fabricated an atomic scale interfacial heterojunction of homogeneously distributed (001) TiO2 nanosheets inserted into layered Ti3C2Tx (Fig. 9a–f), through delicately controlled hydrothermal oxidation of HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx in the presence of a directing agent, sodium tetrafluoroborate (NaBF4). This minimally defective and interfacial well-bonded (001) TiO2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid exhibited significantly enhanced photocatalytic activity as the defect-induced electron–hole recombination was reduced and highly conductive Ti3C2Tx efficiently conducted photogenerated electrons away and increased the lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.73
 Fig. 9  Schematic for (a) charge-transfer process over (001) TiO2/Ti3C2Tx, (b) band alignments and charge flow at {001} TiO2/Ti3C2Tx interfaces. (c) Low resolution TEM image of TiO2/Ti3C2Tx. High resolution TEM image of (d) the area highlighted by the yellow box labelled b in (c), shows the intimate proximity of layered Ti3C2Tx and a TiO2 crystal, (e) the growth of TiO2 perpendicular to the [001] direction of the Ti3C2Tx sheet, and (f) small TiO2 crystal formed near the edge of Ti3C2Tx. The insets (f1) and (f2) show the lattice fringes of TiO2 and Ti3C2Tx respectively [reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. (g) Schematic of the chemical etching of Ti3C2Tx flakes to produce a porous Ti3C2Tx structure. (h) TEM image of porous Ti3C2Tx after chemical etching in 0.2 M CuSO4 solution at RT [reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2016 Wiley]. 
Zhang et al. fabricated a sandwich-like, magnetic Ti3C2Tx/magnetite (Fe3O4)/maghemite (Fe2O3) composite with enhanced phosphate sorption selectivity and capacity. A mixture of 1 M FeSO4, 2 M iron(II) chloride (FeCl3) and HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx was held isothermally at 80 °C for 4 h to facilitate ion exchange reactions that resulted in Ti–Fe in place of Ti–H terminations as well as to intercalate Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions. This mixture was then added to a boiling 6 M NaOH solution, to convert remnant Fe salts to Fe-based hydroxides. By maintaining at 100 °C for 5 h, the Fe-based hydroxides were then transformed into nanosized ferrites.74
Ren et al. developed a chemical etching procedure to prepare mesoporous Ti3C2Tx at RT (Fig. 9g). An aqueous solution of copper(II) sulphate (CuSO4) was added to a colloid of delaminated HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx. Catalysed by Cu2+ ions, the dissolved O2 in water partially oxidized the Ti3C2Tx flakes, forming TiO2 nanoparticles that were removed by subsequent HF treatment to leave behind porous Ti3C2Tx flakes (Fig. 9h) with more defects, less –F, more O and –OH terminations and larger exposed surfaces.75 These mesoporous Ti3C2Tx flakes are then used together with MWCNTs to prepare electrode materials with promising performances.
Ma et al. combined delaminated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx and exfoliated graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets through vacuum filtration to form a robust free-standing hybrid film. It exhibited outstanding performance in catalysing the oxygen-evolution reaction (OER) due to these novel coupled Ti–Nx motifs acting as electroactive sites, and the high surface area from the hierarchically porous structure contributed to a high electrochemical double layer capacitance. Additionally, its hydrophilic and porous nature allowed good wettability of active surfaces with an aqueous electrolyte and rapid transport of reactants to the active sites and fast removal of reaction products, such as O2.76
Zhang et al. synthesized an urchin-shaped alkalization-intercalated HF-etched Ti3C2/Ag/Ag0.9Ti0.1 bimetallic nanowire composite (Fig. 10a–d) by mixing 30 mM of AgNO3, 100 mg of 6 M NaOH-activation-treated Ti3C2Tx and 100 mg of PVP in DI water at room temperature. It was proposed that the NaOH-activation-treatment of Ti3C2Tx substituted –F groups with –OH groups and increased the c lattice due to ion exchange forming –ONa groups from some –OH groups. The presence of activated low-valence Ti species on Ti3C2Tx was ascribed to Ag self-reduction, while addition of PVP induced the formation of 5-fold nanotwin Ag seeds (Fig. 10d), which subsequently grew into Ag/Ti (Ag0.9Ti0.1) bimetallic nanowires (Fig. 10c). This nanocomposite, with enhanced conductivity, numerous oxygen adsorption sites and shortening the diffusion path of adsorbed oxygen, displayed encouraging electrocatalytic activity for the ORR, whereby its onset potential and half-wave potential are higher than those of commercial 20 wt% Ag/C and previously reported Ag-based catalysts.77 This group also evaluated a HF-etched Ti3C2/Ag composite, synthesized without the NaOH-activation-treatment of Ti3C2Tx and PVP addition, as a high rate anode material for Li-ion batteries with excellent cyclability.78
 Fig. 10  FESEM image of the HF-etched Ti3C2/Ag/Ag0.9Ti0.1. A and B represent a Ag nanowire and a Ag nanoparticle, respectively. (b) TEM image of the Ti3C2/Ag/Ag0.9Ti0.1. (c) HRTEM image of nanowire A. Inset (c-1) shows the width of Ag0.9Ti0.1 nanowire ∼42 ± 5 nm. Inset (c-2) shows the SAED fringe confirming the nanotwinned Ag structure. (d) HRTEM image of nanoparticle B with a 5-fold twin; the inset corresponds to the SAED of nanoparticle B [reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. 
Chen et al. initiated, in the absence of an initiator, grafting of poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA) onto HF-etched multi-layered V2CTx by using a facile method of self-initiated photografting and photopolymerization (SIPGP) to prepare a V2CTx@PDMAEMA composite.79 The cationic-charged PDMAEMA favourably interacted with the negatively charged surface of V2CTx to form a composite. Consequently, V2CTx was endowed with the versatile reversible hydrophilic to hydrophobic behaviour of PDMAEMA when thermally stimulated and the controlled conductivity as triggered by carbon dioxide (CO2) stimulation, and such functionalized V2CTx hybrids may potentially find applications in the biological field.
Experimentally, in most MXene/polymer composites to date, in which MXene is the additive and polymer serves as the matrix, DMSO-intercalated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx single/few-layered fillers have been unanimously added to polymeric matrices. Polymeric-based composites which incorporate other MXenes, beyond DMSO-intercalated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx, as expected remain unexplored because of the trickle-down effect from the bottleneck in effective preparation of other single/few-layered MXenes. Gradually, as more other exfoliated single/few-layered MXenes are prepared, their incorporation into polymeric composites with new properties and applications is to be explored in the near future.
Critical to fabricating a well-mixed MXene/polymer composite, the selection of polymer must also take into consideration its solubility in solvent(s) during processing, in addition to having the polymer favourably interact with the negatively terminated MXene surface. Generally, mechanical properties of polymeric composites are enhanced with the addition of MXene fillers, although the orientation or how the fillers are randomly stacked is influential towards if the enhanced mechanical properties are anisotropic or isotropic.52
As mentioned above, one early strategy to improve the electrochemical performance of MXene-based composites is to open the structure of the multi-layered MXene matrix through delamination and reassembling them into a porous “paper”-like structure. Incorporation of interlayer spacers, such as CNTs, or conductive polymers, such as PPy, has further enhanced the electrochemical performance of the free-standing “papers” by increasing their electrical conductivities (with additional electron conductive pathways) and interlayer spaces that promote electrolyte ion access and transportation.47,55–58 Since no polymeric binders or conductive additives are included, the undesirable dead volume and interface are reduced and associated overpotentials are eliminated.
Surface terminations of MXenes are chemically modified, so that they are able to change from one predominant surface group to another, so as to more effectively attach cations to increase interlayer spacings, or to facilitate subsequent procedures such as oxidation or self-assembly, and achieve new properties and improved performances compared to their non-composite counterparts.59,80,81 Functionalization of MXene-based additives or matrices to endow desirable properties, such as enhancement of the matrix-filler interfacial strengths, remains to be conducted. Passivation or removal of MXenes' inherent surface functional groups is also possible through thermal treatment in Ar, hence presenting a wide array of probable modifications to be studied for work with or around microscopically defective and varyingly surface terminated MXene-based materials. Hydrothermal oxidation, which offers scalable products and highly reproducible crystallinity, good morphological and compositional control, relatively low temperature and short duration, seems to be the most preferred method to develop MXene/oxide composites, and alternative methods remain yet to be explored.60,63,68–74
Similarly, intimate contact between the conducting MXene matrices and well-dispersed fillers, be it as-synthesized oxides or CNTs, is crucial to the overall homogeneity and properties of MXene-based composites. It remains intriguingly challenging to alternatively attain a hierarchical structure with such intimate contact and good-distribution of exposed foreign additive material(s) amongst the MXene matrix network if the MXene does not participate as both the precursory source of metal cations and the supporting matrix structure itself. Details of the performance of various composites in their respective applications and the comparison of electrochemical performances amongst some composites will be discussed in the following section.
3. Structures, properties and applications
The various as-synthesized MXenes are endowed with the rare combination for 2D materials of good electronic conductivity comparable to multi-layered graphene and high hydrophilicity with small contact angles measured.14 Intercalated epitaxial MXene thin films (<20 nm) are highly transparent with about 90% transmittance (T) in the visible-to-infrared region.25 Weak coupling between stacked MXene layers, spontaneous intercalation of a variety of organic and inorganic molecules or ions and subsequent delamination to single or few layers via sonication have been demonstrated.25,26,31,35,43,45–48 Understanding both the surface terminations and the interlayer interactions is the prerequisite to purposefully manipulate the properties of MXenes for their various applications. Consequently, modelling and simulation, such as density functional theory (DFT) and to a lesser extent, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, have been extensively applied to understand the structure, to predict properties and to identify potential applications of MXenes, guiding much of the experimental research in the field of MXenes, although most of the earlier modelling studies are regarding uniform terminating species.34,82–105
On the basis of DFT calculations, Srivastava et al. detailed the mechanism of exfoliation and simultaneous functionalization of Ti3C2Tx by the HF etchant.106 The Ti atoms on the edges of parent phase Ti3AlC2 were proposed as the initial sites for dissociated H/F ions to attach onto, subsequently weaken Ti–Al bonds and increase the interlayer gap for more HF molecules to intercalate. Al was then removed from Ti3AlC2 due to the formation and release of AlF3 and H2, leaving behind Ti3C2 that strongly bonds to –OH and –F. Density of states and electron localization function calculations identified that the functionalization of Ti3C2 was motivated by the formation of strong bonds. Gibbs free energy (ΔG) calculations indicated that the formation of fully fluorinated or mixed functionalized Ti3C2 was both thermodynamically favourable and conferred the random, uncontrolled and mixed functionalization of Ti3C2. Consistent with a recent NMR study, more of –F terminations were observed due to the preference of higher electronegativity of F ions and associated greater stability to the overall structure.37 The random and non-uniform distribution of surface termination groups on MXenes is consequential of the chemical exfoliation process itself, and re-emphasizes the need for development of alternative preparation routes to achieve controlled functionalization of MXenes.
Early theoretical models predicted Ti3C2Tx configurations, in which surface termination groups were energetically favoured to be located either above the hollow sites between three neighbouring C atoms or above the C atoms on both sides of the Ti3C2 or a combination of the aforementioned.97,98 However, later computational studies revealed the complexity in the locations and orientations of surface groups for they depended on the species (n values) and elemental compositions.100,101 Xie et al. suggested that O and/or –OH terminated MXenes were the most stable, because –F terminations were readily replaced by –OH groups, which could occur when they were washed and/or stored in H2O; and –OH was converted to –O terminations during the high temperature treatments and/or metal adsorption processes.102
Karlsson et al. investigated the structural, elemental and chemical properties of single and double sheets of Ti3C2Tx (prepared by immersion of 2.5 g of Ti3AlC2 1 M NH4HF2 for 5 days) by aberration-corrected atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)-electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). Under high angle annular dark-field (HAADF)-STEM imaging, with Ti-sites as the reference, the inherited close-packed structure of Ti3C2Tx was observed as atomic positions of two Ti3C2Tx sheets remained laterally aligned (Fig. 11b) even after the removal of Al layers. Non-uniform coverage of O-based surface groups on Ti3C2Tx, native point defects such as Ti vacancies and oxidized titanium adatoms (TiOx) (Fig. 11c) was also observed.107
 Fig. 11  (a) Crystal structure model of MAX phase Ti3AlC2 (left), MAX phase Ti3AlC2 projected along the a axis (middle), and MXene phase Ti3C2Tx projected along the a axis (right) with –OH-terminated functional groups. The three Ti sublayers are labelled Ti1, Ti2, and Ti3 [reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. (b) Atomic resolution HAADF-STEM image of a typical Ti3C2Tx sheet with the positions of surface groups labelled by the arrows. (c) HAADF-STEM image of a Ti adatom on a single Ti3C2Tx sheet [reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society]. 
Sang et al. similarly adopted STEM-EELS to characterize single layer Ti3C2Tx (using a 7.5:1 molar ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2, in 6 M HCl at 35 °C for 24 h). The prevalence of different point defects (single Ti vacancies, Ti vacancy clusters) in the monolayer flakes and the importance of etchant concentration in defect formation were elucidated. The experimental HAADF-STEM image of Ti3C2Tx flakes was ascertained to be that of a single layer through comparison with similarly oriented simulated HAADF-STEM images calculated by using a multislice algorithm (Fig. 12a and b). Additionally, DFT simulations were performed to provide insight into the energetic costs associated with Ti defect formation, and the influence of different functional groups on the stability of the vacancies. Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations were adopted to theoretically study the influence of the defects on the surface chemistry and electronic properties of Ti3C2Tx and derived the insensitivity of Ti3C2Tx's conductivity to defect concentration. Experimentally, with 2.7 wt% HF etchant, vacancy clusters were rarely observed in a Ti3C2Tx single layer; however with 5.3 wt% HF etchant, vacancy clusters became more of a common sight (Fig. 12d and e).108
 Fig. 12  Comparison between experimental high-resolution HAADF-STEM images and simulated HAADF-STEM images for Ti3C2Tx MXene from a single layer at two different off-tilt orientations: (a) α = 0 and β = 0 mrad; (b) α = 0 and β = −189 mrad. The insets show the projected arrangement of Ti atoms for each case. (c) Atomic-scale HAADF-STEM images of defects in single-layer Ti3C2Tx. Comparison between the experimental HAADF-STEM image, defect crystal structure determined from DFT, and simulated HAADF-STEM image of VTi. HAADF-STEM images of single-layer Ti3C2Tx MXene flakes prepared using etchants with different HF concentrations: (d) 2.7 wt% HF and (e) 5.3 wt%. Single VTi vacancies and vacancy clusters  are indicated by red and blue circles, respectively [reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. 
Coinciding with DFT calculations, the electronic properties (metallic or semi-conductive), thermodynamic stability, intercalation mechanisms and energy storage capability of MXenes are also found to be dependent on defects and surface terminations. Beyond O, –OH, and –F, there could exist other stable and viable surface terminations, such as methoxy (–OCH3).1,84,94,100,102,104
Magne et al. investigated the site-projected electronic structure of multi-layered (both HF-etched and HCl/LiF etched) Ti3C2Tx by using a combination of TEM-EELS and DFT calculations. The electron energy-loss near edge structures (ELNESs) at the carbon (C) and surface element (O or F) K edges are shown to be highly sensitive to the identity and location of the surface groups (Fig. 13b), and can be indirectly used to probe the Ti d density of states and subsequently the electronic properties (Fig. 13c). Tx groups were revealed to be above the hollow sites of three neighbouring C atoms (C1) and not directly above the C atoms (C2) (Fig. 13a).109
 Fig. 13  (a) Side view of a Ti3C2T2 single sheet with the two T surface group locations labelled C1 and C2. (b) Comparison between the experimental C–K edge and calculations performed considering the –OH group (Tx) in configurations C1 or C2. (c) Comparison between the simulated F–K edge in C1 (bold black line), the unoccupied p-DOS of the excited F atom (F* – thin black line), the surface titanium (Tis) d-DOS (red line) and the volume titanium (Tiv) d-DOS (blue dashed line). The Tis and Tiv DOS were divided by 500 and 250 respectively to be plotted on the same scale as the F* DOS [reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
Hui Pan theoretically calculated the electronic properties of transition metal nitride monolayers and their applicability as anode materials for LIBs. Metallic and anti-ferromagnetic bare Ti2N monolayers were predicted to have an open circuit voltage of 0.53 V and a high specific capacity of 487 mA h g−1, due to low adsorption energy and long bonding distance with Li atoms. Although –OH surface groups could reduce the diffusion barrier to 0.005 eV, unlike O and –F terminations, the lithiation process required more effort for its positive adsorption energy and is overall detrimental to its performance as an anode. Additionally, other metallic Mn+1Nn (M = Ta, Ti and V; n = 1 and 2) monolayers were computed and identified as non-magnetic with the exception of Ti3N2 being ferromagnetic.110 More interestingly, according to computations by He et al., Mn2CF2, a yet-to-be-synthesized but stable MXene, was predicted to exhibit room-temperature ferromagnetism (high Curie temperature of 520 K), wide half-metallic gap (0.9 and 2.5 eV at PBE + U and HSE06 levels, respectively) and a substantial magnetic anisotropy (24 μeV) and its potential application in spintronics was highlighted by Hu et al.111,112 Although various Cr2XTx has also been predicted to retain its ferromagnetism even with surface terminations unlike other MXenes, to date none of these MXenes have been experimentally synthesized and examined to verify the validity of the calculations.100
Experimentally, most MXenes have been hitherto characterized to have inherent metallic behaviour except for a semiconducting oxygen-terminated Ti2COx and Mo2CTx.32,67 Zhou et al., using ab initio calculations, examined the electronic structures and electron transport properties of Ti2CO2 nanoribbons and revealed that the energy gaps in patterned (armchair- (Fig. 14a) and zigzag-terminated edges (Fig. 14b)) Ti2CO2 nanoribbons were tunable by appropriate crystallographic orientation and widths.113 At a width parameter beyond six, the armchair Ti2CO2 nanoribbons remain semiconducting (although band gaps decrease with increasing width of nanoribbons) (Fig. 14c), while zigzag nanoribbons become conducting (no or little band gaps) (Fig. 14d) and this is in accordance with previous calculations.114 By combining nonequilibrium Green's function with DFT calculations, armchair and zigzag nanoribbon systems exhibit different current–voltage curves, with no onset bias for most of the zigzag nanoribbons. Nonlinear features and weak negative differential resistance behaviours were observed in some armchair and zigzag nanoribbon systems.
 Fig. 14  Optimized atomic configurations of Ti2CO2 nanoribbons. (a) Top and side view of the armchair Ti2CO2 nanoribbon monolayer with the width parameter of 10. (b) Top and side view of the zigzag Ti2CO2 nanoribbon monolayer with the width parameter of 10. The red, gray and white circles represent O, C and, Ti atoms, respectively. Total density of states (TDOS) and projected density of states (PDOS) on atomic orbitals of Ti, C, and O atoms of (c) asymmetric armchair; and (d) zigzag Ti2CO2 nanoribbons, respectively. The Fermi energy is at zero [reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. 
Zhang et al. computed the acoustic phonon limited carrier mobility of Ti2CO2 monolayers and nanoribbons by using DFT and deformation potential theory. The hole mobility along the x direction (104 cm2 V−1) was derived to be thrice as large as the value along the y direction, while the electron mobility was about two orders of magnitude lower (102 cm2 V−1). By controlling their width and engineering their edge, the Ti2CO2 nanoribbons, with a drastic difference between the electron and hole mobility, were anticipated to be useful for photocatalysis and field-effect transistors.115
Different MXenes have been predicted with varying high in-plane elastic moduli.85,91 According to theoretical investigations by Fu et al., the enhancement in strength by highly stabilising oxygen functional groups of Ti3C2O2 was attributed to the charge transfer from inner Ti–C bonds to the external Ti–O surface bonds, hindering irreversible deformation and subsequently a high critical stress was needed for lattice failure.116 Guo et al. studied the tensile stress–strain relationships of Tin+1Cn (n = 1, 2, or 3) and surface functionalized Tin+1CnTx under different loading directions and unravelled the corresponding deformation mechanisms using first-principles calculations (Fig. 15a and b). Under biaxial and tensile strains, up to the critical point, Ti–C bonds are gradually stretched resulting in stress induced strengthening and beyond the critical strain, the surface Ti layer abruptly collapses along the out-of-plane direction and is accompanied by shrinkage of Ti–C bonds and relaxation of stress (Fig. 15c and d). Importantly, surface functionalization (O, –OH or –F) is observed to form covalent bonds with Ti (disappearance of lone pair electrons from Ti atoms) and enhance the mechanical flexibility of Tin+1Cn. Young's modulus of Tin+1Cn is also observed to slightly decrease as n increases.117
 Fig. 15  Calculated stress–strain curves of (a) Ti2C and (b) Ti2CO2. (c) Variations of bond lengths (Ti–C) and the out-of-plane heights, h, of Ti atoms in Ti2C. The arrows indicate the onset strains of instability. The inset shows the atomic structure of Ti2C. (d) Variations of the out-of-plane heights, h-Ti of Ti atoms in Ti2CO2 and the out-of-plane heights, h-O, of O atoms. The inset shows the atomic structure of Ti2CO2 wherein the surface groups are located at the most energetically favorable positions. Bond lengths and out-of-plane heights are normalized by their equilibrium values [reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
Beyond the stable and superconductive (under 2.5 K) Mo2C (>100 μm) without surface functional groups prepared by Xu et al. through the traditional vapour deposition (CVD) method and the first Mo2CTx recently synthesized by Halim et al. as a potential Li-ion battery anode, most intrinsic physical properties of Mo2CTx remained unavailable.32,118 Computationally, Zha et al. predicted Mo2CTx to have more widespread potential applications beyond a high capacity anode material for it was found to be nonmagnetic and possessed a high electrical conductivity (106 Ω−1 m−1), favourable thermal conductivity (48.4 Wm−1 K−1), small thermal expansion coefficient (2.26 × 10−6 K−1) and high mechanical strength.119,120
Aston et al. calculated the theoretical thermodynamic stability of 54 MXene compounds to streamline and identify yet-to-be-synthesized but stable MXenes. From a thermodynamic perspective, oxygenated transition metal nitrides such as Ti3N2O2, Ti3N3O2, V3N2O2, V4N3O2 and Cr4N3O2 were predicted to be experimentally probable and six fluorinated Sc-based Mxenes (Scn+1XnF2) were expected to easily exfoliate and produce single layers.121
Theoretically, Ti2CO2, Hf2CO2, Zr2CO2, Sc2CO2, and Sc2CF2 are predicted to possess an indirect band gap while Sc2C(OH)2 is expected to have a small direct band gap.100 Theoretical studies by L. Li, Khazaei et al., and Si et al. indicated Mo2Ti2C2O2 to be a topological semiconductor.122–124 Anasori et al., using DFT calculations in conjunction with experimental data, predicted that the controlled modifications of electronic properties (from metallic to semiconducting) of a subfamily of ordered layered double transition metals carbides (M′2M′′C2 and M′2M′′2C3, where M′ layers are sandwiched between M′′ layers and the C atoms occupy the octahedral sites between them) may be achieved through surface terminations and choice of outer M′ layers.125
Lee et al. and Ma et al. investigated and reported the possibility to hypothetically induce an indirect-to-direct band gap of Sc2CO2 with application of either a critical tensile strain or external electric field.92,96,126 Using a DFT tight-binding method, Zhang et al. examined the stability and electronic properties of Sc2C monolayers, nanotubes and their functionalized counterparts. Sc2CH2 and Sc2C(OH)2 nanotubes were found to be stable and increasing so as their radii increased, semiconducting and with band gaps tunable by changing their radii.127 Yang et al. identified that magnetic Sc2CT2 could be theoretically obtained through doping with Cr or Mn.128
More recently, Wang et al. proposed experimentally derived atomistic models that encompassed total neutron scattering and multilevel refinement methods, accounting for the coexistence and random surface groups (Fig. 16a–f) in certain MXenes, so as to improve the accuracy in predicting the properties of MXene from the existing idealized, limited, hypothetical and unrealistic models.129 As most theoretical studies to date have been conducted based on single, isolated sheets, deviating from most experimentally obtained few-/multi-layered MXene flakes, ensuing models should also accommodate interlayer interactions such as van der Waals forces and hydrogen bonding for more realistic computations. It is also to be noted that although DFT calculations produce stable and consistent geometries, the computed electronic properties (whether metallic or narrowly band semiconducting) are mainly dependent on the choice of the exchange-correlation functional.130 As compared to the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PDE) functional, Heyd–Scuseria–Eznzerhof (HSE06), a hybrid functional, was recommended to be included in calculations of electronic properties for more accurate band gap predictions.97,101
 Fig. 16  Structural representation of (a–c) HF10 and (d–f) HF48 MXenes. The Ti, C, O, F, and H are in blue, black, red, green, and pink spheres, respectively. Hydrogen bonds are as black/white dashed lines for O⋯H and F⋯H. All other bonds are as solid lines. Plots (a) and (d) are viewed along the crystallographic c* axis (i.e., the stacking direction). Plots (b) and (e) are top view (the a*–b* surface) of a single isolated sheet, illustrating random occupation of –O/OH/F groups. Plots (c) and (f) highlight the formation of interlayer hydrogen bonds (attractive force) and repulsive interactions when alike terminating atoms are facing each other. All hydrogen bonds shown in the plot are with the lengths of ≥1.5 Å and ≤2.3 Å [reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society]. 
These inherently complex MXenes, with nanocrystalline Mn+1XnTx layers, short-range ordering of surface structure and randomly stacked monolayers, have shown immense potential applications as transparent conductive films, environmental remediation, electromagnetic interference (EMI) absorption and shielding, electrochemical applications, such as Li-ion batteries (LIBs), supercapacitors, other electrochemical storage systems and electrocatalysts. Other prospective applications, including hydrogen storage media (using Sc2C, Ti2C, V2C and Cr2C), NH3 electrosynthesis (using V3C2 and Nb3C2), and additives for tribological studies, are however still in their hypothetical or infancy stage which will not be covered in this review.79,88,89,131–136
3.1 Transparent conductive films
Berdiyorov et al. theoretically derived the isolated effect of each individual surface termination group on dielectric and optical properties of Ti3C2Tx. Generally, the different surface groups were observed to similarly decrease the static dielectric function and increase the ultraviolet reflectivity of Ti3C2Tx compared to that of pristine Ti3C2, although, in the visible range, only –F and –OH demonstrated lower absorption and reflectivity than pristine Ti3C2.105
Halim et al. first demonstrated the potential application of MXenes as transparent conductive electrodes, by using a transparent (85% transmittance) and highly conductive intercalated Ti3C2Tx thin film (19 nm) that was prepared by chemically etching a magnetron-sputtered Ti3AlC2 with NH4HF2 solution at RT.25 However, it is not scalable due to the high cost and small quantity of magnetron-sputtered films.
Dillon et al. reported a low cost and scalable fabrication method to prepare continuous, optically transparent (Fig. 17a) and highly in-plane conductive (bulk conductivity = 6500 S cm−1) Ti3C2Tx thin films (Fig. 17b) by spin-casting, the basal planes of individual Ti3C2Tx flakes that showed a high degree of alignment, parallel to the substrate as reflected by the high intensity of 002 XRD peak at 7.1°. Stability and performance of these Ti3C2Tx thin films in an ambient atmosphere are still a work in progress though, since their conductance was degraded rather quickly by a factor of three when exposed to either O2 or moisture albeit retaining their good transmittance.137
 Fig. 17  (a) UV-vis-NIR transmittance spectra of the spincast Ti3C2Tx film with varying thickness. (b) Sheet conductance vs. film thickness (lower x-axis) and ln(transmittance) (upper x-axis) of spincast Ti3C2Tx films. Red circles represent the thickness of the Ti3C2Tx film deposited on a Si–SiO2 substrate as measured by AFM; the dashed red line is the linear fit with slope σ = 6600 S cm−1. Black solid squares represent the thickness of the Ti3C2Tx film deposited on glass, quartz and polyetherimide, derived from measured transmittance; the black line is the linear fit to the data points of derived thickness with slope σ = 6500 ± 800 S cm−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (c) Sheet resistance vs. transmittance at 550 nm of Ti3C2Tx sprayed from ethanol and water solutions. The inset shows the low sheet resistance region. (d) Change in % T of Ti3C2Tx films due to chemical intercalation (positive change indicates an increase in % T as compared to pristine Ti3C2Tx films) [reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. 
More recently, Hantanasirisakul et al. fabricated homogeneous, transparent conductive Ti3C2Tx thin films by using spray coating from colloidal HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx on various substrates (Fig. 17c). As revealed by the measurement of ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectrophotometry, a comparatively thick Ti3C2Tx film of 70 nm still retained 44% transmittance in the visible region, while a thin Ti3C2Tx film had a transmittance as high as 91%. Intuitively, a trade-off between transparency and conductivity exists in terms of the film thickness. Although the changes in transmittance are yet to be fully understood and too insignificant to be practically applied, reversible changes of % T during electrochemical intercalation/deintercalation of Ti3C2Tx films (Fig. 17d) suggested potential application in sensors and electrochromic applications.138
Mariano et al. detailed the increment of superimposed Ti3C2Tx flakes with reduction of the spin casting rate, i.e. 800 rpm produced a 3 flake overlap, 600 rpm gave a 4 flake overlap and 400 rpm resulted in a 5 flake overlap. It was noted that additional overlapping layers may help to improve the interconnectivity between nanosheets while retaining high VIS-NIR region transmission, as evidenced by the low sheet resistance of 437 Ω sq−1, high 77% T for films (5 flake overlap, 7.4 ± 0.5 nm) deposited at 400 rpm. Thicker films were found to be less drastically impacted by oxidation and remained stable in air over two months. By annealing the films between 100 °C and 200 °C, sheet resistance was further decreased due to the removal of any remnant adsorbed water, intercalated species on and within Ti3C2Tx layers; however at temperature beyond 250 °C, the films began to oxidize and sheet resistance reverted to its initial values.139
Ali et al. fabricated conductive and transparent thin films of Ti3C2Tx using EDHA, a scalable electrospray technique which involved deposition of solution in the absence of a vacuum under the influence of an electric field at ambient temperature. A low resistivity of 3.4 × 10−4 Ω cm and ca. 86.7% T were recorded for a 135 nm Ti3C2Tx thin film.140
Aïssa et al. reported to exhibit a similarly low resistivity of ca. 3.4 × 10−4 Ω cm for an electrosprayed thin film of Ti3C2Tx (250 nm thick on a glass substrate), even lower than that of an indium tin oxide (ITO) thin film of identical thickness. More significantly, with a mere 0.25 wt% of graphene incorporated, the measured conductivity and Hall mobility doubled and tripled respectively. An optimized 30-fold reduction in resistivity as compared to its electrosprayed pristine Ti3C2Tx counterpart was achieved by incorporating a low content of 2.5 wt% graphene (indicative of a low electrical percolation threshold) to form a binary, fully percolated composite.54 This markedly improved electrical conductivity (9.5 × 104 S cm−1) is attributed to filling up and smoothening of HF-etched Ti3C2Tx inherent defects (such as nanopores which acted as resistance for electron flow) by graphene deposition, as observed under SEM and AFM. The formation of a cross-linked and electrically conductive network of graphene within the film provides an additional interconnecting path throughout the composite for more electron flow and probable alignment of graphene flakes through interaction with the Ti3C2Tx surface, especially so in low graphene content (<0.5 wt%).
Lipatov et al. fabricated field-effect transistors (FETs) with large HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx monolayer flakes (using a 7.5:1 molar ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2) as conductive channels, by first drop-casting diluted colloidal solution of delaminated HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx onto a Si/SiO2 substrate, followed by e-beam lithography for device patterning and e-beam evaporation for the deposition of 3 nm Cr and 20 nm Au as metal contacts. The average resistivity and field-effect electron mobility of 10 similarly fabricated devices under vacuum were respectively measured to be 2310 ± 570 Ω sq−1 and 2.6 ± 0.7 cm2 V−1 s−1. The resistivity of a Ti3C2Tx single layer (ca. 1 nm) was thus calculated to be 2.31 ± 0.57 μΩ m (4600 ± 1100 S cm−1). Sheet resistivity of the bulk HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx film (ca. 9 μm thick) was measured to be 15.8 ± 1.3 μΩ m via the van der Paw method.42 The small difference of within one order of magnitude between resistivity of a single Ti3C2Tx monolayer and that of a Ti3C2Tx film was consistent with the reported resistance anisotropy in an earlier theoretical prediction and in situ experimental work by Hu et al. and implied decent inter-flake conductance through the surface functional groups.141 Environmental degradation and decrease in the conductivity of the devices in humid air were caused by p-doping due to electron accepting adsorbates such as oxygen and water molecules and oxidation at the edges of Ti3C2Tx flakes.
3.2 Environmental remediation
Mashtalir et al. first demonstrated that negatively surface charged Ti3C2Tx could be used to remove a cationic dye, methylene blue (MB), from solution in the dark, due to favourable adsorption (Fig. 18a). Under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, in the presence of the HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx, both MB and an anionic dye, acid blue 80 (AB80), were observed to undergo rapid photodegradation, suggesting the presence of possible complex processes, such as selective adsorption, degradation of various molecules and catalysing reactions. It was also found that the as-synthesized Ti3C2Tx was not stable in water, especially in the presence of O2, because they could be partially oxidized to form TiO2, thus requiring more work to address this issue.46
 Fig. 18  (a) Time dependence of MB (C0 = 0.05 mg mL−1) and AB80 (C0 = 0.06 mg mL−1) concentrations in aqueous Ti3C2Tx suspensions in the absence of light [reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. (b) Schematic of hydroxyl trap, top view of Ti3C2(O2H2−2mPbm) structure when Pb coverage is 1/9 ML. S1–S6 represent the different atom sites of the hydroxyl [reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society]. TEM images of (c) E. coli and (d) B. subtilis treated with 200 μg mL−1 of Ti3C2Tx for 4 h. The cell wall stripped down after exposure to Ti3C2Tx nanosheets (red arrows b and d), Ti3C2Tx nanosheets tightly adsorbed around the cells and entered the cells (red arrows a and c). The intracellular densities of both cells decreased and Ti3C2Tx attached to the cellular membrane of both bacteria (red arrows b and d) [reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. 
Using photodegradation of methyl orange under UV irradiation as a representative model, Gao et al. assessed that a hydrothermally synthesized TiO2/Ti3C2Tx nanocomposite possessed enhanced photocatalytic activity (electron–hole separation) as compared with pure anatase TiO2 or HF-etched Ti3C2Tx. Due to the presence of a heterojunction in TiO2/Ti3C2Tx, this composite could be suitable for applications in purification of contaminated water or air.69
Peng et al. elucidated the preferential reversible adsorption of lead ions (Pb2+) from a solution with effluent contents below 2 μg L−1, as well as a high level of Ca2+ and Mg2+, by using HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx treated with alkalization intercalation. The sequestration of heavy metal pollutants is enhanced by cation (Na+) substitution for the –OH groups, thus forming active sites favourable for ion-exchange. It is anticipated that the exhausted materials could be efficiently regenerated.81 Based on first-principles calculations, this group further elucidated the adsorption mechanism as heavy-metal ions being trapped within hydroxyl potential traps (with sufficient opposite-spin electron pairs) and examined the effect of different hydroxyl sites (Fig. 18b) and different functional groups on the adsorption behaviour thus extending intercalated Ti3C2(OH)2's applicability to adsorb other heavy metals.142
Ying et al. observed simultaneous reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) and adsorption of Cr(III) at pH 5.0, as well as reduction of other oxidant agents such as K3[FeCN]6], KMnO4 and NaAuCl4 by delaminated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. Additionally, its reducing activity in aqueous solution was reaffirmed by the observation that white rutile TiO2 nanoparticles were slowly precipitated from black delaminated Ti3C2Tx aqueous dispersion over the course of 3 months under atmospheric conditions.143 Consequently, these dispersions, containing high surface area Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, are promising candidates for efficient removal of high valence toxic metal compounds from industrial wastewater.
Similarly, a sandwich-like, magnetic Ti3C2Tx/Fe3O4/Fe2O3 composite was prepared by Zhang et al. for phosphate removal by exploiting its sorption selectivity with both Ti–O and Ti–F surface terminations, readily forming Ti–O–P complexes across a wide acidic pH range of 2.5 to 6.0.74 Nanosized Fe2O3 intercalated between the HF-etched Ti3C2Tx layers and increased the available surface area for reaction and the surface embedded magnetic Fe3O4 would be responsible for the effective separation. It is expected that the separation kinetics could greatly enhance, when an industrial magnetic field is applied. Additionally, the exhausted Ti3C2Tx/Fe3O4/Fe2O3 can be readily regenerated in binary alkaline brine solutions.
Wang et al. experimented with multi-layered HF-etched V2CTx as a potential and efficient adsorbent for the capture of radionuclide, uranium (U(VI)), with a highly normalized U(VI) adsorption capacity of 256 mg g−1 over a pH range of 3.0 to 5.0. Encouragingly, these multi-layered V2CTx with adsorbed U(VI) could be regenerated when exposed to highly acidic (pH < 3) solutions. Based on DFT calculations and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) results, the preferential adsorption of uranyl ions by –OH bonded to V of the V2CTx layers suggested the work of an ion-exchange mechanism.144
Chang et al. vacuum filtrated dilute suspensions of HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx (0.01 mg mL−1) to fabricate membranes of thicknesses 1.5 ± 0.1 μm with water flux ca. 38 L bar−1 h−1 m−2 on commercial polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) supports. It was distinctively observed that HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx membranes exhibited better selectivity than graphene oxide membranes, towards small (<4.5 Å) metal cations with increasing charges from +2 to +4, under similar testing conditions, with single-charged cations having an order of magnitude faster permeation of water as compared to multiple-charged cations. It was explained that single-charged and small radii (<6.4 Å) cations (Li+, Na+, and K+) capably penetrated between Ti3C2Tx interlayers and adsorption of ions on both sides of Ti3C2Tx formed an electric double layer on the surface of each individual flake and subsequently led to repulsion of the sheets which enabled higher permeation rates. For multiple-charged cations (Mg2+, Ca2+, and Al3+), beyond an initial increment of the Ti3C2Tx interlayer distances, as more of such multi-charged ions were intercalated, the electrostatic attraction between the negatively charged Ti3C2Tx and highly charged cations shrank the interlayer distances instead, and reduced permeation rates. Intuitively, bulky MB+ dye ions (>6.4 Å) were excluded by these Ti3C2Tx membranes because they are too large to pass through.145 From DFT calculations, Berdiyorov et al. explained the origin of ionic selectivity to be from the variation of energy barriers for ions of different charge to be intercalated between the layers.146
Additionally, Rasool et al. evaluated the suitability and applicability of such Ti3C2Tx membranes for ion separation, water purification, antimicrobial coatings and related applications, through the investigations of their interaction mechanisms and bactericidal activity in two bacterial models (Fig. 18c and d). Its negatively charged surfaces, high hydrophilicity, and hydrogen bonding between oxygenate groups have been suggested to be the contributing factors towards the strong antibacterial behaviour observed. However, the exact antibacterial mechanism is yet to be fully understood.147
Smith et al. first proposed, conceptualized and theoretically simulated the use of symmetric Na-ion intercalation electrodes separated by a Na-blocking membrane to desalinate NaCl from water.148 Most recently, Srimuk et al. demonstrated the first use of HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx as a novel intercalation electrode for desalination via capacitive deionization (CDI). Tapping into its exceptional pseudocapacitance, a CDI cell, with both electrodes based on drop-casted HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx onto a commercial porous separator, was set up and evaluated to have an average salt adsorption capacity of 13 ± 2 mg g−1 over 30 CDI cycles.149 Beyond carbonaceous materials and ion immobilization via double layer formation, ion intercalation into the layered Ti3C2Tx structure presents itself as an alternative towards enhanced electrochemical desalination.
3.3 Electromagnetic interference (EMI) absorption and shielding
Qing et al. first explored the use of HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx as fillers (50 wt%) to an epoxy composite of 1.4 mm thickness and achieved a low reflection loss (RL) of −11 dB (excellent microwave absorption performance exceeding 92%) over the frequency range of 12.4–18 GHz. It was proposed that the presence of surface functional groups, intrinsic defects and dangling bonds of HF-etched Ti3C2Tx and the numerous interfaces between Ti3C2Tx and epoxy matrix resulted in more electron relaxation polarization and interfacial polarization under an alternating electrical field and thus contributed significantly towards dielectric loss.150
Han et al. investigated the post-etching heat treatment of Ti3C2Tx and its related surface structural change and influence on its dielectric properties and EM wave absorption performance (Fig. 19a). The removal of Al layers through HF-etching was reaffirmed to lead to a significant enhancement of complex permittivity because of the surface functional groups and improved electrical conductivity. Rapid annealing of HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx at 800 °C for 2 h in argon with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 resulted in the oxidation of the surface Ti layers to form a localized sandwich structure of anatase and rutile TiO2 nanoparticles and amorphous carbon sheets supported by the layered Ti3C2Tx flakes. The decrease in hydroxyl groups and formation of amorphous carbon improved the electronic conductivity, and coupled with the formation of capacitor-like structures by amorphous carbon and low permittivity anatase and rutile TiO2, dielectric dipole interactions and accompanying relaxation at these multiple interfaces enhanced the dissipation of the EM wave. A minimum reflection coefficient of −48.4 dB at 11.6 GHz was attained by a 50 wt% annealed Ti3C2Tx/wax composite of 1.7 mm thickness. Contrary to EM absorbing materials, increased loading of Ti3C2Tx (between 60 wt% to 90 wt%) in wax composites was also examined for their EMI shielding performance. Counterintuitively, a majority of the total shielding effectiveness (SE) of Ti3C2Tx/wax composites was contributed by EM wave absorption and not EM wave reflection (Fig. 19b) even though Ti3C2Tx possessed metal-like free electron density.151
 Fig. 19  (a) Permittivity (real (ε′) and imaginary (ε′′)) and the loss tangent (tanδ) versus frequency for composites of the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase, Ti3C2Tx, and annealed Ti3C2Tx in a wax matrix with 50 wt% loading. (b) Schematic of the proposed EMI shielding mechanism. Incoming EM waves (orange arrows) strike the surface of a MXene flake. Because reflection occurs before absorption, part of the EM waves is immediately reflected from the surface owing to many charge carriers from the highly conducting surface (magenta arrows), whereas induced local dipoles, resulting from termination groups, help with absorption of the incident waves passing through the MXene structure. Transmitted waves with less energy are then subjected to the same process when they encounter the next MXene flake, giving rise to multiple internal reflections (dashed black arrows), as well as more absorption. Each time an EM wave is transmitted through a MXene flake, its intensity is substantially decreased, resulting in an overall attenuated or eliminated EM wave [reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. 
Shahzad et al. adopted a higher LiF to Ti3AlC2 molar ratio (7.5 to 1) to prepare delaminated Ti3C2Tx without sonication and films of these pristine HCl/LiF-derived delaminated Ti3C2Tx and its composite with 10 wt% sodium alginate (SA) at recorded exceptional EMI SE performance at 92 (45 μm thickness) and 57 dB (8 μm thickness), respectively. It was proposed that in addition to polarization losses from the induced dipoles by the surface terminations, the abundance of Ti3C2Tx surface free electrons partially reflected some incident EM waves, the high electron density Ti3C2Tx absorbed and caused a decrease in energy of the remaining waves due to ohmic losses and the 2D nanolamellar structure of Ti3C2Tx provided the necessary reflecting surfaces for an internal multiple reflection phenomenon that scattered EM waves and dissipated energy in the form of heat. Unprecedentedly, this 90 wt% Ti3C2Tx–SA composite encompasses many desirable properties for commercialization such as high EMI SE at 57 dB, low density of 2.31 g cm−3, low thickness of 8 μm, oxidation resistance, high flexibility and ease of processing.41
Evidently, even though this three EMI shielding with MXenes similarly involved Ti3C2Tx, the variances in synthesis conditions resulted in fundamentally different Ti3C2Tx, in terms of the degree of exfoliation and delamination (number of atomic layers) and the proportion of surface terminations, and consequently EMI absorption or shielding performance. More interestingly, surface modification of the MXene, use of other members in the MXene family or MXene-based composites remains a promising possibility to be further explored.
3.4 Energy storage

3.4.1 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). 
LIBs, as a ubiquitous cornerstone of portable consumer electronic era and de facto front-runner incorporated into commercial battery packs for electric vehicles (EVs), are still limited in terms of energy density, due to the incumbent commercial graphite anodes. MXenes are promising LIB anode materials, since they have excellent electronic conductivity, low operating voltage range of −0.2 to 0.6 V vs. Li/Li+, low diffusion barriers which are favourable for high rate performance and exceptional mechanical properties that are invariant to Li adsorption. Unlike typical diffusion limited battery electrode materials, intercalation of ions in MXenes can paradoxically occur at a high rate, without significantly depreciating their energy storage capacities. Levi et al. explained that the rapid electrochemical cationic intercalation between partially swollen MXene layers, resembling ion adsorption at the solid–liquid interface, was facilitated by the presence of water molecules and resulted in significant structural deformation (expansion and contraction). It was conjectured that this electrochemical capacitive paradox was made possible by the presence of both shallow and deep cationic adsorption sites, filled with ions and water molecules.152 As mentioned earlier, MXene sheets with more O terminations are suggested to possess the highest capacity as compared to other surface groups.102,104 It seems that HCl/LiF etching may be the most preferred method to prepare MXenes for LIBs although it has a relatively lower yield and controlling surface chemistry of MXenes can be pivotal to performance enhancement.37,94,99
Based on DFT calculations, Tang et al. predicted a high theoretical Li-ion capacity of 320 mA h g−1 for a hypothetically bare Ti3C2 monolayer whereas if fully terminated by either –OH or –F, a drastically reduced theoretical capacity of 67 or 130 mA h g−1 would be obtained instead.97 Based on X-ray Absorption Near Edge Structure (XANES) data, Xie et al. proposed the formation of extra Li layers on the already-lithiated O-terminated Ti3C2 to account for the exceptional capacity of 410 mA h g−1, as reported by Mashtalir et al. for a DMSO-intercalated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx, which exceeded its theoretical capacity (320 mA h g−1).31,102 Eames et al., in a later DFT study, reaffirmed that surface termination by oxygen (O) presented the highest capacity compared to those terminated by either –OH or –F.104 Xie et al. and Er et al. had separately conducted ab initio DFT calculations to derive the theoretical lithium and sodium capacity of Ti3C2Tx, and it was noted that storage capacities were enhanced by a larger interlayer distance.87,99 Zhao et al. assessed the influences of strain and Li concentration on Li-ion storage capacity of Ti2C and reported that the low diffusion barriers (favourable for good rate performance) remained invariant under high strain or Li concentration and only binding energy of Li (related to stability) slightly lowered under high strain.103 The diffusion barriers of the bilayer structure of oxygen-functionalized Ti- and V-based carbide MXenes, as computed by Ashton et al., were significantly higher than those of the corresponding monolayers, thus reiterating the importance of having dispersed MXene single layers to attain high LIB anode performance.153
Encouraged by the first application of HF-etched multi-layered Ti2CTx as an anode material in LIBs, where a reversible capacity of 70 mA h g−1 was recorded even after 200 cycles at 10C in a half-cell configuration, other MXene materials, such as Ti3C2Tx, Mo2TiC2Tx, Nb2CTx, V2CTx, Nb4C3Tx, and Mo2CTx, have also been examined as potential anodes for LIBs.15,17,31,32,63,154 By combination with transition metal oxides (TMOs) which have higher Li+ capacity but poor conductivity, the synergistic effect of TMO and Ti2CTx leads to much improved performance (Fig. 20a) as compared with either individual TMO or Ti2CTx.68,155
 Fig. 20  (a) Rate performance of the TiO2/Ti2CTx hybrid obtained by partially oxidizing Ti2CTx with H2O2 (ca. 5 minutes of contact time) at various current densities [reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. (b) Cycling stability of Ti3C2Tx at 1C and the Ti3C2Tx/CNF composite at 1C and 100C. The inset shows the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) plots of Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx/CNF composite [reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. (c) CV curves of PVP–Sn4+@Ti3C2Tx at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. (d) Schematics of synthesis processes for the fabrication of free-standing and flexible Ti3C2Tx/TMO hybrid films through sandwich-like assembly by alternating filtration or spray coating methods or an in situ growth method [reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2016 Elsevier]. 
Mashtalir et al. prepared a mixture of narrow sized distributed single and few-layered Ti3C2Tx by intercalation of DMSO between the HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx at RT for 18 h under constant stirring, followed by sonication in DI water for 6 h. A free-standing, binder-free Ti3C2Tx electrode was then assembled by filtering the mixture through a membrane. Reportedly, this Ti3C2Tx electrode demonstrated an excellent rate performance of 410 mA h g−1 at 1C and 110 mA h g−1 at 36C, both after 700 cycles. This elucidated the possible formation of additional Li layers on the already lithiated and surface terminated Ti3C2Tx, resulting in capacity exceeding the theoretical value.31 Despite its inherent moderate gravimetric capacity (320 mA h g−1), Kim et al. showed that by cold-pressing HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx with a conductive agent, carbon black (CB), a high-density and practical Ti3C2Tx electrode with an areal capacity of 5.9 mA h cm−2 at C/3 exceeding that of commercial graphite anodes could be achieved.156
In bid to improve the electronic conductivity between layers of HF-etched Ti3C2Tx sheets, reduce contact resistance amongst the sheets and increase ion accessibility by preventing restacking, Lin et al. grew conductive CNFs to connect the isolated layers. Consequently, this 86.2 wt% Ti3C2Tx/CNFs retained a reversible capacity of 320 mA h g−1 at 1C after 300 cycles and 97 mA h g−1 at 100C even after 2900 cycles (Fig. 20b).58 Alternatively, Ren et al. improved ion accessibility by synthesizing porous Ti3C2Tx flakes and by incorporating 10 wt% of MWCNTs as interlayer spacers and conductive agent, the as-prepared porous Ti3C2Tx/MWCNTs retained a reversible capacity of 800 mA h g−1 at 160 mA g−1 after 350 cycles. This exceptional reversible capacity is presumed to be consequential of more adsorption and storage of Li+ ions on the edges of pores in this porous Ti3C2Tx/MWCNT composite.75 Zou et al. synthesized a 90 wt% HF-etched Ti3C2/Ag composite, by reducing AgNO3 in the presence of Ti3C2Tx. The formation of well-dispersed Ag nanoparticles on the layered Ti3C2Tx improved its overall electrical conductivity. This composite electrode recorded a reversible capacity of 310 mA h g−1 at 1C (320 mA g−1) after 800 cycles, 260 mA h g−1 at 10C after 1000 cycles and 150 mA h g−1 at 50C after 5000 cycles. It was inferred that the Ag species had important catalytic roles in increasing more efficient and conductive Ti(III) species from Ti(II) species in the Ti3C2/Ag composite after 2000 cycles (discharge–charge), whereas a pristine Ti3C2Tx displayed negligible Ti species variation after cycling.78
To overcome its inherent moderate gravimetric capacity, Luo et al. synthesized a PVP–Sn4+@Ti3C2Tx nanocomposite, which exhibited a synergistic “pillar effect”, whereby spontaneous expansion of anchored Sn when alloying with Li+, concurrently pushed the Ti3C2Tx interlayers further apart to allow more Li+ intercalation and when tested in a half-cell configuration, it retained a reversible capacity of 544 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 after 200 cycles.59 However, it is also noted that the charge–discharge profiles of Ti3C2Tx resemble more of supercapacitors than those of LIBs (Fig. 20c); thus it is noteworthy that they may be more compatible in Li-ion capacitors or hybrid devices instead. Zhao et al. prepared a freestanding delaminated HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx/planar NiCo2O4 composite film using three different methods, namely alternating filtration, spray coating and an in situ growth process (Fig. 20d). The former two methods offered the flexibility to fabricate the hybrid films with different mass ratios of NiCo2O4 to Ti3C2Tx and it was noted that the mechanical properties deteriorate with increasing NiCo2O4 content. The in situ growth process, probably catalysed by Ni and Co cations, induced partial oxidation of Ti3C2Tx flakes and resulted in a comparatively reduced conductivity of the hybrid film. It was established that the activated (through pre-cycling at low rates) spray-coated 50 wt% Ti3C2Tx/planar NiCo2O4 hybrid film (3 μm) displayed the best performance amongst the three samples as it retained a reversible capacity of ca. 1010 mA h g−1 at 1C after 100 cycles. This performance was attributed to better electrolyte penetration with a higher degree of disorder in arrangement of Ti3C2Tx and planar NiCo2O4 nanoflakes within the film due to spray coating and a large amount of Ti3C2Tx (50 wt%) to facilitate fast electron and ion transfer.157
The next most studied MXene after Ti3C2Tx is Nb2CTx, whereby Naguib et al. first demonstrated HF-etched multi-layered Nb2CTx's prospect as an anode of LIBs as it maintained a reversible capacity of 170 mA h g−1 at 1C and 110 mA h g−1 at 10C, both after 150 cycles.15 Mashtalir et al., in the same study that reported i-PrA as an intercalant to assist in delaminating HF-etched multi-layered Nb2CTx, prepared a flexible and free-standing 90 wt% Nb2CTx/MWCNT composite, which exhibited an unprecedented capacity of 220 mA h g−1 at 10C after 100 cycles.47 Similar to that of the high-density Ti3C2Tx electrode, by cold-pressing HF-etched multi-layered Nb2CTx with CB, Kim et al. prepared a practical Nb2CTx electrode with an even higher areal capacity of 6.7 mA h cm−2 at C/3.156 Although Nb2CTx anode performance for LIBs, in terms of reversible capacity and high rate performance, is promising, the observed sloping/linear charge–discharge profiles over a large potential range resemble more of electrochemical behaviour of a capacitor than a battery. Byeon et al. assembled and tested three prototypical hybrid cells using Nb2CTx as either a cathode or an anode and both in a symmetrical setup.158
As an experimental LIB anode material, HF-etched multi-layered V2CTx displayed a reversible capacity of 210 to 260 mA h g−1 at 1C and 125 mA h g−1 at 10C, both after 150 cycles. However, its appeal as a prospective anode material was greatly diminished for its requirement of high lithiation voltage.15 A synergistic composite of orthorhombic Nb2O5 nanoparticles with Nb4C3Tx and amorphous carbon as synthesized by Zhang et al., exhibited a reversible capacity of 195 mA h g−1 at 0.25C after 400 cycles.63
Recently, two Mo-based MXenes have also been prepared and examined as anode materials for LIBs. Anasori et al. identified the resemblance of electrochemical behaviour of Mo2TiC2Tx to be quite different to that of Ti3C2Tx and with a reversible capacity of 145 mA h g−1 at 1C after 160 cycles.17 Synthesized by Halim et al., the first Mo2CTx with an addition of 8 wt% MWCNTs reported a reversible capacity of 250 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 and 76 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1, both after 1000 cycles.32 Table S1 in the ESI† shows the list of investigated Ti-, Nb-, V-, and Mo-based MXenes as a prospective LIB anode material.
It is noted that device manufacturing requirements such as current collectors, conductive agents, polymeric binders, etc. inevitably compromise the eventual volumetric capacities; thus there has been much effort towards preparing free-standing, binder-free MXene electrodes. The gravimetric capacity (normalized to the total electrode mass) is also observed to be negatively affected by a higher thickness or mass loading. Most work to date has been evaluated as a LIB electrode in a half-cell configuration, with few assembled into a full cell to determine their energy and power densities which are in fact more critical for practical applications.


3.4.2 Supercapacitors. 
Supercapacitors provide alternative energy storage with rapid power density but low energy density as compared to batteries. Therefore, research studies have been targeted primarily on improving their volumetric capacity, i.e. energy density per volume. As per their charge–discharge mechanisms, supercapacitors are classified as either electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) or pseudocapacitors. The former is based on the reversible accumulation of electrolyte ions at the electrode–electrolyte interfaces without redox reactions, while the latter relies on fast and reversible surface redox reactions, however retaining rectangular-shaped CV curves. In general, pseudocapacitors possess higher volumetric capacitances and lowered cycling stability. MXenes, with their 2D characteristics, large surface areas and highly defined morphology, present themselves as promising electrode materials for supercapacitors.
Lukatskaya et al. used electrochemical in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) to probe the mechanism of high capacitance of Ti3C2Tx in 1 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 21a). Changes in the Ti oxidation state of Ti3C2Tx are detected during charge/discharge, indicative that the predominant electrochemical behaviour of Ti3C2Tx is pseudocapacitive (which produces rectangular-shaped CVs). More importantly, the average Ti oxidation state in Ti3C2Tx, by first approximation, is closer to +2 than +4 (Fig. 21b).159
 Fig. 21  (a) Ti K-edge XANES spectra of Ti3C2Tx at −0.4 V (blue line) and 0.1 V (green line), together with those of TiO (red line) and TiO2 (black line). (b) Average Ti oxidation state determination in Ti3C2Tx at various applied potentials (see inset), using the Ti K-edge energy shift of the reference TiO and TiO2 compounds [reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (c) Digital photograph showing the transferred L-s-Ti3C2Tx MXene MSC on flexible scotch tape, and the corresponding (d) CVs, (e) charge–discharge curves, and (f) variation in areal capacitances with scan rates [reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
Xu et al. adopted a classic molecular dynamic simulation to examine a representative Ti3C2(OH)2 electrode, with a slit nanopore, in room temperature ionic liquid and ascertained that charge storage is a combination of fast counter-ion insertion and counter-ion/co-ion exchange. Electrolyte ions are shown to spontaneously wet the Ti3C2(OH)2 slit nanopore even in the absence of external potential. Additionally, cyclic variation of spatial distribution of ions and orientation of cation dipoles within the pore during charging/discharging help screen external electric potential. Ions are theoretically observed to be significantly accelerated and have more ordered dipole orientation within the Ti3C2(OH)2 electrode with a narrower slit (analogous to the layer distance).160
Ghidiu et al. pioneered the work to prepare a clay-like paste of HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx, with intercalated water and ions, which could be conveniently used to assemble a flexible and freestanding film. When evaluated in a three-electrode configuration in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, these as-prepared films displayed a high volumetric capacitance of 900 F cm−3 in the absence of faradaic redox reactions.30 Comparatively, Dall'Agnese et al. attempted surface chemistry modifications to replace –F in HF-etched Ti3C2Tx with hydroxyl groups and delaminated multi-layered Ti3C2Tx that were pre-intercalated with DMSO; and the prepared electrode only registered a moderate volumetric capacitance of 520 F cm−3 under similar testing conditions.80 Hu et al. via a facile dropping-mild baking (DMB) method to prepare an electrode of Ti3C2Tx films on nickel foam with an excellent gravimetric capacitance of 499 F g−1 (albeit low active material loading and tested in a two-electrode configuration) provided some food for thought to alternative fabrication of MXene-based energy storage devices.161
In view of the inclination of delaminated Ti3C2Tx stacks restacking and limiting full access of electrolyte ions to their surfaces during electrode preparation, Zhao et al. introduced a simple procedure of repeated, alternating filtration of the Ti3C2Tx suspension and SWCNT dispersion and obtained a volumetric capacitance of 390 F cm−3 at 2 mV s−1. Although MgSO4, a less toxic and affordable neutral electrolyte, offers a broader operating voltage window, its poorer conductivity limits the measured capacitance.55
In line with the idea to incorporate interlayer spacers, Boota et al. managed in situ polymerization of PPy and alignment of PPy chains between Ti3C2Tx layers and attained a more conductive, pseudocapacitive composite with exceptional volumetric capacitance close to 1000 F cm−3 at 5 mV s−1.56 Zhu et al. electrophoretically deposited HF-etched Ti3C2Tx onto a fluoride-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate for 30 s, and subsequently immersed in an electrochemical polymerizing electrolyte and polymerized for 600 s to fabricate an electrochemically optimized free-standing PPy/Ti3C2Tx film with volumetric and gravimetric capacitances of 291 F cm−3 and 485 F g−1, respectively at 1 mA cm−2 and excellent cyclic stability with ca. 100% capacitance retention after 20000 cycles.162
Lin et al. prevented the restacking of delaminated Ti3C2Tx stacks by means of a Ti3C2Tx hydrogel film and recorded a gravimetric capacitance of 62 F g−1.163 Dall'Agnese et al. extended the capacitance testing of Ti3C2Tx/MWCNTs in an organic electrolyte, and attained a moderate capacitance of 245 F cm−3 at 2 mV s−1.164 Yan et al. alternatively measured the capacitance of Ti3C2Tx/MWCNTs in an alkaline electrolyte of 6 M KOH and recorded a capacitance of 393 F cm−3 at 5 mV s−1.165 Through partial oxidation of Ti3C2Tx, Zhu et al. synthesized a TiO2/Ti3C2Tx composite with a gravimetric capacitance of 143 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1.71 Rakhi et al. and Tang et al. have coincidentally explored different forms of MnO2 as interlayer spacers for Ti3C2Tx and attained improved electrochemical performances.166,167 Wang et al. synthesized a 38 wt% delaminated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx/nickel–aluminium layered double hydroxide composite by a liquid phase deposition with an outstanding specific capacitance of 1061 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1.168
Progressively, towards the development of flexible energy storage devices, Peng et al. fabricated an all-Ti3C2Tx solid-state interdigital prototype microsupercapacitor (MSC) by solution spray-coating of large size (3–6 μm laterally) HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx as the current collector, followed by spray-coating small size HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx (ca. 1 μm) with more defects and edges on top as the electroactive layer (Fig. 21c–f). The interdigital pattern was carved by a photoresist-free direct laser cutting method and then meticulously filled with a PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte. The all-Ti3C2Tx device, with comparatively lower contact resistance than those with platinum current collectors, recorded areal and volumetric capacitances of ca. 27 mF cm−2 and ca. 357 F cm−3, respectively, at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 and demonstrated exceptional cyclic stability with 100% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1.169
Kurra et al. adopted a scalable and cost-efficient Meyer rod coating of HF-etched Ti3C2Tx and HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx slurries on commercially available A4 printing paper. These flexible fabricated devices, when supported on a flat plastic or glass substrate, were capably carved by laser patterning. The HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx microsupercapacitor (ca. 125 μm), with larger interlayer spacing and better conductivity, showed an areal capacitance of 25 mF cm−2 and 10.5 mF cm−2, respectively, at scanning rates of 20 mV s−1 and 1000 mV s−1. Its HF-etched counterpart (ca. 125 μm) only recorded an areal capacitance of 6.2 mF cm−2 and 4.2 mF cm−2.170
Li et al. assembled a conventional sandwich-type all-solid-state supercapacitor with a PVA/H3PO4 soaked glass fiber membrane inserted between two pieces of the 75 wt% HF-etched Ti3C2Tx/electrochemically exfoliated graphene nanocomposite film electrode. This device delivered a volumetric capacitance of 184 F cm−3 at a current density of 0.2 A cm−3 and retained 85.2% of initial volumetric capacitance after 2500 cycles. A flexible interdigital microsupercapacitor was fabricated by spray-coating the same composition of HF-etched Ti3C2Tx/electrochemically exfoliated graphene solution onto a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate through a mask. This fabricated device measured an areal capacitance of 3.26 mF cm−2 and a volumetric capacitance of 33 F cm−3 at 5 mV s−1.171
Although Ti2CTx has a higher calculated gravimetric capacitance than Ti3C2Tx, Ti3C2Tx is still the most studied pseudocapacitive MXene for its superior electronic conductivity and chemical stability.14 There is growing interest in Nb- and Mo-based MXenes as well for they potentially possess an even larger capacitance.17,32,64 Table S2 in the ESI† summarizes the use of various MXenes as electrode materials for supercapacitors.
It is noteworthy that capacitance values are dependent on various parameters, such as constitutes of composites, electrolytes, scan rate, current load, mass ratio and cell configuration; therefore mere numerical comparison of capacitance should be taken with a pinch of salt.


3.4.3 Beyond LIBs and supercapacitors. 
As various cations (Li+, Na+, Mg2+, K+, NH4+ and Al3+) have been observed to spontaneously intercalate in between Ti3C2Tx layers, Ti3C2Tx has been earmarked as potential Na-, K-, Mg- and Al-ion batteries/capacitors.26,87,99,104 Beyond Li, other elements offer more abundancy and possibly greater gravimetric capacity due to multi-electron redox chemistry. Yang et al. predicted the theoretical Na+ storage capacity of various M2CTxvia DFT computations and derived capacities from 190–288 mA h g−1. Wang et al. assessed HF-etched multi-layered Ti2CTx as a negative electrode for Na-ion hybrid capacitors and recorded a reversible capacity of 175 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1 at the end of 100 cycles in a half-cell configuration and configured it into a prototype Na-ion full cell as well.172
Xie et al. first reported Ti3C2Tx to have an experimental reversible capacity of 80 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 120 cycles in a Na-ion half-cell configuration as well as calculated its theoretical capacity to be 268 mA h g−1, assuming a single Na adsorption layer.99 Evidently, with a different interlayer distance input, Er et al. derived a different theoretical capacity of 351.8 mA h g−1 for Na+ on Ti3C2Tx and Yu presented a theoretical value exceeding 367.7 mA h g−1.87,173 Wang et al. recorded HF-etched Ti3C2Tx with a reversible Na+ ion storage capacity of 68.3 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 even after 1000 cycles, demonstrating its long-term cycling stability and experimentally observed the formation of double Na-atomic layers amongst the Ti3C2Tx interlayers, thus reaffirming the possibility of multi-layer adsorption (Fig. 22a–f).174 Kajiyama et al. related a small portion of Na+ being trapped within the structure of Ti3C2Tx even after full desodiation to an increase of interlayer distance from 9.7 Å to 12.5 Å; together with the penetrated solvent molecules, they beneficially swelled the interlayer spaces of Ti3C2Tx during initial cycles of sodiation.175 Xie et al. experimented with a self-assembled porous multi-layered Ti3C2Tx/MWCNT composite that measured a high volumetric capacity of 421 mA h cm−3 at 20 mA g−1.57 Another MXene, V2CTx, was paired with hard carbon and assembled into a full cell, achieving a capacity of 50 mA h g−1.176
 Fig. 22  Optimized geometries of Ti3C2X (a), NaxTi3C2X (b), and AlxTi3C2X (c) from the side view. The DFT calculations were performed with a modified model based on experimental results and indicated that the Na ions can easily diffuse in Ti3C2X. (d) Annular bright-field (ABF) image of Ti3C2X observed along the a/b axis. Two C atomic layers (labelled with purple arrows) interleave into three Ti-atomic layers (labelled with blue arrows) with a sequence of Ti(s)–C–Ti(c)–C–Ti(s), forming an edge-shared TiC6 octahedral stacking. The functional groups such as O and/or F atoms (labelled with red arrows) prefer to stay on top of the Ti(c) atoms, instead of the topmost sites of the C atoms on both sides of the Ti3C2 layer. (e) ABF image of Ti3C2X electrodes upon Na intercalation with a cutoff potential of 0.0 V. The inset shows that Na ions are intercalated into Ti3C2X from the surface, fully occupying the interlayers and remained on top of the C atoms rather than on top of the Ti(s) or Ti(c) atoms in the Ti3C2X layer. Moreover, double Na-atomic layers (labelled with double yellow arrows) are observed in one interlayer of the fully intercalated sample. (f) ABF image of Ti3C2X upon Al intercalation. Intercalation of the Al ions (labelled with green arrows) induces horizontal sliding of the Ti3C2X monolayer [reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society]. 
Zhao et al. loaded HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Txvia an impregnation process at 155 °C for 24 h, and evaluated its performance as a lithium–sulfur (Li–S) battery cathode. This pioneering Li–S cathode retained a high reversible capacity of 970 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 even after 100 cycles.177 Interestingly, Liang et al. loaded 70 wt% of sulfur into delaminated HF-etched Ti2CTx and measured a reversible capacity of 723 mA h g−1 at C/2 after 650 cycles. The strong interaction between polysulfides and surface Ti atoms was attributed to mitigation of the loss of the active material, and consequential good cycling performance.178 Recently, Lin et al. incorporated delaminated HCl/LiF-prepared Ti3C2Tx into a glass fiber membrane for Li–S batteries via simple vacuum filtration. Highly active surfaces of Ti3C2Tx chemically bonded with lithium polysulfides (LiPSs) via strong metal–sulfur interactions, thereby suppressing the dissolution of LiPSs. The performance of the commercial bulk S cathode was greatly improved to a high reversible capacity of 591 mA h g−1 at 1.5 A g−1 after 100 cycles.179 Bao et al. synthesized a hierarchical structure of 20 wt% HF-etched Ti3C2Tx/mesoporous C by a single-step pyrolysis of Ti3C2Tx/MOF-5 at 900 °C for 3 h in argon and subsequent HF etching to remove ZnO. Ti3C2Tx/MOF-5 was obtained from solvothermal synthesis of a 40 mL DMF mixture, containing 10 mg of Ti3C2Tx, 0.6 mmol of zinc nitrate hexahydrate, 0.2 mmol of terephthalic acid and 0.085 mL triethylamine, at 105 °C for 24 h. The Ti3C2Tx/mesoporous C/S composite cathode, from heating Ti3C2Tx/mesoporous C and elemental sulfur at 155 °C for 10 h in Ar, attained a high reversible capacity of 704.6 mA h g−1 at a current density of 837.5 mA g−1 (C/2) after 300 cycles. Its good electrochemical performance was attributed to effective trapping of LiPSs by active hydrophilic surfaces of Ti3C2Tx surfaces as well as delay of outward diffusion of LiPSs due to strong physical adsorption by the mesoporous matrix of the nanocomposite.180

3.5 Electrocatalysts
Electrolytic/solar water splitting, involving the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) (2H2O → 4e− + 4H+ + O2) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (2H+ + 2e− → H2), is one important clean energy technology. However, like the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode of fuel cells which requires the use of an expensive noble metal catalyst, its commercial uptake is limited; hence there are extensive efforts towards the development of highly efficient and cost-effective non-precious metal electrocatalysts.
Ma et al. assembled a robust free-standing hybrid film of delaminated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx and exfoliated graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets by vacuum filtration. As a working electrode for the OER, this Ti3C2Tx–g-C3N4 hybrid exhibited a sharp onset potential at 1.44 V (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)) and a low operating potential of 1.65 V to deliver 10.0 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M KOH (Fig. 23a–c). Its excellent performance was attributed to Ti–Nx motifs acting as electroactive sites, its high surface area from the hierarchically porous structure contributing to a high electrochemical double layer capacitance and its hydrophilicity and high porosity enabling good wettability of active surfaces to allow rapid transport of reactants and removal of reaction products. This freestanding hybrid film was also examined as a trial air cathode in rechargeable zinc (Zn)–air batteries and at a current density of 20 mA cm−2, it registered discharging (ORR) at 0.87 V and charging at 2.55 V.76
 Fig. 23  (a) Polarization curves and (b) Tafel plots of TCCN, IrO2/C, Ti3C2, and g-C3N4 in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (scan rate: 0.5 mV s−1). The inset in panel (a) optical image of TCCN directly used as the OER electrode operating at 1.70 V with generated bubbles on the surface indicating the formation of O2 gas. Dashed line in (a) polarization curve of TCCN after 5000 potential cycles (scan rate: 100 mV s−1). (c) Chronoamperometric response at a constant potential of 1.65 V (Ej=10 of TCCN). The inset shows chronopotentiometric response at a constant current density of 10.0 mA cm−2 of TCCN as compared to that of IrO2/C [reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (d) Schematic of formation of the Schottky barrier at the MXene/TiO2 interface [reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. 
Wang et al. hydrothermally synthesized rutile TiO2/Ti3C2Tx composites at 95 °C for 4 h and identified an optimal Ti3C2Tx content of 5 wt% which recorded a 400% enhancement in the photocatalytic HER at ca. 17.8 μmol h−1 gcatalyst−1 as compared to pure rutile TiO2. By strategically encapsulating Ti3C2Tx with rutile TiO2, the intimate contact allowed sufficient light absorption by TiO2, efficient charge transfer from TiO2 to Ti3C2Tx, formed a depletion layer at the Ti3C2Tx–TiO2 interface (Schottky barrier) (Fig. 23d) which facilitated electron–hole separation and improved photocatalytic activity. Adopting an identical synthesis approach, TiO2/Ti2CTx and TiO2/Nb2CTx composites with 5 wt% loading of MXenes were prepared. The TiO2/Nb2CTx composite demonstrated the best performance as a co-catalyst for the photocatalytic HER with the weakest photoluminescence emission peak because Nb2CTx has the highest work function amongst the MXenes used in this work whereas TiO2/Ti3C2Tx displayed the lowest hydrogen evolution rate.72
Seh et al. presented a combined theoretical and experimental study of Ti2CTx and Mo2CTx as independent electrocatalysts for the HER. First, the hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH) of various M2XTx was derived by DFT calculations and presented as a volcano plot. Mo2C and Ti2C, both with O on the basal plane as catalytically active sites, were calculated to have a theoretical overpotential of 48 mV and 358 mV, respectively. Experimentally, HF-etched Mo2CTx, as evaluated in a three-electrode electrochemical cell using a rotating disk electrode apparatus at 1600 rpm in 0.5 M H2SO4, maintained a stable HER activity after ca. 30 cycles, reaching a current density of 10 mA cmgeo−2 at an overpotential of 305 mV, whereas HF-etched Ti2CTx recorded an initial overpotential of 609 mV to reach 10 mA cmgeo−2 and its HER activity deteriorated further upon continued cycling. As expected, delaminated HF-etched Mo2CTx, with an increased proportion of exposed basal planes, recorded improved HER activity and supported the theory of basal planes as the most probable surfaces for Mo2CTx's catalytic activity.181
Ling et al., using a projector augmented wave method, identified that poor HER catalytic activity of pure V2CO2 was due to high H binding strength and elucidated that through strain engineering and introduction of high catalytic transition metal (Fe, Co, and Ni) onto the surface of V2CO2, the H–O binding strength can indeed be weakened and thus improve the HER performance.182
By screening 48 MXenes using ab initio calculations, Guo et al. shortlisted two yet-to-be-synthesized but stable MXenes, Zr2CO2 and Hf2CO2, with good optical absorption in the wavelength from 300 to 500 nm and high and directionally anisotropic carrier mobility as a candidate single photocatalyst for efficient water splitting to produce hydrogen.183
Zhang et al. synthesized an urchin-shaped alkalization-intercalated HF-etched Ti3C2/Ag/Ag0.9Ti0.1 bimetallic nanowire composite by mixing AgNO3, NaOH-treated Ti3C2Tx and PVP at room temperature. This nanocomposite recorded exceptional electrocatalytic activity for the ORR, with an onset potential of 0.921 V and half-wave potential of 0.782 V. The layered conductive Ti3C2Tx provided an effective electron pathway for the transfer of electrons from Ti or C to Ag and numerous favourable oxygen adsorption sites. The Ti-doping of Ag nanowires increased the concentration of defects or vacancies, which provided even more oxygen adsorption sites. These Ti-doped Ag nanowires could also act as a bifunctional catalyst to catalyse different ORR steps.77
Xie et al. explored the use of HF-etched Ti3C2Tx as a more active and durable support for a platinum (Pt) nanoparticle cathode catalyst for proton exchange membrane fuel cells. The 20 wt% Pt/Ti3C2Tx was prepared by refluxing a homogeneous mixture, containing ethylene glycol, 320 mg of Ti3C2Tx, 240 mg of trisodium citrate dehydrate and 160 mg of chloroplatinic acid, at 160 °C for 2 h in N2. The numerous –OH and –F groups on HF-etched Ti3C2Tx served as anchor points that facilitated good dispersion and strong binding of Pt nanoparticles. It was also suggested that the strong Pt–Ti3C2Tx interaction could have altered the electronic structure of Pt nanoparticles and prevented the oxidation and subsequent dissolution of the Pt catalyst.184
4. Conclusions and outlook
In summary, we have provided an overview of the progress in synthesis, characterization and applications of the new family of 2D early transition metal carbides, carbonitrides and nitrides, by using different fluoride compounds as etchants under various conditions. Two of the most mature synthesis routes to layered carbides and carbonitrides are HF etching and HCl/LiF etching, each brings about multi-layered MXenes with different morphologies and surface chemistries. Although only weak residual forces hold and prevent HF-etched multi-layered MXenes from readily separating into individual layers, a mere sonication procedure without preceding intercalation of species between the layers can only result in low yield of single/few-layered MXenes.
Most recently, with a modified HCl/LiF etching procedure with an increased molar ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2 of 7.5:1 instead of 5:1, while other aspects of the procedure (in 6 M HCl solution at 35 °C for 24 h) remained identical to those reported by Ghidiu et al., delaminated Ti3C2Tx flakes have been reportedly obtained without sonication and their yield can be further improved with a more concentrated HCl etchant solution. These delaminated Ti3C2Tx flakes are observed to be 4–15 μm laterally, have well-defined and clean edges and exhibit no visible pin holes. Because a myriad of cations is observed to spontaneously intercalate MXenes, the implications are far-reaching and influential as seen with delaminating stacked MXenes, preparation of MXene composites and their various potential applications.
Importantly, clay-like (hydrated), HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx can only be prepared when an intercalant source, LiCl, is present as part of the etchant solution—rather than as a later addition. Evidently, new reducing agents, etchants, and intercalants, for a fluoride-free MXene synthesis protocol, to control desired chemical species to bind on the surface of MXene's and fine-tune the properties and expand their potential applications, are to be explored.
Experimentally, in most polymeric-based composites, beyond the ubiquitous single/few layers of DMSO-intercalated HF-etched Ti3C2Tx fillers, incorporation and studies of other experimentally viable, exfoliated single/few-layered MXenes as fillers in polymer composites remain bewildering unexplored. Detailed investigations of the mechanism of matrix-filler interfacial interaction(s), quantification and characterization of enhanced mechanical properties of polymeric composites with inclusions of different MXene-based fillers, and variation in processing pathways to manipulate stacking of fillers within polymeric matrices can provide invaluable insights and contribute to the development of future applications.
As the most well-studied MXene, Ti3C2Tx and its composites have been explored as candidates for the sequestration of heavy metal pollutants and absorption of dyes and radionuclide. Also, they could be used as a biocide in water treatment, which has demonstrated promising results. Experimentally, much work remains to be conducted to fully understand the difference in absorption of various ions, when deploying a more complex but realistic environmental setup. To evaluate the reliability and lifespan of the proposed systems, more comprehensive studies are required to clarify the actual mechanism and reversibility of absorption and release ions/molecules/pollutants/radionuclide by Ti3C2Tx and investigate the degradation in performance after repeated usage. One such example reported to date is the first use of HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx as a novel intercalation electrode for desalination via capacitive deionization (CDI).
By varying the synthesis conditions, fundamentally different Ti3C2Tx in terms of the degree of exfoliation and delamination (i.e., number of atomic layers) and the proportion of surface terminations, and consequently electromagnetic wave absorption or shielding performance have been discussed. More interestingly, surface modification to the MXene, use of other members in the MXene family or MXene-based composites with the inclusion of magnetic nanostructures all deserve to be further explored.
The use of MXene-based composites, with different filler(s), such as metal oxides with higher specific capacity, for energy storage applications, is inevitable, due to the inherent moderate theoretical capacity of MXenes. Incorporation of interlayer spacers, such as CNTs or PPy, to provide additional electron conductive pathways and maintain interlayer spaces that promote electrolyte ion access and transportation, has been successful in enhancing the overall electrochemical performances of the materials. It remains intriguingly challenging to alternatively attain a hierarchical structure with intimate contact and good-distribution of exposed non-Ti additive component(s) amongst the carbide MXene matrix. As the first nitride MXene, Ti4N3Tx has been recently prepared, so that we anticipate the incorporation of the more conductive nitride MXene, with higher theoretical specific capacity as the default composite matrix instead of carbide MXene for high energy and power density applications and especially so if the more lightweight Ti2N (487 mA h g−1), can be experimentally synthesized. More in situ characterizations are necessary for mechanistic studies of the exact lithium/sodium ion storage and reaction pathways.
From experimental characterization, existing idealized and hypothetical models have been identified to be inadequate and limited in accurate property predictions of multi-layered or intercalated MXene stacks. Therefore, ensuing models should accommodate interlayer interactions, such as van der Waals forces and hydrogen bonding, for more realistic computations of these inherently complex MXenes. Our current incomplete understanding of the surface chemistry of the MXenes, i.e., the exact species bond to the MXene surfaces during synthesis and their precise contribution to the overall stoichiometry, adds to the difficulty of the already challenging theoretical studies. Indispensably, modelling remains vital to discovering novel and unexpected properties (such as directionally anisotropic carrier mobility), screening yet-to-be-synthesized MXenes with attractive properties (such as room-temperature ferromagnetism and semi conductance), thus guiding experimental efforts.
Several few-layered MXenes have been found to be potential candidates as transparent conductors, while various multi-layered MXenes have carved their niches in environmental remediation. MXene-based composites have opened a new pathway to the advancement in various energy storage systems, due to the possible synergistic effect in agglomeration prevention, facilitating electronic conductivity, improving electrochemical stability, enhancing pseudocapacitance and minimizing the shortcomings of individual components. Regardless of the advancement of these 2D layered MXenes and their composites in transparent conductors, environmental remediation, electromagnetic wave absorption and shielding, electrocatalysts, Li-ion batteries (LIBs), supercapacitors and other electrochemical storage systems, more studies, such as understanding the exact mechanisms behind certain properties and precise engineering the surface chemistries to attain desired performances, remain to be conducted in the near future.
Acknowledgements
K. Zhou would like to acknowledge the funding support of AcRF Tier 1 project (RG128/14), MOE, Singapore. P. S. Lee acknowledged the funding award no. NRF-NRFI2016-05. We would like to thank Prof. Y. Gogotsi for his valuable suggestions to our manuscript.
References
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. W. Barsoum, MAX Phases: Properties of Machinable Ternary Carbides and Nitrides, John Wiley & Sons,  2013 Search PubMed .
B. Anasori, J. Halim, J. Lu, C. A. Voigt, L. Hultman and M. W. Barsoum, Scr. Mater., 2015, 101, 5–7 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Zhang, Y. C. Zhou, Y. W. Bao, M. S. Li and J. Y. Wang, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 26, 2373–2380 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Barsoum, T. El-Raghy and M. Ali, Metall. Mater. Trans. A, 2000, 31, 1857–1865 CrossRef .
M. W. Barsoum, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2000, 28, 201–281 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, D. Music, R. Ahuja, S. Li and J. M. Schneider, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 092102 CrossRef .
J. Emmerlich, D. Music, P. Eklund, O. Wilhelmsson, U. Jansson, J. M. Schneider, H. Högberg and L. Hultman, Acta Mater., 2007, 55, 1479–1488 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Sun, Int. Mater. Rev., 2011, 56, 143–166 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Lei, X. Zhang and Z. Zhou, Front. Phys., 2015, 10, 276–286 CrossRef .
Y. Xiao, J.-Y. Hwang and Y.-K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10379–10393 CAS .
P. Kumar, H. Abuhimd, W. Wahyudi, M. Li, J. Ming and L.-J. Li, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2016, 5, Q3021–Q3025 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966–15969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ghidiu, M. Naguib, C. Shi, O. Mashtalir, L. M. Pan, B. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Gogotsi, S. J. L. Billinge and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9517–9520 RSC .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. C. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, M. Naguib, M. Ghidiu, L.-M. Pan, J. Gu, J. Nanda, J. Halim, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 99, 660–666 CrossRef CAS .
R. Meshkian, L.-Å. Näslund, J. Halim, J. Lu, M. W. Barsoum and J. Rosen, Scr. Mater., 2015, 108, 147–150 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, F. Y. Chen, Q. Ye, P. Eklund, S. Du and Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 5092–5097 CrossRef .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, B. Dyatkin, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 147–152 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chang, C. Li, J. Yang, H. Tang and M. Xue, Mater. Lett., 2013, 109, 295–298 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, S. Li, R. Ahuja and J. M. Schneider, Solid State Commun., 2004, 129, 589–592 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, F. Chang, J. Yang, H. Tang and C. Li, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2014, 49, 813–819 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halim, M. R. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, J. Lu, C. R. Smith, L.-Å. Näslund, S. J. May, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, P. Eklund and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall’Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Feng, Y. Yu, Y. Wang, F. Jiang, Y. Yu, L. Mi and L. Song, Mater. Des., 2017, 114, 161–166 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Wang, C. Shen, C. Zhang, Q. Hu, A. Zhou and B. Liu, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2016, 12, 702–710 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, Y. Xue, L. Li, S. Chen, Y. Nie, W. Ding and Z. Wei, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11035–11040 RSC .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CAS .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall’Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1716 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M.-Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ye, P. Xiao, W. Liu, K. Chen, T. Chen, J. Xue, S. Du and Q. Huang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 70339–70344 RSC .
I. R. Shein and A. L. Ivanovskii, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 65, 104–114 CrossRef CAS .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .

          J. A. Lane, U. S. A. E. Commission and E. United Nations, International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic, Reading, Mass,  1958 Search PubMed.
M. A. Hope, A. C. Forse, K. J. Griffith, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Ghidiu, Y. Gogotsi and C. P. Grey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5099–5102 RSC .
J. Halim, K. M. Cook, M. Naguib, P. Eklund, Y. Gogotsi, J. Rosen and M. W. Barsoum, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 362, 406–417 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Harris, M. Bugnet, M. Naguib, M. W. Barsoum and G. R. Goward, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13713–13720 CAS .
T. Zhang, L. Pan, H. Tang, F. Du, Y. Guo, T. Qiu and J. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 695, 818–826 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. Man Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lipatov, M. Alhabeb, M. R. Lukatskaya, A. Boson, Y. Gogotsi and A. Sinitskii, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600255 CrossRef .
M. Ghidiu, J. Halim, S. Kota, D. Bish, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3507–3514 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, A. I. Kolesnikov, E. Raymundo-Pinero, M. Naguib, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9128–9133 RSC .
M. Naguib, R. R. Unocic, B. L. Armstrong and J. Nanda, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 9353–9358 RSC .
O. Mashtalir, K. M. Cook, V. N. Mochalin, M. Crowe, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14334–14338 CAS .
O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3501–3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. Huang, G. Li, X. Zhang and Z. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 384, 287–293 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mahouche-Chergui, S. Gam-Derouich, C. Mangeney and M. M. Chehimi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4143–4166 RSC .
X. Zhang, J. Xu, H. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Yan, B. Pan, J. Zhou and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4361–4365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16676–16681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, T. Saito, S. Lai, M. S. Rager, T. Aytug, M. Parans Paranthaman, M.-Q. Zhao and Y. Gogotsi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 72069–72073 RSC .
X. Wu, L. Hao, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Wang and J. Liu, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 515, 175–188 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aïssa, A. Ali, K. A. Mahmoud, T. Haddad and M. Nedil, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 043109 CrossRef .
M.-Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 339–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Boota, B. Anasori, C. Voigt, M.-Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1517–1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, M.-Q. Zhao, B. Anasori, K. Maleski, C. E. Ren, J. Li, B. W. Byles, E. Pomerantseva, G. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 513–523 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, D. Sun, Q. Huang, J. Yang, M. W. Barsoum and X. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14096–14100 CAS .
J. Luo, X. Tao, J. Zhang, Y. Xia, H. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Gan, C. Liang and W. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2491–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dyatkin, C. Zhang, V. Presser, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7420–7423 RSC .
H. Ghassemi, W. Harlow, O. Mashtalir, M. Beidaghi, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi and M. L. Taheri, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14339–14343 CAS .
Z. Li, L. Wang, D. Sun, Y. Zhang, B. Liu, Q. Hu and A. Zhou, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2015, 191, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. J. Kim, M. Ghidiu, M.-Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum, V. Nicolosi and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4143–4151 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, M. Beidaghi, M. Naguib, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, B. Dyatkin, K. M. Cook, S. J. Kim, B. Eng, X. Xiao, D. Long, W. Qiao, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3937–3943 CrossRef .
J. Li, Y. Du, C. Huo, S. Wang and C. Cui, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 2631–2635 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Rakhi, B. Ahmed, M. N. Hedhili, D. H. Anjum and H. N. Alshareef, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5314–5323 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lai, J. Jeon, S. K. Jang, J. Xu, Y. J. Choi, J.-H. Park, E. Hwang and S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19390–19396 RSC .
B. Ahmed, D. H. Anjum, M. N. Hedhili, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7580–7587 RSC .
Y. Gao, L. Wang, A. Zhou, Z. Li, J. Chen, H. Bala, Q. Hu and X. Cao, Mater. Lett., 2015, 150, 62–64 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, C. Yang, M. Duan, Y. Tang and J. Zhu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 1022–1028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Y. Tang, C. Yang, F. Wang and M. Cao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A785–A791 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, R. Peng, Z. D. Hood, M. Naguib, S. P. Adhikari and Z. Wu, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1490–1497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, X. Yang, Y. Li, H. Yu, H. Wang and F. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6051–6060 CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Teng, G. Zou, Q. Peng, Q. Du, T. Jiao and J. Xiang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7085–7093 RSC .
C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, T. Makaryan, J. Halim, M. Boota, S. Kota, B. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Ma, J. L. Cao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1138–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. Li, G. Zou, C. Fernandez, B. Liu, Q. Zhang, J. Hu and Q. Peng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 6763–6771 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zou, Z. Zhang, J. Guo, B. Liu, Q. Zhang, C. Fernandez and Q. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 22280–22286 CAS .
J. Chen, K. Chen, D. Tong, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Xue, Q. Huang and T. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 314–317 RSC .
Y. Dall'Agnese, M. R. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 48, 118–122 CrossRef .
Q. Peng, J. Guo, Q. Zhang, J. Xiang, B. Liu, A. Zhou, R. Liu and Y. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4113–4116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, M. Estili and Y. Sakka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7841–7849 RSC .
I. R. Shein and A. L. Ivanovskii, Superlattices Microstruct., 2012, 52, 147–157 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Enyashin and A. L. Ivanovskii, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 207, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, J.-X. Li, Y.-L. Du and C. Cui, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2014, 83, 290–293 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lashgari, M. R. Abolhassani, A. Boochani, S. M. Elahi and J. Khodadadi, Solid State Commun., 2014, 195, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
D. Er, J. Li, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11173–11179 CAS .
Q. Hu, D. Sun, Q. Wu, H. Wang, L. Wang, B. Liu, A. Zhou and J. He, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 14253–14260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Wu, X. Ye, A. Zhou, D. Sun, L. Wang, B. Liu and J. He, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 10606–10612 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, M. Estili and Y. Sakka, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2014, 15, 014208 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kurtoglu, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, MRS Commun., 2012, 2, 133–137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, S. B. Cho and Y.-C. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14724–14728 CAS .
S. Zhao, W. Kang and J. Xue, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 133106 CrossRef .
A. N. Enyashin and A. L. Ivanovskii, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13637–13643 CAS .
L.-Y. Gan, Y.-J. Zhao, D. Huang and U. Schwingenschlögl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 245307 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, Z. Hu, X. Zhao, Q. Tang, D. Wu, Z. Zhou and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5593–5599 CAS .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16909–16916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Enyashin and A. L. Ivanovskii, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2012, 989, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, Y. Dall’Agnese, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, H. L. Zhuang and P. R. C. Kent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9606–9615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, C.-Y. Chung, N. S. Venkataramanan, M. Estili, Y. Sakka and Y. Kawazoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2185–2192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie and P. Kent, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 235441 CrossRef .
Y. Xie, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, X. Yu, K.-W. Nam, X.-Q. Yang, A. I. Kolesnikov and P. R. C. Kent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6385–6394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, W. Kang and J. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14983–14990 CAS .
C. Eames and M. S. Islam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16270–16276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Berdiyorov, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 055105 CrossRef .
P. Srivastava, A. Mishra, H. Mizuseki, K.-R. Lee and A. K. Singh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24256–24264 CAS .
L. H. Karlsson, J. Birch, J. Halim, M. W. Barsoum and P. O. Å. Persson, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4955–4960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sang, Y. Xie, M.-W. Lin, M. Alhabeb, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi, P. R. C. Kent, K. Xiao and R. R. Unocic, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9193–9200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Magne, V. Mauchamp, S. Celerier, P. Chartier and T. Cabioc'h, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 30946–30953 RSC .
H. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21486–21493 CAS .
J. He, P. Lyu and P. Nachtigall, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11143–11149 RSC .
L. Hu, X. Wu and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12939–12945 RSC .
Y. Zhou, K. Luo, X. Zha, Z. Liu, X. Bai, Q. Huang, Z. Guo, C.-T. Lin and S. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17143–17152 CAS .
S. Zhao, W. Kang and J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 879–888 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Zhao, D. Wu, Y. Jing and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16020–16025 RSC .
Z. H. Fu, Q. F. Zhang, D. Legut, C. Si, T. C. Germann, T. Lookman, S. Y. Du, J. S. Francisco and R. F. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 104103 CrossRef .
Z. Guo, J. Zhou, C. Si and Z. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 15348–15354 RSC .
C. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Chen, J. Guo, N. Kang, X.-L. Ma, H.-M. Cheng and W. Ren, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1135–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-H. Zha, J. Yin, Y. Zhou, Q. Huang, K. Luo, J. Lang, J. S. Francisco, J. He and S. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15082–15088 CAS .
D. Cakr, C. Sevik, O. Gulseren and F. M. Peeters, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6029–6035 Search PubMed .
M. Ashton, K. Mathew, R. G. Hennig and S. B. Sinnott, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3550–3556 CAS .
L. Li, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2016, 124, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, A. Ranjbar, M. Arai and S. Yunoki, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 125152 CrossRef .
C. Si, K.-H. Jin, J. Zhou, Z. Sun and F. Liu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6584–6591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, C. Shi, E. J. Moon, Y. Xie, C. A. Voigt, P. R. C. Kent, S. J. May, S. J. L. Billinge, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 227–234 RSC .
Y. Lee, Y. Hwang and Y.-C. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7163–7169 CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Ma, X. Zhao, Q. Tang and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4960–4966 CAS .
J. Yang, X. Luo, S. Zhang and L. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12914–12919 RSC .
H.-W. Wang, M. Naguib, K. Page, D. J. Wesolowski and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 349–359 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Nina, W. B. Michel and M. R. James, Europhys. Lett., 2013, 101, 57004 CrossRef .
A. Yadav, A. Dashora, N. Patel, A. Miotello, M. Press and D. C. Kothari, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 389, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Azofra, N. Li, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2545–2549 CAS .
Y. Gao, L. Wang, Z. Li, A. Zhou, Q. Hu and X. Cao, Solid State Sci., 2014, 35, 62–65 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, B. Chen, H. Song, H. Tang and C. Li, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2014, 49, 926–932 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Xue, X. Yang, Z. Wang, G. Luo, Z. Huang, X. Sui and C. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 2762–2767 RSC .
H. Zhang, L. Wang, Q. Chen, P. Li, A. Zhou, X. Cao and Q. Hu, Mater. Des., 2016, 92, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Dillon, M. J. Ghidiu, A. L. Krick, J. Griggs, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum and A. T. Fafarman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4162–4168 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hantanasirisakul, M.-Q. Zhao, P. Urbankowski, J. Halim, B. Anasori, S. Kota, C. E. Ren, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600050 CrossRef .
M. Mariano, O. Mashtalir, F. Q. Antonio, W.-H. Ryu, B. Deng, F. Xia, Y. Gogotsi and A. D. Taylor, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16371–16378 RSC .
A. Ali, A. Belaidi, S. Ali, M. I. Helal and K. A. Mahmoud, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 5440–5445 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Li, M. Hu, J. Tan, P. Hou, F. Li and X. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, Q. Peng, H. Fu, G. Zou and Q. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 20923–20930 CAS .
Y. Ying, Y. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Mao, W. Cao, P. Hu and X. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1795–1803 CAS .
L. Wang, L. Yuan, K. Chen, Y. Zhang, Q. Deng, S. Du, Q. Huang, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, Z. Chai, M. W. Barsoum, X. Wang and W. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16396–16403 CAS .
C. E. Ren, K. B. Hatzell, M. Alhabeb, Z. Ling, K. A. Mahmoud and Y. Gogotsi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4026–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Berdiyorov, M. E. Madjet and K. A. Mahmoud, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 113110 CrossRef .
K. Rasool, M. Helal, A. Ali, C. E. Ren, Y. Gogotsi and K. A. Mahmoud, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3674–3684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Smith and R. Dmello, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A530–A539 CrossRef CAS .
P. Srimuk, F. Kaasik, B. Kruner, A. Tolosa, S. Fleischmann, N. Jackel, M. C. Tekeli, M. Aslan, M. E. Suss and V. Presser, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18265–18271 CAS .
Y. Qing, W. Zhou, F. Luo and D. Zhu, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 16412–16416 CrossRef CAS .
M. Han, X. Yin, H. Wu, Z. Hou, C. Song, X. Li, L. Zhang and L. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21011–21019 CAS .
M. D. Levi, M. R. Lukatskaya, S. Sigalov, M. Beidaghi, N. Shpigel, L. Daikhin, D. Aurbach, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(1), 1400815 CrossRef .
M. Ashton, R. G. Hennig and S. B. Sinnott, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 023901 CrossRef .
M. Naguib, J. Come, B. Dyatkin, V. Presser, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Dong, X. Zhang, Y. Xu and J. Fransaer, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 202, 24–31 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kim, M. Naguib, M. Zhao, C. Zhang, H.-T. Jung, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 163, 246–251 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Zhao, M. Torelli, C. E. Ren, M. Ghidiu, Z. Ling, B. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 603–613 CrossRef CAS .
A. Byeon, A. M. Glushenkov, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, J. Li, B. W. Byles, B. Blake, K. L. Van Aken, S. Kota, E. Pomerantseva, J. W. Lee, Y. Chen and Y. Gogotsi, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 686–694 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, S.-M. Bak, X. Yu, X.-Q. Yang, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500589 CrossRef .
K. Xu, X. Ji, B. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. Ruan, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, Z. Li, H. Zhang, T. Hu, C. Zhang, Z. Wu and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13531–13533 RSC .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Q. Deng, J. Zhou, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Li, Q. Huang and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600969 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, D. Barbara, P.-L. Taberna, K. L. Van Aken, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 575–579 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dall’Agnese, P. Rozier, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 510–515 CrossRef .
P. Yan, R. Zhang, J. Jia, C. Wu, A. Zhou, J. Xu and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 38–43 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Rakhi, B. Ahmed, D. Anjum and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18806–18814 CAS .
Y. Tang, J. Zhu, C. Yang and F. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 685, 194–201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Dou, J. Wang, B. Ding, Y. Xu, Z. Chang and X. Hao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Peng, B. Akuzum, N. Kurra, M.-Q. Zhao, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, E. C. Kumbur, H. N. Alshareef, M.-D. Ger and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2847–2854 CAS .
N. Kurra, B. Ahmed, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601372 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Hou, F. Wang, M. R. Lohe, X. Zhuang, L. Niu and X. Feng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1601847,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201601847 .
E. Yang, H. Ji, J. Kim, H. Kim and Y. Jung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5000–5005 RSC .
Y.-X. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5288–5296 CAS .
X. Wang, X. Shen, Y. Gao, Z. Wang, R. Yu and L. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2715–2721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kajiyama, L. Szabova, K. Sodeyama, H. Iinuma, R. Morita, K. Gotoh, Y. Tateyama, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3334–3341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dall’Agnese, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2305–2309 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, M. Liu, Y. Chen, B. Hou, N. Zhang, B. Chen, N. Yang, K. Chen, J. Li and L. An, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7870–7876 CAS .
X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3907–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lin, W. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Zhao, W. Duan, Z. Zhao, B. Liu and J. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5993–5998 CAS .
W. Bao, D. Su, W. Zhang, X. Guo and G. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8746–8756 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang, Q. Chen and J. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600180 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Guo, J. Zhou, L. Zhu and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11446–11452 CAS .
X. Xie, S. Chen, W. Ding, Y. Nie and Z. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10112–10114 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta06772gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Mn+1AlXn + 3HF → Mn+1Xn + AlF3 + 1.5H2	(1)
Mn+1Xn + 2H2O → Mn+1Xn(OH)2 + H2	(2)
Mn+1Xn + 2HF → Mn+1XnF2 + H2	(3)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the structure of –OH-terminated Ti3C2 after selective etching of Ti3AlC2; yellow, black, red and white circles represent Ti, C, O and H atoms, respectively. (b) STEM image of the first two Ti3C2Tx layers after applying the Wiener filter; scale bar is equivalent to 1 nm, atoms are shown with the same colors as (a) [reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society]. (c) Schematic of the structures of the parent Mo2TiAlC2 phase and exfoliated HF-etched Mo2TiC2Tx phase, respectively; red, green, blue and black circles represent Mo, Ti, Al and C atoms, respectively. (d) XRD patterns of Mo2TiAlC2 (red), HF-etched Mo2TiC2Tx (green) and delaminated HF-etched Mo2TiC2Tx (blue). In the delaminated sample, only c-direction peaks, (00l) peaks, are visible, corresponding to a c lattice parameter of 30.44 Å; the (110) peak is no longer observed, indicating loss of order in non-basal directions. (e and f) HRSTEM images of Mo2TiAlC2 and Mo2TiC2Tx, respectively. Atoms are shown with the same colors as (c). Atomic ordering is verified by EDX mapping. No Al was observed in EDX of Mo2TiC2Tx. (g) Low magnification TEM image of the layered structure throughout the sample of exfoliated HF-etched Mo2TiC2Tx [reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of Ti3C2Tx ‘clay’ synthesis by HCl/LiF etching and preparation into a free-standing and desired shape electrode. (b) XRD plots of Ti3AlC2 and Ti3C2Tx. (c) SEM image of cross-section of rolled Ti3C2Tx. TEM images of (d) several flakes of Ti3C2Tx with lateral sizes up to a few hundred nanometres, (e) single-layered Ti3C2Tx, and (f) double-layered Ti3C2Tx [reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group].	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Side view schematic of a M3X2Tx structure showing various M atoms and their terminations. I refers to a M atom bonded to an O atom; II, to OH; III, to a M atom directly bonded to a F-atom; IV, to a M atom bonded to OH, that, in turn, is strongly bonded to a H2O molecule; M atoms only bonded to C atoms are designated, M*. Yellow, black, red, white and blue circles (not to scale) represent M, X, O, H and F atoms, respectively [reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2016 Elsevier]. (b) 1H NMR (11.7 T) spectra of HF and HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx recorded at 60 kHz MAS. (c) 19F NMR (11.7 T) spectra of HF and HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx recorded at 60 kHz MAS. (d) Graphical comparison of the differences in composition of the Ti3C2Tx surface functional groups when synthesized by HF and HCl/LiF etching respectively [reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016 the Owner Societies].	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images of Ti3C2Tx flakes produced by using: (a) Route 1 (ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2 is 5:1), and (b) Route 2 (ratio of LiF to Ti3AlC2 is 7.5:1), respectively. Small panels in (a) and (b) show HRTEM images and SAED patterns of monolayer 2D crystals of Ti3C2Tx. AFM images of the Ti3C2Tx flakes deposited on Si/SiO2: (c) Route 1, and (d) Route 2. (e) AFM height profiles measured along the dashed lines in (c). The colors of the height profiles in (e) correspond to the colors of the dashed lines in (c). (f) AFM height profile measured along the dashed line in (d) [reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.].	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of an individual Ti4N3Tx flake. The inset shows the SAED pattern of the Ti4N3Tx flake, inheriting the hexagonal basal plane symmetry of the parent Ti4AlN3 phase. (b) Raman spectra of Ti4AlN3 (red curve) and delaminated Ti4N3Tx (blue curve), with corresponding vibrational peaks identified through fitting with a product of Gaussian and Lorentzian functions [reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. XRD patterns of (c) Ti3CNTx before TBAOH intercalation, and after mixing with TBAOH for 2, 4, and 21 h (black, red, blue and green curves, respectively); (d) V2CTx before TBAOH intercalation, and after mixing with TBAOH for 2, and 4 h (black, red, and blue curves, respectively). The peaks denoted by * are from remnant Mn+1AXn phases. The insets are schematics of the Mn+1XnTx unit cells prior to, and after, TBAOH intercalation accompanied by the corresponding change in the c lattice parameter [reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the preparation of free-standing, sandwich-like Ti3C2Tx/CNT paper. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of Ti3C2Tx/MWCNTs [reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (c) Cross-sectional TEM images of aligned PPy chains (bright) between Ti3C2Tx layers (dark) [reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (d) Zeta potential of HCl/LiF etched Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, CTAB-grafted CNTs (CNT-CTAB), and self-assembled Ti3C2Tx/CNT-CTAB (Ti3C2Tx/CNT-SA). The inset shows digital photographs of the pristine Ti3C2Tx suspension, CNT-CTAB in water, and Ti3C2Tx/CNT-SA composites [reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2016 Elsevier].	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of the HF-etched multi-layered Ti3C2Tx–CNT composite. The inset shows that some CNFs grew within the interlayer spaces of Ti3C2Tx flakes [reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. (b) TEM image of PVP–Sn4+@Ti3C2Tx. The inset shows the lateral size distribution of the anchored Sn4+ nanocomplex particles. (c) STEM image of PVP–Sn4+@Ti3C2Tx. The inset shows the corresponding elemental mapping of Ti, O, and Sn. (d) Close-up XRD patterns of three different samples (Ti3C2Tx, alk-Ti3C2Tx, and Sn4+@Ti3C2Tx) [reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the structure of Nb4C3Tx and its hierarchical composite structure after oxidation. (b) TEM image of oxidized Nb4C3Tx at 850 °C for 0.5 h under a CO2 flow rate of 75 sccm. The inset shows a higher resolution TEM image [reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (c) Pore size distribution comparison of Nb2CTx before and after CO2 oxidation at 800 °C for 1 h at a CO2 feed rate of 150 sccm, the formation of 1.0–1.5 nm pores is indicative of the formation of voids between the layers of Nb2CTx after CO2 oxidation [reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic for (a) charge-transfer process over (001) TiO2/Ti3C2Tx, (b) band alignments and charge flow at {001} TiO2/Ti3C2Tx interfaces. (c) Low resolution TEM image of TiO2/Ti3C2Tx. High resolution TEM image of (d) the area highlighted by the yellow box labelled b in (c), shows the intimate proximity of layered Ti3C2Tx and a TiO2 crystal, (e) the growth of TiO2 perpendicular to the [001] direction of the Ti3C2Tx sheet, and (f) small TiO2 crystal formed near the edge of Ti3C2Tx. The insets (f1) and (f2) show the lattice fringes of TiO2 and Ti3C2Tx respectively [reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. (g) Schematic of the chemical etching of Ti3C2Tx flakes to produce a porous Ti3C2Tx structure. (h) TEM image of porous Ti3C2Tx after chemical etching in 0.2 M CuSO4 solution at RT [reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2016 Wiley].	 

 	Fig. 10  FESEM image of the HF-etched Ti3C2/Ag/Ag0.9Ti0.1. A and B represent a Ag nanowire and a Ag nanoparticle, respectively. (b) TEM image of the Ti3C2/Ag/Ag0.9Ti0.1. (c) HRTEM image of nanowire A. Inset (c-1) shows the width of Ag0.9Ti0.1 nanowire ∼42 ± 5 nm. Inset (c-2) shows the SAED fringe confirming the nanotwinned Ag structure. (d) HRTEM image of nanoparticle B with a 5-fold twin; the inset corresponds to the SAED of nanoparticle B [reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Crystal structure model of MAX phase Ti3AlC2 (left), MAX phase Ti3AlC2 projected along the a axis (middle), and MXene phase Ti3C2Tx projected along the a axis (right) with –OH-terminated functional groups. The three Ti sublayers are labelled Ti1, Ti2, and Ti3 [reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. (b) Atomic resolution HAADF-STEM image of a typical Ti3C2Tx sheet with the positions of surface groups labelled by the arrows. (c) HAADF-STEM image of a Ti adatom on a single Ti3C2Tx sheet [reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 12  Comparison between experimental high-resolution HAADF-STEM images and simulated HAADF-STEM images for Ti3C2Tx MXene from a single layer at two different off-tilt orientations: (a) α = 0 and β = 0 mrad; (b) α = 0 and β = −189 mrad. The insets show the projected arrangement of Ti atoms for each case. (c) Atomic-scale HAADF-STEM images of defects in single-layer Ti3C2Tx. Comparison between the experimental HAADF-STEM image, defect crystal structure determined from DFT, and simulated HAADF-STEM image of VTi. HAADF-STEM images of single-layer Ti3C2Tx MXene flakes prepared using etchants with different HF concentrations: (d) 2.7 wt% HF and (e) 5.3 wt%. Single VTi vacancies and vacancy clusters  are indicated by red and blue circles, respectively [reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Side view of a Ti3C2T2 single sheet with the two T surface group locations labelled C1 and C2. (b) Comparison between the experimental C–K edge and calculations performed considering the –OH group (Tx) in configurations C1 or C2. (c) Comparison between the simulated F–K edge in C1 (bold black line), the unoccupied p-DOS of the excited F atom (F* – thin black line), the surface titanium (Tis) d-DOS (red line) and the volume titanium (Tiv) d-DOS (blue dashed line). The Tis and Tiv DOS were divided by 500 and 250 respectively to be plotted on the same scale as the F* DOS [reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 14  Optimized atomic configurations of Ti2CO2 nanoribbons. (a) Top and side view of the armchair Ti2CO2 nanoribbon monolayer with the width parameter of 10. (b) Top and side view of the zigzag Ti2CO2 nanoribbon monolayer with the width parameter of 10. The red, gray and white circles represent O, C and, Ti atoms, respectively. Total density of states (TDOS) and projected density of states (PDOS) on atomic orbitals of Ti, C, and O atoms of (c) asymmetric armchair; and (d) zigzag Ti2CO2 nanoribbons, respectively. The Fermi energy is at zero [reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 15  Calculated stress–strain curves of (a) Ti2C and (b) Ti2CO2. (c) Variations of bond lengths (Ti–C) and the out-of-plane heights, h, of Ti atoms in Ti2C. The arrows indicate the onset strains of instability. The inset shows the atomic structure of Ti2C. (d) Variations of the out-of-plane heights, h-Ti of Ti atoms in Ti2CO2 and the out-of-plane heights, h-O, of O atoms. The inset shows the atomic structure of Ti2CO2 wherein the surface groups are located at the most energetically favorable positions. Bond lengths and out-of-plane heights are normalized by their equilibrium values [reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 16  Structural representation of (a–c) HF10 and (d–f) HF48 MXenes. The Ti, C, O, F, and H are in blue, black, red, green, and pink spheres, respectively. Hydrogen bonds are as black/white dashed lines for O⋯H and F⋯H. All other bonds are as solid lines. Plots (a) and (d) are viewed along the crystallographic c* axis (i.e., the stacking direction). Plots (b) and (e) are top view (the a*–b* surface) of a single isolated sheet, illustrating random occupation of –O/OH/F groups. Plots (c) and (f) highlight the formation of interlayer hydrogen bonds (attractive force) and repulsive interactions when alike terminating atoms are facing each other. All hydrogen bonds shown in the plot are with the lengths of ≥1.5 Å and ≤2.3 Å [reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) UV-vis-NIR transmittance spectra of the spincast Ti3C2Tx film with varying thickness. (b) Sheet conductance vs. film thickness (lower x-axis) and ln(transmittance) (upper x-axis) of spincast Ti3C2Tx films. Red circles represent the thickness of the Ti3C2Tx film deposited on a Si–SiO2 substrate as measured by AFM; the dashed red line is the linear fit with slope σ = 6600 S cm−1. Black solid squares represent the thickness of the Ti3C2Tx film deposited on glass, quartz and polyetherimide, derived from measured transmittance; the black line is the linear fit to the data points of derived thickness with slope σ = 6500 ± 800 S cm−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (c) Sheet resistance vs. transmittance at 550 nm of Ti3C2Tx sprayed from ethanol and water solutions. The inset shows the low sheet resistance region. (d) Change in % T of Ti3C2Tx films due to chemical intercalation (positive change indicates an increase in % T as compared to pristine Ti3C2Tx films) [reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.].	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Time dependence of MB (C0 = 0.05 mg mL−1) and AB80 (C0 = 0.06 mg mL−1) concentrations in aqueous Ti3C2Tx suspensions in the absence of light [reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. (b) Schematic of hydroxyl trap, top view of Ti3C2(O2H2−2mPbm) structure when Pb coverage is 1/9 ML. S1–S6 represent the different atom sites of the hydroxyl [reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society]. TEM images of (c) E. coli and (d) B. subtilis treated with 200 μg mL−1 of Ti3C2Tx for 4 h. The cell wall stripped down after exposure to Ti3C2Tx nanosheets (red arrows b and d), Ti3C2Tx nanosheets tightly adsorbed around the cells and entered the cells (red arrows a and c). The intracellular densities of both cells decreased and Ti3C2Tx attached to the cellular membrane of both bacteria (red arrows b and d) [reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Permittivity (real (ε′) and imaginary (ε′′)) and the loss tangent (tanδ) versus frequency for composites of the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase, Ti3C2Tx, and annealed Ti3C2Tx in a wax matrix with 50 wt% loading. (b) Schematic of the proposed EMI shielding mechanism. Incoming EM waves (orange arrows) strike the surface of a MXene flake. Because reflection occurs before absorption, part of the EM waves is immediately reflected from the surface owing to many charge carriers from the highly conducting surface (magenta arrows), whereas induced local dipoles, resulting from termination groups, help with absorption of the incident waves passing through the MXene structure. Transmitted waves with less energy are then subjected to the same process when they encounter the next MXene flake, giving rise to multiple internal reflections (dashed black arrows), as well as more absorption. Each time an EM wave is transmitted through a MXene flake, its intensity is substantially decreased, resulting in an overall attenuated or eliminated EM wave [reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Rate performance of the TiO2/Ti2CTx hybrid obtained by partially oxidizing Ti2CTx with H2O2 (ca. 5 minutes of contact time) at various current densities [reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. (b) Cycling stability of Ti3C2Tx at 1C and the Ti3C2Tx/CNF composite at 1C and 100C. The inset shows the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) plots of Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx/CNF composite [reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry]. (c) CV curves of PVP–Sn4+@Ti3C2Tx at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society]. (d) Schematics of synthesis processes for the fabrication of free-standing and flexible Ti3C2Tx/TMO hybrid films through sandwich-like assembly by alternating filtration or spray coating methods or an in situ growth method [reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2016 Elsevier].	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Ti K-edge XANES spectra of Ti3C2Tx at −0.4 V (blue line) and 0.1 V (green line), together with those of TiO (red line) and TiO2 (black line). (b) Average Ti oxidation state determination in Ti3C2Tx at various applied potentials (see inset), using the Ti K-edge energy shift of the reference TiO and TiO2 compounds [reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (c) Digital photograph showing the transferred L-s-Ti3C2Tx MXene MSC on flexible scotch tape, and the corresponding (d) CVs, (e) charge–discharge curves, and (f) variation in areal capacitances with scan rates [reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 22  Optimized geometries of Ti3C2X (a), NaxTi3C2X (b), and AlxTi3C2X (c) from the side view. The DFT calculations were performed with a modified model based on experimental results and indicated that the Na ions can easily diffuse in Ti3C2X. (d) Annular bright-field (ABF) image of Ti3C2X observed along the a/b axis. Two C atomic layers (labelled with purple arrows) interleave into three Ti-atomic layers (labelled with blue arrows) with a sequence of Ti(s)–C–Ti(c)–C–Ti(s), forming an edge-shared TiC6 octahedral stacking. The functional groups such as O and/or F atoms (labelled with red arrows) prefer to stay on top of the Ti(c) atoms, instead of the topmost sites of the C atoms on both sides of the Ti3C2 layer. (e) ABF image of Ti3C2X electrodes upon Na intercalation with a cutoff potential of 0.0 V. The inset shows that Na ions are intercalated into Ti3C2X from the surface, fully occupying the interlayers and remained on top of the C atoms rather than on top of the Ti(s) or Ti(c) atoms in the Ti3C2X layer. Moreover, double Na-atomic layers (labelled with double yellow arrows) are observed in one interlayer of the fully intercalated sample. (f) ABF image of Ti3C2X upon Al intercalation. Intercalation of the Al ions (labelled with green arrows) induces horizontal sliding of the Ti3C2X monolayer [reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Polarization curves and (b) Tafel plots of TCCN, IrO2/C, Ti3C2, and g-C3N4 in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (scan rate: 0.5 mV s−1). The inset in panel (a) optical image of TCCN directly used as the OER electrode operating at 1.70 V with generated bubbles on the surface indicating the formation of O2 gas. Dashed line in (a) polarization curve of TCCN after 5000 potential cycles (scan rate: 100 mV s−1). (c) Chronoamperometric response at a constant potential of 1.65 V (Ej=10 of TCCN). The inset shows chronopotentiometric response at a constant current density of 10.0 mA cm−2 of TCCN as compared to that of IrO2/C [reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.]. (d) Schematic of formation of the Schottky barrier at the MXene/TiO2 interface [reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.].	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta06772g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
