Peculiar piezoelectricity of atomically thin planar structures  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR08063E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR08063E
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 2875-2901Peculiar piezoelectricity of atomically thin planar structures

        
          
            Mohammad B. 
            Ghasemian
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Torben 
            Daeneke
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zahra 
            Shahrbabaki
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jiong 
            Yang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Kourosh 
            Kalantar-Zadeh
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney Campus, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: k.kalantar-zadeh@unsw.edu.au
bSchool of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia
cSchool of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
Received 
      19th September 2019
    , Accepted 15th January 2020First published on 16th January 2020AbstractThe emergence of piezoelectricity in two-dimensional (2D) materials has represented a milestone towards employing low-dimensional structures for future technologies. 2D piezoelectric materials possess unique and unprecedented characteristics that cannot be found in other morphologies; therefore, the applications of piezoelectricity can be substantially extended. By reducing the thickness into the 2D realm, piezoelectricity might be induced in otherwise non-piezoelectric materials. The origin of the enhanced piezoelectricity in such thin planes is attributed to the loss of centrosymmetry, altered carrier concentration, and change in local polarization and can be efficiently tailored via surface modifications. Access to such materials is important from a fundamental research point of view, to observe the extraordinary interactions between free charge carriers, phonons and photons, and also with respect to device development, for which planar structures provide the required compatibility with the large-scale fabrication technologies of integrated circuits. The existence of piezoelectricity in 2D materials presents great opportunities for applications in various fields of electronics, optoelectronics, energy harvesting, sensors, actuators and biotechnology. Additionally, 2D flexible nanostructures with superior piezoelectric properties are distinctive candidates for integration into nano-scale electromechanical systems. Here we fundamentally review the state of the art of 2D piezoelectric materials from both experimental and theoretical aspects and report the recent achievements in the synthesis, characterization and applications of these materials.Mohammad B. GhasemianDr Mohammad Bagher Ghasemian received a MSc degree in analytical chemistry from Iran University of Science & Technology in 2011. He holds a PhD degree in materials science and engineering from the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Australia. Currently, he is a postdoctoral research associate in the School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW, Australia, under the supervision of Prof. Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh focusing on the preparation and application of 2D materials, liquid metals, piezoelectric materials and device fabrication.Torben DaenekeDr Torben Daeneke received his PhD in chemistry from Monash University, Australia in 2012. After graduating, he held postdoctoral appointments at the CSIRO and at RMIT University (Australia). He received a RMIT Vice Chancellor's postdoctoral fellowship in 2015. In 2018 he joined RMIT's School of Engineering as a faculty member and is now a senior lecturer. His research interests span from the chemistry of liquid metals over the synthesis and functionalisation of 2D materials to materials for energy and electronic applications.Zahra ShahrbabakiZahra Shahrbabaki is a PhD student in the School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at the University of Sydney, Australia. She received a bachelor's degree in chemical engineering from the University of Tehran, Iran, in 2018. Her current research interests include the synthesis and characterization of novel materials for the assembly of electronic devices and sensors.Jiong YangDr Jiong Yang is a postdoctoral research associate under the supervision of Prof. Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in Sydney, Australia. Before joining UNSW, he earned his PhD degree from the Australian National University. He has published over 20 highly cited peer-reviewed journal papers and book chapters on the characterization and device fabrication of two-dimensional semiconductors. His research interests include two-dimensional semiconductors, liquid metals, nano-fabrication, nano-photonics, and optoelectronic applications.Kourosh Kalantar-ZadehKourosh Kalantar-Zadeh is a professor of chemical engineering at the University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. He is also a Laureate Fellow of the Australian Research Council. He has co-authored >425 research articles and reviews. Prof. Kalantar-Zadeh is a member of the editorial boards of several journals including Applied Materials Today, ACS Applied Nano Materials, ACS Sensors, Advanced Materials Technologies, Nano-Micro Letters and ACS Nano. He is internationally recognised for his work on sensors, two-dimensional materials and liquid metals. He was a recipient of the 2017 IEEE Sensor Council Achievement and 2018 ACS Advances in Measurement Science Lectureship Awards.
1. Introduction
The piezoelectric effect, which was discovered in 1880 by the Curie brothers, is defined as the capability of a material to convert mechanical stimuli into electrical signals and vice versa.1 Generally, it is believed that piezoelectricity only appears in materials with a bandgap which also do not feature centrosymmetry in their crystal structures.2 In metals, electrostatic forces between ions are screened by itinerant electrons. Additionally, the ferroelectric switching in metals is ruled out by screening, which excludes the external electric fields. Hence, metals do not possess piezoelectricity since polarization charges are fully screened due to the high electron concentration. However, this view has been questioned when spontaneous polarization and ferroelectricity were found in metallic WTe2 by Fei et al., suggesting a metal is also able to exhibit piezoelectricity, as if a material is ferroelectric it is piezoelectric too.3 Deformation within piezoelectric materials, due to an external force, results in the distortion of the crystal lattice and consequently the generation of an electrical potential. Based on dimensionality, piezoelectric nanostructures are classified into four main categories of zero-dimensional (0D), one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D), and three-dimensional (3D) materials, as shown in Fig. 1.4 The definition of 0D piezoelectricity is a new concept. Basically, it refers to nanomaterials such as nanodots, nanodispersions, heterogeneous particle arrays, uniform particle arrays, hollow spheres and core–shell quantum dots that can be assembled together in order to establish the base for other types of piezoelectric nanostructures.5
 Fig. 1  (a–d) Schematic views of zero- to three-dimensional piezoelectric nanostructures. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
0D nanoparticles present high surface area, strong piezoelectric properties and intrinsic single domain; however, their practical application is limited due to assembly complications.6 As an instance, the formation of single domains with a high piezoresponse has been observed in arrays of PbTiO3 nanodots. The size dependency exploration on the piezoelectric properties of these nanodots revealed a decrease in the piezoelectric coefficient with increasing lateral size, while nanodots with diameters of approximately 10 nm preserve ferroelectricity.7 1D piezoelectric materials, such as nanowires, nanobelts, nanotubes and nanorods, usually have a diameter of less than 100 nm, which are either intrinsically piezoelectric or become piezoelectric when they lose their centrosymmetry in one or two directions.4,8,9 2D piezoelectric materials, which are planar structures with nanometer thicknesses, are formed from intrinsically piezoelectric materials or those which lose their centrosymmetry in one direction when thinned down. Both 1D and 2D piezoelectric nanostructures are used as building blocks of energy harvesters, catalytic systems, electronic devices and sensors.4,10–12
Many layered materials have been identified that feature strong in-plane bonds and weak van der Waals interlayer coupling. These layered van der Waals materials are tempting candidates for splitting off individual half unit cell thick or thicker layers through exfoliation in the search for 2D piezoelectric sheets.13 Extensive investigations of 2D materials revealed that many of them possess unique properties, which offer new opportunities to the realm of piezoelectricity, including high crystallinity paired with the exceptional ability to sustain enormous deformation/strain before failure, as well as the reduction of centrosymmetry, appearance of new electronic states and possibility of surface modifications that affect the bulk of the 2D structure.14 In contrast to 1D and bulk piezoelectric structures, 2D piezoelectric materials can also be easily integrated with conventional surface electronic technologies, which allows the incorporation of piezoelectric devices for practical applications.15,16
Out of the thirty-two described 3D crystal classes, 21 crystal classes are non-centrosymmetric, while in four 2D crystal classes, including cubic, rectangular, hexagonal and oblique, the inversion symmetry can be broken by reducing the thickness from 3D to 2D of the same material composition.17 The opportunity of inducing non-centrosymmetry when a layered crystal is thinned down, especially to monolayer thickness, offers access to a vast family of new materials for creating 2D piezoelectric structures. While some bulk materials, including many transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), are centrosymmetric, they may reveal a broken centrosymmetry after thinning down to a single layer, due to the loss of the inversion centre. This can be achieved for materials that contain at least two van der Waals layers in their unit cell, with the inversion point being within the van der Waals gap. In contrast, monolayer graphene preserves its inversion symmetry, since the inversion centre resides within the central monolayer.14 Altogether, the interactions between layers within stratified materials can be divided into London interactions, hydrogen bonds and interstitial cations. A wide range of compounds such as oxides, hydroxides, carbides, nitrides, halides, chalcogenides and phosphates can be prepared into a layered form,18 and the search for 2D piezoelectric materials has so far been limited to their exfoliated form.
Raman features and phonon modes have been used for studying characteristics such as thickness, feasibility of exfoliation, stability and crystal structure of layered piezoelectric materials.18,19 Scattering and transport of the carriers in 2D TMDCs are ruled by the material's planar structure, while the mobility of the carriers is mainly influenced by the following scattering mechanisms: (i) optical and acoustic phonon scattering, (ii) surface interface phonon scattering, (iii) Coulomb scattering at charged impurities and (iv) roughness scattering.20,21 On the other hand, diverse factors such as carrier density, effective carrier mass, layer thickness, temperature, and phonon and electronic band structures also influence the degree that scattering mechanisms affect the mobility of carriers.20

Ab initio calculations have determined the phonon dispersion in WS2 and MoS2.22 The obtained results correlated with the experimental Raman spectra of MoS2 indicate that the main Raman peaks match with the out-of-plane A1g mode and the in-plane E1u and E12g phonon modes. By decreasing the layer thickness of MoS2 the position of the peaks slightly shifted due to the effect of the neighbouring layers on Coulomb interactions.20 These peak shifts allow Raman spectroscopy to identify changes in the thickness of thin materials. Similarly, the layer thickness of atomically thin h-BN was identified relative to the intensity of the E2g optical phonon mode.23 More interestingly, the shifts in the out-of-plane and in-plane phonon coupling modes of 2D MoS2 were employed to study its sensitivity against relative humidity.24 By increasing the relative humidity to a certain level, the position of the A1g peaks showed a blue shift due to the absorption of water molecules and change of electron–phonon interactions while the E2g peaks remained unchanged. The intensity and position of Raman peaks also strongly depend on the applied strain since it changes the crystal phonons. Generally, compressive and tensile strains lead to phonon hardening (blue shift) and phonon softening (red shift), respectively. In the case of 2D materials, strain enhances the intensity of the Raman spectra which can be used for studying the properties of piezoelectric materials.25,26 The stability of 2D Janus group-VI chalcogenides has been investigated through the molecular dynamics and phonon dispersion calculations.27 Accordingly, MoSSe, WSeTe, WSTe, and WSSe monolayers are stable while MoSTe and MoSeTe monolayers were recognised as unstable. Also, based on the formation energy and phonon dispersion estimations, all the nine members of 2D Janus group-III chalcogenides (GaInS2, GaInSe2, GaInTe2, Ga2SSe, Ga2SeTe, Ga2STe, In2SSe, In2SeTe, and In2STe) are stable.27
In spite of the fact that a few reviews have demonstrated piezoelectricity in two dimensions, they generally lack the depiction of important theoretical characteristics and data mining in the field of 2D piezoelectric materials. A recent review by Liu et al.28 briefly demonstrated the key advances of 2D piezoelectric materials, especially in the fields of piezotronics and piezophototronics. However, the absence of theoretical studies and data mining for identifying 2D piezoelectric candidates is sensed. This paper expands upon the recent progress and most important aspects of 2D piezoelectric materials from the fundamental principles to applications. We outline 2D piezoelectric materials and review the main preparation methods followed by the theoretical and experimental approaches of measuring piezoelectricity in 2D materials. Theoretical predictions of piezoelectricity and the diverse compounds discovered through data mining are presented. 2D compounds that are the topic of recent intense research and their applications are discussed.
2. Piezoelectric materials
The discovery of piezoelectricity in 2D materials29 led to new horizons for energy harvesting systems, electronics, actuators, and sensors for employing such low-dimensional materials in the next-generation technologies. Although there are many review articles on piezoelectric materials,10,30–34 information about the 2D piezoelectric structures is still sparse. With recent progress in the synthesis methods for materials at atomic levels, piezoelectricity in atomically thin layered materials has drawn more attention. Recent studies have evidenced many promising 2D materials for their piezoelectric properties.2,15,26,35,36 Five important groups of 2D piezoelectric materials including h-BN, TMDCs, groups III and IV monochalcogenides and chemically modified graphene have attracted much interest in the field of piezoelectricity.37–39 It was demonstrated that 2D TMDCs such as 2H-MoS2, 2H-WS2 and 2H-MoSe2 present stronger piezoelectric coefficients than h-BN and engineered graphene and some of them, specifically 2H-MoTe2, show remarkable piezoelectric coefficients even larger than those of 3D wurtzite materials including bulk GaN and AlN.37,40 Based on first-principles calculations,41 layered group III monochalcogenides including InSe, GaS and GaSe were also recognized to be piezoelectric in monolayer form. The structure of this group of monolayered materials is quite similar to that of 2H-TMDCs and both groups possess a D3h point group symmetry with no inversion centre and thus non-zero piezoelectric response.
Group IV monochalcogenide 2D piezoelectrics comprising GeS, GeSe, SnS and SnSe possess a C2V point group to offer colossal piezoelectricity. First principles simulations predict that monolayer group IV monochalcogenides can show strong piezoelectric coefficients approximately one to two orders of magnitude larger than those of other 2D piezoelectrics such as 2H-MoS2 and h-BN.42 The strong piezoelectricity in monolayer group IV monochalcogenides arises from the stable non-centrosymmetric structure of monolayers and their flexible puckered C2V symmetries along the armchair direction.43 In spite of the fact that graphene possesses many distinctive physical and mechanical properties, this 2D nanomaterial is not intrinsically piezoelectric due to its inversion symmetry factor; however, piezoelectricity can be induced in graphene through physical or chemical modifications (engineering) which will be discussed in the following sections. Although the piezoelectric polarization of 2D materials, such as h-BN and MoS2, is usually narrowed to the in-plane orientation and odd number of layers, as an interesting group III–VI chalcogenide material, α-In2Se3 shows both out-of-plane and in-plane piezoelectricity proven by theoretical calculations and experimental studies.44,45 The experimental studies assigned this in-plane/out-of-plane coexistence to the noncentrosymmetry in α-In2Se3 which originates from the hexagonal stacking and offers an exceptional opportunity to take advantage of both directional and nondirectional piezoelectricity in devices. According to the piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) measurements, the d33 piezoelectric coefficient in α-In2Se3 is increased from 0.34 to 5.6 pm V−1 by the accumulation of layers from single to bulk without the odd/even effect and this layer dependency of in-plane and both out-of-plane piezoelectric characteristics has been associated with the substrate clamping effect in α-In2Se3.44
According to the principles of crystallography, the piezoelectric effect appears in all non-centrosymmetric point groups except for the cubic class 432. In 2D piezoelectric materials, piezoelectricity generally originates through three phenomena: (1) loss of centrosymmetry, (2) charge delocalization and (3) surface modification,15,46 which are discussed below.
2.1. Centrosymmetry impact
Material properties and their application are significantly correlated with and impacted by their crystal symmetry. To induce the piezoelectric effect, the material needs to have a nonzero electronic band gap and a nonsymmetric crystal structure.47,48 The lack of centrosymmetry determines the piezoelectric moduli and certain optical properties of the material. The symmetry of single or few layered materials might be different from that of their bulk counterparts, leading to new material properties that arise in 2D nanostructures. Many bulk materials lose their inversion centre when downsized to 2D, specifically to monolayer dimensions. Reduction of the dimensionality to 2D crystal structures significantly increases the anisotropy and reduces symmetry elements, which promote piezoelectricity in 2D structures such as buckled hexagonal and 2H structures with broken inversion symmetry.37,49,50 2H-MoS2 and h-BN are well-known examples, which possess an inversion centre and nonpiezoelectric nature in the bulk structure, while their individual monolayers present piezoelectricity due to the lack of centrosymmetry, as shown in Fig. 2.14,29,51 Moreover, the breaking of inversion symmetry and piezoelectricity are also observed in odd number of layers since all odd-rank tensor properties, such as the third-rank piezoelectric tensor properties, might be mathematically nonzero.47 A computational study48 suggested that many bulk structures with different point groups lose their centrosymmetries upon exfoliation to monolayers and statistically the percentage of structures with no centre of inversion grew from 18% in bulk crystals to 43% in monolayer counterparts for the same structure (Fig. 3a), which may potentially offer output power response, if possessing a nonzero electronic band gap, as depicted in Fig. 3b.
 Fig. 2  (a, b) Top views and (c, d) side views of atomically thin h-BN and 2H-MoS2, respectively. (B, N, Mo and S atoms are red, blue, silver and yellow, respectively.) The arrows show the direction of piezoelectric polarization. Hexagonal primitive cell and orthorhombic unit cell used in DFT simulations are highlighted in blue and yellow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 3  Computed point groups of the identified layered materials. (a) The point group distribution of layered materials with and without centrosymmetry in the Materials Project database indicating that many bulk materials lose the centre of inversion upon exfoliation into monolayers. (b) Distribution of materials with nonzero band gaps as the essential criteria for piezoelectricity. The symmetry of primary bulk 3D crystals and their corresponding AA-stacked crystals have been shown in red and blue, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
2.2. Delocalization of charges
Changes in the local polarization and lower carrier concentration are the other possible origins of creation or enhancement of piezoelectricity in materials after thinning down from the bulk to 2D nanostructures.15 The piezoelectric effect is highly correlated with the direction of polarization, for example, the piezoelectric effect is limited in the c-axis of ZnO and just exists in the in-plane direction with three-fold rotation symmetry for MoS2. ZnO nanosheets with a wurtzite structure retain their hexagonal structures even when they thinned down to a few atomic layers and thus the crystal non-centrosymmetry and piezoelectricity are preserved.52 As shown in Fig. 4a, the centres of negative and positive ions are displaced relative to the stress applied along the apex of the tetrahedron, which motivate the piezoelectric polarization and piezoelectricity along the c-axis.53 CdS is another example of a material in which piezoelectricity increases by thinning due to the delocalization of charges. CdS ultrathin films (2–3 nm) and ZnO nanosheets (2 nm) showed piezoelectric coefficients (d33) of 32.8 and 23.7 pm V−1, respectively, which are almost two to three times larger than those of their bulk counterparts.53–55
 Fig. 4  (a) Hexagonal structure of the ZnO nanomaterial with Zn–O–Zn stacking while the O atom is in the centre of the tetrahedron before compression (left) while a piezoelectric field is generated when the unit cell of ZnO is compressed by an external force (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of a graphene layer with oxygen termination on a SiO2 substrate (left) and generation of oriented dipolar surface states adjacent to the substrate surface as the origin of the piezoresponse due to the chemical interaction between carbon and oxygen atoms (right). Reproduced from ref. 62. CC BY 4.0. (c) The emergence of polarization in a triangular-hole graphene nanosheet under the applied strain and (d) a finite element model showing the qualitative nature of distribution of strain towards the triangular hole in a thin sheet based on the linearized elasticity theory. Reprinted from ref. 66, with the permission of AIP Publishing. (e) Presence of piezoelectricity in an engineered graphene single sheet doped with different atoms on the surface due to broken inversion symmetry. Polarization changes perpendicular to the graphene sheet by applying an equibiaxial in-plane strain to graphene which can be used for determining the e31 piezocoefficient. The inset indicates the direction of positive polarization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. (f) Different configurations of piezoelectric graphene doped with BN. R and W are the radius of BN rings and the width of the separating wall, respectively, and the enclosed areas show the unit cell of each configuration. (g) D3h and C2V point symmetry defects (holes) in graphene which break the inversion symmetry of graphene. Unit cells are enclosed with black lines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (h) Top and side views of surface-modified h-BN with hydrogen and/or fluorine atoms; the left and right groups are chair and boat forms respectively, and the unit cells are shown with rectangles. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. 
The carrier concentration (nc) can be obtained using nc = 1/ρeμe where ρ, e and μe are resistivity, electronic charge and electron mobility, respectively. Previous studies implied that the piezoelectricity in materials significantly depends on the carrier concentration.56 For example, CdS thin films synthesized by chemical vapor deposition exhibited a carrier concentration of ∼1012–1015 cm−3.54 By increasing the carrier concentration from 109 to 1018 cm−3 in CdS, the piezoelectric coefficient dropped by 60%.57,58 It was suggested that the stronger piezoelectricity in CdS ultrathin films arises from a lower carrier concentration, free boundary and change in local polarization due to the small dimensionalities with a large surface area, and charge and defect redistribution near the surfaces.53,54,59
2.3. Surface modification
Piezoelectricity in 2D materials can originate from surface and structural modifications. A non-centrosymmetric structure and subsequently piezoelectric characteristics can be produced in 2D materials through appropriate crystal engineering and material modification. The most widely studied monolayer material, graphene,60,61 typically possesses an inversion symmetry and is not naturally piezoelectric. However, single-layer graphene deposited on SiO2 grating substrates presented a considerable vertical piezoelectric coefficient of 1.4 nm V−1. As shown in Fig. 4b, this piezo-response was associated with the broken symmetry of the crystal structure due to the chemical interaction of carbon atoms in graphene with the oxygen atoms of the underlying SiO2 substrate. This chemical interaction induces a non-zero dipole moment and polarization in the system.62 Similarly, there are other examples of generating piezoelectricity in 2D graphene by selective chemical modification or introducing structural defects.39,63–65 The flexoelectricity concept has been introduced to rationalize the emerging piezoelectricity in porous graphene sheets having holes with defined symmetries and shapes. The average strain gradient around the hole is non-zero due to the broken inversion symmetry; therefore, flexoelectricity causes local polarization and generally a non-zero net polarization in the graphene sheet, as described in Fig. 4c and d.66 Theoretical67–70 and experimental71–73 studies have proven that piezoelectricity can be engineered into graphene through the selective adsorption of adatoms on the surface. Calculations carried out by Ong et al. showed that employing H, Li, K and F on single-layer graphene could result in the change of polarization (Fig. 4e) and the generation of piezoelectricity in graphene by breaking the inversion symmetry, leading to piezoelectric coefficients that are comparable with those of 3D piezoelectric materials such as wurtzite BN and GaN, as listed in Table 1. The highest d31 piezoelectric coefficient in graphene was obtained after modification with F and Li whereas doping with Li or K resulted in the highest e31 piezoelectric coefficient.39,60 2D graphene also becomes piezoelectric by substituting its carbon pairs with different patterns of BN, which transforms the point symmetry of graphene from D6h (centrosymmetric) to D3h (non-centrosymmetric). Similarly, hole defects may induce D3h or C2v point symmetries, which break the inversion symmetry in graphene, as shown in Fig. 4f and g.63 Although h-BN monolayers are intrinsically piezoelectric, chemical doping such as fluorination and hydrogenation may be applied on both sides of h-BN to induce flatness distortion and consequently produce new in-plane and out-of-plane dipole moments and piezoelectric responses in h-BN (Fig. 4h).74
Table 1 Piezoelectric coefficients (d31 in pm V−1 and e31 in pC m−1) in graphene after chemical doping with K, Li, H, and F adatoms calculated by density functional theory (DFT). Bulk wurtzite BN76 and GaN77 are listed for comparison. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society




Atom(s)

d
31


e
31





K
0.23
52


Li
0.15
55


H
0.11
20


F
0.0018
−26


F, Li
0.30
30


H, F
0.034
−31


3D BN
0.33
—


3D GaN
1.05
—




2.4. Piezoelectric polarization direction
Polarization is a crucial concept in piezoelectric materials for understanding their response to the externally applied stimuli. By the application of an electric field, dipoles are created by changing the position of electrons and nuclei and consequently the material undergoes polarization. In addition to the electric field, polarization occurs in piezoelectric materials by the application of a mechanical stress. Negative and positive charges neutralize each other; therefore, piezoelectric materials do not show any current flow under zero-load conditions. However, by applying compacting or stretching forces, a voltage appears due to the imbalance of the dipole moments.75 The selection of piezoelectric materials for particular applications requires a standard mean to identify the direction of polarization and set the electrical and mechanical axes of operation. These axes are described by numbers, for instance, 1, 2 and 3 corresponding to the x, y and z axes, respectively, which are set during the poling process.75,78 The polarization direction aligns with the direction of the applied electric field through the poling process when the material is subjected to a sufficiently large electric field. The poled materials retain the polarization direction even after the external field is ceased and exhibit piezoelectric properties.79 Applying a mechanical tension or compression on a poled piezoelectric material alters the dipole moments and generates voltage. The direction of the poling field leads the direction of the electrical and mechanical axes. When a compression happens along the polarization direction or a tension happens perpendicular to the polarization direction, a voltage with the same polarity of the poling voltage is generated. On the other hand, compressions perpendicular to or tensions along the polarization direction lead to a voltage with opposite polarity to that of the poling voltage. These behaviours are known as generator actions.80
The direction of piezoelectric polarization is sequentially switched by changing the orientation of the applied strain tensor. Therefore, the mechanical and electrical behaviours of piezoelectric materials can be coupled through the Sij = dkijEk equation where s, d and E represent the second rank strain tensor, piezoelectric coefficient and electric field, respectively (i, j and k stand for x, y and z of the Cartesian frame).81 Piezoelectricity in 2D materials is highly correlated with the direction of polarization, which can be in-plane, out-of-plane or both and can potentially play an important role in the development of future planar devices if harnessed correctly and efficiently. While many 2D materials show in-plane intrinsic piezoelectricity, out-of-plane ferroelectricity and piezoelectricity are more straightforward and applicable for circuit designs such as nanogenerators, nonvolatile memory and photovoltaic devices.82
TMDCs, h-BN and graphene nitride possess in-plane piezoelectricity. As an example of TMDC materials, the piezoelectric property of MoS2 is only restricted to the in-plane (d11) direction and no out-of-plane (d33) direction is found since MoS2 monolayers preserve the ideal symmetry feature along the vertical z-axis, as shown in Fig. 2b and d.51 Also, due to the unique hexagonal structure, the in-plane piezoelectric field vector in 2D MoS2 has three equal directions, which are along the three-fold symmetry axes.
In contrast to graphene, h-BN shows intrinsic piezoelectricity with a strong in-plane direction due to the alternating sequence of nitride and boron atoms in the hexagonal array.36 Although the noncentrosymmetrical structure and the lack of an inversion centre are known as the basic origins of intrinsic piezoelectricity, extrinsic piezoelectricity and polarized dipoles can be induced in 2D materials by applying special interfaces, e.g. doped graphene with out-of-plane piezoelectricity, which will be discussed in the following section.
Some materials such as rhombohedral α-In2Se3 and Janus MoSSe exhibit more intricate piezoelectricity in both in-plane and out-of-plane directions.82–84 In the synthesis of 2D Janus MoSSe through plasma stripping and thermal selenisation, one layer of S atoms in MoS2 can be artificially replaced by a layer of Se atoms, which creates a broken out-of-plane symmetry and vertical piezoelectricity in 2D MoSSe, which are not observed in pristine 2D MoS2. Besides that, such a Janus MoSSe monolayer takes advantage of the in-plane piezoelectric effect due to atomic planar projections similar to those of the TMDC family.84
3. Preparation techniques of 2D piezoelectric materials
To date, many synthesis methods have been developed for the preparation of 2D materials which mainly can be divided into two main groups of “top-down” and “bottom-up” methods. In the first approach, bulk hosts of layered materials are delaminated into their elemental layers, while materials are grown “atom by atom” under special conditions in the latter method.85 Although various synthesis approaches have been developed,43 two major methods of exfoliation from the bulk and direct growth by vapor phase deposition are the dominant methods. In this section, different synthesis methods for the synthesis of 2D materials are discussed with the emphasis on those materials with piezoelectric properties.
3.1. Exfoliation
Generally, exfoliation is the process of dividing bulk layered materials into their mono- or few-layered flakes by overcoming the van der Waals interactions between the adjacent layers.86,87 Bulk layered materials are defined as compounds with periodic layered structures held together by weak interlayer noncovalent attractions and strong intralayer covalent bonds.18 Exfoliation techniques have developed considerably88,89 and new exfoliation derivative methods such as mechanical cleavage,13 ion intercalation90 and surfactant-assisted ultrasonication91 were further developed. During mechanical exfoliation, the interlayer potential energies are reduced by applying an external mechanical force. Mechanical exfoliation techniques gave birth to graphene and the technique was later extended to other related 2D materials such as phosphorene, h-BN, TMDCs and MXenes.13,86,88,92–94
2D materials obtained through mechanical exfoliation are of remarkably high quality with clean surfaces and high crystallinity, and as a result are considered to possess superior physical properties including those which are important for piezoelectricity. However, the large-scale production of 2D materials via exfoliation techniques is limited because of the associated low production rate and small yields of this technique, which might possibly be improved by liquid exfoliation. In this regard, ultrasonic wave agitation has been extensively used for generating cavitation bubbles and breaking up layered crystals, allowing the production of exfoliated nanosheets.18,88 However, such liquid phase techniques interfere with crystallinity and sheet size and will induce surface adsorbents to the final 2D sheets which can severely impact their piezo properties.
As another exfoliation approach, the chemical exfoliation method including solvent-assisted exfoliation or liquid phase exfoliation (LPE)13,92 and ion intercalation assisted exfoliation have been used for the large-scale preparation of 2D materials. Layered compounds such as BN, Bi2Te3, C3N4, MoS2, MoSe2, MoTe2, NbSe2, NiTe2, TaSe2, and WS2 were exfoliated by direct sonication in organic solvents (like isopropanol and N-methylpyrrolidone) and deposited on a large scale or as individual flakes and nanosheets.64,92,95 Inevitably, LPE introduces functional groups and/or reduces the stoichiometry of the as-prepared 2D materials altering the chemical composition from that of the bulk, which might adversely affect their properties.86 Specifically for 2D TMDCs, the intense and invasive LPE methods transform the crystal structure from the dominant 2H structure that does not feature centrosymmetry into semi-metallic 1T polymorphs which feature weak piezoelectricity and high electrical conductivity.
The exfoliation energies of many parent bulk materials were estimated through high-throughput screening of material databases to identify probable candidates for exfoliation to 2D materials.18,96 In the process of producing 2D materials, the values of two closely related factors of binding energy between layers (EB) and exfoliation energy (EXF), the required energy for removing an individual layer, are extremely important. Björkman et al.97 estimated the interlayer binding and exfoliation energies in a large number of layered materials by different methods. Calculations showed that the difference between EB and EXF is small and less than 4%; thus interlayer binding energy can be assumed to be equal to the exfoliation energy in all layered materials. Moreover, computational results indicated that these energies for most systems, independent of their electronic structure, are between 13–21 meV Å−2, as shown in Fig. 5a–e.97 A topology-scaling algorithm search in the Materials Project crystal structure database by Ashton et al. nominated 826 stable layered materials that can be exfoliated to 2D monolayers, while most of them (680) showed an exfoliation energy lower than 150 meV per atom, the threshold of exfoliation energies for experimentally existent materials, as demonstrated in Fig. 5f.98 Similarly, a high-throughput computational study determined 1825 candidates for exfoliation with 1036 easily exfoliable and 789 potentially exfoliable layered materials.99
 Fig. 5  (a) The process of increasing the interlayer distance for calculating the interlayer binding energy and (b) the corresponding binding energy curve. (c) Interlayer binding energies for a series of materials calculated by random-phase approximation (RPA) and the Vydrov and van Voorhis (VV10) methods. (d) Comparison of the results of different DFT-based approaches for treating van der Waals (vdW) interactions to assess their relative deviations from RPA. Reprinted figure from ref. 97. Copyright (2012) by the American Physical Society. (f) The exfoliation energy histogram calculated by DFT for 826 layered materials and (e) their comparison with experimentally synthesised 2D MoS2 and SnSe. Reprinted figure from ref. 98. Copyright (2017) by the American Physical Society. 
3.2. Chemical vapour deposition
Atomically thin films or flakes can be prepared directly on specific substrates by depositing the desired compounds from their gaseous phase or through reactions of gaseous precursors in the vapor phase, leading to deposition methods which offer 2D highly controllable layers that can achieve large area coverage with good uniformity and high crystallinity. Such layers can be of suitable physical quality to offer the predicted piezoelectricity of specific 2D systems. Additionally, the direct formation of 2D layers on a substrate that features different crystalline and chemical properties from the deposited compound can provide an inherent non-symmetry that can boost the piezoelectric coupling coefficients. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD), as one of the main approaches of vapor phase deposition, introduces thin layers of materials by the chemical reaction of volatile precursors on substrates.100 Due to controllable adjustment of the thickness and acceptable electronic properties, different types of 2D piezoelectric materials such as In2Se3, MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2101–105 have been synthesized using the CVD technique. CVD is frequently considered to be the most practical approach for synthesizing TMDC monolayers. Early reports on the synthesis of MoS2 were based on the growth of multilayer materials from S and MoO3 precursors106,107 or through the sulfurization of a Mo-deposited substrate.108

Fig. 6 schematically describes the CVD principles of synthesizing 2H-MoS2 by the chemical reaction of MoO3 and S on the Si/SiO2 substrate at elevated temperature.
 Fig. 6  (a) The schematic of chemical vapour deposition of MoS2. 1 to 5 legends in order are: MoO3 nanopowder, sulfur powder, horizontal furnace, quartz substrates for deposition and quartz tube. Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Optical images of CVD-grown (b) MoS2 (reproduced from ref. 109. CC BY 4.0) and (c) MoSe2 (reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society). 
The technique may also produce 2H-MoSe2 when using the Se precursor.103,110 In addition to the mentioned advantages of CVD over exfoliation methods, such as large-scale preparation and well-dispersed monolayers on the substrate, CVD also provides a route to directly grow layered heterostructures with clean interfaces, which are attractive for piezotronic device applications.
3.3. Liquid metal-based printing
Many 2D materials including Ga2S3,111 GaS, In2S3,112 SnO,113 and γ-AlOOH114 that are not accessible with existing synthesis methods can be feasibly prepared through the liquid metal-based reaction route using low melting point metals such as gallium and its eutectic alloys.115 Recently, Zavabeti et al.116 developed a unique technique to synthesis large area ultrathin 2D metal oxides using nontoxic eutectic gallium-based liquid alloys as a reaction environment at room temperature to isolate metal oxide nanosheets, including Al2O3, HfO2 and Gd2O3, from the liquid metal surface through two synthesis approaches. The first is a van der Waals (vdW) exfoliation technique117 in which the liquid metal droplet is touched by a solid substrate, where the oxide skin is isolated due to the absence of macroscopic forces between the oxide skin and the parent liquid metal (Fig. 7a and b). In the second method, pressurized air passes through the liquid metal placed under deionized water, as shown in Fig. 7c. The oxide nanosheets that formed due to the reaction between the injected air and the liquid metal are dispersed into the aqueous solution as the air bubbles are released. 2D piezoelectric GaPO4 which is not achievable by conventional exfoliation was also synthesized by a liquid metal-based printing process followed by a secondary vapor phase reaction.118 Ga2O3 nanosheets were first exfoliated directly from liquid gallium onto a substrate (SiO2/Si wafer) and subsequently phosphatized during a chemical vapor reaction in a tube furnace with phosphoric acid to result in GaPO4 with a thickness of 1.1 nm, as shown in Fig. 8a–c. Employing PFM measurements and density functional theory simulation, significant experimental and theoretical vertical piezoelectric coefficients of 7.5 and 8.5 pm V−1, respectively, were observed for these unit cell thick GaPO4 nanosheets.
 Fig. 7  (a) Thin layers of Al2O3, Gd2O3 and HfO2 shown on the cross-section of the liquid metal. (b) vdW exfoliation technique through the touch print of a solid substrate on the surface of the liquid metal which allows the transfer of interfacial oxide layer to the substrate. (c) Schematic description of the pressurized gas injection method into the liquid metal and bursting of the formed bubbles into the upper solution. A drop-cast resulting sheet has been imaged on a SiO2/Si wafer (right). Adjusted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
 Fig. 8  (a) The exfoliation of a Ga2O3 nanosheet by the vdW 2D printing method from the surface of a gallium liquid metal followed by a phosphatisation step through the chemical vapour phase reaction to produce GaPO4. (b) AFM topography and height profile of the aforementioned GaPO4. (c) d33 values of GaPO4 films with different thicknesses obtained through PFM measurements and DFT simulations. Reproduced from ref. 118. CC BY 4.0. (d) The MoS2 monolayer produced in the liquid phase using an asymmetric microcentrifugation surface acoustic wave device comprising LiNbO3 chips connected to the PDMS reservoir. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (e) Low-resolution bright-field TEM image of two stacking InSe nanosheets directly grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and (f) AFM image of the triangular InSe monolayer inside the square. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
3.4. Other methods
There are also other types of deposition methods based on molecular beam epitaxy and physical deposition techniques that can result in high quality 2D crystals that should be tested for creating piezoelectric materials. Hydrothermal methods and salt-assisted and graphene-assisted synthesis techniques are further possibilities for the preparation of 2D materials that can be potentially used for making 2D piezoelectric layers.27,85
High quality MoSe2 thin films were successfully grown layer-by-layer from monolayer to eight layers by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and in situ angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) was used to study the transition from indirect to direct bandgap in MoSe2 thin films with variable thickness.119 Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is classified as a typical physical bottom-up approach for the deposition of complicated oxide thin films;120 however, this technique has been recently used for growing 2D materials owing to the precise control of thickness and stoichiometry, which are potential piezoelectric candidates.121 Yang et al.120 reported the direct growth wafer-scale synthesis of single phase 2D InSe nanosheets by PLD with a nominal thickness of ∼1 nm (Fig. 8e and f). The PLD technique has also been used for the preparation of 2D 2H-MoS2122–124 and Yb/Er co-doped WSe2.125 An interesting consideration is that the piezoelectricity of layered structures can assist in their exfoliation. Besides the conventional exfoliation methods, piezoelectric MoS2 monolayers were obtained using a compact microcentrifugation surface acoustic wave (SAW) device which applied a concomitant mechanical shear force and electric field for the efficient exfoliation of layered bulk materials, shown in Fig. 8d.126
This developed SAW system presented a remarkable yield per unit time of 3.816% h−1 which is significantly higher than those of other liquid phase exfoliation methods such as probe sonication with an aqueous surfactant (0.625% h−1)95 and liquid exfoliation using a blender with an aqueous surfactant (0.40% h−1).127 Nebulization using SAW devices can also result in high efficiency and ultrafast exfoliation of MoS2.128
4. Characterization of piezoelectricity in 2D materials
By thinning down to the nanoscale, many macroscopic methods are not suitable for the characterization of 2D piezoelectric materials. To date, different approaches have been introduced and developed in both theoretical and experimental areas to study 2D piezoelectric materials. Although each method might be used for understanding a particular aspect of the material, a variety of characterization techniques and their combination are usually employed to ascertain the comprehensive characterization of piezoelectricity in 2D nanomaterials. Density functional theory (DFT), molecular dynamics simulations (MD) and molecular structural mechanics (MSM) can be highlighted as the most commonly used atomistic simulation methods of determining piezoelectricity in 2D materials; meanwhile, experimental techniques such as piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) and direct tensile testing are employed to confirm these properties in parallel with theoretical studies.43 The following section presents a brief review of the simulation and experimental approaches for investigating the piezoelectric properties of 2D materials.
4.1. Theoretical assessments
In parallel with the experimental explorations of new 2D piezoelectric materials, theoretical and simulation research on the piezoelectric characteristics of 2D nanostructures has also emerged, to complement experimental studies on 2D piezoelectric materials.2,49,129–132 Today, many reviews on different types of bulk piezoelectric materials can be found,1,4,8,10,133,134 while experimental studies on 2D piezoelectric materials are limited to a few well-known 2D nanostructures (e.g. h-BN and MoS2)35,89,135–139 and systematic data collection in monolayer symmetries for probing piezoelectricity in 2D materials has been rarely reported. Theoretical calculations and simulations can now predict piezoelectricity in novel 2D materials that has never been demonstrated through experiments. As a result, the gap of knowledge in the domain of 2D piezoelectricity appears to be filling fast through data mining of 2D materials in recent reports. Data mining promotes the fast scanning of all materials in a database to identify many unexplored materials which are often not just confined to the well-studied material families that would have been otherwise unlikely to be recognized through experimental techniques. Recently, several groups of 2D materials such as piezoelectric monolayers, electrode materials and heterostructures have been established on the basis of high-throughput computations and data-mining algorithms.18
Ashton et al.98 carried out a data mining investigation of the Materials Project crystal structure database using a topology-scaling algorithm (TSA) to recognize materials with potential layered motifs in their crystal structures through measuring the sizes of bonded atomic clusters in different unit cells (Fig. 9a). Their search yielded 826 promising layered materials as potential candidates for the production of 2D monolayer structures after exfoliation. The calculated data indicated that some stable planes such as buckled structures, as shown in Fig. 9b, could possess piezoelectricity due to their broken inversion symmetry.
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of a topology-scaling algorithm to find probable materials with layered motifs in their crystal structures. Black circles imply the cluster of bonded atoms in a unit cell while coloured circles represent seven periodic images of the same cluster for a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell of the original cell. Periodic images can bond to each other in 0, 1, 2 or 3 dimensions which define the dimensionality of structural motifs. (b) Buckled structures of GeTe and SnS with broken inversion symmetry that leads to piezoelectricity. Reprinted figure from ref. 98. Copyright (2017) by the American Physical Society. (c) Different groups of weakly bonded solids with 2D subunits and similar chemical compositions found through data mining in the Materials Project database (T: transition metal, Ac: actinides, F: halogens, As; large pnictogens, S: chalcogens and La: lanthanides). (d) Distribution of band gaps for bulk materials consisting of 2D layers estimated by the Kohn–Sham DFT calculation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
Cheon et al.48 carried out an intensive data mining survey on around 50000 inorganic crystals and discovered hundreds of unrecognized low-dimensional layered structures including 325 potential 2D piezoelectric materials. A data mining algorithm was employed to find lattice-commensurate heterostructures and two-dimensional weakly bonded solids in the Materials Project database140 of bulk materials. Their algorithm detected materials composed of 2D structures which were held together through weak bonds such as weakly ionic or van der Waals interactions and determined the dimensionality of van der Waals bonds between the subunits of bulk materials.
The algorithm also monitored the bonding length as a criterion to differentiate covalent and van der Waals bonds, in order to identify how atoms are connected in subunits. Based on this data mining investigation, 23 distinct chemical families consisting of 1173 2D materials with unique chemical formulas were identified while 325 of them were highlighted as potential 2D piezoelectric monolayers owing to the lack of an inversion centre in their single layer crystal structures and non-zero band gap, as described in Fig. 9c, d and 3. 943 out of the total 1173 2D materials have been experimentally synthesized.48

4.1.1. Density functional theory. 
DFT has been employed to scrutinize and measure the properties of 2D materials, such as exfoliation energy, band gap, point group, and optical, physical and piezoelectric properties, and has been proven to be a robust technique.97,98,141,142 DFT simulations also provide the opportunity to predict and explain the origin of piezoelectricity and compare the piezoelectric coefficients of different materials.37,143 First principles DFT calculations indicated the presence of intrinsic piezoelectricity and strong piezoelectric coefficients in group-III monolayer monochalcogenides with an MX stoichiometry (M = Ga or In, X = S or Se).41Fig. 10a shows the atomic structure of 2D GaS from top and side views which is also the representative structure for GaSe and InSe monolayers. DFT-optimized parameters and their corresponding experimental structural parameters of bulk phases including monolayer thickness h, lattice constant a0, band gap Egap and M–M bond length dM–M are listed in Table 2 for the direct comparison of DFT results and experimental parameters. The DFT calculations estimated that GaSe, GaS and InSe monolayers present significant piezoelectric coefficients (2.30, 2.06 and 1.46 pm V−1, respectively) with the same order of magnitude as those of 2H-MoS2 and h-BN indicating that a large piezoresponse can be observed in many 2D materials with a broken centrosymmetry.41 Other studies have also predicted piezoelectricity in graphene oxide and doped graphene. DFT calculations estimated the piezoelectric coefficients to be 0.24, and 0.30 pm V−1 for graphene oxide and doped graphene, respectively.29,39,144
 Fig. 10  (a) Top and side views of the GaS monolayer. Lattice constant, thickness of the monolayer and the distance between two bonded metal atoms are marked with a0, h and dM–M, respectively. The x and y directions correspond to the armchair and zigzag directions of the monolayer, respectively, and the bottom arrow indicates the polarization direction after uniaxial stretching of the monolayer. Reproduced from ref. 149. CC BY 4.0. (b) Periodic trend of d11 in 37 two-dimensional materials within three categories of metal dichalcogenides, metal oxides, and group III–V semiconductors (except PbO which possesses an inversion centre and a null piezoelectric response). (c) Direct relation of d11 in 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (groups 5 and 6) to the ratio of anion and cation polarizabilities. (d) In group III–V compounds, d11 is directly correlated to the anion and cation polarizabilities ratio and the Bader charge and in-plane lattice parameter, except for AlN, InN and GaN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (e) 2D structural transition from a rectangular unit cell with threefold coordinated atoms to a square unit cell with fivefold coordinated atoms in SnS and GeSe monochalcogenide monolayers at Tc. Reprinted figure from ref. 150. Copyright (2003) by the American Physical Society. Molecular dynamics numerical measurements of (f) stress–strain, (g) polarization density–strain and (h) polarization density–electric field of 2D h-BN and MoS2 (symbols). The elastic constant, piezoelectric coefficient and dielectric constant for 2D h-BN and MoS2 (lines) were obtained by applying linear curve fitting on the corresponding results of MD simulations. Reprinted from ref. 151, copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier. 
Table 2 The comparison of the structural parameters and band gaps of bulk and monolayer materials obtained through experiments145–148 and DFT calculations,41 respectively (a0, h and dM–M are in Å and Egap is in eV). Reproduced with permission from ref. 41




Material
Bulk
Monolayer



a
0


h


d
M–M


E
gap


a
0


h


d
M–M


E
gap





GaS
3.59
4.60
2.45
2.59
3.64
4.66
2.48
2.37


GaSe
3.76
4.78
2.46
2.10
3.82
4.83
2.47
1.81


InSe
4.00
5.28
2.78
1.17
4.09
5.39
2.82
1.40




An intensive theoretical study was carried out by Blonsky et al.37 on 37 2D materials from different families of metal oxides (MO, M = Be, Ca, Cd, Mg, Pb, Zn), metal dichalcogenides (MX2, M = Cr, Mo, Nb, Ta, W and X = S, Se, Te) and group III–V semiconductors (AX, A = Al, B, Ga, In and X = As, N, P, Sb) to determine their piezoelectric coefficients. All of these materials showed a hexagonal symmetry and nonzero piezoelectricity, as shown in Fig. 10b, and the majority of them exhibited d11 coefficients higher than the value for typical bulk piezoelectric structures, except 2D tetragonal PbO which has an inversion centre and a null piezoelectric tensor. In particular, CaO, CdO, CrSe2, CrTe2 and ZnO systems revealed remarkable piezoelectric coefficients, as listed in Table 3. The nominated 2D materials generally presented low formation energies compared to their bulk counterparts which facilitate their exfoliation from bulk structures13,132 and some of them have already been synthesized and experimentally characterized.20,152,153 Through DFT calculations, Duerloo et al.29 discovered that unlike their bulk counterparts, many regular 2D monolayers of TMDCs possess piezoelectric properties. Their calculations of the piezoelectric coefficient of monolayer materials revealed that some of them may exhibit a piezoelectric coupling factor larger than many recognized bulk wurtzite structures such as AlN.29
Table 3 Piezoelectric coefficients (d11 in pm V−1 and e11 in pC m−1) and formation energies (ΔEf in meV per atom) for 2D metal dichalcogenides, group II oxides and group III–V compounds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society




Metal dichalcogenides
Group II oxides
Group III–V compounds


Material

d
11


e
11

ΔEf
Material

d
11


e
11

ΔEf
Material

d
11


e
11

ΔEf




CrS2
6.15
543
75
BeO
1.39
132
90
BN
0.61
139
90


CrSe2
8.25
575
75
MgO
6.63
230
430
Bp
2.18
240
520


CrTe2
13.45
654
85
CaO
8.47
155
560
BAs
2.19
204
520


MoS2
3.65
362
77
ZnO
8.65
266
190
BSb
3.06
206
590


MoSe2
4.55
383
80
CdO
21.7
333
260
AlN
2.75
223
510


MoTe2
7.39
467
83
PbO
0
0
85
AlP
0.09
3.5
520


WS2
2.12
243
77








AlAs
0.38
12.7
500


WSe2
2.64
257
80








AlSb
0.79
19.9
480


WTe2
4.39
323
120








GaN
2.00
148
420


NbS2
3.12
211
93








GaP
1.29
52.6
450


NbSe2
3.87
222
97








GaAs
1.50
49.0
410


NbTe2
4.45
184
100








GaSb
1.42
33.2
390


TaS2
3.44
267
87








InN
5.50
224
450


TaSe2
3.94
250
90








InP
0.02
0.5
440


TaTe2
4.72
207
140








InAs
0.08
1.7
410


















InSb
1.15
17.9
380




Furthermore, the DFT calculation was used for finding a correlation between the piezoelectric coefficient and structural properties of these 2D materials. As shown in Fig. 10c, the piezoelectric coefficients (d11) of 15 materials in group 5 and 6 transition-metal dichalcogenides are directly proportional to the ratio of polarizabilities of isolated cations and anions indicating that the strong piezoelectric coefficient in dichalcogenides arises from the small cation and large anion polarizability. A similar trend was identified in the case of 2D materials of groups III–V (Fig. 10d). In this class, piezoelectricity originates from the displacement of ions and the resulting change in polarization. It was observed that the piezoelectric coefficient is correlated to the ratio of cation and anion polarizabilities, and the formation of the Bader charge and lattice parameters.37


4.1.2. Molecular dynamics. 
MD is one of the main approaches to study nanomechanics, since the size-dependent properties in nanostructures can be well predicted through MD simulations using continuum theories.154 MD calculations155,156 have been employed sporadically for studying the origin of piezoelectricity and some other piezoelectric properties such as the piezoelectric coefficient, strain effects, and phase transition in the bulk and one-dimensional piezoelectric materials;157–161 however, very few similar studies on 2D piezoelectric materials have been reported.162
MD has been used for predicting the fundamental effects of temperature on the physical properties of few-layered group-IV monochalcogenides, identifying temperature as an avenue towards the tuning of the material's properties. According to the MD calculations, SnSe and GeSe monochalcogenide monolayers experience a two-dimensional rectangular-to-square unit cell phase transition at a critical temperature Tc, as shown in Fig. 10e,150 which leads to a dramatic change in their band structure and electronic, piezoelectric, spin and optical properties. Similarly, another MD simulation on the stability of 2H single-layer CrS2 at 600 K showed no structural transition, indicating the stability of single-layer piezoelectric CrS2 at this temperature.143
Recently, Zhang conducted MD simulations on the piezopotential properties of 2D h-BN and 2H-MoS2 nanosheets.151 Accordingly, a new nonlocal electromechanical model based on Eringen's nonlocal theory was designed for studying the small-scale effects in the analytical modelling of these 2D materials. The numerical simulations and analytical modelling showed that small-scale effects can change the electromechanical behaviours of 2D piezoelectric materials and significantly affect their piezopotential properties, indicating that previously used classical electromechanical models are not reliable for the precise characterization of the piezopotential in 2D piezoelectric materials. Moreover, the elastic constant, piezoelectric coefficient and dielectric constant of 2D h-BN and MoS2 materials were numerically measured through the MD simulations, as shown in Fig. 10f and g. The MD findings also showed that the piezo-potential coefficients of both h-BN and 2H-MoS2 nanosheets increased by decreasing their lengths which proves that the piezo-potential properties of 2D materials can be significantly enhanced at the nanoscale by small-scale effects that change the electromechanical behaviours of 2D materials.151


4.1.3. Molecular structural mechanics. 
Although the material characteristics and element sectional parameters are readily available in material data handbooks or can be calculated through the element sectional dimensions for practically-produced macroscopic structures, there is no information about the sectional and elastic properties of atom–atom bonds for nanostructured materials; hence, establishing a link between the macroscopic structure and microscopic computational chemistry seems necessary.43 For this purpose, the covalent bonds among two adjacent atoms act as connecting beam members with round cross-sections where individual atoms act like the joints of related load-bearing beam members with bending and axial stiffness and torsional rigidity. The sectional properties of these beam members are determined by setting a linkage between molecular mechanics and structural mechanics.163,164 Subsequently, the whole nanostructure is considered and simulated as a space frame structure, which can be solved and explained by the MSM method.43 MSM simulations have been extensively employed for the prediction and modelling of the mechanical behavior of different nanostructures such as graphene and h-BN nanosheets165,166 and the study of piezoelectricity in 2D h-BN.167 Using MSM, Zhang et al.167 studied the buckling and pre-buckling deformation behaviors of h-BN nanosheets subjected to an electric field. These deformations are the consequence of the stress generated in the sheets through the reverse piezoelectric effect under the exposed electric field. The obtained results indicated structural selective deformations for BN as axial and shear deformations were observed in zigzag and armchair h-BN planes, respectively, suggesting the high dependence and relation of polarization in the BN nanostructure to the crystal orientation. The influence of the aspect ratio a/b of BN nanosheets on the critical buckling axial electrical field (Ecr) was also tracked by MSM. Calculations showed that Ecr decreases by increasing the ratio a/b, especially for armchair h-BN.

4.2. Experimental assessments
Generally, piezoelectric coefficients in piezoelectric materials can be determined through the direct measurement techniques such as laser Doppler vibrometry,168,169 laser interferometry,170 and pneumatic pressure rig,171 by indirect methods including impedance and return loss172 and acoustic wave173 and by other methods.174 However, most of these methods are unable to identify the local electromechanical properties at the nanoscale.
Moreover, by reducing the dimensions of piezoelectric materials to the atomic scale, the common characterization methods of measuring piezoelectricity in bulk materials such as the Sawyer–Towler-circuit method are not suitable and new alternatives were developed. Various techniques are used for the structural and elemental characterization of 2D piezoelectric materials and their outcomes are employed as inputs for either first-principles calculations and further simulations. The synthesis–structure–property correlations in piezoelectric materials can be established by comparing the results of these simulations and experimental measurements of the tested specimen.8

4.2.1. Piezoresponse force microscopy. 
PFM employs the inverse piezoelectric concept to measure piezoelectricity in materials. Basically, a small AC voltage is applied to the surface of the sample through the atomic force microscope (AFM) tip resulting in an inhomogeneous electric field below the tip. This electric field induces local surface deformations, including lateral torsions and vertical expansions or retractions which deflect the cantilever which is sensed by the lock-in amplifier.175,176 The mechanism of PFM imaging and possible movements of the cantilevers are demonstrated in Fig. 11a and b.177,178 The amplitude and phase of the generated deformations are used for identifying the strength and direction of dipoles in piezoelectric materials. Due to the improvement of the spatial resolution of PFM in recent years, the technique has become one of the most useful tools for characterizing the electromechanical properties of piezoelectric and ferroelectric nanostructures, allowing the characterization of domain nucleation and evolution,179 the conduction of static domain imaging180 and resolution analysis,181 and manipulation and fabrication at the nanoscale.174,182 The PFM technique is widely used for the quantitative measurement of piezoelectric coefficients, ferroelectric domain imaging and determining the domain switching behaviours in 2D piezoelectric materials. The image contrast arises due to changes in the piezoresponse sign when crossing the boundary of domains with opposite polarizations. As a special class of piezoelectric materials, ferroelectric materials present piezoelectricity due to the lack of structural symmetry. Ferroelectrics exhibit spontaneous polarization, i.e. polarization in the absence of an electric field; hence PFM is also employed extensively for studying ferroelectric materials. The ferroelectric nature of materials can be further confirmed by combining the amplitude–voltage butterfly loop, 180° phase-voltage reversal loop and switched domains caused by opposite voltages, as shown in Fig. 11c–e.36,83
 Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of the PFM mechanism. (b) Schematics of vertical (1) and lateral (2) PFM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. (c) In-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) switching coupling models in an In2Se3 flake. (d) OOP and IP phase images of the In2Se3 flake after writing two square patterns indicating that the polarization direction can be changed by an external bias. Scale bar is 1 μm. (e) Local ferroelectric switching loops of the In2Se3 flake without and with a Au top electrode. The butterfly-like amplitude–voltage loop and sharp change in the phase graph are typically observed in ferroelectric materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 


4.2.2. Laser Doppler vibrometry. 
The out-of-plane vibrations with ultra-high frequencies can be detected by laser Doppler vibrometry (LDV).183 Basically, the Doppler frequency shifts by light scattering on the moving surface. The shift in the Doppler frequency is directly proportional to the velocity of the surface and hence the non-contact and easy measurement of the surface vibration velocity is possible by tracking the Doppler frequency shift. An optical microscope can be used to transmit and focus the laser beam on the sample, as well as tracking the sample changes.183 LDV has been used for measuring the piezoelectric coefficient of piezoelectric thin films of materials such as PZT, AlN, LiNbO3, and NBT.184–187 In such processes, a variable DC bias voltage and an alternating small voltage (Vac) are applied to the piezoelectric material for measuring the piezoelectric hysteresis loop. An electric field is generated and cycled in the piezoelectric material and the resulted displacements are monitored. The DC bias field is applied in cycles to obtain the d33versus electric field hysteresis loop and the piezoelectric coefficient can be calculated using the equation d33 = Δt/Vac, where Δt is the amplitude of vibration (pm) of the piezoelectric material.168 LDV has been employed to record the visual surface displacements of 2D MoS2 attributed to the acoustically generated electric field in the piezoelectric MoS2 monolayer, as shown in Fig. 12a.169 Using the contrast against the substrate the piezoelectric coupling coefficient could be estimated.
 Fig. 12  (a) Optical image of 2D MoS2 flakes (left) and visual evidence of their inherent piezoelectricity by measuring the vibration pattern and intensity in single layer MoS2 flakes by laser Doppler vibrometry (LDV) after acoustic wave excitation (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (b) Description of second-harmonic generation and schematic energy-level diagram. (c) Fitted curves of the second-harmonic (SH) intensity of odd-layer atomically-thin h-BN and MoS2 samples as a function of their crystallographic orientation. Column diagram shows the layer dependence of the SH intensity and surface nonlinear susceptibility in few layered (one to five) MoS2 and h-BN materials indicating the noncentrosymmetric structure of odd layer thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. (d) AFM image of a MoS2 thin film with a variable thickness from 1 layer to 3 layers (scale bar is 1 μm) and the corresponding second-harmonic image where the brighter color indexed by X means a stronger SHG intensity in the 1L region of MoS2 (scale bar is 5 μm). (e) Polar plot based on the second-harmonic intensity as a function of the angle in the MoS2 monolayer. Reprinted figure from ref. 190. Copyright (2013) by the American Physical Society. 


4.2.3. Second-harmonic generation. 
Second harmonic generation (SHG) or frequency doubling is a special phenomenon of sum-frequency generation. SHG is described as a nonlinear optical technique in which a nonlinear material interacts with two photons of the same frequencies (ω), generating a new photon with twice the frequency (equivalently twice the energy) and half the wavelength of the original photons, as depicted in Fig. 12b. Similar to other even-order nonlinear optical cases, SHG is not found in materials with inversion centrosymmetry; therefore it can be applied as a powerful tool for the characterization of ferroelectric and piezoelectric materials.188,189 SHG has been used widely as a robust method to probe the symmetry variations in 2D piezoelectric materials and for domain imaging and switching in ferroelectrics.14,190,191 The optical second-harmonic generation in few-layered (one to five) atomically-thin MoS2 and h-BN samples was investigated by Li et al.23 As shown in Fig. 12c, strong and weak SHG signals were observed in odd and even layers, respectively, implying the non-centrosymmetric structure and broken inversion symmetry of materials with odd layer thickness. Rotational symmetries of lattices were also revealed by measuring the SHG as a function of crystal orientations in odd layer MoS2 and h-BN samples which proved that few-layered MoS2 and h-BN materials possess the same crystallographic structure as those of the layers in their bulk crystals. In a similar manner, the orientational dependency of SHG has been used for imaging the crystal domains of CVD-grown and exfoliated 2D MoS2.190,192 An example is shown in Fig. 12d, in which the brighter region presents a stronger second-harmonic intensity in the MoS2 monolayer which depends on the laser input power and the crystal rotation angles. A sixfold pattern can be obtained when the second-harmonic intensity of this area (1L MoS2) is plotted as a function of the rotation angle shown in Fig. 12e. PFM and SHG are considered as ideal non-destructive techniques for the characterization of thin films. The extreme sensitivity of SHG to symmetry changes also leads to its application in the determination of the Curie temperature and the identification of ferroelectric–paraelectric phase transitions.193 However, PFM offers a remarkably higher spatial resolution in comparison with SHG which allows high resolution domain imaging. As such a combination of both techniques is often applied.36


4.2.4. Direct tensile testing. 
Tensile testing and lateral bending are known to be the most common ways of determining direct piezoelectricity by measuring the generated electric potential or charge under mechanical deformation in piezoelectric nanostructures; however, the low amplitudes of the generated charges or voltages in 2D materials and the need for ultra-sensitive electronic measurement devices present challenges.
In the direct tensile testing method, the piezoelectric specimen is laid on a precision tensile device, while two conductive contacts are created at the specimen's sides which are linked to a charge amplifier. Due to the piezoelectric effect, the applied direct tensile stimuli induce electric polarization in the sample and the generated electric charges are measured.8 According to the experimental tensile study on monolayer MoS2 by Wu et al.,14 oscillating current and voltage signals are observed when odd-layer MoS2 materials are stretched and released, as shown in Fig. 13a and b. Positive voltage and current output were identified when a strain was applied in the x direction (armchair), while a decreasing strain resulted in a negative output which directly indicated the conversion of mechanical stimuli into electricity by 2D MoS2. By straining the device along the armchair direction of MoS2, strain-induced piezoelectric polarizations evolve in the zigzag edges of the sample and a flow of electrons occurs in an external load resistor. Here, by releasing the device into its initial state, piezoelectric polarization charges disappear and electrons drive back in the opposite direction. Stretching and releasing cycles of the device cause alternating pulses. However, by the rotation of the strain direction from x (armchair) to y (zigzag), the piezoelectric response is reversed. This dependency of piezoelectric charge polarization on the strain directions can be interpreted through the symmetry analysis of the D3h point group of single layer MoS2.
 Fig. 13  (a) Optical image of a typical device made by depositing a single layer MoS2 flake on a PET flexible substrate between metal electrodes. (b) Mechanism of generating the piezoelectric output due to continuous stretching and releasing of the 2D MoS2 piezoelectric device. Piezoelectric polarizations are produced at the zigzag edges of the MoS2 monolayer upon stretching. (c) Decreasing the piezoelectric output by increasing the number of layers in the MoS2 flake while even layers and the bulk do not show any output. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd,14 copyright (2014). (d) Electromechanical behaviour and I–Vb characteristics of a MoS2 device under compressive (left) and tensile (right) strains at different applied forces. Inset photos present the relation between the locations of the applied forces and the resulting compressive/tensile strains. Current values decreased and increased under compressive and tensile strains, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 102. CC BY 4.0. 
According to the D3h symmetry, 2D MoS2 only presents one non-zero independent coefficient e11. Thus, the in-plane polarization along the x direction can be explained as P1 = e11(ε11 − ε22), where ε11 and ε22 are the strain tensors along the x and y directions, respectively. Consequently, the sign of the piezoelectric output reverses by switching the strain direction from x (armchair) to y (zigzag).14 In fact, a peak output of 20 pA and 15 mV associated with a mechanical to electrical energy conversion efficiency of 5.08% was produced after the MoS2 monolayer was strained by 0.53%, while this output decreased with increasing thickness (Fig. 13c). The piezoelectric effect in triangular MoS2 monolayers was also studied by measuring the I–V curves under isotropic mechanical deformation using an AFM tip in the centre and edge of 2D MoS2. A drop and a growing trend in current magnitudes were observed under compressive and tensile strains on these MoS2 monolayers, respectively, which were fixed between sets of S–D (source/drain) electrodes, as shown in Fig. 13d. These devices could be used as strain/force sensors. The contrasting behaviour of compressive and tensile strains was rationalized by differences in locally strain-induced charge polarizations.102,194

5. Applications of 2D piezoelectric materials
As discussed earlier, the polarization direction imposes a crucial impact on the piezoelectric properties of 2D materials which subsequently defines their specific performance in different devices and applications. For example, although the h-BN monolayer presents good thermal conductivity and superior mechanical and chemical properties, its application is limited due to the planar structure and the absence of out-of-plane piezoelectricity.2 Therefore, attempts have been made to predict and engineer different polarization directions in other 2D material candidates for nanoelectromechanical applications.37,39,60,62,66,74,195 A symmetry analysis using density-functional perturbation theory predicted 37 2D materials with an in-plane (d11) piezoelectric coefficient among metal oxides and metal dichalcogenides, while an additional out-of-plane coefficient (d31) was found in some hexagonal group III–V materials, such as AlAs and InP.37
The exceptional and unique properties of 2D piezoelectric materials have led to the creation of many innovative devices for a large variety of applications such as piezotronics,14,15,196 energy harvesting and storage,14,197–200 catalysis,138,201,202 optoelectronic,20,203,204 nanoelectronic205,206 and piezophototronic applications,15,207,208 actuations,209 sensing210–212 and bio-applications.213–215 The most important applications of 2D piezoelectric materials are discussed in the following section.
5.1. Piezotronics
The presence of piezoelectricity in semiconductor materials with different crystal structures has greatly helped in the development of the piezotronic research field.216,217 The piezotronic effect was introduced for 3D wurtzite piezoelectric nanostructures in 2007218 and since then many electronic devices such as strain sensors,219,220 nanodiodes,221 and nanotransistors emerged based on piezotronics.222 This effect can be explained as the change of the interfacial carrier dynamics as a result of piezoelectric polarization modulation.223 The piezotronic effect employs the piezoelectric potential as the gate voltage to modulate the properties of charges which affect the interfacial properties, in contrast with conventional electronics which rely on the electrostatic coupling between the electric field induced by the gate voltage and a conductive channel.15 One of the very first experimental demonstrations of piezotronics in 2D materials has been in 2H-MoS2 monolayers,14 which were also confirmed by DFT calculations.142,197 This first 2D piezotronic device was successfully implemented by transferring MoS2 flakes on flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates, as shown in Fig. 13a. The resulting metal–semiconductor–metal structure comprised of two back-to-back Schottky barriers. The effect of strain on the electrical transport properties of such MoS2-based devices was investigated by Wu et al. and Liu et al.14,142 They measured the electric current–voltage curves of the developed devices and assigned the asymmetry changes in the output curves to the presence of the piezotronic effect, which modulates the metal–MoS2 contacts, as shown in Fig. 14a and b. It was found that under strains, the current–voltage curves showed alternating changes, indicating that changes in the transport behaviors mainly arise from piezotronics.
 Fig. 14  (a) The effect of strain in a single-layer MoS2 device under an opposite drain bias which leads to an asymmetric modulation of carrier transport implying the piezotronic characteristics of the device. The current–voltage curve moves under the applied strains (ε with negative and positive signs denotes the compressive and tensile strains, respectively). (b) The band diagrams of a single layer MoS2 device. The observed piezotronic behaviour is explained based on the changes of Schottky barrier heights due to the strain-induced polarization, where ϕs and ϕd are the heights of Schottky barriers at source and drain contacts, respectively, and Ep represents the change in the Schottky barrier height as a result of piezoelectric polarization charges. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd,14 copyright (2014). (c) Optical image of a flexible two terminal single-layer MoS2 piezophototronic device. (d) Schematic description of the setup used for studying the piezophototronic properties of 2D MoS2. (e) Band diagrams explaining the working mechanism of the piezophototronic process and the relation between the photocurrent (Iph) and the applied strain in the monolayer MoS2 photodetector. The observed piezophototronic response is attributed to the variations of the Schottky barrier height caused by strain-induced polarization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208, copyright John Wiley and Sons, 2016. 
Since 2D MoS2 is a semiconducting piezoelectric material, for which carrier transport can be modulated by strain-induced piezoelectric charges, it is a promising candidate for developing piezotronic devices.2 By assembling a strain/force sensor, Qi et al. investigated the piezotronic properties of 2D MoS2 arising from coupled in-plane piezoelectricity and carrier transport.102 In this work, local isotropic strains were applied to different spots of monolayer MoS2 using a contact mode AFM, whilst an external bias was applied for measuring the corresponding conductivity changes. Here the AFM load on the centre and near the edges of the MoS2 monolayer led to compressive strain (concave shaped deformation) and tensile strain (convex shaped deformation), respectively, as shown in Fig. 13d. With increasing force, the current decreased and it increased under compressive and tensile strains, respectively. The current modulation in this device was associated with the changes in the Schottky barrier height (SBH) as a result of the applied strains and piezotronic effect. In such a device, compressive strain increased the barrier height thereby decreasing the generated current. Conversely, a tensile strain decreased the barrier height and increased the current. At the molecular level, and according to the energy band diagrams, negative piezoelectric polarization charges are generated at the zigzag edges of the 2D MoS2 triangle under compressive strain. The produced negative piezopotential depletes free electrons close to the metal interfaces, leading to increased SBHs at both contacts and eventually current reduction under the compressive strain. In reverse, positive piezoelectric polarization charges are induced at three zigzag edges of the MoS2 monolayer due to a local tensile strain and the free electrons near the interfaces between metal contacts and MoS2 are attracted by the produced positive piezopotential, resulting in reduced SBHs at both contacts and increase in the measured current under the tensile strain.102 The ability of the piezotronic effect in the modulation of metal–semiconductor contacts in 2D materials introduces new approaches to develop photovoltaic, optoelectronic, catalysis and force nanosensor technologies102 without the need for modifying the chemistry and physics of interfaces.
5.2. Data transfer and modulation/demodulation
One of the possible applications of piezoelectricity in 2D materials which are also semiconducting is the modulation/demodulation of the data. After the exposure of a direct bandgap 2D semiconductor to light, excitons are produced that can be dragged using acoustic waves along the planar surface of the 2D materials. The excitons only recombine when they are screened. The entrapment of the excitons on the surface and the presence of piezoelectricity help to alter the velocity of the propagation via the applied signals and as such provide the modulation and demodulation capability.224 This was first demonstrated in monolayer MoS2 and the concept should be further expanded to other 2D piezoelectric materials for commercial applications.169
5.3. Piezophototronics
Some 2D materials show unique photonic properties in addition to their remarkable piezoelectric abilities, leading to novel applications in innovative optoelectronics. The piezophototronic phenomenon is generated in 2D materials when distinctive piezoelectric, photonic and semiconductor properties are coupled.15 Fundamentally, electro-optical observations such as carrier generation, separation, transport and recombination at p–n junctions or metal–semiconductor Schottky contacts can be systematically controlled by applying a strain-induced piezopotential in piezophototronic materials218,225 leading to the emergence of improved optoelectronic devices including solar cells, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photosensors and photoelectrochemical devices.15,226–230 Both piezotronic and piezophototronic systems employ piezopotential as gate stimuli to modify the optoelectronic and electronic interactions in semiconductor devices.231 The principles of the piezophototronic effect was initially explained in 2010 by Hu et al.232 for 3D wurtzite piezoelectric nanostructures. This effect was also recently observed in 2D materials such as 2H-MoS2 for applications in strain-gated flexible optoelectronics.208 For this purpose, the crystallographic orientations of mechanically-exfoliated MoS2 monolayers were determined through the second-harmonic generation method before transferring on flexible substrates between two electrical contacts, as shown in Fig. 14c. The piezophototronic performance of this 2D MoS2-based device was monitored by measuring the generated photocurrent under systematically tuned optical illumination and mechanical strain, as depicted in Fig. 14d. The process of the strain-gated flexible optoelectronics and the strain dependence of the photocurrent in a device under a −2 V drain bias is schematically illustrated in Fig. 14e. By applying a mechanical strain to the device, the piezoelectric charges generated in the zigzag edges of the MoS2 monolayer affect the metal–MoS2 contacts directly through modulating the concentration or distribution of free carriers in single layer MoS2 at the vicinity of the Schottky barrier. In another word, the mechanical strain acts as a controlling gate signal to modify the optoelectronic mechanism which can be called the piezophototronic effect. As shown in Fig. 14e, the tensile strain and large compressive strain caused a decrease in the photocurrent, while a small compressive strain increased the photocurrent, as discussed in ref. 208. The piezophototronic behavior of a 2D MoS2 single Schottky solar cell was theoretically simulated and compared with other counterparts including MoSe2 and WSe2.233 This study revealed that the performance of solar cells can be enhanced when the SBH is tuned effectively by strain-induced piezo-polarization charges in the interface. Accordingly, an increase of 5.8% in the open-circuit voltage was seen after applying a 1% strain (Fig. 15a) and the modulation impact of the piezophototronic effect on the MoS2 solar cell was found to be significantly higher than that of WSe2 and MoSe2 solar cells (Fig. 15b) likely due to the higher measured piezoelectric coefficient in MoS2 (although theoretically the coupling coefficient of MoSe2 is higher than that of MoS2 – Table 3).233
 Fig. 15  (a) The dependence of open circuit voltage (Voc) and maximum output power (Pm) under various applied strains in a two-dimensional MoS2 piezophototronic solar cell. (b) The comparison of γ of a piezophototronic solar cell in three 2D materials (MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2) as a function of strain. The ratio γ introduces the modulation for the open circuit voltage of a piezophototronic solar cell by piezoelectric charges. Reprinted from ref. 233, copyright (2017), with permission from Elsevier. (c) Electric field applied to a MoS2 monolayer along the armchair (Mo and S parallel, left) and zigzag (Mo and S in the same line, right) directions of the triangular monolayer MoS2 flake. (d) Voltage output resulted by applying strain to the MoS2 nanogenerator along the armchair and (e) zigzag directions. Reprinted from ref. 104, copyright (2016), with permission from Elsevier. (f) Piezoelectric energy harvester (PEH) based on the WSe2 monolayer with the Cr/Au electrodes and PET substrate. (g) Voltage output signal of the 2D WSe2-based PEH by applying a 1 GΩ external load. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234, copyright John Wiley and Sons, 2017. (h) A piezoelectric device based on a PbI2 nanosheet connected to Au electrodes on a PET substrate. (i) Forward and reversed open-circuit voltages of a 2D PbI2 piezoelectric device while the blue line indicates the open-circuit voltage of the device without a PbI2 nanosheet. Reprinted from ref. 235, copyright (2018), with permission from Elsevier. (j) Different stacking structures of bilayer WSe2; AA and AB stacking modes show polarity in the same direction while the directions of polarity in the AA′, AB′ and A′B stacking structures are opposite. (k) The comparison of simulated piezoelectric coefficients of monolayer WSe2 with AA and AB stacked structures. The inset shows the estimated polarization charges obtained by DFT simulation for the WSe2 monolayer compared to different stacking counterparts under the same uniaxial strain. (l) A large-area integrated PEH device created by parallel connection of four arrays of tb-WSe2 (each array consists of five tb-WSe2, as magnified in the left photo) and (m) the output voltage signals of this tb-WSe2 based PEH device measured periodically under 1 GΩ of load resistance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234, copyright John Wiley and Sons, 2017. 
5.4. Energy harvesting
2D piezoelectric materials are also of great interest in the construction of flexible nanogenerators, owing to their morphological advantages.1 As discussed earlier, the strong piezoelectricity with a d11 value in MoS2 monolayers (Table 3) was used within a flexible substrate to form a 2D nanogenerator.14 In contrast to this nanogenerator where the piezoelectric response was only found in the zigzag edges of MoS2 monolayers, Kim et al. detected an electrical output on both zigzag and armchair edges of the triangular-shaped MoS2 monolayer, and particularly the nanogenerator device based on the armchair direction of MoS2 provided a double output power compared to the zigzag direction under the same strain of 0.48%, as demonstrated in Fig. 15c–e.104 Following these pioneering studies on MoS2 nanogenerators, other nanogenerators for energy harvesting based on 2D WSe2234 and PbI2235 were reported as shown in Fig. 15f–i. Although the previous report23 indicated that nanomaterials with even layer thickness possess an AA′ stacking structure and consequently are non-piezoelectric due to the centrosymmetric structure, Lee et al. proved that piezoelectric properties can be engineered in WSe2 bilayers (b-WSe2) through turbostratic stacking and artificial transferring of the WSe2 monolayer (m-WSe2) onto another which results in tb-WSe2 structures with another four stacking modes of AA, AB, A′B and AB′, as shown in Fig. 15j. Since the AA and AB modes of stacked b-WSe2 exhibit polarity in the same direction, they retained the piezoelectric coefficients of 1.08 and 1.19 pm V−1, respectively (Fig. 15k). In this work, the total output of tb-WSe2 piezoelectric energy harvesters (PEHs) was increased by integrating a sequential series of tb-WSe2 nanogenerators through a multi-electrode patterning design, as shown in Fig. 15l and m.234 López-Suárez et al.198 showed that tailored nonlinearities in 2D-based piezoelectric systems can also lead to remarkable energy harvesting from ambient energy inputs such as vibration and thermomechanical sources. They explored the dynamics and applications of wide bandgap h-BN monolayers in nonlinear vibration energy harvesting devices with the aid of ab initio calculations and molecular dynamics simulations. The system was driven into a nonlinear bistable situation by applying the compressive strain. In this regime, quasi-harmonic vibrations were combined with low-frequency swings between the minima of a double-well potential and electrical power is naturally produced in the nonlinear mechanical harvester due to the intrinsic piezoelectricity of 2D h-BN. In particular, it was predicted that a 20 nm2 device (20 nm × 1 nm h-BN monolayer) under 0.3% compressive strain can generate up to 0.18 pW from a 5 pN vibration. Such a device has yet to be experimentally shown.
5.5. Sensors
2D piezoelectric materials are employed as constituents of different types of sensors such as strain, optical, humidity, chemical, and gas sensors. Fabrication of strain sensors requires materials with specific characteristics such as excellent electrical performance, good mechanical compliance and suitable processability that allow patterning for device fabrication. So far 1D nanomaterials, including nanowires and nanorods of piezoelectric materials such as ZnO, have been used as the building blocks of strain sensors.219 However, fabrication of such 1D piezoelectric sensors on a large scale is challenging due to difficulties with picking up and placing nanorods across electrodes. Since the dimensionality of 2D piezoelectric materials and layered semiconductors is compatible with the large-scale microfabrication techniques of thin films, they do not show the limitations of 1D materials. A superior gauge factor of ∼760, higher than those for silicon (∼200) and graphene (∼300) strain sensors, was characterized for a 2D-based MoS2 strain sensing device, suggesting the potential of MoS2 monolayers for highly sensitive strain sensing. The higher sensitivity and gauge factor of MoS2 monolayers were attributed to enhanced piezoelectric polarization in 2D MoS2.14
Using ZnO nanoplatelets, Liu et al.237 reported a new kind of 2D piezotronic transistor (2DPT) with a very high pressure/sensitivity between 60.97–78.23 meV MPa−1 which is much higher than that of nanowire-based piezotronic transistors. In addition, by ordered assembly of ZnO nanoplatelets, a 2DPT array with an unprecedented spatial resolution of 12700 dpi for piezotronic transistors was obtained. This study demonstrated the advantage of ZnO 2DPT as an active sensor for high-resolution tactile sensing. 2D materials with the piezophototronic effect also have been developed for optoelectronic applications such as photodetectors for optical sensors.208
5.6. Actuators
Actuators are used for producing mechanical vibrations and motions to move or control a system by utilizing the reverse piezoelectric effect and applying a bias voltage. Materials with nanometric dimensionalities introduce extreme strength mechanical responses. Nanometer-thick layers compared to bulky structures present enhanced strength and additional functionalities for applications in elastic strain engineering (ESE) due to efficient strain transfer, easy integration and feasible processing. In particular, 2D materials depict a unique high stretchability up to ∼20% strain magnitudes promoting their use for ESE.209 The modulation of strain in piezoelectric actuators has been used for tuning the physical properties of different materials such as 2D semiconductors, superconductors, ferromagnets and quantum dots.238
Actuations in 2D piezoelectric materials can be investigated by theoretical simulations for better understanding of the vertical piezoelectric experimental results. For instance, COMSOL Multiphysics simulation can be used to estimate the deformation of such 2D films under the applied voltages. Simulations have shown that ultrathin piezoelectric CdS might generate an expansion up to 150 pm under a negative voltage of −5 V, as shown in Fig. 16a–c.54 Actuators can be used for assessing the physical parameters of interest in 2D piezoelectric materials. For example, the PFM amplitude mode can probe an out of plane (vertical) piezoresponse in piezoelectric ultrathin films.54 Tunable biaxial stresses were applied on a graphene monolayer using a piezoelectric actuator to study the characteristic Raman features of graphene.236 An electromechanical device comprising single layer graphene (SLG) integrated on the piezoelectric [Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3]0.72-[PbTiO3]0.28 (PMN-PT) substrate was produced for smooth variations of strain by tensile stress or biaxial compression to graphene, as shown in Fig. 16d. The optical and photoluminescence properties of 2D WSe2239 and tri-layer MoS2240 were also investigated through the same approach.
 Fig. 16  (a) Side view of the stress distribution and deformation of a CdS thin film under the applied voltage induced by a PFM tip. (b, c) Linear increment of deformation and expansion of the CdS thin film from ∼30 to ∼150 pm when the applied DC voltage varies from −1 V to −5 V on the surface indicating a high vertical piezoelectricity in the CdS ultrathin film as an actuator. Adapted with permission from ref. 54, copyright American Association for the Advancement of Science, 2016. (d) The schematic illustration of a thin actuator used for applying electromechanical in-plane biaxial strain to graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
5.7. Biomedical applications
Flexible electronics, in particular lead-free biocompatible piezoelectric materials, offered many promises in bioscience for applications in biomedical devices, nanogenerators, sensors, bioinspired artificial skins and many more.31,131,241–243 2D TMDC nanosheets, which also belong to the family of piezoelectric materials when they are in monolayer morphology, are being used widely in biomedical research due to their excellent characteristics such as large surface-to-volume ratio, ease of surface modification, good cytocompatibility, high thermal and optical conversion efficiency and strong spin–orbit coupling.213 Indirectly, by reducing the power consumption of biomedical and portable electronic devices, the power generated by harvesting electrical energy from human activities or biomechanical movements, such as muscles and cardiac/lung motions, can be used for powering these devices or stored in batteries for self-powered wireless sensors.244–246 These energy harvesters consist of organic or inorganic piezoelectric materials embedded in stretchable and flexible thin films such as polyimide (PI), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS).1 As discussed earlier, ultra-sensitive and high-performance 2D piezoelectric materials such as MoS214,104 and WSe2234 are employed as the main building blocks of nanogenerators which can also be used in biomedical applications.1,242,245
6. Conclusion and future perspective of 2D piezoelectric materials
All in all, even one century after of the discovery of piezoelectricity, many concepts of this phenomenon have remained unknown and recent developments of piezoelectricity in 2D materials have provoked much more in-depth research in this field. In fact, fascinating properties have been shown to exist at the 2D scale since many non-piezoelectric forms of bulk materials become piezoelectric by downsizing to the single or few fundamental layers due to the disruption of inversion centres and broken centrosymmetry. The planar surface of 2D materials exposes all of the structural constituents for efficient surface modification to enhance the piezoelectric properties even further.
The thickness reduction to the atomic level induces unique properties in 2D piezoelectric materials which are important for exploring the interactions between free charge carriers, phonons and photons. Furthermore, the limited number of atoms and the simple structural design of typical 2D materials provide an uncomplicated framework for computational analyses and simulations as robust tools for understanding the fundamental atomic interactions and designing novel materials. Extensive efforts have been focused on the screening of 2D nanostructures, and both experimental results and computational predictions consistently confirmed the intriguing properties of 2D piezoelectric materials for innovative electronic devices and nano-electromechanical systems.
The intrinsic piezoelectricity has been predicted in diverse 2D materials, while most of them have not been determined experimentally due to their instability and limitations of synthesis methods; thus novel and controllable synthesis techniques need to be devised towards the ideal preparation of 2D piezoelectric materials that can also accommodate suitable carrier concentrations. Furthermore, more chemically stable 2D piezoelectrics have to be considered through theoretical studies and simulations, with a special focus on their availability and stability in an ambient environment. Although 2D piezoelectric materials demonstrate outstanding piezoelectric coefficients with the same order of magnitude, larger than those of their bulk counterparts, these values are lower than those of some high-performance and well-known bulk piezoelectric materials such as PZT. In this regard, attention should be diverted to those 2D crystals such as PbO and SnS that have been predicted to possess colossal piezoelectric coupling coefficients in monolayers. Several key features of piezoelectric materials such as piezoelectric coefficient, polarization value and Curie temperature should be measured quantitatively to provide a clear comparison between 2D piezoelectric materials and other morphologies. The generation of piezoelectricity by surface modification has been dominantly invested on graphene247 while piezoelectricity could be tailored for various monolayer materials such as carbon nitride,248 phosphorene,249 germanene250 and silicone251 by surface engineering. As another promising view, 2D piezoelectric materials can be used as the building blocks of innovative van der Waals heterostructures and 2D material composites.
Efficient theories and modelling frameworks need to be developed for better understanding of 2D piezoelectric materials’ behaviors observed in experiments and simulations; in particular, the nonlinear relations between the electromechanical coupling effect and the applied strain in 2D piezoelectric materials have to be taken into the account since it has been proven that these nonlinearities play critical roles in the electromechanical properties of bulk and 1D materials.252 Similarly, the electronic properties of 2D piezoelectric materials are also affected by the applied strain, owing to the fact that piezoelectric charges possibly affect the related quantum yield; hence understanding the influence of strain on 2D piezoelectric materials can expand their further applications. Dielectricity is another important factor which affects the electromechanical performance of piezoelectric materials; however, to date, only a few reports have addressed this.10
Pyroelectricity is another attractive concept that was proposed in some 2D piezoelectric nanostructures, and is assumed as a promising research field for designing new devices. Similarly, 2D ferroelectric materials present some advantages (such as flexibility and band gap tunability) over the conventional bulk ferroelectrics; however, research on the ferroelectricity in 2D materials is in its initial and tentative stage. Therefore, the research field of 2D materials can be promoted by further research on the different aspects of ferroelectricity and pyroelectricity in 2D materials. Diverse 2D piezoelectric materials such as TMDC nanosheets are also biocompatible, leading to exciting prospects for real-world applications and research translation in biotechnology.213 These 2D piezoelectric materials can be functionalized or covered by biocompatible polymers such as polyethylene glycol (PEG) to guarantee a long-term combinatorial therapy. They can be actuated via electric fields to release drugs and target diseased cells. Additionally, lead-based piezoelectric materials can be replaced by biocompatible 2D materials in self-powered piezoelectric implantable devices to avoid replacing discharged batteries and further invasive operation.
Conflicts of interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence FLEET (CE170100039) for the financial support in this work.
References
H. Liu, J. Zhong, C. Lee, S.-W. Lee and L. Lin, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2018, 5, 1–35 CAS .
R. Hinchet, U. Khan, C. Falconi and S.-W. Kim, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 611–630 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fei, W. Zhao, T. A. Palomaki, B. Sun, M. K. Miller, Z. Zhao, J. Yan, X. Xu and D. H. Cobden, Nature, 2018, 560, 336–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Fang, J. X. Liu and V. Gupta, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1716–1726 RSC .
J. N. Tiwari, R. N. Tiwari and K. S. Kim, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 724–803 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, X. Kang, Y. Sang and H. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500358 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Varghese, R. W. Whatmore and J. D. Holmes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2618–2638 RSC .
H. D. Espinosa, R. A. Bernal and M. Minary-Jolandan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4656–4675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Ghasemian, A. Rawal, F. Wang, D. Chu and D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10976–10984 RSC .
J. Zhang, C. Wang and C. Bowen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13314–13327 RSC .
W. Wu, C. Pan, Y. Zhang, X. Wen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 619–642 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gupta, S. Brahma, J. Dutta, B. Rao and C.-P. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Li, F. Zhang, L. Lin, S. Niu, D. Chenet, X. Zhang, Y. Hao, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2014, 514, 470–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lin, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today Nano, 2018, 4, 17–31 CrossRef .
L. Newton, T. Slater, N. Clark and A. Vijayaraghavan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 376–393 RSC .
T. Wu and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4432–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, A. Chen and Z. Zhou, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2019, 9, 1–15 Search PubMed .
H. Tian, J. Tice, R. Fei, V. Tran, X. Yan, L. Yang and H. Wang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 763–777 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balendhran, J. Deng, J. Z. Ou, S. Walia, J. Scott, J. Tang, K. L. Wang, M. R. Field, S. Russo, S. Zhuiykov, M. S. Strano, N. Medhekar, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 109–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Molina-Sanchez and L. Wirtz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 155413 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Rao, K. F. Mak, Y. You, S. Wang, C. R. Dean and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3329–3333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, N. Li, H. Yu, Z. Wei, M. Liao, P. Chen, S. Wang, D. Shi, Q. Sun and G. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702076 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yagmurcukardes, C. Bacaksiz, E. Unsal, B. Akbali, R. T. Senger and H. Sahin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2018, 97, 115427 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhan, D. Guo and G. Xie, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 13181–13212 RSC .
R. Li, Y. Cheng and W. Huang, Small, 2018, 14, 1802091 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, E. T. N. Wahyudin, J.-H. He and J. Zhai, MRS Bull., 2018, 43, 959–964 CrossRef .
K.-A. N. Duerloo, M. T. Ong and E. J. Reed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2871–2876 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Akdogan, M. Allahverdi and A. Safari, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 2005, 52, 746–775 Search PubMed .
F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4283–4305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 540–552 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Bowen, H. A. Kim, P. M. Weaver and S. Dunn, Chem. Rev., 2014, 7, 25–44 CAS .
E. Aksel and J. L. Jones, Sensors, 2010, 10, 1935–1954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Miro, M. Audiffred and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6537–6554 RSC .
C. Cui, F. Xue, W.-J. Hu and L.-J. Li, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2018, 2, 1–14 CrossRef .
M. N. Blonsky, H. L. Zhuang, A. K. Singh and R. G. Hennig, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9885–9891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Tu and X. Hu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 035434 CrossRef .
M. T. Ong and E. J. Reed, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1387–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Alyoruk, Y. Aierken, D. Cakir, F. M. Peeters and C. Sevik, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 23231–23237 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li and J. Li, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3796–3802 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fei, W. Li, J. Li and L. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 173104 CrossRef .
J. Zhang and S. A. Meguid, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2017, 32, 1–20 Search PubMed .
F. Xue, J. Zhang, W. Hu, W.-T. Hsu, A. Han, S.-F. Leung, J.-K. Huang, Y. Wan, S. Liu, J. Zhang, J.-H. He, W.-H. Chang, Z. L. Wang, X. Zhang and L.-J. Li, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4976–4983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xue, X. He, J. R. D. Retamal, A. Han, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, J.-K. Huang, W. Hu, V. Tung, J.-H. He, L.-J. Li and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901300 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-L. Su, K. Gupta, Y.-L. Hsiao, R.-C. Wang and C.-P. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 410–417 RSC .

          J. F. Nye, Physical properties of crystals: their representation by tensors and matrices, Clarendon, Oxford,  1957 Search PubMed .
G. Cheon, K. N. Duerloo, A. D. Sendek, C. Porter, Y. Chen and E. J. Reed, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1915–1923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Zhuang, A. K. Singh and R. G. Hennig, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 1–8 CrossRef .
H. L. Zhuang and R. G. Hennig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20440–20445 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Xiao, M. Liu, S. Xiong, Z. J. Wong, Z. Ye, Y. Ye, X. Yin and X. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, J. H. Seo, G. Luo, M. B. Starr, Z. Li, D. Geng, X. Yin, S. Wang, D. G. Fraser, D. Morgan, Z. Ma and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, S. Liu, G. Gao, Y. Pang, X. Yin, X. Feng, L. Zhu, Y. Bai, L. Chen, T. Xiao, X. Wang, Y. Qin and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4903–4908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. He, H. Zhu, L. Sun, W. Fu, X. Wang, L. C. Hoong, H. Wang, Q. Zeng, W. Zhao, J. Wei, Z. Jin, Z. Shen, J. Liu, T. Zhang and Z. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 1600209 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Agrawal and H. D. Espinosa, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 786–790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Wang, W.-S. Liao, Z.-H. Lin, N.-J. Ku, Y.-C. Li, Y.-C. Chen, Z.-L. Wang and C.-P. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400392 CrossRef .
T. Ogawa, H. Oikawa and A. Kojima, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1971, 10, 593–599 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Scrymgeour and J. W. Hsu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2204–2209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, S. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Feng, L. Zhu, H. Guo, W. Ding, L. Chen, Y. Qin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 724–733 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Ong, K.-A. N. Duerloo and E. J. Reed, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3615–3620 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Hill, A. Vijayaragahvan and K. Novoselov, IEEE Sens. J., 2011, 11, 3161–3170 CAS .
G. da Cunha Rodrigues, P. Zelenovskiy, K. Romanyuk, S. Luchkin, Y. Kopelevich and A. Kholkin, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7572 CrossRef PubMed .
K. E. El-Kelany, P. Carbonniere, A. Erba and M. Rerat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8966–8973 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zelisko, Y. Hanlumyuang, S. Yang, Y. Liu, C. Lei, J. Li, P. M. Ajayan and P. Sharma, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Javvaji, B. He and X. Zhuang, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 225702 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chandratre and P. Sharma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 1–3 CrossRef .
O. Leenaerts, H. Peelaers, A. D. Hernandez-Nieves, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 195436 CrossRef .
P. V. Medeiros, A. J. Mascarenhas, F. de Brito Mota and C. M. de Castilho, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 485701 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-H. Jin, S.-M. Choi and S.-H. Jhi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 033414 CrossRef .
D. W. Boukhvalov and M. I. Katsnelson, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 344205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Adam, M. S. Fuhrer, E. D. Williams and M. Ishigami, Nat. Phys., 2008, 4, 377–381 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D. H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
B. Li, L. Zhou, D. Wu, H. Peng, K. Yan, Y. Zhou and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5957–5961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. M. Noor, H. J. Kim and Y. H. Shin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6575–6582 RSC .

          R. S. Dahiya and M. Valle, Robotic tactile sensing: technologies and system, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .
K. Shimada, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, 358–360 CrossRef .
A. Hangleiter, F. Hitzel, S. Lahmann and U. Rossow, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 1169–1171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trolier-McKinstry and P. Muralt, J. Electroceram., 2004, 12, 7–17 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kratzer, M. Lasnik, S. Rohrig, C. Teichert and M. Deluca, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 422 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. R. Moheimani and A. J. Fleming, Piezoelectric transducers for vibration control and damping, Springer Science & Business Media,  2006 Search PubMed .

          A. Safari and E. K. Akdogan, Piezoelectric and acoustic materials for transducer applications, Springer US,  2008 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, D. Wu, Y. Zhu, Y. Cho, Q. He, X. Yang, K. Herrera, Z. Chu, Y. Han, M. C. Downer, H. Peng and K. Lai, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5508–5513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cui, W. J. Hu, X. Yan, C. Addiego, W. Gao, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Li, Y. Cheng, P. Li, X. Zhang, H. N. Alshareef, T. Wu, W. Zhu, X. Pan and L. J. Li, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1253–1258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-Y. Lu, H. Zhu, J. Xiao, C.-P. Chuu, Y. Han, M.-H. Chiu, C.-C. Cheng, C.-W. Yang, K.-H. Wei, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, D. Sokaras, D. Nordlund, P. Yang, D. A. Muller, M.-Y. Chou, X. Zhang and L.-J. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahmood, I. A. De Castro, K. Pramoda, K. Khoshmanesh, S. K. Bhargava and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 455–480 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, J. Liu, C. Wang, X. Leng, Y. Xiao and L. Fu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 28–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, A. Vijayaraghavan, M.-H. Ham, H. Zheng, M. Breedon and M. S. Strano, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5660–5666 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
J. Z. Ou, A. F. Chrimes, Y. Wang, S. Y. Tang, M. S. Strano and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 857–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Donato, E. Messina, A. Foti, T. J. Smart, P. H. Jones, M. A. Iati, R. Saija, P. G. Gucciardi and O. M. Marago, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1245–1255 RSC .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Smith, P. J. King, M. Lotya, C. Wirtz, U. Khan, S. De, A. O'Neill, G. S. Duesberg, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, J. Chen, J. Wang, A. I. Minett, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3944–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Choudhary, I. Kalish, R. Beams and F. Tavazza, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 5179 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Björkman, A. Gulans, A. V. Krasheninnikov and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 235502 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ashton, J. Paul, S. B. Sinnott and R. G. Hennig, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 118, 106101 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Mounet, M. Gibertini, P. Schwaller, D. Campi, A. Merkys, A. Marrazzo, T. Sohier, I. E. Castelli, A. Cepellotti, G. Pizzi and N. Marzari, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 246–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Wong, H. Liu and D. Chi, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 2016, 62, 9–28 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feng, W. Zheng, F. Gao, X. Chen, G. Liu, T. Hasan, W. Cao and P. Hu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4278–4283 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qi, Y. W. Lan, A. Z. Stieg, J. H. Chen, Y. L. Zhong, L. J. Li, C. D. Chen, Y. Zhang and K. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Chang, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Han, J. Pu, J.-K. Chang, W.-T. Hsu, J.-K. Huang, C.-L. Hsu, M.-H. Chiu, T. Takenobu, H. Li, C.-I. Wu, W.-H. Chang, A. T. S. Wee and L.-J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8582–8590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kim, R. Bhatia, T.-H. Kim, D. Seol, J. H. Kim, H. Kim, W. Seung, Y. Kim, Y. H. Lee and S.-W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 483–489 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, B. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Tang, C. T. Nai, L. Li, J. Zheng, L. Gao, Y. Zheng, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6722–6727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, X.-Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M.-T. Chang, C.-T. Lin, K.-D. Chang, Y.-C. Yu, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-S. Chang, L.-J. Li and T.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balendhran, J. Z. Ou, M. Bhaskaran, S. Sriram, S. Ippolito, Z. Vasic, E. Kats, S. Bhargava, S. Zhuiykov and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 461–466 RSC .
K. K. Liu, W. Zhang, Y. H. Lee, Y. C. Lin, M. T. Chang, C. Y. Su, C. S. Chang, H. Li, Y. Shi, H. Zhang, C. S. Lai and L. J. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, W. Tang, B. Tian, B. Liu, X. Zhao, Y. Liu, T. Ren, W. Liu, D. Geng, H. Y. Jeong, H. S. Shin, W. Zhou and K. P. Loh, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500033 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. van der Zande, P. Y. Huang, D. A. Chenet, T. C. Berkelbach, Y. You, G. H. Lee, T. F. Heinz, D. R. Reichman, D. A. Muller and J. C. Hone, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 554–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, N. Pillai, S. Kuriakose, S. Walia, A. Jannat, K. Xu, T. Alkathiri, M. Mohiuddin, T. Daeneke, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, J. Z. Ou and A. Zavabeti, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 4665–4672 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Carey, J. Z. Ou, R. M. Clark, K. J. Berean, A. Zavabeti, A. S. Chesman, S. P. Russo, D. W. Lau, Z. Q. Xu, Q. Bao, O. Kevehei, B. C. Gibson, M. D. Dickey, R. B. Kaner, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Daeneke, P. Atkin, R. Orrell-Trigg, A. Zavabeti, T. Ahmed, S. Walia, M. Liu, Y. Tachibana, M. Javaid, A. D. Greentree, S. P. Russo, R. B. Kaner and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10974–10983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zavabeti, B. Y. Zhang, I. A. de Castro, J. Z. Ou, B. J. Carey, M. Mohiuddin, R. Datta, C. Xu, A. P. Mouritz, C. F. McConville, A. P. O'Mullane, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1–9 CrossRef .
T. Daeneke, K. Khoshmanesh, N. Mahmood, I. A. de Castro, D. Esrafilzadeh, S. J. Barrow, M. D. Dickey and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4073–4111 RSC .
A. Zavabeti, J. Z. Ou, B. J. Carey, N. Syed, R. Orrell-Trigg, E. L. H. Mayes, C. Xu, O. Kavehei, A. P. O'Mullane, R. B. Kaner, K. Kalantar-zadeh and T. Daeneke, Science, 2017, 358, 332–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Syed, A. Zavabeti, J. Z. Ou, M. Mohiuddin, N. Pillai, B. J. Carey, B. Y. Zhang, R. S. Datta, A. Jannat, F. Haque, K. A. Messalea, C. Xu, S. P. Russo, C. F. McConville, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3618 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. R. Chang, B. Zhou, Y. T. Cui, H. Yan, Z. Liu, F. Schmitt, J. Lee, R. Moore, Y. Chen, H. Lin, H. T. Jeng, S. K. Mo, Z. Hussain, A. Bansil and Z. X. Shen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 111–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, W. Jie, C. H. Mak, S. Lin, H. Lin, X. Yang, F. Yan, S. P. Lau and J. Hao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4225–4236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang and J. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8859–8878 RSC .
L. Jiao, W. Jie, Z. Yang, Y. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Zhang, W. Tang, Z. Wu and J. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2522–2529 RSC .
W. Jie, Z. Yang, F. Zhang, G. Bai, C. W. Leung and J. Hao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6950–6958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Serna, S. H. Yoo, S. Moreno, Y. Xi, J. P. Oviedo, H. Choi, H. N. Alshareef, M. J. Kim, M. Minary-Jolandan and M. A. Quevedo-Lopez, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6054–6061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Bai, Z. Yang, H. Lin, W. Jie and J. Hao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9261–9267 RSC .
M. Mohiuddin, Y. Wang, A. Zavabeti, N. Syed, R. S. Datta, H. Ahmed, T. Daeneke, S. P. Russo, A. R. Rezk, L. Y. Yeo and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5593–5601 CrossRef CAS .
E. Varrla, C. Backes, K. R. Paton, A. Harvey, Z. Gholamvand, J. McCauley and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1129–1139 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ahmed, A. R. Rezk, B. J. Carey, Y. Wang, M. Mohiuddin, K. J. Berean, S. P. Russo, K. Kalantar-zadeh and L. Y. Yeo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704756 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhuang, B. He, B. Javvaji and H. S. Park, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2019, 99, 054105 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Michel and B. Verberck, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 1–10 Search PubMed .
L. C. Gomes, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 1–8 Search PubMed .
A. K. Singh, K. Mathew, H. L. Zhuang and R. G. Hennig, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1087–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, H. Wang, Y. Xia, D. Cui, Y. Shi, M. Dong, C. Liu, T. Ding, J. Zhang, Y. Ma, N. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Sun, R. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12446–12467 RSC .
W. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–17 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Jie, P. Chen, W. Liu and J. Hao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707007 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shi, H. Li and L. J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2744–2756 RSC .
J. E. ten Elshof, H. Yuan and P. Gonzalez Rodriguez, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–34 Search PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–15 Search PubMed .
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder and K. A. Persson, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 011002 CrossRef .
R. Armiento, B. Kozinsky, M. Fornari and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 1–13 CrossRef .
W. Liu, A. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 1–5 Search PubMed .
H. L. Zhuang, M. D. Johannes, M. N. Blonsky and R. G. Hennig, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 1–5 Search PubMed .
Z. Chang, W. Yan, J. Shang and J. Z. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 1–5 Search PubMed .
A. Kuhn, A. Chevy and R. Chevalier, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1975, 31, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuhn, A. Chevy and R. Chevalier, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1976, 32, 983–984 CrossRef .
J. Rigoult, A. Rimsky and A. Kuhn, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1980, 36, 916–918 CrossRef .

          O. Madelung, Semiconductors: Data Handbook, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg,  2004 Search PubMed .
M. Mosaferi, I. Abdolhosseini Sarsari and M. Alaei, Journal, 2018, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. Mehboudi, B. M. Fregoso, Y. Yang, W. Zhu, A. van der Zande, J. Ferrer, L. Bellaiche, P. Kumar and S. Barraza-Lopez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 117, 246802 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 568–578 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Song, S. L. Li, L. Gao, Y. Xu, K. Ueno, J. Tang, Y. B. Cheng and K. Tsukagoshi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9666–9670 RSC .
G. Kim, A. R. Jang, H. Y. Jeong, Z. Lee, D. J. Kang and H. S. Shin, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1834–1839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, P. Li, F. Jin and J. Wang, Compos. Struct., 2016, 140, 758–775 CrossRef .
B. J. Alder and T. E. Wainwright, J. Chem. Phys., 1959, 31, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .

          D. C. Rapaport, The Art of Molecular Dynamics Simulation, Cambridge University Press,  2004 Search PubMed .
V. Yamakov, C. Park, J. H. Kang, K. E. Wise and C. Fay, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2014, 95, 362–370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, A. J. Kulkarni, K. Sarasamak, S. Limpijumnong, F. J. Ke and M. Zhou, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 1–4 Search PubMed .
K. Momeni, G. M. Odegard and R. S. Yassar, Acta Mater., 2012, 60, 5117–5124 CrossRef CAS .
M. Graf, M. Sepliarsky, R. Machado and M. G. Stachiotti, Solid State Commun., 2015, 218, 10–13 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Ravi, F. Simona, J. Hulliger and M. Cascella, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 1901–1907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ahmadpoor and P. Sharma, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16555–16570 RSC .
C. Li and T.-W. Chou, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2003, 40, 2487–2499 CrossRef .
K. I. Tserpes and P. Papanikos, Composites, Part B, 2005, 36, 468–477 CrossRef .
A. Sakhaee-Pour, M. T. Ahmadian and R. Naghdabadi, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 085702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Scarpa, S. Adhikari and A. Srikantha Phani, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 065709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, C. Wang and S. Adhikari, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2013, 46, 1–5 Search PubMed .
R. Herdier, D. Jenkins, E. Dogheche, D. Remiens and M. Sulc, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2006, 77, 1–5 CrossRef .
A. R. Rezk, B. Carey, A. F. Chrimes, D. W. Lau, B. C. Gibson, C. Zheng, M. S. Fuhrer, L. Y. Yeo and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 849–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Lueng, H. L. W. Chan, C. Surya, W. K. Fong, C. L. Choy, P. Chow and M. Rosamond, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1999, 254, 123–127 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, F. Chu and S. Trolier-McKinstry, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 588–594 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohigashi, J. Appl. Phys., 1976, 47, 949–955 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takenaka, K. O. Sakata and K. O. Toda, Ferroelectrics, 1990, 106, 375–380 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, P. Lin, B. Chen, L. Wang, L. Chen, D. Li and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3877–3885 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Kalinin, A. Rar and S. Jesse, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 2006, 53, 2226–2252 Search PubMed .

          S. V. Kalinin and A. Gruverman, Scanning probe microscopy: electrical and electromechanical phenomena at the nanoscale, Springer, New York,  2007 Search PubMed .
M.-H. Zhang, H. C. Thong, Y. X. Lu, W. Sun, J.-F. Li and K. Wang, J. Korean Ceram. Soc., 2017, 54, 261–271 CrossRef CAS .
E. Soergel, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 1–17 CrossRef .
H. Miao, X. Zhou, S. Dong, H. Luo and F. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8515–8520 RSC .
J. Seidel, L. W. Martin, Q. He, Q. Zhan, Y. H. Chu, A. Rother, M. E. Hawkridge, P. Maksymovych, P. Yu, M. Gajek, N. Balke, S. V. Kalinin, S. Gemming, F. Wang, G. Catalan, J. F. Scott, N. A. Spaldin, J. Orenstein and R. Ramesh, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 229–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Kalinin, S. Jesse, B. J. Rodriguez, J. Shin, A. P. Baddorf, H. N. Lee, A. Borisevich and S. J. Pennycook, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3400–3411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. You, Z. Chen, X. Zou, H. Ding, W. Chen, L. Chen, G. Yuan and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5388–5394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Rothberg, M. S. Allen, P. Castellini, D. Di Maio, J. J. J. Dirckx, D. J. Ewins, B. J. Halkon, P. Muyshondt, N. Paone, T. Ryan, H. Steger, E. P. Tomasini, S. Vanlanduit and J. F. Vignola, Opt. Lasers Eng., 2017, 99, 11–22 CrossRef .
Z. Wang and J. Miao, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 1–7 CAS .
J. Hernando, J. L. Sánchez-Rojas, S. González-Castilla, E. Iborra, A. Ababneh and U. Schmid, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 053502 CrossRef .
V. Edon, D. Remiens and S. Saada, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 256, 1455–1460 CrossRef CAS .
S. Quignon, C. Soyer and D. Remiens, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95, 3180–3184 CrossRef CAS .

          R. W. Boyd, in Nonlinear Optics, ed. R. W. Boyd, Academic Press, Burlington, 3rd edn,  2008, pp. 1–67 Search PubMed .
S. A. Denev, T. T. A. Lummen, E. Barnes, A. Kumar, V. Gopalan and D. J. Green, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 2699–2727 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Malard, T. V. Alencar, A. P. M. Barboza, K. F. Mak and A. M. de Paula, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 1–5 CrossRef .
H. Yokota, R. Haumont, J.-M. Kiat, H. Matsuura and Y. Uesu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 1–3 CrossRef .
N. Kumar, S. Najmaei, Q. Cui, F. Ceballos, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou and H. Zhao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 1–6 Search PubMed .
F. Liu, L. You, K. L. Seyler, X. Li, P. Yu, J. Lin, X. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Wang, H. He, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou, P. Sharma, X. Xu, P. M. Ajayan, J. Wang and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Shi, M.-H. Chiu and L.-J. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 293–305 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Jin, W. Y. Yoon and W. Jo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1334–1339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, Y. Zhou, A. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 1–5 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, W. Liu, X. Huang, A. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 800–807 CrossRef CAS .
M. López-Suárez, M. Pruneda, G. Abadal and R. Rurali, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 175401 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Feng and J. Li, Small, 2014, 10, 2165–2181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, G. Ji, B. Ding, Y. Ma, B. Qu, W. Chen and J. Y. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7890–7896 RSC .
C.-J. Liu, S.-Y. Tai, S.-W. Chou, Y.-C. Yu, K.-D. Chang, S. Wang, F. S.-S. Chien, J.-Y. Lin and T.-W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21057–21064 RSC .
Y. Qi, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, B. Yan, Y. Ren and Z. Chen, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2903–2909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Baugher, H. O. Churchill, Y. Yang and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 262–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dankert, L. Langouche, M. V. Kamalakar and S. P. Dash, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 476–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Chang, M. N. Yogeesh, R. Ghosh, A. Rai, A. Sanne, S. Yang, N. Lu, S. K. Banerjee and D. Akinwande, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1818–1823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xue, L. Chen, J. Chen, J. Liu, L. Wang, M. Chen, Y. Pang, X. Yang, G. Gao, J. Zhai and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3391–3398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Wang, R. Yu, Y. Liu, S.-H. Wei, J. Hone and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8463–8468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Martin-Sanchez, R. Trotta, A. Mariscal, R. Serna, G. Piredda, S. Stroj, J. Edlinger, C. Schimpf, J. Aberl, T. Lettner, J. Wildmann, H. Huang, X. Yuan, D. Ziss, J. Stangl and A. Rastelli, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2018, 33, 1–39 Search PubMed .
J. Z. Ou, W. Ge, B. Carey, T. Daeneke, A. Rotbart, W. Shan, Y. Wang, Z. Fu, A. F. Chrimes, W. Wlodarski, S. P. Russo, Y. X. Li and K. Kalantar-zadeh, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10313–10323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Berean, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke, B. J. Carey, E. P. Nguyen, Y. Wang, S. P. Russo, R. B. Kaner and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Small, 2015, 11, 5035–5040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, R. Wen, Y. Liu, K. Zhang, J. Kou, J. Zhai and Z. L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8110–8116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Agarwal and K. Chatterjee, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16365–16397 RSC .
H. Chen, T. Liu, Z. Su, L. Shang and G. Wei, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 74–89 RSC .
W. Yin, L. Yan, J. Yu, G. Tian, L. Zhou, X. Zheng, X. Zhang, Y. Yong, J. Li, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6922–6933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and W. Wu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2013, 1, 62–90 CrossRef .
W. Hu, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2018, 30, 042001 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4632–4646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Gu, P. Fei, W. Mai, Y. Gao, R. Yang, G. Bao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3035–3040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Wang, K.-Y. Lai, Y.-C. Li, Y.-C. Chen and C.-P. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6289–6295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. He, C. L. Hsin, J. Liu, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 781–784 CrossRef .
W. Hu, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, K. Gupta and C.-P. Liu, MRS Bull., 2018, 43, 936–940 CrossRef .
K. Jenkins, V. Nguyen, R. Zhu and R. Yang, Sensors, 2015, 15, 22914–22940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rocke, S. Zimmermann, A. Wixforth, J. P. Kotthaus, G. Böhm and G. Weimann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 4099–4102 CrossRef CAS .
C. Du, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2018, 20, 1700760 CrossRef .
C. Pan, M. Chen, R. Yu, Q. Yang, Y. Hu, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1535–1552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, P. Lin, B. Chen, L. Wang, L. Chen, D. Li and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3877–3885 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lin, L. Zhu, D. Li, L. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14472–14479 RSC .
P. Lin, X. Chen, X. Yan, Z. Zhang, H. Yuan, P. Li, Y. Zhao and Y. Zhang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 860–868 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, Y. Chen, J. Sun, L. Jing, M. Liu, T. Liu, Y. Pan, X. Pu, B. Ma, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sha, J. Zhang, S. Tan, X. Luo and W. Hu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2019, 52, 213003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Y. Chang, P. Fei, R. L. Snyder and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1234–1240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Zheng, Z. Zhao, R. Huang, J. Nie, L. Li and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 448–453 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, J. Y. Park, E. B. Cho, T. Y. Kim, S. A. Han, T. H. Kim, Y. Liu, S. K. Kim, C. J. Roh, H. J. Yoon, H. Ryu, W. Seung, J. S. Lee, J. Lee and S. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–7 Search PubMed .
H. Song, I. Karakurt, M. Wei, N. Liu, Y. Chu, J. Zhong and L. Lin, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 7–13 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ding, H. Ji, Y. Chen, A. Herklotz, K. Dorr, Y. Mei, A. Rastelli and O. G. Schmidt, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3453–3458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, L. Wang, X. Feng, Z. Wang, Q. Xu, S. Bai, Y. Qin and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606346 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Jie, P. Chen, W. Liu and J. Hao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707007 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Martin-Sanchez, A. Mariscal, M. De Luca, A. T. Martin-Luengo, G. Gramse, A. Halilovic, R. Serna, A. Bonanni, I. Zardo, R. Trotta and A. Rastelli, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1399–1414 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Hui, X. Liu, W. Jie, N. Y. Chan, J. Hao, Y.-T. Hsu, L.-J. Li, W. Guo and S. P. Lau, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7126–7131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kurapati, K. Kostarelos, M. Prato and A. Bianco, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6052–6074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Kim, B. Kumar, K. Y. Lee, H.-K. Park, J.-H. Lee, H. H. Lee, H. Jun, D. Lee and S.-W. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2017 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-H. Wang, W.-S. Liao, N.-J. Ku, Y.-C. Li, Y.-C. Chen, L.-W. Tu and C.-P. Liu, Small, 2014, 10, 4718–4725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, H. J. Shin, H. Lee, C. K. Jeong, H. Park, G.-T. Hwang, H.-Y. Lee, D. J. Joe, J. H. Han, S. H. Lee, J. Kim, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Q. Zheng, B. Shi, Z. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700029 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Pu, L. Li, M. Liu, C. Jiang, C. Du, Z. Zhao, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 98–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. Xia, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Chen and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3092–3108 RSC .
H. O. H. Churchill and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Davila, L. Xian, S. Cahangirov, A. Rubio and G. Le Lay, New J. Phys., 2014, 16, 095002 CrossRef .
L. Tao, E. Cinquanta, D. Chiappe, C. Grazianetti, M. Fanciulli, M. Dubey, A. Molle and D. Akinwande, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 227–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. S. Al-Zahrani, J. Pal, M. A. Migliorato, G. Tse and D. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 382–391 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Mohammad B. Ghasemian	Dr Mohammad Bagher Ghasemian received a MSc degree in analytical chemistry from Iran University of Science & Technology in 2011. He holds a PhD degree in materials science and engineering from the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Australia. Currently, he is a postdoctoral research associate in the School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW, Australia, under the supervision of Prof. Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh focusing on the preparation and application of 2D materials, liquid metals, piezoelectric materials and device fabrication.
Torben Daeneke	Dr Torben Daeneke received his PhD in chemistry from Monash University, Australia in 2012. After graduating, he held postdoctoral appointments at the CSIRO and at RMIT University (Australia). He received a RMIT Vice Chancellor's postdoctoral fellowship in 2015. In 2018 he joined RMIT's School of Engineering as a faculty member and is now a senior lecturer. His research interests span from the chemistry of liquid metals over the synthesis and functionalisation of 2D materials to materials for energy and electronic applications.
Zahra Shahrbabaki	Zahra Shahrbabaki is a PhD student in the School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at the University of Sydney, Australia. She received a bachelor's degree in chemical engineering from the University of Tehran, Iran, in 2018. Her current research interests include the synthesis and characterization of novel materials for the assembly of electronic devices and sensors.
Jiong Yang	Dr Jiong Yang is a postdoctoral research associate under the supervision of Prof. Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in Sydney, Australia. Before joining UNSW, he earned his PhD degree from the Australian National University. He has published over 20 highly cited peer-reviewed journal papers and book chapters on the characterization and device fabrication of two-dimensional semiconductors. His research interests include two-dimensional semiconductors, liquid metals, nano-fabrication, nano-photonics, and optoelectronic applications.
Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh	Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh is a professor of chemical engineering at the University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. He is also a Laureate Fellow of the Australian Research Council. He has co-authored >425 research articles and reviews. Prof. Kalantar-Zadeh is a member of the editorial boards of several journals including Applied Materials Today, ACS Applied Nano Materials, ACS Sensors, Advanced Materials Technologies, Nano-Micro Letters and ACS Nano. He is internationally recognised for his work on sensors, two-dimensional materials and liquid metals. He was a recipient of the 2017 IEEE Sensor Council Achievement and 2018 ACS Advances in Measurement Science Lectureship Awards.

 	Fig. 1  (a–d) Schematic views of zero- to three-dimensional piezoelectric nanostructures. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a, b) Top views and (c, d) side views of atomically thin h-BN and 2H-MoS2, respectively. (B, N, Mo and S atoms are red, blue, silver and yellow, respectively.) The arrows show the direction of piezoelectric polarization. Hexagonal primitive cell and orthorhombic unit cell used in DFT simulations are highlighted in blue and yellow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Computed point groups of the identified layered materials. (a) The point group distribution of layered materials with and without centrosymmetry in the Materials Project database indicating that many bulk materials lose the centre of inversion upon exfoliation into monolayers. (b) Distribution of materials with nonzero band gaps as the essential criteria for piezoelectricity. The symmetry of primary bulk 3D crystals and their corresponding AA-stacked crystals have been shown in red and blue, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Hexagonal structure of the ZnO nanomaterial with Zn–O–Zn stacking while the O atom is in the centre of the tetrahedron before compression (left) while a piezoelectric field is generated when the unit cell of ZnO is compressed by an external force (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of a graphene layer with oxygen termination on a SiO2 substrate (left) and generation of oriented dipolar surface states adjacent to the substrate surface as the origin of the piezoresponse due to the chemical interaction between carbon and oxygen atoms (right). Reproduced from ref. 62. CC BY 4.0. (c) The emergence of polarization in a triangular-hole graphene nanosheet under the applied strain and (d) a finite element model showing the qualitative nature of distribution of strain towards the triangular hole in a thin sheet based on the linearized elasticity theory. Reprinted from ref. 66, with the permission of AIP Publishing. (e) Presence of piezoelectricity in an engineered graphene single sheet doped with different atoms on the surface due to broken inversion symmetry. Polarization changes perpendicular to the graphene sheet by applying an equibiaxial in-plane strain to graphene which can be used for determining the e31 piezocoefficient. The inset indicates the direction of positive polarization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. (f) Different configurations of piezoelectric graphene doped with BN. R and W are the radius of BN rings and the width of the separating wall, respectively, and the enclosed areas show the unit cell of each configuration. (g) D3h and C2V point symmetry defects (holes) in graphene which break the inversion symmetry of graphene. Unit cells are enclosed with black lines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (h) Top and side views of surface-modified h-BN with hydrogen and/or fluorine atoms; the left and right groups are chair and boat forms respectively, and the unit cells are shown with rectangles. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies.	 

K	0.23	52
Li	0.15	55
H	0.11	20
F	0.0018	−26
F, Li	0.30	30
H, F	0.034	−31
3D BN	0.33	—
3D GaN	1.05	—

 	Fig. 5  (a) The process of increasing the interlayer distance for calculating the interlayer binding energy and (b) the corresponding binding energy curve. (c) Interlayer binding energies for a series of materials calculated by random-phase approximation (RPA) and the Vydrov and van Voorhis (VV10) methods. (d) Comparison of the results of different DFT-based approaches for treating van der Waals (vdW) interactions to assess their relative deviations from RPA. Reprinted figure from ref. 97. Copyright (2012) by the American Physical Society. (f) The exfoliation energy histogram calculated by DFT for 826 layered materials and (e) their comparison with experimentally synthesised 2D MoS2 and SnSe. Reprinted figure from ref. 98. Copyright (2017) by the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The schematic of chemical vapour deposition of MoS2. 1 to 5 legends in order are: MoO3 nanopowder, sulfur powder, horizontal furnace, quartz substrates for deposition and quartz tube. Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Optical images of CVD-grown (b) MoS2 (reproduced from ref. 109. CC BY 4.0) and (c) MoSe2 (reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Thin layers of Al2O3, Gd2O3 and HfO2 shown on the cross-section of the liquid metal. (b) vdW exfoliation technique through the touch print of a solid substrate on the surface of the liquid metal which allows the transfer of interfacial oxide layer to the substrate. (c) Schematic description of the pressurized gas injection method into the liquid metal and bursting of the formed bubbles into the upper solution. A drop-cast resulting sheet has been imaged on a SiO2/Si wafer (right). Adjusted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The exfoliation of a Ga2O3 nanosheet by the vdW 2D printing method from the surface of a gallium liquid metal followed by a phosphatisation step through the chemical vapour phase reaction to produce GaPO4. (b) AFM topography and height profile of the aforementioned GaPO4. (c) d33 values of GaPO4 films with different thicknesses obtained through PFM measurements and DFT simulations. Reproduced from ref. 118. CC BY 4.0. (d) The MoS2 monolayer produced in the liquid phase using an asymmetric microcentrifugation surface acoustic wave device comprising LiNbO3 chips connected to the PDMS reservoir. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (e) Low-resolution bright-field TEM image of two stacking InSe nanosheets directly grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and (f) AFM image of the triangular InSe monolayer inside the square. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of a topology-scaling algorithm to find probable materials with layered motifs in their crystal structures. Black circles imply the cluster of bonded atoms in a unit cell while coloured circles represent seven periodic images of the same cluster for a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell of the original cell. Periodic images can bond to each other in 0, 1, 2 or 3 dimensions which define the dimensionality of structural motifs. (b) Buckled structures of GeTe and SnS with broken inversion symmetry that leads to piezoelectricity. Reprinted figure from ref. 98. Copyright (2017) by the American Physical Society. (c) Different groups of weakly bonded solids with 2D subunits and similar chemical compositions found through data mining in the Materials Project database (T: transition metal, Ac: actinides, F: halogens, As; large pnictogens, S: chalcogens and La: lanthanides). (d) Distribution of band gaps for bulk materials consisting of 2D layers estimated by the Kohn–Sham DFT calculation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Top and side views of the GaS monolayer. Lattice constant, thickness of the monolayer and the distance between two bonded metal atoms are marked with a0, h and dM–M, respectively. The x and y directions correspond to the armchair and zigzag directions of the monolayer, respectively, and the bottom arrow indicates the polarization direction after uniaxial stretching of the monolayer. Reproduced from ref. 149. CC BY 4.0. (b) Periodic trend of d11 in 37 two-dimensional materials within three categories of metal dichalcogenides, metal oxides, and group III–V semiconductors (except PbO which possesses an inversion centre and a null piezoelectric response). (c) Direct relation of d11 in 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (groups 5 and 6) to the ratio of anion and cation polarizabilities. (d) In group III–V compounds, d11 is directly correlated to the anion and cation polarizabilities ratio and the Bader charge and in-plane lattice parameter, except for AlN, InN and GaN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (e) 2D structural transition from a rectangular unit cell with threefold coordinated atoms to a square unit cell with fivefold coordinated atoms in SnS and GeSe monochalcogenide monolayers at Tc. Reprinted figure from ref. 150. Copyright (2003) by the American Physical Society. Molecular dynamics numerical measurements of (f) stress–strain, (g) polarization density–strain and (h) polarization density–electric field of 2D h-BN and MoS2 (symbols). The elastic constant, piezoelectric coefficient and dielectric constant for 2D h-BN and MoS2 (lines) were obtained by applying linear curve fitting on the corresponding results of MD simulations. Reprinted from ref. 151, copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier.	 


GaS	3.59	4.60	2.45	2.59	3.64	4.66	2.48	2.37
GaSe	3.76	4.78	2.46	2.10	3.82	4.83	2.47	1.81
InSe	4.00	5.28	2.78	1.17	4.09	5.39	2.82	1.40


CrS2	6.15	543	75	BeO	1.39	132	90	BN	0.61	139	90
CrSe2	8.25	575	75	MgO	6.63	230	430	Bp	2.18	240	520
CrTe2	13.45	654	85	CaO	8.47	155	560	BAs	2.19	204	520
MoS2	3.65	362	77	ZnO	8.65	266	190	BSb	3.06	206	590
MoSe2	4.55	383	80	CdO	21.7	333	260	AlN	2.75	223	510
MoTe2	7.39	467	83	PbO	0	0	85	AlP	0.09	3.5	520
WS2	2.12	243	77	
	
	
	
	AlAs	0.38	12.7	500
WSe2	2.64	257	80	
	
	
	
	AlSb	0.79	19.9	480
WTe2	4.39	323	120	
	
	
	
	GaN	2.00	148	420
NbS2	3.12	211	93	
	
	
	
	GaP	1.29	52.6	450
NbSe2	3.87	222	97	
	
	
	
	GaAs	1.50	49.0	410
NbTe2	4.45	184	100	
	
	
	
	GaSb	1.42	33.2	390
TaS2	3.44	267	87	
	
	
	
	InN	5.50	224	450
TaSe2	3.94	250	90	
	
	
	
	InP	0.02	0.5	440
TaTe2	4.72	207	140	
	
	
	
	InAs	0.08	1.7	410

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	InSb	1.15	17.9	380

 	Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of the PFM mechanism. (b) Schematics of vertical (1) and lateral (2) PFM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. (c) In-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) switching coupling models in an In2Se3 flake. (d) OOP and IP phase images of the In2Se3 flake after writing two square patterns indicating that the polarization direction can be changed by an external bias. Scale bar is 1 μm. (e) Local ferroelectric switching loops of the In2Se3 flake without and with a Au top electrode. The butterfly-like amplitude–voltage loop and sharp change in the phase graph are typically observed in ferroelectric materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Optical image of 2D MoS2 flakes (left) and visual evidence of their inherent piezoelectricity by measuring the vibration pattern and intensity in single layer MoS2 flakes by laser Doppler vibrometry (LDV) after acoustic wave excitation (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (b) Description of second-harmonic generation and schematic energy-level diagram. (c) Fitted curves of the second-harmonic (SH) intensity of odd-layer atomically-thin h-BN and MoS2 samples as a function of their crystallographic orientation. Column diagram shows the layer dependence of the SH intensity and surface nonlinear susceptibility in few layered (one to five) MoS2 and h-BN materials indicating the noncentrosymmetric structure of odd layer thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. (d) AFM image of a MoS2 thin film with a variable thickness from 1 layer to 3 layers (scale bar is 1 μm) and the corresponding second-harmonic image where the brighter color indexed by X means a stronger SHG intensity in the 1L region of MoS2 (scale bar is 5 μm). (e) Polar plot based on the second-harmonic intensity as a function of the angle in the MoS2 monolayer. Reprinted figure from ref. 190. Copyright (2013) by the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Optical image of a typical device made by depositing a single layer MoS2 flake on a PET flexible substrate between metal electrodes. (b) Mechanism of generating the piezoelectric output due to continuous stretching and releasing of the 2D MoS2 piezoelectric device. Piezoelectric polarizations are produced at the zigzag edges of the MoS2 monolayer upon stretching. (c) Decreasing the piezoelectric output by increasing the number of layers in the MoS2 flake while even layers and the bulk do not show any output. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd,14 copyright (2014). (d) Electromechanical behaviour and I–Vb characteristics of a MoS2 device under compressive (left) and tensile (right) strains at different applied forces. Inset photos present the relation between the locations of the applied forces and the resulting compressive/tensile strains. Current values decreased and increased under compressive and tensile strains, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 102. CC BY 4.0.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The effect of strain in a single-layer MoS2 device under an opposite drain bias which leads to an asymmetric modulation of carrier transport implying the piezotronic characteristics of the device. The current–voltage curve moves under the applied strains (ε with negative and positive signs denotes the compressive and tensile strains, respectively). (b) The band diagrams of a single layer MoS2 device. The observed piezotronic behaviour is explained based on the changes of Schottky barrier heights due to the strain-induced polarization, where ϕs and ϕd are the heights of Schottky barriers at source and drain contacts, respectively, and Ep represents the change in the Schottky barrier height as a result of piezoelectric polarization charges. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd,14 copyright (2014). (c) Optical image of a flexible two terminal single-layer MoS2 piezophototronic device. (d) Schematic description of the setup used for studying the piezophototronic properties of 2D MoS2. (e) Band diagrams explaining the working mechanism of the piezophototronic process and the relation between the photocurrent (Iph) and the applied strain in the monolayer MoS2 photodetector. The observed piezophototronic response is attributed to the variations of the Schottky barrier height caused by strain-induced polarization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208, copyright John Wiley and Sons, 2016.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The dependence of open circuit voltage (Voc) and maximum output power (Pm) under various applied strains in a two-dimensional MoS2 piezophototronic solar cell. (b) The comparison of γ of a piezophototronic solar cell in three 2D materials (MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2) as a function of strain. The ratio γ introduces the modulation for the open circuit voltage of a piezophototronic solar cell by piezoelectric charges. Reprinted from ref. 233, copyright (2017), with permission from Elsevier. (c) Electric field applied to a MoS2 monolayer along the armchair (Mo and S parallel, left) and zigzag (Mo and S in the same line, right) directions of the triangular monolayer MoS2 flake. (d) Voltage output resulted by applying strain to the MoS2 nanogenerator along the armchair and (e) zigzag directions. Reprinted from ref. 104, copyright (2016), with permission from Elsevier. (f) Piezoelectric energy harvester (PEH) based on the WSe2 monolayer with the Cr/Au electrodes and PET substrate. (g) Voltage output signal of the 2D WSe2-based PEH by applying a 1 GΩ external load. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234, copyright John Wiley and Sons, 2017. (h) A piezoelectric device based on a PbI2 nanosheet connected to Au electrodes on a PET substrate. (i) Forward and reversed open-circuit voltages of a 2D PbI2 piezoelectric device while the blue line indicates the open-circuit voltage of the device without a PbI2 nanosheet. Reprinted from ref. 235, copyright (2018), with permission from Elsevier. (j) Different stacking structures of bilayer WSe2; AA and AB stacking modes show polarity in the same direction while the directions of polarity in the AA′, AB′ and A′B stacking structures are opposite. (k) The comparison of simulated piezoelectric coefficients of monolayer WSe2 with AA and AB stacked structures. The inset shows the estimated polarization charges obtained by DFT simulation for the WSe2 monolayer compared to different stacking counterparts under the same uniaxial strain. (l) A large-area integrated PEH device created by parallel connection of four arrays of tb-WSe2 (each array consists of five tb-WSe2, as magnified in the left photo) and (m) the output voltage signals of this tb-WSe2 based PEH device measured periodically under 1 GΩ of load resistance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234, copyright John Wiley and Sons, 2017.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Side view of the stress distribution and deformation of a CdS thin film under the applied voltage induced by a PFM tip. (b, c) Linear increment of deformation and expansion of the CdS thin film from ∼30 to ∼150 pm when the applied DC voltage varies from −1 V to −5 V on the surface indicating a high vertical piezoelectricity in the CdS ultrathin film as an actuator. Adapted with permission from ref. 54, copyright American Association for the Advancement of Science, 2016. (d) The schematic illustration of a thin actuator used for applying electromechanical in-plane biaxial strain to graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
