Theoretical maximum efficiency of solar energy conversion in plasmonic metal–semiconductor heterojunctions   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP04512F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP04512F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30013-30022Theoretical maximum efficiency of solar energy conversion in plasmonic metal–semiconductor heterojunctions†

        
          
            Scott K. 
            Cushing
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Alan D. 
            Bristow
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Nianqiang 
            Wu
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia 26506-6315, USA
bDepartment of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia 26506-6106, USA. E-mail: nick.wu@mail.wvu.edu
Received 
      30th July 2015
    , Accepted 16th October 2015First published on 19th October 2015AbstractPlasmonics can enhance solar energy conversion in semiconductors by light trapping, hot electron transfer, and plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer (PIRET). The multifaceted response of the plasmon and multiple interaction pathways with the semiconductor makes optimization challenging, hindering design of efficient plasmonic architectures. Therefore, in this paper we use a density matrix model to capture the interplay between scattering, hot electrons, and dipole–dipole coupling through the plasmon's dephasing, including both the coherent and incoherent dynamics necessary for interactions on the plasmon's timescale. The model is extended to Shockley–Queisser limit calculations for both photovoltaics and solar-to-chemical conversion, revealing the optimal application of each enhancement mechanism based on plasmon energy, semiconductor energy, and plasmon dephasing. The results guide application of plasmonic solar-energy harvesting, showing which enhancement mechanism is most appropriate for a given semiconductor's weakness, and what nanostructures can achieve the maximum enhancement.
Introduction
Shockley and Queisser's (SQ) calculations1 revolutionized solar materials design by providing a framework to systematically improve photovoltaics and solar-to-chemical conversion by optimizing thermalization losses. The predicted maximum efficiencies are based on a thick-film limit in which all incident solar light is absorbed. Unfortunately, recombination losses necessitate thin films, negating the thick-film limit and preventing the predicted efficiencies from being obtained in practical structures.2 The energy required for water splitting is also incongruent with the ideal band gap for solar energy conversion, further constraining realizable efficiencies.3,4
Subsequent generations of solar design have proposed to increase efficiencies by further decreasing thermalization losses,5–10 but the issue of how to balance recombination and light absorption losses still exists. Plasmonic enhancement offers a different approach, focusing on increasing absorption in the semiconductor above and below the band gap instead of minimizing thermalization losses. When isolated, a metal can only weakly led to photoconversion, with most incident light converted to heat. The metal's plasmon, however, excels at trapping and manipulating light on a per volume basis with a dipole moment orders of magnitude larger than a semiconductor.11,12 Plasmonic enhancement can therefore allow thick-film limits to be achieved in thin films and nanostructures.
Solar-energy conversion can be enhanced by plasmonics in three ways, best understood by examining the progression of the plasmon after excitation. When light is resonant with the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) frequency the conduction electrons of the metal oscillate collectively, concentrating the incident light in the near field. The energy stored in the near field can be re-radiated as scatter, or the collective electron oscillations can dephase, destroying the coherence of the plasmon and leaving a hot-electron distribution.13 Scattering from the plasmon can be used for light trapping, increasing the path length of the photon through the semiconductor and the probability for absorption.14–18 The plasmonic hot electrons can overcome an interfacial Schottky barrier with a semiconductor, creating excited carriers in the semiconductor but where the plasmon absorbs, similar to a photosensitizer.19–23 The plasmon's near field can non-radiatively excite carriers in the semiconductor through plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer (PIRET), enhancing photoconversion where the semiconductor absorbs weakly.24–28
The relative strengths of scattering, hot electrons, and PIRET are connected by the rate at which the collective electron oscillations cease, known as the dephasing time. For bulk Au and Ag, the reported dephasing time ranges from 10–30 fs, with damping increasing at energies above the interband transition threshold of 2.3 and 3.9 eV respectively.13 Large metal nanoparticles (R ∼ 50 nm) generally have plasmon frequencies below the interband threshold, and given that radiative damping increases with volume, scattering dominates the plasmon's response.29 As the size is reduced (R ∼ 15 nm), the radiative efficiency drops and interband damping increases, with the near field dominating the optical response as well-known from surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS).30 If the size is further reduced (R ∼ 3 nm), high surface scattering rates cease the collective electron motion almost instantaneously, eliminating the resonance absorption peak, with incident light only heating the metal through hot carrier creation.31 The importance of the plasmon's dephasing in determining the efficiency of near-field versus hot electron enhancement was recently seen experimentally,25 with the degree of interface damping controlling whether energy absorbed by the plasmon was transferred non-radiatively to a semiconductor or converted to heat. The complex response of the plasmon makes optimization for a given semiconductor's weaknesses difficult, as depending on the size of the metal nanoparticle, the position of the plasmon peak, and the metal–semiconductor interface,26 any or all of the three enhancement pathways could be present.
Therefore, in this paper, a density matrix model25,32–35 is extended to include coupling between a plasmon and a semiconductor in SQ theory, relying on the plasmon's dephasing to simultaneously optimize the three enhancement pathways for photovoltaics (PV) and photo-electrochemical cells (PEC). For a single nanoparticle, scattering was found most efficient for dephasing times close to the bulk metal (20–30 fs, R ∼ 50 nm), replicating larger metal nanoparticles, with the plasmon increasing absorption above the band edge at energies where thermalization losses were least. Hot electron production rates should increase for small metal nanoparticles (<3 fs, R ∼ 3 nm), however, hot electron transfer was found optimal at dephasing times (3–10 fs, R ∼ 15 nm) which balance increased hot carrier production against the decrease in absorption from linewidth broadening, and at plasmon energies well below the band gap of the semiconductor. PIRET was found most efficient when the plasmon's dephasing (5–10 fs, R ∼ 15 nm) is similar to the semiconductor and the plasmon's energy overlaps the semiconductor's band edge. Overall, PIRET created the largest enhancement, almost double the PV and PEC efficiency versus the semiconductor alone. PIRET led to the highest enhancement because the plasmon's larger dipole moment allowed energy transfer at dephasing times which broadened the plasmon's linewidth to maximize spectral coverage. The resulting predictions give unified design guidelines for optimizing plasmonics towards the SQ limit in thin films and nanostructures, as well as extending spectral coverage in PEC.
Theory and model
Density matrix model
The density matrix model was chosen to represent the plasmon since it allows the importance of the dephasing13,25 in the plasmon's short-lived, coherent response to be captured. The density matrix treats the plasmon statistically, capturing the average optical dynamics of the ensemble of electron oscillations, both when collective and when dephased relative to each other.25,32–35 The density matrix also allows dipole–dipole coupling and scattering to be treated in the coherent and incoherent limits. This is crucial as the collective dipole moment decreases to that of the individual interband and intraband transitions after the plasmon dephases, changing the dipole–dipole coupling strength.
However, the density matrix model does neglect the size-dependent scattering and absorption probabilities given by Mie theory, as well as the size-dependent distribution of interband and intraband hot electrons and holes.22 To overcome these omissions, the yield of scattering and hot electron processes are fixed at their theoretical upper limits, ignoring the details of generation, but capturing how the semiconductor can best be enhanced spectrally by these processes. The semiconductor itself is treated under the framework of balancing band gap versus thermalization losses as consistently used for guiding solar design.1–10 The maximum efficiency calculations in this paper are therefore intended to place an upper limit on what is possible using the different plasmonic enhancement mechanisms, show how the plasmon's response can be best tailored towards the different enhancement routes, and guide what size and shape nanoparticle could best achieve these goals.
In the density matrix, the diagonal elements represent the mean population of the statistical ensemble of oscillators, and the off-diagonal elements represent the induced polarization. The plasmon (Fig. 1a) was modeled as an ensemble of dipole oscillators with a recombination time T1 and a dephasing time 1/T2 = 1/(2T1) + 1/(T2*). The factor of two times T1 ensures the correct decay rate of the population and T1* is pure dephasing. The natural linewidth broadening in the absorption and scattering cross sections is given by T2. The parameters were transferred into the density matrix (Fig. 1b) and solved using the quantum master equation. Further details of the density matrix model can be found in the ESI,† and the coupled-dipole model was based on ref. 36.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of density matrix model for describing the optical response of a plasmon. (a) Dipole model of the plasmon including the dephasing, T2, which leads to natural line broadening and the recombination, T1. (b) The parameters from the dipole model are input into the density matrix, which describes the ground (ρgg) and excited state (ρee) as the diagonal elements, and the coherences between the ground and excited state (ρeg, ρge) off-diagonal. (c) The density matrix is solved using the quantum master equation, giving the time dependences of the plasmon's population and polarization after excitation. 
The excited state population and the polarization represented the optical response of the plasmon, calculated by the expectation of the on and off-diagonal components of the density matrix respectively. In Fig. 1c, when light was first incident on the metal nanoparticle, the plasmon was in a coherence with the incident field and an uncertainty existed in its population. The uncertainty leads to the plasmon's linewidth through the energy-time uncertainty principle.37 During the coherence, incident light was concentrated in the plasmon's near field and the polarization was representative of scattered intensity.36 The polarization quickly ceased after the excitation pulse stopped because of the plasmon's short sub-20 fs coherence time, leaving an excited state population representative of hot electrons. The excited state population corresponded to absorption of incident light.
The interaction pathways between metal and semiconductor do not exist independently. Hot electron transfer, scattering, and dipole–dipole coupling are all possible before the plasmon has dephased and must be treated coherently. After the plasmon dephases, hot electron transfer remains possible, re-emission of light weakly occurs by fluorescence through intraband transitions, and dipole–dipole coupling exists in the incoherent limit. The relative contribution of each decay pathway in the coherent and incoherent limit is controlled by the dephasing time, as shown in Fig. 2 in the time and frequency domains.
 Fig. 2  Optical response of plasmon with varying dephasing. The polarization is representative of scattering and the excited state population of absorption. (a)–(c) As the dephasing rate was decreased, the relative strength of the polarization to excited state population increased. The coherence also extended further past the initial excitation pulse, shown in (c) in grey. (d)–(f) The decrease in dephasing rate led to an increase in the steady-state amplitude of the polarization relative to the population. Quicker dephasing rates led to a broader, but weaker absorption cross section, as represented by (d) and (f) which are scaled by a factor of 2.5 to match the scale in (d). 
For a 30 fs dephasing time, corresponding to a large (R ∼ 50 nm) metal nanoparticle with energy above the metal's interband transition, the plasmon had a strong polarization (scattering) response relative to absorption (Fig. 2a and d). As the dephasing rate was increased, corresponding to a smaller metal nanoparticle (R ∼ 15 nm), the scattering intensity dropped and the absorption began to dominate (Fig. 2b and e). The increase in dephasing rate decreased the peak absorption intensity but increased the absorption linewidth. This balance is important when optimizing the plasmon's strength and spectral range for capturing and converting solar energy. Decreasing the dephasing time to 3 fs (Fig. 2c and f) led to the absorption further dominating the optical response, but with the peak absorption strength also decreased.
Although the density matrix calculations were performed in the dipole approximation, in which scattering cross sections of large nanoparticles are not always adequately described, the optical response in Fig. 1 was consistent with damping-modified dielectric constant Mie theory calculations (Fig. S1, ESI†) and the data of ref. 13 for nanorods and nanospheres.
The density matrix model was next extended to include interaction with a semiconductor by representing the semiconductor as a sum over interband dipole transitions weighted by the joint density of states (JDOS).38 The JDOS was representative of a direct band gap semiconductor (see ESI,† for further calculation details), but with the finite linewidth of the interband dipole transitions leading to an Urbach tail, mimicking realistic semiconductors.39 The JDOS was scaled to give a semiconductor absorption of 50% of the incident light to represent a thin semiconductor film or nanoparticle. The resulting absorption (Fig. S2a, ESI†) was representative of the TiO2,26 Cu2O,25 and Fe2O327 commonly used in plasmonic samples.
In other words, the semiconductor's photoconversion yield with or without the plasmon was found by solving the density matrix in the steady state limit for a spectrum of dipole's covering the incident excitation frequency range, then weighting each excited state population by the JDOS. Near-field interaction between the plasmon and semiconductor interband transitions were treated in a coupled-dipole approximation, scattering yields were used to predict re-absorption probabilities, and hot electron transfer was assumed to occur at a fixed rate from the remaining plasmon population. This approach allowed coherent effects, such as dephasing on resonance energy transfer and scattering versus absorption, as well as incoherent transfer schemes to be included. All possible plasmon–semiconductor enhancement pathways were therefore linked to a single parameter, the dephasing, allowing for optimization to be feasible.
More specifically, the calculations were as follows for a given dephasing time, summarized in Fig. S3 (ESI†). First, the incident power and frequency were taken from an AM1.5G spectrum, see ESI,† for spectrum reference. The response of the plasmon and semiconductor with and without coupling were then calculated by solving the density matrix using the quantum master equation.36 The semiconductor's excited state population versus frequency with dipole–dipole coupling gave the effect of PIRET. A dipole–dipole coupling of 0.001 fs−1 was assumed, equivalent to a metal surface to semiconductor separation distance of ∼5–10 nm for a ∼10–15 nm metal nanoparticle. The plasmon's polarization gave the effect of scattering under the assumption that the plasmon re-reflected light not absorbed by the semiconductor. The plasmon's scattering peak at a dephasing of 8–10 fs was scaled so that 100% of re-reflected light was trapped by the semiconductor, equivalent to the plasmon acting as a back-reflector with a dephasing dependent efficiency and linewidth. The plasmon's remaining excited state population after PIRET and scattering was multiplied by a constant transfer rate to represent hot electron transfer. The transfer rate was taken as 10% from the limiting value in ref. 40, and the transferred carriers were energetically added to the semiconductor's excited state population where the plasmon absorbed.
The calculated plasmonic enhancement was next converted into a combined absorption profile for plasmon and semiconductor. The combined absorption profile was integrated over the solar spectrum to determine the number of photons absorbed, giving the photocurrent after thermalization losses were subtracted. The output power, determined by multiplying the photocurrent by the input voltage for PV and the band gap energy for PEC, then gave the overall efficiency after dividing by the AM1.5G solar spectrum. The thermal distributions of plasmon-excited carriers were assumed identical to the combined absorption for PIRET and scattering. For hot electron transfer, excited carriers were treated as if deposited over a Schottky barrier at energy of Eg/2 + Eplasmon under the assumption of an intrinsic semiconductor.
The approximations made in this paper should be further detailed before reviewing the results. First, the effect of hot electron transfer on the population and subsequent effect on PIRET and scattering was neglected. This approximation was made because the ∼10% reduction in excited state population did not include the effect of increased interfacial dephasing through electron transfer, which can lead to decreases of 50% in PIRET efficiency,25 and in realistic situations hot electron transfer is expected to be closer to 1%.40 Otherwise, the plasmon's population included the competing effects of scattering versus absorption versus dipole–dipole coupling. The change in refractive index of the semiconductor on optical response was also neglected, as well as the necessary sizes for the dipole–dipole treatment and near field effects to be fully valid. Finally, the heating of the plasmon and its effect on PV and PEC was neglected, but could be included in the future by assuming the remaining population of the plasmon is converted to phonons and heat.
Results
Photoconversion enhancement
The plasmonic enhancement pathways were first considered independent of each other, shown in Fig. 3 for a plasmon energy of 1.8 eV and a range of plasmon dephasings and semiconductor band gaps. The representative 1.8 eV plasmon energy was chosen because it is near the energetic limit for water splitting and the peak intensity of the solar spectrum. The conclusions were the same for other plasmon energies, as reflected later in Fig. 4 and 5. The interplay between dephasing and dominant plasmonic enhancement mechanism can be seen, as well as the ability of the plasmon to increase photoconversion above and below the semiconductor band edge. Fig. 3 is scaled as the relative enhancement to photoconversion by the plasmon, determined by dividing the plasmon-coupled-semiconductor population by the semiconductor alone, such that an enhancement of 1.4 translates to the plasmon creating 1.4 times more carriers across for a spectrally flat spectrum than the semiconductor by itself.
 Fig. 3  Relative enhancement of semiconductor photoconversion by the plasmon. (a) The relative enhancement versus the plasmon's dephasing and semiconductor band gap, defined by dividing the coupled-plasmon-semiconductor absorption integrated the incident spectrum by the semiconductor absorption integrated over the same incident spectrum. The plasmon energy was fixed at 1.8 eV. (b) A cut-out of the 3D plot of part (a) at a semiconductor band gap of 1.8 eV, the semiconductor dephasing time is shown for comparison. The dashed line in (a) shows the approximate position of the cut in part (b). 
 Fig. 4  Maximum efficiency for solar energy conversion of an AM1.5G spectrum through (a) photovoltaics and (b) photo-to-chemical conversion. The semiconductor scale in (b) only goes to 1.4 eV because the assumed 0.8 eV in losses and 0.5 eV offset from the absorption tail. The plasmonic enhancement mechanism responsible for the maximum conversion efficiency at a plasmon–semiconductor energy combination is shown. The maximum efficiency is labeled on each contour, along with the value from the semiconductor alone at that point in parenthesis. The dephasing at several points across the graph which led to the maximum enhancement is also shown. Ranges corresponding to the given dephasing times for Au nanosphere (NS) radius and Au nanorod (NR) aspect ratio are overlaid from ref. 13. A cut-out at 1.5 eV and 2 eV for the (a) photovoltaic and (b) photo-to-chemical conversion calculation is included in (c) and (d) respectively. 
 Fig. 5  Maximum possible enhancement for solar energy conversion for (a) photovoltaics and (b) photo-to-chemical conversion. Whereas in Fig. 4 the plasmonic enhancement mechanisms are treated separately, in this figure the enhancement mechanisms act synergistically. The maximum efficiency is labeled on each contour, along with the value from the semiconductor alone at that point in parenthesis. Each color contour corresponds to a dephasing range, as labelled at several points across the graph. In (c) and (d) the maximum enhancement from an optimal plasmon energy and dephasing is compared to the semiconductor alone absorbing light for the model of the paper and the case of 100% absorption at the band edge. The ∼2 eV band gap required for water splitting is indicated. 

Fig. 3a shows scattering was most efficient at increasing photoconversion when the plasmon's dephasing was close to the value of bulk metals (20–30 fs) and the plasmon energy was greater than the semiconductor band edge. These dephasing times increased the scattering yield relative to absorption, as also seen in Fig. 2, allowing more light to be trapped by reflection instead of being converted to heat in the metal by absorption. Again, this dephasing range corresponds to the metal nanoparticle being larger (R ∼ 50 nm) since radiative efficiency increases with volume.14–18 The plasmon energy was optimized above the semiconductor band edge for scattering because it only acts to increase absorption where the semiconductor can already absorb light. The largest scattering enhancement was therefore seen for a semiconductor with band gap at the 1.8 eV plasmon resonance, matching the most intense portion of the solar spectrum. While these conclusions are for a single particle picture where increased dephasing narrows the plasmon's linewidth, the design conclusions of minimizing plasmon absorption and maximizing reflection are still congruent with those of more complex light-trapping structures.
Opposite to scattering, hot electron transfer created the largest increase in photoconversion when the semiconductor had an ultraviolet (UV) band gap and the plasmon absorbed light below band gap. Although smaller dephasing times mean less energy is lost to scattering and dipole–dipole coupling, the peak absorption intensity also decreases, see Fig. 2, balancing any gains. The hot electron transfer enhancement was therefore relatively constant across the dephasing range tested in Fig. 3, only decreasing slightly at both extremes. The optimal dephasing time for hot electron transfer was found to be 3–10 fs, consistent with the 10–20 nm nanoparticles most common experimentally.19–23 This conclusion does not take into account hot electron generation in the metal away from the plasmon resonance, or the dependence of hot electron and hole energy on metal nanoparticle size and interband transition energy,22 but the importance of balancing plasmon dephasing against overall absorption intensity is still a central design criteria for efficient hot electron enhancement.

Fig. 3 also shows that PIRET increased photoconversion near/below the semiconductor band edge, only limited by the overlap of the semiconductor's and plasmon's absorption profiles. This trend is consistent with incoherent24 and coherent25 dipole–dipole coupling theory, which show resonance energy transfer is most efficient when the two dipole's linewidths overlap. The largest PIRET enhancement happened when the plasmon energy was slightly sub-band gap in the semiconductor's absorption tail. At this spectral position the plasmon's larger dipole moment allowed strong light absorption and subsequent population transfer to occur, extending the semiconductor's photoconversion range.

Fig. 3b reveals that PIRET was most efficient when the plasmon had a dephasing smaller but similar in magnitude to the semiconductor. Above and below this range, the efficiency dropped off quickly because of a balance of three effects. First, similar to hot electrons, the absorption intensity must be optimized against the linewidth to allow the maximum increase in solar energy conversion. Second, as the dephasing increased, more of the plasmon's energy was re-radiated as scatter, decreasing the available energy for dipole–dipole coupling. Third, during initial excitation the semiconductor and plasmon were in a coherence and shared the captured energy. This means that if the semiconductor and plasmon had identical dephasing times and dipole moments, the final incoherent populations would be equal. As the plasmon's dephasing time was decreased (increased) relative to the semiconductor, however, an energy transfer direction is defined since more (less) energy was trapped on the plasmon on average. The dependence of energy transfer direction on dephasing was experimentally seen in ref. 25.
Overall, PIRET led to the largest enhancement of the three mechanisms, exciting ∼1.3–1.4 times more carriers than the semiconductor alone, consistent with experimental enhancements.24–26,41,42 PIRET created the largest enhancement to the semiconductor's population because dipole–dipole coupling occurred at dephasing rates which correlated with broad plasmon linewidths. At these dephasings, the plasmon could absorb light over a wide spectral range while still transferring population to the semiconductor effectively, converting more of the solar spectrum. This is in contrast to optimized scattering, which in the density matrix model could only be achieved with limited linewidths, decreasing the number of photons captured. Hot electron transfer was maximal at broad linewidths like PIRET, but the weaker transfer rate limited the possible enhancement.
PV and PEC Enhancement
The relative enhancements of Fig. 3 were next converted into a maximum solar energy conversion efficiency (Fig. 4a for PV and Fig. 4b for PEC), using the solar spectrum instead of the assumed flat spectrum. The efficiency of the plasmon-enhanced semiconductor is labelled on the contour lines. The efficiency of a semiconductor alone at the given band gap energy (constant in plasmon energy) is also labeled in parenthesis for comparison. This value is shifted from thick-film SQ limits because of the semiconductor's absorption profile (Fig. S2b, ESI†). The dephasings which led to the maximum efficiency at several points are also marked, including a representative nanorod or nanosphere size from ref. 13. Further, the enhancement mechanism responsible for the given efficiency is shown as the color contour plot. All color contour plots are smoothed over the finite grid of semiconductor and plasmon energies used, so boundaries between mechanisms should not be taken as sharp.
The design conclusions of Fig. 3 were reflected in the maximum-efficiency calculations of Fig. 4, with enhancement factors shifted by the shape of the solar spectrum. For both PV and PEC, hot electron transfer was dominate for wide band gap semiconductors coupled to sub-band-gap plasmons, with the plasmon's broad linewidth extending spectral coverage. Hot electrons doubled the efficiency of wide band gap semiconductors by a factor of 2 to 3 for the assumed 10% transfer rate. The largest hot electron transfer enhancement occurred for dephasing times which balanced absorption intensity versus linewidth. For PEC, the power was calculated from the short circuit current and the band edge voltage minus 0.8 eV in losses,3 including an additional 0.5 eV offset to account for the band-edge tail. This translated to a larger hot electron enhancement for PEC than PV because smaller thermalization losses were present at short circuit. In PV a narrow range where a small band gap semiconductor was best enhanced by hot electrons also was found. This occurred because hot electron transfer deposited carriers in the semiconductor at a different energy than direct light absorption, avoiding some thermalization losses.
The balance of light absorption versus thermalization also modified the optimal conditions for PIRET and scattering compared to Fig. 3. For PV, scattering was found dominant at plasmon energies above the semiconductor band edge, with dephasing times approaching the bulk metal. These dephasing times led to large scattering cross sections which increased semiconductor absorption where thermalization losses were smallest. Near the band edge, PIRET more efficiently captured and transferred light in the semiconductor's weak absorption tail than scattering. For PEC, PIRET dominated both above and near the band edge because the effects of thermalization were diminished at short circuit, and the broad plasmon linewidth better increased spectral coverage than scattering.
Overall, PIRET led to the largest solar energy conversion efficiency compared to hot electrons and scattering. The peak PV and PEC efficiency was almost doubled when the plasmon was overlapped with the band edge and the plasmon's dephasing time was close to that of the semiconductor. Ref. 13 shows that this condition can be met using Au nanorods tuned across the resonance range tested here and Au nanospheres with resonances tuned to less than 2 eV (R < 50 nm).
It is important to note that the scattering amplitude was scaled to allow 100% light trapping at 8–10 fs, making scattering in PV slightly more efficient above the semiconductor band edge than PIRET. If the condition was relaxed to 100% light trapping at 15 fs, scattering became less dominant (Fig. S4, ESI†), showing the relative equivalence of PIRET and scattering for enhancements above, but not near, the semiconductor band edge. The equivalence occurs because both mechanisms act to increase the probability with which the semiconductor absorbs a photon, just through different radiative or non-radiative interactions.
In Fig. 4 the three plasmonic enhancement mechanisms were optimized separately to show the best individual application. However, when a metal nanoparticle is combined with a semiconductor, all three enhancement routes can co-exist and enhance photoconversion simultaneously. Fig. 5 therefore shows the maximum efficiency for PV and PEC obtained considering scattering, hot electrons, and PIRET together. The dephasing that led to the peak enhancement is shown by the colored contours. The nanosphere and nanorod size range which can satisfy these dephasings from ref. 13 is the same as shown in Fig. 4. When acting synergistically, the plasmon increased the peak maximum efficiency over two times to 18% for PV and 15% for PEC from 8% and 5% for the semiconductor alone. For PV and PEC, the maximum enhancement occurred for dephasing times of around 10 fs, indicating PIRET was still leading to the largest enhancement but with scattered light further increasing photoconversion. Inclusion of thermalization losses in PV again altered the optimal dephasing times and linewidths from PEC.
The ability of the plasmon to restore a weakly absorbing semiconductor to the SQ limit is seen in Fig. 5c and d. For photovoltaics the thick-film limit was approached at band gaps larger than ∼1.5 eV. For photoelectrochemical cells, the thick-film limit was actually surpassed at band gaps larger than 1.8 eV, the energy necessary for water splitting. Plasmon-coupled-semiconductors can outperform the thick-film limit because the plasmon increases the light absorption spectral range, acting similar to a two semiconductor heterostructure. The thick-film limit is not surpassed in PV because thermalization losses balance the increase in spectral absorption.
Discussion

Fig. 4 and 5 show the unique approach plasmonics gives to solar energy harvesting. A plasmon alone cannot efficiently drive the solar energy conversion process due to the short lifetime of excited intraband transitions. Instead, it very effectively acts as an antenna, absorbing a large amount of light in a small volume, and then using this energy to create carriers in the semiconductor both above and below the band gap. SQ limit calculations usually serve as an upper limit, as recombination losses require thin films which cannot absorb all incident light. With the inclusion of plasmonics, thick-film like absorption can be reached while still using thin films and nanostructures that balance recombination losses.
This goal, however, can only be achieved by selecting the proper enhancement mechanism and plasmon dephasing based on semiconductor band gap. The design guidelines gained from Fig. 3–5 are summarized in Fig. 6, wherein the optimal use of each plasmonic enhancement mechanism is represented. Again, it must be remembered these conclusions are for a single particle, or a per-volume, based enhancement. In more complex architectures light trapping can lead to 100% trapping across the solar spectrum,14–18 and although the transfer efficiency of hot electrons remains around 1% in most plasmonic nanoparticles,19–23 possibilities to reach 30% have been shown.43 However, the same argument can be made for applying more complex structures to dipole–dipole coupling, increasing its transfer rate as well. Therefore, the important conclusion of Fig. 3–5 is that when considered on a per-volume basis, the plasmon's near field will lead to the largest enhancement in photoconversion.
 Fig. 6  Representative schematic for where each plasmonic mechanism will lead to the largest enhancement in semiconductor photoconversion. The linewidths have been exaggerated in the schematic relative to the semiconductor absorption which is shown in grey. 
How to optimize plasmonic nanoparticles for a particular dephasing should also be commented on. The dephasing range used in this paper covers 0.1–30 fs, which at the high side is on the scale of bulk Au or Ag, indicating a plasmonic nanoparticle with little additional damping, and on the low side covers heavy damping on length scales where quantum effects could occur. Within this range, the dephasing is most easily selected by tuning nanoparticle size, shape, and metal. Nanoparticle size determines dephasing by the balance between surface damping effects in small nanoparticles versus the increase in radiative efficiency with metal volume. The size also determines the resonance position relative to the interband transition threshold of a given metal. For a similar resonance and size, ref. 13 showed the nanoparticle shape is equally important, with nanospheres having a quicker dephasing time than nanorods.
These guidelines can be used to qualitatively select a nanoparticle shape, however more complex geometries require direct measurement of dephasing times. This is difficult, as single-particle measurements or similar complex experimental techniques are necessary to accurately determine dephasing times within the inhomogenously broadened experimental linewidth. As a substitute, finite difference time domain (FDTD) or other classical EM calculations can be used to estimate the dephasing time of complex structures through the linewidth (Γ) by T2 = 2ℏ/Γ where 2ℏ = 1316 meV fs.13 Simulation can be used to predict an optimal structure to match the dephasing times given in this paper, then verified by comparison to experimental absorption and characterization. This procedure is already common in predicting spectral range and local electromagnetic field enhancements for semiconductor photoconversion, but should be extended to selecting the appropriate dephasing and plasmonic enhancement mechanism.
The predictions were also compared against representative results for experimental systems to verify the model. It is difficult to compare the absolute performance because it depends on the complete solar system's efficiency and not just the plasmon. Instead, the ratio of the total solar energy conversion efficiency with and without the plasmon was compared against Fig. 4 and 5. An estimated dephasing of 1–3 femtoseconds was used to be consistent with most plasmonic geometries. For photovoltaic cells with bandgaps of ∼1.8 eV and plasmon energies of ∼1.8 eV44 and ∼3 eV45 in a scattering configuration, enhancements of ∼1.2 were reported, consistent with the 1.2–1.4 times enhancement predicted from Fig. 4 when the 60% reflection efficiencies from the experimental geometries is taken into account. For a PEC using hot electrons, usually relying on TiO2 with a bandgap of 3.2 eV and a Au plasmon with energy ∼2 eV, the enhancements have consistently been less than 1%.21,23 If the upper-limit 10% transfer rate used in calculating Fig. 4 is adjusted to the 1% or less reported, this changes the enhancement predicted from 3 times to <1.1 times, in line with experimental values. For PIRET with a plasmon energy ∼1.9 eV and semiconductor bandgap of ∼1.8 eV,25 an enhancement of 2.3 was reported by integrating the action spectrum photocatalysis over the solar spectrum. Although photocatalysis was not calculated, this is close to the unassisted PEC shown in Fig. 4, which predicts an enhancement of 2.2 times, in line with experimental value.
These experimental results validate the model, but also point to a larger theme. Only PIRET is optimized in the 1–3 fs dephasing range of most plasmonic nanoparticles, and correspondingly the experimental enhancement is the largest, congruent with the theoretical predictions. For scattering and hot electrons, the optimal dephasing range is not reached. Therefore, if plasmonic enhancements are to be maximized, more attention must be paid to tuning the dephasing, in addition to choosing the appropriate plasmon energy and enhancement mechanism.
Conclusions
In summary, the possible plasmonic enhancement mechanisms were unified in a predictive model using a density matrix approach, allowing the relative scattering, dipole–dipole, and hot electron enhancements to be calculated including the effects of dephasing and coherence. This approach revealed the optimal dephasing for each enhancement mechanism, as well as what plasmon energy and mechanism will lead to the largest enhancement in photoconversion for a given semiconductor band gap. Scattering dominated at dephasings close to the bulk metal when the plasmon had an energy above the semiconductor's band gap. Hot electrons dominated for wide band gap semiconductors when the plasmon had a small energy and a dephasing that balanced absorption intensity and linewidth. PIRET led to the largest enhancement when the plasmon's dephasing was close to the semiconductor and the plasmon was overlapped with the band edge. In general, the largest enhancement is possible by using PIRET and scattering in conjunction to increase photoconversion near the band edge. The results presented will simplify design and optimization of plasmonics for solar energy enhancement in PV and PEC by allowing the best plasmon dephasing and energy to be selected for a given semiconductor band edge.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Army Research Laboratory (W911NF-14-2-0116), the National Science Foundation (CBET-1233795), and NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant (1102689). WVU shared facilities use is appreciated.
References
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shah, P. Torres, R. Tscharner, N. Wyrsch and H. Keppner, Science, 1999, 285, 692 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bolton, S. Strickler and J. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Weber and M. J. Dignam, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1258, 131, 1258 CrossRef PubMed .
A. De Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839 CrossRef .
R. T. Ross and T. L. Hsiao, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 4783 CrossRef PubMed .
R. T. Ross and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 3813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 457, 3 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Trupke, M. A. Green and P. Würfel, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 4117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Willets and R. P. Van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sonnichsen, T. Franzl, T. Wilk, G. Plessen, J. Feldmann, O. Wilson and P. Mulvaney, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 077402 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Catchpole and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21793 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aydin, V. E. Ferry, R. M. Briggs and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 517 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Pala, J. S. Q. Liu, E. S. Barnard, D. Askarov, E. C. Garnett, S. Fan and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2095 Search PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, H. B. T. Li, E. Verhagen, R. J. Walters, R. E. I. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 237 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Krämer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, H. Zhang and Y. K. Gun’ko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16616 CAS .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, T. R. Senty, F. Meng, A. D. Bristow, A. Manivannan and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 601–607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, J. Bright, B. Yost, P. Zheng, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16239 CAS .
E. Thimsen, F. L. Formal, M. Grätzel and S. C. Warren, Nano Lett., 2010, 11, 35 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668 CrossRef CAS .
A. Campion and P. Kambhampati, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1998, 27, 241 RSC .
L. B. Scaffardi, N. Pellegri, O. De Sanctis and O. J. Tocho, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 158 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Sadeghi, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2013, 88, 013831 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, A. O. Govorov and G. W. Bryant, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 97, 146804 CrossRef .
R. D. Artuso and G. W. Bryant, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 195419 CrossRef .

          A. V. Zayats and S. A. Maier, Active Plasmonics and Tuneable Plasmonic Metamaterials, Wiley, New Jersey,  2013 Search PubMed .
G. V. Varada and G. S. Agarwal, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1992, 45, 6721 CrossRef .

          L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .
P. C. Becker, H. L. Fragnito, C. H. Brito Cruz, R. L. Fork, J. E. Cunningham, J. E. Henry and C. V. Shank, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1988, 61, 1647 CrossRef CAS .
S. John, C. Soukoulis, M. H. Cohen and E. N. Economou, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986, 57, 1777 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Leenheer, P. Narang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 134301 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, J. Bright, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, P. Zheng, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 47 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meng, S. K. Cushing, J. Li, S. Hao and N. Wu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1949 CrossRef CAS .
A. Giugni, B. Torre, A. Toma, M. Francardi, M. Malerba, A. Alabastri, R. P. Zaccaria, M. I. Stockman and E. Di Fabrizio, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-S. Kim, S.-I. Na, J. Jo, D.-Y. Kim and Y.-C. Nah, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 073307 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tan, R. Santbergen, A. H. M. Smets and M. Zeman, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp04512fThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of density matrix model for describing the optical response of a plasmon. (a) Dipole model of the plasmon including the dephasing, T2, which leads to natural line broadening and the recombination, T1. (b) The parameters from the dipole model are input into the density matrix, which describes the ground (ρgg) and excited state (ρee) as the diagonal elements, and the coherences between the ground and excited state (ρeg, ρge) off-diagonal. (c) The density matrix is solved using the quantum master equation, giving the time dependences of the plasmon's population and polarization after excitation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Optical response of plasmon with varying dephasing. The polarization is representative of scattering and the excited state population of absorption. (a)–(c) As the dephasing rate was decreased, the relative strength of the polarization to excited state population increased. The coherence also extended further past the initial excitation pulse, shown in (c) in grey. (d)–(f) The decrease in dephasing rate led to an increase in the steady-state amplitude of the polarization relative to the population. Quicker dephasing rates led to a broader, but weaker absorption cross section, as represented by (d) and (f) which are scaled by a factor of 2.5 to match the scale in (d).	 

 	Fig. 3  Relative enhancement of semiconductor photoconversion by the plasmon. (a) The relative enhancement versus the plasmon's dephasing and semiconductor band gap, defined by dividing the coupled-plasmon-semiconductor absorption integrated the incident spectrum by the semiconductor absorption integrated over the same incident spectrum. The plasmon energy was fixed at 1.8 eV. (b) A cut-out of the 3D plot of part (a) at a semiconductor band gap of 1.8 eV, the semiconductor dephasing time is shown for comparison. The dashed line in (a) shows the approximate position of the cut in part (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  Maximum efficiency for solar energy conversion of an AM1.5G spectrum through (a) photovoltaics and (b) photo-to-chemical conversion. The semiconductor scale in (b) only goes to 1.4 eV because the assumed 0.8 eV in losses and 0.5 eV offset from the absorption tail. The plasmonic enhancement mechanism responsible for the maximum conversion efficiency at a plasmon–semiconductor energy combination is shown. The maximum efficiency is labeled on each contour, along with the value from the semiconductor alone at that point in parenthesis. The dephasing at several points across the graph which led to the maximum enhancement is also shown. Ranges corresponding to the given dephasing times for Au nanosphere (NS) radius and Au nanorod (NR) aspect ratio are overlaid from ref. 13. A cut-out at 1.5 eV and 2 eV for the (a) photovoltaic and (b) photo-to-chemical conversion calculation is included in (c) and (d) respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Maximum possible enhancement for solar energy conversion for (a) photovoltaics and (b) photo-to-chemical conversion. Whereas in Fig. 4 the plasmonic enhancement mechanisms are treated separately, in this figure the enhancement mechanisms act synergistically. The maximum efficiency is labeled on each contour, along with the value from the semiconductor alone at that point in parenthesis. Each color contour corresponds to a dephasing range, as labelled at several points across the graph. In (c) and (d) the maximum enhancement from an optimal plasmon energy and dephasing is compared to the semiconductor alone absorbing light for the model of the paper and the case of 100% absorption at the band edge. The ∼2 eV band gap required for water splitting is indicated.	 

 	Fig. 6  Representative schematic for where each plasmonic mechanism will lead to the largest enhancement in semiconductor photoconversion. The linewidths have been exaggerated in the schematic relative to the semiconductor absorption which is shown in grey.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp04512f

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
