Oligothiophene-functionalized naphthalimides and perylene imides: design, synthesis and applications   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM16690A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM16690A
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8717-8733Oligothiophene-functionalized naphthalimides and perylene imides: design, synthesis and applications†

        
          
            José L. 
            Segura
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Helena 
            Herrera
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Peter 
            Bäuerle
          
          
        
      b
aDepartamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, E-28040, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: segura@quim.ucm.es;  Fax: +34 91344103
bInstitute of Organic Chemistry II and Advanced Materials, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, D-89081 Ulm, Germany. E-mail: peter.baeuerle@uni-ulm.de;  Fax: +49 7315022840
Received 
      19th December 2011
    , Accepted 15th February 2012First published on 16th March 2012AbstractThe syntheses of a variety of oligothiophene-functionalized naphthalimides and perylene imides have provided fundamental understanding of energy and charge carrier generation/flow at the molecular level. The correlation of the electrochemical and photophysical properties with their molecular structures is crucial for rational exploration of new materials for (opto)electronic applications including organic solar cells (OSCs), dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and organic field effect transistors (OFETs). This review surveys the different structural modifications carried out in these molecular ensembles with special attention to the electrochemical and photophysical properties of these materials and the relationship with their properties which have allowed, among others, the rational design of ambipolar semiconductors for OFETs. These types of ensembles have been also employed in the investigation of novel molecular design strategies to tailor organic p–n heterojunctions with molecular-level precision as well as in the development of new techniques for the direct characterization of the internal electronic structure of single bipolar molecular heterojunctions including subnanometre features of the intramolecular donor–acceptor interface.José L. SeguraJosé L. Segura obtained his PhD in Organic Chemistry in 1994 at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid. After a stay in the group of Professor W. Daily (University of Pennsylvania) he performed post-doctoral stays in the group of Prof. M. Hanack (University of Tübingen) and in the group of Professor F. Wudl (University of California at Santa Barbara). In 1995 Dr Segura joined the faculty in the Department of Organic Chemistry at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid where he is currently a Professor in Organic Chemistry. Results have been published in more than 120 peer-reviewed scientific papers and 6 book chapters. His current research interests involve the synthesis, electrochemical and photophysical characterization of π-conjugated organic molecular and macromolecular materials for optoelectronics.Helena HerreraHelena Herrera was born in 1983 in Madrid, Spain. She studied chemistry at Complutense University in Madrid where she graduated in 2008. She is currently a PhD student in the group of Prof. José L. Segura focusing amongst others in the synthesis, electrochemical and photophysical characterization of oligothiophene–rylene ensembles for (opto)electronics.Peter BäuerlePeter Bäuerle received his PhD in organic chemistry from the University of Stuttgart (Germany, 1985) working with Prof. F. Effenberger. After a post-doctoral year at MIT, Boston (USA, 1986), in the group of Prof. M. S. Wrighton, he completed his habilitation (1994) at the University of Stuttgart. After being a Professor of Organic Chemistry at the University of Würzburg (Germany, 1994–95), he became Director of the Institute for Organic Chemistry II and Advanced Materials at the University of Ulm (Germany, since 1996). Current research interests of the group include development of novel organic semiconducting materials, in particular, conjugated poly- and oligothiophenes, structure–property relation, self-assembling properties, and their applications in electronic devices, in particular organic solar cells. Results have been published in more than 260 peer-reviewed scientific papers, 8 book chapters and 7 patents. For his work in the field of plastic electronics he was awarded with the René Descartes Prize of the European Union (2000). Guest Professorships at the University of Osaka (Japan, 2002), Université Rennes 1 (France, 2004), Melbourne (Australia, 2008), Shanghai (China, 2010), and Gainesville (USA, 2012) followed. He is co-founder of Heliatek GmbH, Dresden/Ulm, a spin-off company devoted for the production of organic solar cells (2006). Since October 2009 he serves as Vice President for research at the University of Ulm.
1. Introduction
Oligothiophenes have been extensively investigated as active components in organic electronic devices and molecular electronics.1,2 They have been used in the fabrication of organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) or lasers,3 organic field-effect transistors (OFETs),4 integrated circuits and organic solar cells (OSCs).5 Additionally, monodisperse oligomers have received in recent years a great deal of attention given that they are excellent model compounds for the corresponding polydisperse polymers which include chain length distributions, defects and interruptions of the conjugated chains.6 They have been of major importance for establishing structure–property relationships and extrapolations to the polymer have been established by monitoring how different properties depend on the chain length which is the so-called oligomeric approach.7,8 Thus, since the first report on polythiophene in 1980,9 many smaller oligothiophenes have been synthesized such as those extensively reviewed by Roncali,10,11 Zotti,12 Pomerantz,13 Bryce et al.,14 Swager et al.15,16 and Bäuerle et al.2,17
Donor (D)–acceptor (A) oligothiophene derivatives have received a great deal of attention due to their interesting electrochemical properties which make them interesting candidates for ambipolar field-effect charge transport18–20 as well as because of their varied photophysical properties. In this review article we will concentrate on the different oligothiophenes covalently linked to naphthalimides21,22 and perylene imides,23,24 the smallest members of the rylene colorant family,25 because of their significance as organic materials and in supramolecular chemistry. We will review the different structural modifications carried out in these molecular ensembles, the influence of these modifications on their electrochemical and photophysical properties in order to find application in the fabrication of organic field effect transistors (OFETs), organic solar cells (OSCs) and dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).
2. Functionalization of perylene imides and naphthalene imides
Since the discovery of perylene dyes by Kardos in 1913,26 rylene dyes have received considerable attention in academic as well as in industrial dye and pigment research because of their chemical, thermal and photochemical stabilities.27 The interest in these pigments has increased in recent years because of their use in the field of electronic materials, in which perylene and naphthalene imides are among the best n-type semiconductors available to date.28
Together with the interesting applications, these derivatives exhibit high chemical versatility as they can be functionalized at different positions (Fig. 1) producing different effects in the electronic molecular properties. Thus, imide functionalization with different substituents allows derivatives to be obtained with indistinguishable absorption and emission properties due to the presence of nodes in the HOMO and LUMO at the imide nitrogen which reduce the coupling between the perylene bisimide units and the imide substituents to a minimum.23 Therefore imide functionalization is suited to tailor the solubility or aggregation of the perylene imide derivatives without having a strong impact on the molecular electronic properties. Alternatively, perylene derivatives can be functionalized at the carbocyclic scaffold either in the so-called bay-area or in the peri positions. These substitution patterns may produce pronounced changes in the absorption and emission bands of the perylene derivatives.
 Fig. 1  Numbering and nomenclature of the substitution positions of perylene imides (upper left) and naphthalimides (upper right) together with the structure of the most extensively investigated derivatives perylene diimides (PDI) and naphthalene diimides (NDI). 
For the naphthalimide system synthetic modifications are also readily accommodated on either the aromatic ‘naphthalene’ core itself or at the ‘N-imide site’, allowing for varieties of functional groups and structural motifs to be incorporated.21,22 In contrast with the parent perylene derivatives, naphthalene imides show a clear dependence of their first reduction potential—corresponding to the LUMO level—on the nature of the N-substituent.29
In Fig. 2 are depicted the different types of oligothiophene–perylene imide (structures I–VI) and oligothiophene–naphthalene imide (structures VII–IX) ensembles reported so far including structures with the oligothiophenes as substituents at (a) imide nitrogen (I, VIII), (b) bay positions of the perylene imide moiety either directly conjugated (III) or connected through a spacer (II), (c) peri positions of the perylene imide moiety (IV), (d) core positions of the naphthalene imide moiety (VII) and (e) directly conjugated to the naphthalene imide or perylene imide moiety through an imidazole linker (VI, IX). In the next sections we will revise the electrochemical and photophysical properties of the ensembles together with their different applications.
 Fig. 2  Different structures of the perylene imide (I–VI) and naphthalene imide (VII–IX) systems functionalized with oligothiophene moieties at bay (II, III), peri (IV) and imide (I, VIII) positions together with one structure that involves annulation at bay positions (V) and two structures consisting of the direct conjugation of oligothiophene moieties to the naphthalene imide or perylene imide moiety through an imidazole linker (VI, IX). 
3. Perylene imides and naphthalene imides functionalized with oligothiophene moieties at imide nitrogen (I, VIII)
The first example of a perylene imide substituted with oligothiophene moieties at imide positions (5, Scheme 1) was reported by Chen, Yu and coworkers in 2006.30
 Scheme 1  Synthesis of the first example of a perylene imide substituted with an oligothiophene moiety at imide position. 
The key step for the functionalization involves the characteristic amination of the perylene anhydride 1 with derivative 2 bearing two primary amine functionalities. Subsequent Stille cross-coupling reaction between 3 and tin functionalized oligothiophene 4 afforded the new donor–acceptor quartet molecule 5 in a 45% yield.
Electrochemical characterization of 5 shows that the quartet molecule has both reversible oxidative and reductive processes with oxidation potentials at 0.29, 0.40, and 0.61 V vs. Fc/Fc+, presumably from the bis-oligothiophene block, and reduction potentials at −1.18 and −1.37 V vs. Fc/Fc+, corresponding to the characteristic two reduction steps of the perylene bisimide blocks. On the other hand, the absorption spectrum of the quartet molecule 5 can be reconstructed by a summation from those corresponding to the perylene bisimide and the bisoligothiophene moieties. The electrochemical potentials together with the UV-vis absorption spectrum are indicative of weak electronic interactions between the perylene bisimide and oligothiophene blocks in the ground state which agrees with the above mentioned minimum coupling between the perylene bisimide units and the substituents at the imide positions. The energies and electronic wave function distributions of the frontier molecular orbitals (MOs) calculated for 5 clearly demonstrate predominant contributions of the oligothiophene block in the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) and those of the perylene bisimide in the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Frontier MOs of the quartet molecule 5 from ZINDO calculations, showing the localization of electron densities of the HOMO on the oligothiophene building block and of the LUMO on the PDI blocks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. 
A similar lack of interaction between the oligothiophene and perylene imide moieties in the ground state has been reported for other ensembles (6,317,32,338,34935) in Fig. 4) as well as in the poly(aryl ether) dendrimers 1036 and 1136 (Fig. 5) in which the oligothiophene moieties are linked to the perylene imide blocks also at the imide positions through different linkers.
 Fig. 4  PDI derivatives substituted with oligothiophene moieties at imide positions. 
 Fig. 5  Terthiophene-terminated poly(aryl ether) dendrimers with PDI cores. 
Concerning the fluorescence properties of these compounds, most of the fluorescence from the perylene bisimide (PDI) and the oligothiophene blocks is quenched in the donor–acceptor ensembles 5–8. For derivatives 9a–c it is observed that the quenching is more efficient when the number of PDI units increases. For dendritic derivatives 10 and 11 is observed that the emission of the perylene moiety in the second-generation derivative is more efficiently quenched than in the first-generation analogue. The electron richness of the terthiophene groups is responsible for the quenching of the perylene emission by photoinduced electron transfer. The increased number of terthiophene groups (G1 = 4 and G2 = 8) may be responsible for the more efficient quenching observed for 11.36 Due to this interesting behavior the photophysics of systems 5–11 have been investigated in depth.
According to the electronic spectrum of the quartet molecule 5 and its redox potential it can be calculated that the energy gaps between the S1 state oligomer*–PDI or oligomer–PDI* and the charge separated state oligomer+–PDI− are 1.41 and 0.89 eV respectively, which are sufficiently large and expected to be energetically favorable for the CS process originating from the S1 state of either the oligomer* or the PDI* block of the quartet molecule. Thus, transient spectroscopic studies performed for the quartet 5 show two different dynamics of charge separation and recombination associated with two types of donor/acceptor pair conformations in solution. The short flexible spacers between donors and acceptors provide enough flexibility for reorganization of the molecules thus allowing through bond and through space electron transfer processes.30
Derivatives 8a,b (Fig. 4) containing quinquethiophene (5T) and a PDI moiety linked with a propyl (8a) or hexyl (8b) moiety have been also investigated by using femtosecond laser flash spectroscopy.34 For this ensemble, absorption of 5T covers the wavelength region with the lowest absorption of PDI and fluorescence of 5T overlaps with absorption of PDI. Therefore the system is favorable for achieving light energy harvesting. Upon irradiation of the PDI molecule, charge separation occurred almost quantitatively even in nonpolar solvents while irradiation of the 5T moiety produces efficient energy transfer to the PDI moiety from which charge separation occurs, indicating photon energy funneling. Thus, in this system 5T acts as an antenna of the charge separation system, like a photosynthesis system of a plant. Spectroscopic studies together with theoretical calculations performed for 8a,b show that these dyads tend to take a folded conformation due to the flexibility of the alkyl chain linkers. For the hexyl spacer the longer linker allows a larger freedom for conformation than that for the propyl spacer and therefore the interaction between chromophores is smaller for 8b. Therefore, from the laser flash photolysis study it was revealed that both the charge separation and the energy transfer rates of the molecule with hexyl linker 8b are slower than those of the dyad with propyl spacer 8a.34
In 2011, Advincula and coworkers reported the synthesis of terthiophene-terminated poly(aryl ether) dendrimers with PDI cores (10 and 11, Fig. 5).36 These dendrimers were designed to act as electrochemically active precursor polymers, which bear the electroactive terthiophene group that can be cross-linked electrochemically to form conjugated polymer network films. Interestingly, the characterization of the optical and redox properties of the polymer films shows that it is possible to incorporate donor and acceptor moieties in the same molecule with retention of doping properties. Furthermore, the fabricated films show a clear dual electrochromism by showing electrochromic activity in both anodic and cathodic potential scans.
In contrast with the above mentioned systems in which donor and acceptor moieties are linked through flexible linkers, Yu, Chen and coworkers investigated the photophysics of rigid linear donor–acceptor dyads based on oligothiophenes and perylene bisimide (6a–d, Fig. 4).31 For these rigid dyads it has been observed that the charge separation process is much more efficient than the charge recombination process in both solutions and films, which is of interest for photovoltaic applications. Comparison between the charge recombination rates of covalently linked dyad films and those of films prepared by non-covalently linked oligothiophene and PDI demonstrates that the rigid covalent linker reduces the probability of geminate recombination of charges due to direct face to face packing between donor and acceptor moieties. Additionally, the slowest charge recombination rate was observed in the dyad connected to a bulky group (6a) that hindered the packing.
In 2009, Aso and coworkers reported the photovoltaic performance of the dendritic oligothiophene–PDI ensemble 7a (Fig. 4).32 Electrochemical studies as well as the UV-vis spectrum of 7a indicate again negligible interaction between the donor and acceptor blocks in the ground state. The fluorescence emission is nearly quenched in the dendritic systems indicating efficient photoinduced electron transfer from the oligothiophene to the PDI. Thus, a photovoltaic device based on 7a was prepared with the structure ITO/7a/Al exhibiting an incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of 5.5% and a low overall power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.25% under an illumination of 10 μW cm−2 light at 410 nm. Interestingly, the efficiency observed is higher in comparison with that measured for an analogous linear system. The authors claim that the improvement in the photovoltaic performance can be explained by the aggregation behavior of the dendritic structure which may lead to construction of carrier transporting pathways. The same research group extended this investigation to a novel derivative with an extended octithiophene unit at the central core of the dendrimer (7b, Fig. 4). Slightly better performance of the photovoltaic device fabricated with 7b (IPCE of 6.7% and η of 0.40%) was observed in comparison with that mentioned above for 7a.33 However, as the authors explain, the low power conversion efficiency observed for these types of compounds is probably due to the limited charge transport as a consequence of the insufficient intermolecular alignment which does not allow the construction of carrier transport pathways and rapid back electron transfer.
This problem was addressed by Li, Fukushima, Aida and coworkers, who reported in 2010 the formation of photoconductive nanofibers by self-assembly of an amphiphilic donor–acceptor dyad (12amphi, Fig. 6) consisting of oligothiophene and perylene diimide.37
 Fig. 6  Oligothiophene-PDI dyads with amphiphilic (12amphi) and lipophilic (12lipo) character. 
The oligothiophene–PDI dyad bearing triethylene glycol side chains at one terminus and dodecyl side chains at the other (12amphi, Fig. 6) self-assembles into nano-fibers with a long range D/A heterojunction. In contrast, when the dyad is modified with dodecyl side chains at both termini (12lipo, Fig. 6) ill-defined microfibers result. The two dyad molecules are structurally different from one another only in terminal side chains. Both dyads present almost an identical absorption spectrum and when excited at 430 nm (wavelength at which the oligothiophene (OT) absorbs) the diagnostic emission of the oligothiophene moiety was quenched almost completely (98%). Likewise, nearly complete quenching was observed for the PDI fluorescence upon excitation of the dyads at 490 nm (wavelength at which the PDI absorbs). As in other dyads discussed above the results indicate the occurrence of an efficient photoinduced electron transfer between the oligothiophene and PDI units. However, an important difference between both dyads is their tendency to form well defined nano-fibers. When suspensions of 12amphi (0.5 mg) in THF/MeOH (9:1, v/v, 1 mL) were heated at 60 °C and then allowed to cool at 25 °C, it resulted in a new suspension. After being dried, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the suspension shows the presence of nanofibers with a high aspect ratio. In sharp contrast, upon analogous conditions, 12lipo assembles into ill-defined microscopic fibers. Furthermore, it has been found that the photoconducting properties of the nanofibrous assembly of 12amphi (4.3 nA upon exposure to xenon light under an applied voltage of +2 V) are much better than those of the microfibrous assembly of 12lipo (1.9 × 10−3 nA) measured under identical conditions. Considering that the fluorescence quenching efficiencies in both dyads are equally high, the contrasting electrical properties should arise from different packing behaviors within the fibers. The observed X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns could be explained with theoretical calculations by assuming that 12amphi in the nano-fiber self-assembles into a bilayer configuration consisting of laterally connected tail-to-tail pairs (Fig. 7a). In contrast, XRD of self-assembled 12lipo can be rationalized in terms of a lamellar structure with a periodicity corresponding to the molecular structure of 12lipo (Fig. 7b). The better geometrical integrity for π-stacking in the nanofibers of 12amphi may be responsible for its enhanced photoconductivity. This design strategy with ‘side-chain incompatibility’ can be envisaged as the strategy of choice for the realization of p/n heterojunctions from covalently connected D–A dyads.
 Fig. 7  Schematic representations of plausible molecular packing geometries of (a) the nanofiber of 12amphi and (b) the macrofiber of 12lipo. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. 
Not only perylene imides but also naphthalene imides have been functionalized with oligothiophene moieties at imide nitrogen (Fig. 8). As it was previously mentioned, the main difference with the perylene analogues is that naphthalene imides show a clear dependence of their first reduction potential—corresponding to the LUMO level—on the nature of the N-substituent. Thus, Zagorska, Pron and coworkers reported a series of 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxydiimide (NDI) derivatives endowed with different substituents at the imide nitrogens including bithiophene moieties (13, Fig. 8).38 It is observed that the introduction of thienyl groups as inherent parts of the N-substituents in NDI lowers their LUMO level by 180–200 meV with respect to that in alkyl naphthalene bisimides and by 60–80 meV as compared to alkylaryl ones. The low position of the LUMO level on these NDI derivatives, together with the characteristic tendency of NDI derivatives toward π-stacking, makes them good candidates for the fabrication of air-operating n-channel organic field effect transistors (OFETs). In fact, 13 has been reported to be successfully used in the fabrication of OFETs with an electron mobility of 9.1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, an ION/IOFF ratio of 5.0 × 105 and a threshold voltage (VT) of 18 V.39
 Fig. 8  NDI derivatives functionalized with oligothiophene moieties at imide positions. 
In 2011, Perepichka and coworkers reported the synthesis of a series of donor–acceptor dyads based on bis(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)s (bisEDOTs) and NDI (15–17, Fig. 8) in which the molecular design provides the complete separation of HOMO and LUMO orbitals.40 Thiol functionalities were incorporated either in the acceptor (16) or donor (17) sites for selective anchoring of the dyads to metal electrodes. Thus, the optoelectronic properties of the dyads could be investigated not only in solution but also in self-assembled monolayers on gold. Monolayers of Au–S–NDI–bisEDOT and Au–S–bisEDOT–NDI could be prepared via self-assembly of acetyl-protected 16 and 17, respectively, onto evaporated gold substrates from THF solution, in the presence of a catalytic amount of NH4OH. Surface coverage of 40 Å2 and 110 Å2 was obtained respectively for 16 and 17. Considering the calculated geometry of the molecules the authors conclude that dyad 16 forms well packed monolayers of “stand-up” molecules which makes these monolayer junctions highly interesting in order to study their transport properties as rectifiers.40
Because of the interest of this type of bipolar molecules as potential candidates to be used as nanoscale p–n heterojunctions, Crommie and coworkers performed direct characterization of the internal electronic structure of a single bipolar molecular heterojunction, including subnanometre features of the intramolecular donor–acceptor interface.41 Thus, the energy level and spatial extent of molecular orbitals across the surface of an individual bipolar molecule (15, Fig. 8) were investigated by Angstrom-resolved scanning tunneling spectroscopy (Fig. 9). It was found that individual molecules of 15 exhibit type II heterojunction behavior42 with orbital energy shifts occurring over subnanometre intramolecular interface distances. This new ability to directly measure the orbital quantities with angstrom spatial resolution paves the way for the improvement of power conversion efficiencies on molecular photovoltaic devices based on rational molecular design and local characterization feedback.
 Fig. 9  Energy-resolved dI/dV maps of the local density of states of a single bipolar BND molecule. Left image shows the dI/dV map of the molecule at V = −0.6 V, revealing localization of the HOMO orbital onto the left side of the molecule (dashed red line outlines the bithiophene region). Right image shows the dI/dV map of the molecule at V = 1.1 V, revealing localization of the LUMO orbital onto the right side of the molecule (dashed blue line outlines the naphthalene region). Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. 
4. Perylene imides functionalized with oligothiophene moieties at bay positions with non-conjugated linkers (II)
In 2004, Würthner and coworkers reported the first covalently linked oligothiophene–perylene imide ensembles (18a–c, Fig. 10) by esterification of N,N′-bis(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)-1,6,7,12-tetra(4-hydroxyphenoxy)perylene-3,4:9,10-tetracarboxylic acid bisimide with ω-carboxyhexyl-α-bi and terthiophenes in the presence of DCC and DMAP as coupling reagents.43 For all three ensembles (18a–c) it was observed that the oligothienyl substituents do not affect the absorption properties of the perylene bisimide chromophore and vice versa.44 The electrochemical characterization showed that the reduction potentials of the PDI moiety were not affected by the presence of the oligothienyl moieties. This behaviour can be explained by the presence of the non-conjugated linker that efficiently prevents electronic communications between both building blocks.
 Fig. 10  PDI derivatives functionalized with oligothiophene moieties at bay-positions with non-conjugated linkers. 
On the other hand, the oxidation of the oligothienyl moieties leads to oxidative coupling for 18a and 18b, providing electroactive quaterthiophene– and sexithiophene–perylene bisimide networks, respectively. By contrast, no stable film was obtained from 18c due to the presence of the methyl groups on the terthienyl moieties that prohibit the formation of structurally well defined polymeric networks. Interestingly, for the films generated from 18b, two separate regimes of electrical conductance were observed which are accessible by applying appropriate charging potentials on the polymeric materials.
In 2009, Bäuerle and Würthner et al. extended this strategy to the synthesis of dendritic oligothiophene–perylene bisimide hybrids (19G0–G3, Fig. 10).45 Investigation of the optoelectronic properties revealed once again that the perylene core and dendritic oligothiophene (DOT) units were electronically decoupled. Photophysical investigations of these ensembles confirm the presence of photoinduced electron transfer processes which were facilitated with increasing DOT generation and donor strength. Similarly to the analogues with linear oligothiophenes (18a,b), electropolymerization experiments with higher generation hybrids 19G2 and 19G3 afforded donor–acceptor networks with p-type conductivity.
5. Perylene imides and naphthalene imides directly linked to oligothiophene moieties respectively at bay (III) and core (VII) positions
The first synthesis of a perylene imide directly conjugated to oligothiophene moieties was reported by Liu and Zhu et al. in 2005.46 Three oligothiophene–perylene–oligothiophene ensembles (21a–c) were obtained by Suzuki or Stille coupling reaction between a PDI derivative dibromo substituted at bay positions (20) and suitable thiophene and oligothiophene derivatives endowed with boronic acid or tributylstannyl functionalities (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of PDI derivatives directly linked to oligothiophene moieties at bay positions via Suzuki (21a) and Stille (21b,c) cross coupling reactions. 
In contrast with all the previous ensembles mentioned above, the UV-vis absorptions of 21a–c show that the perylene core and oligothiophene units were not electronically decoupled as a consequence of the direct conjugation between both building blocks. Thus, the UV-vis absorptions of 21a–c undergo a bathochromic shift along with considerable band broadening and a less pronounced vibronic feature in comparison with an unsubstituted perylene bisimide used as reference. Similarly to previously described donor–acceptor ensembles, the fluorescence quenching of the perylene core was observed. An in-depth photophysical study of 21a–c47 was carried out by means of time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy and femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy in the visible region. It was found that as the number of thiophene repeat units increases the rate constants of charge separation and charge recombination increase by about 3 orders and over 1 order of magnitude, respectively, because of the combined effects of energetics and electronic coupling. Thus, the change in the size of the donor could alter and tune the dynamics of electron transfer.
Concerning the electrochemical behavior of 21a–c, they all show a facile and reversible n-doping characteristic because of the presence of the perylene bisimide moiety and their oxidation potential can be tuned by varying the thiophene moieties. Furthermore, the presence of the bithiophenic and terthiophenic moieties in 21b and 21c accounts for the possibility to electropolymerize these systems to produce low band-gap conducting materials with good reversible p- and n-doping processes.46
Bäuerle, Li, Müllen and coworkers reported in 2010 the synthesis of N,N′-bisoctylperylenediimides functionalized in the bay positions with terthiophenes of varying architectures (22a–c, Fig. 11) in order to achieve different colors.48
 Fig. 11  PDI derivatives functionalized in the bay positions with oligothiophenes of varying architectures. 
Going from 22c to 22a and finally to 22b a monotonic decrease of the absorption coefficient and a red shift of the absorption onset are observed. This effect corresponds to the distinct effective conjugation for the different architectures. While 22b possesses three α-connected thiophenes, resulting in the longest conjugation, 22a has only two α-conjugated thiophenes around the PDI core and therefore the red shift is noticeably smaller. In the case of 22c with the β-connected terthiophene, an hypsochromic shift due to the lack of conjugation (β-connected with PDI core) between the PDI core and the terthiophene moiety is observed. Regarding the fluorescence emission, 22a and 22b exhibit low energy emission bands which result from charge transfer while 22c does not show any significant fluorescence. The different behavior of 22c can be rationalized in terms of the β-connection of the terthiophene and a strong twist of the donor part of the assembly (terthiophene) with respect to the acceptor perylene block which are therefore decoupled. Thus, while 22a and 22b show substantial charge transfer, 22c exhibits the characteristic strong photoinduced electron transfer previously observed for all the ensembles in which the oligothiophenes are not directly conjugated to the perylene system.
The photochemical stability of these systems was also investigated showing important differences after exposure of toluene solutions of the samples to sunlight for several days. Whereas 22b is stable, 22c completely decomposes. 22a undergoes a color change and shows a decrease of mass of 4 which may be due to a photoinduced fusion of the branched terthiophene moiety.
A similar functionalization pattern was used by Thayumanavan, Valiyaveetil and coworkers to synthesize low band gap pentathiophene–perylene diimide systems with tunable charge transport properties (23 and 24, Fig. 11).49 In molecule 23, the linear pentathiophene units are attached to the bay positions of the PDI moiety via the central thiophene unit through a β linkage, leading to a cross-conjugated D–A–D system. Whereas in molecule 24 the donor unit is cross-conjugated and attached to PDI via the central thiophene through an α linkage. Both compounds showed ambipolar redox behavior. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of 24 are both lowered in comparison with that of 23 although similar energy gaps of 1.38 and 1.36 eV are observed respectively for 23 and 24. The most interesting aspect of these compounds is their different charge transport properties. While compound 24 exhibits only electron transport behavior with a mobility of 6.21 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1, the parent 23 shows, after annealing, a hole mobility of 1.04 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a minimal electron mobility of 9.13 × 10−8 cm2 V−1 s−1. This predominant hole transport feature of 23 is unusual for PDI-based systems. The fact that the PDI unit is buried between the pentathiophene chains which are not in plane with the PDI unit hinders the interaction of PDI with adjacent units and therefore the mobility is dominated by thiophene units. Thus, this strategy provides the ability to tune the charge transport properties, while retaining the low band gap characteristics of the materials.
These studies are interesting in order to open up new possibilities for tailoring chromophores for desired applications such as organic photovoltaics or organic field effect transistors.
Solution processable ensembles based on 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylicdiimide (NDI) and oligothiophenes (25a–c, Fig. 12) were reported by Krüger and coworkers in 2007.50 Electrochemical characterization of the homologous series shows that the half wave potentials of the two characteristic reduction processes of the naphthalene bisimide core shift to more positive values when the number of thiophene rings increases thus confirming the electronic coupling between both moieties. HOMO energy levels estimated from cyclic voltammetry are −6.60 eV (25a), −6.11 eV (25b) and −6.09 eV (25c) while the LUMO values are −4.48 eV (25a), −4.5 eV (25b) and −4.52 eV (25c) and therefore a relatively low injection barrier for the electrons was expected in organic field effect transistors in conjunction with an Au source and drain contacts (the work function of Au after air exposure has been reported between −4.7 and −5.0 eV). Thus, OFETs have been fabricated with these systems exhibiting n-type mobilities of 8.6 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 (25a), 4.4 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 (25b) and 3.1 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 (25c). The decrease in n-type field effect mobility upon an increase in the number of attached thiophene rings was explained in terms of a recombination effect as a result of the lower system planarity or of the hole accumulation due to the high injection barrier for the charge carriers. Appropriate characterization of the hole transport properties of these materials could not be carried out because of a high hole injection barrier.
 Fig. 12  Solution processable NDI-oligothiophene derivatives with n-type field-effect mobility in OFETs. 
6. Perylene imides directly linked to oligothiophene moieties at peri positions (IV)
A series of ensembles based on perylene imide and oligothiophene moieties attached through the peri hydrogen of perylene moieties (27–29, Fig. 13)51–58 have been reported by Bäuerle and coworkers. The key building block for this type of functionalization is 9-bromo-N-(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)perylene-3,4-dicarboximide 26 (Fig. 13) which can be reacted with suitably functionalized oligothiophene moieties by using different metal-catalysed coupling reactions.
 Fig. 13  Perylene imide derivatives with oligothiophene moieties directly linked at peri positions (27–29) together with the key building block 26 used for their syntheses. 
The investigation of the electronic properties of dyads 27a–f shows that the coupling of thiophene units to the perylene system through the peri positions induces a change in the vibronic distribution of the π–π* band which red shifts with growing oligothiophene chain length. Additionally, a new weak absorption band in the regime of 534–538 nm is observed irrespective of the oligothiphene chain length which was attributed to a charge transfer transition.51 On the other hand, the characteristic intense fluorescence of the perylene imide moiety (ϕ = 90%) progressively decreases to 67% for monothiophene derivative 27a, 37% for bithiophene derivative 27b, 21% for terthiophene derivative 27c and to values around 1% for the longer homologues.51 Photophysical investigation of the bithiophene-based dyad 27b by femtosecond time resolved spectroscopy and single photon timing experiments shows that electron transfer from the bithiophene donor to the perylene imide acceptor is observed in polar solvents. Thus, the fluorescence quenching observed in the longer homologues can be also rationalized in terms of photoinduced electron transfer from the oligothiophene donors to the perylene acceptor.
In the electrochemical characterization of the dyads it is observed, as a general trend, that the two characteristic reversible reduction waves of the perylene imide are slightly facilitated and shifted positively by only ΔE° ≤ 80 mV, but are independent of the oligothiophene chain length.
The small shift observed in the redox potentials together with the small red shift observed in the absorption spectra in these dyads suggest that, although the building blocks are directly connected, the two chromophoric units are rather electronically decoupled due to steric interactions of the perylene system with the adjacent 3-hexylthiophene unit. A similar photophysical and electrochemical behaviour was observed for the parent triads 28a–c in which the donor and acceptor moieties are also rather electronically decoupled.53
Based on the redox data obtained for these dyads and triads, their HOMO and LUMO energy levels were estimated showing that some of them are suitable for the easy injection of holes from PEDOT-covered ITO electrodes. On the other hand, the LUMOs of these hybrid systems are higher in energy with respect to both the LUMO of the fullerene derivative PCBM and the work function of aluminium and therefore they are suitable to be tested in bulk-heterojunction photovoltaic devices. Thus, some of these dyads and triads have been investigated in photovoltaic devices with a standardized setup consisting of a PEDOT:PSS-covered ITO cathode, a 1:4 mixture of dyads or triads and PCBM as a photoactive layer and a LiF-covered Al anode. Power conversion efficiencies of 0.2%, 0.33% and 0.48% were obtained respectively for 26a, 27d and 27f under AM 1.5G (1000 W m−2) illumination.
A structural modification of the above dyads and triads involves the syntheses of star shaped perylene–oligothiophene–triphenylamine hybrid systems in which the oligothiophenes are attached to the perylene moiety also through the peri positions (29a–c, Fig. 13).56 The absorption spectra of the three systems are practically identical and independent of the chain length of the oligothiophene branches resulting in a constant optical bandgap of 2.11 eV. The reduction potentials observed for 29a–c are in excellent agreement with those observed for the respective linear perylenes 27 and therefore with those of pure perylene imides. This electrochemical behavior, in agreement with the absorption measurements, confirms again that donor and acceptor units connected through the peri positions are rather electronically decoupled due to steric interactions.
All these star shaped perylene–oligothiophene–triphenylamine hybrid systems exhibit fast photoinduced electron transfer and strongly quenched emission. Femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy studies show that the triarylamine is not functioning as a second electron donor, but it does improve the donor capabilities of the oligothiophene unit.54
The estimation of the molecular orbital levels for these compounds from electrochemical data shows a gradual decrease of the HOMO energy level with increasing chain length (−5.09 eV for 29a, −5.04 eV for 29b and −5.02 eV for 29c) while that of the LUMO remains constant (−3.37 eV) and is therefore suitable to be investigated in photovoltaic devices. Thus, a photovoltaic device with a standardized setup consisting of a PEDOT:PSS-covered ITO cathode, a 1:4 mixture of 29b and PCBM as a photoactive layer and a top anode of aluminium shows a power conversion efficiency of 0.25% under AM 1.5G (1000 W m−2) illumination.
For application of these hybrid-systems in combination with mesoscopic oxides they have to be modified by carboxylic acid groups at the end of the oligothiophene chain. This has been accomplished by the attachment of triphenylamines bearing carboxylic acid functionalities (30a–c, Fig. 13).55 This approach combines the extension of the donor system with the possibility to adsorb the corresponding perylenyl–oligothiophene–triphenylamines onto mesoscopic oxide layers. This characteristic was used to prepare monolayers of 30a on insulating mesoscopic Al2O3 films which exhibit cross-surface ambipolar charge percolation.55
In 2010, Bäuerle and Bach et al. reported the use of 30a–c as sensitizers to elucidate the main factor that determines charge recombination dynamics and thereby the photovoltaic performance of dye sensitized NiO solar cells.57 In contrast to donor–acceptor-type dyes used in conventional TiO2 photoanodes, in derivatives 30a–c the carboxylic acid anchoring groups are attached to the donor component which is an important design feature for efficient NiO photocathode sensitizers. Thus, a photon to charge carrier conversion efficiency of up to 96% for dye sensitized photocathodes (p-DSCs) based on 30a–c is observed. Additionally, short circuit current densities (JSC), field factors (FF), open circuit voltages (VOC) as well as the overall energy conversion efficiency (η) drastically increase with increasing length of the oligothiophene linkers in dyes 30a–c. The best performance was obtained for a cell assembled from mesoporous 1.25 μm thick NiO electrodes sensitized with 30c under AM1.5 (1000 W m−2) illumination that exhibits a JSC of 5.35 mA cm−2, a VOC of 218 mV, a FF of 35 and a η of 0.41%.57 More recently, Bach and coworkers have incorporated dye 30c in octahedral NiO nanoparticles and used them as photocathode materials in p-type dye sensitized solar cells resulting in open circuit voltages exceeding 300 mV.58
7. Annulated oligothiophenes at bay positions of perylene imides (V)
Ko and coworkers reported in 2011 the synthesis of PDI derivatives with annulated thiophene moieties in the bay region to produce core-expanded perylene dyes directly conjugated with oligothiophenes (31a,b, Fig. 14).59
 Fig. 14  Core-expanded perylene dyes directly conjugated with oligothiophenes. 
It is observed that, as a result of the more planar configuration, the absorption maximum in the electronic spectrum of these novel annulated derivatives is bathochromically shifted in comparison with analogues in which similar oligothiophene moieties are linked to the bay positions without annulation. Also the oxidation potentials of the annulated systems experience a large positive shift in their redox potentials, rendering oxidation more difficult in comparison with the non-annulated analogues due to the more efficient electron delocalization on the relative planar configurations. The red shifted absorption of these compounds together with their suitable HOMO and LUMO levels allowed their successful incorporation in bulk heterojunction solar cells as donor materials blended with the fullerene derivative PCBM as the acceptor (Table 1). The maximum quantum efficiency of 47% at 435 nm has been reported for the device based on 31a. The overall power conversion efficiency reported for a ITO/PEDOT:PSS/31a:PCBM (1:2 wt% ratio)/Al device was 1.42%. The relatively good photovoltaic performance obtained for this novel donor may be ascribed to the synergistic effects of its enhanced absorption and good quality uniform film due to the planar configuration.
Table 1 Best photovoltaic performance reported for devices fabricated with the indicated semiconductors




Compound

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
OC/V
FF

η (%)
Ref.





a ITO/material/Al device upon illumination with monochromatic light.
b ITO/PEDOT/material:PCBM/LiF/Al under AM 1.5G, 1000 W m−2 illumination.
c ITO/PEDOT/material:PCBM/Al under AM 1.5G, 1000 W m−2 illumination.
d ITO/PEDOT:PSS/31a:PCBM (1:2 wt% ratio)/Al.






7a



0.2
0.46
0.27
0.25

33




7b



0.2
0.66
0.29
0.40

33




27d









0.33

50




27f









0.48

50




28a



0.7
0.68
0.31
0.2

52




28b



1.4
0.60
0.29
0.25

55




31a



5.94
0.776
30.80
1.42

57




31b



2.53
0.960
33.31
0.81

57





These results provide a novel interesting structural modification enabling the incorporation of other electron donor systems in order to optimize the photovoltaic performance.
8. Direct conjugation of oligothiophene moieties to the naphthalene imide or perylene imide moiety through an imidazole linker (VI, IX)
In the search for low-bandgap materials where both facile electron and hole injection are possible, Segura and Bäuerle et al. synthesized in 2007 a peryleneamidine monoimide-fused terthiophene (33, Fig. 15) with a bandgap of 1.4 eV and with ambipolar characteristics showing high electroactivity in both the p- and n-doping processes.60 An anodic shift of the characteristic reduction waves of the perylene imide moiety and a cathodic shift of the oxidation wave corresponding to the terthiophene moiety are observed as a consequence of the direct conjugation of both electroactive moieties. The UV-vis spectrum of 33 covers the whole UV-visible region. The spectrum shows the fingerprints of the perylene imide at ca. 500 nm and terthiophene at ca. 350 nm and some new bands appearing at lower energies. A broad absorption band with a large charge-transfer character was observed at ca. 610 nm and extending up to 800 nm. An in-depth spectroscopic characterization of 33 together with that of an analogue based on naphthalene monoimide (35) and monothiophene derivatives (32 and 34, Fig. 15), in connection with their electronic structure, was reported by Casado, López-Navarrete, Segura and coworkers.61 Thus, the broad absorption band observed at low energies for terthiophene derivatives 33 and 35 could be rationalized in terms of the displacement of the electron density from the HOMO mostly located at the terthiophene unit to the LUMO mainly contributed from the naphthalimide or perylene imide moieties.
 Fig. 15  Peryleneamidine monoimide- (32, 33) and naphthaleneamidine monoimide-fused oligothiophenes (34–39) used in the fabrication of OFETs. 
The fabrication of organic thin film transistors (OTFTs) based on 32–35 reported by Facchetti, Marks, Segura and coworkers has allowed the characterization of their carrier transport properties.62 Although the electrochemical characterization of these molecules indicates similar redox energetics for all members of these series, thin film transistor measurements (Table 2) revealed markedly different charge transport performances which were analyzed by thin-film XRD and AFM, and supported by DFT-level computation. Thus, the differences in charge transport properties could be rationalized in terms of crystallinity of the film as well as of computed molecular reorganization energies. In this respect, an in-depth study has been performed for the ensembles 32–39 in order to quantify microstructural regularity and out-of-plane d-spacings, which is essential for estimating molecular orientation with respect to the gate insulator in the case of top-contact OFETs. The optimal orientation for efficient charge transport between the source and drain electrodes is that in which cofacial π-conjugated planes are aligned perpendicular to the dielectric substrate surface.63 Thus, the appearance of multiple Bragg reflections and Laue oscillations around the first-order Bragg diffraction peak is a good indication of high semiconductor thin film crystalline quality and of long-range order.64 Thus, the best performance was obtained for naphthalimide derivative 34 which exhibits a high degree of crystallinity as evidenced from very intense and sharp Bragg reflections. An electron mobility of 0.35 cm2 V−1 s−1, a threshold voltage of 28 V and an ION/IOFF ratio of 106 are measured for 34. Only electron transport is efficient for 32–35 despite the presence of terthiophene moieties in 33 and 35. This has been ascribed to oligothiophene skeletal distortions arising from steric hindrance between the carbonyl group of the arylene core and the sulfur atom of the neighboring thiophene ring (Fig. 16, left). These 50–60° distortions of the oligothiophene skeleton from planarity disrupt π-conjugation thus lowering the HOMO energy. A second generation of this kind of compound (36–38, Fig. 15) has been recently reported in which the skeletal distortion is prevented (Fig. 16, middle).65
Table 2 OFET electrical data including the highest mobility values reported for the indicated semiconductors




Compound

μ
e/cm2 V−1 s−1

V
T/V

I
ON/IOFF

μ
h/cm2 V−1 s−1 [max]

V
T/V

I
ON/IOFF
Ref.





14

9.1 × 10−3
18
5 × 105







39




23

9.13 × 10−8




1.04 × 10−4





49




24

9.83 × 10−7











49




25a

8.6 × 10−6
2
1 × 104







50




25b

4.4 × 10−6
2
4 × 102







50




25c

3.1 × 10−6
4
80







50




32

0.15
27
107







62




33

3.5 × 10−3
45
105







62




34

0.35
28
106







62




35

3.5 × 10−3
45
104







62




36

2.60 × 10−2
31
105







65




37

2.01 × 10−2
43
1 × 102
6.79 × 10−3
−68
30

65




38

9.19 × 10−3
41
102
1.67 × 10−3
−51
10

65




39

8.52 × 10−6
5
10
1.77 × 10−5
11
10

65





 Fig. 16  Sketch illustrating sulfur–oxygen repulsive interactions in naphthalene imide–terthiophene ensemble 35 (left) in comparison with the lack of repulsive interactions in 37 (middle). On the right side is represented the imide pentathiophene ensemble 39 which contains one part of the oligothiophene moiety without repulsive interactions and another with them. 
By modulating the length of the oligothiophene fragment, the majority carrier charge transport can be switched from n- to ambipolar behavior. Thus, the highest FET performance is achieved for solution-processed films of 37 with optimized film mobilities of 2 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 7 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for electrons and holes respectively. The absence of skeletal distortions allows closer intermolecular π–π stacking and intramolecular π-conjugation. Additionally, by increasing thiophene catenation the HOMO energy raises thus approaching the Fermi level of the electrodes in OFETs and facilitating holes injection.
Finally, the ambipolarity of these directly conjugated oligothiophene–naphthalene ensembles has been also used to generate polymers exhibiting n- and p-doping processes. Thus, the naphthalene imide–terthiophene ensemble 33 has been successfully electropolymerized and the new polymer presents a p-doping process with anion exchange and its electrochemical reduction with cation exchange during potential cycling. Stored specific charges of 38 mA h g−1 for the polymer reduction and 13 mA h g−1 for its oxidation make the material interesting for fast charge/discharge batteries or specialized supercapacitors in which the material is also required as the anode.66
9. Summary
Seven years have passed since the first synthesis of perylene imide–oligothiophene ensembles and since then a great deal of attention has been devoted to this kind of systems from the electrochemical, photophysical and theoretical point of view because of their potential as materials for ambipolar OFETs, organic solar cells or dye-sensitized solar cells.
Together with the interesting applications, these derivatives exhibit high chemical versatility as they can be functionalized at different positions producing distinct effects in the electronic molecular properties. Non-conjugated ensembles have been obtained by N-imide functionalization of the rylene moiety or by using non-conjugated spacers in core functionalized rylene imides. On the other hand, conjugated donor–acceptor hybrids have been synthesized by directly linking the oligothiophene moieties to core positions of the naphthalimide moiety or the bay and peri positions of the perylene imide moieties. However, the two chromophoric units are not fully conjugated in these kinds of ensembles due to steric interaction of the rylene system with the oligothiophene unit. More efficient conjugation has been achieved by linking the donor and acceptor moieties through an imidazole linker.

N-Imide functionalization of the rylene moiety or the use of non-conjugated spacers in core functionalized rylene imides allows donor–acceptor ensembles to be obtained with a minimum coupling between the rylene moiety and the oligothiophene block. Photoinduced electron and/or energy transfer processes have been reported for these systems in which the charge separation and energy transfer rates can be tailored by the choice of oligomers with different lengths and by tuning the length and rigidity of the spacer.
Direct conjugation between oligothiophenes and perylene imides at the bay position allows ensembles to be obtained in which both units are not electronically decoupled. This has been used, among others, to achieve different colors in perylene bisimides functionalized in the bay positions with oligothiophenes of varying architectures.
Perylene imide–oligothiophene–triphenylamine hybrids in which the oligothiophenes are attached to the perylene moiety through the peri positions have been reported to exhibit fast photoinduced electron transfer. The triarylamine moiety destabilized the HOMO level of the hybrid systems making them suitable to be used in dye sensitized NiO solar cells.
Direct annulation of the oligothiophene moiety in the bay region of perylene imides has proven to be an efficient interesting structural modification to obtain systems with good photovoltaic performances. Finally, planar naphthaleneamidine-monoimide fused oligothiophene semiconductors have been designed for facile charge transport in organic field effect transistors. By modulating the length of the oligothiophene fragment and the planarity of the ensemble, the majority carrier charge transport can be switched from n- to ambipolar behaviour.
Despite the interesting applications found already for this kind of hybrid materials there are still challenges ahead. Among them, the organization of the ensembles with molecular-level precision through rational design strategies is one of the main aims in the search of better mobilities in OFETs and improved efficiencies in organic photovoltaics.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support from Spanish Government (MCI) Project CTQ2010-14982, Comunidad Autónoma de Madrid (S2009/MAT-1467) and a UCM-BSCH joint project (GR58/08). J. L. Segura wishes to thank the Collaborative Research Center 569 (SFB 569) for the support of a research stay at the University of Ulm. The authors wish to give credit to the scientists who have participated in the development of this chemistry whose names are cited in the references. J.L.S. and H.H. are deeply indebted to their collaboration partners Prof. Tobin J. Marks, Dr Antonio Facchetti and Dr Rocío Ponce at the Northwestern University and Prof. Juan T. López Navarrete and Prof. Juan Casado from the University of Málaga.
References

Handbook of Oligo- and Polythiophenes, ed. D. Fichou, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1999 Search PubMed .
A. Mishra, C.-Q. Ma and P. Bäuerle, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 1141–1276 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mariano, M. Mazzeo, Y. Duan, G. Barbarella, L. Favaretto, S. Carallo, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 063510 CrossRef .
H. Yan, Z. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dötz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, Nature, 2009, 457, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fitzner, E. Reinold, A. Mishra, E. Mena-Osteritz, H. Ziehlke, C. Körner, K. Leo, M. Riede, M. Weil, O. Tsaryova, A. Weiß, C. Uhrich, M. Pfeiffer and P. Bäuerle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 897–910 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Segura and N. Martín, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2403–2435 RSC .

Electronic Materials: the Oligomer Approach, ed. K. Müllen and G. Wegner, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1998 Search PubMed .
P. Bäuerle, Adv. Mater., 1992, 4, 102 CrossRef .
T. Yamamoto, K. Sanechika and A. Yamamoto, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Lett. Ed., 1980, 18, 9 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roncali, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 173 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roncali, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 1875 RSC .

          G. Zotti, in Handbook of Conductive Molecules and Polymers, ed. H. S. Nalwa, Wiley,  1997, vol. 2, p.137 Search PubMed .

          M. Pomerantz, in Handbook of Conducting Polymers, ed. T. A. Skotheim, R. L. Elsenbaumer and J. R. Reynolds, Marcel Dekker,  1998, p. 277 Search PubMed .
L. M. Goldenberg, M. R. Bryce and M. C. Petty, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 1957 RSC .
D. T. McQuade, A. E. Pullen and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 2537 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Holliday and T. M. Swager, Chem. Commun., 2005, 23 RSC .

          A. Mishra, C.-Q. Ma, J. Segura and P. Bäuerle, Functional Oligothiophene-Based Materials: Nanoarchitectures and Applications in Thiophene-Based Materials for Electronics and Photonics, ed. D. Perepichka and V. Perepichka, Wiley,  2009 Search PubMed .
M.-H. Yoon, S. A. DiBenedetto, A. Fachetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1348 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ando, J.-I. Nishida, H. Tada, Y. Inoue, S. Tokito and Y. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5336 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zaumseil and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1296 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sakai, J. Mareda, E. Vauthey and S. Matile, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4225–4237 RSC .
R. M. Duke, E. B. Veale, F. M. Pfeffer, P. E. Kruger and T. Gunnlaugsson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3936–3953 RSC .
F. Würthner, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1564–1579 RSC .
C. Huang, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 2386–2407 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Weil, T. Vosch, J. Hofkens, K. Peneva and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9068–9093 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Würthner and M. Stolte, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5109–5115 RSC .

          M. Kardos, D. R.P. 276357,  June 14, 1913; M. Kardos, Friedländers Fortschr. Teerfarbenfabr, 1917, 12, 492 Search PubMed ; M. Kardos, Chem. Abstr., 1914, 8, 3243 Search PubMed .

          H. Langhals, Color Chemistry. Synthesis, Properties and Applications of Organic Dyes and Pigments, 3rd revised edn, ed. H. Zollinger, vol. 43,  2004 Search PubMed .
X. Zhan, A. Facchetti, S. Barlow, T. J. Marks, M. A. Ratner, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Marder, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 268–284 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gawrys, D. Boudinet, M. Zagorska, D. Djurado, J.-M. Verilhac, G. Horowitz, J. Pécaud, S. Pouget and A. Pron, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1478–1485 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Chen, S. Xiao and L. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11730–11738 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Liang, S. Xiao, J. M. Szarko, M. Sprung, M. K. Mukhopadhyay, J. Wang, L. Yu and L. X. Chen, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 1497–1507 RSC .
Y. Ie, T. Uto, N. Yamamoto and Y. Aso, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1213–1215 RSC .
Y. Ie, T. Uto, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa and Y. Aso, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 797–801 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujitsuka, K. Harada, A. Sugimoto and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 10193–10199 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. El-Khouly, D. H. Choi and S. Fukuzumi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 218, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ponnapati, M. J. Felipe and R. Advincula, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7530–7537 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Li, A. Saeki, Y. Yamamoto, T. Fukushima, S. Seki, N. Ishii, K. Kato, M. Takata and T. Aida, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 1566–1572 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gawrys, D. Boudinet, A. Kornet, D. Djurado, St. Pouget, J.-M. Verilhac, M. Zagorska and A. Pron, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1913–1920 RSC .
P. Gawrys, Da. Djurado, J. Rimarcik, A. Kornet, D. Boudinet, J.-M. Verilhac, V. Lukes, I. Wielgus, M. Zagorska and A. Pron, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 1803–1809 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kondratenko, A. G. Moiseev and D. F. Perepichka, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1470–1478 RSC .
C. Tao, J. Sun, X. Zhang, R. Yamachika, D. Wegner, Y. Bahri, G. Samsonidze, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie, T. D. Tilley, R. A. Segalman and M. F. Crommie, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3963–3967 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley, New York, 8th edn,  2004 Search PubMed .
C.-C. You, C. R. Saha-Möller and F. Würthner, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2030–2031 RSC .
C.-C. You, P. Espindola, C. Hippius, J. Heinze and F. Würthner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3764–3772 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. R. Fischer, T. E. Kaiser, F. Würthner and P. Bäuerle, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1129–1141 RSC .
S. Chen, Y. Liu, W. Qiu, X. Sun, Y. Ma and D. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2208–2215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, H. Fu, Y. Wu, S. Chen, F. Shen, X. Zhao, Y. Liu and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem., 2008, 112, 2689–2696 CAS .
H. Wonneberger, C.-Q. Ma, M. A. Gatys, C. Li, P. Bäuerle and K. Müllen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14343–14347 CrossRef CAS .
G. Balaji, T. S. Kale, A. Keerthi, A. M. Della Pelle, S. Thayumanavan and S. Valiyaveettil, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 18–21 CrossRef CAS .
H. Krüger, S. Janietz, D. Sainova, D. Dobreva, N. Koch and A. Vollmer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3715–3723 CrossRef .
J. Cremer, E. Mena-Osteritz, N. G. Pschierer, K. Müllen and P. Bäuerle, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2005, 3, 985–995 CAS .
E. Fron, M. Lor, R. Pilot, G. Schweitzer, H. Dincalp, S. De Feyter, J. Cremer, P. Bäuerle, K. Müllen, M. Van der Auweraer and F. C. DeSchryver, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2005, 4, 61–68 CAS .
J. Cremer and P. Bäuerle, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 3715–3723 CrossRef CAS .
A. Petrella, J. Cremer, L. De Cola, P. Bäuerle and R. M. Williams, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 11687–11695 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Cremer, P. Bäuerle, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5706–5713 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cremer and P. Bäuerle, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 874–884 RSC .
A. Nattestad, A. J. Mozer, M. K. R. Fischer, Y.-B. Cheng, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle and U. Bach, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zhang, F. Huang, A. Nattestad, K. Wang, D. Fu, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle, U. Bach and Y.-B. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4808–4810 RSC .
H. Choi, S. Paek, J. Song, C. Kim, N. Cho and J. Ko, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5509–5511 RSC .
R. Blanco, R. Gómez, C. Seoane, J. L. Segura, E. Mena-Osteritz and P. Bäuerle, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 2171–2174 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. González, J. Casado, J. T. López Navarrete, R. Blanco and J. L. Segura, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 6732–6740 CrossRef .
R. Ponce Ortiz, H. Herrera, R. Blanco, H. Huang, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks, Y. Zheng and J. L. Segura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8440–8452 CrossRef .

  (a) Y. Sun, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 53–65 RSC ; 
  (b) G. Horowitz, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1946–1962 CrossRef CAS .

          B. D. Cullity and S. R. Stock, Elements of X-Ray Diffraction, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ,  2001 Search PubMed .
R. Ponce Ortiz, H. Herrera, C. Seoane, J. L. Segura, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 532–543 CrossRef .
T. F. Otero, J. Arias-Pardilla, H. Herrera, J. L. Segura and C. Seoane, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 16513 RSC .

Footnote† Dedicated to Professor Carlos Seoane on the occasion of his 60th birthday.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
José L. Segura	José L. Segura obtained his PhD in Organic Chemistry in 1994 at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid. After a stay in the group of Professor W. Daily (University of Pennsylvania) he performed post-doctoral stays in the group of Prof. M. Hanack (University of Tübingen) and in the group of Professor F. Wudl (University of California at Santa Barbara). In 1995 Dr Segura joined the faculty in the Department of Organic Chemistry at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid where he is currently a Professor in Organic Chemistry. Results have been published in more than 120 peer-reviewed scientific papers and 6 book chapters. His current research interests involve the synthesis, electrochemical and photophysical characterization of π-conjugated organic molecular and macromolecular materials for optoelectronics.
Helena Herrera	Helena Herrera was born in 1983 in Madrid, Spain. She studied chemistry at Complutense University in Madrid where she graduated in 2008. She is currently a PhD student in the group of Prof. José L. Segura focusing amongst others in the synthesis, electrochemical and photophysical characterization of oligothiophene–rylene ensembles for (opto)electronics.
Peter Bäuerle	Peter Bäuerle received his PhD in organic chemistry from the University of Stuttgart (Germany, 1985) working with Prof. F. Effenberger. After a post-doctoral year at MIT, Boston (USA, 1986), in the group of Prof. M. S. Wrighton, he completed his habilitation (1994) at the University of Stuttgart. After being a Professor of Organic Chemistry at the University of Würzburg (Germany, 1994–95), he became Director of the Institute for Organic Chemistry II and Advanced Materials at the University of Ulm (Germany, since 1996). Current research interests of the group include development of novel organic semiconducting materials, in particular, conjugated poly- and oligothiophenes, structure–property relation, self-assembling properties, and their applications in electronic devices, in particular organic solar cells. Results have been published in more than 260 peer-reviewed scientific papers, 8 book chapters and 7 patents. For his work in the field of plastic electronics he was awarded with the René Descartes Prize of the European Union (2000). Guest Professorships at the University of Osaka (Japan, 2002), Université Rennes 1 (France, 2004), Melbourne (Australia, 2008), Shanghai (China, 2010), and Gainesville (USA, 2012) followed. He is co-founder of Heliatek GmbH, Dresden/Ulm, a spin-off company devoted for the production of organic solar cells (2006). Since October 2009 he serves as Vice President for research at the University of Ulm.

 	Fig. 1  Numbering and nomenclature of the substitution positions of perylene imides (upper left) and naphthalimides (upper right) together with the structure of the most extensively investigated derivatives perylene diimides (PDI) and naphthalene diimides (NDI).	 

 	Fig. 2  Different structures of the perylene imide (I–VI) and naphthalene imide (VII–IX) systems functionalized with oligothiophene moieties at bay (II, III), peri (IV) and imide (I, VIII) positions together with one structure that involves annulation at bay positions (V) and two structures consisting of the direct conjugation of oligothiophene moieties to the naphthalene imide or perylene imide moiety through an imidazole linker (VI, IX).	 

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis of the first example of a perylene imide substituted with an oligothiophene moiety at imide position.	 

 	Fig. 3  Frontier MOs of the quartet molecule 5 from ZINDO calculations, showing the localization of electron densities of the HOMO on the oligothiophene building block and of the LUMO on the PDI blocks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30.	 

 	Fig. 4  PDI derivatives substituted with oligothiophene moieties at imide positions.	 

 	Fig. 5  Terthiophene-terminated poly(aryl ether) dendrimers with PDI cores.	 

 	Fig. 6  Oligothiophene-PDI dyads with amphiphilic (12amphi) and lipophilic (12lipo) character.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representations of plausible molecular packing geometries of (a) the nanofiber of 12amphi and (b) the macrofiber of 12lipo. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37.	 

 	Fig. 8  NDI derivatives functionalized with oligothiophene moieties at imide positions.	 

 	Fig. 9  Energy-resolved dI/dV maps of the local density of states of a single bipolar BND molecule. Left image shows the dI/dV map of the molecule at V = −0.6 V, revealing localization of the HOMO orbital onto the left side of the molecule (dashed red line outlines the bithiophene region). Right image shows the dI/dV map of the molecule at V = 1.1 V, revealing localization of the LUMO orbital onto the right side of the molecule (dashed blue line outlines the naphthalene region). Reprinted with permission from ref. 41.	 

 	Fig. 10  PDI derivatives functionalized with oligothiophene moieties at bay-positions with non-conjugated linkers.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of PDI derivatives directly linked to oligothiophene moieties at bay positions via Suzuki (21a) and Stille (21b,c) cross coupling reactions.	 

 	Fig. 11  PDI derivatives functionalized in the bay positions with oligothiophenes of varying architectures.	 

 	Fig. 12  Solution processable NDI-oligothiophene derivatives with n-type field-effect mobility in OFETs.	 

 	Fig. 13  Perylene imide derivatives with oligothiophene moieties directly linked at peri positions (27–29) together with the key building block 26 used for their syntheses.	 

 	Fig. 14  Core-expanded perylene dyes directly conjugated with oligothiophenes.	 



7a


	0.2	0.46	0.27	0.25	
33


7b


	0.2	0.66	0.29	0.40	
33


27d


	
	
	
	0.33	
50


27f


	
	
	
	0.48	
50


28a


	0.7	0.68	0.31	0.2	
52


28b


	1.4	0.60	0.29	0.25	
55


31a


	5.94	0.776	30.80	1.42	
57


31b


	2.53	0.960	33.31	0.81	
57


 	Fig. 15  Peryleneamidine monoimide- (32, 33) and naphthaleneamidine monoimide-fused oligothiophenes (34–39) used in the fabrication of OFETs.	 


14
	9.1 × 10−3	18	5 × 105	
	
	
	
39


23
	9.13 × 10−8	
	
	1.04 × 10−4	
	
	
49


24
	9.83 × 10−7	
	
	
	
	
	
49


25a
	8.6 × 10−6	2	1 × 104	
	
	
	
50


25b
	4.4 × 10−6	2	4 × 102	
	
	
	
50


25c
	3.1 × 10−6	4	80	
	
	
	
50


32
	0.15	27	107	
	
	
	
62


33
	3.5 × 10−3	45	105	
	
	
	
62


34
	0.35	28	106	
	
	
	
62


35
	3.5 × 10−3	45	104	
	
	
	
62


36
	2.60 × 10−2	31	105	
	
	
	
65


37
	2.01 × 10−2	43	1 × 102	6.79 × 10−3	−68	30	
65


38
	9.19 × 10−3	41	102	1.67 × 10−3	−51	10	
65


39
	8.52 × 10−6	5	10	1.77 × 10−5	11	10	
65


 	Fig. 16  Sketch illustrating sulfur–oxygen repulsive interactions in naphthalene imide–terthiophene ensemble 35 (left) in comparison with the lack of repulsive interactions in 37 (middle). On the right side is represented the imide pentathiophene ensemble 39 which contains one part of the oligothiophene moiety without repulsive interactions and another with them.	 
Footnote
† Dedicated to Professor Carlos Seoane on the occasion of his 60th birthday.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
