A new type of transparent and low cost counter- electrode based on platinum nanoparticles for dye -sensitized solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00463D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00463D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1838-1844Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsA new type of transparent and low cost counter-electrode based on platinum nanoparticles for dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Giuseppe 
            Calogero
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Pietro 
            Calandra
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alessia 
            Irrera
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alessandro 
            Sinopoli
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ilaria 
            Citro
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Gaetano 
            Di Marco.
          
        
      
CNR-IPCF Istituto per I Processi Chimico-Fisici del CNR, Sede di Messina, Via Ferdinando D'alcontres 37, Messina, Italy. E-mail: calogero@me.cnr.it;  Fax: +39 0903974130;   Tel: +39 09039762247
Received 
      21st September 2010
    , Accepted 3rd March 2011First published on 31st March 2011AbstractHere we report on the fabrication of a new low-cost transparent cathode based on platinum nanoparticles prepared by a bottom-up synthetic approach. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images showed the platinum nanoparticles homogeneously distributed on a fluorine doped tin oxide conductive glass surface. We demonstrated that, with such a type of cathode, the solar energy conversion efficiency is the same as that obtained with a platinum sputtered counter-electrode, and is more than 50% greater than that obtained with a standard electrode, i.e. one prepared by chlorine platinum acid thermal decomposition, in similar working conditions. Using a special back-reflecting layer of silver, we improved upon the performance of a counter-electrode based on platinum sputtering, achieving an overall solar conversion efficiency of 4.75% at 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5) of simulated sunlight.

Broader context
The sun is considered the ultimate solution to the environmentally friendly energy challenge. In one hour, the sun gives a gigantic quantity (13.6 TW) of radiation on the Earth, more energy than is consumed in a whole year in the world. So, photovoltaic cells (PVCs) are regarded as one of the key technologies towards a sustainable energy supply. Furthermore, electric power can be produced near the end user, avoiding transmission losses and reducing costs. Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are generally based on TiO2 semiconductors, conductive transparent electrodes, iodine based electrolytes, platinum catalysts and ruthenium based dyes. For a large scale and mass application, stable and transparent devices at low cost are required. In this paper, Calogero et al. gave considerable attention to developing a more stable, efficient and transparent catalyst based on platinum nanoparticles, that combines the transparent property of the conventional platinum-based counter-electrode, prepared by thermal reduction of H2PtCl6, with the metallic properties of a platinum sputtered thin film.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)1 are popular low-cost photovoltaic devices. Although the best performances of these third generation solar cells were obtained by Gratzel and co-workers2,3 using optimized cell components, for large scale and mass application some of the materials used need to be replaced or avoided because they are toxic or too expensive. In this case, for aesthetic and commercial motivations requiring transparent and large-sized modules, the global solar energy conversion efficiency of the photovoltaic device is drastically reduced.4
A DSSC is constituted by the following three main key components:
i) the photoanode, where light energy is converted into electricity
ii) the electrolyte, which is necessary for the charge regeneration of the dye
iii) the counter-electrode, which uses the electrons arriving from the external circuit back for the reduction of the oxidized charge mediator.
A scheme of the working principle of a DSSC is reported in Fig. 1. Here, we focused our research activity on the counter-electrode (CE), the place where the charge mediator regeneration takes place. The counter-electrode role is twofold: first, it transfers electrons arriving from the external circuit back into the redox system, and second, it catalyzes the reduction of the redox species used as a mediator in regenerating the oxidized dye after electron injection into the semiconductor conduction band. The main requirements for a catalytic material to be used as counter-electrode in a DSSC are a low charge-transfer resistance and high exchange current densities for the reduction of the charge mediator oxidized form. Furthermore, such materials must possess good chemical and electrochemical stability in the electrolyte system used in the DSSC. One of the characteristics of the counter-electrodes, also named cathodes, is the ability to keep the overvoltage as low as possible at photocurrent densities up to 20 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 1  A schematic representation of a DSSC. The photoanode is constituted by a thin semiconductor nanoparticle film deposited on a transparent conductive support where a dye is absorbed; the function of the dye is to extend the absorption spectrum of the semiconductor in the visible range and to inject the electron from the excited state D* into the conduction band of the nanoparticles. The electrolyte is composed of a solvent and a redox couple which act as charge mediators; its function is to reduce the oxidated state of the dye. The counter-electrode is commonly prepared by covering a conductive support with a catalyst material able to reduce triiodide to iodide and exchanging the electrons from the external circuit through the electrolyte to the dye. 
So far, platinum has been the preferred material for CE, since it is a good catalyst for the triiodide reduction. To date, the best counter-electrode developed for DSSCs is a platinum film sputtered FTO glass, whose thickness is around 0.2–2 micron. This type of counter-electrode combines the good catalytic activity for triiodide reduction, the high electrical conductivity and the light reflecting properties of the metallic Pt layer. Usually, it is prepared employing a large amount of expensive platinum, by the sputtering technique or by thermal vapour deposition. Since the two principal aspects of DSSCs are transparency and low cost, this type of counter-electrode is not considered for the production of large areas of DSSC. So, a transparent film of platinum clusters deposited onto FTO glass by chlorine platinum acid thermal decomposition or by electrochemical reduction is widely employed instead of the expensive and not transparent platinum-based sputtered layer.5–10 These alternative methods require low platinum quantities (10–100 μg cm−2), which, although reducing cost, are also responsible for a sizeable reduction of efficiency photovoltaic conversion of the solar cells.11,12 Since known world platinum reserves are limited, amounting to ∼33600 t, there is a challenge for substituting platinum with cheaper materials for DSSC applications. In this context, carbon is the second most widely tested material for the DSSC cathode. This research was triggered by Kay et al.13 in 1996; recently carbon-based materials such as carbon nanotubes, graphite or graphene were employed as low cost cathode materials.14–16
With the aim of fabricating a new low-cost, stable, transparent and efficient counter-electrode, we focused our attention on the use of platinum nanoparticles as advanced and high-surface catalyst materials. It is well known that the available catalytic surface in the electrode plays a crucial role in determining the overall device current, so we prepared rough/porous electrodes which, being characterised by a higher surface area, are expected to assure a higher number density of catalytic sites.
There are plenty of efficient methods for metal nanoparticles synthesis,17 but it is important to point out that, whatever the approach used, there is not any general synthetic method for all materials: each one has its advantages and disadvantages and can prove efficient for some applications but not suitable for others. So, the choice of the synthetic method must take into account the subsequent use of the nanoparticles.
In this framework, top-down approaches (sputtering itself has also been used to prepare nanoparticles)18–20 are generally resource-consuming; on the other hand chemical methods, which are typical bottom-up techniques, are generally cheaper and a better fit for large scale applications.
In this paper we prepared a transparent efficient platinum counter-electrode for DSSCs, based on platinum nanoparticles stabilized by the use of a capping agent deposited on FTO glass. We compare this new type of counter-electrode with those prepared by chlorine platinum acid thermal decomposition and by metal sputtering techniques. This preparation method is simple and cheap.
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials
The conductive glass plates (FTO glass, fluorine-doped SnO2, sheet resistance 15 Ω cm−2) and the titanium oxide (TiO2) nanopowder (<25 nm) were purchased respectively from Solaronix SA and Sigma-Aldrich. All solvents and chemicals employed were of reagent or spectrophotometric grade and were used as received. The synthetic dyecis-[Ru (2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)2(NCS)2], called N3, was synthesized and purified following the procedure reported in literature.21 A N3 standard solution was prepared by dissolving 20 mg of complex in 50 mL of ethanol.
2.2 Photoanode preparation
The semiconductor paste was prepared by blending 2.5 g of commercial TiO2 nanopowder (Aldrich), 4 mL of 0.1 M nitric acid, 0.08 g of polyethylene glycol (MW 8000) and 0.2 mL of Triton X100 (Aldrich). The resulting suspension was stirred for 2 h and subsequently immersed in a ultra-sonic bath for additional 2 h. The photoanode was prepared by depositing a film of the semiconductor paste on the FTO conducting glass. Two edges of the FTO glass plate were covered with four layers of adhesive tape (3M Magic) to control the thickness of the film and to mask electric contact strips; successively the TiO2 paste was spread uniformly on the substrate by sliding a glass rod along the tape spacer. The resulting mesoscopic oxide film was estimated to be around 10 μm thick. After drying the TiO2, the covered glass plates were sintered in air for 30 min at 450 °C, cooled to about 80 °C and soaked for one night in the dye solution; excess dye was removed by rinsing with ethanol, and the plates dried in an oven.
2.3 
          Platinum nanoparticle synthesis

          Pt
          nanoparticles were prepared by the following three-step procedure as schematized in Fig. 2:
 Fig. 2  A schematic representation of the synthetic steps for the preparation of platinum nanoparticles by the bottom-up approach and chemical reduction. Step 1: addition of tetraoctylammonium bromide organic solution to chlorine platinum acid. Step 2: mixing of organic and water phases to allow complete platinum acid transfer into organic phase. Step 3: removal of water phase. Step 4: addition of reduction agent water based solution. Step 5: mixing and formation of platinum nanoparticles. Step 6: separation of phase containing the nanoparticles and their stabilization by the use of a capping agent. 
i) 3 ml of an aqueous solution of H2PtCl6 3 mM was added to 8 ml of a 5 mM tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB)/toluene solution and kept under vigorous stirring for at least 2 h to allow complete H2PtCl6 transfer to the organic phase. The aqueous phase was then separated and discarded.
ii) An aqueous solution of NaBH4 0.04 M was slowly added to the above solution under vigorous stirring. NaBH4 addition allows Pt(IV) reduction and Pt(0) nanoparticle formation in the organic phase. Although the organic phase turned immediately to brown, indicating the fast Pt(0) nanoparticle formation, it was kept at ambient conditions overnight to ensure the completion of the reaction.
iii) The organic phase was separated and an opportune amount of n-dodecylmercaptan (moles of n-dodecylmercaptan ≈ moles of Pt) was added to further stabilize the Pt(0) nanoparticles.
2.4 Preparation of platinum counter-electrodes
Four different types of counter-electrodes were prepared according to the following procedures:
Method A) Ptnanoparticle deposition: the platinum nanoparticle thin film on FTO glass was formed by casting followed by calcination. A suitable amount (about 50 μl per cm2 of FTO glass) of the solution containing platinum nanoparticles, prepared as described in paragraph 2.2, was deposited on each 2 cm × 2 cm squared specimen of FTO glass, and the solvent was allowed to evaporate. Then, the specimens were kept at 350 °C for about 1 h. This treatment causes the thermal decomposition of the organic molecules allowing fixing of the Pt nanoparticles onto the FTO glass. The resulting FTO-supported Pt counter-electrodes were used without any further treatment.
Method B) Pt acidthermal decomposition: a solvent-assisted drop-casting technique was used to spread a H2PtCl6 (5 mM) isopropanol solution onto FTO glass, and the resulting film was heated at 500 °C for half an hour.
Method C) Pt sputtering deposition: a light reflecting Pt mirror (500 nm thick) was deposited, by sputtering, onto an FTO conductive glass. The sputtering system consisted of a 150 Watt RF-magnetron, which generally works at low pressure (10−5–10−3 torr) under a N2 gas flow.
Method D) Ptnanoparticles and silver mirror: furthermore a special counter-electrode was prepared; a thin layer of silver was deposited onto the non conductive side of an FTO glass by electron beam evaporation (EBE) using high purity silver pellets as the source. The substrates were located in the vacuum chamber of the evaporator and a 500 nm-thick silver layer was evaporated on top of them at room temperature. Then method A was followed in order to fix platinum nanoparticles on the conductive FTO side.
2.5 Fabrication of DSSCs
The photoanode and the platinum counter-electrode were assembled and clipped in a sandwich type arrangement with the electrolyte solution placed in between. The electrolyte solution was prepared dissolving 0.33 g LiI, 0.031 g I2, 0.384 g dimethyl-propyl-benzimidazole iodide (DMPII) and 0.183 g TBP in 3 g of MPN. A second electrolyte composition was prepared from the first one by the addition of guanidine thiocyanate (GuSCN, 0.1 M). Furthermore, a sealed cell was prepared using surlyn polymer foil as a spacer. A few drops of the above cited low volatility electrolyte solution were then introduced into the cellvia the vacuum side through the injection hole, subsequently sealed with 25 μm surlyn film and a microscope cover glass.
2.6 Measurements
The absorption spectra of the counter-electrodes were recorded by a Perkin Elmer L20 UV-Vis spectrophotometer.
Current–voltage curves were recorded by a digital Keithley 236 multimeter connected to a PC and controlled by a homemade program. Simulated sunlight irradiation was provided by a LOT-Oriel solar simulator (Model LS0100-1000, 300 W Xe Arc lamp powered by LSN251 power supply equipped with AM 1.5 filter, 100 mW cm−2). The cell active area was 0.5 cm2. The incident irradiance was measured with an ORIEL radiant power meter equipped with an ORIEL thermopile detector.
Electrochemical experiments were carried out in argon-purged 3-methoxypropionitrile solution with an Autolab PGSTAT 12 potentiostat/galvanostat instrument interfaced to a personal computer, using differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) technique. The working electrodes (WE) were: an FTO glass electrode with a Pt nanoparticle solution deposited on it, an FTO glass electrode with a chlorine acid platinum solution deposited on it, an FTO glass electrode based on platinum sputtering and a glassy carbon electrode (0.08 cm2). The glassy carbon electrode is widely used in electrochemistry as a working reference electrode because of its active surface, which is constituted by a granular non-graphitizable carbon with very high isotropic structural and physical properties and with a very low permeability for liquids and gases. The counter-electrode was a Pt wire. The reference electrode was a SCE (Standard Calomelan Electrode) electrode. We added 0.5 mL of a 0.1 M solution of ferrocene in 3-methoxypropionitrile as the first internal standard, then we added 50 mg of tris (bipyridine)ruthenium(II) dichloride (Ru(bpy)3) as the second internal standard. Two internal standards were employed because of the superposition of the ferrocene peak with the iodide one. The concentration of the examined compound was 5.0 × 10−4 M; 0.05 M tetrabutylammonium phosphate was added as a supporting electrolyte. Consequently, oxidation potential data are reported with respect to the ruthenium complex. DPV experiments were performed at different scan rates of 4, 10, 20 and 25 mV s−1, a pulse height of 10 mV and a duration of 40 ms, but only the most resolute graphics are reported. Structural characterization was performed by a Zeiss Supra 25 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with a Schottky field emission gun. The acceleration voltage can be varied in the 0.1–30 kV range. A Gatan Digital Microscope Software was used for the statistical analysis. The AFM analyses were performed using a digital microscope with low noise and high spatial resolution (nm).
3. Results and discussion
In Fig. 3, the optical transmittance at different wavelengths is reported. We noted that the platinum nanoparticle based CE prepared by method C appears more transparent than the platinum CE prepared using method B, while, of course, when method A was employed the transmittance was very poor. Fig. 4 (a) shows a plan-view SEM image of the platinum nanoparticle based counter-electrode, and the inset shows a plan-view at high resolution of the platinum nanoparticles. Fig. 4 (b) shows a plan-view SEM image of the thermal platinum counter-electrode: the typical roughness of the FTO surface is clearly visible. Fig. 4 (c) shows a plan-view SEM image of the Pt mirror.
 Fig. 3  Optical transmittance spectra of platinum based films (Pt nanoparticles,, Pt thermal decomposition, Pt sputtered) deposited onto FTO glass. 
 Fig. 4  (a) A plan-view SEM image of the platinum nanoparticle based counter-electrode; the inset shows a higher magnification of the platinum nanoparticle based counter-electrode. (b) A plan-view SEM image of the thermal platinum counter-electrode, (c) a plan-view SEM image of the PT mirror. 
The platinum nanoparticles are homogenously distributed and strongly supported on the typical structure of the FTO glass. Fig. 5 shows the statistical analysis of the nanoparticle size distribution obtained from the SEM images. In fact, the figure reports a Gaussian distribution of the measured radii; by fitting these data we can access the nanoparticles mean radius. The black line in the figure represents the fit with a Gaussian function of the histogram bars. The mean radius is in the range of 4–5 nanometres. We evaluated the roughness of the different counter-electrodes by Atomic Force Microscopy. We calculated from the AFM images (images not showed) a roughness (RMS) of about 5.5 nm for method A, of 3.2 nm for method B and of 3.5 nm for method C. We noted a big difference between the platinum nanoparticle CE and the other two CEs, confirming that the roughness is the key factor. Because both methods B and C showed the same roughness value, we conclude that the best performance of the counter-electrode made by method C is prevalently due to the high electrical conductivity and the back reflection property of the metal sputtered sheet.
 Fig. 5  Histogram plots of the platinum nanoparticle size distributions (as obtained from plan view SEM analyses), fitted with a Gaussian curve (black line), of the platinum nanoparticle based counter-electrode. 
As shown in Fig. 6, we characterized the counter-electrodes using the differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) technique. The reported values are those evaluated from the peak potentials in the DPV experiments. The DPV technique has been used to show the reactivity of Pt electrodes towards the iodide/triiodide redox process. The first oxidation peak (from the left) is assigned to iodide, the second one to the chloride and the third one is the ruthenium standard. From the electrochemical data presented in Table 1, also converted vs.NHE (Normal Hydrogen Electrode), we demonstrated that for the platinum nanoparticle CE a lower potential is necessary for the oxidation process of the iodide with respect to the other two platinum CEs. Furthermore, we found that the intensity of the current corresponding to the oxidation potential of the iodide for the Pt nanoparticle CE is higher than that of the other two platinum CEs, when the same area is used. This high current value depends on the high number of oxidation events which occur in the pulse duration time. From this first result we could conclude that the platinum nanoparticle CE, thanks to its high surface area and homogeneity, should be better than platinum sputtered CE. The high surface area of the platinum nanoparticles facilitates the diffusion of the electrolyte and results in a lot of active sites for triiodide reduction, thus increasing the Jsc. From I–V parameters, as reported in Fig. 7, the two platinum CEs (method A and method C) showed similar performance. With homemade fabricated DSSCs we found that the new CE based on platinum nanoparticles is 54% more efficient than that prepared by chlorine platinum acid thermal decomposition. As shown in the data in Table 2, the maximum current density (Jmax) was improved by 45%, while the short circuit current density was increased by 18%. This is because we have to consider other properties like the conductivity of the catalyst film and the reflectivity; so the surface advantage of the platinum nanoparticle CE is reduced. We found that by placing a reflecting silver thin layer on the non conductive back side of the CE we obtain an improvement in the I–V parameters, reaching a solar cell efficiency of 4.75% with a corresponding Jsc of 12.87 mA cm−2, a fill factor of 0.56 and a Voc of 0.66 V. Obviously, the use of a back reflector imply to renounce to the transparency of the DSSC, which is important from aesthetic point of view, but the advantage is a gain in efficiency as reported in literature from Ji et al.22 We used this special counter-electrode to show that the second key factor is not the conductivity of the CE, which is limited by the conductivity of the photoanode and by the internal resistance of the cell, but is the light reflected from the back side. In fact, the special silver CE had a roughness of 5.5 nm, which, combined with the mirror effect, overcomes the Pt mirror sputtered CE efficiency. Obviously, the overall cell performance reported in Table 2 could be optimized and further improved by using a blocking layer in the photoanode in order to reduce the recombination process of the iodine, and by increasing the current density or changing the electrolyte. In fact, when using the second electrolyte composition only for the platinum nanoparticle based CE we reach an efficiency of 4.72%, with a fill factor of 0.625, a Voc of 0.642 and a Jsc of 11.70 mA cm−2. A recent study has found that the addition of a solution containing GuSCN to the electrolyte could improve the solar cell performance by slowing the surface recombination.23,24,25 Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the effects of guanidinium cations in DSSCs. Gratzel reported that the addition of guanidinium cations to the electrolyte could control the self-assembly of the dye at the TiO2 interface and suppress the dark current.24
 Fig. 6  
DPV measurements of the three platinum based working electrodes (WE) and of the glassy carbon working electrode (used as reference) of LiI (5.0 × 10−4 mol L−1) in 3-methoxypropionitrile. The current densities for samples A, B and C are obtained with a WE immersed area of 2 cm2, while for the glassy carbon WE the area was 0.08 cm2. In all graphics, peaks are assigned to iodide (peak no. 1), to chloride (peak no. 2), and to ruthenium standard (peak no. 3). Although DPV experiments were performed at different scan rates, the most resolute graphics are reported here. 
Table 1 
          Redox potential of iodidevs. different platinum counter-electrodes calculated from DPV, reported both vs.SCE and vs.NHE





                  Pt
                  Electrode Method

E potential (mV vs.SCE)

E potential (mV vs.NHE)





                  Sputtering deposition
369
610



Thermal decomposition

373
614



Nanoparticle deposition
337
578




 Fig. 7  Current–voltage characteristic curve of DSSCs with the three different platinum based counter-electrodes prepared: (△) Pt sputtered prepared by method C; (○) Pt nanoparticles prepared by method A; (◊) Pt thermal decomposition prepared by method B. 
Table 2 Current–voltage parameters of DSSC based on different platinum counter-electrodes





                  Preparation Methods
                

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF

J
max (mA cm−2)

V
max (mV)

η(%)





Nanoparticle deposition
10.14
659
0.56
8.888
425
3.77



Thermal decomposition

8.56
655
0.43
6.115
400
2.44



                  Sputtering deposition
11.28
644
0.54
8.674
450
3.90




4. Conclusions
We presented a new platinum CE preparation method based on nanoparticle fabrication by a bottom-up synthetic approach. The platinum nanoparticles were found to be in the size range of a few nanometres, uniformly dispersed thanks to a capping agent, and strongly anchored to the FTO sheet by thermal treatment. Electrochemical data show that this new transparent CE has better oxidation and consequently reduction properties. The photoelectrochemical data show that it is more efficient than a platinum standard CE prepared by thermal decomposition, and exhibits similar performance to the best platinum sputtered CE. The results presented here are very important for large scale and mass application of DSSCs in the industrial market. In fact, it is not convenient to use the expensive platinum sputtered CE or the low performing platinum CE produced by thermal decomposition for the future world-wide commercialization of DSSCs. Our solution is cheap and easy to transfer to large-scale production. Furthermore, the platinum nanoparticles could be prepared via many different synthetic methods, leaving us to choose the more suitable, sustainable and low-cost method. Finally, we demonstrated that with the use of a silver back-reflecting layer it is possible to improve upon the platinum sputtered solar cell efficiency.
Acknowledgements
We thank MATIS IMM CNR for SEM analysis and structural characterization and Dott. F. Puntoriero for his support during DPV measurements. We also gratefully acknowledge R. Caruso and G. Spinella (IPCF_CNR) for their technical assistance.
Notes and references
M. Gratzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 3 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Pechy, T. Renouard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humpry-Backer, P. Comte, P. Liska, L. Cevey, E. Costa, V. Shklover, L. Spiccia, G. B. Deacon, C. A. Bignozzi and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1613 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
F.-T. Kong, S.-Y. Dai and K.- J. Wang, Adv. OptoElectron., 2007 DOI:10.1155/2007/75384 .
S. Kim, Y. Nah, Y. Noh, J. Jo and D. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 3814 CrossRef CAS .
N. Papageorgiou, W. F. Maier and M. Gratzel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 876 CAS .
X. Fang, T. Ma, G. guan, M. Akiyama, T. Kida and E. Abe, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 570, 257 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hauch and A. Georg, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3457 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hao, J. Wu, J. Lin and Y. Huang, Compos. Interfaces, 2006, 13, 899 Search PubMed .
N. Papergiou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1421 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Murakami and M. Gratzel, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 572 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Chen, C. H. Chen and T. C. Wei, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1687 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Gratzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44(1), 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calogero, F. Bonaccorso, O. M. Marago, P. G. Gucciardi and G. Di Marco, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 2903 RSC .
L. Kavan, J. H. Yum and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(1), 165 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2010 DOI:10.1155/2010/727134 .
P. Calandra, G. Calogero, A. Sinopoli and P. G. Gucciardi, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2010 DOI:10.1155/2010/109495 .
S. Terauchi, N. Koshizaki and H. Umehara, Nanostruct. Mater., 1995, 5(1), 71 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu and Shun-Ichiro Tanaka, Scr. Mater., 2001, 44(8–9), 2051 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy, M. Komatsu, K. Matsuishi and S. Onari, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1997, 58(5), 741 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Muller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopolous and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Ji, X. D. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Z. H. Yang, N. Cai, C. C. Wei, J. Sun and S. Z. Xiong, Phys. Status Solidi, 2010, 3-4, 1124 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Huang, G. Schlichthorl, A. J. Nozik, M. Gratzel and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2576 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 3 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, B. C. O'Regan, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21818 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
The sun is considered the ultimate solution to the environmentally friendly energy challenge. In one hour, the sun gives a gigantic quantity (13.6 TW) of radiation on the Earth, more energy than is consumed in a whole year in the world. So, photovoltaic cells (PVCs) are regarded as one of the key technologies towards a sustainable energy supply. Furthermore, electric power can be produced near the end user, avoiding transmission losses and reducing costs. Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are generally based on TiO2 semiconductors, conductive transparent electrodes, iodine based electrolytes, platinum catalysts and ruthenium based dyes. For a large scale and mass application, stable and transparent devices at low cost are required. In this paper, Calogero et al. gave considerable attention to developing a more stable, efficient and transparent catalyst based on platinum nanoparticles, that combines the transparent property of the conventional platinum-based counter-electrode, prepared by thermal reduction of H2PtCl6, with the metallic properties of a platinum sputtered thin film.


 	Fig. 1  A schematic representation of a DSSC. The photoanode is constituted by a thin semiconductor nanoparticle film deposited on a transparent conductive support where a dye is absorbed; the function of the dye is to extend the absorption spectrum of the semiconductor in the visible range and to inject the electron from the excited state D* into the conduction band of the nanoparticles. The electrolyte is composed of a solvent and a redox couple which act as charge mediators; its function is to reduce the oxidated state of the dye. The counter-electrode is commonly prepared by covering a conductive support with a catalyst material able to reduce triiodide to iodide and exchanging the electrons from the external circuit through the electrolyte to the dye.	 

 	Fig. 2  A schematic representation of the synthetic steps for the preparation of platinum nanoparticles by the bottom-up approach and chemical reduction. Step 1: addition of tetraoctylammonium bromide organic solution to chlorine platinum acid. Step 2: mixing of organic and water phases to allow complete platinum acid transfer into organic phase. Step 3: removal of water phase. Step 4: addition of reduction agent water based solution. Step 5: mixing and formation of platinum nanoparticles. Step 6: separation of phase containing the nanoparticles and their stabilization by the use of a capping agent.	 

 	Fig. 3  Optical transmittance spectra of platinum based films (Pt nanoparticles,, Pt thermal decomposition, Pt sputtered) deposited onto FTO glass.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A plan-view SEM image of the platinum nanoparticle based counter-electrode; the inset shows a higher magnification of the platinum nanoparticle based counter-electrode. (b) A plan-view SEM image of the thermal platinum counter-electrode, (c) a plan-view SEM image of the PT mirror.	 

 	Fig. 5  Histogram plots of the platinum nanoparticle size distributions (as obtained from plan view SEM analyses), fitted with a Gaussian curve (black line), of the platinum nanoparticle based counter-electrode.	 

 	Fig. 6  
DPV measurements of the three platinum based working electrodes (WE) and of the glassy carbon working electrode (used as reference) of LiI (5.0 × 10−4 mol L−1) in 3-methoxypropionitrile. The current densities for samples A, B and C are obtained with a WE immersed area of 2 cm2, while for the glassy carbon WE the area was 0.08 cm2. In all graphics, peaks are assigned to iodide (peak no. 1), to chloride (peak no. 2), and to ruthenium standard (peak no. 3). Although DPV experiments were performed at different scan rates, the most resolute graphics are reported here.	 


                  Sputtering deposition	369	610

Thermal decomposition
	373	614

Nanoparticle deposition	337	578

 	Fig. 7  Current–voltage characteristic curve of DSSCs with the three different platinum based counter-electrodes prepared: (△) Pt sputtered prepared by method C; (○) Pt nanoparticles prepared by method A; (◊) Pt thermal decomposition prepared by method B.	 


Nanoparticle deposition	10.14	659	0.56	8.888	425	3.77

Thermal decomposition
	8.56	655	0.43	6.115	400	2.44

                  Sputtering deposition	11.28	644	0.54	8.674	450	3.90

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
