Defect passivation strategies in perovskites for an enhanced photovoltaic performance  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE01767A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE01767A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4017-4056Defect passivation strategies in perovskites for an enhanced photovoltaic performance

        
          
            Lin 
            Fu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Lian 
            Wang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Ruiyang 
            Yin
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Li
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Longwei 
            Yin
          
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory for Liquid-Solid Structural Evolution and Processing of Materials, Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan 250061, P. R. China. E-mail: yinlw@sdu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory for Superlattices and Microstructures, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences & Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronic Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, China
Received 
      3rd June 2020
    , Accepted 16th September 2020First published on 16th September 2020AbstractSince the first introduction of the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite in the field of optoelectronics, extraordinary progress in both the photoelectric-conversion-efficiency and stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been witnessed. However, a variety of drawbacks associated with defects in PSCs, such as energy deficits, ion migration, operational instability and hysteresis, greatly hinder the potential industrial applications of PSCs. Herein, a systematic and comprehensive understanding of the origin, classification, nature, relationships and overlapping effects of defects in perovskite is summarized and reviewed. According to their positions in the energy structure relative to band edges, shallow- and deep-level defects are summarized, while point defects, undercoordinated ions, impurities and pinholes are categorized based on a dimension-criterion. We look at the established understanding of how the detrimental defects induce non-radiative recombination, charge trapping and scattering, ion migration and hysteresis, providing a relatively clear relationship between the performance and defects in perovskite films. An overview of the defect passivation strategies is presented on the fabrication route, including film formation, post-treatment and interlayer engineering between the perovskite layer and charge transport layer, giving a unique perspective. Based on defect passivation engineering, challenges and suggestions to break the bottlenecks of PSCs on the way to commercialization are proposed.
Lin Fu
Lin Fu received her BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2016. She is currently a PhD candidate at Shandong University under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin. Her research interests are mainly focused on the synthesis of inorganic perovskite materials and the technological improvement of perovskite solar cells.
Hui Li
Hui Li graduated with a BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2018. She is currently a PhD candidate at Shandong University. Her research interests are mainly focused on the design of high-performance stable inorganic perovskite solar cells.
Lian Wang
Lian Wang received her BEng in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2018. She is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin at Shandong University. Her current research interests focus on the defect engineering for perovskite solar cells and the design of high-performance perovskite solar cells.
Ruiyang Yin
Ruiyang Yin received his Bachelor's degree (major in Physics) at Shandong University in 2018. He is currently a graduate student at the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current scientific interests focus on flexible wearable devices and photoelectric devices.
Bo Li
Bo Li graduated with a BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2015. He is currently a PhD candidate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Shandong University under the supervision of Professor Longwei Yin. His research interests are focused on the structure and photophysics of semiconductor materials and inorganic perovskite solar cells.
Longwei Yin
Longwei Yin is a distinguished Professor and Director of Institute of Materials Physics and Chemistry, Shandong University (SDU), China. He received his PhD in 2001 in SDU. He completed his postdoctoral research from 2003 to 2006 in Prof. Bando Yoshio's group at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan. He won the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2010. His research interests are mainly focused on energy conversion and storage devices, including Li or Na based secondary batteries, supercapacitors, photo/electro-catalysis, and solar cells.

Broader context
With the increasingly serious energy crisis, the demand for sustainable and environment friendly energy sources is becoming more and more urgent. One of the most promising candidates is perovskite optoelectronic technology in view of the blowout development in both the efficiency and stability achieved in recent years. However, a variety of drawbacks, such as energy deficit, ion migration, operational degradation and hysteresis, greatly hinder the potential industrial applications of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Particularly, it has been demonstrated that most of the intractable issues are associated with defects. Herein, to provide a valid guidance for further progress in PSCs, a systematic and comprehensive understanding of the origin, classification, nature, relationships and overlapping effects of defects in perovskites is reviewed and summarized, establishing a relatively clear relationship between the performance and defects. State-of-the-art mainstream mechanisms of various passivation strategies are elucidated with an overview of relevant literature along the device fabrication route, including film formation, post-treatment and interlayer engineering between the perovskite layer and charge transport layer. Based on the summary of defect passivation engineering, challenges and suggestions for a breakthrough the bottlenecks of PSCs on the way to future commercialization are also proposed.

1. Introduction
As the demand for sustainable energy sources becomes more and more urgent, numerous efforts have been made on the photovoltaic technologies to directly convert solar energy into clean electrical energy. Among several state-of-the-art generations of solar cells, perovskite solar cells (PSCs), with the perovskite active light-harvesting material in cubic symmetry (Pm3m space group) and the structural formula of ABX3, are currently the most encouraging and promising hotspots of research.1–3 The typical configuration of PSCs involves a glass substrate serving as the incident light window supporting the device stack composed of a perovskite absorber layer sandwiched between charge-(hole and electron)-selective contacts that are capped by electrodes. Generally speaking, A, B and X represent a monovalent cation (e.g., CH3NH3+, HC(NH2)2+, Cs+), a divalent metal cation (e.g., Pb2+, Sn2+) and a halide anion (e.g., I−, Br−, Cl−), respectively. For example, methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3, MAPbI3) is the most common organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite and is widely regarded as the basic standard.
Compared with the other available solar cells, the advantages of PSCs are evident. For silicon solar cells that have dominated the primary share of the photovoltaic (PV) industry, indirect bandgap induced limited light absorption, high-purity material requirements, high-temperature processing, and high costs of manufacture remain serious limitations in realizing the highly cost-effective silicon PV module system.4 The highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of a single-junction solar cell was achieved by gallium arsenide (GaAs). This III–V device has been traditionally used in small-area markets, such as space technology, subject to not only the lack of large-area layer-transfer technology but also the encapsulation and recycling of the toxic As. The efficiency of other well-established thin-film solar cells based on copper indium diselenide (GIGS), cadmium telluride (CdTe) or inorganics lags and suffers from slow growth. Dye-sensitized and quantum dot solar cells are subject to similar conditions. In consideration of PSCs, an impressive certified PCE record of over 25% has been achieved,5 which benefitted from the intrinsic photophysical properties of perovskites, such as large absorption coefficient, suitable bandgap, small exciton binding energy, long charge diffusion length and high charge carrier mobility. The annual growth rate for PSCs (10.2%) is also much faster than that of silicon and thin-film solar cells (less than 3.5%), exhibiting great efficiency potential.6 In terms of preparation, the employment of affordable raw materials, relatively low-temperature processing, universal solution techniques and the potential for roll-to-roll manufacture of flexible substrates ensure the simple manufacturability, as well as low manufacturing cost. It is also worth mentioning that the calculated levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) of other PV technologies was found to be higher than that of PSC modules within 0.05 USD per kW h (efficiency: 12% per lifetime: 15 years).7 Perovskite/silicon, perovskite/CIGS and perovskite/perovskite tandem solar cells with theoretical efficiency limits far exceeding single-junction solar cells have great potential for realizing commercialization in the near future.8 Currently, PSCs are cost-effective and high-performance candidates for energy supply, possessing the distinct advantages of high-efficiency, lightweight and flexibility, scalable low-temperature solution processability and color tunability.
Despite the desirable photovoltaic physical properties of perovskite materials and the considerable performance of PSCs, the pathway to commercial application is still full of obstacles. Firstly, considering the theoretical Shockley–Queisser limit of about 31%, there is a relatively large space for improving the PCE of PSCs. It was found that charge recombination plays a major role in restricting the performance enhancement, which usually happens in the presence of defect states. Secondly, the instability of contemporary PSCs makes it difficult to meet the industrial requirement that the working lifetime should be more than twenty years. Apart from the thermal decomposition of organic moieties, the perovskite degradation caused by the unavoidable exposure to moisture, oxygen and UV light, also reduces the outdoor durability of the overall devices. These external environments are thought to initially affect the grain boundaries and surfaces of perovskite films and then bring harm to the whole.9–11 Thirdly, the poor reproducibility and current–voltage hysteresis remain to be solved, both of which are associated with defect formation and migration.12,13 Last but not least, compared with the lab-scale devices of less than 1 cm2 to date, it is of great importance to enlarge the effective areas of PSCs for the more economical cost of electricity, where the lattice disorder and defect density in polycrystalline perovskite film can be increased at the same time. To sum up, perovskite defects are somehow responsible for most of the tough issues that may hinder the further industrialization of PSCs; therefore, researchers are attempting to figure out effective passivation methods to reduce the deleterious influences of defect states.
To improve the optoelectronic qualities of polycrystalline perovskite films, a broad diversity of passivation strategies has been carried out from the point of both theoretical calculations and practical experiments in recent years. To start with, it was identified that passivation is a kind of modification technology that enhances the durability of certain sensitive materials against environmental conditions. Inspired by surface-passivation strategies applied on silicon solar cells by covalent bonding, the under-coordinated ions at the surfaces and grain boundaries of perovskite films have been carefully passivated by coordinate bonds and ionic bonds.14–18 On the one hand, post-treatments to cover the susceptible perovskite films with robust materials have been proposed, where hydrophobic heterogeneous encapsulation protects perovskites from the external corrosion factors. Perovskite crystal growth is controlled to produce high-quality films with reduced grain boundaries, among which the investigation of single-crystal perovskite has been performed as an extreme instance.19–22 Solvent engineering, doping engineering, additive engineering and other detailed synthesis improvements of perovskite films have been critically investigated for the low density of trap states in the bulk and/or on the surface.23–28 Besides, interlayer management has been performed to indirectly tailor the perovskite film formation, passivate defects and tune the energy structure, also giving encouraging results.
In this review, based on the origins, properties and effects of different kinds of defects, the progress on minimizing the defect density in single-junction PSCs is systematically summarized. We retrospectively examined the established understanding of how the detrimental defects induce non-radiative recombination, charge trapping and scattering, hysteresis and ion migration, providing a relatively clear relationship between the performance of optoelectronic devices and defects in polycrystalline perovskite films. Thereafter, recent defect passivation strategies on the perovskite film and the interlayer between the perovskite layer and CTL are covered in the order of the construction procedure, that is, film formation engineering, post-treatment engineering, and interlayer engineering (as illustrated in Fig. 1). In the end, based on defect passivation engineering, challenges and suggestions to break the bottlenecks of PSCs on the way to commercialization are proposed.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of defect passivation strategies for PSCs.66,226,278,316 
2. Defects and their influences on performance
In the ideal lattice of the ABX3 cubic perovskite, a cation is located around the BX6 octahedra with 12-fold coordination, where all atoms are on their equilibrium sites without crystal distortions; the realistic conditions are, however, not that perfect. With the employment of solution processing with annealing at high temperature, the crystal growth of perovskite films is active and accelerated only if the continually conducted post-treatment technologies lead to the inevitable formation of diverse defects. Imperfect lattice alignments within the perovskite bulk-like vacancies, interstitials and doping are unavoidable. Non-coordinated ions and dangling bonds at grain boundaries and surfaces are also observed. The types and densities of lattice imperfections depend on the fabrication process on a large scale, since the details, such as substrate, precursor stoichiometry, deposition method, annealing time and temperature, etc., can make a difference in the supply of defect formation energy.29 The possibility of the existence of a defect is determined by its formation energy. In general, the formation energies of defects can be theoretically calculated by the first principle, guiding the experiment operation in some cases. In addition to the synthesis process of perovskite films, the defects are also sensitive to the operation conditions of the corresponding PSCs.30,31 It has been widely demonstrated that the degradation and decomposition arising from light, heat, moisture and oxygen can induce the formation of new defects, damaging the charge generation and transport properties of the perovskite film, as well as the performance and stability of the resultant photovoltaic device. The activation energy of the defect state relies on the ambient environment to some extent, such as moisture and oxygen.32–34 To passivate the perovskite defects for the qualified commercialization of PSCs, fundamental investigations on the impacts of defects on the charge carrier recombination and transport, ion migration, and structural stability are presented in this section, which plays an essential role in the development of both efficiency and stability.
2.1 Classification of defects
Based on the state of the energy level in the bandgap, we separated the defects in perovskite films into two categories, shallow- and deep-level defects. The shallow-level defects lie in the positions near the band edges (either the conduction band minimum or the valence band maximum edge), whereas the deep-level defects are in the middle transition levels within the bandgap. It has been proved that the formation energy of a defect is positively correlated with its depth in the forbidden region relative to the band edges. Shallow-level defects are much easier to form and occupy a larger proportion of defect density in the perovskite films as compared with the deep-level defects. Huang et al. demonstrated that structural defects in perovskite films are prone to be located at shallow energy levels within or close to the band edges, due to the antibonding coupling in the valence band edge, mixed with a Pb lone pair s orbital and an iodine p orbital.35 As a matter of course, acting as the dominant Shockley–Read–Hall nonradiative recombination centers to trap free charge carriers, the deep-level defects lead to a severe deficit of charge transport and extraction.36 Due to the nonradiative recombination induced by the deep-level defects, the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the optoelectronic device is directly decreased, hindering the overall PCE. On the contrary, shallow-level defects are always regarded as being benign and not strongly influencing the performance of PSCs as do the deep-level ones, because the charge recombination rate of shallow-level defects is much lower, which rarely impedes the charge transport or reduces the charge mobility. That is why the perovskite family is so-called defect-tolerant, despite the density of shallow-level defects being quite high due to the low formation energy, thermodynamically. Regarding the defect density, taking MAPbI3 polycrystalline film as an example, the value is of the order of 1016–1018 cm−3, which is larger as compared to the typical crystalline Si (108 cm−3) and GaAs (1016–1018 cm−3).37,38 Despite the high degree of defect tolerance, the shallow-level defects are not free of the mobile ions, resulting in many other disadvantages (e.g., hysteresis, phase segregation and degradation) and precluding the practical commercialization of PSCs.39–43 Therefore, whether the transition energy level is located close to the band edges or not, all defects should be taken seriously for the satisfactory performance of PSCs.
Just like conventional semiconductors, the structural imperfections exhibited in perovskites can also be divided into dimensions. Zero-dimensional (0D) defects refer to point defects in the grain interior, including vacancies, interstitials and anti-site substitutions, derived intrinsically or from doped ions.44 Taking MAPbI3 as an example, all of the possible point defects are as follows: MA (VMA), Pb (VPb), and I (VI) vacancies, MAi, Pbi and Ii interstitials, and MAPb, PbMA, MAI, PbI, IMA and IPb anti-site substitutions.45 It was found via intensive theoretical calculations that only a small proportion of these point defects acts as deep-level defects and their total density is rather low. The deep-level point defects include anti-site occupations of IPb and IMA, interstitials of Pbi, vacancies of PbI and VI (Fig. 2a), leading to the non-radiative recombination process of free electrons and holes that is detrimental to the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.46–48 This scenario also agrees well with the above-mentioned defect tolerance theory that the presence of deep-level defects in perovskite crystal grains is rare because of the high formation energy. However, the shallow-level defects with low formation energies have high densities in perovskite films as have been determined experimentally, which usually contributes to the n-type self-doping nature of the MAPbI3 perovskite. As for the all-inorganic perovskites, the case of intrinsic 0D defects is similar to that in MAPbI3. These days, α-CsPbI2Br has become the mainstream among the family of CsPbX3 due to its balanced properties between phase stability and optical bandgap. Theoretical results demonstrated that only six (PbBr, PbI, ICs, IPb, BrCs and BrPb) out of eighteen (VCs, VPb, VI, VBr vacancies, Csi, Pbi, Ii, Bri interstitials, CsPb, CsI, CsBr, PbCs, PbI, PbBr, ICs, IPb, BrCs, BrPb substitutions) kinds of point defects are deep-level (Fig. 2b), whose formation energies are large and the concentrations are low.49 The difference is that dominant defects can be affected by the bromine (Br) content in the period of crystal growth.
 Fig. 2  Transition energy levels of point defects in (a) MAPbI348 and (b) α-CsPbI2Br.49 (c) Typical point defects in perovskites including vacancies, interstitials and anti-site atoms, in the order of formation energy and depths in the bandgap.45 (d) Migration pathways in MAPbI3 for ① VI, ② VMA, ③ VPb and ④ Ii, where dashed circles and red atoms refer to vacancies and interstitials, respectively. White = H, brown = C, blue = N, purple = I, and black = Pb atoms.39 
Two-dimensional (2D) defects are commonly used to describe the grain boundary and surface defects, including defect arrays, undercoordinated ions of the termination lattice periodicity and combinations of point defects and dislocations on the crystal surfaces and interfaces. Additionally, some researchers reported the dislocations in the perovskite crystals as one-dimensional (1D) defects.50 It has been broadly accepted that this kind of defect belongs to the deep-level class and is a member of the prime suspects who are responsible for the harmful nonradiative recombination. Higher defect density and faster nonradiative decay at the grain boundaries have been confirmed as compared to those of the grain interiors, impairing the performance on the device level. The charged defects between individual crystal grains and on contact interfaces are associated with the unbalanced charge accumulation that may trigger the downward or upward bending of the band, which suppresses the separation of charge carriers. With the help of photoemission electron microscopy, Stranks and coworkers observed the defect distribution at the interface of the mixed-halide perovskite, which turned out to be discrete nanoscale trap clusters.51 In contrast to the single-crystal perovskite, the trap density of the polycrystalline perovskite film was dramatically increased, impeding charge transport and leading to more than an order of magnitude decrease in the diffusion lengths of the charge carriers.37,50,52 Defects at the grain boundaries and surfaces would quench photoluminescence, resulting in the extra loss of photogenerated charge carriers. Conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) demonstrated that the grain boundaries provided a dominantly faster pathway for ion migration in MAPbI3 thin films, relative to the stronger hysteresis.53 The trapped charges in defects along the interfaces were revealed to be the origin of current–voltage hysteresis. As a consequence, abundant attention has been paid to the techniques for growing large perovskite grains with diminished grain boundaries by passivation strategies.54,55 Along the interfaces between the perovskite layer and the adjacent CTL, surface charge trap sites, such as undercoordinated Pb atoms and halide ions, exert negative influences on charge mobility and injection efficiency. Matched energy level alignment together with the functionality of the interface defect passivation is one of the major solutions in dealing with the interface defects. Furthermore, it is believed that 2D defects are sensitive to the environment. Moisture, heat and light-driven irreversible degradation are initiated from the defect states at grain boundaries and surfaces and gradually propagate to the grain bulks in polycrystalline thin films, which can be accelerated by the built-in electric field under operation conditions.56
The pinholes, cracks, precipitates and impurities are classified as three-dimensional (3D) defects. Due to the rough topography involving microcracks and scratches on the surface, the poor contact between the transport layer and the perovskite layer leads to large series resistance, which is responsible for the reduction of the short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF). Volatile organic components like MA+ ions in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites tend to evaporate during not the annealing procedure and also the working period, leaving the residual lead halide as the impure phase and dragging down the photovoltaic properties of the PSC device. Correlating the structural imperfections to electronic properties, most 3D defects are deep-level and need to be avoided.
2.2 Ion migration and structural stability
Although the shallow-level defects with low defect formation energy are regarded to be benign and free of nonradiative recombination, they pose a danger in many other terms. Owing to the perovskite nature of the soft ionic solid, defects are mobile within the driving force under an electric field (Fig. 2c and d). After the production of PSCs, a built-in electric field is generated, even in the dark, because of the existence of the work function difference between the anode and the cathode. Within this electric field, the positively charged point defects with low migration activation energies tend to move to the cathode, while the negatively charged defects drift in the opposite direction towards the anode.39,57,58 Ion migration occurs in the form of mobile charged defects, such as vacancies and interstitials. The movement of defects is strongly influenced by light and temperature.59–61 Under illumination, iodine atoms would be oxidized by photogenerated holes to create iodide vacancies.62 This conversion process from iodide to iodine can be expressed by the following equation:  This reduces the size of the ion, allowing it to leave the crystal lattice and form an interstitial and vacancy. In 2016, Xing et al. found that the ion drift velocity of polycrystalline MAPbI3 film under 1 sunlight illumination was more than an order of magnitude higher than that in the dark, which proved that light irradiation could quite reduce the energy barrier of ion migration and facilitate ultrafast vacancy-mediated ion migration.12 This effect of light on defects leads to further phase segregation in mixed halide perovskites. As shown in Fig. 3a, due to the different affinities of Pb2+ for Br− and I−, halide ions migrate under illumination, resulting in iodide- and bromide-rich domains.63,64 The role of temperature in the defect fate was also revealed through theoretical calculations by P. Delugas et al., who demonstrated that the mobility of iodine vacancies and iodine interstitial defects grew drastically as the temperature increased.65Fig. 3b displays snapshots of the iodine interstitial diffusion during annealing. In addition to the more widely discussed halide ions, lead cations also tend to be transformed into metallic Pb0 under heating or illumination due to their soft nature.66–68 Taking MAPbI3 as an example, the decomposition process can be expressed by the following chemical equation:CH3NH3PbI3 → (–CH2–) + NH3 + HI + PbI2PbI2 → Pb + I2The corresponding degradation mechanism includes two parts. Firstly, the perovskite decomposes into PbI2 and other volatile components (NH3 and HI) that leave the film as gases. Subsequently, PbI2 degrades into metallic Pb and I2, and iodine leaves the surface by sublimation. Ultimately, the photolysis of PbI2 leaves voids in the perovskite film and generates new trap states that are harmful to the device performance. Consequently, within the perovskite film, the accumulation of charged defects at perovskite interfaces creates an obstacle electric field opposite to the built-in electric field in operation conditions. This ion redistribution hinders the extraction and collection of photogenerated free charge carriers, getting in the way of achieving the superb performance of PSCs. In contrast, the direction of the electrical field created under illumination is opposite to that additional electric field in the dark, leading to the reverse migration of charged defects as compared with the case above. Measured by both theoretical calculations and experimental conductivity variations as a function of temperature, the activation energies of certain ions have been indicated to be lower than 1 eV, such as MA+ and I−, which are likely to be easily triggered by normal conditions of heat, light or electric field.12,69 Eventually, the detrimental ion accumulation in the interfaces is eliminated, enhancing the charge transport and injection efficiency. On the other hand, the doping effect can also occur along with the defect migration, altering the local band-bending scenario near the interfaces. In this case, the perovskite interface with accumulated positively charged defects is of the n-type, while the interface with negatively charged defects is of the p-type.29 It is worth noting that the grain boundaries have been identified to be primary channels in polycrystalline perovskite films for the defect migration.70 Yun and coworkers collected the Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) images of PSCs on top surfaces under various voltage bias, indicating that ions preferred to migrate along the grain boundaries, which is probably related to the higher ionic diffusivity or ion segregation of grain boundaries.71
 Fig. 3  (a) Scheme showing halide vacancies in the Pb–I plane of mixed halide perovskites, which influences halide ion migration and ultimately leads to I-rich and Br-rich domains (marked by dashed circles).63 (b) Snapshots of the II diffusion during annealing. Pb, I, C, and N are represented by green, pink, blue, and cyan spheres, respectively. PbI octahedra are gold. For clarity, the H atoms of MA molecules are not represented. Blue circles and blue arrows indicate the position of the defect, and the displacements with respect to the previous defect positions.65 (c) Schematic illustration of the effects of shallow and deep-level defects in perovskites on the device energetics. The typical process includes ① the generation of electron–hole pairs, ② radiative recombination, ③ trapping and escaping from shallow-level defects, ④ radiative recombination by shallow-level defects, and ⑤ nonradiative monomolecular recombination by deep-level defects. 
Assisted by X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, cathodoluminescence (CL) and photoluminescence (PL) spectra, it has been well recognized that phase segregation of different ion-rich domains appears in mixed halide perovskite films, which is driven by light soaking and connected to the redistribution of mobile defects.72–74 The difference in the free energy in the dark and under illumination was used to explain this phenomenon. Taking MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 as an example, Bischak et al. reported that the segregation of Br-rich and I-rich phases exhibited the lowest free energy under illumination, while the single-phase showed the lowest free energy in the dark.74
Operational hysteresis behavior was observed in the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of PSCs when measured under different scan directions (reserve or forward bias), rates or ranges,12,13,75 and the electric field screening effect induced by the migration of charged defects is widely acknowledged to be the major cause. As aforementioned, the ionic nature of the perovskite enables the high mobility of charged defects with a small activation energy under operation conditions, leading to defect accumulation and band bending in the interfaces of the CTLs and the perovskite layer. Since the steric hindrance is further reduced under illumination, ions are capable of drifting across the perovskite thin film within the timescale of 1 s.12 As favorable pathways of mobile ions, 2D defects at grain boundaries and surfaces make critical contributions to the hysteretic behavior. When typically tested under AM1.5 solar illumination, the movement of these ionic charges at interfaces interrupts the band configuration, giving variable and anomalous PCEs that are extracted from J–V curves. Furthermore, it has been proposed that the capacitive current originating from nonradiative recombination as well as ion migration can make a difference in the extraction of photogenerated charge carriers, being further responsible for hysteresis.76
Defects are generally considered to be the starting point and accelerant in the degradation of PSCs.9–11,77 When polycrystalline perovskite films are exposed to moisture, their defects at grain boundaries and interfaces provide vulnerable sites and extensive infiltration pathways for the hydration reaction of perovskite with water to form hydrates.31 Moreover, under illumination, the trapped charges in defects promote the deprotonation process of organic cations in perovskites, which brings forward the formation and release of volatile molecules and the irreversible decomposition of perovskite films.11 As for the oxygen-induced influence, the trapped charges facilitate the generation of superoxides by providing electrons to react with oxygen, contributing to the perovskite degradation into PbI2, I2, H2O and CH3NH2.77 Apart from accelerating the decomposition of perovskite films, defects have been demonstrated to be able to recover the reversible degradation through ion migration when stored in the dark.78 In the degradation of MAPbI3, for instance, the volatility of CH3NH2 means the residual PbI2 left in the perovskite films, and then PbI2 decomposes into I2 and metallic lead (Pb0). Grain boundaries and surfaces adsorbing the former create new trap centers, while the latter defect presents the pinning effect of the Fermi level as the donor level and n-type nature on the surface. Both of these decomposition products are attributed to the performance decline of PSCs. Simultaneously, the defect-induced mobile ions across the perovskite films can react with the contact layers in the solar cell configuration, damaging the structural stability and optoelectronic performance of PSCs. The spiro-MeOTAD–iodide complex was observed by the irreversible chemical reaction of oxidized spiro-OMeTAD+ in the hole transport layer (HTL) with I− ions from the perovskites, deteriorating the hole mobility and further the efficiency.79 Generally, in the conventional planar or mesoporous PSCs, the mobile iodine ions chemically corrode the silver electrodes, reducing the conductivity by the formation of the insulating layer, AgI.80 The degradation process can be accumulated by light and heat during aging.
2.3 Recombination and transport of charge carriers
In an ideal pathway, the photogenerated free charge carriers are formed when electrons are excited by incident light from the ground state to the conduction band minimum (process 1 in Fig. 3c). Then, they are supposed to be transported through the photovoltaic semiconductor to the electrode or adjacent transport material. However, the inevitable existence of defects induces extra transition levels in the bandgap, influencing the optoelectronic process and hindering charge carrier transport by scattering or capturing free charges. Charges trapped by shallow-level defects can easily escape back to the conduction band minimum or the valence band maximum edge (process 3 in Fig. 3c), or pose radiative recombination (process 4 in Fig. 3c), neither of which is likely to result in a big energy loss.81 When encountering deep-level defects in the transport process, the trapped charges undergo non-radiative recombination with opposite charges and compromised optoelectronic energy in the form of phonons (process 5 in Fig. 3c). Thereby, the parameters of charge mobility, charge density, charge lifetime and charge diffusion length decrease, leading to the severe energy loss of PSCs.
In the equilibrium of charge recombination and charge generation, the steady-state charge density and the defect density closely associate with the quasi-Fermi level splitting through the shifting or pinning of the Fermi-level and even the band alignment relative to the transporting layers. The VOC of an optoelectronic device strongly depends on the quasi-Fermi levels splitting of electrons and holes in the light-absorber material under illumination. As a result, the nonradiative recombination of free carriers determined by defects undesirably reduces the voltages of PSCs. Besides the VOC, the voltage under maximum power point (MPP) conditions degrades as well, which simultaneously exerts a detrimental influence of defects on the value of FF. In a bid to mitigate the defect-mediated nonradiative recombination losses, defect passivation engineering is of crucial importance and is expected to be an efficient strategy for obtaining PCE approaching the Shockley–Queisser limit.
It is well-known that the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of PSCs determines the value of JSC, and the charge injection or extraction efficiency, charge collection efficiency and absorptivity together determine the value of IPCE.56 The charge injection efficiency is the proportion of the charge injection rate in the summation of charge injection, radiative recombination and nonradiative recombination rate. The former is determined by the energy band alignment constituted by the perovskite layer and the adjoining transport layers, whereas the latter two are determined by the quality of the perovskite film and the interface contact. A large density of defects would reduce the charge extraction efficiency, IPCE, and ultimately the JSC through a large amount of nonradiative recombination. Meanwhile, the perovskite morphology and the interfacial contact resistance can be manipulated by passivation, which brings about a dense and pinhole-free surface. Therefore, passivation strategies to diminish defect densities play a decisive role in maximizing the photovoltaic performance of PSCs while providing an electric driving force that originates from the satisfactory energy level alignments.
It is essential to suppress the harmful effects of defects including nonradiative recombination, charge trapping, ion migration, as well as hysteresis and material degradation. Passivation techniques on defects are supposed to expedite the development of reliable and efficient PSCs with long-term stability.
3. Novel passivation strategies
As discussed above, defects in the bulk and grain boundaries that are created during the crystal nucleation or the growth of polycrystalline perovskite films primarily induce nonradiative recombination and ion migration, impairing the VOC and stability of PSCs. Therefore, based on the fabrication route of perovskite films, we have reviewed the current passivation approaches targeting the perovskite films by ionic or coordinate bonding, including the film formation and post-treatment engineering. Some of the used passivators can passivate the undesired defects in bulk and grain boundaries, and also play an important role in crystallization control and stability enhancement.
3.1 Passivation during perovskite formation
During annealing and solution processing, the relatively high temperatures generally induce the rapid crystal growth of perovskites, inevitably creating a wide range of defects and seriously impairing the performance of PSCs. In this section, effective state-of-the-art passivation strategies during the film formation process are reviewed.

3.1.1 Bulk passivation by metal cations and anions. 
Both positively charged metal ions and negatively charged anions have been introduced into the perovskite precursor solution to passivate bulk defects (Table 1). Through ionic interactions, the metal cations target undercoordinated I− ions, I interstitials and negatively charged Pb–I anti-site substitutions (PbI3−), while the anions aim for the defects of Pb interstitials and halide vacancies.
Table 1 Passivation strategies during perovskite formation by metal cations and anions




Passivator
Perovskite components
Passivation functional groups

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




Na+
CsMAPbI3
Na+
1.06
24.5
78
20.2

82



KI
Cs0.06FA0.79MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
K+
1.18
23.06
79
21.6

83



RbI
CsPbI2Br
Rb+
1.24
14.02
69
12

313



MnCl2
CsPbI2Br
Mn2+
1.172
14.37
80
13.47

91



ZnI2
CsPbI2Br
Zn2+
1.236
15.61
63
12.16

90



EuCl2
CsPbI2Br
Eu2+
1.22
14.64
76.6
13.71

93



CaCl2
CsPbI2Br
Ca2+, Cl−
1.32
15.22
83.29
16.79

314



NiCl2
MAPbI3
Ni2+
1.13
22.64
81
20.6

94



CdI2
Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8PbI2.55Br0.45
Cd2+
1.16
22.0
80
20.5

96



Europium(III) acetylacetone
MAPbI3
Eu3+–Eu2+
1.15
23.53
80.7
21.89

66



FACl
FAPbI3
FA+, Cl−
1.04
18.90
68
13.37

99



NH4Cl
MAPbI3 (flexible)
NH4+, Cl−
13.14
19.71
73.5
15.86

103



MACl
FAPbI3
MA+, Cl−
1.13
25.92
82
24.02

106



HI
MAPbI3
I−
1.1
20.5
78
17.6

315



NbF5
FA0.85MA0.15PbI3
Nb5+, F−
1.05
25.40
77.08
20.56

114



NaF
Cs0.05FA0.54MA0.41(I0.98Br0.02)3
F−, hydrogen bond (N–H⋯F)
1.126
24.23
80.35
21.92

316



CsAc
FA0.85MA0.15PbI3
Cs+, COO−
1.12
24.92
78.64
21.95

115



Pb(SCN)2
MAPbI3
SCN−
1.09
21.55
69.97
16.41

119





Considering that cesium ions (Cs+) have been reported to be suitable for A-site replacement in perovskites, alkali metal ions have been extensively investigated as passivators. Bi et al. first demonstrated the spontaneous contribution of Na+ ions in the enhancement of the performance of PSCs.82 Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) measurements evidenced that Na+ ions diffused from ITO glass (Fig. 4a), efficiently passivating grain boundaries and leading to alleviated trap density and enhanced PL lifetime. Also, potassium (K) doping was acknowledged as an effective route to suppress hysteresis and improve the stability of PSCs. However, Abdi-Jalebi et al. found that the K+ ions accumulated at the grain boundaries and surfaces, rather than being doped into the (Cs0.06FA0.79MA0.15)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 lattice (Fig. 4b).83 The undercoordinated Br− and I− ions were passivated, which suppressed the migration of halide ions and enabled perovskite films with excellent luminescence and remarkable stability. Song et al. later proved that K+ ions (radii of 1.38 Å) preferred to occupy the interstitial sites within the perovskite lattice among the alkali metal ions by experiment and density functional theory (DFT) calculation, serving as the most effective element to inhibit the formation of Frenkel defects, which are the atomistic origins of hysteresis (Fig. 4c).84 Zheng et al. uncovered that light illumination was the key to triggering the passivation effect of K+via forming KBr-like compounds.85 The enhanced PCE performance and negligible J–V hysteresis of PSCs were attributed to the eliminated interface defects and mitigated ion migration as a result of the K+ passivation. Rubidium cations (Rb+) were also incorporated into the “cation cascade”, which stabilized the black phase of FA-based perovskites and promoted the “lock-up” passivation for excess iodide-halides.86,87 Nevertheless, the passivation effect of Rb+ was discovered to be inferior to that of K+, because KBr in the perovskite precursor solution formed thin surface passivation layers, whereas Rb+ additives were in favor of generating harmful phase-segregated rubidium halide crystals on the micro-scale (Fig. 4d). It should be noted that significant grain coalescence was promoted by the humidity treatment in K-passivated devices, leading to the remarkably enhanced humidity stability of PSCs.88 More recently, as demonstrated by synchrotron-based nano-X-ray fluorescence and complementary measurements, halogen homogenization induced by low concentration of alkali metal ions optimized the space carrier dynamics of perovskites and elongated the lifetimes of charge carriers.89
 Fig. 4  Metal cation incorporation. (a) SIMS measurement interdiffusion-grown MAPbI3 films on an ITO glass substrate.82 (b) Schematic of a cross-section of a film showing halide-vacancy management in cases of excess halide, in which the surplus halide is immobilized through complexing with potassium into benign compounds at the grain boundaries and surfaces.83 (c) J–V curves of PSCs based on (FAPbI3)0.875(CsPbBr3)0.125 doped with 10 μmol of LiI, NaI, KI, RbI and CsI, measured in the reverse and forward scans.85 (d) Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) decomposition results of a K- and Rb-passivated sample.88 (e) The electron localization function contour plots of pristine MAPbI3 (up) and MAPbI3 (Ni2+) perovskite film at Ni:Pb = 0.03 (bottom).94 (f) Proposed mechanism of the cyclic elimination of Pb0 and I0 defects and the regeneration of the Eu3+–Eu2+ metal ion pair.66 
Divalent and trivalent metal cations are in the spotlight for passivating defects in perovskites, especially the inorganic CsPbI2Br.28,90,91 Bai et al. found that Mn2+ doping in the CsPbI2Br precursor solution not only suppressed nucleation while retarding growth rates to obtain micro-crystalline thin films, it also passivated defect states at the grain boundaries and surface, thereby lessening the nonradiative recombination.91 Recently, Han et al. employed CaCl2 to realize n-type doping in CsPbI2Br, which delivered a record VOC of 1.32 V and PCE of 16.79%.28 It is worth noting that Ca2+ ions were not incorporated into the perovskite lattice but were combined with Cl− ions and passivated the grain boundaries, raising the Fermi level and thus enhancing the built-in voltage. Similarly, Sr2+ doping enriched the surface of the CsPbI2Br film with Sr, which passivated the defects and enhanced the VOC and FF.92 Eu2+ was a compelling passivator as well for its simultaneous effect of stabilizing the α phase of CsPbI2Br and suppressing nonradiative recombination.93 Ni2+ ions were distributed among MA+ and octahedral [PbI6]4−, and effectively passivated anti-site PbI3− defects and suppressed the formation of the Pb cluster (Pb0) through the interaction with undercoordinated I− ions and I-rich anti-sites (Fig. 4e).94 Interestingly, Wang et al. used the europium ion pair of Eu3+–Eu2+ as the “redox shuttle”, which oxidized Pb0 and reduced Ii in a complete cyclical transition (Fig. 4f).66 The mediated device achieved a PCE of 21.52% and sustained 90% of the initial PCE value after 8000 h. Given that the larger electronegativity difference between Cd and I makes the bonding energy of Cd–I stronger than that of Pb–I, Cd2+ ions were judiciously employed in the CsMAFA perovskite to alleviate the formation of halide vacancies and improve humidity and light stability.95–97 On the other hand, the passivation of cation doping is not just through ionic bonding. For instance, Chen et al. doped Ge2+ ions into Sn-based PSCs whose passivation mechanism was concluded to be the full-covered and stable GeO2 layer on the surface.98 To sum up, metal cations are facile and effective passivators but the passivation mechanism should be investigated in-depth to determine whether the metal cations are located within the perovskite lattices or at the grain boundaries/surfaces.
Halogen ions are commonly used anions. By respectively adding PbCl2, MACl, FACl, NH4Cl, CsCl to the precursors, the passivation mechanism of chloride ions (Cl−) has been intensively studied.99–105 Although Cl− has been shown to easily escape from the perovskite films during annealing, the influence of residual Cl− ions can be ascribed to two aspects. Cl− ions slow down the crystallization of perovskite films, enlarge the grain size and smooth the film morphology. The electronic properties of perovskite films can be influenced by Cl− ions via doping or defect passivating at grain boundaries. It is worth noting that Kim et al. delivered a marvelous PCE as high as 24.02% by introducing MACl into FAPbI3-based PSCs, where Cl− ions stabilized the perovskite structure and expedited the formation of high-quality FAPbI3 films by reducing the formation energy (Fig. 5a).106 Excessive iodide ions in perovskite precursor solutions were considered to compensate for the halogen vacancies at grain boundaries, thereby mitigating the nonradiative recombination induced by those trap states.83,107,108 Taking N,1-diiodoformamidine (DIFA) in the FA0.85MA0.15PbI3 precursor as an example, VI was filled with I− of DIFA and the hydrophobic C–I groups remarkably enhanced the hydrophobicity of perovskite films.109 The iodine in the [PbI6]4− octahedron can be replaced by bromine, which not only regulates the crystal structure and optical bandgap but also promotes the quality of the perovskite films.110–112 It was found that the incorporation of Br induced a significant potential barrier bending and effective passivation effect at the grain boundaries (Fig. 5b and c).113 Since fluoride (F) ions have the strongest electronegativity, the vacancy defect passivation was derived from the strong ionic bonding with Pb2+ and hydrogen bonding (N–H⋯F) with MA+/FA+ cations, which also immobilized the diffusion of organic cations and halide anions (Fig. 5d and e).50 As a novel α-phase stabilizer, NbF5 was reported by Liu to suppress the formation of the undesired δ-phase while reducing the trap densities by more than a half.114
 Fig. 5  The incorporation of negatively charged anions. (a) Scheme showing the role of the MACl additive in the α-phase FAPbI3 perovskite.106 One-dimensional potential and topography line profiles near the GBs in (b) the control MAPbI3 film without Br, and (c) MAPbI2.88Br0.12 film.113 (d) Net atomic charges of I and Pb ions on the FAPbI3 surface with the incorporation of NaI species (FA–I) or NaF species (FA–F), and without any incorporation (FA). (e) The formation energy of a surface VFA in the clean FAPbI3 (FA) and FA–I or FA–F species incorporated surfaces.50 (f) DLTS spectra of the control and target layers measured between 150 K and 330 K.117 
Beside halide ions, anionic groups have been utilized to passivate the halide vacancies by ionic bonds. Yuan et al. developed a facile co-alloying method through the simultaneous incorporation of Cs+ and the carboxylate group (–COO−, Ac−). Ac− strongly interacted with Pb2+ by forming Pb–Ac bonds, thereby realizing the contraction of the FA0.85MA0.15PI3 lattice.115 It was revealed that ionized iodide (triiodide: I3−) not only mitigated the chemical degradation caused by hydroxide and Ox,116 but also reduced the amount of deep-level traps within the perovskite bulk (Fig. 5f).117 Yin et al. showed that O2− ions acted as a p-type dopant to passivate the shallow hole traps and facilitated the transfer of charge carriers.118 Thiocyanate ions (SCN−) were able to lessen the recombination by the release of CH3NH2 gas, which promoted the formation of excess PbI2 to passivate the grain boundaries.119


3.1.2 Self-passivation by non-stoichiometric precursors. 
Interestingly, although the atomic ratios of defect-free perovskite crystals are ideally supposed to be stoichiometric, the grain boundaries of perovskites with either an excess or deficiency of PbI2 can be self-passivated by the unreacted PbI2 or organic halides.
Since the first research concerning the passivation effect of PbI2 in 2013,120 increasing interest has been ignited. Femtosecond time-resolved transient absorption spectroscopy (fs-TA) performed on the PbI2-rich surface first indicated its passivation effect.121 The presence of PbI2 was commonly observed at the grain boundaries and surfaces through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (Fig. 6a and b). The surface potential of grain boundaries without thermal annealing was identified to be higher than that of grain interiors but showed lower states after thermal annealing.122,123 As is shown in Fig. 6a, an I-type band alignment mechanism was proposed by Chen et al. to explain the self-induced passivation effect of PbI2, which prevented excitons from the surface trap states.122 Owing to the larger bandgap (2.3 eV) of PbI2 as compared to that of MAPbI3 (1.5 eV), nonradiative transport channels were reduced, thereby suppressing the nonradiative recombination rate. Although a surge of research has focused on the incompletely converted PbI2 in the two-step solution deposition,123–125 its passivation is not feasible for bringing a further increase because the amount of excess PbI2 located at grain boundaries is uncontrollable. Hence, adding additional PbI2 to the one-step stoichiometric precursor was put forward to mitigate the nonradiative recombination and enhance the charge separation;126,127 the overly excessive amount of PbI2 is detrimental to the PCE and stability of PSCs.123,128–133 For planar-structured PSCs, it was concluded that moderate residual PbI2 was beneficial, while overly excessive PbI2 caused serious hysteresis and instability owing to electron accumulation stemming from the imbalanced extraction of holes and electrons; ion migration was also triggered by insufficient organic components.123 Evidenced by XRD and UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, the burn-in of PSCs upon exposure to illumination and humidity was accelerated by the unreacted PbI2.128,129 Furthermore, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) confirmed that PbI2 decomposed to metallic Pb and mobile iodine under illumination, which was likely to diffuse into the perovskite phase and induce interstitial defects.133
 Fig. 6  Passivation by non-stoichiometric precursors. (a) SEM images and type-I band alignment of MAPbI3 film with PbI2 wrapping the perovskite grain.122 (b) 2D topography spatial maps of perovskite films before (left) and after annealing at 150 °C for 60 min (right).122 (c) Schematic representation of the coating process to form the MAPbI3 perovskite films with and without the grain boundary healing layer via Lewis acid–base adduct intermediates.108 (d) c-AFM images for the MAPbI3 perovskite films for x = 0 (left) and 0.06 (right).108 
For organic halides, taking MAI as an example, Park and coworkers presented that 6 mol% excess in the precursor solution formed an MAI layer at the grain boundaries (Fig. 6c and d), inducing highly ionic-conducting pathways that significantly inhibited nonradiative recombination and facilitated charge extraction.108 However, Edgar et al. discovered that excess MAI in the dipping solution of the two-step deposition jeopardized the conductivity of perovskite, thereby decreasing the JSC of PSCs.134


3.1.3 Grain-boundary passivation by additives. 
It was found that the formation of defects mainly accumulates at the grain boundaries, which makes grain boundaries the most susceptible to environmental stress. To tackle this issue, additive engineering with the employment of zwitterions, Lewis acids (e.g., fullerene derivatives) or Lewis bases (e.g., O-donor, S-donor, and N-donor), quantum dots and ionic liquids have been widely reported to passivate the grain-boundary defects, along with modulating perovskite crystallization and morphology, as well as improving the operation stability of PSCs.
Zwitterions, with both positively and negatively charged functional groups, are capable of passivating dual ionic defects at the same time. Zheng et al. added 3-(decyldimethylammonio)-propane-sulfonate inner salt (DPSI) into the perovskite precursor, where the quaternary ammonium cations and sulfonic anions in DPSI passivated VMA and VI respectively, boosting the PCE to 21.1%, combined with prominent light stability (Fig. 7a).135 A bifunctional additive called 4-(1H-imidazol-3-ium-3-yl)butane-1-sulfonate (IMS) was reported by Zhou et al. to modulate the orientation of the perovskite crystal and passivate the defects at grain boundaries, especially VI, delivering the highest VOC of 1.208 V among the MAPbI3-based planar PSCs.136 Cai et al. employed trimethylammonium chloride (TACl) to lower the density of grain boundaries and trap states, which greatly elongated the carrier diffusion length and improved the PCE from 19.1% to 20.9%.137 Given the few investigations on zwitterions, the systematic passivation mechanism of zwitterions should be further explored.
 Fig. 7  Passivation by zwitterions and Lewis acid additives. Schematic illustrations of (a) DPSI defect passivation135 and (b) the in situ passivation of halide-induced deep traps: PCBM is adsorbed on the Pb–I anti-site defective grain boundary during perovskite self-assembly.140 (c) The structures of Ii− and its interaction products with 1/2O2, O2, and 3/2O2, along with the calculated energetics (ΔE, eV).143 (d) Theoretical calculation of the halide vacancy, halide vacancy and O2 passivation, and halide vacancy and dissociated O atom passivation.147 
Lewis base or acid additives in precursor solution or antisolvent are desired to realize in situ passivation during the formation of perovskite films by eliminating the trap states and nonradiative recombination at the grain boundaries (Table 2). Lewis acids that can accept extraneous electron pairs have the capability of passivating the electron-rich defects such as undercoordinated I− ions and Pb–I anti-site substitutions. In contrast, Lewis bases that can donate electron pairs can passivate the electron-deficient defects like undercoordinated Pb2+ ions. Because of the inherent electron-accepting ability of the fullerene spherical structure, fullerene (C60) and its derivatives (PCBM, ICBM, etc.) are prominent Lewis acids. Bulk heterojunction perovskite–PCBM was fabricated by Chiang et al. using a two-step solution process at a low temperature, where PCBM filled the pinholes between the perovskite grains and significantly improved FF to 0.82 with no hysteresis.138 Li et al. reported that a PCBM decrease during the process of spin-coating could assist the perovskite growth.139 Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) mapping confirmed the PCBM distribution at grain boundaries. The enhancement of the PL intensity and the curtate transit time of transient photocurrent (TP) measurement indicated the suppressed nonradiative decay and accelerated charge transport. Fundamentally, Xu et al. first proved the chemical interaction between PCBM and perovskites, where PCBM was thermodynamically in favor of interacting with the Pb–I anti-site defects at grain boundaries and surfaces (Fig. 7b).140 Due to the better solubility of indene-C60 biadduct (ICBA) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), Wu et al. added a small amount of ICBA to the perovskite precursor, achieving better performance as compared with the PCBM-mediated devices.141 Zhang et al. also made use of the α-bis-PCBM additive in the antisolvent, dramatically improving the crystallinity of the perovskite films and facilitating the extraction and transportation of electrons.142
Table 2 Passivation strategies during perovskite formation by Lewis acids and bases




Passivator
Perovskite components
Passivation functional groups

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




Lewis acids


PCBM
MAPbI3
Fullerene
0.97
20.2
82
16.0

138



ICBM
MAPbI3−xClx
Fullerene
1.088
21.59
77
18.14

141



α-Bis-PCBM
FAMAPb(IBr)3
Fullerene
1.13
23.95
74
20.8

142



O2
CsPbI2Br
O atom
1.180
16.31
78.8
15.17

147







Lewis bases


Ascorbic acid (AA)
MA0.5FA0.5Pb0.5Sn0.5I3
O donor
0.74
24.57
67
12.18

149



Agarose
MAPbI3
O donor
0.99
23.50
63
14.66

154



Benzoquinone (BQ)
MAPbI3
O donor
1.02
21.30
72
15.66

148



PU
MAPbI3 (flexible)
O donor
1.213
22.12
80.3
18.7

151



PBDB-T
Ca0.04FA0.82MA0.14PbI2.58Br0.42
O donor
1.113
22.39
77.8
19.38

153



AQ310
FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45
O donor
1.15
21.80
78.4
19.66

150



Caffeine
MAPbI3
O donor
1.143
22.97
77.13
20.25

170



SP3
MAPbI3
O donor
1.146
22.69
78.55
20.43

171



4-tert-Butylpyridine
MAPbI3
N donor
1.06
21.39
77
17.41

173



Melaminium iodide
FA0.875Cs0.125Pb(I0.875Br0.125)3
N donor
1.082
21.80
76.4
18.43

161



Pyridine
Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3)
N donor
1.136
22.29
75.12
19.03

172



PVP
MAPbI3
N donor (pyridine groups)
1.15
21.74
80.9
20.23

174



N–RGO
FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45
–NH2 or –OH
1.15
21.80
74
18.73

160



Benzylamine (BA)
FAPbI3
Aromatic ring, –NH2
1.12
23.6
73
19.2

317



DAP
MAPbI3
–NH2
1.18
22.5
81.7
21.7

163



KHQSA
FASnI3
SO3−
0.55
17.64
69.4
6.76

318



Dimethyl sulfide (DS)
MAPbI3 (flexible)
S donor
1.008
20.99
63.1
13.35

163



Thiourea (TU)
MAPbI3
S donor
1.09
23.97
75
19.80

167



Cu(Tu)I
MAPbI3−xClx
S donor, I−
1.12
22.3
79.8
20

164



MPTS
FAMAPb(IBr)3
S donor, SiO2
1.12
23.39
79.8
20.81

165



HPA
MAPbI3
P donor
1.07
20.4
74
16.2

177



4-ABPACl
MAPbI3
hydrogen bond
1.0
22.05
75
16.55

159



5-AVA
MAPbI3
O donor, –NH2






11.0

175



Theophylline
FAxMA1−xPb(IBr)3
O donor, hydrogen bond
1.191
21.71
77
15.76

180



Ethyl cellulose
MAPbI3
O donor, hydrogen bond
1.1
22.89
77
19.41

155



PCDTBT
MAPbIxCl3−x
N donor, S donor
0.94
21.77
77
15.76

181



TDZDT
MAPbI3
N donor, S donor
1.10
22.77
76
19.04

319



IT-4F
MAPbI3
O donor, N donor, S donor
1.12
21.35
76.74
18.35

320



Urea
MAPbI3
O donor, –NH2
1.092
21.68
78
18.55

178



IT-M
Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
O donor, S donor
1.14
22.34
77.7
19.70

321



PBT1
CsMAFAPb(IBr)3
O donor, S donor
1.13
22.91
79.8
20.67

322



D4TBP
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45
O donor, –NH2, aromatic ring
1.16
22.51
80.3
21.0

182





Oxygen is also a Lewis acid that has been evidenced to eliminate deep-level traps and mitigate detrimental recombination.37,143 Through DFT calculations, a mechanism was proposed where oxygen effectively inactivated deep hole traps caused by iodide interstitials, thanks to the formation of stable oxidized products (Fig. 7c).143 Additionally, Tian et al. concluded that the key factor was the light-induced curing in the presence of oxygen, where the photochemical reaction involving oxygen could deactivate the trapping sites.144 As such, a highly versatile hybrid chemical vapor deposition (HCVD) strategy was designed with a mixture of O2/N2 gas to assist the volatilization and deposition of MAI, gifting the MAPbI3 films with superior crystallinity and lower densities of both shallow- and deep-level defects.145 However, oxygen is a “double-edged sword” because its diffusion into perovskite films would produce superoxides, which react with organic cations, jeopardizing the chemical stability of PSCs.146 Liu et al., therefore, chose the all-inorganic CsPbI2Br to obtain deep insight into the passivation effect of oxygen. According to the experiments and DFT calculation, they uncovered that the oxygen atoms were much more effective in passivation as compared to oxygen molecules because oxygen atoms could realize the bulk and surface passivation while the oxygen molecules were preferentially absorbed on superficial halogen vacancies via just physisorption (Fig. 7d).147
Lewis bases can passivate undercoordinated Pb2+ ions or Pb clusters by forming Lewis adducts. The presence of oxygen (O),148–156 nitrogen (N),157–162 sulfur (S),163–169 or phosphorus (P) atoms159 that contain lone electron pairs is the obvious feature of Lewis bases. By interacting with MAI through O donors in perovskite precursors, benzoquinone (BQ) molecules slowed down the crystallization process for high-quality MAPbI3 films with enlarged grain size.148 The p-type π-conjugated polymer PBDB-T in antisolvent not only triggered heterogeneous nucleation, it also filled in the grain boundaries and passivated the interstitials and vacancies through the electron-rich O atoms, providing a bridge for carrier transport between crystalline grains.153 Since carboxyl (–COOH) groups strongly coordinate to Pb2+ ions, caffeine with two –COOH groups enhanced the activation energy during the crystallization of perovskite films and improved the thermal and moisture stability.170 Interestingly, with the use of the organic D–π–A molecules with different substituted phenyl units as the electron donors, Wu et al. greatly enhanced the electron density on –COOH and strengthened the coordination between –COOH and undercoordinated Pb2+, which effectively eliminated the Pb cluster (Fig. 8a).171 A macromolecular intermediate phase (CH3NH3I·PbI2·DMF·DMSO·PPC) formed by the poly(propylene carbonate) (PPC) and perovskite precursor solution via the Lewis base functional groups led to the MAPbI3·PPC cross-linker, which subsequently enabled enlarged, cross-linked perovskite grains with minimized grain-to-grain electrical decoupling.156 Meanwhile, the carbonyl (CO) of the remnant PPC in MAPbI3 films effectively passivated the defects like undercoordinated Pb2+ or NH3+ ions at the grain boundaries. The slightly different defect passivation of ethyl cellulose (EC) was attributed to hydrogen bonds in addition to O donors, which effectively abated the ion migration and decreased the hysteresis index by three times.155 Ammonium groups (–NH2) with N donors can anchor to the Pb–I frameworks through coordinating with Pb2+ ions or forming hydrogen bonds with I−. Pyridine and its derivatives containing N donors are also regarded as passivators and regulators for perovskite growth. Guanidinium (GA+) ions with three symmetric amino groups were utilized to passivate undercoordinated iodide as well as successfully suppress the formation of iodide vacancies.157 Theoretical calculations indicated that GA could stiffen the organic Pb–I lattice, thereby suppressing nonradiative recombination and mitigating the diffusion of ions (Fig. 8b).158 Recently, the passivation effect of long-chain polymers with different functional groups (i.e., amino (b-PEI), pyridine (PVP), and carboxylic acid groups (PAA)) was studied systematically by Yang.174 Using DFT calculations, the bonding energies between b-PEI, PVP, PAA and MAPbI3 were estimated to be 51.88, 37.70, and 15.71 kJ mol−1, respectively. Unexpectedly, PVP exhibited the most efficient defect passivation and best performance, while b-PEI showed the worst. Further analysis from proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) measurements manifested that the amino group on b-PEI would convert to an ammonium group when mixed with MAI because of the strong basicity of the amino group, which changed the coordination bond (amino-Pb2+) to ionic bonding (MA+–I−) and induced new trap states. Containing a carboxyl group and an amine group, the aminovaleric acid (AVA) terminated dangling bonds and mitigated superoxide induced degradation.175 It was reported that S donors were stronger than O donors when coordinating with Pb2+ to form Lewis adducts.176 A novel p-type Cu(thiourea)I (Cu(Tu)I) passivated the undercoordinated Pb2+ ions via Tu and halide anions (I−). Compared to the traditional conductor CuI, Cu(Tu)I suppressed charge recombination more effectively by lowering the energy level of trap states and annihilating the potential wells for holes at heterojunctions (Fig. 8c).164 Besides, sulfhydryl groups (–SH) can strongly interact with Pb2+ ions to retard the perovskite growth as well as passivate positively charged defects such as iodide vacancies. (3-Mercaptopropyl)trimethoxysilane (MPTS), including the terminal group of –SH, realized perovskite crystal modulation, defect passivation and stability enhancement.165 In terms of P-donor passivation, the use of the hypophosphorous acid (HPA) by Zhang et al. reduced the oxidized I2 back into I−, thus ameliorating the imbalanced I/Pb stoichiometry and significantly restraining the formation of Pb0.177
 Fig. 8  Passivation by Lewis base additives. (a) Schematic illustration of the passivation process of D–π–A molecules for the undercoordinated Pb2+.171 (b) Geometries of MAPbI3, MA0.75FA0.25PbI3, and MA0.75GA0.25PbI3 at 0 (top) and 300 K (bottom).158 (c) Illustration of a possible mechanism for the trap state passivation.164 (d) Schematics of the perovskite formation with and without urea.178 (e) Theoretical models of perovskites with molecular surface passivation of Pb–I anti-site by theophylline and theobromine.180 (f) Schematic illustration of the passivation effect of D4TBP on different defect sites.182 (g) Energy offset-dominated trap state passivation and intergrain charge transport.183 
For the synergistic passivation effect, a trend of employing molecules with poly-functional groups has emerged. Lee et al. reported a non-volatile Lewis base, urea, which not only increased the activation energy by the formation of MAI·PbI2·DMSO·urea adduct, but it also healed the defects at the grain boundaries, leading to the enhanced crystallinity and prolonged carrier lifetime (Fig. 8d).178 An intermediate adduct phase formed by Lewis acid–base interaction between the perovskite precursor solution and thiourea enabled high-quality perovskite films with enlarged grain size, greatly enhanced light absorption and inhibited defect states, promoting the separation and transport of charge carriers.167,168 Notably, Wang et al. illuminated the relationship between the molecular configuration and the passivation effectiveness.179,180 They found that the N–H and CO in theophylline were optimal because the hydrogen bonds between N–H and I promoted the bonding of CO and anti-site Pb defects (Fig. 8e). As a result, the theophylline-treated device exhibited a higher PCE of 22.6% as compared that of the theobromine treated device. In addition to the combined passivation of N and O donors, the coupling of S and N donors was also applied to passivate the undercoordinated Pb2+ by mixing the electron donor polymer (PCDTBT) into the MAPbIxCl3−x precursor.181 Furthermore, a new molecule D-4-tert-butylphenylalanine (D4TBP) comprising amine, 4-tert-butyl-phenyl and carboxyl was synthesized by Yang et al. and passivated multiple kinds of defects including ionic and neutral defects as shown in Fig. 8f, enabling a record small VOC loss of 0.34 V.182 By introducing semiconducting molecules with Lewis acids or basic functional groups within the bulk films, Niu et al. completed the simultaneous passivation on the Pb–I anti-site defects and halide vacancies.183 They explained how the energy offset between the introduced molecules and the MAPbI3 affected trap states and intergrain carrier transport, and discovered that molecules with better energetic parity with perovskites exhibited better performance (Fig. 8g). In addition, with the employment of bis-PCBM as a Lewis acid and N-(4-bromophenyl)thiourea (BrPh-ThR) as a Lewis base, Gratzel and coworkers boosted the PCE from 19.3% to 21.7%.184 The compelling passivation effect achieved by these results will motivate us to explore more Lewis acids and bases for better performance of PSCs.
The passivation effect of quantum dots (QDs) has recently attracted increasing attention in the field of PSCs. Several researchers showed that the incorporation of carbon quantum dots (CQDs) containing hydroxyl, carbonyl, and amino groups passivated the undercoordinated Pb2+ located at the grain boundaries, thus suppressing nonradiative recombination (Fig. 9a).185,186 Chen et al. introduced multifunctional n-type goethite quantum dots (FeOOH QDs) for heterogeneous nucleation.187 For one thing, the iron and oxygen of FeOOH QDs passivated the undercoordinated ions through Lewis acid–base adducts. For another, the interaction between iron and –OH of FeOOH QDs and perovskite suppressed the migration of I− and MA+. Oleyl amine-coated PbSO4(PbO)4 quantum dots in antisolvent formed hydrogen bonds between the H atoms of OA and I atoms of MAPbI3, passivating the undercoordinated Pb2+ ions at the surface and protecting MAPbI3 films from the intrusion of moisture/oxygen.188 More recently, black phosphorus quantum dots (BPQDs) were introduced into the CsPbI2Br precursor solution by Gong et al., which served as heterogeneous nucleation sites to regulate the nucleation and growth of CsPbI2Br perovskite films. The diminution of coulombic repulsion induced electronic donor–acceptor-like bonding between molecules of the CsPbI2Br precursor and P atoms of BPQDs, effectively enhancing the electron extraction efficiency and stabilizing the α-phase of CsPbI2Br.189 Perovskite QDs are also considered to be effective passivators. For example, Zheng et al. utilized the CsPbBrCl2 QDs as dopants that attached the ligands to the surface of the perovskite films, applying the synergistic effect of elemental passivation and surface modification.190
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the proposed mechanism of CQD passivation on Pb2+.185 (b) Structures of (CC2)PbI3, (CC3)PbI3, and (CN)PbI3. Top: Schematic of the salt. Middle: X-ray structures showing the infinite [PbI3]n− chains with the shortest I⋯I distance indicated. Bottom: Hydrogen bonding between the cations and the anions.193 (c) Long-term stability of the most stable device with BMIMBF4 in the perovskite film under full-spectrum sunlight and heat stressing at 70–75 °C.195 (d) Stability tests performed for the PSCs based on MAPbI3 and 1% ETI:MAPbI3 under MPPT tracking in an argon atmosphere at 60 °C (left) and ambient air, 40 ± 5% RH at room temperature (right).197 
Ionic liquids (ILs) are salts composed of large organic cations and various organic or inorganic anions, which exist in liquid form below 100 °C. Due to the strong interionic electrostatic force, ILs have unique ionic conductivity and superior thermal/electron-chemically stability, filling halide vacancies with specific ions and motivating applications in perovskite films.191,192 Zhang et al. employed imidazolium ILs functionalized with –CH2–CHCH2 (CC1), –CH2CCH(CC2) or –CH2CN (CC3) as dopants in the MAPbI3 precursor, followed by methylamine fumigation.193 The interaction between PbI2 and IL dopant formed imidazolium-PbI3− salts, which affected the growth of perovskite crystals (Fig. 9b). Consequently, CC2-treated devices realized the optimal PCE up to 19.21%. It is worth noting that Wang et al. recently incorporated three types of water-soluble triazolium ILs, comprised of an amino group, an adjustable alkyl side chain and a cation of 1-alkyl-4-amino-1,2,4-triazolium in the MAPbI3 precursor solution.194 Amino groups with lone electron pairs in the ILs interacted with the undercoordinated Pb2+ defects and alkyl chains vertically on the perovskite layer and formed a hydrophobic surface. 1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4) additives in the (FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3 PSCs enlarged the grain size, strengthened the interaction between the perovskite layer and HTL, optimized the energy alignment and mitigated ion migration, delivering an improved PCE of 19.9% and dramatically enhancing the long-term device stability (Fig. 9c).195 The hydrogen bonding formed between 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromine (BMIBr) additive and MA of perovskite inhibited the migration of MA+ and the volatility of MA, preventing decomposition and improving the thermal-resistance of PSCs.196 Moreover, 1-(4-ethenylbenzyl)-3-(3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-tridecafluorooctylimidazolium iodide (ETI) was reported to form a permeation barrier that inhibited the out-diffusion of thermally degraded MA.197 With enhanced thermal stabilization, the ETI-mediated devices sustained 80% PCE after 700 h in ambient conditions (Fig. 9d).
Apart from crystallization modulation and defect passivation, precursor solution stabilization originated from precursor-additive interactions restraining the degradation of aging. In the MA0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 precursor comprising FAI, MABr, PbI2 and PbBr2, the deprotonation of MA+ ions to volatile methylamine (CH3NH2) caused the loss of MA+ dissolved in the solution and resulted in the undesired impure phase analogous to yellow non-perovskite δ-FAPbI3.198,199 The organic small molecule, ITIC-Th (3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(5-hexylthienyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene) was utilized by Qin et al. to sustain the MA+ ions during the aging process and stabilize the [PbI6]4− framework through Pb–S bonding, promoting the formation of stable α-phase perovskite films.198 Moreover, CO and cyano (CN) groups in the ITIC-Th effectively passivated Pb0 generated from iodide vacancies and greatly enhanced the FF of devices. Min and coworkers demonstrated that the amine-sulfur coordination between the elemental sulfur (S8) additive and MA+ ions could also stabilize the MAFAPb(IBr)3 precursor solution by precluding the deprotonation of MA+ to CH3NH2.199 The remaining sulfur ions further benefited the chemical stabilization and inhibited the photo-driven phase segregation of PSCs. However, Wang et al. uncovered that the impure phase in the aged precursor solution was a mixed 1D phase mingled with the N-methyl FA (MFA+) and N,N′-dimethyl FA (DMFA+) cations instead of δ-FAPbI3, a by-product formed by the reaction between CH3NH2 and FAI. Based on this, they introduced triethyl borate (TEB) to weaken the capability of I− to capture protons in MA+ ions by strong B–I interactions between the I− in MAI and the B in TEB, significantly suppressing the impure phase in perovskite film and improving the performance and reproducibility of PSCs.200


3.1.4 Mixed-dimensional perovskite heterojunction. 
Derived from the long and bulkier hydrophobic organic components, low-dimensional (1D and 2D) perovskites exhibit superior light and humidity stability.201–203 However, the PCE performance of low-dimensional perovskite-based solar cells is inferior to that of 3D perovskites because of the relatively wider bandgaps, low charge mobilities and inefficient charge transport process because of insulating organic spacer cations.201,204,205 More recently, the mixed dimensional perovskite heterojunctions that combine the stability of the low-dimensional perovskites and the superior light-harvesting properties of 3D perovskites have emerged, which effectively solve the instability issue without compromising PCE performance.206–208
1D perovskites possess unique thermodynamic structure stability and flexibility because of the individual metal halide octahedron. Fan et al. reported 1D/3D hybrid PSCs for the first time by introducing 2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)pyridine (PZPY) into the 3D perovskite precursor, resulting in prolonged carrier lifetimes and mitigated carrier recombination (Fig. 10a). More importantly, 1D perovskites with high flexibility blocked the channels of ion migration, leading to reversible self-healing ability under temperature cycling from 25 °C to 80 °C (Fig. 10b).209 Imidazolium iodide (IMI) was reported to be an effective additive with an auto-passivation effect in the perovskite precursor as well. With the help of the fumigated MA gas, high concentration IM+ cations were deprotonated to imidazole, forming the 1D IMPbI3 to realize defect passivation.210
 Fig. 10  The mixed-dimensional perovskite heterojunction. (a) The 1D–3D perovskite structure.209 (b) Long-term stability of the unencapsulated control and 1D–3D hybrid perovskite solar cells during temperature cycling (25–85 °C) at 55% RH.209 (c) 2D–3D perovskite structure.16 (d) Proposed electronic band offsets of the 2D–3D heterojunction.16 (e) Improved moisture stability with 2D perovskite at grain boundaries. Photos of the perovskite films incorporating bare FAPbI3, FAPbI3 with 2D perovskite and FA0.98Cs0.02PbI3 with 2D perovskite exposed to RH of 80 ± 5% at 20 ± 2 °C for different times (left), and the evolution of the absorption of the films at 600 nm under RH 80 ± 5% at 20 ± 2 °C (right).212 (f) Stability test of CsPbI3·0.025EDAPbI4-based devices and films. PCE of the champion PSC as a function of storage time in a dark dry box (left), and XRD patterns and images of the CsPbI3·0.025EDAPbI4 film heated at 100 °C in a dry box for 1 week (right).216 
2D perovskites with larger bandgaps can energetically wrap the 3D grains, converting the defect-rich boundaries to layered 2D perovskites. Wang et al. first reported this conversion by introducing n-butylammonium cations (BA+), which formed perpendicularly orientated 2D perovskites embedded between the grains of the 3D perovskite (Fig. 10c).16 The heterostructured 2D/3D perovskite structure greatly inhibited nonradiative recombination (Fig. 10d).16,211 To stabilize the α phase structure, 1.67 mol% of 2D PEA2PbI4 was incorporated into the CsFAPbI3 precursor solution.212 The modified perovskite film obtained an ideal bandgap identical to pure FAPbI3 with remarkable humidity durability (Fig. 10e). Li et al. reported the quasi-3D FAxPEA1−xPbI3 perovskite by introducing phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) in a two-step deposition, where hydrophobic PEA+ cations passivated grain boundaries and formed a self-assembled organic shell that increased the energy of the phase transition.213 Constructing a quasi-2D perovskite or 2D/3D perovskite heterojunction via large radius cations also made a great difference in CsPbI3-based PSCs for black phase stability.214,215 A small amount of 2D EDAPbI4 (EDA: ethylenediamine) perovskite in the CsPbI3 precursor impeded the undesired transition from the α-phase to the δ-phase by cross-linking CsPbI3 crystals without damaging charge transport (Fig. 10f).216 They concluded that the phase-stability enhancement of α-CsPbI3 was attributed to the oriented (100) layer structure of EDAPbI4. Jiang et al. reported that the quasi-2D perovskite α-CsPbI3 was formed by PEAI additives, which significantly prohibited the δ-phase and decreased trap densities.215 As a typical barrier molecule, the amount of PEAI in the perovskite precursor adjusted the dimensionality from 2D, quasi-2D to 3D in the chemical formula of (PEA)2Csn−1PbnI3n+1.217 For the dual functions of morphology modulation and defect passivation to minimize the oxidation of Sn2+/Sn4+, Jokar added n-butylammonium iodide (BAI) and ethylenediammonium diiodide (EDAI2) to the FASnI3 precursor solution, which relaxed the crystal strain and decreased defect states.218 GASCN additives introduced into the mixed Sn–Pb perovskite precursor improved the properties of structure and photoelectricity, which benefited from the passivation effect of the 2D structure at grain boundaries.219 Meanwhile, the induced 2D structure prevented Sn from diffusing out of grains and blocked the diffusion of oxygen into grains, thereby suppressing Sn vacancies. The passivation effect of the 2D perovskite capping layer formed by post-treatment will be discussed in Section 3.3.2.

3.2 Surface passivation by post-treatment
A recent study uncovered that the density of deep traps at the perovskite surface was one to two orders of magnitude higher than that in bulk.220 Dangling bonds generated by the discontinuous structure of perovskite crystals, such as the undercoordinated halide anions and lead cations, are responsible for those surface defect states, which can cause deleterious carrier recombination and performance deterioration of PSCs. Hence, effective surface passivation strategies are still at the heart of pushing the PCE of PSCs. In this section, post-treatments to passivate surface defects after the formation of perovskite are reviewed.

3.2.1 Lewis acid–base adduct. 
In addition to the Lewis acid and base additives in perovskite precursors, Lewis acid–base chemistry has been extensively employed for surface passivation through post-treatment (Table 3). As mentioned in Section 3.1.3, the electron-deficient defects and electron-rich defects can be passivated by Lewis bases and Lewis acids, respectively. Thus, deep-level traps induced by both anions and cations can be effectively suppressed and the overall performance of PSCs will be greatly ameliorated.
Table 3 Post-treatment passivation by Lewis acids and bases




Passivator
Perovskite components
Passivation functional groups

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




Lewis acids


PCBM
MAPbI3
Fullerene
0.98
20.3
75
14.9

221



IPFB
MAPb(ICl)3
Fluorine substituent aromatic ring
1.06
23.38
67
15.7

222



F4TCNQ
MAPbI3
Fluorine substituent aromatic ring
1.06
20.3
75.4
18.1

223



TPFP
CsFAMAPb(IBr)3
Fluorine substituent aromatic ring
1.16
23.97
76
21.04

224







Lewis bases


TOPO
MAPbI3
O donor
0.916
18.69
75.1
12.8

232



Pyridine
MAPbI3−xClx
N donor
1.05
24.1
72
15.5

221



Thiophene
MAPbI3−xClx
S donor
1.02
21.3
68
14.3

221



3-Hexylthiophene
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45
S donor
1.15
23.2
75
19.9

226



P3HT
CsPbI2Br
S donor (thiophene grouos)
1.30
13.1
70
12.0

227



MMI
MAPbI3
S donor
1.125
23.51
76
20.10

230



PVP
MAPbI3
–NCO (acylamine group)
1.05
22.0
80.4
20.93

227



IDIC
MAPbI3
O donor, N donor
1.11
22.96
76.5
19.5

228



2-MP
MAPbI3
N donor, S donor
1.16
22.61
71.44
20.28

229



SN
FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3
N donor, S donor
1.15
24.0
75
20.9

218



PASP
MAPbI3
S donor, –CO, para-fluorine
1.07
22.8
82.2
20.05

323



Me4NBr
(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4
–N(CH3)3+
0.76
26.44
72.81
14.56

324




L-α-Phosphatidylcholine
FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45
–N(CH3)3+, –PO4−
1.08
22.7
80
19.6

325



Choline chloride
FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45
–N(CH3)3+, Cl−
1.14
23.7
78
21.0

325





C60 and its derivatives are the most representative Lewis acids. With thermal admittance spectroscopy measurement, Shao et al. first confirmed that PCBM passivated both shallow- and deep-level trap states (Fig. 11a), which mitigated the charge recombination and hysteresis of PSCs.221 Lewis acids such as iodopentafluorobenezene (IPFB) and 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) were proposed to passivate undercoordinated I− traps by halogen bonding (Fig. 11b).222,223 Recently, Yang et al. introduced a multifunctional Lewis acid additive, tris(pentafluorophenyl)phosphine (TPFP), containing three fluorine-substituted benzene rings connected by a phosphorus atom.224 Analogous to IPFB, the strong electronegativity of fluorine atoms made the phosphorus atom a strong positive charge center, which effectively passivated the undercoordinated I− ions. On the other hand, the aromatic rings substituted by F enhanced hydrophobicity.
 Fig. 11  Post-treatment via Lewis bases and acids. (a) Trap density of states (tDOS) obtained by thermal admittance spectroscopy.221 (b) Schematic view of the halogen bond interaction between the iodopentafluorobenzene (top) and illustration of the electrostatic screening of halides via halogen bond complexation of IPFB on the perovskite surface (bottom).222 (c) Thiophene or pyridine molecules can donate electron density to Pb and form a coordinate covalent bond, effectively neutralizing the excess positive charge in the crystal.221 (d) Interaction schematic of the π-conjugated Lewis base and Pb. (e) Molecular structure of passivating materials and schematic illustration of their interaction with metal ions.229 (f) Photographs of the pristine and passivated perovskite films before and after high humidity aging under >95% RH.229 (g) Statistics of VOC distribution for devices with PCBM, L-α-phosphatidylcholine, choline iodide and choline chloride.233 
Molecules with N or S donors can passivate the Lewis acid traps (undercoordinated Pb2+ or Pb cluster) caused by halogen vacancies. Snaith and coworkers first reported the surface treatment via thiophene with S atoms or pyridine with N atoms (Fig. 11c), prolonging the PL lifetime by nearly one order of magnitude to 2 μs;221 thereafter, the derivatives of pyridine were extensively employed. For example, the hydrophobic polymer poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PVP) was found to passivate the undercoordinated Pb2+ through pyridine, which effectively mitigated the trap states and nonradiative recombination at the surfaces.225 Moreover, thiophene derivatives with thiophene rings that have highly delocalized π-electrons are also widely used to enhance charge transfer and collection at the interface accompanied by surface passivation.226,227 Fundamentally, for the first time, Huang and coworkers proposed the model of Lewis adducts by the coordination between the carbonyl and cyano groups in the n-type π-conjugated Lewis base, indacenodithiophene end-capped with 1.1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone (IDIC) with the Lewis acid defects on the perovskite surfaces and grain boundaries (Fig. 11d).228 Zhang et al. reported the strengthened surface bidentate anchoring passivation by 2-mercaptopyridine (2-MP) with both sulfhydryl and pyridine (Fig. 11e), presenting a two-fold enhancement of the PL lifetime and significant resistance of heat and humidity with respect to monodentate counterparts of pyridine or p-toluenethiol (Fig. 11f).229 An ingenious surface “patch” strategy was carried out through methimazole (MMI) post-treatment that converted the residual PbI2in situ.230 The interaction between Pb, I and S atoms prevented the formation of VI and superoxides in perovskite films, which effectively suppressed ion diffusion. Bi et al. judiciously designed a bifunctional molecule possessing tetrazolium (S) and phenylammonium (N) moieties, of which –NH2 effectively suppressed the A-site vacancies while thiol-functionalized (–SH) passivated the undercoordinated Pb2+.231 With the respect to O donor-based Lewis bases, Huang et al. post-healed defects via dip-coating the hydrophobic trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) ligand where the O atom in the PO bond coordinated with the halide-deficit site.232 The three long alkyls chain of TOPO strengthened the moisture resistance. Belisle et al. discovered that TOPO post-deposition effectively passivated the surface defects and thereby alleviated the driving electric field of phase segregation caused by the uneven distribution of mobilized carriers (Fig. 11g).233


3.2.2 Alkylammonium halogen salts. 
Alkylammonium halogen salts are comprehensive passivators targeting both cation and anion defects by hydrogen or ionic bonding, whose function is to produce a capping layer for low-dimensional perovskite, or merely to passivate the defect states.
On the one hand, some linear alkaneamine functionalities involving GA+, iso-butylammonium (iBA+) and ethylammonium (EA+) can form a low-dimensional perovskite capping layer on the surface of 3D perovskite films.234–236 The 2D surface passivation layer fabricated by the mixture of bulky ammonium iodide (iBAI) and FAI modulated morphology, annihilated surface traps and thereby delivered a PCE of 21.7% with prominent humidity stability (Fig. 12a).235 Besides, the 2D/3D stacking structure via the reaction between 3D perovskite and n-butylamine or n-butylammonium iodide (BAI) (Fig. 12b) was conducive to thermal-resistance along with healing defects at grain boundaries and surfaces.236 Hi et al. fabricated a 3D/2D perovskite heterojunction via spin-coating PEAI/MAI dissolved in isopropanol (IPA).237 Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) experiments in Fig. 12c confirmed the formation of the (PEA)2(MA)4(Pb5I16) layer with a preferential orientation capable of selectively extracting charge and abating recombination losses (Fig. 12d). The conversion process of PEAI to 2D PEA2PbI4 was carefully controlled by You et al. (Fig. 12e), where the benzene rings with the π-conjugation structure facilitated charge transport.238 Iodide ions in PEAI filled VI at grain boundaries and surfaces while the amine groups coordinated with the iodide ions via hydrogen bond and also passivated Pbi (Fig. 12f). The combined defect passivation enabled a certified PCE as high as 23.32%. To avoid the undesired aggregation of PEAI crystals, 4-tert-butyl-benzylammonium iodide (tBBAI) was newly synthesized by Gratzel and coworkers.239 Compared with PEAI, the bulky tert-butyl substitution group of tBBAI enabled more even coverage on the surface of perovskite films, presenting a lower defect density and much faster charge extraction. Zhao et al. applied hot vapor-assisted post-treatment with protectively ultrathin 4-fluoroaniline (FAL), in which the conjugated amine in the aromatic ring and para-fluorine substituent were instrumental in both defect passivation and charge transfer.240 On the other hand, long alkaneamine radicals like octylammonium (OA+), tertbutylammonium (tBA) and NH3I(CH2)8NH3I (C8) have also been reported, which cannot form 2D perovskites on account of the high formation energy but directly passivate the defect states by themselves;14,241,242 nevertheless, the long linear alkaneamine, n-hexylammomium bromide (C6Br), was an exception.243 The 3D/2D (C6H13NH3)2(FA)Pb2Br2I5 perovskite heterostructure was formed by the in situ preparation of a 2D perovskite layer on a 3D perovskite via a unique combination of C6Br/chloroform. In conclusion, alkylammonium halogen salts with powerful integrated passivation effects have been considered to be near-perfect passivators.
 Fig. 12  Surface passivation by alkylammonium halogen salts. (a) Schematic of the MP passivation treatment method with FAI and iBAI.235 (b) Schematic figure of the perovskite film treated by BA to form the 2D/3D stacking structure.236 (c) GIWAXS pattern of a MAPI/PEAMAPI bilayer film with highlighted (002) and (222) diffraction rings.237 (d) Schematic energy level diagram of the MAPI/PEAMAPI heterojunction solar cell.237 (e) XRD patterns of perovskite films with PEAI treatment under different conditions.238 (f) Possible passivation mechanism of PEAI on perovskite film.238 


3.2.3 Wide bandgap material capping. 
A well-established strategy of chemically converting surface dangling bonds into wide bandgap semiconductors such as SiO2 and SiNx has been widely reported in Si solar cells.244 This classic approach has also been applied in PSCs to eliminate the deep-level defects at grain boundaries and surfaces that often generate favorable interface band alignment. Notably, the formation of wide-bandgap inorganic oxide capping on perovskite surface contributes to trap-assisted recombination inhibition and stability enhancement.
An oligomeric silica matrix was proposed to warp the perovskite grains.245 The core–shell structure enabled the synchronous defect passivation and grain stabilization (Fig. 13a), thus gifting the MAPbI3 based PSCs with a PCE of 21.5% and distinguished operational stability of only 20% PCE decline after 5200 h under full UV light. Yang et al. realized in situ conversion by post treating the perovskite surface with sulfate or phosphate ions, which acted as a protective barrier against the ambient atmosphere (Fig. 13b) and passivated the undercoordinated Pb clusters (Fig. 13c).246 The PCE of 21.1% was achieved with unprecedented moisture stability. Thereafter, Godding et al. revealed that the post-treatment of hydrogen peroxide oxidized Pb0 on the perovskite surfaces and formed the PbO layer, effectively preventing the accumulation of anionic vacancies and Pb–Pb dimers.247
 Fig. 13  Passivation by wide bandgap materials and organic materials with hydrophobic groups. (a) Schematic illustration of the in situ formation of the OS-wrapped perovskite thin film and the hypothesized perovskite-OS nanostructures.245 (b) Schematic of the protection for perovskites through the in situ formation of lead sulfate on the perovskite surface.246 (c) tDOS obtained by thermal admittance spectroscopy for the devices with or without lead sulfate top layers.246 (d) Schematic structure of the interface between the WBH and P3HT.248 (e) Energy-level diagram of NBH, WBH and P3HT.248 (f) Mechanism of PVP-induced cubic phase stability.253 (g) Energy diagram of the suppression of the surface charge recombination by an insulating layer.254 
The wide bandgap semiconductor in type-I band alignment can serve as an electronic barrier impeding the charge transfer between perovskite grains as well as between perovskite layers and CTLs, thereby reducing the nonradiative recombination caused by trap states. For instance, an ultra-thin wide-bandgap perovskite induced by the in situ reaction of n-hexyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (HTAB) was stacked on the narrow-bandgap perovskite layer, promoting the self-assembly of P3HT due to the compatibility of alkyl chains between HTAB and P3HT (Fig. 13d and e).248 Despite this conversion greatly reducing the traps caused by deleterious defects, it is challenging but essential to ensure that the thickness of the wide bandgap layers does not hinder the charge transport.


3.2.4 Hydrophobic organic material capping. 
The development of PSCs is challenged to a large extent by their intrinsic instability under water and in oxygen. Hydrophobic materials with specific passivation groups (e.g., carbonyl, fluorine) can prevent the invasion of water molecules and also passivate defects.249
Small molecules possessing fluorine groups have been employed to protect against attracting moisture on account of the hydrogen bonds between the strongly electronegative fluorine with water molecules.250,259 Similar to the reported BF4− ions that were incorporated in the halide sites of perovskite crystal, PF6− from the post-treated FAPF6 solution could partially substitute I− in FA0.88Cs0.12PbI3 and in situ form a second phase called FA0.88Cs0.12PbI3−x(PF6)x between the perovskite layer and HTL.251 Motto et al. introduced polyethylene oxide (PEO) with polar ether groups and hydroxyl terminations to protect the perovskite film from moisture infiltration.252 At the same time, this surface treatment reduced the products (I2) of photo-driven degradation without hindering the charge injection, thereby improving the device photostability. Due to the acylamino groups, the PVP-induced surface passivation lowered the surface energy by improving the density of the electron cloud on the CsPbI3 surface and significantly stabilized the phase structure of α-CsPbI3 (Fig. 13f).253 A mechanism was proposed to elucidate the reason why the super-hydrophobic insulting polystyrene (PS) layer greatly suppressed charge recombination; the formation of the tunneling contact just allowed electrons to be transported to the electron transport layer (ETL) while it hindered holes within the perovskite layer (Fig. 13g).254 PS passivated the defects at the interface of the perovskite film and HTL, improving the PL intensity and prolonging carrier lifetimes.255

4. Interlayer engineering
In typical a PSC, a perovskite layer with the thickness of several hundred nanometers is sandwiched between ETL and HTL to achieve the effective transport of photo-generated carriers. Unfortunately, there are various defects at interfaces between the perovskite layer and the CTLs, including defect arrays, undercoordinated ions and combinations of point defects and dislocations, such as undercoordinated halide ions and Pb2+, lead clusters, and Pb–I anti-site defects (PbI3−). Not long ago, Huang and coworkers reported the spatial and energy distribution of trap states in PSCs, confirming that the charge trap densities of all interfaces of polycrystalline perovskite films were one to two orders of magnitude larger than that of the film interior.207 When the electrons and holes generated in the light-absorbing layer transmit to these two interfaces respectively, the defect states at interfaces will serve as recombination sites which observably affect the charge transfer process and optoelectronic performance of devices. As a result, interlayer engineering was carried out, which not only suppressed carrier recombination at CTL/perovskite interface by defect passivation, but also modified the energy level alignment to promote carrier transport. It is also critical to limit the degradation of the interface to improve the stability of PSCs.
4.1 The interlayer between the ETL and perovskite
The ETL plays a crucial role in realizing high VOC of PSCs, which determines the extraction and transmission of photogenerated charges. Hence, a defect-free ETL/perovskite interface with a matched band structure is the key to high PCE. Introducing an interlayer between the ETL and the perovskite layer is an effective way to achieve this goal. In this section, we discuss the strategies of chemical bond formation, interfacial dipole layer construction, homojunction and heterojunction to passivate the defects and optimize the energy level alignment. In particular, since the growth process of perovskite crystals is highly substrate-dependent, the influence of interlayer engineering at the ETL/perovskite interface (n–i–p structure) on regulating the morphology of perovskite films is also summarized.
In typical n–i–p-type PSCs, the n-type ETL located under the perovskite layer is usually a sturdy material (such as TiO2 or SnO2) with high resistance to surface treatment. However, when electron–hole pairs are generated in TiO2 under illumination, the holes in the valence band will recombine with electrons at the oxygen adsorption sites, leaving free electrons in the conduction band and positively charged oxygen vacancies (or Ti3+ sites) on the TiO2 surface, which are deep electron-donating sites.256 To overcome this issue, organic materials have been used for the interfacial passivation of PSCs. In 2014, Ogomi et al. inserted HOCO–R–NH3+I as an anchoring group between the perovskite and TiO2 ETL, which not only passivated the defects on the surface of the porous layer and inhibited the interfacial charge recombination, but it also improved the growth of perovskite crystals (Fig. 14a).257 Some researchers proposed to remove the mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) layer to fundamentally eliminate the defects. However, it turned out to be difficult to prepare a smooth and continuous perovskite film on compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) without m-TiO2 by one-step spin coating. Thankfully, the quality of perovskite films in planar solar cells can also be improved by the interlayer. For example, Dong et al. used a [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid (PCBA) monolayer as a hole blocking layer between c-TiO2 and perovskite, where the carboxyl group on the PCBA formed chemical bonds with c-TiO2, reducing the density of the defect states at the interface and suppressing carrier recombination.258 As shown in Fig. 14b, a record VOC of 1.16 V was demonstrated for the heterojunction PSC with the highest PCE of 17.76%.
 Fig. 14  (a) Structure of the titania anode where HOCO–R–NH3+ was inserted between the perovskite and porous titania.257 (b) J–V curves of PHJ PSCs fabricated without and with PCBA modification.258 (c) Schematic diagram of the band shift of the perovskite and TiO2 in a graded heterojunction structure with a mixed and graded interlayer. The negative and positive circles represent electrons and holes, respectively, and the arrows express their flowing directions.262 (d) Schematic diagram of the band shift of the perovskite and PCBM in the GHJ structure with a mixed and graded interlayer. The negative and positive circles represent electrons and holes, respectively, and the arrows indicate their flowing directions.264 
Depending on the growth conditions and substrates, perovskites may either be n-type or p-type semiconductors, due to different defect states. As pointed out in a previous report, the valence band maximum would shift up to 0.7 eV under light illumination due to light-excited electrons filling the surface trap states and reducing the surface band bending.259 The energy-barrier mismatch between the ETL and the perovskite layer also leads to inefficient electron extraction. As a result, it is crucial to develop approaches to optimize the energy level alignment by the interlayer between the perovskite and ETL. For instance, an interesting strategy using a polar ethanolamine (EA)-based solvent to form an interfacial dipole layer was demonstrated by Yu et al., which reduced the energy barrier between c-TiO2 and the perovskite layer and passivated surface defects of c-TiO2.260 Perry et al. deposited cobaltocene (Co(C5H5)2) directly on the surface of MAPbI3, improving the perovskite surface conductivity and optimizing the interfacial energy level structure.261
Based on the diffusion technique where the guest ions gradually diffuse from the dopants into the object films, the concept of homojunction and heterojunction has been proposed. An interesting approach utilizing a homojunction was demonstrated by Qiao et al. who found that “insoluble” n-type trivalent metal cations (Sb3+, In3+) could spontaneously enrich both sides of perovskite film due to the mismatched cation sizes and charge states.262 The dopants on the ETL side could form a perovskite homojunction layer with a well-matched band-edge to the c-TiO2 layer (Fig. 14c). As a result of the promoted charge separation and collection, the Sb3+-doped PSCs showed a stable PCE of 21.04% with a high fill factor of 0.84. In another work, Chen et al. employed guanidine bromide (GABr) to adjust the work function of a wide-bandgap perovskite film, obtaining a graded perovskite homojunction (GPHJ) with bulk passivation and large grains.263 A perovskite–fullerene gradient heterojunction (GHJ) was prepared by distributing PCBM in the perovskite layer (Fig. 14d).264 This structure not only improved the collection of photoelectrons, it also reduced recombination losses, leading to centimeter-scale PSCs with a certified PCE over 18%. Additionally, Wang et al. proved that choline iodide (CHI) could reduce the work function of β-CsPbI3 from 3.69 eV to 3.47 eV and optimize the energy level alignment at the interface between the absorption layer and CTLs.265 CHI also enhanced the phase stability of CsPbI3 by penetrating its bulk film through pinholes and cracks. As a result, the CHI–CsPbI3-based PSCs reached a repeatable efficiency of 18.4% under the environmental conditions of 45 ± 5 °C (Fig. 15a). In an inverted device, a simple solution-processed secondary growth technique produced a wider bandgap region on the surface of the perovskite film, to reduce the electron–hole recombination rate.266 Consequently, the champion device showed a PCE of 21.51% (Fig. 15b).
 Fig. 15  (a) Corresponding PV metrics of PSCs based on CsPbI3 and CHI–CsPbI3 (0.1 cm2 effective cell area; 32 devices). All J–V curves were measured at ∼45 ± 5 °C under full-sun illumination.265 (b) The J–V curves of the inverted planar heterojunction PSCs, obtained from reverse scans under simulated AM 1.5 G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. The inset shows a schematic diagram of the solar cell used in this work.266 (c) Schematic diagram of the perovskite solar cell device structure, SAM-induced permanent dipole formation, and involvement of the SAM in the crystalline structure of perovskite crystals.267 
Since the surface properties of the ETL as a deposition substrate have a great influence on the crystallization of the perovskite layer, a great number of researchers have focused on introducing the interface layer to control the perovskite crystal growth, trying to prepare perovskite films in a more ideal form and fundamentally eliminate the imperfections. It was found that the good wettability of the substrates contributed to the formation of homogeneous perovskite films.257 Covered with amino or ammonium groups, the substrates are favorable for growing smooth and highly crystalline MAPbI3 films. Zuo et al. inserted a 3-aminopropanoic acid self-assembled monolayer (C3-SAM) interlayer between the MAPbI3 and the ZnO layer, a simple approach to obtaining the amino rich surface, improving the perovskite coverage and lowering the defect density (Fig. 15c).267 Ogomi et al. found that the carboxyl groups in the HOOC–R–NH3I monolayer could bind to the TiO2 surface while the –NH3− groups modulated the crystallization process as growth sites, which increased the intimacy of the perovskite and TiO2 layer and enhanced the interfacial compatibility.257 The phenyl backbone with the π-conjugated structure can accelerate charge transport and the carboxyl group can bind strongly to the oxide layers like ZnO, TiO2, or SnO2; therefore, benzoic acid derivatives were chosen. Li et al. assembled a 4-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) interfacial monolayer, which dramatically enhanced the hydrophilicity of the TiO2 layer and the crystallinity of the perovskite layer.268 Additionally, evidenced by the experiment and DFT calculations, You et al. incorporated a biopolymer heparin sodium (HS) interlayer where –COO−/SO3− anions formed a Lewis base-acid adduct with Pb2+ ions in perovskite and Na+ cationic groups filled VMA and passivated the under-coordinated I−.269
Due to good stability, the inorganic layer is also used for interface passivation and is expected to further improve the environmental stability of the device. Ito et al. inserted a Sb2S3 interlayer to suppress the oxidation of I− to I2 on the TiO2/perovskite interface, which improved the stability of PSCs under light exposure.270 Inorganics containing alkali metal elements such as sodium, potassium, or cesium have been used to passivate the perovskite/ETL interface. For example, Li et al. used CsBr to modify the ETL/MAPbI3−xClx interface, which reduced the electronic defect density and enhanced the electron extraction (Fig. 16a and b).271 This technique led to a remarkable improvement in both device performance and stability under UV irradiation. Then, in 2018, Seo et al. also used CsBr to modify the surface of TiO2 for further interaction enhancement with perovskite.272 Photo-generated electrons were quickly extracted, resulting in a PCE of 21% with negligible hysteresis.
 Fig. 16  (a) Time-resolved photoluminescence spectra of perovskite thin films on the c-TiO2 layer collected at 30 MHz at 0.03 μJ per cm2 per pulse.271 (b) Trap density of states (tDOS) for devices without CsBr (black) and with CsBr modification (red).271 (c and d) DFT calculation of the MAPbI3/MXene structure. Electrostatic potential averaged over planes perpendicular to the (c) MAPbI3/Ti3C2(OH)2 and (d) MAPbI3/Ti3C2O2 interface. The computed structures are shown within the plots, where green, magenta, blue, yellow, cyan, grey and red spheres represent I, Pb, N, C, H, Ti and O atoms, respectively. The red dashed lines represent the dipole-corrected vacuum levels.275 (e) Schematic illustration of a planar PSC device modified with ZnO–MgO–EA+.279 (f) The best J–V data of the planar PSC devices measured under AM 1.5G illumination with a RH of 70%.279 
By tailoring the electronic structure through quantum confinement or functionalization, 2D materials have been used as interface modifiers.273,274 Agresti demonstrated that 2D transition metal carbides (MXene, Ti3C2Tx) with various termination groups (Tx) adjusted the work function of perovskite and TiO2 ETL without affecting other electrical properties.275 The mechanism was established by DFT calculations on perovskite/Ti3C2Tx with OH and O termination (Fig. 16c and d). The vacuum potential slope of the OH-terminated MXene was higher than that with O termination, indicating a larger interface dipole which reduced the work function and affected the energy level alignment.
Besides TiO2, other metal oxide ETLs such as ZnO and SnO2 also need modulating.184,276 For ZnO, despite having a higher electron mobility than TiO2,184 its poor chemical compatibility with perovskites makes it challenging to obtain highly efficient and stable PSCs.277 An interesting wet chemical method was reported by Chen et al., who utilized TiO2 to passivate the surface of ZnO nanorods (NRs) to form an n–n+ heterojunction at the ZnO/TiO2 interface.278 The generated built-in electric field greatly improved the electron transfer efficiency near the interface and hindered carrier recombination. A thin layer of MgO and protonated ethanolamine (EA) was used, where MgO inhibited the interfacial charge recombination and protonated EA promoted the electron transport from the perovskite to ZnO (Fig. 16e). The interfacial modification made ZnO compatible with perovskite and overcame the instability of the ZnO/perovskite interface. Eventually, PSCs with PCE up to 21.1% were successfully manufactured without hysteresis (Fig. 16f).279 As for SnO2, in 2015, Baena et al. manufactured SnO2 ETL by low-temperature (<120 °C) atomic layer deposition (ALD), achieving PCE of more than 18%, supported by a VOC up to 1.19 V and negligible hysteresis (Fig. 17a).280 In another study, Ke et al. found that fullerenes could be re-dissolved during perovskite deposition so that ultra-thin fullerenes remained on the interface while the dissolved portion penetrated the grain boundaries of the perovskite film.281 The fullerenes-passivated SnO2/perovskite interface and perovskite grain boundaries blocked holes more effectively, as well as promoted electron transfer. Since the depth of the trap state at the ETL or ETL/perovskite interface is related to the Fermi level position, Aygüler et al. adjusted the Fermi level of the SnOx ETL by controlling the annealing temperature, thereby reducing trap energy (Fig. 17b).282 Highly efficient PSCs without hysteresis were prepared through partially eliminated interfacial traps, suppressed charge accumulation and recombination. Furthermore, Yang et al. introduced a multifunctional 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) SAM at the SnO2/perovskite interface.283 For one thing, the insulting SAM layer hindered the back transfer of electrons and suppressed the interfacial recombination. For another, the terminal functional amino groups optimized the band alignment of the interface and healed the surface defects through hydrogen bonds, together with the enlarged grain size and enhanced crystallinity of MAPbI3 films. As a result of the systematic investigation of SAMs with different terminal groups, Zuo et al. concluded that the interfacial optoelectronic properties were determined by interfacial chemical interactions (Fig. 17c).284 4-Pyridinecarboxylic acid (PA)-mediated devices presented the best PCE of 18.8% because of the suppressed surface defects and facilitated interfacial charge transfer derived from the reduced work function and enhanced interaction between the perovskite and the SnO2 layer. Anions such as –COO−, –SO3− and –SO4− in the zwitterion molecules formed chemical bonds with the hydroxyl groups on the SnO2 surface. Choi et al. developed a zwitterionic compound, 3-(1-pyridinion)-1-propanesulfonate, of which the positively charged ions of the additive passivated the Pb–I anti-site defects and SO3− groups formed chemical bonds on the surface of SnO2 ETL.285
 Fig. 17  (a) Current–voltage properties of TiO2 and SnO2-based planar mixed halide/cation perovskite devices. Black arrows indicate a backward scan from VOC to JSC and red arrows indicate the reversed scan.280 (b) Comparison of energetic difference between conduction band minimum (CBM) and Fermi level of SnOx and trap depth energies of solar cells.282 (c) Schematic diagram of the SAM between the SnO2 and perovskite film (left) and the corresponding work function and PCE performance of PSCs and OSCs (right). (BA is benzoic acid, PA is 4-pyridine carboxylic acid, CBA is 4-cyanobenzoic acid, ABA is 4-aminobenzoic acid, and C3 is 3-propanoic acid)284 Schematic diagrams of band alignment and charge recombination in the cells with (d) the ZnO single layer and (e) TiO2/ZnO bilayer as compact layers, respectively.286 (f) ① Schematic of photo-catalysis effect of TiO2 under UV illumination. ② Schematic of perovskite degradation resulting from the photocatalytic effect of TiO2. ③ Schematic of retarding photo-catalysis effect by SnO2 inserting layer.288 
To combine the merits of ZnO, SnO2 and TiO2, Xu et al. developed a TiO2/ZnO ETL for planar PSCs through a sol–gel method.286 As shown in Fig. 17d and e, the type II band structure of the electron transport bilayer and perovskite facilitated photo-induced carrier transport and avoided charge accumulation, increasing PCE from 13.2% to 17.2%. In another study, Huan et al. prepared a SnO2–TiO2 composite layer via low-temperature processing and achieved better energy level alignment at the perovskite/FTO interface, thus facilitating charge extraction and reducing surface recombination.287 Similarly, Wan et al. proposed the passivation of the TiO2 surface by a thin layer of SnO2 formed in situ, significantly delaying the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 and thus improving the UV stability of PSC (Fig. 17f).288 The performance improvement was attributed to the enhanced contact between the perovskite and the bottom ETL, the passivation of TiO2 surface defects and the high electron mobility of SnO2.
4.2 Interlayer between the HTL and perovskite
Reducing defects at perovskite/HTL interface plays an equally vital role in inhibiting carrier recombination. Due to the intrinsic or weak self-doping characteristic of the perovskites, the electric field adjacent to the perovskite/HTL interface cannot realize the effective separation of carriers.289 At present, the most commonly used hole transport material for high-performance PSCs is spiro-OMeTAD, but it is more expensive than perovskites. Moreover, to ensure better conductivity, spiro-OMeTAD is often heavily doped, resulting in higher recombination losses at the perovskite/HTL interface.290–292 Additives of spiro-OMeTAD such as lithium salts are also likely to be oxidized when exposed to air and degrade the perovskite layer at the interface.
Therefore, defect passivation and energy level alignment optimization at the perovskite/HTL interface have profound impacts on pushing the performance improvement of PSCs. In this section, the most representative works regarding perovskite/HTL interlayer engineering will be discussed, involving intermediate level alignment between adjacent layers, interfacial trap states passivation, isolating layer of external environment and growth process control on perovskite crystals. It should be noted that on account of the chemical fragility of perovskites themselves, more delicate treatment is required when the interface modification is performed above the perovskite layer to inhibit charge recombination and realize efficient hole extraction at the interfaces.
Recently, quantum dots (QDs) have become prominent materials for passivating interface defects for efficient and stable PSCs by virtue of their high photoluminescence quantum yields.293 Among them, perovskite QDs have greater potential for interface engineering because their lattice constants and processing requirements are similar to those of perovskite films. For instance, Cha et al. optimized the energy level alignment by incorporating MAPbBr3−xIx QDs between MAPbI3 film and HTL (Fig. 18a).294 With the help of MAPbBr0.9I2.1 QDs, the photogenerated holes were effectively extracted into HTL to improve the photovoltaic performance of planar PSCs. Akin et al. used inorganic CsPbBr1.85I1.15 QDs to passivate defects in the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface, which significantly inhibited carrier recombination and increased the VOC of triple-cation PSCs by 50 millivolts (Fig. 18b).295 Since the good moisture resistance and ion migration suppression of the perovskite QD layer, the operating stability of passivated PSCs was enhanced (Fig. 18c and d). Similarly, with the consistency of structure and stoichiometry as well as the compatibility of the preparation process, CsPbBr3 nanocrystals (NCs) were used for proper band alignment to promote hole extraction (Fig. 18e).296 Finally, the photoelectric performance and stability of PSCs were improved simultaneously, achieving a high PCE of 20.56%.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the perovskite solar cell structure.294 (b) J–V curves for control devices and QDs-modified devices.295 The aging test for devices with the control (black line) and QDs-10-modified (red line) perovskite films. (c) The devices were measured in ambient air (at room temperature and 40–50% humidity) without any encapsulation for 30 days.295 (d) The devices were maintained at the maximum power point (MPP) under one sun and N2 atmosphere over 400 h.295 (e) Energy-level diagram of the materials used in GHJ-structured PSC, with energy levels given in eV.296 
On the other hand, as described in Section 4.1, a similar defect passivation by organics has been adopted at the perovskite/HTL interface. In the case of MAPbX3, halide and/or MA ions may be lost during the annealing process, resulting in undercoordinated Pb at grain boundaries and surfaces that may act as electron trap states. To passivate the undercoordinated Pb2+ defects, Haudhary et al. employed the solution-processable hydrophobic polymer, poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PVP), to modify the interface through its Lewis base side chain (Fig. 19a).225 2D perovskite layers have also been brought forward by the reaction of organics with the perovskite surface as interface passivation. 5-Ammonium valeric acid iodide (5-AVAI) was utilized to passivate the perovskite/HTL interface by reacting with residual PbI2 on the surface of the perovskite film, introducing the in situ ultra-thin 2D perovskite (5-AVA)2PbI4 (5-AVA = 5-ammoniumvaleric acid) between the perovskite and CuSCN (Fig. 19b).297 The wide-gap 2D perovskite layer was demonstrated to efficiently suppress the reverse electron transfer and cut down current leakage loss, which also reduced the hysteresis behavior. Similarly, Liu et al. reported that the terminal ammonium group of pentafluoro-phenylethylammonium (FEA) could interact with the {PbI4} layer through hydrogen bonds, consuming the non-perovskite phase of FAPbI3 existing on the surface of 3D perovskite layer and forming 2D (FEA)2PbI4 interlayer.298 This technique enhanced the hole extraction and mitigated ionic diffusion in the devices, leading to a champion PCE over 22%. The hydrophobicity of FEA also prevented the 3D perovskite from being exposed to moisture (Fig. 19c). An atomic-level passivation mechanism of the low-dimensionality passivation layer on perovskite film (Fig. 19d) was proposed by adding different types of organic ammonium salts (ethylammonium iodide (EAI), imidazolium iodide (IAI), and guanidinium iodide (GAI)), which was mainly attributed to the reduced density of electron defects existing at the perovskite/HTL interface.299 In another study, Tan et al. came up with an in situ back-contact passivation strategy that a series of polymers with appropriate highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) were selected to deposit as interlayers of perovskite/HTL.300 They pointed out that the polymers could passivate trap states in the perovskite film, and also improve the charge extraction efficiency through the perovskite/HTL interface, exhibiting a stable PCE of 21.6% with a VOC of 1.15 V and an FF of 83%.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic energy level diagram displaying the blocking effect of the PVP polymer at the interface.225 (b) Crystal structure of a 2D (5-AVA)2PbI4 perovskite.297 (c) Images of water droplets on the surfaces of 3D/2D and 3D perovskite films at different water loading times.298 (d) Schematic representation of the 1D/3D heterostructure evidenced by solid-state NMR proximity measurements.299 
Besides organic passivation materials, inorganics like Al2O3 have also been included as interlayers between the perovskite and HTL to facilitate carrier transport. For example, Koushik et al. utilized the ALD technique to deposit an Al2O3 layer on top of the perovskite film, which was thin enough to provide a tunnel contact and protect the perovskite from moisture.301
For p–i–n planar PSCs, PEDOT:PSS is a common hole-transporting material with inherent acidity and relatively poor electron blocking ability that needs to be modified.302 An approach involving 2D materials was demonstrated by Wang et al. who utilized graphene oxide (GO) and MoS2 as passivation layers to modify the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface and PCBM/Ag interface, respectively (Fig. 20a).303 A better matching energy level structure (Fig. 20b) was established by the higher work function of GO as compared to PEDOT:PSS, while MoS2 reduced the work function of Ag. Due to the distinctive optical and electrical properties of these 2D materials, the VOC of the prepared device increased from 0.962 to 1.135 V with the boosted PCE from 14.15% to 19.14%. Interestingly, GO is also considered as a candidate for efficient and stable HTL due to its excellent ion-blocking ability, despite its poor hole selection properties and oxygen groups that may cause structural defects and reduce carrier mobility.304,305 In 2019, Liu et al. inserted an amphiphilic conjugated polyelectrolyte, PTFTS, with triphenylamine and polar sulfonate groups between the perovskite and GO HTL (Fig. 20c), leading to better band alignment via reducing the work function of GO.306 The strong intermolecular interaction between the PTFTS layer and the perovskite promoted the charge transport, and finally optimized the PCE of 17% for large-area (1.08 cm2) PSCs prepared on flexible substrates. p-Type metal oxides are strong candidates as hole transport materials in inverted PSCs, among which NiO is the most commonly used due to its excellent stability and high hole mobility. Nevertheless, the poor interface contact between NiO and the perovskite limits the efficiency of NiO-based devices.307,308 To overcome this issue, Bai et al. used diethanolamine (DEA) to modify the surface of the NiO nanocrystalline layer by chemical bonds, i.e., Ni–N and –OH–Pb (Fig. 20d).36 The work function of NiO was slightly reduced from 4.47 to 4.41 eV by the molecular dipole layer, improving the extraction and transmission rate of holes and reducing the trap states of the perovskite film. In the end, the PCE was greatly enhanced from about 11% to more than 15%.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagram of the device structure and molecular structures of 2D interfacial materials.303 (b) Schematic diagram of energy levels in perovskite solar cells with both MoS2 and GO modifying layers.290 (c) The inverted device architecture of planar PSCs used in this work. The chemical structures of GO and polymer interlayers are shown on the left and right, respectively.306 (d) Schematic illustration of the surface modification of NiO NC film with a DEA monolayer, highlighting the enhanced contact at the NiO/perovskite interface through a link between the –OH groups and Pb in the perovskite.36 (e) Potential passivation effect: interactions between under-coordinated Pb atoms on the perovskite crystal and DA–PEDOT:PSS with amino and hydroxyl groups.311 
It is acknowledged that the properties of the substrates affect the induction period of perovskite film growth.309,310 Therefore, perovskite/HTL interface engineering of the inverted structure also greatly affects the crystallization of perovskite and thus, the resulting morphology. The amino and hydroxyl groups of the dopamine (DA) interlayer between PEDOT:PSS and the perovskite coordinated with the undercoordinated Pb (Fig. 20e), modulating the crystallization process and annihilating surface defects to attenuate the charge recombination.311 Meanwhile, the DA doping also improved the work function of HTL, thereby improving the charge extraction ability of HTL. Given that the amine groups are inclined to complex with Ni-based compounds, whereas the –OH groups tend to coordinate with Pb-based compounds, Yang and coworkers used diethanolamine (DEA) containing both –OH and amine groups to modify the NiO/perovskite interface, which improved the perovskite crystallinity and interface contact.312
5. Summary
PSCs hold excellent prospects in the future of solar energy utilization, and the research field has made striking progress with PCE exceeding 25%. However, the performance of 33.5% of the Shockley–Queisser limit is still hampered by various harmful defects inside the devices. The unavoidable existence of defects leads to extra transition energy levels in the bandgap, hindering carrier transmission and the capture or scattering of free charges. Due to the perovskite nature of soft ionic solids, charged defects will move and redistribute by the electric field within the device, leading to defect accumulation and band bending at the interfaces of CTLs and perovskite layers. Consequently, the accumulation of charged defects would generate an obstacle electric field opposite to the built-in electric field in the PSCs, which will hinder the transport of photogenerated carriers. The screening effect of this electric field is widely believed to be the main reason for the hysteresis behavior. Defects are also commonly considered to be the starting point and accelerant in the degradation of PSCs. Therefore, defect passivation engineering plays an indispensable and vital role in suppressing carrier recombination and promoting charge extraction/transmission. It is a powerful approach to push the efficiency to the theoretical limit as well as to stabilize PSCs. Therefore, there is still a long way to go before PSCs can be manufactured and applied on a large scale due to some thorny issues such as hysteresis and poor stability, which are related to defects. Defect healing is a powerful approach to pushing the efficiency to the theoretical limit as well as to stabilize the PV devices, thus gradually realizing the commercialization of PSCs.
Herein, we have summarized the nature of different kinds of defects, established the understanding of how the defects induce non-radiative recombination, ion-migration and hysteresis, and analyzed valid defect passivation strategies proposed by various research teams around the world. Specifically, we explored the role of defect passivation in preparing high-quality PSCs from two parts, including the perovskite film itself and interfaces between the perovskite layer and CTLs. According to the sequence of construction, the specific strategies for perovskite passivation are mainly divided into film formation and post-treatment engineering. Passivation agents can bind to the defects inside the perovskite or at the interface through ionic bonds, covalent bonds or other chemical interactions, and optimize the interface contact by means of intermolecular forces. Besides, the passivators perfect the energy level alignment in PSCs and facilitate the carrier transport process. Appropriate interfacial layers can slow down the degradation rate of perovskites induced by moisture, heat, and light, which further improves the long-term stability of PSCs.
To date, extensive research on defect passivation within the perovskite and at the interfaces has been reported, bringing momentous progress. However, regarding defect passivation, there are still many challenges to realizing the commercial application of PSCs.
First of all, it is difficult to explicitly characterize the type and density of certain defects in perovskite films. Researchers need to develop more advanced characterization techniques combined with theoretical guidance to accurately explore the defects in perovskites; i.e., developing prime defect monitoring and measurement tools will be crucial research areas for PSCs. Secondly, most of the current reports on defect passivation focus on healing only one specific kind of defect such as undercoordinated I− and Pb2+ ions. To achieve long-term stability, researchers need to propose more comprehensive and meticulous passivation strategies for the complete modification of the crystal interior, grain boundaries and the surface. This requires an in-depth understanding of the passivation mechanism, and also a thorough grasp of the nature, concentration and distribution of the defects. Besides, innovative passivation agents that can form a large-area, uniformly passivated film should be paid more attention for efficient large-area devices. Further work must be done to figure out how defect passivation approaches perform in large-scale processing. Finally, since long-term operational stability is an essential property for the commercialization of devices, more realistic stability tests and more precise results are required to certify the effectiveness of the passivation strategies.
In addition to the above factors, exploiting more efficient and cheaper large-area preparation techniques for perovskite films is a prerequisite for the large-scale application of PSCs. It is also indispensable to develop practical recycling processes to avoid lead pollution and realize the reuse of components such as conductive substrates and metal electrodes. Based on the considerations above, we suppose that the large-scale utilization of PSCs requires at least ten years of arduous efforts by scientists and engineers.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge support from the project supported by the State Key Program of National Natural Science of China (No. U1906227), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51872171), and the Shandong Province Natural Science Foundation (No. ZR201801290005).
References
C. Liu, J. Yuan, R. Masse, X. Jia, W. Bi, Z. Neale, T. Shen, M. Xu, M. Tian and J. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1905245 CrossRef .
N. G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1903106 CrossRef .
T. Miyasaka, A. Kulkarni, G. M. Kim, S. Öz and A. K. Jena, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902500 CrossRef .
A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler and W. C. Sinke, Science, 2016, 352, 4424 CrossRef .
NREL Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html, accessed: March 11, 2020.
B. Li, L. Fu, S. Li, H. Li, L. Pan, L. Wang, B. Chang and L. Yin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20494 RSC .
C. Ma and N.-G. Park, Chem., 2020, 6, 1254 CAS .
T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 828 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1 CrossRef .
A. M. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. Van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein and J. Nelson, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, M. S. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J.-K. Lee, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. Byun and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1 Search PubMed .
J. Xing, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, Y. Fang and J. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 30484 RSC .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jung, T. J. Shin, J. Seo, G. Kim and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2188 RSC .
T. Zhao, C.-C. Chueh, Q. Chen, A. Rajagopal and A. K.-Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 757 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, W. Sato, K. Shoyama and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5410 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Q. Dong, Y. Liu, C. Bao, Y. Fang, Y. Lin, S. Tang, Q. Wang, X. Xiao and Y. Bai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, C. Yang, X. Zheng, I. Gereige, A. AlSaggaf, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1258 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y.-Y. Tan, Z.-X. Chen, T. Wang, S. Hu, Z.-A. Nan, L.-Q. Xie, Y. Hui, J.-X. Huang and C. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1665 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, S. Yang, B. Cao, X. Tao and Z. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1905021 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Q. Jiang, Q. Ye, Z. Chu, X. Li, X. Yang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1 CrossRef .
S. Wieghold, J.-P. Correa-Baena, L. Nienhaus, S. Sun, K. E. Shulenberger, Z. Liu, J. S. Tresback, S. S. Shin, M. G. Bawendi and T. Buonassisi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 1, 6801 CAS .
Y. Yun, F. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Fang, S. Liu, W. Huang, Z. Cheng, Y. Liu, Y. Cao and M. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1907123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mo, C. Zhang, J. Chang, H. Yang, H. Xi, D. Chen, Z. Lin, G. Lu, J. Zhang and Y. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13032 RSC .
L. Han, S. Cong, H. Yang, Y. Lou, H. Wang, J. Huang, J. Zhu, Y. Wu, Q. Chen and B. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800054 CrossRef .
S. Wang, X. Li, T. Tong, J. Han, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu, Z. Huang and W. C. Choy, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800027 CrossRef .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
A. J. Pearson, G. E. Eperon, P. E. Hopkinson, S. N. Habisreutinger, J. T. W. Wang, H. J. Snaith and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600014 CrossRef .
J. A. Christians, P. A. Miranda Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Stoeckel, M. Gobbi, S. Bonacchi, F. Liscio, L. Ferlauto, E. Orgiu and P. Samorì, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702469 CrossRef .
H.-H. Fang, S. Adjokatse, H. Wei, J. Yang, G. R. Blake, J. Huang, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600534 CrossRef .
G. Gordillo, C. Otálora and M. Reinoso, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 75304 CrossRef .
H. Huang, M. I. Bodnarchuk, S. V. Kershaw, M. V. Kovalenko and A. L. Rogach, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2071 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Bai, Y. Deng, Q. Dong, M. Hu, C. Bi and J. Huang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2016, 101, 1 CrossRef .
F. De Angelis and A. Petrozza, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 383 CrossRef CAS .
C. Haughn, K. Schmieder, J. Zide, A. Barnett, C. Ebert, R. Opila and M. Doty, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 182108 CrossRef .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118 RSC .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter and A. J. Pearson, Nature, 2018, 555, 497 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zeng, X. Zhang, C. Liu, T. Feng, Z. Chen, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, H. Zhang and B. Yang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800239 CrossRef .
W. Li, M. U. Rothmann, A. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. R. Pascoe, J. Lu, L. Jiang, Y. Chen and F. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700946 CrossRef .
T. A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323 RSC .
W. Chu, W. A. Saidi, J. Zhao and O. V. Prezhdo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6435 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Akkerman, G. Rainò, M. V. Kovalenko and L. Manna, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 394 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1 Search PubMed .
L. Qiao, W.-H. Fang, R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4684 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, T. Shi, P. Liu, W. Xie, K. Chen, X. Xu, L. Shui, C. Shang, Z. Chen and H. Yip, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20201 RSC .
L. K. Ono, S. Liu and Y. Qi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6676 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. S. Doherty, A. J. Winchester, S. Macpherson, D. N. Johnstone, V. Pareek, E. M. Tennyson, S. Kosar, F. U. Kosasih, M. Anaya, M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, E. L. Wong, J. Madeo, Y.-H. Chiang, J.-S. Park, Y.-K. Jung, C. E. Petoukhoff, G. Divitini, M. K. L. Man, C. Ducati, A. Walsh, P. A. Midgley, K. M. Dani and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2020, 580, 360 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ni, C. Bao, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, W. Wu, S. Chen, X. Dai, B. Chen, B. Hartweg and Z. J. Yu, Science, 2020, 367, 1352 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang and A. Gruverman, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752 RSC .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Shao and Q. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3218 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Han, S. Tan, J. Xue, L. Meng, J. W. Lee and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803515 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, T. Li, Q. Wang, J. Xing, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602164 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ran, J. Xu, W. Gao, C. Huang and S. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4581 RSC .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Han and Y. Tateyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10048 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Kim, A. Senocrate, T. Y. Yang, G. Gregori, M. Gratzel and J. Maier, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 445 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yoon, K. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1507 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Barker, A. Sadhanal, F. Deschler, M. Gandini and S. P. Senanayak, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1416 CrossRef CAS .
P. Delugas, C. Caddeo, A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2356 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Hu, B. Huang, M. Sun, B. Dong, G. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Chen and L. Li, Science, 2019, 363, 265 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Raga, M. C. Jung, M. V. Lee, M. R. Leyden, Y. Kato and Y. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1597 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Xu, C. Wang, B. Ecker and Y. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3904 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .
G. A. MacDonald, M. Yang, S. Berweger, J. P. Killgore, P. Kabos, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and F. W. DelRio, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3642 RSC .
J. S. Yun, J. Seidel, J. Kim, A. M. Soufiani, S. Huang, J. Lau, N. J. Jeon, S. I. Seok, M. A. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600330 CrossRef .
D. W. DeQuilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulović, H. J. Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1 Search PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613 RSC .
C. G. Bischak, C. L. Hetherington, H. Wu, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, D. T. Limmer and N. S. Ginsberg, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1028 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, M. Yang, S. Priya and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 905 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kang and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805214 CrossRef .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8208 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604 RSC .
J. Carrillo, A. Guerrero, S. Rahimnejad, O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502246 CrossRef .
C. Besleaga, L. E. Abramiuc, V. Stancu, A. G. Tomulescu, M. Sima, L. Trinca, N. Plugaru, L. Pintilie, G. A. Nemnes and M. Iliescu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5168 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena, E. Halvani Anaraki, B. Philippe, S. D. Stranks, M. E. Bouduban, W. Tress, K. Schenk, J. L. Teuscher and J.-E. Moser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10331 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, X. Zheng, B. Chen, H. Wei and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1400 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Son, S.-G. Kim, J.-Y. Seo, S.-H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, W. Chen, T. Bu, K. P. Ghiggino, F. Huang, Y. Cheng, P. Tapping, T. W. Kee, B. Jia and X. Wen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901016 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Turren-Cruz, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Science, 2018, 362, 449 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, A. J. Pearson, G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, B. Philippe, H. Rensmo, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2671 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, Y. Luo, T. M. Brenner, J. Snaider, S. Sun, X. Li, M. A. Jensen, N. T. P. Hartono, L. Nienhaus, S. Wieghold, J. R. Poindexter, S. Wang, Y. S. Meng, T. Wang, B. Lai, M. V. Holt, Z. Cai, M. G. Bawendi, L. Huang, T. Buonassisi and D. P. Fenning, Science, 2019, 363, 627 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, S.-C. Chen and Q. Zheng, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 1044 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bai, J. Zhang, Z. Jin, H. Bian, K. Wang, H. Wang, L. Liang, Q. Wang and S. F. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 970 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. J. Lau, M. Zhang, X. Deng, J. Zheng, J. Bing, Q. Ma, J. Kim, L. Hu, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2319 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiang, Z. Wang, D. J. Kubicki, W. Tress, J. Luo, D. Prochowicz, S. Akin, L. Emsley, J. Zhou, G. Dietler, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Joule, 2019, 3, 205 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, L. Guan, H. Pan, Q. Sun, X. Zhao, H. Li, H. Pan, Y. Shen, Y. Shao, L. Sun, Z. Cui, L. Ding and M. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804286 CrossRef .
J. F. Galisteo-López, M. E. Calvo and H. Míguez, ACS Appl. Energy. Mater., 2019, 2, 6967 CrossRef .
M. I. Saidaminov, J. Kim, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Tan, G. Long, F. Tan, A. Johnston, Y. Zhao, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 648 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, P. N. Rudd, Z. Ni, C. H. Van Brackle, H. Wei, Q. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3989 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, M.-G. Ju, H. F. Garces, A. D. Carl, L. K. Ono, Z. Hawash, Y. Zhang, T. Shen, Y. Qi, R. L. Grimm, D. Pacifici, X. C. Zeng, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, Nat.
Commun., 2019, 10, 16 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, Z. Xiao, J. Zhang, W. Chai, H. Xu, Z. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7149 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Uribe, J. Ciro, J. F. Montoya, J. Osorio and F. Jaramillo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 1, 1047 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xie, C.-C. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Li, M. Cai, X. Liu, X. Yang and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1942 RSC .
Q. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Fu, W. Zhou, Y. Zhao, X. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803095 CrossRef .
X. Dai, Y. Deng, C. H. Van Brackle, S. Chen, P. N. Rudd, X. Xiao, Y. Lin, B. Chen and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903108 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Pool, A. Gold-Parker, M. D. McGehee and M. F. Toney, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7240 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, P. Yadav, D. Prochowicz, M. Sponseller, A. Osherov, V. Bulović and J. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803587 CrossRef .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019, 3, 2179 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, M. Yang, S. Yang, X. Qu, L. Yang, L. Fan, J. Yang and F. Rosei, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104224 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Son, J.-W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I.-H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi, D. Kim and N.-G. Park, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, G. Wu, W. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, D. Wang and S. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901241 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, B. Yang, X. Mao, R. Yang, L. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Xiong, Y. Yang, R. He, W. Deng and K. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14827 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Sutter-Fella, Y. Li, M. Amani, J. W. Ager, F. M. Toma, E. Yablonovitch, I. D. Sharp and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 800 CrossRef CAS .
J. He and T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18514 RSC .
G. Y. Kim, S. H. Oh, B. P. Nguyen, W. Jo, B. J. Kim, D. G. Lee and H. S. Jung, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2355 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, F. Qian, S. Yang, Y. Cai, Q. Wang, J. Sun, Z. Liu and S. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807850 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, Y. Cai, S. Yang, H. Zhao, F. Qian, Y. Han, J. Sun, Z. Liu and S. Liu, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900220 CrossRef .
B.-W. Park, D. U. Lee, D. Jung, W. S. Yang, T. K. Oanh Vu, T. J. Shin, J. Baik, C.-C. Hwang, E. K. Kim and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5604 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yin, H. Chen, T. Shi, S.-H. Wei and Y. Yan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1500044 CrossRef .
W. Ke, C. Xiao, C. Wang, B. Saparov, H.-S. Duan, D. Zhao, Z. Xiao, P. Schulz, S. P. Harvey, W. Liao, W. Meng, Y. Yu, A. J. Cimaroli, C.-S. Jiang, K. Zhu, M. Al-Jassim, G. Fang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5214 CrossRef CAS .
T. Supasai, N. Rujisamphan, K. Ullrich, A. Chemseddine and T. Dittrich, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 183906 CrossRef .
L. Wang, C. McCleese, A. Kovalsky, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12205 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H.-S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Z. Chu, P. Wang, X. Yang, H. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703852 CrossRef .
S. Wang, W. Dong, X. Fang, Q. Zhang, S. Zhou, Z. Deng, R. Tao, J. Shao, R. Xia, C. Song, L. Hu and J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6600 RSC .
D. Bi, A. M. El-Zohry, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 589 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, J. Seo, J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, M. A. Green, J. Seidel, T. K. Ahn and S. I. Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502104 CrossRef .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 CrossRef .
F. Liu, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, C. Surya, W. K. Chan, J. Wang, A. M. C. Ng, C. Liao, H. Li, K. Shih, C. Wei, H. Su and J. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502206 CrossRef .
S. Shukla, S. Shukla, L. J. Haur, S. S. H. Dintakurti, G. Han, A. Priyadarshi, T. Baikie, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3804 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Gujar, T. Unger, A. Schönleber, M. Fried, F. Panzer, S. van Smaalen, A. Köhler and M. Thelakkat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 605 RSC .
T. Meier, T. P. Gujar, A. Schönleber, S. Olthof, K. Meerholz, S. van Smaalen, F. Panzer, M. Thelakkat and A. Köhler, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7512 RSC .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS .
J. Holovský, A. Peter Amalathas, L. Landová, B. Dzurňák, B. Conrad, M. Ledinský, Z. Hájková, O. Pop-Georgievski, J. Svoboda, T. C.-J. Yang and Q. Jeangros, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 3011 CrossRef .
B.-E. Cohen, S. Gamliel and L. Etgar, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081502 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, Y. Deng, B. Chen, H. Wei, X. Xiao, Y. Fang, Y. Lin, Z. Yu, Y. Liu, Q. Wang and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803428 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, D. Li, Z. Xiao, Z. Wen, M. Zhang, W. Hu, X. Wu, M. Wang, W.-H. Zhang, Y. Lu, S. Yang and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901026 CrossRef .
F. Cai, Y. Yan, J. Yao, P. Wang, H. Wang, R. S. Gurney, D. Liu and T. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801985 CrossRef .
C.-H. Chiang and C.-G. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 196 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Sleppy, N. Dhasmana, M. Soliman, L. Tetard and J. Thomas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11648 RSC .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, T. Chen, X. Yue and L. Zhu, Org. Electron., 2018, 58, 6 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, W. Shi, J. Luo, N. Pellet, C. Yi, X. Li, X. Zhao, T. J. S. Dennis, X. Li, S. Wang, Y. Xiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Bi and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606806 CrossRef .
D. Meggiolaro, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2794 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, M. Peter, E. Unger, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits, A. Yartsev, V. Sundström and I. G. Scheblykin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 24978 RSC .
A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, S. H. Cheung, H. C. Gokkaya, S. K. So, A. B. Djurišić, Y. Wan, X. Wu and C. Surya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32805 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef .
S.-C. Liu, Z. Li, Y. Yang, X. Wang, Y.-X. Chen, D.-J. Xue and J.-S. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18075 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qin, T. Matsushima, T. Fujihara and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603808 CrossRef .
X. Xu, C.-C. Chueh, Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, J. Xu, S. B. Jo and A. K. Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 392 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C.-C. Chen, M. Cai, X. Hua, F. Xie, X. Liu, J. Hua, Y.-T. Long, H. Tian and L. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800715 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, X. Hu, C. Liu, L. Tan and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703061 CrossRef .
J. Peng, J. I. Khan, W. Liu, E. Ugur, T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, K. Wang, H. Dang, E. Aydin, X. Yang, Y. Wan, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole, F. Laquai, S. De Wolf and T. P. White, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801208 CrossRef .
P.-L. Qin, G. Yang, Z.-W. Ren, S. H. Cheung, S. K. So, L. Chen, J. Hao, J. Hou and G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706126 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, T. Chen, D. Pan, J. Gao, C. Zhu, F. Lin, C. Zhou, Q. Tai, S. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Q. Dai, Y. Han, H. Xie and X. Guo, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104246 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, S. Xiong, T. Qu, Y. Zhang, X. He, X. Guo, Q. Zhao, S. Braun, J. Chen, J. Xu, Y. Li, X. Liu, C. Duan, J. Tang, M. Fahlman and Q. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13491 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Han, J.-W. Lee, C. Choi, S. Tan, C. Lee, Y. Zhao, Z. Dai, N. De Marco, S.-J. Lee, S.-H. Bae, Y. Yuan, H. M. Lee, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 520 CrossRef CAS .
N. De Marco, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, Z. Liu, L. Meng, E.-P. Yao, Y. Liu, A. Schiffer and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1009 CrossRef .
J. He, W.-H. Fang, R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2070 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Ibrahim Dar, C. Yi, J. Luo, M. Tschumi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, H. Han and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 703 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hadadian, J.-P. Correa-Baena, E. K. Goharshadi, A. Ummadisingu, J.-Y. Seo, J. Luo, S. Gholipour, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8681 CrossRef CAS .
S.-G. Kim, J. Chen, J.-Y. Seo, D.-H. Kang and N.-G. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25372 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, Z. Yang, P. N. Rudd, Y. Shao, X. Dai, H. Wei, J. Zhao, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, X. Xiao, Y. Feng and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav8925 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, X. Zhu, Z. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Niu, Z. Wang, S. Zuo, S. Priya, S. Liu and D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801418 CrossRef .
S. Ye, H. Rao, Z. Zhao, L. Zhang, H. Bao, W. Sun, Y. Li, F. Gu, J. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7504 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xie, J. Chen, P. Vashishtha, X. Zhao, G. S. Shin, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N.-G. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2192 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, S. Huang, L. Chen, X. Li, B. Ding, S. Huang and G. Yang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800088 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Z. Ma, B. Liu, W. Wu, Y. Zhu, R. Ma and C. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800034 CrossRef .
C. Fei, B. Li, R. Zhang, H. Fu, J. Tian and G. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602017 CrossRef .
L. Gao, S. Huang, L. Chen, X. Li, B. Ding, S. Huang and G. Yang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1870194 CrossRef .
R. Wang, J. Xue, L. Meng, J.-W. Lee, Z. Zhao, P. Sun, L. Cai, T. Huang, Z. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Duan, J. L. Yang, S. Tan, Y. Yuan, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1464 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Li, Y. Wu, X. Meng, D. Cui, X. Yang and L. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803766 CrossRef .
X. Liu, J. Wu, Y. Yang, T. Wu and Q. Guo, J. Power Sources, 2018, 399, 144 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Wu, X.-Q. Shi, X.-H. Ding, Y.-K. Ren, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, Y. Ding, P. Xu and S.-Y. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3602 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zuo, H. Guo, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Jariwala, N. De Marco, S. Dong, R. DeBlock, D. S. Ginger, B. Dunn, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700106 CrossRef .
C.-T. Lin, F. De Rossi, J. Kim, J. Baker, J. Ngiam, B. Xu, S. Pont, N. Aristidou, S. A. Haque, T. Watson, M. A. McLachlan and J. R. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3006 RSC .
I. Wharf, T. Gramstad, R. Makhija and M. Onyszchuk, Can. J. Chem., 1976, 54, 3430 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, D. W. deQuilettes, A. Sadhanala, W. Li, L. Wang, D. S. Ginger, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, S.-H. Bae, Y.-T. Hsieh, N. De Marco, M. Wang, P. Sun and Y. Yang, Chem, 2017, 3, 290 CAS .
S. Fu, X. Li, L. Wan, Y. Wu, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Bao and J. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901852 CrossRef .
R. Wang, J. Xue, K.-L. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Luo, D. Fenning, G. Xu, S. Nuryyeva, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, J. L. Yang, J. Zhu, M. Wang, S. Tan, I. Yavuz, K. N. Houk and Y. Yang, Science, 2019, 366, 1509 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Zhang, M. Li, Z.-K. Wang, Y.-R. Jiang, H.-R. Liu, Y.-G. Yang, X.-Y. Gao and H. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2572 RSC .
S. Yang, J. Dai, Z. Yu, Y. Shao, Y. Zhou, X. Xiao, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5781 CrossRef CAS .
T. Niu, J. Lu, R. Munir, J. Li, D. Barrit, X. Zhang, H. Hu, Z. Yang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706576 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, D. Bi, N. Pellet, C. Xiao, Z. Li, J. J. Berry, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. Zhu and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3480 RSC .
Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, R. Hu, M. Jiang, R. Zhang, H. Lv, J. Tian, L. Chu, J. Zhang, Q. Xue, H.-L. Yip, R. Xia, X. A. Li and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3044 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, F. Yuan, B. Zhang, S. Zhou, J. Zhang, Y. Bai, L. Fan, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and Z. A. Tan, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 115 RSC .
H. Chen, Q. Luo, T. Liu, J. Ren, S. Li, M. Tai, H. Lin, H. He, J. Wang and N. Wang, Small, 2019, 15, 1904372 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, F. Li, L. Zhu, Z. Shen, Y. Weng, Q. Lou, F. Tan, G. Yue, Q. Huang and M. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104313 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, L. Guan, Q. Li, Y. Li, T. Zhang, H. Pan, Q. Sun, Y. Shen, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, 5661 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, J. Troughton, N. Gasparini, Y. Lin, M. Wei, Y. Hou, J. Liu, K. Song, Z. Chen, C. Yang, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, J. Pan, J. Chen, A. A. Zhumekenov, T. D. Anthopoulos, Y. Han, D. Baran, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Joule, 2019, 3, 1963 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salado, F. J. Ramos, V. M. Manzanares, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. J. Dyson and S. Ahmad, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2708 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salado, M. A. Fernández, J. P. Holgado, S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. J. Dyson and S. Ahmad, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3846 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Fei, P. Gao, Y. Lee, F. F. Tirani, R. Scopelliti, Y. Feng, P. J. Dyson and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702157 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Han, X. Li, Z. Liu, S. Liu and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900417 CrossRef .
S. Bai, P. Da, C. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, F. Fu, M. Kawecki, X. Liu, N. Sakai, J. T.-W. Wang, S. Huettner, S. Buecheler, M. Fahlman, F. Gao and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2019, 571, 245 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, G. Zhao, Y. Jia, X. Zhang and Y. Liu, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2018, 12, 1800130 CrossRef .
R. Xia, Z. Fei, N. Drigo, F. D. Bobbink, Z. Huang, R. Jasiūnas, M. Franckevičius, V. Gulbinas, M. Mensi, X. Fang, C. Roldán-Carmona, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. J. Dyson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902021 CrossRef .
M. Qin, J. Cao, T. Zhang, J. Mai, T.-K. Lau, S. Zhou, Y. Zhou, J. Wang, Y.-J. Hsu, N. Zhao, J. Xu, X. Zhan and X. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703399 CrossRef .
H. Min, G. Kim, M. J. Paik, S. Lee, W. S. Yang, M. Jung and S. I. Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803476 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Y. Fan, L. Wang, C. Chen, Z. Li, R. Liu, H. Meng, Z. Shao, X. Du, H. Zhang, G. Cui and S. Pang, Chem, 2020, 6, 1369 CAS .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, W. Zhang, X. Su, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Liang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700162 CrossRef .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS .
L. Etgar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 234 RSC .
S. Yang, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Y.-B. Cheng, H. J. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15016 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Hoffman, I. Spanopoulos, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803384 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, R. Munir, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. Li, T. Niu, D.-M. Smilgies, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. D. Mohite, K. Zhao, A. Amassian and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707166 CrossRef .
S. Shao, J. Liu, G. Portale, H.-H. Fang, G. R. Blake, G. H. ten Brink, L. J. A. Koster and M. A. Loi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702019 CrossRef .
J. Fan, Y. Ma, C. Zhang, C. Liu, W. Li, R. E. I. Schropp and Y. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703421 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, G. Grancini, Z. Fei, E. Shirzadi, X. Liu, E. Oveisi, F. F. Tirani, R. Scopelliti, Y. Feng, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. J. Dyson, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 105 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, H. Lai, T. Liu, D. Lu, X. Wan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901242 CrossRef .
J.-W. Lee, Z. Dai, T.-H. Han, C. Choi, S.-Y. Chang, S.-J. Lee, N. De Marco, H. Zhao, P. Sun, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3021 CrossRef .
N. Li, Z. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, H. Liu, B. Peng, A. Petrone, X. Li, L. Wang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601307 CrossRef .
F. Li, Y. Pei, F. Xiao, T. Zeng, Z. Yang, J. Xu, J. Sun, B. Peng and M. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6318 RSC .
Y. Jiang, J. Yuan, Y. Ni, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Jiu, M. Yuan and J. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1356 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. Guo, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700841 CrossRef .
K. Wang, Z. Li, F. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Bian, H. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Ding and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902529 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jokar, C.-H. Chien, A. Fathi, M. Rameez, Y.-H. Chang and E. W.-G. Diau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2353 RSC .
J. Tong, Z. Song, D. H. Kim, X. Chen, C. Chen, A. F. Palmstrom, P. F. Ndione, M. O. Reese, S. P. Dunfield, O. G. Reid, J. Liu, F. Zhang, S. P. Harvey, Z. Li, S. T. Christensen, G. Teeter, D. Zhao, M. M. Al-Jassim, M. F. A. M. van Hest, M. C. Beard, S. E. Shaheen, J. J. Berry, Y. Yan and K. Zhu, Science, 2019, 364, 475 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ni, C. Bao, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, W.-Q. Wu, S. Chen, X. Dai, B. Chen, B. Hartweg, Z. Yu, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Science, 2020, 367, 1352 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abate, M. Saliba, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, K. Wojciechowski, R. Avolio, G. Grancini, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3247 CrossRef CAS .
D. Song, D. Wei, P. Cui, M. Li, Z. Duan, T. Wang, J. Ji, Y. Li, J. M. Mbengue, Y. Li, Y. He, M. Trevor and N.-G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6091 RSC .
Z. Yang, J. Dou, S. Kou, J. Dang, Y. Ji, G. Yang, W.-Q. Wu, D.-B. Kuang and M. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910710 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chaudhary, A. Kulkarni, A. K. Jena, M. Ikegami, Y. Udagawa, H. Kunugita, K. Ema and T. Miyasaka, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2473 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Wen, S. Yang, P. F. Liu, L. J. Tang, H. W. Qiao, X. Chen, X. H. Yang, Y. Hou and H. G. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703143 CrossRef .
Q. Zeng, X. Zhang, X. Feng, S. Lu, Z. Chen, X. Yong, S. A. T. Redfern, H. Wei, H. Wang, H. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, H. Zhang, J. S. Tse and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705393 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, L. Shen, J. Dai, Y. Deng, Y. Wu, Y. Bai, X. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Fang, H. Wei, W. Ma, X. C. Zeng, X. Zhan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604545 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Y. Wu, C. Shen, E. Li, C. Yan, W. Zhang, H. Tian, L. Han and W.-H. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803573 CrossRef .
L. Liu, S. Huang, Y. Lu, P. Liu, Y. Zhao, C. Shi, S. Zhang, J. Wu, H. Zhong, M. Sui, H. Zhou, H. Jin, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800544 CrossRef .
D. Bi, X. Li, J. V. Milić, D. J. Kubicki, N. Pellet, J. Luo, T. LaGrange, P. Mettraux, L. Emsley, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4482 CrossRef .
G. Huang, C. Wang, H. Zhang, S. Xu, Q. Xu and Y. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2449 RSC .
R. A. Belisle, K. A. Bush, L. Bertoluzzi, A. Gold-Parker, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2694 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Alharbi, A. Y. Alyamani, D. J. Kubicki, A. R. Uhl, B. J. Walder, A. Q. Alanazi, J. Luo, A. Burgos-Caminal, A. Albadri, H. Albrithen, M. H. Alotaibi, J.-E. Moser, S. M. Zakeeruddin, F. Giordano, L. Emsley and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3008 CrossRef .
Y. Cho, A. M. Soufiani, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, D. S. Lee, J. Seidel, X. Deng, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703392 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Z. Chen, S. Yang, X. Zheng, S. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Zhao and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, J. Schlipf, M. Wussler, M. L. Petrus, W. Jaegermann, T. Bein, P. Müller-Buschbaum and P. Docampo, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5999 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Y. Liu, F. T. Eickemeyer, L. Pan, D. Ren, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, B. Carlsen, B. Yang, X. Dong, Z. Wang, H. Liu, S. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar, X. Li and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907757 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, J. Xie, G. Cheng, Y. Xiang, H. Zhu, W. Guo, H. Wang, M. Qin, X. Lu, J. Qu, J. Wang, J. Xu and K. Yan, Small, 2018, 14, 1803350 CrossRef .
T. Zhao, C.-C. Chueh, Q. Chen, A. Rajagopal and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 757 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bu, J. Li, W. Huang, W. Mao, F. Zheng, P. Bi, X. Hao, J. Zhong, Y.-B. Cheng and F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6793 RSC .
J. J. Yoo, S. Wieghold, M. C. Sponseller, M. R. Chua, S. N. Bertram, N. T. P. Hartono, J. S. Tresback, E. C. Hansen, J.-P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulović, T. Buonassisi, S. S. Shin and M. G. Bawendi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2192 RSC .
B. Hoex, J. Schmidt, P. Pohl, M. C. M. van de Sanden and W. M. M. Kessels, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 044903 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, Y. Lin, L. Ren, X. Shi, E. Strounina, Y. Deng, Q. Wang, Y. Fang, X. Zheng, Y. Lin, Z.-G. Chen, Y. Du, L. Wang and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1231 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, S. Chen, E. Mosconi, Y. Fang, X. Xiao, C. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. Yu, J. Zhao, Y. Gao, F. De Angelis and J. Huang, Science, 2019, 365, 473 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. W. Godding, A. J. Ramadan, Y.-H. Lin, K. Schutt, H. J. Snaith and B. Wenger, Joule, 2019, 3, 2716 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Akin, L. Pan, R. Uchida, N. Arora, J. V. Milić, A. Hinderhofer, F. Schreiber, A. R. Uhl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar and M. Grätzel, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2543 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, H. Guo, K. Wang and X. Liu, Org. Electron., 2017, 41, 42 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, S.-G. Kim and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801948 CrossRef .
S. G. Motti, D. Meggiolaro, A. J. Barker, E. Mosconi, C. A. R. Perini, J. M. Ball, M. Gandini, M. Kim, F. De Angelis and A. Petrozza, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 532 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, T. Yu, S. Zhou, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1076 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Q. Dong, T. Li, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6734 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, X. Yan, Z. Kang, Y. Huan, Y. Li, R. Zhang and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18787 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey, T. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16651 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, W. Li, X. Zhang, Q. Xu, Q. Liu, C. Li and Z. Bo, Small, 2016, 12, 1098 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zu, P. Amsalem, M. Ralaiarisoa, T. Schultz, R. Schlesinger and N. Koch, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41546 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, D. B. Kim, G. Baek, B. R. Lee, E. D. Jung, S. Lee, J. H. Chu, D. K. Lee, K. J. Choi, S. Cho and M. H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3492 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Perry, J. G. Labram, N. R. Venkatesan, H. Nakayama and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800087 CrossRef .
H. W. Qiao, S. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Chen, T. Y. Wen, L. J. Tang, Q. Cheng, Y. Hou, H. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804217 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Z. Song, C. Xiao, D. Zhao, N. Shrestha, C. Li, G. Yang, F. Yao, X. Zheng, R. J. Ellingson, C.-S. Jiang, M. Al-Jassim, K. Zhu, G. Fang and Y. Yan, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Yue, M. Cai, F. Xie, E. Bi, A. Islam and L. Han, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16148 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Qi, M. Gratzel and Y. Zhao, Science, 2019, 365, 591 CrossRef CAS .
D. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Wang, A. Sadhanala, Q. Hu, R. Su, R. Shivanna, G. F. Trindade, J. F. Watts, Z. Xu, T. Liu, K. Chen, F. Ye, P. Wu, L. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Zhang, R. H. Friend, Q. Gong, H. J. Snaith and R. Zhu, Science, 2018, 360, 1442 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zuo, Z. Gu, T. Ye, W. Fu, G. Wu, H. Li and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2674 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Liang, D. Gao and W. Huang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 94290 RSC .
S. You, H. Wang, S. Bi, J. Zhou, L. Qin, X. Qiu, Z. Zhao, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, X. Shi, H. Zhou and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706924 CrossRef .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, K. Manabe and H. Nishino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16995 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, W. Zhang, S. Van Reenen, R. J. Sutton, J. Fan, A. A. Haghighirad, M. B. Johnston, L. Wang and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 490 RSC .
J.-Y. Seo, R. Uchida, H.-S. Kim, Y. Saygili, J. Luo, C. Moore, J. Kerrod, A. Wagstaff, M. Eklund, R. McIntyre, N. Pellet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705763 CrossRef .
A. Agresti, S. Pescetelli, A. L. Palma, B. Martín-García, L. Najafi, S. Bellani, I. Moreels, M. Prato, F. Bonaccorso and A. Di Carlo, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1862 CrossRef CAS .
L. Najafi, B. Taheri, B. Martin-Garcia, S. Bellani, D. Di Girolamo, A. Agresti, R. Oropesa-Nunez, S. Pescetelli, L. Vesce, E. Calabro, M. Prato, A. E. Del Rio Castillo, A. Di Carlo and F. Bonaccorso, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10736 CrossRef CAS .
A. Agresti, A. Pazniak, S. Pescetelli, A. Di Vito, D. Rossi, A. Pecchia, M. Auf der Maur, A. Liedl, R. Larciprete, D. V. Kuznetsov, D. Saranin and A. Di Carlo, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1228 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, R. Yang, K. Wang, C. Wu, X. Zhu, J. Feng, X. Ren, G. Fang, S. Priya and S. F. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3239 CrossRef .
Z.-L. Tseng, C.-H. Chiang, S.-H. Chang and C.-G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 311 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. Yin, M. Que, Y. Yang and W. Que, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 57996 RSC .
J. Cao, B. Wu, R. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Hui, B. W. Mao and N. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30 Search PubMed .
J. P. Correa Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. Srimath Kandada, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Petrozza, A. Abate, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928 RSC .
W. Ke, D. Zhao, C. Xiao, C. Wang, A. J. Cimaroli, C. R. Grice, M. Yang, Z. Li, C.-S. Jiang, M. Al-Jassim, K. Zhu, M. G. Kanatzidis, G. Fang and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14276 RSC .
M. F. Ayguler, A. G. Hufnagel, P. Rieder, M. Wussler, W. Jaegermann, T. Bein, V. Dyakonov, M. L. Petrus, A. Baumann and P. Docampo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11414 CrossRef .
G. Yang, C. Wang, H. Lei, X. Zheng, P. Qin, L. Xiong, X. Zhao, Y. Yan and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1658 RSC .
L. Zuo, Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, H. Chen, P. Sun, S.-Y. Chang, H. Zhao, S. Dong and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 17, 269 CrossRef .
K. Choi, J. Lee, H. I. Kim, C. W. Park, G.-W. Kim, H. Choi, S. Park, S. A. Park and T. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3238 RSC .
X. Xu, H. Zhang, J. Shi, J. Dong, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19288 RSC .
X. Huang, Z. Hu, J. Xu, P. Wang, L. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 164, 87 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wan, X. Qiu, H. Chen, Y. Liu, H. Xie, J. Shi, H. Huang, Y. Yuan, Y. Gao and C. Zhou, Org. Electron., 2018, 59, 184 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18508 RSC .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, D. T. Moore, Y. Yan, E. M. Miller, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16207 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, J. A. Márquez, S. Zhang, C. J. Hages, D. Rothhardt, S. Albrecht, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith, T. Unold and D. Neher, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 847 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Xiao, S. Ma, S. Yu, C. Zhou, P. Liu, Y. Chen, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 45 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cha, P. Da, J. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Chen, F. Xiu, G. Zheng and Z. S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8581 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akin, Y. Altintas, E. Mutlugun and S. Sonmezoglu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 557 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zai, C. Zhu, H. Xie, Y. Zhao, C. Shi, Z. Chen, X. Ke, M. Sui, C. Chen, J. Hu, Q. Zhang, Y. Gao, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 30 CrossRef .
J. Chen, J.-Y. Seo and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702714 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, S. Akin, L. Pan, R. Uchida, N. Arora, J. V. Milic, A. Hinderhofer, F. Schreiber, A. R. Uhl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar and M. Gratzel, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2543 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Alharbi, A. Y. Alyamani, D. J. Kubicki, A. R. Uhl, B. J. Walder, A. Q. Alanazi, J. Luo, A. Burgos-Caminal, A. Albadri, H. Albrithen, M. H. Alotaibi, J. E. Moser, S. M. Zakeeruddin, F. Giordano, L. Emsley and M. Gratzel, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3008 CrossRef .
F. Tan, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, M. Wei, M. Liu, A. Mei, P. Li, B. Zhang, C. S. Tan, X. Gong, Y. Zhao, A. R. Kirmani, Z. Huang, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, J. Kim, Y. Zhao, O. Voznyy, Y. Gao, F. Zhang, L. J. Richter, Z. H. Lu, W. Zhang and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1807435 CrossRef .
D. Koushik, W. J. H. Verhees, Y. Kuang, S. Veenstra, D. Zhang, M. A. Verheijen, M. Creatore and R. E. I. Schropp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 91 RSC .
K. W. Wong, H. L. Yip, Y. Luo, K. Y. Wong, W. M. Lau, K. H. Low, H. F. Chow, Z. Q. Gao, W. L. Yeung and C. C. Chang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2788 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Wang, X. Chen, Z. Li, J. Wang, T. Li and X. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4860 RSC .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2013 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, S. Li, X. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Qin, S. Leng, Y.-X. Xu, K. Yao and H. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 734 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, P. W. Liang, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C. C. Chueh, M. S. Glaz, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 695 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, H. Yu, Z. Zhu, K. Jiang, T. Zhang, N. Zhao, S. Yang and H. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9098 RSC .
S. Olthof and K. Meerholz, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1 CrossRef .
A.-N. Cho and N.-G. Park, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3687 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xue, M. Liu, Z. Li, L. Yan, Z. Hu, J. Zhou, W. Li, X.-F. Jiang, B. Xu, F. Huang, Y. Li, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707444 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, H. Chen, S. Xiao, Q. Xue, T. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Q. Li, C. Hu, Y. Yang, Z. Hu, F. Huang, K. S. Wong, H.-L. Yip and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2950 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, F. Zhao, J. Tao, J. Jiang, J. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Hu and J. Chu, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 983 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, H. Zhao, C. Duan, S. Yang, Z. Yang, Z. Liu and S. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909972 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song, H. J. Han, S. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, D. Kim, H. W. Shin, T. K. Ahn, C. Wolf, T.-W. Lee and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3424 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, S. Tao, Y. Chen, X. Niu, C. K. Onwudinanti, C. Hu, Z. Qiu, Z. Xu, G. Zheng, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Liu, Y. Lun, J. Hong, X. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Xie, Y. Gao, Y. Bai, S. Yang, G. Brocks, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 408 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, W. Geng, Y. Zhou, H.-H. Fang, C.-J. Tong, M. A. Loi, L.-M. Liu and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9986 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tai, X. Guo, G. Tang, P. You, T.-W. Ng, D. Shen, J. Cao, C.-K. Liu, N. Wang, Y. Zhu, C.-S. Lee and F. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 806 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, F. Zhang, Y. Xiao, S. Wang and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4971 RSC .
Y. Guo, J. Ma, H. Lei, F. Yao, B. Li, L. Xiong and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5919 RSC .
G. Yang, P. Qin, G. Fang and G. Li, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800055 CrossRef .
W. Chen, Y. Wang, G. Pang, C. W. Koh, A. B. Djurišić, Y. Wu, B. Tu, F.-Z. Liu, R. Chen, H. Y. Woo, X. Guo and Z. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808855 CrossRef .
B. Wang, F. Wu, S. Bi, J. Zhou, J. Wang, X. Leng, D. Zhang, R. Meng, B. Xue, C. Zong, L. Zhu, Y. Zhang and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23895 RSC .
X. Du, R. Qiu, T. Zou, X. Chen, H. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900413 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Lin Fu, Hui Li and Lian Wang contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Lin Fu
	Lin Fu received her BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2016. She is currently a PhD candidate at Shandong University under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin. Her research interests are mainly focused on the synthesis of inorganic perovskite materials and the technological improvement of perovskite solar cells.

Hui Li
	Hui Li graduated with a BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2018. She is currently a PhD candidate at Shandong University. Her research interests are mainly focused on the design of high-performance stable inorganic perovskite solar cells.

Lian Wang
	Lian Wang received her BEng in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2018. She is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Longwei Yin at Shandong University. Her current research interests focus on the defect engineering for perovskite solar cells and the design of high-performance perovskite solar cells.

Ruiyang Yin
	Ruiyang Yin received his Bachelor's degree (major in Physics) at Shandong University in 2018. He is currently a graduate student at the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current scientific interests focus on flexible wearable devices and photoelectric devices.

Bo Li
	Bo Li graduated with a BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2015. He is currently a PhD candidate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Shandong University under the supervision of Professor Longwei Yin. His research interests are focused on the structure and photophysics of semiconductor materials and inorganic perovskite solar cells.

Longwei Yin
	Longwei Yin is a distinguished Professor and Director of Institute of Materials Physics and Chemistry, Shandong University (SDU), China. He received his PhD in 2001 in SDU. He completed his postdoctoral research from 2003 to 2006 in Prof. Bando Yoshio's group at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan. He won the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2010. His research interests are mainly focused on energy conversion and storage devices, including Li or Na based secondary batteries, supercapacitors, photo/electro-catalysis, and solar cells.

Broader context
With the increasingly serious energy crisis, the demand for sustainable and environment friendly energy sources is becoming more and more urgent. One of the most promising candidates is perovskite optoelectronic technology in view of the blowout development in both the efficiency and stability achieved in recent years. However, a variety of drawbacks, such as energy deficit, ion migration, operational degradation and hysteresis, greatly hinder the potential industrial applications of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Particularly, it has been demonstrated that most of the intractable issues are associated with defects. Herein, to provide a valid guidance for further progress in PSCs, a systematic and comprehensive understanding of the origin, classification, nature, relationships and overlapping effects of defects in perovskites is reviewed and summarized, establishing a relatively clear relationship between the performance and defects. State-of-the-art mainstream mechanisms of various passivation strategies are elucidated with an overview of relevant literature along the device fabrication route, including film formation, post-treatment and interlayer engineering between the perovskite layer and charge transport layer. Based on the summary of defect passivation engineering, challenges and suggestions for a breakthrough the bottlenecks of PSCs on the way to future commercialization are also proposed.


 	Fig. 1  Illustration of defect passivation strategies for PSCs.66,226,278,316	 

 	Fig. 2  Transition energy levels of point defects in (a) MAPbI348 and (b) α-CsPbI2Br.49 (c) Typical point defects in perovskites including vacancies, interstitials and anti-site atoms, in the order of formation energy and depths in the bandgap.45 (d) Migration pathways in MAPbI3 for ① VI, ② VMA, ③ VPb and ④ Ii, where dashed circles and red atoms refer to vacancies and interstitials, respectively. White = H, brown = C, blue = N, purple = I, and black = Pb atoms.39	 

 		 
CH3NH3PbI3 → (–CH2–) + NH3 + HI + PbI2
PbI2 → Pb + I2

 	Fig. 3  (a) Scheme showing halide vacancies in the Pb–I plane of mixed halide perovskites, which influences halide ion migration and ultimately leads to I-rich and Br-rich domains (marked by dashed circles).63 (b) Snapshots of the II diffusion during annealing. Pb, I, C, and N are represented by green, pink, blue, and cyan spheres, respectively. PbI octahedra are gold. For clarity, the H atoms of MA molecules are not represented. Blue circles and blue arrows indicate the position of the defect, and the displacements with respect to the previous defect positions.65 (c) Schematic illustration of the effects of shallow and deep-level defects in perovskites on the device energetics. The typical process includes ① the generation of electron–hole pairs, ② radiative recombination, ③ trapping and escaping from shallow-level defects, ④ radiative recombination by shallow-level defects, and ⑤ nonradiative monomolecular recombination by deep-level defects.	 

Na+	CsMAPbI3	Na+	1.06	24.5	78	20.2	
82

KI	Cs0.06FA0.79MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3	K+	1.18	23.06	79	21.6	
83

RbI	CsPbI2Br	Rb+	1.24	14.02	69	12	
313

MnCl2	CsPbI2Br	Mn2+	1.172	14.37	80	13.47	
91

ZnI2	CsPbI2Br	Zn2+	1.236	15.61	63	12.16	
90

EuCl2	CsPbI2Br	Eu2+	1.22	14.64	76.6	13.71	
93

CaCl2	CsPbI2Br	Ca2+, Cl−	1.32	15.22	83.29	16.79	
314

NiCl2	MAPbI3	Ni2+	1.13	22.64	81	20.6	
94

CdI2	Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8PbI2.55Br0.45	Cd2+	1.16	22.0	80	20.5	
96

Europium(III) acetylacetone	MAPbI3	Eu3+–Eu2+	1.15	23.53	80.7	21.89	
66

FACl	FAPbI3	FA+, Cl−	1.04	18.90	68	13.37	
99

NH4Cl	MAPbI3 (flexible)	NH4+, Cl−	13.14	19.71	73.5	15.86	
103

MACl	FAPbI3	MA+, Cl−	1.13	25.92	82	24.02	
106

HI	MAPbI3	I−	1.1	20.5	78	17.6	
315

NbF5	FA0.85MA0.15PbI3	Nb5+, F−	1.05	25.40	77.08	20.56	
114

NaF	Cs0.05FA0.54MA0.41(I0.98Br0.02)3	F−, hydrogen bond (N–H⋯F)	1.126	24.23	80.35	21.92	
316

CsAc	FA0.85MA0.15PbI3	Cs+, COO−	1.12	24.92	78.64	21.95	
115

Pb(SCN)2	MAPbI3	SCN−	1.09	21.55	69.97	16.41	
119


 	Fig. 4  Metal cation incorporation. (a) SIMS measurement interdiffusion-grown MAPbI3 films on an ITO glass substrate.82 (b) Schematic of a cross-section of a film showing halide-vacancy management in cases of excess halide, in which the surplus halide is immobilized through complexing with potassium into benign compounds at the grain boundaries and surfaces.83 (c) J–V curves of PSCs based on (FAPbI3)0.875(CsPbBr3)0.125 doped with 10 μmol of LiI, NaI, KI, RbI and CsI, measured in the reverse and forward scans.85 (d) Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) decomposition results of a K- and Rb-passivated sample.88 (e) The electron localization function contour plots of pristine MAPbI3 (up) and MAPbI3 (Ni2+) perovskite film at Ni:Pb = 0.03 (bottom).94 (f) Proposed mechanism of the cyclic elimination of Pb0 and I0 defects and the regeneration of the Eu3+–Eu2+ metal ion pair.66	 

 	Fig. 5  The incorporation of negatively charged anions. (a) Scheme showing the role of the MACl additive in the α-phase FAPbI3 perovskite.106 One-dimensional potential and topography line profiles near the GBs in (b) the control MAPbI3 film without Br, and (c) MAPbI2.88Br0.12 film.113 (d) Net atomic charges of I and Pb ions on the FAPbI3 surface with the incorporation of NaI species (FA–I) or NaF species (FA–F), and without any incorporation (FA). (e) The formation energy of a surface VFA in the clean FAPbI3 (FA) and FA–I or FA–F species incorporated surfaces.50 (f) DLTS spectra of the control and target layers measured between 150 K and 330 K.117	 

 	Fig. 6  Passivation by non-stoichiometric precursors. (a) SEM images and type-I band alignment of MAPbI3 film with PbI2 wrapping the perovskite grain.122 (b) 2D topography spatial maps of perovskite films before (left) and after annealing at 150 °C for 60 min (right).122 (c) Schematic representation of the coating process to form the MAPbI3 perovskite films with and without the grain boundary healing layer via Lewis acid–base adduct intermediates.108 (d) c-AFM images for the MAPbI3 perovskite films for x = 0 (left) and 0.06 (right).108	 

 	Fig. 7  Passivation by zwitterions and Lewis acid additives. Schematic illustrations of (a) DPSI defect passivation135 and (b) the in situ passivation of halide-induced deep traps: PCBM is adsorbed on the Pb–I anti-site defective grain boundary during perovskite self-assembly.140 (c) The structures of Ii− and its interaction products with 1/2O2, O2, and 3/2O2, along with the calculated energetics (ΔE, eV).143 (d) Theoretical calculation of the halide vacancy, halide vacancy and O2 passivation, and halide vacancy and dissociated O atom passivation.147	 

Lewis acids
PCBM	MAPbI3	Fullerene	0.97	20.2	82	16.0	
138

ICBM	MAPbI3−xClx	Fullerene	1.088	21.59	77	18.14	
141

α-Bis-PCBM	FAMAPb(IBr)3	Fullerene	1.13	23.95	74	20.8	
142

O2	CsPbI2Br	O atom	1.180	16.31	78.8	15.17	
147



Lewis bases
Ascorbic acid (AA)	MA0.5FA0.5Pb0.5Sn0.5I3	O donor	0.74	24.57	67	12.18	
149

Agarose	MAPbI3	O donor	0.99	23.50	63	14.66	
154

Benzoquinone (BQ)	MAPbI3	O donor	1.02	21.30	72	15.66	
148

PU	MAPbI3 (flexible)	O donor	1.213	22.12	80.3	18.7	
151

PBDB-T	Ca0.04FA0.82MA0.14PbI2.58Br0.42	O donor	1.113	22.39	77.8	19.38	
153

AQ310	FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45	O donor	1.15	21.80	78.4	19.66	
150

Caffeine	MAPbI3	O donor	1.143	22.97	77.13	20.25	
170

SP3	MAPbI3	O donor	1.146	22.69	78.55	20.43	
171

4-tert-Butylpyridine	MAPbI3	N donor	1.06	21.39	77	17.41	
173

Melaminium iodide	FA0.875Cs0.125Pb(I0.875Br0.125)3	N donor	1.082	21.80	76.4	18.43	
161

Pyridine	Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3)	N donor	1.136	22.29	75.12	19.03	
172

PVP	MAPbI3	N donor (pyridine groups)	1.15	21.74	80.9	20.23	
174

N–RGO	FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45	–NH2 or –OH	1.15	21.80	74	18.73	
160

Benzylamine (BA)	FAPbI3	Aromatic ring, –NH2	1.12	23.6	73	19.2	
317

DAP	MAPbI3	–NH2	1.18	22.5	81.7	21.7	
163

KHQSA	FASnI3	SO3−	0.55	17.64	69.4	6.76	
318

Dimethyl sulfide (DS)	MAPbI3 (flexible)	S donor	1.008	20.99	63.1	13.35	
163

Thiourea (TU)	MAPbI3	S donor	1.09	23.97	75	19.80	
167

Cu(Tu)I	MAPbI3−xClx	S donor, I−	1.12	22.3	79.8	20	
164

MPTS	FAMAPb(IBr)3	S donor, SiO2	1.12	23.39	79.8	20.81	
165

HPA	MAPbI3	P donor	1.07	20.4	74	16.2	
177

4-ABPACl	MAPbI3	hydrogen bond	1.0	22.05	75	16.55	
159

5-AVA	MAPbI3	O donor, –NH2	
	
	
	11.0	
175

Theophylline	FAxMA1−xPb(IBr)3	O donor, hydrogen bond	1.191	21.71	77	15.76	
180

Ethyl cellulose	MAPbI3	O donor, hydrogen bond	1.1	22.89	77	19.41	
155

PCDTBT	MAPbIxCl3−x	N donor, S donor	0.94	21.77	77	15.76	
181

TDZDT	MAPbI3	N donor, S donor	1.10	22.77	76	19.04	
319

IT-4F	MAPbI3	O donor, N donor, S donor	1.12	21.35	76.74	18.35	
320

Urea	MAPbI3	O donor, –NH2	1.092	21.68	78	18.55	
178

IT-M	Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	O donor, S donor	1.14	22.34	77.7	19.70	
321

PBT1	CsMAFAPb(IBr)3	O donor, S donor	1.13	22.91	79.8	20.67	
322

D4TBP	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45	O donor, –NH2, aromatic ring	1.16	22.51	80.3	21.0	
182


 	Fig. 8  Passivation by Lewis base additives. (a) Schematic illustration of the passivation process of D–π–A molecules for the undercoordinated Pb2+.171 (b) Geometries of MAPbI3, MA0.75FA0.25PbI3, and MA0.75GA0.25PbI3 at 0 (top) and 300 K (bottom).158 (c) Illustration of a possible mechanism for the trap state passivation.164 (d) Schematics of the perovskite formation with and without urea.178 (e) Theoretical models of perovskites with molecular surface passivation of Pb–I anti-site by theophylline and theobromine.180 (f) Schematic illustration of the passivation effect of D4TBP on different defect sites.182 (g) Energy offset-dominated trap state passivation and intergrain charge transport.183	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the proposed mechanism of CQD passivation on Pb2+.185 (b) Structures of (CC2)PbI3, (CC3)PbI3, and (CN)PbI3. Top: Schematic of the salt. Middle: X-ray structures showing the infinite [PbI3]n− chains with the shortest I⋯I distance indicated. Bottom: Hydrogen bonding between the cations and the anions.193 (c) Long-term stability of the most stable device with BMIMBF4 in the perovskite film under full-spectrum sunlight and heat stressing at 70–75 °C.195 (d) Stability tests performed for the PSCs based on MAPbI3 and 1% ETI:MAPbI3 under MPPT tracking in an argon atmosphere at 60 °C (left) and ambient air, 40 ± 5% RH at room temperature (right).197	 

 	Fig. 10  The mixed-dimensional perovskite heterojunction. (a) The 1D–3D perovskite structure.209 (b) Long-term stability of the unencapsulated control and 1D–3D hybrid perovskite solar cells during temperature cycling (25–85 °C) at 55% RH.209 (c) 2D–3D perovskite structure.16 (d) Proposed electronic band offsets of the 2D–3D heterojunction.16 (e) Improved moisture stability with 2D perovskite at grain boundaries. Photos of the perovskite films incorporating bare FAPbI3, FAPbI3 with 2D perovskite and FA0.98Cs0.02PbI3 with 2D perovskite exposed to RH of 80 ± 5% at 20 ± 2 °C for different times (left), and the evolution of the absorption of the films at 600 nm under RH 80 ± 5% at 20 ± 2 °C (right).212 (f) Stability test of CsPbI3·0.025EDAPbI4-based devices and films. PCE of the champion PSC as a function of storage time in a dark dry box (left), and XRD patterns and images of the CsPbI3·0.025EDAPbI4 film heated at 100 °C in a dry box for 1 week (right).216	 

Lewis acids
PCBM	MAPbI3	Fullerene	0.98	20.3	75	14.9	
221

IPFB	MAPb(ICl)3	Fluorine substituent aromatic ring	1.06	23.38	67	15.7	
222

F4TCNQ	MAPbI3	Fluorine substituent aromatic ring	1.06	20.3	75.4	18.1	
223

TPFP	CsFAMAPb(IBr)3	Fluorine substituent aromatic ring	1.16	23.97	76	21.04	
224



Lewis bases
TOPO	MAPbI3	O donor	0.916	18.69	75.1	12.8	
232

Pyridine	MAPbI3−xClx	N donor	1.05	24.1	72	15.5	
221

Thiophene	MAPbI3−xClx	S donor	1.02	21.3	68	14.3	
221

3-Hexylthiophene	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45	S donor	1.15	23.2	75	19.9	
226

P3HT	CsPbI2Br	S donor (thiophene grouos)	1.30	13.1	70	12.0	
227

MMI	MAPbI3	S donor	1.125	23.51	76	20.10	
230

PVP	MAPbI3	–NCO (acylamine group)	1.05	22.0	80.4	20.93	
227

IDIC	MAPbI3	O donor, N donor	1.11	22.96	76.5	19.5	
228

2-MP	MAPbI3	N donor, S donor	1.16	22.61	71.44	20.28	
229

SN	FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3	N donor, S donor	1.15	24.0	75	20.9	
218

PASP	MAPbI3	S donor, –CO, para-fluorine	1.07	22.8	82.2	20.05	
323

Me4NBr	(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4	–N(CH3)3+	0.76	26.44	72.81	14.56	
324


L-α-Phosphatidylcholine	FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45	–N(CH3)3+, –PO4−	1.08	22.7	80	19.6	
325

Choline chloride	FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45	–N(CH3)3+, Cl−	1.14	23.7	78	21.0	
325


 	Fig. 11  Post-treatment via Lewis bases and acids. (a) Trap density of states (tDOS) obtained by thermal admittance spectroscopy.221 (b) Schematic view of the halogen bond interaction between the iodopentafluorobenzene (top) and illustration of the electrostatic screening of halides via halogen bond complexation of IPFB on the perovskite surface (bottom).222 (c) Thiophene or pyridine molecules can donate electron density to Pb and form a coordinate covalent bond, effectively neutralizing the excess positive charge in the crystal.221 (d) Interaction schematic of the π-conjugated Lewis base and Pb. (e) Molecular structure of passivating materials and schematic illustration of their interaction with metal ions.229 (f) Photographs of the pristine and passivated perovskite films before and after high humidity aging under >95% RH.229 (g) Statistics of VOC distribution for devices with PCBM, L-α-phosphatidylcholine, choline iodide and choline chloride.233	 

 	Fig. 12  Surface passivation by alkylammonium halogen salts. (a) Schematic of the MP passivation treatment method with FAI and iBAI.235 (b) Schematic figure of the perovskite film treated by BA to form the 2D/3D stacking structure.236 (c) GIWAXS pattern of a MAPI/PEAMAPI bilayer film with highlighted (002) and (222) diffraction rings.237 (d) Schematic energy level diagram of the MAPI/PEAMAPI heterojunction solar cell.237 (e) XRD patterns of perovskite films with PEAI treatment under different conditions.238 (f) Possible passivation mechanism of PEAI on perovskite film.238	 

 	Fig. 13  Passivation by wide bandgap materials and organic materials with hydrophobic groups. (a) Schematic illustration of the in situ formation of the OS-wrapped perovskite thin film and the hypothesized perovskite-OS nanostructures.245 (b) Schematic of the protection for perovskites through the in situ formation of lead sulfate on the perovskite surface.246 (c) tDOS obtained by thermal admittance spectroscopy for the devices with or without lead sulfate top layers.246 (d) Schematic structure of the interface between the WBH and P3HT.248 (e) Energy-level diagram of NBH, WBH and P3HT.248 (f) Mechanism of PVP-induced cubic phase stability.253 (g) Energy diagram of the suppression of the surface charge recombination by an insulating layer.254	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Structure of the titania anode where HOCO–R–NH3+ was inserted between the perovskite and porous titania.257 (b) J–V curves of PHJ PSCs fabricated without and with PCBA modification.258 (c) Schematic diagram of the band shift of the perovskite and TiO2 in a graded heterojunction structure with a mixed and graded interlayer. The negative and positive circles represent electrons and holes, respectively, and the arrows express their flowing directions.262 (d) Schematic diagram of the band shift of the perovskite and PCBM in the GHJ structure with a mixed and graded interlayer. The negative and positive circles represent electrons and holes, respectively, and the arrows indicate their flowing directions.264	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Corresponding PV metrics of PSCs based on CsPbI3 and CHI–CsPbI3 (0.1 cm2 effective cell area; 32 devices). All J–V curves were measured at ∼45 ± 5 °C under full-sun illumination.265 (b) The J–V curves of the inverted planar heterojunction PSCs, obtained from reverse scans under simulated AM 1.5 G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. The inset shows a schematic diagram of the solar cell used in this work.266 (c) Schematic diagram of the perovskite solar cell device structure, SAM-induced permanent dipole formation, and involvement of the SAM in the crystalline structure of perovskite crystals.267	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Time-resolved photoluminescence spectra of perovskite thin films on the c-TiO2 layer collected at 30 MHz at 0.03 μJ per cm2 per pulse.271 (b) Trap density of states (tDOS) for devices without CsBr (black) and with CsBr modification (red).271 (c and d) DFT calculation of the MAPbI3/MXene structure. Electrostatic potential averaged over planes perpendicular to the (c) MAPbI3/Ti3C2(OH)2 and (d) MAPbI3/Ti3C2O2 interface. The computed structures are shown within the plots, where green, magenta, blue, yellow, cyan, grey and red spheres represent I, Pb, N, C, H, Ti and O atoms, respectively. The red dashed lines represent the dipole-corrected vacuum levels.275 (e) Schematic illustration of a planar PSC device modified with ZnO–MgO–EA+.279 (f) The best J–V data of the planar PSC devices measured under AM 1.5G illumination with a RH of 70%.279	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Current–voltage properties of TiO2 and SnO2-based planar mixed halide/cation perovskite devices. Black arrows indicate a backward scan from VOC to JSC and red arrows indicate the reversed scan.280 (b) Comparison of energetic difference between conduction band minimum (CBM) and Fermi level of SnOx and trap depth energies of solar cells.282 (c) Schematic diagram of the SAM between the SnO2 and perovskite film (left) and the corresponding work function and PCE performance of PSCs and OSCs (right). (BA is benzoic acid, PA is 4-pyridine carboxylic acid, CBA is 4-cyanobenzoic acid, ABA is 4-aminobenzoic acid, and C3 is 3-propanoic acid)284 Schematic diagrams of band alignment and charge recombination in the cells with (d) the ZnO single layer and (e) TiO2/ZnO bilayer as compact layers, respectively.286 (f) ① Schematic of photo-catalysis effect of TiO2 under UV illumination. ② Schematic of perovskite degradation resulting from the photocatalytic effect of TiO2. ③ Schematic of retarding photo-catalysis effect by SnO2 inserting layer.288	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the perovskite solar cell structure.294 (b) J–V curves for control devices and QDs-modified devices.295 The aging test for devices with the control (black line) and QDs-10-modified (red line) perovskite films. (c) The devices were measured in ambient air (at room temperature and 40–50% humidity) without any encapsulation for 30 days.295 (d) The devices were maintained at the maximum power point (MPP) under one sun and N2 atmosphere over 400 h.295 (e) Energy-level diagram of the materials used in GHJ-structured PSC, with energy levels given in eV.296	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic energy level diagram displaying the blocking effect of the PVP polymer at the interface.225 (b) Crystal structure of a 2D (5-AVA)2PbI4 perovskite.297 (c) Images of water droplets on the surfaces of 3D/2D and 3D perovskite films at different water loading times.298 (d) Schematic representation of the 1D/3D heterostructure evidenced by solid-state NMR proximity measurements.299	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagram of the device structure and molecular structures of 2D interfacial materials.303 (b) Schematic diagram of energy levels in perovskite solar cells with both MoS2 and GO modifying layers.290 (c) The inverted device architecture of planar PSCs used in this work. The chemical structures of GO and polymer interlayers are shown on the left and right, respectively.306 (d) Schematic illustration of the surface modification of NiO NC film with a DEA monolayer, highlighting the enhanced contact at the NiO/perovskite interface through a link between the –OH groups and Pb in the perovskite.36 (e) Potential passivation effect: interactions between under-coordinated Pb atoms on the perovskite crystal and DA–PEDOT:PSS with amino and hydroxyl groups.311	 
Footnote
† Lin Fu, Hui Li and Lian Wang contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
