Recent advancements in poly-Si/SiO x passivating contacts for high-efficiency silicon solar cells: technology review and perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA04730F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA04730F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 20147-20173Recent advancements in poly-Si/SiOx passivating contacts for high-efficiency silicon solar cells: technology review and perspectives

        
          
            Jiakai 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      abcd, 
      
        
          
            Xianglin 
            Su
          
        
      abcd, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *abcd, 
      
        
          
            Bike 
            Zhang
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Yang
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      abcd and 

        
          
            Guofu 
            Hou
          
          
        
      *abcd
aInstitute of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University, Tianjin, 300350, China. E-mail: carolinehq@nankai.edu.cn; gfhou@nankai.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Tianjin, Tianjin, 300350, China
cCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering, Tianjin, 300072, China
dRenewable Energy Conversion and Storage Center of Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, China
eJinko Solar, Haining, Zhejiang 314400, China
Received 
      14th June 2022
    , Accepted 24th August 2022First published on 25th August 2022AbstractAs photovoltaics (PVs) made out of crystalline silicon (c-Si) have become more commonplace, the past decade has witnessed leaps and bounds in performance advances, the majority of which have been focused on lowering the losses associated with the directly metallized and/or heavily doped regions seen in typical devices. There are a number of recent developments that have the potential to greatly enhance the efficiencies of commercially available thin-film c-Si solar cells, including passivating contact featuring stacks of polysilicon (poly-Si)/SiOx, commonly abbreviated as TOPCon (tunnel oxide passivated contacts), which has led to efficiencies of over 26% and 24% being achieved by lab-based and industrial cells, respectively. This paper provides an outline of the evolution of this structure, which dates back to the 1980s, and a description of the present status of this technique in the lab and in industry. While the future of poly-Si junctions seems to be bright, as predicted by the International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaics, various difficulties remain unresolved, such as the preparation of poly-Si and metallization issues. Additionally, this review discusses the remaining hurdles and the potential for poly-Si junctions to revolutionize the PV industry.Jiakai ZhouJiakai Zhou is currently a PhD student at the Institute of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University under the supervision of Prof. Guofu Hou. He received his BS degree in electronic information engineering from Xidian University in 2017 and his MS degree in integrated circuit engineering from Hebei University of Technology in 2020. His main research focuses on TOPCon solar cells.Qian HuangQian Huang is an associate professor at the Institute of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University. She received her PhD from Nankai University in 2009. Her research mainly focuses on thin film photovoltaic materials/devices and the design of key materials for integrated circuits.Ying ZhaoYing Zhao received his PhD from Nankai University in 1995. He is a full professor and the dean of the College of Electronic Information and Optical Engineering in Nankai University. He is the vice-chair of the PVSEC International Advisory Committee. He is also the vice-president of China Renewable Energy Society and the director of PV Committee. He has been engaged in research into photovoltaic materials and devices.Guofu HouGuofu Hou is a full professor at the Institute of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University. He received his PhD from Nankai University in 2005 and started his postdoc studies at the University of Toledo in 2009. His research mainly focuses on the performance improvement and industrialization of high-efficiency crystalline silicon heterojunction solar cells (SHJ, TOPCon, POLO, and DASH) and PbX (X = S, Se) colloidal quantum dot solar cells, and on the application of novel two-dimensional photoelectric materials and devices.
1. Introduction
Solar energy is considered as a critical renewable resource that can be utilized for long-term energy conservation initiatives, and the resulting low levelized cost of electricity is especially attractive in comparison to traditional fossil fuels when using thin silicon (Si) wafers. At the moment, photovoltaic (PV) systems that convert solar energy to useable power are generated using a homojunction crystalline silicon (c-Si) technique with diffused junctions formed under high-temperature conditions; these account for more than 95% of the global market.1,2 In tandem with the fast growth of c-Si PV manufacturing, ongoing technical advancements have improved performance while also lowering costs. “Passivated” contacts or junctions have combined surface passivation with charge carrier selection capabilities in one of the most recent technical developments.3
The selective layers in traditional Si solar cells are formed through doping the near surface of the Si absorber, which results in diffused p–n and high-low junctions, and an efficiency record of 25% has been set for Si solar cells using this method.4 A significant drawback of these cells is the high levels of Auger recombination that occurs as a result of the high doping concentration in diffused areas. To circumvent this constraint, decoupling the contact from the absorber is a primary concept. This concept is not novel in other kinds of solar cells. Indeed, many PV methods need decoupled selective contacts due to the technological impossibility of creating diffused p–n junctions. PEDOT:PSS films in organic solar cells and TiO2 electrodes in perovskite solar cells are typical instances of such decoupled selective contacts.5,6 Diffused p–n junctions, however, did not take off in c-Si solar cells until more than half a century after they were initially produced.7 Among the several approaches that have been examined, those involving hydrogenated amorphous silicon heterojunctions (SHJs) or doped polysilicon (poly-Si) junctions are preferred. The current performance record of 26.7% for c-Si was obtained using the SHJ technique, which is not examined in this work.8 In spite of the considerable variations in manufacturing equipment and methods from the currently dominant c-Si PV techniques, SHJ technology has long been a premium alternative, and it continues to gain market share, even now. In comparison, cells with poly-Si junctions (tunnel oxide passivated contacts, TOPCon) make use of the high-temperature procedures and metallization methods that are currently used in industry, so this approach may be considered as an advance over existing mainstream technology with great potential.
The development trajectory of Si PVs is shown in Fig. 1A, and continual technical advances have ensured that they have maintained vital efficiency increases. At the moment, the highest PERC efficiency is 24.03%. The Achilles heel of this concept is recombination at the metal/semiconductor contact, which limits future growth potential. Fortunately, the road toward increased efficiency has continued owing to the development of novel passivation contact ideas. Using one such novel technique, innovative Si-based solar cells utilizing TOPCon possess the potential to surpass traditional PERC-type solar cells. Over the last four years, small-area cells using poly-Si junctions have achieved efficiencies of more than 26% with different types of doped substrates using front-and-back-contacted or interdigitated back contact (IBC) designs.12,16,17 Poly-Si junctions are created via sandwiching ultra-thin silicon oxide (SiOx) insulating layers between c-Si wafers and heavily doped poly-Si layers, as illustrated in Fig. 1B. These encouraging findings have fueled a technical drive by PV producers to include poly-Si junctions into existing manufacturing lines. As can be seen in Fig. 1C, poly-Si junction architectures, as determined by the International Technology Roadmap for PVs (ITRPV), will continue to gain market share over the next decade, reaching a market share of nearly 25% and achieving industrial average efficiencies of 24% and 24.5% for p/n-substrates, respectively, by 2030.14Fig. 1D depicts the effects of this effort, where the datapoints demonstrate the latest advancements in large-area cell efficiencies when poly-Si passivating contacts are used. Many well-known PV manufacturers have made public their research on poly-Si passivation junctions.18–20 Two of the three major manufacturers have already established pilot lines capable of producing large-area cells with poly-Si junctions with efficiencies greater than 24.5%.20,21
 Fig. 1  Solar cells with poly-Si junctions: current status and potential expansion. (A) Potential future developments relating to Si PV technology on the basis of past efficiency improvements and ongoing research into new technologies. Al-BSF represents an aluminum back surface field and PERC refers to a passivated emitter and rear cell. Reproduced with permission;9–13 copyright: 2020, AIP Publishing LLC. (B) A schematic diagram of a typical n-type TOPCon structure. Reproduced with permission;14 copyright: 2019, Springer Nature. (C) Development trends for different Si solar cell technologies in the past and future.15 (D) TOPCon cell efficiency records for different poly-Si deposition routes. The gray and red boxes show the best efficiencies for lab-based and industrial devices, respectively. The deposition routes include plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD), and plasma oxidation and plasma assisted in situ-doping deposition (POPAID). 
This paper complements and updates earlier assessments through providing a focused view of poly-Si junctions and their potential to revolutionize the PV sector from both academic and industrial viewpoints.9,15,18 It covers the physical mechanisms of poly-Si junctions, technical advancements, and lingering obstacles. It will be shown that upon introducing the TOPCon concept with promising prospects, an annual increase in Si solar cell performance can be maintained, which is an indispensable requirement for staying on the cost-reduction curve relating to the levelized cost of PV-based electricity. With this in mind, an overview of ideas and materials linked to the development and operating processes of poly-Si junctions is provided in this article along with in-depth discussions of contact formation, surface passivation, manufacturing procedures, and further material features in the context of passivating contact formation.
2. Historical developments and mechanisms relating to poly-Si-based passivating contacts
Several landmark structures in the history of the development of poly-Si-based passivation contacts are presented in Fig. 2. Overstraeten proposed using poly-Si layers beneath the contacts in Si solar cells as early as the 1980s to prevent recombination.23 Subsequently, Green et al. expanded this to metal–insulator Si solar cells (MIS) and MIS-n+p solar cells through using doped poly-Si on SiO2 structures.24 The achievement of relatively high open-circuit voltage (VOC) values indicated the promise of this method. According to Stanford University, a different technique based on SIPOS (semi-insulating poly-Si) resulted in an outstanding VOC value of 720 mV from test samples.25–27 Swanson et al. used thick thermally produced oxides (∼2 nm thick) that could no longer function as tunnel oxides.28 An extremely high temperature was utilized to create pinholes so that direct current could flow through the device.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagrams of numerous passivation contact structures featuring doped poly-Si with interfacial SiOx.22 
Following these vigorous efforts in the 1980s, research into poly-Si/SiOx interactions fell into a profound lull for the next few years. However, the outstanding potential of such structures was not entirely overlooked. Later, in 2005, Richard Swanson emphasized the necessity for new contacts with a low recombination current density (J0) (“a contact with J0 < 5 fA cm−2 is required that produces excellent majority carrier contact”).29 This may be seen as the start of a new era for poly-Si-based passivating contacts.
SunPower introduced a passivating contact design in its third-generation products (Gen III).30,31 The major difference between Gen III and Gen II is the optimized carrier loss at the contact, as evidenced by the excellent VOC value of 727 mV. To the best of our knowledge, no specific information about how these passivating contacts were made has been made public. Given SunPower's documented experience in the field, as seen based on their patent output, it looks probable that a poly-Si/SiOx stack was utilized.
TetraSun created a revolutionary technique (TetraCell) for solar cells, involving both sides undergoing contact, resulting in an extremely high VOC value approaching 720 mV.32 The superior passivation properties can be ascribed to “contact shielding”, an alternative term for passivating contacts. The TetraCell design had front and rear passivating contacts. According to the relevant patent output, the passivating contact technique is based on poly-Si/SiO2 architecture.
Microelectronics equipment was used to create hyper-abrupt poly-Si/SiO2 junctions.33 Chemical oxidation or a regenerative thermal oxidizer were used to create the tunnel oxide. Even though the completed solar cell demonstrated good contact passivating qualities, the relatively thick Si wafers restricted the VOC values.
In 2013, Feldmann et al. presented a novel hybrid construction including a diffused front emitter and poly-Si/SiO2 back contact, and this is when the term TOPCon was invented.34,35 Feldmann et al. demonstrated a high efficiency of 23% and an ideal VOC value of 698 mV using this technique. The high fill factor (FF), which demonstrated good majority transport across the tunnel oxide, was just as noteworthy as the high voltage. An interfacial oxide grown in HNO3 was used to build the n-TOPCon structure of these initial cells, and phosphorus-doped SiCx film was formed via PECVD and then heated to 800–900 °C before being passivated with hydrogen. Dopant diffusion into the c-Si absorber could be facilitated via thermal annealing. Majority carrier transit through the tunnel oxide is facilitated due to the minor doping profile in the bulk, according to previous simulation results.36 As a result, the poly-Si/SiO2 system cannot be considered “decoupled” from the c-Si absorber. It can be regarded that a combination of band bending and in-diffusion makes the performance possible.
In the earliest n-type TOPCon cells, the recombination characteristics were essentially constrained by the front contacts. In n-type TOPCon cells, the addition of local p++ boron diffusion beneath the front contacts and a few minor modifications resulted in efficiency of 25.8%.37,38 A thorough examination of the recombination and transport properties of the final devices revealed that a rear emitter layout on p-Si may also be desirable.39
Indeed, Römer et al. released the first findings from POLO technology research by ISFH in 2013, and they achieved a low J0 value of less than 10 fA cm−2.40,41 A significant departure from the TOPCon technique is the employment of a relatively thick interfacial oxide, in the region of 2.4–3.6 nm, which could no longer operate as a direct tunnel oxide. A high-temperature annealing process at temperatures above 1000 °C is required to break up the oxide. When used in IBC solar cells, the POLO method yielded an efficiency record of 26.1% (VOC = 727 mV).42,43
The PERPoly cell was designed by ECN in 2016, and its structure is highly similar to TOPCon, except for the addition of a passivated and anti-reflection coating and gridded electrodes on the rear side, maximizing the efficiency of double-sided power production.44 SERIS developed the MonoPoly idea in 2017 and nothing changed structurally, save for a polished rear surface and the addition of an AlOx/SiNx laminated structure on the front side.45 Thus, solar cells with poly-Si junctions have been developed via incorporating a variety of novel techniques, and industry worldwide continues to refer to these as TOPCon structures.
TOPCon involves a composite structure consisting of a ∼2 nm-thick intermediate oxide layer and a highly doped poly-Si layer. Contemporary methods for fabricating this structure rely on 5 fundamental building blocks: (1) the growth or deposition of an ultra-thin layer of interfacial material, typically SiOx; (2) the deposition of a Si/Si compound layer; (3) the incorporation of dopants into the Si layer; (4) Si recrystallization and the reactivation of the dopants; and (5) hydrogenation.49
Charge-carrier creation, the separation of photo-generated charge carriers, and the collection of photo-generated charge carriers are the three basic processes that underlie the operation of a solar cell. Absorber materials may excite electrons from a low-energy state, Ei, to a high-energy state, Ej, when they absorb a photon, and the energy gap between these two states must be equal to the photon energy, i.e., Ei − Ej = hν. A void is produced in the lower-energy state when an electron is stimulated from one state to another. This void is referred to as a hole and it acts like a positive charge. Thus, electron–hole pairs, or so-called charge carriers, are produced in materials as a result of photon absorption. The propensity for electron–hole pairs to reform is strong and persistent. Splitting an electron–hole pair into a free electron and a hole, which subsequently flow to opposite terminals, is necessary for solar energy conversion. Hole and electron electrochemical potentials and conductivity differences at the solar cell terminals are the two most important elements during charge-carrier separation. Because of differences in electrochemical potential and conductivity, electrons and holes are compelled to travel in opposing directions. Once electrons and holes have been separated, the conductivity of the electron route must be greater than that of the hole in order for the electrons to go in a different direction. The inverse is true for the hole route. Finally, the charge carriers are transferred to an external circuit, where they do work. This is the last step in transforming sunlight into electricity.
A silicon solar cell must have two metal electrodes to transfer the current generated by the bulk absorption layer. Defects in the bulk region of the absorber have been reduced as much as possible, but the surface of the absorber still has a very high defect density and carrier recombination rate, and metals cannot support the chemical passivation of these defects. The contact area can be defined as the area between the metal interface with high recombination activity and the bulk absorption layer; this starts at the metal interface with active carrier recombination and ends at the surface of the light absorption layer. Surface passivation and low resistance with respect to the majority carrier are two key criteria for a well-prepared contact. A clean PN junction is no longer required in typical solar cells, and the driving factor for producing an electric current may be a quasi-Fermi level gradient, rather than a built-in electric field that can separate the photocarriers. The equilibrium Fermi level splits into a quasi-Fermi level when it is illuminated, and this gradient can drive photovoltaic carriers. To allow the divided photocarriers to travel in different directions, the asymmetric conductivity of the carriers acts as a driving force.50,51Fig. 3A depicts the carrier transport mechanism, where the cell is broken down into three stages: absorption, passivation, and contact. The (n+) poly-Si layer creates an accumulation layer on top of the absorber layer due to a disparity in the work function (Φm) between the two. The accumulation layer or energy band bending forms a barrier which stops holes from accessing the interfacial oxide, while allowing electrons to do so easily. In addition, the interfacial oxide offers an insurmountable barrier to holes, preventing tunneling, thus making the layer carrier-selective. The tunneling oxide itself also has some carrier selectivity, as it provides a barrier with an energy of 4.5 eV for hole tunneling and only 3.1 eV for electron tunneling. Fig. 3B shows the energy band diagram of passivating contact with a stack of poly-Si/SiOx. Compared with traditional PERC-type solar cells, a distinctive feature of TOPCon-type solar cells is that they are beneficial for one-dimensional charge transport, because contact is comprehensive rather than local. ISFH has provided a theoretically extensive examination of the potential efficiency limitations of solar cells with various structural configurations based on the concept of carrier selectivity.47 The maximum efficiency estimations for solar cells with various combinations of electron-/hole-selective materials are shown in Fig. 3C. The selectivity of cells featuring SiOx/poly-Si, regardless of doping type, is around 14.0, outperforming heterojunctions with an intrinsic thin layer (HIT). The TOPCon structure (28.2–28.7%) is superior to HIT (28.5%) and PERC (24.5%) in terms of its efficiency limits, and it is closest to the theoretical efficiency limit (29.43%). Research into the concept of passivating contacts has progressed exponentially in recent years, allowing for a greater variety of material combinations. As seen in Fig. 3D, poly-Si-based contacts have exceptional ρc and J0 values, guaranteeing that such solar cells possess the best possible efficiency.48 In comparison to other commonly used materials, poly-Si is the greatest choice in terms of the overall properties. Although the properties of cells using various approaches are widely recognized, the most major industrialization challenge is enhancing the performances of poly-Si-based contacts via upgrading current materials or via developing novel materials. The existing literature cites some notable breakthroughs in the area of solar cells using the TOPCon design.18 Solar cells with the TOPCon design possess greater conversion efficiencies across a larger area than solar cells with other forms of passivating contacts, so they have a better chance of finding industrial use. The TOPCon cell structure has already shown excellent efficiencies of 24% or higher, and some announcements even claim efficiencies of more than 25% (JinkoSolar has set a new world record with a maximum solar conversion efficiency of 25.7% using its large-size monocrystalline Si TOPCon solar cell), demonstrating that the TOPCon structure will play a crucial role in industrial production.52–56
 Fig. 3  The principles and advantages of passivating contacts with a stack of poly-Si/SiOx. (A) The structure of a passivating contact solar cell and the carrier transport mechanism. Reproduced with permission;18 copyright: 2022, Elsevier. (B) An energy band diagram of passivating contact with a stack of poly-Si/SiOx. Reproduced with permission;46 copyright: 2016, AIMS Press. (C) The combined selectivity (Se&h) and maximum efficiency (ηmax) values of cells with various electron/hole-selective contact materials.210 Reproduced with permission;47 copyright: 2021, Elsevier. (D) J0, contact resistance (ρc), and maximum efficiency values for various passivating contacts and a performance comparison (Rsheet represents the sheet resistance). The green plus and red minus signs indicate excellent and poor performance, respectively. Reproduced with permission;48 copyright: 2017, Wiley-Blackwell. 
The interfacial oxide is an important component because it can efficiently passivate dangling bonds on the c-Si surface, lowering the interface trapped charge density (Dit). The recombination of minority charge carriers at the metal contact is prevented via the presence of a thin interfacial oxide on the poly-Si contact, which acts as a tunneling barrier. This holds true even if an extremely low surface recombination velocity is achievable at the interface without the oxide.57 Poly-Si is an equally significant part of the structure; it can be alloyed with carbon or oxygen to optimize the characteristics, such as allowing a wider band gap. Electrons and holes are selectively targeted by the Φm value, which induces substantial band bending in c-Si. This also provides sufficient conductivity to maintain the quasi-Fermi level splitting of external contacts. Additionally, the doped area produced during the high-temperature annealing process can diminish the density of minority charge carriers in the near-surface area. Moreover, a high doping concentration improves Auger recombination and speeds up recombination at the c-Si/SiOx interface. The major recombination mechanism was recognized via later discoveries.58,59 As a result, the diffusion of dopants into the absorber must be minimized. Fortunately, the oxide layer may act as a highly efficient diffusion barrier, particularly in the case of phosphorus. In addition to triggering dopant diffusion, high-temperature annealing also promotes Si layer crystallization and alters the oxide characteristics, because pinholes are formed in the oxide and the atomic bonds at the Si/SiOx interface are structurally remodeled. Pinhole production is demonstrated to impair surface passivation, but it may also lower the ρc value of passivating contacts with relatively thick oxides where tunneling is ineffective. Based on previous studies, the benefits of passivation and electrical properties can be combined when the pinhole density is between 108 and 109 cm−2.60,61 Ultimately, a hydrogenation process is a commonly used method to further enhance the passivation quality, since electrically active defects at the c-Si/SiOx interface (interface traps) and inside the poly-Si layer seem to be passivated by atomic hydrogen.
As shown by Schmidt et al., in terms of n-TOPCon, the J0 values have been reported to be very low by multiple research groups, despite the fact that these groups used various manufacturing techniques and approaches.49 Although some J0 values below 5 fA cm−2 were recently obtained for p-TOPCon devices, the performance difference between the two types of TOPCon on textured surfaces remains impressively large, where n-TOPCon shows values of 2 to 8 fA cm−2 and p-TOPCon shows values of 8 fA cm−2 to 50 fA cm−2.62,63
3. Passivation stacks: a comprehensive analysis
3.1. The ultrathin interfacial silicon oxide layer
The high cost of PECVD and LPCVD, the use of hazardous silane and poisonous gases when doping, parasitic absorption, and restricted lateral transport substantially limit the application of doped hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) films in SHJ and TOPCon designs despite their excellent passivation performance. Fortunately, an interfacial oxide layer can act as a useful substitute.38
Because it can efficiently passivate c-Si surface dangling bonds and decrease Dit, the interfacial oxide is regarded as a critical component in TOPCon. In order to keep the poly-Si layer apart from the c-Si absorber and inhibit recombination, the interfacial layer is essential; it acts as a diffusion barrier during the dopant activation process, limiting dopant penetration into c-Si and preventing the epitaxial development of the poly-Si layer on top of it. In the vast majority of cases, the interfacial layer is sub-stoichiometric SiOx with a thickness of 1–3 nm.64,65 It is often developed chemically via immersion in boiling HNO3, which creates a self-limiting ∼1.4 nm layer, or via thermal treatment in O2. Additionally, alternative procedures using UV/ozone and ozonized deionized water have also been evaluated.66–68 It is possible to achieve astonishingly uniform J0 and ρc values if the manufacturing technique is changed to account for the SiOx thickness (higher recrystallization and activation temperatures are required for thicker interfacial layers). J0 values < 10 fA cm−2 has been established for poly-Si/SiOx contacts with different doping types utilizing various growing processes, as illustrated in Fig. 4.68–72 For consistency, recent approaches have centered on combining the development of the oxide layer with the subsequent preparation of the Si film, such as via utilizing PECVD or LPCVB chambers.73–75 In 2015, Moldovan et al. used three oxidation methods: HNO3 (nitric acid at 110 °C); DIO3 (ozone in deionized water); and UV/O3 (ultraviolet ozone) to prepare ultra-thin tunneling oxide layers and they characterized these based on iVOC.68 The results showed that when the substrate was an n-type Si wafer, the iVOC values of the passivation layers obtained via different preparation methods after high-temperature annealing were higher than 720 mV, while the iVOC values of textured samples were also higher than 710 mV. After a series of subsequent optimization steps, the highest iVOC value was 743 mV and the J0 density was 0.5 fA cm−2. In 2017, Stegemann et al. studied different methods for preparing the tunneling oxide layer: WCO-HCl (80 °C diluted hydrochloric acid solution oxidation); WCO-NAOS (boiling HNO3 solution oxidation); PO (300 °C, plasma oxidation of N2 and O2 mixed gas via PECVD); TPO (high vacuum radio frequency system, neutral atomic oxygen plasma oxidation); TO (thermal oxidation at 850 °C); and RTO (argon mixed with oxygen at 950 °C, rapid thermal oxidation).76 The stoichiometric ratios were obtained via X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) fitting. It was observed that all the methods, except thermal oxidation (TO), had good inhibitory effects on the formation of low-valent silicon oxides (Si+, Si2+, and Si3+). To measure the passivation properties of each oxide layer, changes in Dit were measured via surface photo-voltage spectroscopy (SPV) before and after forming gas annealing (FGA) treatment. The Dit value at the interface of SiOx/Si tended to decrease after FGA treatment due to the saturated suspension bonding of hydrogen. The Dit values of the oxide layers prepared via WCO-HCl, RTO, and TPO were all below 2 × 1012 cm2 eV−1.
 Fig. 4  The recombination properties of poly-Si-based passivating contacts generated by a variety of techniques. Reproduced with permission;77 copyright: 2021, Elsevier. The plots show the recombination current density J0 and upper limit voltage VUL values for (A) n+ and (B) p+ poly-Si obtained when using various approaches for growing the interfacial oxide. 
There are two possibilities regarding the oxide layer thickness: (1) an ultra-thin oxide layer is present;34 or (2) a moderately thick layer is present, which means that insufficient tunneling occurs and pinholes are required to enable smooth carrier transport.40 Dopant diffusion occurs during the annealing process in both circumstances. In the first case, the shallow diffused layer may boost the tunneling current, but in the second case, this layer will minimize recombination near pinholes.57,60 Although the potential of the TOPCon concept has been recognized, certain fundamental concepts relating to the interfacial oxide remain hotly debated (thickness, stoichiometry, and the charge transport mechanism). Numerical simulation findings support the widespread belief that direct tunneling and defect-aided tunneling are the two primary routes for carrier transport through an ultrathin oxide layer.60,78,79 However, other researchers hypothesized that carrier transport through pinholes may account for a portion of carrier transport in the oxide.61,80 It is commonly established that the thickness of SiOx plays a critical role in determining the transport mechanism. In a situation with ultra-thin SiOx (<1.7 nm), traditional tunneling models can adequately explain charge carrier transport, implying that tunneling effects predominate.36 Tunneling, on the other hand, cannot account for the low junction resistance values seen in SiOx samples with thicknesses of more than 2 nm, indicating that tunneling is not the only process responsible for the TOPCon contact response in the case of thick oxides. For situations with thicker SiOx, considerable evidence suggests that the charge-carrier mechanism depends primarily on direct pinhole-based transport, since thicker oxides help to reduce tunneling currents.61 It is important to note that the annealing conditions impact the pinhole size and density in addition to the SiOx thickness, since the transportation mechanisms of these junctions depend heavily on these two parameters. Additionally, both transport modes have been shown to coexist for a thin SiOx layer containing pinholes.81 In 2016, a predictive model was proposed that was capable of predicting two distinct operating regimes.61 Log(J0) grows linearly with a reduction in log(ρc) if the pinhole density is greater than 1 × 109 cm−2. However, J0 no longer relies on the pinhole density when the density is less than 1 × 107 cm−2; instead, J0 is completely reliant on the recombination behavior. In both operating regimes, Green et al. predicted comparable changes, but there is a distinct difference at the hole density border.80,82 Indeed, both theories are applicable to some extent, and the impact is dependent on the arrangement of junctions. It is clear from the above discussion that a complete theory of carrier transport is almost impossible to formulate. Despite the many attempts, there is still a need for further information regarding the transport mechanism and the inherent dependency of the device on pinhole creation and SiOx thickness. Additionally, for devices containing pinholes, much research has focused on the transport mechanism, but little attention has been devoted to how pinholes are formed; however, this is critical for controlling the transport behavior of passivating contacts and therefore improving conversion efficiencies. To better understand the dynamic interactions between local pinholes and their surroundings, Yang et al. performed comprehensive experiments and simulations, including investigating pinhole creation and charge-carrier transport mechanisms.83 Following the film dynamics throughout the pinhole creation process revealed that tension caused by thermal expansion was most likely the cause of SiOx film fracture. After performing numerical investigations, it was discovered that direct pinhole transport is combined with tunneling charge-carrier transport at poly-Si/SiOx/Si junctions. As seen in Fig. 5, the morphology of the oxide layer is clearly affected by the annealing process, as shown via TEM and EDS studies carried out to assess the film quality and identify the presence of pinholes. Fig. 5F reveals the formation mechanism of pinholes during the heating step, poly-Si and SiOx films and Si substrates progressively expand outward as the annealing temperature increases. Compared with SiOx films, which have a lower thermal expansion coefficient (α), Si substrates and poly-Si films expand more, resulting in tensile stress in the former and compressive stress in the latter. As the SiOx layer is thin, increasing tensile stress first induces concave distortion, followed by SiOx fracture; this is problematic for thick Si substrates and poly-Si films. Pinholes may be formed when SiOx films fracture to relieve or discharge accumulated tension. The reversal of this process happens during the cooling step of annealing. When the annealing temperature is lowered, Si substrates and poly-Si films shrink inward more than SiOx films, causing tensile stress in the former and compressive stress in the latter. Stress in SiOx films can be eased via speeding up SiOx film cracking, resulting in an increase in pinholes.83
 Fig. 5  The appearance of pinholes and the formation mechanism. Reproduced with permission;83 copyright: 2021, Elsevier. (A)–(C) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of TOPCon structures after high-temperature annealing with Ta = (A) 760 °C, (B) 820 °C, and (C) 950 °C. (D) Local energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) profiles. (E) The variation of the mass fractions of Si and O elements with depth. (F) Diagrams showing the mechanism of pinhole formation. 
One of the primary gettering sinks in the poly-Si/SiOx structure has been found to be the poly-Si layer, which is either substantially P-doped or contains electrically inert B complexes (a boron-rich layer or B–Si precipitates).84 The poly-Si gettering sink is protected from metal impurities by the thin SiOx interlayer, which acts as a diffusion barrier and has a significant impact on the gettering rate.85 There are a variety of ways to develop SiOx, and each has a distinct effect on the density, stoichiometry, and integrity (the creation of pinholes). This results in various SiOx interlayer blocking strengths after high-temperature formation.85 By and large, the blocking strength rises as the oxide thickness, stoichiometry, and pinhole density decrease.85–87
Thermal SiOx has the best passivation performance, but its usage in large-scale manufacturing is limited owing to the high thermal budget based on a comprehensive assessment of the various approaches used to develop or deposit an ultrathin SiOx layer for emitter surface passivation.88 Thermally generated SiOx provides a good surface passivation layer regardless of the wafer doping type. Thermal oxidation at high temperatures (∼1000 °C) may, nevertheless, cause significant bulk lifetime deterioration, particularly in multi-crystalline Si wafers. Low throughput and high cost restrict the industrial use of thermally produced oxides. Sodium hypochlorite solution (NCPRE-oxide)-based chemical oxide passivation at low temperatures (∼40 °C) has been presented as practical for industrial-scale deployment because of its low cost, low thermal budget, ease of waste disposal, and single-component and safe chemical preparation.89 NaOCl is employed to produce the oxide film in this procedure. The solution is homogenous due to the single-component chemical procedure, which aided the uniform formation of a SiOx layer over Si. This resulted in a 4 mV increase in VOC and a 0.3% increase in absolute efficiency. The findings demonstrate the feasibility of this novel low-cost chemical oxidation technique for industrial-scale applications. Additionally, this approach may be investigated as a viable option for growing a SiOx layer in TOPCon devices, reducing background plating during Ni–Cu metallization and reducing the influence of potential-induced deterioration (PID).
When the poly-Si layer is annealed at temperatures of 800–1000 °C, dopant diffusion into the c-Si bulk occurs. Increased Auger recombination and enhanced majority transport through the SiOx film arise due to the doping profile.57 As a result, the doping profile must be carefully regulated to strike a balance between these two effects. It was discovered that the kind of tunnel oxide used has a significant impact on the thermal stability of the TOPCon system and on in-diffusion and the consequent doping profile.68,90,91 The use of PECVD SiOxNy layers might be an attractive approach for controlling the final doping pattern. Their practical utilization in n-type TOPCon devices was shown in recent papers, realizing very low J0 values of 2–3 fA cm−2.92,93 Moreover, structures with SiOxNy demonstrated improved firing stability; this is likely owing to enhanced Si–H bond energies caused by the insertion of N, which lowers the amount of H emitted from the interface during the process of firing.94 To obtain the same level of surface passivation for TOPCon with different doping types, the plasma oxidation method for producing ultra-thin interfacial oxides seems like an interesting low-temperature alternative to thermal oxidation. To keep the surface passivation level high, it is assumed that nitrogen is incorporated into the SiOx film during plasma oxidation. When fabricating bifacial TOPCon solar cells with a lean production flow, plasma oxidation provides the advantage of single-sided layer formation. A single high-temperature annealing step may be used to alter the oxide properties to satisfy the demands of the dopant species while avoiding the probable degradation of one side.
The development of an industrial technique capable of producing a high-quality, homogeneous, and inexpensive SiOx layer is important for the commercial manufacturing of TOPCon solar cells. A wet-chemical method that combines high dependability, ease of control, and high throughput is a viable choice for SiOx film preparation. While both HNO3 and ozone water are recognized for use in wet-chemical approaches for growing tunneling layers, the former is often used in research publications due to its better oxide layer generation abilities.96 According to Moldovan's study, enhancing the solution oxidation capacity aids in improving the quality of the oxide layer, resulting in improved surface passivation.68,97 Generally, increasing the temperature of a chemical solution is an efficient strategy to increase its oxidation capacity. Raising the temperature, on the other hand, is incompatible with the commercial application of established wet-chemical processes. This is because hot HNO3 at temperatures above 90 °C is normally needed to generate high-quality SiOx films; nevertheless, it volatilizes so rapidly that the acid composition changes over time, reducing the repeatability, homogeneity, and quality of SiOx. Tong et al. established a novel wet-chemical approach for growing a high-quality tunnel layer via combining HNO3 (68 wt%) with H2SO4 (98 wt%) at a 3:1 volume ratio (60 °C).98Via substituting mixed-acid-prepared SiOx for HNO3-prepared SiOx, an increase in iVOC and a decrease in J0 were achieved. Additionally, compared to HNO3, the mixed acid demonstrated increased stability and reproducibility.
Interestingly, Pham et al. proposed the concept of a quantum well composed of a stack of SiOx/nanocrystalline silicon (nc-Si)/SiOx sandwiched between poly-Si and c-Si to improve the passivation performance.99 During high-temperature annealing, dopants from a heavily doped poly-Si layer may penetrate into c-Si and reduce the quality of surface passivation. With its double SiOx layer, the quantum well works as an airtight barrier, effectively preventing this. The nc-Si phase placed between the two layers of SiOx may aid carrier movement or tunneling through SiOx for collection. Finally, this contact with the quantum well resulted in an obvious enhancement in the passivation properties. The findings demonstrate the efficacy of this novel passivating contact idea and open a path for future performance enhancements in the area of c-Si solar cells.
Numerous studies have shown that efficiency of up to 21.9% can be obtained using p-TOPCon techniques.100 It should be noted that the passivation performance attained with p+-poly-Si is often poor, which is a barrier to fully exploiting the potential of poly-Si-based contacts, particularly p+-poly-Si contacts that are used in solar cell systems.101 One method of generating high-efficiency hole-selective poly-Si-based passivating contacts is to substitute an AlOx tunnel layer with high negative charge for the standard SiOx tunnel layer with moderate positive charge. It has been shown that when AlOx is annealed at 425 °C, and at 800 °C (a common deposition temperature for poly-Si film), AlOx material forms with a high negative charge density.102–104 In addition to improving passivation, the tunnel layer with a high fixed negative charge will boost the hole extraction capacity of the passivated contacts formed via this process.105 Several researchers have previously shown that AlOx formed via atomic layer deposition (ALD) can be used to passivate connections, resulting in much higher efficiencies. For example, using an AlOx layer and p+-poly-Si as the capping layer, Zheng et al. developed rear emitter solar cells with a hole-selective AlOx tunnel layer passivating contact, obtaining up to 20.5% device efficiency.104 Ultrathin AlOx tunnel layers, such as AlOx/p+-poly-Si passivated contacts, were shown by Kaur et al. to improve the hole extraction selectivity in an otherwise conventionally processed solar cell (with a phosphorous diffused front contact). It was observed that the AlOx tunnel layer thickness, thermal activation conditions, and ambient conditions had obvious impacts on the efficiency and selectivity of the examined passivated contacts.106 Furthermore, in terms of n-type c-Si substrates, a comparative study was conducted using ultrathin ALD AlOx, wet-chemically prepared SiOx, or a combination of the two as the tunnel layer in TOPCon structures.107 Surprisingly, it was discovered that AlOx and AlOx/SiOx did not offer superior passivation compared with SiOx. While investigating the causes, it was discovered that AlOx, particularly the AlOx/SiOx bilayer, considerably boosted B diffusion while suppressing P diffusion. The AlOx and AlOx/SiOx regions were also discovered to have a notable concentration of B, which could serve as a reservoir for B diffusion. Additionally, AlOx/SiOx improved B diffusion and slowed P diffusion through free carrier assistance extrinsic diffusion. Auger recombination and recombination through B–O pair defects were both increased due to the increased B diffusion, which reduced the quality of p-TOPCon passivation. Another factor that may have harmed the passivation quality is that Al diffused into the c-Si substrate; this can cause deep-level defects and significantly increase SRH (Shockley–Read–Hall) recombination.
3.2. The heavily doped poly-Si layer
The heavily doped poly-Si is likewise important. Typically, the roles of poly-Si include: (1) contact, since varying the poly-Si doping concentration may alter Φm and result in varying selectivity; (2) acting as a barrier against metallization and in-diffusion, preventing SiOx from being destroyed and avoiding damaging the passivation properties; (3) gettering, enhancing the bulk quality; and (4) providing a field effect, resulting in the formation of a charge-rich area on the Si surface which can repel one kind of carrier.108
As illustrated in Fig. 6, the poly-Si thickness may have a considerable influence on the contact properties for a variety of reasons. To begin with, photons that have been absorbed by poly-Si are recombined (a tiny fraction of minority carriers produced in poly-Si may be gathered).110 The absorption coefficient of doped poly-Si is comparable to c-Si, and JSC loss due to this parasitic absorption was estimated to be ∼0.45 mA cm−2 for every 10 nm of poly-Si when put on the front side.111,112 Furthermore, free charge carriers in the poly-Si layer absorb infrared photons in a similar fashion to those in c-Si.111 For poly-Si in the rear side case, this loss happens as well, ranging from 0.3–0.5 mA cm−2 (related to doping) for poly-Si film with a thickness of 140 nm.113 As seen from Fig. 6, although increasing the thickness of poly-Si boosts the JSC loss, it also lowers J0, especially for n+ poly-Si layers in contact with screen-printed metal pastes. This trade-off is considered to hamper the application of poly-Si contacts on the sunward side of solar cells. To minimize optical losses, numerous groups have investigated diluting poly-Si film with trace amounts of oxygen or carbon, therefore extending the optical band gap (typically at the price of hampering the FF), or selectively thinning/etching the poly-Si layer in non-metallized areas.113–115
 Fig. 6  Poly-Si junction recombination and current losses in relation to the poly-Si thickness. Reproduced with permission;77 copyright: 2021, Elsevier. The evolution of J0 and VUL values for (A) n+ poly-Si and (B) p+ poly-Si with a change in the poly-Si thickness. Additionally, the predicted loss in short-circuit current density (JSC) when these layers are put on the front side is displayed on the top horizontal axis.109 
The electrical performance of the poly-Si/SiOx junction is strongly influenced by the poly-Si doping degree. Low dopant concentrations (<1019 cm−3) result in increased J0 and ρc values, while high dopant concentrations (>1020 cm−3) may result in severe oxide breakdown and dopant penetration into the c-Si absorber, leading to enhanced J0 values.58 An additional high-temperature annealing process, commonly done in a quartz furnace, is required to activate the dopants and recrystallize Si, except when thermal diffusion is utilized for doping. When it comes to poly-Si junction performance, factors like the activation temperature and duration have a significant impact on everything from the final doping profile to the crystallization degree of Si film and the management of the dopant tail in the c-Si substrate.116–118 Another option is to include the dopant activation phase in the firing process for screen-printed metallization. Firing is a quick thermal phase that involves a high temperature of ∼800 °C for a brief (<1 min) duration, significantly reducing the time required for dopant activation and diffusion and for recrystallization. Regardless of the consistency of the findings obtained utilizing various fabrication processes, as seen in Fig. 4 and 6, a constant tendency toward lower J0 values has been found for n-poly-Si junctions vs. p-poly-Si junctions. This is mostly due to dopant segregation; phosphorus has a substantially greater segregation coefficient at the TOPCon contact than boron119,120 The quantity of phosphorous diffusion into the tunnel layer and its ability to further reach the c-Si substrate are considerably reduced as a result. In contrast, boron-doped poly-Si layers often have high boron concentrations in both the tunnel oxide and the c-Si substrate; this may boost surface recombination and Auger recombination.65,71,112
In terms of the preparation of the poly-Si layer, many CVD and physical vapor deposition (PVD) methods can be employed effectively to prepare the Si film in the TOPCon technique. The predominant approach in industry is the LPCVD of poly-Si, which is achieved via thermally decomposing silane in low-pressure quartz tubes. However, since this is non-directional and poly-Si must be removed from one side of the wafer, the high homogeneity and consistency of this technique are partly offset.122 PECVD, a directional deposition method based on the plasma-based decomposition of the precursors at low temperatures, is widely used by current manufacturers to deposit SiNx, Al2O3, and SiOx layers with different functions, and the a-Si:H layer used in SHJ solar cells.123,124 Since a high hydrogen concentration is required for the application of such functional layers, blisters may appear inside the poly-Si layer, especially the relatively thick poly-Si layers that are required to survive damage during the firing process of metallization. However, researchers and equipment manufacturers are still compelled to incorporate PECVD into massive production lines because of its ability to deposit selectively on one side.125 Atmospheric-pressure CVD (APCVD) and hot-wire CVD (HWCVD) are two additional single-side CVD procedures which are employed to generate TOPCon structures, however, they are not as widely used.126–128 PVD methods like sputtering and electron beam evaporation show great promise as single-side deposition alternatives. Instead of using potentially harmful precursor gases, PVD has the advantage of being able to deposit thick films with little or no hydrogen content (thereby avoiding blistering), and PVD deposition occurs at a lower temperature than CVD (close to room temperature).129–131 Due to the inadequate passivation quality, PVD cannot be used to deposit poly-Si films in industry, despite being a fundamental aspect of the SHJ technique used to form transparent conductive oxides.132 The choice between PECVD and LPCVD has been discussed for a long time. LPCVD suffers from a number of problems: low film formation rates and difficulties in controlling uniformity; the inability to avoid a-Si wrap-around and the need to use additional equipment and processes to eliminate wrap-around; the need to often incorporate secondary phosphorus diffusion; and the need for regular maintenance downtime to replace the quartz tubes and carriers. PECVD deposits a-Si at a fast rate and enables in situ doping; PECVD produces slight and regular wrap-around areas on the sides of the wafer and on the front edge of the cell, but they are easy to remove; and PECVD deposits a-Si only on graphite boats, which can be cleaned periodically without quartz tube consumables and without the need for pre-plated quartz tubes. As shown in Fig. 7, Fraunhofer ISE has systematically studied the mass production costs of various existing TOPCon technical routes. Based on calculations, PECVD technology has superior potential for cost reduction on the premise that the unit consumption of silver paste continues to decrease and the efficiency of TOPCon cells continues to improve. Additionally, PECVD has significant appeal due to other characteristics, including single-sided deposition, in situ doping, the availability of industrial tools, the demonstration of the process in lab-size cells, and its application in large-area industrial cells and deposition modes.121 The advantages mentioned above ensure that tube PECVD is considered a very viable technology route. Numerous additional research institutions have reported findings comparable to those obtained with LPCVD when employing PECVD.67,70,74 In the research of F. Feldmann et al., it has been demonstrated that a PECVD system is capable of producing screen-printing-compatible TOPCon layers yielding recombination currents of ∼3 fA cm−2 and ∼200 fA cm−2 in the passivated and metallized regions, respectively.133 However, PECVD technology has not yet been truly mass-produced, and there are still key technical issues to be resolved.
 Fig. 7  All-in cell and all-in module costs and levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) values calculated for the bifacial p-PERC and n-TOPCon process pathways. Reproduced with permission;121 copyright: 2021, Elsevier. 
The poly-Si/SiOx structure, in contrast to SHJ devices, is generated at a high temperature of around 900 °C, as opposed to temperatures in the range of 200–300 °C, during the manufacturing process. Enabling simultaneous gettering effects during cell construction is possible because of the adequate impurity diffusion this results in.134
The accumulation of metal impurities in heavily doped poly-Si films was demonstrated to have a minor influence on the passivation quality of TOPCon structures under P and B doping.135 The Fe concentrations in poly-Si/SiOx structures may be reduced by many orders of magnitude following heavy P doping into the TOPCon structures, either through ex-situ thermal diffusion from the poly-Si surface or in situ doping during the poly-Si (or later a-Si) layer deposition period.136–138 Structures formed via the ion implantation and thermal treatment of poly-Si/SiOx materials have also been shown to increase the lifetimes of minority carriers in the bulk of float-zone, epitaxial, and cast-mono Si substrates.139–141 In the standard phosphorus diffusion process, for example, various gettering processes may be in play; therefore, it can be assumed that the doping strategy will simultaneously alter the gettering effects. As is the case with P doping, the gettering impact of B doping is primarily due to substantial B doping and related gettering processes. Effective gettering through B-doped areas is dependent on the development of electrically inactive B complexes, such as B-rich layers or B–Si precipitates.142
The incorporation of dopants may be accomplished in a number of ways, including in situ preparation alongside the Si layer, ion implantation, or thermal diffusion.40 To accomplish n-/p-type doping in situ, the most straightforward technique is to combine regulated rates of PH3 or B2H6/BCl3 with silane in LPCVD or PECVD. Aside from the fact that doped Si is one order of magnitude slower to deposit than undoped Si, the lateral homogeneity of in-situ-doped Si films is less than ideal.77In situ doping may be done during PVD via employing solid sources, such as a GaP thermal effusion cell for electron beam deposition or a B target for sputtering.132,143 Thermal diffusion is the most widely used ex-situ doping technique, since the furnace used for diffusion is prevalent in current industrial assembly lines, particularly for n-type doping with POCl3 sources.40,67,71 Alternatively, patterned doped areas may be formed using a liquid spin-on or spray-on dopant, dopant ink, or paste.144–146 Recently, a novel method for obtaining p-type poly-Si-based junctions utilizing a spin-on approach for varied combinations of Ga and B glass solutions was proposed; surface passivation after hydrogenation could be improved regardless of the Ga:B ratio.147 All thermal diffusion techniques have the benefit of simultaneously recrystallizing the Si layer and activating the dopants, obviating the need for a separate high-temperature phase.12 Although it has versatility and has resulted in encouraging lab-scale findings, ion implantation is difficult to deploy in the PV sector owing to its high operating and maintenance costs and difficulties in fulfilling ever-increasing throughput requirements. We emphasize, however, that plasma immersion ion implantation (PIII) has the potential to result in cost savings and increased throughput.146,148
A significant disadvantage of TOPCon technology lies in the extremely low bandgap of poly-Si, which will result in significant absorption losses when used on the front side. The features of heavily doped poly-Si (increasing carrier selectivity via forming excellent contacts) may also result in substantial free-carrier adsorption, which must still be addressed.149 Therefore, researchers have long tried to find carrier-selective candidates with better transparency. Interestingly, the optical performance of a material improves when it is alloyed with carbon or nitrogen.150,151 Additionally, it has been found that these doped n-poly-Si films manifest better passivating performance compared to their dopant-free counterparts. The main reason for the improved passivation quality is that additional integration inhibits the crystallization of poly-Si films, hence reducing the likelihood of blistering.152 A viable hypothesis is that oxygen incorporation has the good potential for reducing blisters, which is primarily due to a decrease in the interfacial area via inhibiting poly-Si crystallization and providing stress-release pathways, similar to the carbon/nitrogen doping scenario.153 In addition, compared to doping sources such as CH4 and NH3, CO2 has the advantages of high safety, low cost, and ease of handling. Recent research has shown the feasibility of an n-c-Si/SiOx/n-poly-SiOx rear passivating contact system, and a prepared n-type TOPCon cell achieved 22.62% efficiency.154
However, the efficiency is severely hampered by recombination losses in the bulk and surface (doped front emitter). Numerous studies on the fabrication of TOPCon structures have recently revealed new approaches for minimizing parasitic absorption losses associated with the poly-Si layer.108 Etching the poly-Si layer, using suitable doping profiles or techniques, and adjusting the annealing processes can all contribute significantly to increasing the performances of TOPCon solar cells.
3.3. Surface treatment
Finally, hydrogenation can enhance the passivation quality, since atomic hydrogen apparently passivates electrically active defects at the interface of c-Si/SiOx (interface traps) and within the poly-Si film.155,156 Hydrogen may be injected atomically via hydrogen plasma treatment (RPHP) or capping may be carried out with a hydrogen-rich transparent conductive oxide or dielectric film, such as SiNx, Al2O3, or combinations thereof.157,158 Passivation is activated via post-deposition heat treatment when utilizing PECVD SiNx, a method that has the additional benefit of being part of already established industrial processes. Passivation was shown to be very successful when ultra-thin interfacial SiOx layers were capped with heavily doped poly-Si and then passivated with a SiNx layer. Additionally, the firing step may be utilized to liberate hydrogen from the SiNx film; this procedure can significantly improve the stability of the properties of TOPCon structures.157–159 FGA delivers molecular hydrogen; however, it does not improve surface passivation much, particularly in passivating contacts on textured surfaces. Specifically, unpaired Si valence electrons produce interface traps in the Si band gap at the Si/SiOx contact, tending to cause recombination. They manifest themselves as paramagnetic point defects, such as Pb on (111)-Si or Pb0 and Pb1 on (100)-Si. Pb or Pb0 defects are formed on Si atoms that are back-bonded to three other Si atoms, while Pb1 defects are found on Si atoms bonded to two Si atoms and one oxygen atom.160 Hydrogen has the ability to passivate such defects, lowering Dit by around two orders of magnitude.161 Non-radiative defects inside poly-Si are passivated via hydrogenation, as are dangling bonds in the residual amorphous Si phase following the partial crystallization of the amorphous film during the annealing process.156
The capping layer structural composition has a significant impact on the hydrogenation efficiency of TOPCon structures capped with SiNx. During SiNx deposition, for example, the H concentration and refractive index n may be changed via altering the flow ratio of NH3 and SiH4. When n > 2, TOPCon structures with SiNx capping exhibit higher firing stability on textured surfaces.162 Effective surface recombination velocities, Seff, below 1 cm s−1 have been achieved when Al2O3 has been applied to c-Si or SiO2 surfaces, where interface passivation is heavily dependent on both the post-deposition annealing temperature and the microstructure of the layer.163 The quantity of hydrogen in Al2O3 films generated via ALD, for example, is governed by the deposition temperature. Because abundant hydrogen is available in the deposited film at low deposition temperatures, a relatively low annealing temperature is necessary to enable hydrogen effusion and to thermally activate hydrogenation.164,165 Both Al2O3 and SiNx require a temperature budget to initiate hydrogenation, which may be provided either during the deposition process or during postdeposition annealing.166 It is probable that hydrogen effusion from the Si/SiOx interface and/or the poly-Si layer results in surface passivation when objects with SiNx capping are exposed to long-term annealing at temperatures above the deposition temperature. When poly-Si layers are directly capped with Al2O3, hydrogenation can remain stable at elevated annealing temperatures and for long durations. When Al2O3 is included in multi-layer stacks of Al2O3/SiNx, it may improve the passivation quality and provide increased thermal stability when fired at temperatures up to 825 °C. Al2O3 sandwiched between the poly-Si and SiNx layers presumably works as a hydrogen effusion barrier and inhibits the presence of blisters inside the stack.166
The presence of hydrogen at the SiOx interface is well-known to help with passivation, however, it has been shown that too much hydrogen may actually degrade poly-Si passivation and raise J0.52 As depicted in Fig. 8, an optimal range exists regarding the density of hydrogen. The deactivation of phosphorus dopants and the development of recombination sites with different elements have all been demonstrated to occur when hydrogen levels are too high. Vacancy-hydrogen complexes have also been found to form when hydrogen levels are too high.167–171 It has also been postulated that hydrogen itself might promote recombination, perhaps leading to a decrease in the carrier lifetime; this could serve as a plausible explanation regarding the influence of excess hydrogen found in current research. There is some evidence that hydrogen diffusion during firing and the interaction of hydrogen with oxide interface defects may help explain the overall passivation quality of fired TOPCon structures. The presence of hydrogen is advantageous in the passivation of defects, but an excessive amount of hydrogen might degrade poly-Si passivation.
 Fig. 8  
J
0 values determined after firing with changes in the anticipated hydrogen density. Reproduced with permission;52 copyright: 2021, American Chemical Society. Unless otherwise specified, all samples were fired at 800 °C and coated with industrial SiNx film. 
It was recently established that an annealing environment including water vapor may passivate electrically active defects as well.172 The most important aspect of this breakthrough is that it provides a simple and cost-effective approach for hydrogenation. Furthermore, Andrea et al. proved that high-temperature annealing and hydrogenation may both be done in one firing phase.100 Interestingly, conductive hydrogenated silicon carbide (SiCx:H) has been developed in a TOPCon structure for hydrogenation and carrier transportation; hydrogen accumulation in the SiOx layer was shown to be critical for passivation, limiting recombination and contributing to the excellent passivation performance.54
4. Technical challenges and prospects
4.1. Outlook
The high efficiency potential of TOPCon cells and their compatibility with current process flows have made this technique particularly appealing for industrial use. However, the mass manufacturing of solar cells is widely recognized to have a number of stringent criteria.173,174 As a result, generating dependable and high-throughput cell manufacturing processes is critical for the assembly-line-based industrial production of TOPCon cells.175 Industrial TOPCon cells have an n-type base with an n-type TOPCon passivated rear side. The boron emitter on the front side is passivated using an Al2O3/SiNx stack. The back side is protected using SiNx film that acts as a hydrogen source and enhances the optical characteristics of the solar cell. i-TOPCon cells are currently being researched to obtain an optimal industrial process method; this is considered as comparable to the situation facing PERC technology after its commercial debut in 2014, as noted by Chen et al.176Fig. 9 summarizes the many features and research areas involved in the manufacture of industrial TOPCon devices. As universities, research institutions, and businesses have all seen extremely encouraging results, TOPCon is a strong competitor for inclusion in next-generation high-efficiency solar cells. Currently, the emphasis of the industry seems to be on the industrialization of TOPCon cells, and cooperative efforts from paste suppliers and cell makers have hastened the development of the metallization process, which is a crucial feature. Compared to PERC, silver consumption is almost doubled, n-type wafers are used, and 1–2 more steps are added to the process sequence. Therefore, reducing cost and increasing efficiency are still the main themes of TOPCon cell development. The following kinds of studies can be used to move researched alternatives from theory to practice. (1) Fundamental research into poly-Si junctions and transparent conductive oxides, such as electrical studies of the transport and recombination of carriers; optical studies of contacts and transparent conductive oxides, notably relating to parasitic absorption and the assessment of techniques to increase transparency; structural investigations, with particular attention focused on the SiOx film; and current transport simulations, to fine-tune current processes. (2) Research into the integration of poly-Si junctions into mainstream cells, including investigations into numerous ways of producing poly-Si junctions; assessments of innovative alternative cell architectures; process improvements and alignment with current manufacturing production processes; and the exploration of related tandem structures. (3) Research into evaluating innovative module connecting techniques.
 Fig. 9  A summary of the technology choices for the manufacture of TOPCon devices in contrast to the scenarios facing PERC devices in 2014. Reproduced with permission;95 copyright: 2021, Wiley-Blackwell. 
4.2. Metallization
The metallization of TOPCon cells in the laboratory commonly involves the evaporation of Ag or Al. However, evaporation is not currently regarded as a cost-effective metallization method, and there are more economically viable alternatives. Screen-printing and rapid firing are the most promising metallization methods. The metallization of cells is an irreplaceable technological step.
According to PERC manufacturing expertise, the screen printing of silver or aluminum-silver pastes is a preferred method here. Developing metallization pastes for poly-Si layer contact and minimizing the metal-induced complexation rates are challenging tasks for the following main reasons. Firstly, reducing the metal-induced recombination rate is very demanding due to the properties of metal–semiconductor interactions. Secondly, the poly-Si layers, which play an important role in the contact properties of the paste, are significantly different. The key factors affecting the performances of polysilicon surface pastes are as follows. (1) The thickness of poly-Si. From the perspective of the absorption rate, ultra-thin poly-Si layer is preferred, but its metal-induced loss is more serious. In screen printing and sintering metallization processes, thicker poly-Si layers are usually more advantageous. As long as the poly-Si layer is located on the back of the cell, it is completely acceptable for the film layer to be slightly thicker. (2) The doping concentration of the poly-Si layer. In order to form good contact between the metal and poly-Si, a sufficient doping concentration must be achieved. Whether the poly-Si layer is doped in situ at the time of deposition or readily doped after deposition, the surface resistivity can be used as a valid metric. The typical surface resistivity of poly-Si layers is higher than that of conventional diffusion layers, but this is usually only possible for ultrathin poly-Si layers. (3) Surface morphology. The substrate surface used for poly-Si deposition can be textured or smooth. Recent research shows that both types of surfaces have excellent J0 values. (4) High-temperature resistance. The ability to withstand higher temperatures is one of the advantages of poly-Si. However, the rate of metal-induced recombination on poly-Si layer surfaces is also a function of temperature and it usually accelerates with increasing temperature. (5) The uniformity of the poly-Si layer. The homogeneity of the poly-Si layer usually increases with increasing thickness. This has an effect on the contact performance, as inhomogeneous poly-Si layers are prone to suffer more severe local damage during the metallization process. For untested cell designs, different metallization approaches are being explored because of the issue of silver consumption and the impact of the price of silver on manufacturing expenses. Another issue with existing screen-printing pastes is the need for relatively thick poly-Si films to avoid excessive recombination.177,178 Plating contacts onto TOPCon structures might be an attractive alternative to screen printing. In reality, a process sequence including the laser ablation of SiNx and the follow-up electroplating of nickel, copper, and silver caps has shown promising results when the poly-Si thickness is less than 100 nm, with extremely minimal passivation damage being reported.179–181 Furthermore, when the majority of silver is replaced with copper, the total cost of development may be greatly reduced compared to screen printing.182 To test the practicality of laser ablation and plating when compared with reference devices plated via screen-printing, this method was further applied to industrial devices.183 The plated cells feature a slight rise in VOC and FF values and a considerable increase in JSC, resulting in an efficiency improvement of almost 0.4%abs.183 The decreased shadowing of the metal fingers and the reduction of the opening width are primarily responsible for this increase in efficiency. The large-scale usage of low-cost plating methods is hampered by environmental concerns and restrictions (mostly due to waste management). Additional advances in the metallization of poly-Si junctions should be imminent, and techniques like the use of multi-busbars and smart wires are anticipated to play a part in this.
As an anti-reflection coating and a source of adequate lateral conductivity for charge carrier collection at the metal fingers, transparent conductive oxides are important contact materials for TOPCon devices in both-side-contacted solar cells with extremely thin poly-Si layers. The sputtering procedure often used to deposit transparent conductive oxides is known to reduce the effectiveness of surface passivation. The following are some of the findings relating to TOPCon; it has been shown that (1) textured samples are more vulnerable to sputter damage than planar ones, and (2) thicker poly-Si layers reduce the detrimental effects of sputter damage. The crucial c-Si/SiOx contact is protected from UV light by the poly-Si layer, which has a penetration depth of less than 10 nm. It has been discovered that sputter damage cannot be repaired at low temperatures of around 200 °C, unlike in SHJ technology, and instead a higher curing temperature of about 350 °C is needed. Because of this, charge carriers have a harder time moving across the TOPCon/transparent conductive oxide interface.
4.3. Surface texturing
Surface texturing, which is required for light trapping, also presents a barrier to the application of poly-Si junctions. It is worth noting that for TOPCon devices, there are differences between AlOx prepared via the PECVD method and via the ALD method. TOPCon is passivated based on the texture of the boron surface, and the surface morphology and surface area are different; therefore, the fast growth rate obtained using the PECVD two-in-one method and the lack of denseness throughout will lead to a passivation effect that is over an order of magnitude lower compared with an ALD-obtained surface. Bifacial cells, which have textured surfaces on both sides, are becoming more popular, and they must be considered. Due to the existence of sharp tips and edges and deep valleys, passivating pyramidally textured surfaces is a difficult task. Regardless of the SiOx growth process or the Si deposition methodology, the J0 values of TOPCon structures on textured substrates are roughly 103 greater than those of planar (100) substrates. The greater defect density at the SiOx/c-Si interface, thickness nonuniformities in SiOx and poly-Si films, and non-uniform dopant diffusion profiles across the pyramidal features all contribute to the enhanced J0 values.63,184J0 can be improved without sacrificing too much reflectivity via lightly etching the pyramid tips.21,185J0 values < 5 fA cm−2 have been achieved for poly-Si passivated textures using an improved diffusion technique and hydrogenation from SiNx.21,157 Perhaps the modest polishing of pyramid tips can help to optimize J0 without sacrificing too much reflectivity.186 Additionally, factors such as the texturing method used and the selection of texturing additives directly affect the regularity of the pyramid structures and the reflectivity of Si wafer, thus determining JSC and the ultimate cell efficiency. Fabricating high-performance TOPCon structures on the front textured surfaces of Si-based solar cells is a problem that must be solved on the road to industrialization. To solve this problem, Ding et al. used LPCVD equipment to prepare a TOPCon structure.187 By fully optimizing the thickness of poly-Si, the drive-in temperature and time of phosphorus atoms, and the crystallinity of poly-Si before and after annealing, it was found that a TOPCon structure under suitable conditions can not only improve the collection efficiency of carriers by metal electrodes, but it can also maintain superior interface passivation characteristics.
4.4. Industrial process routes
We can observe from the process of the upgrading of TOPCon solar cell efficiency records worldwide in recent years that although the development of lab-scale cells has increased greatly, large-scale manufacturing progress has slowed dramatically. This is mostly because present TOPCon technology is still in its infancy, with the process remaining rather complicated. However, manufacturing line efficiency is already increasing dramatically, owing mostly to the installation of main grid technology, which will result in even larger efficiency gains, and the implementation of certain new procedures that will streamline the process, thus lowering process costs. The cost of TOPCon solar cells has not decreased recently and, therefore, the most urgent challenge is to minimize costs via simplifying the preparation process. TOPCon devices, as a platform technology, can be combined with IBCs, perovskites, and other technologies to form tandem cells in the future, and the limit value of conversion efficiency will be further expanded, showing great potential. At present, TOPCon cells are in the peak period of expanding production, and tube PECVD, LPCVD, and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PEALD) devices coexist in the TOPCon industry. Device equipment manufacturers have laid out different technical paths, and benefits will arise from PERC production line trends when it comes to upgrading TOPCon cells in the next three years. The preparation of oxide passivation contacts is an additional process during TOPCon manufacture based on PERCs, and this is also the core process of TOPCon design. There are four main technical routes, namely LPCVD intrinsic + phosphorus expansion; LPCVD ion implantation; PECVD in situ doping; and PVD in situ doping. Three of the distinct manufacturing processes for TOPCon solar cells are as follows. (1) Poly-Si films are prepared using LPCVD in conjunction with a normal total diffusion technique. LPCVD is used to generate rear SiO2 and poly-Si layers in this method. An intrinsic amorphous Si layer is applied after the LPCVD-produced SiO2 film, which is formed between 600 and 700 °C. This is followed by etching, which removes poly-Si from the front surface, and then one-sided diffusion, which has an annealing impact on the film since the diffusion temperature may surpass 850 °C, making it possible for the film to be annealed without a separate annealing step. This single-sided etching approach must be carefully followed, since it thins down the original front surface PN junction, and it is necessary to remove the phosphor silica glass on the back surface after etching. Additionally, backside Si coating may not result in proper crystallization during the phosphorus diffusion method, necessitating pre-diffusion crystallization annealing at a higher temperature. The electrodes are then prepared via applying a standard double-sided coating and screen-printing procedure once the previous step has been finished. The Al2O3 layer generated by the ALD process is favorable for n-type TOPCon cells, where Al2O3 and SiNx are needed at the front and must be extremely thin and thoroughly passivated. (2) Poly-Si films are prepared using LPCVD in conjunction with boron expansion and phosphorus ion implantation. Phosphorus expansion is used in the above-mentioned method while ion implantation is used in this one. It is not necessary to execute single-sided etching in order to remove the bypassed layer of intrinsic poly-Si on the positive surface due to the fact that the doped ions will not bypass this when implanted by means of ion implantation, which is done on just one side. It is more expensive, but the bypass issue is lessened via using ion implantation equipment. (3) A PECVD method can be used for the fabrication of poly-Si layers using in situ doping. Many businesses have introduced procedures for creating amorphous Si layers via PECVD in recent years; this allows for the simultaneous deposition of SiOx and amorphous Si films with the same PECVD equipment, followed by annealing for crystallization. Only 9 process steps are required for PECVD compared to 11 for diffusion or ion implantation due to the low temperature and single-sided deposition processes.
4.5. Revelation of internal mechanisms
Progress has also been achieved in the study of TOPCon solar cell mechanisms and process specifics, offering technological assistance for the optimization of industrial processes. Information has been obtained in the following areas. (1) Factors that influence the properties of a passivated tunnel layer. The phrases “passivation properties” and “conductive properties” are mutually exclusive. Previously, it was believed that the oxide tunneling junction was entirely passivated and that no doping occurs in the adjacent c-Si region inside the oxide layer, but recent research indicates that dopant atoms may pass through the oxide layer and reach the c-Si region after high-temperature annealing. Dopant atoms cannot permeate into the c-Si area when the oxide layer thickness is high enough, and thus pinholes must be created thereafter via high temperature annealing to improve conductivity. A study conducted by Feldmann et al. found a considerable drop in the passivation effect when wet nitric acid was applied, but thermal oxidation was shown to still have strong passivation qualities even at higher annealing temperatures.188 (2) Issues with metal contact. Another point of contention is the link between metal sintering and the thickness of the poly-Si layer. Overly thin poly-Si layers allow metal atoms to immediately penetrate c-Si, diminishing the passivation quality. Overly thick layers not only raise deposition costs but also cause light absorption to be reduced or to not occur at all. The concept of POLO is an excellent example of this. One method for resolving this inconsistency is to construct ultra-thin poly-Si film with transparent conductive oxide on the exterior to improve the conductive characteristics. However, the introduction of a transparent conductive oxide needs to properly address a number of issues. (Poly-Si surfaces can be damaged by magnetron sputtering; deposition and annealing processes should be optimized to ensure a low ρc value; the transparent conductive oxide should be optimized as a H source; a high iVOC value should be maintained after annealing; additional annealing processes should be circumvented; and the sintering temperature of the electrodes must not be higher than the melting point of the transparent conductive oxide, which is quite low. A silver paste for medium-to-low temperatures may face larger challenges than in the case of SHJ cells but not more than in the case of PERC cells, which typically operate at temperatures of between 250 and 350 °C.) As evaporation-produced metal electrodes are used in all laboratory-scale high-efficiency TOPCon solar cells, boosting the efficiency of industrial TOPCon solar cells is a considerably more difficult task. (3) With three additional processes and the finding that boron expansion needs more diffusion furnaces, a TOPCon device has a 10% higher capital expenditure (CAPEX) than a PERC device because of the three new machines required. The higher cost of double-sided silver paste and increased equipment expenses are the primary reasons for the higher operating costs of TOPCon solar cells compared to PERC solar cells.189 The following must be done in order for TOPCon solar cells to be competitive: reduce the number of working steps, decrease machine costs, minimize silver paste consumption, and boost efficiency. We should expect to see more competition in the market for TOPCon solar cells if they can combine efficiency with minimal attenuation, low temperature coefficients, and high bifacial rates. If this is the case, they will have lower LCOE values than PERCs. (4) Although much attention has been paid to the mechanisms of charge-carrier transport within oxides and the hydrogenation process, the conclusions obtained are not uniform and are still being debated. To further increase the applicability of so-called passivating contacts, it is necessary to deepen the obtained understanding.
4.6. Selection of the solar-cell structure and type
The development of large-size and thin Si wafers will help costs to continue to fall. Si wafers for TOPCon cells have increased in size from 166 mm to 182 mm and 210 mm, while the thickness continues to be decreased from the current value of 165 μm. In addition, silver paste cost reduction is also an important part of the quantitative development of the TOPCon technique, and leading companies have already realized the process technology of fine-line + multiple main grids. Aside from n-type cells, poly-Si junctions have been predominantly utilized to improve p-type Si wafers, which will continue to be used for many more years, particularly given the trend to move away from boron toward gallium as the preferred dopant, which may result in less in-field degradation. As a result, it is important to figure out how poly-Si connections are inserted onto p-type Si wafers. The optimal device architecture still needs to be explored. As the current world record conversion efficiency of 26.7% for Si solar cells demonstrates, an IBC structure enables the best conversion efficiency under conventional testing circumstances.8 A realistic efficiency of 25.8% has been determined by researchers for large-scale IBC cells having TOPCon structures on both polarity sides.30 To develop IBC cells more similar to PERC cells, ISFH researchers employed screen-printed Al paste to construct the rear p+ area, together with interdigitated n+ poly-Si areas, obtaining 22.6% efficiency on the laboratory scale.190 However, the use of albedo-collecting bifacial devices is becoming more widely acknowledged as a clear route to reducing LCOE, making traditional two-sided cell layouts more appealing for industrial applications. Improving the POLO structure is also an effective route for improving the efficiencies of TOPCon cells. The thicker poly-Si layer of POLO cells will lead to excessive self-absorption, while a layer that is too thin will lead to electrode burn-through. The use of a transparent conductive oxide layer in the outer areas of POLO cells can reduce the poly-Si layer thickness and circumvent the problem of burn-through. However, the transparent conductive oxide temperature is low and low-temperature pastes have to be used.
4.7. Laser-related applications
In the development of TOPCon devices, lasers are mainly used in the boron diffusion + selective emitter process. Compared with the pure boron diffusion process in traditional TOPCon design, the application of laser technology can be incorporated to form selective emitters, thus boosting the conversion efficiency by more than 0.3%.191 The difficulty of boron expansion is higher than that of phosphorus expansion. Although the boron expansion and phosphorus expansion processes are highly similar and the equipment mainly includes diffusion furnaces, due to the low solid solution solubility of boron in Si, boron expansion is more difficult compared to conventional phosphorus expansion, and the boron diffusion temperature needs to reach 900–1100 °C. At present, common boron sources for boron diffusion are mainly boron tribromide (BBr3) and boron trichloride (BCl3). The by-products of BBr3 diffusion can seriously damage quartz devices, and some manufacturers have begun to use BCl3 as the boron source. Although the by-products of BCl3 are basically harmless toward quartz devices, its use is limited by the large bond energy of B–Cl, and the diffusion uniformity is slightly worse than that of BBr3.192 Laser doping is a mainstream way to make selective emitters for PERC devices. The realized method uses phosphorosilicate glass (PSG) formed after phosphorus diffusion as the doping source, performing laser scanning doping in the metal grid area to form an N++ heavily doped area, so as to realize a selective emitter. This process is simple to realize, and it can be realized via adding an additional process to the traditional PERC process. It is compatible with the traditional production line and has become standard in the PERC production line. The technological difficulty related to developing selective emitters for TOPCon cells is that the boron doping process is more complicated. The solid solubility of boron in Si is lower than that of phosphorus, so it is more difficult to dope, and it requires higher energy when diffusing. Therefore, when laser doping is used, it is necessary to use a laser with higher power. However, the optimal power for laser doping is difficult to obtain. If the laser power is too high, it is easy to damage the laser-irradiated textured area, which affects the subsequent passivation process; however, if the power is too low, the energy during diffusion may be insufficient, and it is difficult for the laser to dope the boron from borosilicate glass (BSG) into the P+ layer, which will cause the heavily doped metallization areas to fail to meet concentration requirements. In prior studies, many methods have been developed for preparing TOPCon boron diffusion selective emitter structures; the core idea is how to realize high-concentration heavily doped boron regions with less damage. At present, the main problem is that after laser treatment, the surface that is only annealed but not etched by an alkali cannot undergo excellent surface passivation. Therefore, a selective emitter can only be prepared via a step-by-step boron diffusion method, and it is necessary to add a cleaning process and high-temperature annealing after the preparation of the selective emitter. One-time boron diffusion + laser doping technology is the most favored approach. When BSG is used as the doping source, it is difficult to dope the BSG boron source into the P+ layer via laser doping, resulting in the P++ concentration in the heavily doped region not reaching the standard levels. Therefore, a P++ layer with a high boron surface concentration can be pushed through the diffusion furnace first, but no oxidation is carried out. The P++ layer is used as the laser doping source, and then laser doping and oxidation processes can be carried out, which can solve the problem of the boron doping concentration and simplify the preparation process of selective emitters. The advantages of this technique include the simple processing and equipment requirements, and it can be accomplished using only a diffusion furnace with laser doping equipment and cleaning equipment.193
High-temperature annealing is usually required for the preparation of TOPCon structures to realize crystallization and to activate doping. However, annealing in a high-temperature furnace can cause a number of issues: first, the deterioration of the tunnel oxide and its interfaces; second, increased Auger recombination due to dopant diffusion from poly-Si into the base; third, insufficient dopant activation in poly-Si; and, finally, shortened absorber lifetimes as a result of prolonged high-temperature exposure. Researchers have studied the application of UV pulsed-laser annealing as a replacement for secondary furnace-based high temperature annealing in order to relieve these difficulties and increase process control.194,195 In recent years, laser-based solar cell production has gained popularity, enabling its simple deployment. Pulsed-laser annealing enables selective control over dopant activation and poly-Si layer crystallization while limiting oxide degradation, absorber degradation, and excessive diffusion. This is owing to the use of a short laser pulse (25 ns), which may activate dopants and crystallize poly-Si in nanoseconds, and the use of a shallow absorption depth (10 nm for Si), which can allow the process to affect just the required layer. Due to the low thermal diffusivity of a-Si (0.10 cm2 s−1) and poly-Si (0.14 cm2 s−1) relative to c-Si (0.90 cm2 s−1), it is feasible to attain the high temperatures necessary for activation and crystallization at 900 °C while avoiding tunnel oxide break-up.194 This provides a distinct advantage in terms of avoiding the oxidation of the poly-Si layer during annealing.
Pattern transfer printing (PTP) is a novel non-contact printing technology which coats the required paste on a specific flexible transparent material and uses a high-power laser beam to scan at a high speed to transfer the paste from the flexible transparent material to the surface of the cell, thus forming grid lines. PTP technology can break through the line-width limit of traditional screen printing, easily realizing a line width below 25 μm, achieving a better aspect ratio, helping cells to realize ultra-fine grid cells, matching selective emitter technology, and improving cell conversion efficiencies. It does not need to touch the cell surface, which effectively reduces the defect rate and greatly reduces the amount of silver paste used. In the process of screen printing, in order to ensure the printing quality over the whole device, high pressure is applied to the cell surface over the entire process. With the advent of 182 mm and 210 mm cell sizes, the printing area is larger and the Si wafer is thinner, and pressure reduction during processing can significantly reduce the defect rate, improve the production yield, and further reduce the production costs. The realization of ultra-fine line width can greatly reduce the amount of silver paste used; it has stronger cost reduction and efficiency increase effects for TOPCon and other N-type double-sided cell processes that consume more silver paste, and is expected to play an important role.196
4.8. TOPCon tunnel junctions for tandem solar cells
Once parasitic absorption, defect-related recombination, and resistive losses have been addressed, the efficiency of a Si PV will be restricted by Auger recombination, which is intrinsic to the functioning of Si absorbers in a single-junction design. There have been attempts to overcome the single-junction constraint of Si devices via numerous sophisticated approaches during the last few decades. Third-generation photovoltaics are typically referred to as such since they aspire to reach the thermodynamic limit of 93%.198 Some suggested technologies, such as spectral downshifting and up- and down-conversion, might have the potential to improve single-junction device efficiencies.199–201 However, a tandem design, using Si as the bottom cell in a two-subcell arrangement with a top cell with an optimum band gap of 1.7–1.8 eV, may be the simplest way to considerably improve the efficiency. As can be seen in Fig. 10, since electron–hole pairs are formed in equal numbers in each subcell of the two-terminal tandem device, a “matching” photogenerated current density is achieved when incoming photons are shared evenly between the two cells.197 Notably, the past few years have witnessed substantial advancements in tandem cells composed of a perovskite cell layered over a c-Si cell, where the perovskite effectively absorbs visible light and the c-Si efficiently absorbs near-infrared light. Recent work using poly-Si junctions opens up new options, even if the SHJ design has been used in most leading findings thus far.202 The exceptional thermal stability of poly-Si connections allows them to resist annealing up to 450 °C without harm, which is a desirable property in the two-terminal perovskite/c-Si arrangement.203,204 It is also possible to employ all-inorganic perovskite absorbers, which many feel offer better stability, however, temperatures of over 200 °C are needed for preparation thanks to the high-temperature resistance characteristics of TOPCon structures. A boron-doped poly-Si layer employed as the top junction in a c-Si cell was also proven to be able to directly touch the TiOx bottom electron contact of a perovskite top cell. This benefit, which is expected to be expanded to other metal-oxide contacts in conjunction with poly-Si, eliminates the requirement for an extra transparent conductive oxide (also referred to as a “recombination layer”), simplifying manufacture and lowering parasitic absorption.205 It is critical for the overall perovskite/c-Si tandem architecture that bottom-cell c-Si is selected carefully. The best c-Si bottom-cell type for tandem architectures is still a mystery. Passivating contact methods, represented by TOPCon, are gathering interest, despite the SHJ approach holding the current record for tandem structures. Along with efficiency, the move from small-batch manufacturing in the lab to large-scale production in the industrial sector is a major hurdle to overcome. Based on the present situation in which the SHJ technique is the leading approach, Messner et al. examined several c-Si bottom-cell approaches and recommended that the search for the best c-Si method for commercial promotion is still underway.206 Other forms of bottom-cell passivating contacts, such as TOPCon, warrant more investigation. Additionally, as far as spectral efficiency is concerned, III–V-based devices seem to be excellent tandem companions for Si.207 Along with their efficiency advantages, III–V solar cells are noted for their high dependability and appropriate bandgaps. Additionally, many studies have been conducted on III–V devices, and this maturity enables the study of tandem systems.208 A Pd nanoparticle array was used by Makita et al. to manufacture an InGaP/AlGaAs//Si 3J cell, achieving a final efficiency of 30.8%. The encouraging results were achieved via GaAs device tuning and the use of a TOPCon-based Si device.209
 Fig. 10  Solar spectral irradiance (AM 1.5) and the contributions absorbed by the sub-cells of a perovskite/Si tandem device with two terminals. Reproduced with permission;197 copyright: 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. The dark region is included in the total absorbed radiation. 
Poly-Si-based junctions have been projected to become commonplace in industry because of the positive findings and the active research underway in universities, research institutions, and enterprise. Whether TOPCon can exceed PERCs in terms of both cost and efficiency via the creation of numerous techniques will be revealed over time via industrialization. In summary, further research is required to determine why p-TOPCon has worse passivation capabilities, particularly on textured surfaces. Additionally, it is critical to identify the minimum poly-Si thickness required to maintain quasi-Fermi level splitting. Additionally, the exact processes behind high-temperature annealing that might result in atomic rearrangement at the Si/SiOx interface are being investigated.9
5. Concluding remarks
In the early days of c-Si PVs, passivating contact based on a stack of poly-Si/SiOx was studied. This technique, also known as TOPCon, has seen a revival during the previous decade. The high degree of consistency achieved using diverse poly-Si fabrication methods demonstrates the adaptability of this strategy and the possibility for its transfer to low-cost development, which is a dominant research priority. We were able to cover just a portion of the extensive studies of TOPCon technology in this paper. Indeed, there are several other studies underway to improve our scientific knowledge of such poly-Si/SiOx structures and to develop practical approaches for the mass production of TOPCon cells. TOPCon, which is akin to PERC technology, is likely to have a significant impact on future Si devices and it might potentially become a fundamental technique for novel future alternatives, such as tandem devices. However, there are still a number of obstacles to overcome, most of which are related to cost and poly-Si junction metallization. These difficulties are partly to blame for the production costs of poly-Si junction cells currently being ∼18% higher compared to PERCs. It is expected that this margin will reduce in the near future, similar to the rapid decline in PERC costs during the initial years of production. Regardless of the value of comparisons, the two technologies should not be considered mutually exclusive. Poly-Si junctions can present a route for improving existing PERC technology, and it is anticipated that these designs and other solar cell technologies, such as silicon heterojunctions, will evolve further in the next decade.
Author contributions
Jiakai Zhou: investigation, software, conceptualization, writing original draft, and review and editing. Xianglin Su: formal analysis, investigation, and review and editing. Qian Huang: supervision, and review and editing. Bike Zhang: review and editing. Jie Yang: review and editing. Ying Zhao: supervision. Guofu Hou: supervision, review and editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62074084), National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFB1500402), and Key Research and Development Program of Hebei Province (Grant No. 20314303D).
References
N. Kannan and D. Vakeesan, Solar energy for future world: a review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 62, 1092–1105 CrossRef .
S.-H. Kim, J.-Y. Jung and R. B. Wehrspohn, All-room-temperature processed 17.25%-crystallize silicon solar cell, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3180–3185 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Haegel, H. Atwater Jr and T. Barnes, Terawatt-scale photovoltaics: transform global energy, Science, 2019, 364, 836–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, The path to 25% silicon solar cell efficiency: history of silicon cell evolution, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17, 183–189 CAS .
J. Reinhardt, M. Grein and C. Bühler, Identifying the impact of surface recombination at electrodes in organic solar cells by means of electroluminescence and modeling, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400081 CrossRef .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, M. Wuβler and F. Fabregat-Santiago, Role of the selective contacts in the performance of lead halide perovskite solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 680–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller and G. L. Pearson, A new silicon p-n junction photocell for converting solar radiation into electrical power, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki and W. Yoshida, Silicon heterojunction solar cell with interdigitated back contacts for a photoconversion efficiency over 26%, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hermle, F. Feldmann and M. Bivour, Passivating contacts and tandem concepts: approaches for the highest silicon-based solar cell efficiencies, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 021305 CAS .
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop and J. Hohl-Ebinger, Solar cell efficiency tables (version 55), Prog. Photovoltaics, 2020, 28, 3–15 Search PubMed .
NREL Best Research cell efficiency chart, 2020.
F. Haase, C. Hollemann and S. Schafer, Laser contact openings for local poly-Si-metal contacts enabling 26.1%-efficient POLO-IBC solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 186, 184–193 CrossRef CAS .
A. Richter, M. Hermle and S. W. Glunz, Reassessment of the limiting efficiency for crystalline silicon solar cells, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 1184–1191 Search PubMed .
T. G. Allen, J. Bullock and X. Yang, Passivating contacts for crystalline silicon solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 914–928 CrossRef CAS .
VDMA, International technology roadmap for photovoltaic (ITRPV), 2020.
A. Richter, J. Benick and R. Müller, Tunnel oxide passivating electron contacts as full-area rear emitter of high-efficiency p-type silicon solar cells, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2018, 26, 579–586 CAS .
S. Mack, D. Herrmann and M. Lenes, Progress in p-type tunnel oxide-passivated contact solar cells with screen-printed contacts, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100152 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Q. Huang and Y. Ding, Passivating contacts and tandem concepts: approaches for the highest silicon-based solar cell efficiencies, Nano Energy, 2022, 92, 106712 CrossRef CAS .
PV-magazine, Jinko claims 24.79% efficiency for n-type monocrystalline cell, 2020, https://www.pv-magazine.com/2021/01/06/jinkosolar-claims-24-9-efficiency-for-n-type-monocrystalline-cell.

          O. Schultz-Wittmann, A. Turner and B. Eggleston, High volume manufacturing of high efficiency crystalline silicon solar cells with shielded metal contacts, in 32nd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Munich, Germany,  2016, vol. 22, pp. 456–459 Search PubMed .
D. Chen, Y. Chen and Z. Wang, 24.58% total area efficiency of screen-printed, large area industrial silicon solar cells with the tunnel oxide passivated contacts (i-TOPCon) design, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110258 CrossRef CAS .
SERIS, http://www.seris.sg/.

          R. J. Van Overstraeten, Advances in silicon solar cell processing, in Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference,  1981, pp. 372–376 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green and A. W. Blakers, Advantages of metal-insulator-semiconductor structures for silicon solar cells, Sol. Cells, 1983, 8, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Kwark, SIPOS heterojunction contacts to silicon, PhD thesis, University Stanford,  1984 .
C. L. Axness, L. Riewe and R. A. Reber, Radiation characteristics of SIPOS and polysilicon resistors, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 1992, 38, 1365–1369 Search PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, T. Gmitter and R. M. Swanson, A 720 mV open circuit voltage SiOx:c-Si:SiOx double heterostructure solar cell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1985, 47, 1211 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Y. Gan and R. M. Swanson, Polysilicon emitters for silicon concentrator solar cells, in 21st IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  1990, pp. 245–250 Search PubMed .

          R. M. Swanson, Approaching the 29% limit efficiency of silicon solar cells, in 31st IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2005, pp. 889–894 Search PubMed .

          D. D. Smith, P. J. Cousins and A. Masad, Generation III high efficiency lower cost technology: transition to full scale manufacturing, in 38th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2012, pp. 1594–1597 Search PubMed .

          P. J. Cousins, D. D. Smith and H.-C. Luan, Generation 3: improved performance at lower cost, in 35th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2010, pp. 275–278 Search PubMed .

          O. Schultz-Wittmann, A. Turner and B. Eggleston, High volume manufacturing of high efficiency crystalline silicon solar cells with shielded metal contacts, in 32nd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2016, pp. 456–459 Search PubMed .

          P. Borden, L. Xu and B. McDougall, Polysilicon tunnel junctions as alternates to diffused junctions, in 23rd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2008, pp. 1149–1152 Search PubMed .
F. Feldmann, M. Bivour and C. Reichel, Passivated rear contacts for high-efficiency n-type Si solar cells providing high interface passivation quality and excellent transport characteristics, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 120, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Feldmann, M. Bivour and C. Reichel, A passivated rear contact for high-efficiency n-type Si solar cells enabling high Voc's and FF>82%, in 28th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2013, pp. 988–992 Search PubMed .
H. Steinkemper, F. Feldmann and M. Bivour, Theoretical investigation of carrier-selective contacts featuring tunnel oxides by means of numerical device simulation, Energy Procedia, 2015, 77, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
A. Richter, J. Benick and F. Feldmann, n-Type Si solar cells with passivating electron contact: identifying sources for efficiency limitations by wafer thickness and resistivity variation, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 173, 96–105 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Glunz and F. Feldmann, SiO2 surface passivation layers–a key technology for silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
A. Richter, R. Müller and J. Benick, Design rules for high-efficiency both-sides-contacted silicon solar cells with balanced charge carrier transport and recombination losses, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 429–438 CrossRef CAS .
U. Römer, R. Peibst and T. Ohrdes, Recombination behavior and contact resistance of n+ and p+ poly-crystalline Si/mono-crystalline Si junctions, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 131, 85–91 CrossRef .

          R. Brendel, T. Dullweber and R. Gogolin, Recent progress and options for future crystalline silicon solar cells, in 28th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2013, pp. 676–690 Search PubMed .
C. Hollemann, F. Haase and S. Schäfer, 26.1%-efficient POLO-IBC cells: quantification of electrical and optical loss mechanisms, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2019, 27, 950–958 CAS .
F. Haase, F. Kiefer and S. Schäfer, Interdigitated back contact solar cells with polycrystalline silicon on oxide passivating contacts for both polarities, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56, 08MB15 CrossRef .
M. K. Stodolny, M. Lenes and Y. Wu, n-Type polysilicon passivating contact for industrial bifacial n-type solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
P. Padhamnath, A. Khanna and N. Nandakumar, Development of thin polysilicon layers for application in monoPoly™ cells with screen-printed and fired metallization, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 207, 110358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tao, V. Upadhyaya and K. Jones, Tunnel oxide passivated rear contact for large area n-type front junction silicon solar cells providing excellent carrier selectivity, AIMS Mater. Sci., 2016, 3, 180–189 CAS .
J. Schmidt, R. Peibst and R. Brendel, Surface passivation of crystalline silicon solar cells: present and future, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 187, 39–54 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Macco, B. W. H. van de Loo and W. M. M. Kessels, Atomic Layer Deposition for High-efficiency Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells // Atomic Layer Deposition in Energy Conversion Applications (Ltd), John Wiley & Sons,  2017 Search PubMed .
J. Schmidt, R. Peibst and R. Brendel, Surface passivation of crystalline silicon solar cells: past, present and future, in Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Crystalline Silicon Photovoltaics, 2019 Search PubMed .

          A. Cuevas, T. Allen and J. Bullock, Skin care for healthy silicon solar cells, in 2015 IEEE 42nd Photovoltaic Specialist Conference,  2015 Search PubMed .
D. Neher, J. Kniepert and A. Elimelech, A new figure of merit for organic solar cells with transport-limited photocurrents, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kang, H. Cheong Sio and J. Stuckelberger, Optimum hydrogen injection in phosphorus-doped polysilicon passivating contacts, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 55164–55171 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ding, T. N. Truong and H. T. Nguyen, Boron spin-on doping for poly-Si/SiOx passivating contacts, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 4993–4999 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qiu, M. Pomaska and S. Li, Development of conductive SiCx:H as a new hydrogenation technique for tunnel oxide passivating contacts, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 12, 29986–29992 Search PubMed .
A. Bhambhani, JinkoSolar, 2021, http://www.jinkosolar.com/en/site/newsdetail/1712.
A. Bhambhani, 2021, https://www.pv-magazine.com/2021/06/02/longi-achieves-25-21-efficiency-for-topcon-solar-cell-announces-two-more-records.
H. Steinkemper, F. Feldmann and M. Bivour, Numerical simulation of carrier-selective electron contacts featuring tunnel oxides, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2015, 5, 1348–1356 Search PubMed .
F. Feldmann, R. Müller and C. Reichel, Ion implantation into amorphous Si layers to form carrier-selective contacts for Si solar cells, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 767–770 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stuckelberger, G. Nogay and P. Wyss, Recombination analysis of phosphorus-doped nanostructured silicon oxide passivating electron contacts for silicon solar cells, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2018, 8, 389–396 Search PubMed .
R. Peibst, U. Römer and K. R. Hofmann, A simple model describing the symmetric I–V characteristics of p-polycrystalline Si/n-monocrystalline Si, and n-polycrystalline Si/p-monocrystalline Si junctions, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 841–850 Search PubMed .
R. Peibst, U. Römer and Y. Larionova, Working principle of carrier selective poly-Si/c-Si junctions: is tunnelling the whole story, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 60–67 CrossRef CAS .

          M. K. Stodolny, J. Anker and C. J. J. Tool, Novel schemes of P+ poly-Si hydrogenation implemented in industrial 600 bifacial front-and-rear passivating contacts solar cells, in International Conference EU PVSEC for Photovoltaic Research,  2018, pp. 1–4 Search PubMed .
Y. Larionova, M. Turcu and S. Reiter, On the recombination behavior of p+-type polysilicon on oxide junctions deposited by different methods on textured and planar surfaces, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 214, 1700058 CrossRef .
D. Yan, A. Cuevas and Y. Wan, Silicon nitride/silicon oxide interlayers for solar cell passivating contacts based on PECVD amorphous silicon, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 617–621 CrossRef CAS .
F. Feldmann, J. Schön and J. Niess, Studying dopant diffusion from Poly-Si passivating contacts, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 109978 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Asuha, O. Maida and M. Takahashi, Nitric acid oxidation of Si to form ultrathin silicon dioxide layers with a low leakage current density, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 7328 CrossRef .
D. Yan, A. Cuevas and J. Bullock, Phosphorus-diffused polysilicon contacts for solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 142, 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moldovan, F. Feldmann and M. Zimmer, Tunnel oxide passivated carrier-selective contacts based on ultra-thin SiO2 layers, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 142, 123–127 CrossRef CAS .
R. der Vossen, F. Feldmann and A. Moldovan, Comparative study of differently grown tunnel oxides for p-type passivating contacts, Energy Procedia, 2017, 124, 448–454 CrossRef .
D. Yan, S. P. Phang and Y. Wan, High efficiency n-type silicon solar cells with passivating contacts based on PECVD silicon films doped by phosphorus diffusion, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 193, 80–84 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yan, A. Cuevas and Y. Wan, Passivating contacts for silicon solar cells based on boron-diffused recrystallized amorphous silicon and thin dielectric interlayers, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 152, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
P. Padhamnath, N. Nampalli and A. Khanna, Progress with passivation and screen-printed metallization of Boron-doped monoPoly™ layers, Sol. Energy, 2022, 231, 8–26 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Duttagupta, N. Nandakumar and R. Stangl, Initial results of monoPoly™ silicon solar cells at SERIS, in IEEE 7th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion (WCPEC) (A Joint Conference of 45th IEEE PVSC, 28th PVSEC & 34th EU PVSEC),  2018, pp. 1991–1994 Search PubMed .

          N. Nandakumar, J. Rodriguez and T. Kluge, 21.6% monoPoly™ cells with in-situ interfacial oxide and poly-Si layers deposited by inline PECVD, in IEEE 7th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion (WCPEC) (A Joint Conference of 45th IEEE PVSC, 28th PVSEC & 34th EU PVSEC),  2018, pp. 2048–2051 Search PubMed .
K. C. Fong, T. C. Kho and W. S. Liang, Phosphorus diffused LPCVD polysilicon passivated contacts with in-situ low pressure oxidation, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 186, 236–242 CrossRef CAS .
B. Stegemann, K. M. Gad and P. Balamou, Ultra-thin silicon oxide layers on crystalline silicon wafers: Comparison of advanced oxidation techniques with respect to chemically abrupt SiO2/Si interfaces with low defect densities, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 395, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yan, A. Cuevas and J. I. Michel, Polysilicon passivated junctions: the next technology for silicon solar cells, Joule, 2021, 5, 811–828 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Card and E. H. Rhoderick, Studies of tunnel MOS diodes I. Interface effects in silicon Schottky diodes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1997, 4, 1589–1601 CrossRef .
I. R. C. Post, P. Ashburn and G. R. Wolstenholme, Polysilicon emitters for bipolar transistors: a review and re-evaluation of theory and experiment, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1992, 39, 1717–1731 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, Effects of pinholes, oxide traps, and surface states on MIS solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1978, 33, 178 CrossRef CAS .
N. Folchert, M. Rienäcker and A. A. Yeo, Temperature-dependent contact resistance of carrier selective Poly-Si on oxide junctions, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 425–430 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Rowlandson and N. G. Tarr, A true polysilicon emitter transistor, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 1985, 6, 288–290 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Liu and M. Cui, Charge-carrier dynamics for silicon oxide tunneling junctions mediated by local pinholes, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100667 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, D. Yan and J. Wong-Leung, Direct observation of the impurity gettering layers in polysilicon-based passivating contacts for silicon solar cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2275–2282 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, Z. Yang and F. Feldmann, Understanding the impurity gettering effect of polysilicon/oxide passivating contact structures through experiment and simulation, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 230, 111254 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, D. Yan and S. P. Phang, Effective impurity gettering by phosphorus- and boron-diffused polysilicon passivating contacts for silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 179, 136–141 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Liu and M. Liao, Effective gettering of in-situ phosphorus-doped polysilicon passivating contact prepared using plasma-enhanced chemical-vapor deposition technique, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110256 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Yadav, A. K. Sharma and A. Kottantharayil, Comparative study of different silicon oxides used as interfacial passivation layer (SiNy:H / SiOx / n+-Si) in industrial monocrystalline silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 201, 110077 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Yadav, A. K. Sharma and A. Kottantharayil, Low-cost and low-temperature chemical oxide passivation process for large area single crystalline silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2018, 169, 270–276 CrossRef CAS .
J.-I. Polzin, F. Feldmann and B. Steinhauser, Study on the interfacial oxide in passivating contacts, AIP Conf. Proc., 2019, 2147, 040016 CrossRef CAS .
J.-I. Polzin, S. Lange and S. Richter, Temperature-induced stoichiometric changes in thermally grown interfacial oxide in tunnel-oxide passivating contacts, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 218, 110713 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nandakumar, J. Rodriguez and T. Kluge, Approaching 23% with large-area monoPoly cells using screen-printed and fired rear passivating contacts fabricated by inline PECVD, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2019, 27, 107–112 CAS .
Y. Huang, M. Liao and Z. Wang, Ultrathin silicon oxide prepared by in-line plasma-assisted N2O oxidation (PANO) and the application for n-type polysilicon passivated contact, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 208, 110389 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stohr, J. Aprojanz and R. Brendel, Firing-stable PECVD SiOxNy/n-poly-Si surface passivation for silicon solar cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 4646–4653 CrossRef .
S. W. Glunz, B. Steinhauser and J.-I. Polzin, Silicon-based passivating contacts: the TOPCon route, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2021, 1–19 Search PubMed .
H. K. Asuha, O. Maida and M. Takahashi, Nitric acid oxidation of Si to form ultrathin silicon dioxide layers with a low leakage current density, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 7328 CrossRef .
A. Moldovan, F. Feldmann and G. Krugel, Simple cleaning and conditioning of silicon surfaces with UV/ozone sources, Energy Procedia, 2014, 55, 834–844 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tong, M. Liao and Z. Zhang, A strong-oxidizing mixed acid derived high-quality silicon oxide tunneling layer for polysilicon passivated contact silicon solar cell, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 188, 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Pham, S. Lee and M. Q. Khokhar, Innovative passivating contact using quantum well at poly-Si/c-Si interface for crystalline silicon solar cells, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 423, 130239 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ingenito, G. Nogay and Q. Jeangros, A passivating contact for silicon solar cells formed during a single firing thermal annealing, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 800–808 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hoex, S. B. S. Heil and E. Langereis, Ultralow surface recombination of c-Si substrates passivated by plasma-assisted atomic layer deposited Al2O3, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 042112 CrossRef .
G. Kaur, N. Dwivedi and X. Zheng, Understanding surface treatment and ALD AlOx thickness induced surface passivation quality of c-Si Cz wafers, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2017, 7, 1224–1235 Search PubMed .
S. Chowdhury, G. Chavan and S. Kim, Analysis of passivation property using thin Al2O3 layer and simulation for realization of high-efficiency TOPCon cell, Infrared Phys. Technol., 2020, 110, 103436 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xin, Z. P. Ling and P. Wang, Ultra-thin atomic layer deposited aluminium oxide tunnel layer passivated hole-selective contacts for silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 191, 164–174 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Ling, Z. Xin and G. Kaur, Ultra-thin ALD-AlOx/PEDOT:PSS hole selective passivated contacts: an attractive low cost approach to increase solar cell performance, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 477–486 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kaur, Z. Xin and R. Sridharan, Engineering aluminum oxide/polysilicon hole selective passivated contacts for high efficiency solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 218, 110758 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, Y. Zeng and M. Liao, Dopant diffusion through ultrathin AlOx and AlOx/SiOx tunnel layer in TOPCon structure and its impact on the passivation quality on c-Si solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 223, 110970 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Park, S. Bae and S. J. Park, Role of polysilicon in poly-Si/SiOx passivating contacts for high-efficiency silicon solar cells, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 23261 RSC .
S. Reiter, N. Koper and R. Reineke-Koch, Parasitic absorption in polycrystalline Si-layers for carrier-selective front junctions, Energy Procedia, 2016, 92, 199–204 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Larionova, H. Schulte-Huxel and B. Min, Ultra-thin poly-Si layers: passivation quality, utilization of charge carriers generated in the poly-Si and application on screen-printed double-side contacted polycrystalline Si on oxide cells, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000177 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, A. Bothwell and H. Guthrey, Measurement of poly-Si film thickness on textured surfaces by X-ray diffraction in poly-Si/SiOx passivating contacts for monocrystalline Si solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2022, 236, 111510 CrossRef CAS .
F. Feldmann, C. Reichel and R. Müller, The application of poly-Si/SiOx contacts as passivated top/rear contacts in Si solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 265–271 CrossRef CAS .
F. Feldmann, M. Nicolai and R. Müller, Optical and electrical characterization of poly-Si/SiOx contacts and their implications on solar cell design, Energy Procedia, 2017, 124, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nogay, J. Stuckelberger and P. Wyss, Interplay of annealing temperature and doping in hole selective rear contacts based on silicon-rich silicon-carbide thin films, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 173, 18–24 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ingenito, G. Limodio and P. Procel, Silicon solar cell architecture with front selective and rear full area ion-implanted passivating contacts, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700040 CrossRef .
D. P. Pham and J. Yi, Dopant-grading proposal for polysilicon passivating contact in crystalline silicon solar cells, J. Power Sources, 2022, 522, 231005 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, A. Ingenito and O. Isabella, IBC c-Si solar cells based on ion-implanted poly-silicon passivating contacts, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stuckelberger, G. Nogay and P. Wyss, Passivating electron contact based on highly crystalline nanostructured silicon oxide layers for silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 2–10 CrossRef CAS .
F. Feldmann, B. Steinhauser and T. Pernau, Advances in solar photovoltaics: technology review and patent trends, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 115, 109383 CrossRef .
M. M. Mandurah, K. C. Saraswat and C. R. Helms, Dopant segregation in polycrystalline silicon, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 5755 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kafle, B. Singh Goraya and S. Mack, TOPCon – technology options for cost efficient industrial manufacturing, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 227, 111100 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fırat, H. S. Radhakrishnan and M. R. Payo, Large-area bifacial n-TOPCon solar cells with in situ phosphorus-doped LPCVD poly-Si passivating contacts, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2022, 236, 111544 CrossRef .
C. Battaglia, A. Cuevas and S. De Wolf, High-efficiency crystalline silicon solar cells: status and perspectives, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1552–1576 RSC .
S. Olibet, E. Vallat-Sauvain and C. Ballif, Model for a-Si:H/c-Si interface recombination based on the amphoteric nature of silicon dangling bonds, Phys. Rev. B, 2007, 76, 035326 CrossRef .
A. Eberst, A. Zamchiy and K. Qiu, Optical optimization potential of transparent-passivated contacts in silicon solar cells, Sol. RRL, 2022, 2101050 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Merkle, S. Seren and H. Knauss, Atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition of in-situ doped amorphous silicon layers for passivating contacts, in 35th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2018, pp. 786–791 Search PubMed .
S. Li, M. Pomaska and J. Hoß, Poly-Si/SiOx/c-Si passivating contact with 738 mV implied open circuit voltage fabricated by hot-wire chemical vapor deposition, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 153901 CrossRef .
T. Gao, Q. Yang and X. Guo, An
industrially viable TOPCon structure with both ultra-thin SiOx and n+-poly-Si processed by PECVD for p-type c-Si solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 109926 CrossRef CAS .
J. Steffens, J. Rinder and G. Hahn, Compensation of the sputter damage during a-Si deposition for poly-Si/SiOx passivating contacts by ex-situ P-doping, AIP Conf. Proc., 2019, 2147, 040018 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tutsch, F. Feldmann and J. Polzin, Implementing transparent conducting oxides by DC sputtering on ultrathin SiOx/poly-Si passivating contacts, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 109960 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hoß, J. Baumann and M. Berendt, Sputtering of silicon thin films for passivated contacts, AIP Conf. Proc., 2019, 2147, 040007 CrossRef .
D. Yan, A. Cuevas and S. P. Phang, 23% efficient p-type crystalline silicon solar cells with hole-selective passivating contacts based on physical vapor deposition of doped silicon films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 061603 CrossRef .

          F. Feldmann, B. Steinhauser and T. Pernau, Industrial TOPCon solar cells realized by a PECVD tube process, in 37th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2020 Search PubMed .
A. Liu, S. P. Phang and D. Macdonald, Gettering in silicon photovoltaics: a review, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2022, 234, 111447 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, W. Li and Y. Tian, Post annealing to improve the sheet resistance and uniformity of emitter for enhancing conversion efficiency of mass-produced mc-Si solar cells, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2022, 138, 106316 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dong, T. Jiang and D. Yang, Optimized phosphorus diffusion process and performance improvement of c-Si solar cell by eliminating SiP precipitates in the emitter, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 13820–13825 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, M. Liao and Z. Wang, In-situ phosphorus-doped polysilicon prepared using rapid-thermal anneal (RTA) and its application for polysilicon passivated-contact solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 210, 110518 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hayes, B. Martel and G. W. Alam, Impurity gettering by boron- and phosphorus-doped polysilicon passivating contacts for high-efficiency multicrystalline silicon solar cells, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2019, 216, 1900321 CrossRef .
J. Krügener, F. Haase and M. Rienäcker, Improvement of the SRH bulk lifetime upon formation of n-type POLO junctions for 25% efficient Si solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 173, 85–91 CrossRef .
C. Gemmel, J. Hensen and N. Folchert, 9 ms carrier lifetime in kerfless epitaxial wafers by n-type POLO gettering, AIP Conf. Proc., 2018, 1999, 130005 CrossRef .
T. T. Le, Z. Hameiri and T. N. Truong, Impurity gettering by silicon nitride films: kinetics, mechanisms, and simulation, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 10849–10856 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Kivambe, J. Haschke and J. Horzel, Record-efficiency n-type and high-efficiency p-type monolike silicon heterojunction solar cells with a high-temperature gettering process, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4900–4906 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Lossen, J. Hoß and S. Eisert, Electron beam evaporation of silicon for poly-silicon/SiO2 passivated contacts, in 35th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2018, pp. 418–421 Search PubMed .
D. L. Young, B. G. Lee and D. Fogel, Gallium-doped poly-Si:Ga/SiO2 passivated emitters to n-Cz wafers with iVOC >730 mV, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2017, 7, 1640–1645 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Kang and W. Liu, Solution-doped polysilicon passivating contacts for silicon solar cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 8455–8460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Young, W. Nemeth and V. LaSalvia, Low-cost plasma immersion ion implantation doping for Interdigitated back passivated contact (IBPC) solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 68–76 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Truong, T. T. Le and D. Yan, Investigation of gallium–boron spin-on codoping for poly-Si/SiOx passivating contacts, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100653 CrossRef CAS .
A. Veau, T. Desrues and A. Morisset, Ex situ phosphorus doped polysilicon films by plasma immersion ion implantation (PIII): controlling and simplifying passivated
contacts integration, AIP Conf. Proc., 2019, 2147, 040021 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Rui, Y. Zeng and X. Guo, On the passivation mechanism of poly-silicon and thin silicon oxide on crystal silicon wafers, Sol. Energy, 2019, 194, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guthrey, C. L. Salles and A. S. Kale, Effect of surface texture on pinhole formation in SiOx-based passivated contacts for high-performance silicon solar cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55737–55745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, Z. Liu and Y. Lin, Passivating contact with phosphorus-doped polycrystalline silicon-nitride with an excellent implied open-circuit voltage of 745 mV and its application in 23.88% efficiency TOPCon solar cells, Sol. RRL, 2021, 2100644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boccard and Z. C. Holman, Amorphous silicon carbide passivating layers for crystalline-silicon-based heterojunction solar cells, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 065704 CrossRef .
S. Choi, O. Kwon and K. H. Min, Formation and suppression of hydrogen blisters in tunnelling oxide passivating contact for crystalline silicon solar cells, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 9672 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Su and Q. Huang, A silicon oxide-based highly transparent passivating contact for crystalline silicon solar cells approaching efficiencies of 23%, Nano Energy, 2022, 98, 107319 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schnabel, B. W. H. van de Loo and W. Nemeth, Hydrogen passivation of poly-Si/SiOx contacts for Si solar cells using Al2O3 studied with deuterium, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 203901 CrossRef .
T. N. Truong, D. Yan and C. Samundsett, Hydrogenation of phosphorus-doped polycrystalline silicon films for passivating contact solar cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5554–5560 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. H. van de Loo, B. Macco and M. Schnabel, On the hydrogenation of poly-Si passivating contacts by Al2O3 and SiNx thin films, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 215, 110592 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Stodolny, M. Lenes and Y. Wu, n-type polysilicon passivating contact for industrial bifacial n-type solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Park, H. Park and Se J. Park, Passivation quality control in poly-Si/SiOx/c-Si passivated contact solar cells with 734 mV implied open circuit voltage, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 189, 21–26 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Helms and E. H. Poindexter, The silicon-silicon dioxide system: its microstructure and imperfections, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1994, 57, 791 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stesmans, Interaction of Pb defects at the (111)Si/SiO2 interface with molecular hydrogen: simultaneous action of passivation and dissociation, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 88, 489–497 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bredemeier, D. Walter and J. Schmidt, Light-induced lifetime degradation in high-performance multicrystalline silicon: detailed kinetics of the defect activation, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 173, 2–5 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Bonilla, B. Hoex and P. Hamer, Dielectric surface passivation for silicon solar cells: a review, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 214, 1700293 CrossRef .
G. Dingemans, F. Einsele and W. Beyer, Influence of annealing and Al2O3 properties on the hydrogen-induced passivation of the Si/SiO2 interface, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 093713 CrossRef .
A. Richter, J. Benick and M. Hermle, Reaction kinetics during the thermal activation of the silicon surface passivation with atomic layer deposited Al2O3, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 061606 CrossRef .
J.-I. Polzin, B. Hammann and T. Niewelt, Thermal activation of hydrogen for defect passivation in poly-Si based passivating contacts, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 230, 111267 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Nickel, G. B. Anderson and J. Walker, Hydrogen-induced platelets in disordered silicon, Solid State Commun., 1996, 99, 427–431 CrossRef CAS .
S. Steingrube, P. P. Altermatt and D. S. Steingrube, Interpretation of recombination at c-Si/SiNx interfaces by surface damage, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 014506 CrossRef .
M. A. Roberson and S. K. Estreicher, Vacancy and vacancy-hydrogen complexes in silicon, Phys. Rev. B, 1994, 49, 17040–17049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vaqueiro-Contreras, V. P. Markevich and M. P. Halsall, Powerful recombination centers resulting from reactions of hydrogen with carbon–oxygen defects in n-type Czochralski-grown silicon, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2017, 11, 1700133 CrossRef .
P. Santos, J. Coutinho and S. Öberg, Theory of a carbon-oxygen-hydrogen recombination center in n-type Si, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 214, 1700309 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, M. Liao and Y. Huang, Improvement of surface passivation of tunnel oxide passivated contact structure by thermal annealing in mixture of water vapor and nitrogen environment, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900105 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Wilson, M. Al-Jassim and W. K. Metzger, The 2020 photovoltaic technologies roadmap, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 493001 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, P. P. Altermatt and D. Chen, From laboratory to production: learning models of efficiency and manufacturing cost of industrial crystalline silicon and thin-film photovoltaic technologies, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2018, 8, 1531–1538 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, D. Chen and C. Liu, Mass production of industrial tunnel oxide passivated contacts (i-TOPCon) silicon solar cells with average efficiency over 23% and modules over 345 W, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2019, 27, 827–834 CAS .

          Y. Chen, D. Chen and P. P. Altermatt, >25% large-area industrial silicon solar cell: learning from history and future perspective, in 36th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2019, pp. 294–299 Search PubMed .
P. Padhamnath, J. K. Buatis and A. Khanna, Characterization of screen printed and fire-through contacts on LPCVD based passivating contacts in monoPoly™ solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2020, 202, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
B. Steinhauser, J.-I. Polzin and F. Feldmann, Excellent surface passivation quality on crystalline silicon using industrial-scale direct-plasma TOPCon deposition technology, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800068 CrossRef .
V. Arya, B. Steinhauser and B. Gruebel, Laser ablation and Ni/Cu plating approach for tunnel oxide passivated contacts solar cells with variate polysilicon layer thickness: gains and possibilities in comparison to screen printing, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2020, 217, 2000474 CrossRef CAS .
B. Grübel, H. Nagel and B. Steinhauser, Influence of plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition poly-Si layer thickness on the wrap-around and the quantum efficiency of bifacial n-TOPCon (tunnel oxide passivated contact) solar cells, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2021, 218, 2100156 CrossRef .
A. Fell, T. Niewelt and B. Steinhauser, Radiative recombination in silicon photovoltaics: modeling the influence of charge carrier densities and photon recycling, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 230, 111198 CrossRef CAS .
T. Niewelt, A. Richter and T. C. Kho, Taking monocrystalline silicon to the ultimate lifetime limit, Solar Energy Mater. Solar Cells, 2018, 185, 252–259 CrossRef CAS .
B. Grübel, G. Cimiotti and C. Schmiga, Progress of plated metallization for industrial bifacial TOPCon silicon solar cells, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2022, 30, 615–621 Search PubMed .
H. Z. Massoud, Thermal oxidation of silicon in the ultrathin regime, Solid-State Electron., 1997, 41, 929–934 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Kale, W. Nemeth and H. Guthrey, Modifications of textured silicon surface morphology and its effect on poly-Si/SiOx contact passivation for silicon solar cells, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2019, 9, 1513–1521 Search PubMed .
J. Zhou, Q. Huang and Q. Zhao, Performance promotion of aluminum oxide capping layer through interface engineering for tunnel oxide passivating contacts, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2022, 245, 111865 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ding, Y. Zhuang and Y. Cui, Application of phosphorus-doped polysilicon-based full-area passivating contact on the front textured surface of p-type silicon, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2021, 15, 2000455 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Feldmann, T. Fellmeth and B. Steinhauser, Large area TOPCon cells realized by a PECVD tube process, in 36th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2019 Search PubMed .
Z. Rui, Y. Zeng and X. Guo, On the passivation mechanism of poly-silicon and thin silicon oxide on crystal silicon wafers, Sol. Energy, 2019, 194, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Haase, B. Min and C. Hollemann, Fully screen-printed silicon solar cells with local AlBSF base contacts and a voc of 711 mV, in 37th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2020 Search PubMed .
W. Lin, D. chen and C. Liu, Green-laser-doped selective emitters with separate BBr3 diffusion processes for high-efficiency n-type silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 210, 110462 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, R. Sridharan and X. R. Ng, Development of TOPCon tunnel-IBC solar cells with screen-printed fire-through contacts by laser patterning, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 220, 110834 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Ghosh, S. Bose and G. Das, Fundamentals, present status and future perspective of TOPCon solar cells: a comprehensive review, Surf. Interfaces, 2022, 30, 101917 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Wilkes, A. D. Upadhyaya and A. Rohatgi, Laser crystallization and dopant activation of a-Si:H carrier-selective layer in TOPCon Si solar cells, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2020, 10, 1283–1289 Search PubMed .
S. Chowdhury, J. Park and J. Kim, Crystallization of amorphous silicon via excimer laser annealing and evaluation of its passivation properties, Energies, 2020, 13, 3335 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lossen, M. Matusovsky and A. Noy, Pattern transfer printing (PTPTM) for c-Si solar cell metallization, Energy Procedia, 2015, 67, 156–162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba and J. P. C. Baena, Monolithic perovskite/silicon-heterojunction tandem solar cells processed at low temperature, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 81–88 RSC .
M. A. Green, Third generation photovoltaics: ultra-high conversion efficiency at low cost, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2001, 9, 123–135 CAS .
C. Strümpel, M. McCann and G. Beaucarne, Modifying the solar spectrum to enhance silicon solar cell efficiency—an overview of available materials, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 238–249 CrossRef .
W. G. J. H. M. van Sark, A. Meijerink and R. E. I. Schropp, Enhancing solar cell efficiency by using spectral converters, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 395–409 CrossRef CAS .
T. Trupke and M. A. Green, Improving solar cell efficiencies by up-conversion of sub-band-gap light, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 4117 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, E. Aydin and M. De Bastiani, Efficient tandem solar cells with solution-processed perovskite on textured crystalline silicon, Science, 2020, 367, 1135–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kim, H. Min and K. S. Lee, Impact of strain relaxation on performance of α-formamidinium lead iodide perovskite solar cells, Science, 2020, 370, 108–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jeong, I. W. Choi and E. M. Go, Stable perovskite solar cells with efficiency exceeding 24.8% and 0.3-V voltage loss, Science, 2020, 369, 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, S. T. Omelchenko and D. A. Jacobs, In situ recombination junction between p-Si and TiO2 enables high-efficiency monolithic perovskite/Si tandem cells, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau9711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Messmer, B. S. Goraya and S. Nold, The race for the best silicon bottom cell: efficiency and cost evaluation of perovskite–silicon tandem solar cells, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2020, 1–16 Search PubMed .
Z. (Jason) Yu, M. Leilaeioun and Z. Holman, Selecting tandem partners for silicon solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16137 CrossRef .
I. Almansouri, A. Ho-Baillie and S. P. Bremner, Supercharging silicon solar cell performance by means of multijunction concept, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2015, 5, 968–976 Search PubMed .
K. Makita, H. Mizuno and T. Tayagaki, III-V//Si multijunction solar cells with 30% efficiency using smart stack technology with Pd nanoparticle array, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2020, 28, 16–24 CAS .
L. Wei, Y. Shi and F. Peng, On the limiting efficiency for silicon heterojunction solar cells, Solar Energy Mater. Solar Cells, 2021, 231, 111291 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Jiakai Zhou	Jiakai Zhou is currently a PhD student at the Institute of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University under the supervision of Prof. Guofu Hou. He received his BS degree in electronic information engineering from Xidian University in 2017 and his MS degree in integrated circuit engineering from Hebei University of Technology in 2020. His main research focuses on TOPCon solar cells.
Qian Huang	Qian Huang is an associate professor at the Institute of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University. She received her PhD from Nankai University in 2009. Her research mainly focuses on thin film photovoltaic materials/devices and the design of key materials for integrated circuits.
Ying Zhao	Ying Zhao received his PhD from Nankai University in 1995. He is a full professor and the dean of the College of Electronic Information and Optical Engineering in Nankai University. He is the vice-chair of the PVSEC International Advisory Committee. He is also the vice-president of China Renewable Energy Society and the director of PV Committee. He has been engaged in research into photovoltaic materials and devices.
Guofu Hou	Guofu Hou is a full professor at the Institute of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University. He received his PhD from Nankai University in 2005 and started his postdoc studies at the University of Toledo in 2009. His research mainly focuses on the performance improvement and industrialization of high-efficiency crystalline silicon heterojunction solar cells (SHJ, TOPCon, POLO, and DASH) and PbX (X = S, Se) colloidal quantum dot solar cells, and on the application of novel two-dimensional photoelectric materials and devices.

 	Fig. 1  Solar cells with poly-Si junctions: current status and potential expansion. (A) Potential future developments relating to Si PV technology on the basis of past efficiency improvements and ongoing research into new technologies. Al-BSF represents an aluminum back surface field and PERC refers to a passivated emitter and rear cell. Reproduced with permission;9–13 copyright: 2020, AIP Publishing LLC. (B) A schematic diagram of a typical n-type TOPCon structure. Reproduced with permission;14 copyright: 2019, Springer Nature. (C) Development trends for different Si solar cell technologies in the past and future.15 (D) TOPCon cell efficiency records for different poly-Si deposition routes. The gray and red boxes show the best efficiencies for lab-based and industrial devices, respectively. The deposition routes include plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD), and plasma oxidation and plasma assisted in situ-doping deposition (POPAID).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagrams of numerous passivation contact structures featuring doped poly-Si with interfacial SiOx.22	 

 	Fig. 3  The principles and advantages of passivating contacts with a stack of poly-Si/SiOx. (A) The structure of a passivating contact solar cell and the carrier transport mechanism. Reproduced with permission;18 copyright: 2022, Elsevier. (B) An energy band diagram of passivating contact with a stack of poly-Si/SiOx. Reproduced with permission;46 copyright: 2016, AIMS Press. (C) The combined selectivity (Se&h) and maximum efficiency (ηmax) values of cells with various electron/hole-selective contact materials.210 Reproduced with permission;47 copyright: 2021, Elsevier. (D) J0, contact resistance (ρc), and maximum efficiency values for various passivating contacts and a performance comparison (Rsheet represents the sheet resistance). The green plus and red minus signs indicate excellent and poor performance, respectively. Reproduced with permission;48 copyright: 2017, Wiley-Blackwell.	 

 	Fig. 4  The recombination properties of poly-Si-based passivating contacts generated by a variety of techniques. Reproduced with permission;77 copyright: 2021, Elsevier. The plots show the recombination current density J0 and upper limit voltage VUL values for (A) n+ and (B) p+ poly-Si obtained when using various approaches for growing the interfacial oxide.	 

 	Fig. 5  The appearance of pinholes and the formation mechanism. Reproduced with permission;83 copyright: 2021, Elsevier. (A)–(C) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of TOPCon structures after high-temperature annealing with Ta = (A) 760 °C, (B) 820 °C, and (C) 950 °C. (D) Local energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) profiles. (E) The variation of the mass fractions of Si and O elements with depth. (F) Diagrams showing the mechanism of pinhole formation.	 

 	Fig. 6  Poly-Si junction recombination and current losses in relation to the poly-Si thickness. Reproduced with permission;77 copyright: 2021, Elsevier. The evolution of J0 and VUL values for (A) n+ poly-Si and (B) p+ poly-Si with a change in the poly-Si thickness. Additionally, the predicted loss in short-circuit current density (JSC) when these layers are put on the front side is displayed on the top horizontal axis.109	 

 	Fig. 7  All-in cell and all-in module costs and levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) values calculated for the bifacial p-PERC and n-TOPCon process pathways. Reproduced with permission;121 copyright: 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  
J
0 values determined after firing with changes in the anticipated hydrogen density. Reproduced with permission;52 copyright: 2021, American Chemical Society. Unless otherwise specified, all samples were fired at 800 °C and coated with industrial SiNx film.	 

 	Fig. 9  A summary of the technology choices for the manufacture of TOPCon devices in contrast to the scenarios facing PERC devices in 2014. Reproduced with permission;95 copyright: 2021, Wiley-Blackwell.	 

 	Fig. 10  Solar spectral irradiance (AM 1.5) and the contributions absorbed by the sub-cells of a perovskite/Si tandem device with two terminals. Reproduced with permission;197 copyright: 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. The dark region is included in the total absorbed radiation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
