Nanoporous anodic alumina photonic crystals: fundamentals, developments and perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC05555A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC05555A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5581-5599Nanoporous anodic alumina photonic crystals: fundamentals, developments and perspectives

        
          
            Abel 
            Santos
          
          
        
      abc
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Engineering North Building, 5005 Adelaide, Australia. E-mail: abel.santos@adelaide.edu.au
bInstitute for Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), The University of Adelaide, 5005 Adelaide, Australia
cARC Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics (CNBP), The University of Adelaide, 5005 Adelaide, Australia
Received 
      23rd December 2016
    , Accepted 27th January 2017First published on 27th January 2017AbstractThe control of light – its coupling, splitting, modulating, and filtering – is of fundamental importance for the development of advanced, life-changing technologies, which are expected to revolutionise our society in the near future. Photonic crystal structures with finely tuned optical properties will pave the way for the realisation of these technological advances, enabling the ultimate control and modulation of electromagnetic waves across the spectral regions, from UV to IR. In recent years, an intensive research activity has been focused on the development of advanced photonic crystals. In spite of these technological advances, more fundamental and extensive development and engineering of photonic crystal structures will be needed in the next years to achieve the control of light for innovative technologies based on the quantum nature of photons. Nanoporous anodic alumina (NAA) was long envisaged as a platform to develop photonic crystal structures due to the versatility of its nanoporous structure. Recent studies have demonstrated that the effective medium of NAA can be precisely engineered by rationally designed anodisation strategies. These studies open new opportunities to develop advanced photonic crystal structures based on this nanomaterial, which could find broad applicability across different fields and disciplines. In this scenario, this review introduces the fundamental development of NAA-based photonic crystals and summarises the recent advances and applications in this field.
Abel Santos
Dr Abel Santos received his BEng in Chemical Engineering from the Universitat Jaume I (Spain) in 2006, and MEng and PhD degrees in Electronic Engineering from the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Spain) in 2007 and 2011, respectively. In 2014 he was awarded an ARC-DECRA, and currently he is a ‘Research for Impact’ Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering, member of the Institute for Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), and associate investigator of the ARC Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics (CNBP) at the University of Adelaide, where he works on structural engineering of photonic crystals based on nanoporous anodic alumina.
Introduction
Light is the great unifier across science, currently leading to unprecedented cutting-edge, life-changing technologies, which are revolutionising our society and well-being.1 The fundamental understanding and engineering of the light–matter interaction will generate new opportunities for future breakthrough technologies. Advanced photonic crystal (PC) structures will make it achievable the precise control of light for a plethora of technologies based on the quantum nature of photons. PC structures with precisely designed and engineered optical properties will be needed for the development, implementation and on-chip integration of quantum computing systems, ultra-sensitive lab-on-a-chip sensors and analytical techniques, highly efficient energy systems and advanced medical imaging and therapies.2–5
PCs are periodic structures with allowed and forbidden photonic bands that can modify the motion of photons by altering the propagation of electromagnetic waves when photons travel across the PCs’ structure.6–10 The milestone studies by Yablonovitch and John in 1987 demonstrating the control of spontaneous emission of materials embedded in PCs by the density of states, and the localisation and control of light by the structure of photonic crystals, respectively, stimulated an intensive research activity in the field of PCs.11–13 Since these pioneering works, multiple theoretical concepts and technological implementations have been demonstrated and currently PCs are essential components in numerous devices in the form of filters, mirrors, resonators, and cavities. PCs feature regularly distributed variations of dielectric constant/refractive index, which can be arranged in one, two or three dimensions.6–10 As a result, PCs feature photonic stopbands across their spectrum, which forbid selectively the propagation of photons of certain energies/wavelengths. This property enables the modulation of light by the light–matter interaction, which can be engineered with precision by means of the PCs’ structure.
The periodicity of the features in PCs must be half the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave to be diffracted. Therefore, PCs can be designed and engineered to modulate light in the UV (10–400 nm), visible (400–700 nm), NIR (700–2500 nm) and IR (2500–106 nm) spectral regions, according to the application. In some cases, such a requirement can make the fabrication of PC structures with desired aspect ratio challenging, given that modulation and control of light in optical devices working in the different regions of the spectrum requires PCs to have finely defined geometric features and optical properties.
Photonic crystals based on different materials (e.g. metals, oxides, polymers) can be produced by fabrication methods such as lithography and dry etching, vertical selective oxidation, wet chemical etching, fibre-pulling, embossing, self-organization, and electrochemical etching.11 Among these, electrochemical etching has been demonstrated as an optimal, cost-effective, and industrially scalable approach for the in-depth engineering of a broad range of multi-dimensional PC structures based on different nanoporous materials such as silicon, titanium dioxide and aluminium oxide.14–17 This nanofabrication approach makes it possible to engineer the effective medium of these nanoporous materials by modifying their porosity profile in depth during etching, creating new paths for the production of a broad range of PC structures, including optical mirrors, Fabry–Perót interferometers, resonators, bandpass filters, all-optical switches, cavities, distributed Bragg reflectors, and rugate or gradient-index filters.
Of all the above-mentioned materials, nanoporous anodic alumina (NAA) produced by electrochemical oxidation (i.e. anodisation) of aluminium offers a set of unique properties that make it a highly attractive platform material for the fabrication of PCs. These include scalable and cost-effective fabrication process, highly controllable self-organised nanoporous structure based on well-defined cylindrical nanopores of high aspect ratio, chemical resistance, thermal stability, mechanical robustness, and optical properties.18,19 NAA was long envisaged as a base material for the development of PCs. Pioneering fundamental studies dealt with the development and assessment of 2D NAA–PCs featuring straight cylindrical nanopores from top to bottom.20–22 These seminal studies demonstrated that the optical properties of NAA–PCs can be tuned by the geometric features of its nanoporous structure (e.g. pore diameter, porosity, lattice constant or interpore distance) and its chemical composition (chemical impurities), which can be controlled using different anodisation conditions.19 The development of anodisation strategies aiming to modulate the nanoporous structure of NAA in depth opened new opportunities to create multi-dimensional (1D, 2D and 3D) NAA-based PC structures. Pulse-like anodisation approaches enabled the precise engineering of the effective medium of NAA in depth and thus the fine tuning of its photonic stopband. These photonic nanostructures have recently shown promising results in different applications, including optical sensing, photonic tagging, energy and photovoltaics, and photonics.
In this context, this comprehensive review reports recent advances in NAA–PCs technology. The different standard fabrication processes for the production of NAA-based PCs will be first introduced along with a summary of the properties of this nanomaterial, which make it attractive for the development of PCs. Then, the most significant advances in the development of NAA–PCs by rationally designed anodisation approaches will be commented in detail. Next, the most representative examples of applicability of NAA–PCs will be presented. Finally, this review concludes with a general overview and a prospective outlook on the future trends in this field.
Fundamentals, fabrication and properties
NAA is fabricated by anodisation of aluminium, which is an electrochemical process traditionally used by metal finishing industry for a broad range of applications such as protection against corrosion, decoration and colouring, surface modification, and mechanical resistance against erosion.23 NAA can be defined as a matrix of alumina (i.e. aluminium oxide – Al2O3) featuring arrays of hexagonally arranged cylindrical nanopores from top to bottom, which grow perpendicularly to the underlying aluminium substrate during anodisation (Fig. 1). The structure of NAA can be defined by different geometric features, including its nanopore diameter (dp), pore length (Lp), and interpore distance (dint). Fig. 1 summarises the most representative geometric features of NAA. In recent years, an intense research activity has been carried out to establish optimal self-organisation anodisation conditions towards expanding the existing ranges of geometric features in NAA structures. Particularly interesting is the extension of interpore distance (or lattice constant) using different acid electrolyte solutions and anodising potentials.24–38 Currently, self-organised NAA structures can be produced with dint ranging from 60 to 700 nm by using different acid electrolytes (e.g. sulphuric, oxalic, selenic, malonic, phosphoric, phosphonic, tartaric, citric, phosphonoacetic, etidronic) and anodisation regimes (i.e. mild or hard anodisation).24–38
 Fig. 1  Fabrication, geometric features, structural engineering of effective medium and chemical structure of nanoporous anodic alumina. (a) Two-step anodisation process and structural features of NAA: (i) aluminium substrate; (ii) nanopores nucleation – first step; (iii) nanopores development – first step; (iv) sacrificial oxide layer removal; (v) cross-sectional view of self-organised NAA structure – second step; (vi) tilted 3D view of NAA structure (Lp – nanopores length); (vii) top view of NAA structure (dint – interpore distance and dp – nanopores diameter); (viii) top (right) and cross-sectional (left) SEM images of NAA produced by two-step anodisation process using oxalic acid electrolyte under mild conditions (scale bars = 1 μm and 100 nm, respectively). (b) Structural engineering of effective medium of NAA in depth: (i) aluminium substrate; (ii) sinusoidal anodisation profile; (iii) NAA–PC structure with details of the nanopores geometry; (iv) effective medium approximation. (c) Onion-like chemical structure of NAA: (i) three-layer model proposed by Yamamoto et al.;43 (ii) two-layer model with impurities distribution in depth proposed by Han et al.;63 (iii) TEM image showing details of the chemical composition of the cells in NAA (adapted from ref. 19). 
The characteristic honeycomb structure of NAA is a result of a self-organisation process, which occurs during anodisation.39–41 Although anodisation of aluminium has been intensively studied in the last decades, a complete mechano-electrochemical growth model describing with accuracy this process is yet to be formulated. However, many experimental and theoretical studies indicate that this self-organisation process is a result of a combination of field-assisted dissolution of anodic alumina at the interface oxide/electrolyte and localised stress between adjacent nanopores at the interface metal/oxide, which self-organise in a hexagonal fashion to minimise mechanical stress.19
The milestone works by Masuda established the most broadly used anodisation conditions for the fabrication of self-organised NAA-based structures under mild conditions produced by two-step anodisation.39–41 In this nanofabrication approach, divided into two anodisation steps, a sacrificial nanoporous oxide film is first grown as a shuttle layer to attain a homogenous nanopore growth and self-organisation. Once nucleated and developed, the resulting nanopores feature an almost hemispherical oxide barrier layer at their bottom side and self-organise during the first anodisation step. A front of hexagonally arranged hemispherical oxide barrier layers is formed at the bottom of the nanoporous film after certain time (∼24 h). The oxide film is then removed by selective wet chemical etching to reveal a pattern in the underlying aluminium substrate, the surface of which becomes a replica of the bottom part of the sacrificial oxide film. The second anodisation step is then performed under the same anodisation conditions, resulting in an oxide film with arrays of hexagonally arranged straight cylindrical nanopores homogeneously distributed across the film surface, within hexagonal cells aligned normally to the aluminium substrate (Fig. 1a). The main advantage of this nanofabrication process is that it does not require costly fabrication facilities as compared to traditional lithographic methods and enables a precise control over the geometric features of the nanoporous film by the anodisation conditions.
NAA is produced by anodising aluminium substrates in aqueous acid electrolytes, the most broadly used of which are sulphuric (H2SO4), oxalic (H2C2O4), and phosphoric (H3PO4) acids.39–41 This process is performed in an electrochemical cell, where both electrodes (i.e. anode = aluminium and cathode = platinum wire) are immersed in the electrolyte solution. NAA films can be produced under voltage or current control and the growth of nanopores is a result of a competing electrochemical oxidation (formation of oxide) and dissolution (dissolution of oxide) processes occurring at the oxide barrier layer located at the tip of the nanopores, the driving force of which is the anodising voltage or current. NAA can be produced under mild (MA) or hard anodisation (HA) regimes. MA is performed at moderate anodising voltage/current and acid electrolyte temperature. The characteristic oxide growth rate of MA-NAA is low and almost linear, ranging from 3 to 8 μm h−1. In contrast, HA is carried out at high anodising voltage/current and low electrolyte temperature. The oxide growth rate of HA-NAA regime is fast (from 50 to 70 μm h−1) and decreases exponentially with the anodisation time due to the limited mass transport of oxygen-containing anionic species (i.e. HO− and O2−) from the bulk electrolyte to the reaction interface (i.e. oxide/metal interface) along the nanopores.42
The optical properties of NAA are dependent on the geometric features of its nanoporous structure (e.g. pore diameter and length, interpore distance, porosity, pore density) and its chemical composition (content of impurities incorporated from the acid electrolyte). The most extensively studied optical property of NAA is its photoluminescence, the origin of which is associated with two types of centres: F+ centres – ionised oxygen vacancies in the structure of alumina, and F centres – impurities incorporated into the alumina structure from the acid electrolyte during anodisation.43–48 Numerous studies have analysed the effect of the fabrication parameters (e.g. acid electrolyte, anodisation voltage/current, annealing, pore widening) on the photoluminescence (PL) of NAA.49–55 Typically, the PL spectrum of NAA can be approximated to a Gaussian-like bell, the position and intensity of which depend directly on the fabrication conditions. However, some studies have demonstrated that the characteristic PL peak of NAA can be engineered to feature oscillations or fringes located at specific positions of the spectrum due to a combination of PL and optical interference phenomena.56–59
The property that makes NAA an attractive platform to develop PC structures is its effective medium, which can be engineered with precision and versatility in depth during anodisation by structural engineering. The optical properties of NAA–PCs can be described by the effective medium approximation, where the macroscopic optical properties (e.g. refractive index, dielectric constant) of the composite materials, in this case air and alumina, are estimated by averaging the properties of the individual constituents (e.g. effective refractive index, effective dielectric constant) (Fig. 1b).60 Therefore, to engineer the structure of NAA enables the generation of multi-dimensional PC structures with finely tuned optical properties. Different effective medium approximation models can be used to describe the effective medium of NAA–PCs, including Maxwell–Garnett, Bruggeman, Lorentz–Lorenz, Drude, and Looyenga–Landau–Lifshitz.61
NAA has a chemical structure with an onion-like layered distribution of impurities based on two main layers: an outer layer close to the central nanopore, which is basically composed of pure aluminium oxide, and an inner layer far from the central nanopore, which is contaminated with different impurities incorporated into the alumina structure from the electrolyte during anodisation (Fig. 1c).62 Although it is generally accepted that the onion-like chemical structure of NAA can be divided into two main layers, some studies have pointed out the presence of more than two chemical layers. Yamamoto et al. found that the actual chemical composition of NAA is distributed into three layers, as revealed by the PL spectrum of NAA after discontinuous pore widening steps.43,63 Santos et al. analysed the interference spectrum of NAA during pore widening process in real-time by reflectometric interference spectroscopy (RIfS).64 This study revealed the presence of four layers in the chemical composition of NAA, where the concentration of impurities increases from the inner layer to the outer layer, which is exposed to the acid electrolyte during anodisation.
Pioneering photonic crystal structures
Pioneering studies on NAA–PCs dealt with the fundamental understanding of the light–matter interaction in 2D photonic crystal structures based on NAA.20–22 In these structures, light is modulated when photons travel transversally across the nanoporous structure of NAA, which can be approximated to a composite matrix of alumina and cylindrical nanopores filled with air. The milestone work by Masuda demonstrated for the first time that ideally ordered NAA produced by master stamp lithography and one-step anodisation features a photonic stopband (PSB) in its transmission spectrum, the position of which can be tuned by modifying the lattice constant (or interpore distance) of the NAA matrix (Fig. 2a).20 In this study, the transmission spectrum of 2D NAA–PCs was analysed in the Γ–X and Γ–J directions using two distinct polarization lights (i.e. E and H, both fields parallel to the nanopores). NAA–PCs with a lattice constant of 250 nm showed a characteristic PSB in the E and H transmission spectra for the Γ–X and Γ–J directions, which were in good agreement with theoretical simulations. Another study by Masuda also demonstrated the tuneability of the PSB of NAA–PCs featuring high aspect ratio (>200) with a lattice constant of 500 nm.21 Likewise in his pioneering work, NAA–PCs with 500 nm lattice constant showed a characteristic PSB in the E and H transmission spectra for the Γ–X and Γ–J directions. Masuda and co-workers also demonstrated the presence of a characteristic PSB in the transmission spectrum of self-organised 2D NAA–PCs.22 In this study, NAA–PCs were fabricated with an average lattice constant of 500 nm in phosphoric acid electrolyte at 195 V. The characteristic PSB was observed in the transmission spectrum and its position was demonstrated to undergo a blue shift when the filling factor was increased from 0.1 to 0.3 by pore widening, and a red shift, when the lattice constant was increased from 436 to 513 nm by modifying the anodising voltage. Using similar fabrication conditions, Choi et al. studied the reflection spectrum of 2D NAA–PCs in the NIR region and analysed the effect of the filling factor (i.e. ratio pore radius/interpore distance) on the characteristic PSB.65 An almost linear blue shift of the PSB position was observed when the nanopores of NAA were widened by wet chemical etching (i.e. increment of filling factor) under controlled conditions. These authors observed that the dielectric constant is heterogeneously distributed across the outer oxide layer of the onion-like chemical structure of NAA–PCs. This phenomenon was associated with a non-uniform distribution of anions in the outer layer of NAA, as denoted by the dependence of this parameter with the filling factor in the NIR region (Fig. 2b). In another pioneering study, Masuda and co-workers demonstrated mirrorless laser emission from 2D NAA–PCs loaded with a dendrimer-encapsulated fluorescent dye (pyrromethene 597), which was consistent with the characteristic PSB of these NAA–PCs.66 This study showed that the position of the lasing emission can be tuned by the geometric features of the NAA–PCs, indicating that the origin of such emission is intrinsically dependent on the PSB of these PC structures.
 Fig. 2  Pioneering studies on the optical properties of 2D NAA–PCs. (a) In-plane optical properties of perfectly ordered 2D NAA–PCs (adapted from ref. 20): (i) illustration showing the structure of 2D NAA–PCs produced by master stamp lithography and anodisation with details of the in-plane configuration (top) and Γ–X and Γ–J directions (bottom); (ii) transmission spectra of 2D NAA–PCs for H (top) and E (bottom) polarization light at Γ–X and Γ–J directions; (iii) calculated band-gap structures of 2D NAA–PCs for H (left) and E (right) polarization light. (b) Reflectivity properties of 2D NAA–PCs produced by master stamp lithography followed by direct anodisation (adapted from ref. 65): (i) illustration showing the distribution of impurities in the structure of NAA–PCs; (ii) reflectivity measurements (left) and band structure calculations (right) for different filling factor values; (iii) dependence of the photonic stopband with the filling factor for TE mode (top) and TM mode (bottom). 
These fundamental studies constitute the first demonstration and utilisation of NAA as a platform for the development of PC structures. However, the versatility of these PCs to attain light control in the different regions of the spectrum is limited by the range of lattice constants (i.e. dint) in NAA. Another strategy to generate PC structures based on NAA is the in-depth modulation of its nanopores during anodisation by structural engineering.
Structural engineering of effective medium
The modulation of porosity of NAA enables the in-depth engineering of its effective medium to tune its characteristic PSB. However, the in-depth engineering of nanopores in NAA by anodisation is challenging due to presence of the oxide barrier layer located at the nanopore bottom tips, which acts as an electrical and ionic insulator.19 As a result, direct variations of the anodising voltage or current cannot be precisely translated into porosity or pore morphology modulations. The electric field applied during anodisation is the driving force that enables the flow of ionic species (e.g. Al3+, O2−, OH−) from and to the bulk electrolyte along the nanopores, and across the oxide barrier layer located at the nanopores tips for the formation and dissolution of alumina at the metal/oxide and oxide/electrolyte interfaces, respectively. The modification of the electric field during anodisation has a direct impact on the flow of ionic species across the oxide barrier layer (i.e. electric and ionic resistance), which undergoes a recovery process that relies upon the electric field change and the thickness of the oxide barrier layer, established by the anodising potential.67
Pulse-like anodisation has been demonstrated as an effective approach to overcome the intrinsic limitations of anodisation of aluminium. The seminal works by Lee and co-workers paved the way for rationally designed strategies aiming to engineer the structure of NAA in depth combining different types of anodising voltage or current pulses switched between MA and HA regimes.67–70 The finding of different porosity levels between HA and MA (i.e. ∼3 and ∼10%, respectively) was envisaged by Lee and co-workers as a means of modulating the nanopore diameter of NAA in depth.42 In his pioneering work, manual exchange of the acid electrolyte and anodisation conditions was performed to attain different pore diameters while keeping constant the interpore distance. The resulting NAA structures featured highly uniform periodic modulations of the nanopore diameter by sequential repetition of MA and HA processes (Fig. 3a). To prevent nanopore branching,71–73 the interpore distance in MA and HA layers was kept constant by setting the corresponding anodising voltages so to yield the same interpore distance. The nanopore diameter in MA and HA segments was controlled by the acid electrolyte and the anodising voltage, while the length of each layer was established by the anodisation time.
 Fig. 3  Pioneering developments of pulse-like anodisation by combining mild (MA) and hard (HA) anodisation regimes. (a) First demonstration of structural engineering by Lee et al.:42 (i) master stamp lithography and discontinuous MA–HA pulses by exchange of acid electrolyte and anodisation conditions; (ii) SEM cross-sectional view of MA–HA NAA structure; (iii) SEM images showing top, bottom and cross-sectional details of MA–HA NAA produced by discontinuous pulse anodisation in oxalic acid under potentiostatic conditions. (b) Dynamic pulse-like anodisation combining MA and HA regimes without acid exchanges under potentiostatic conditions in oxalic acid electrolyte by Lee et al.:67 (i) illustration of the pulse-like anodisation process; (ii) SEM cross-sectional images of the resulting NAA structures (scale bars = 500 nm). (c) Dynamic stepwise pulse anodisation between MA and HA regimes using sulphuric acid by Lee et al.:68 (i) scheme of this fabrication process; (ii) tilted (left) and cross-sectional (right) views of the MA–HA NAA structure after wet chemical etching to enhance the porosity contrast between MA and HA layers. 
Although this approach opened new opportunities to engineer the structure of NAA with precision and create new multi-dimensional NAA–PCs, this process requires tedious manual exchange of the acid electrolyte after each anodisation step. To overcome this limitation, Lee and co-workers developed dynamic pulse-like anodisation strategies to continuously modulate the nanoporous structure of NAA without acid electrolyte exchange.67–70 In these methods, the anodising voltage or current is sequentially pulsed between low and high values in a dynamic fashion in order to achieve MA and HA conditions. The correct design of the anodisation conditions (e.g. levels of anodising voltage or current, acid electrolyte and temperature) makes it possible to effectively translate modifications of the electric field into nanopore diameter modulations (i.e. porosity). Pulse anodisation also minimises the Joule's heat generated during the HA stage, which can be efficiently dissipated during the MA stage.
To attain a better understanding on the mechanism behind pulse-like anodisation, Lee and co-workers performed several fundamental studies aiming to discern the effect of different parameters on the effectiveness and versatility of this method to engineer the structure of NAA.67,70 Lee and Kim pointed that the recovery time after an alteration of the electric field is directly dependent upon the thickness of the oxide barrier layer, where the thicker the oxide barrier layer the longer the recovery time.67 In other words, the recovery time increases in the order H2SO4 < H2C2O4 < H3PO4 for the three major acid electrolytes used to produce NAA. Therefore, structural engineering of NAA in oxalic and phosphoric acid at low acid electrolyte temperatures and large electric field differences becomes challenging due to the recovery effect associated with the thickness of the oxide barrier layer. This factor is of critical importance for the direct and effective translation of anodising voltage or current changes into nanopore diameter/porosity modulations in depth. These authors demonstrated that a pulse-like anodisation approach in which the anodising voltage is increased gradually prior to the HA stage enables the precise engineering of the internal nanopore diameter (Fig. 3b).67 NAA structures with tailor-engineered internal nanopore geometries were fabricated through anodising voltage pulses with different periods and amplitudes in oxalic acid electrolyte. This approach was also envisaged for the generation of 3D NAA–PCs by subsequent wet chemical etching.
An observation made by the same authors in another study revealed that the internal nanoporous structure of NAA can be precisely and deliberately modulated under potentiostatic conditions by controlling the current density during anodisation.70 Spontaneous current oscillations were observed during HA of aluminium in oxalic acid electrolyte under unstirred conditions. The authors identified a dependence of the current oscillations with the depth of the nanopores. Symmetrically sinusoidal current oscillations of relatively small and increasing amplitude occurred at the early stage of the process (i.e. short nanopore depth). In contrast, asymmetric sinusoidal current oscillations of large and uniform amplitude were observed at the later stage of the process (i.e. long nanopore depth). A detailed analysis of the nanopore structure was performed to discern the existing relationship between the morphology of the current oscillations and the nanopore diameter modulations. A characteristic pattern between these factors was revealed, where the profile of the current oscillations was found to match the morphology of the nanopore modulations. The nanopore diameter and segment length (i.e. length between consecutive nanopore modulations) increased with the amplitude and the period of the current oscillations, respectively. These observations were associated with periodic changes in the concentration of the acid electrolyte at the bottom of the nanopores due to the unstirred conditions (i.e. limited flow of ionic species). This phenomenon denotes a diffusion-controlled anodisation process, where the longer the nanopores the larger the period of the acid electrolyte concentration at the bottom of the nanopores. It is worthwhile noting that this phenomenon was already observed in previous investigation by the same authors, when performing HA of aluminium in sulphuric electrolyte.74 Although the authors observed nanopore modulations in the structure of HA-NAA, this phenomenon was thought to be associated with the development and generation of gas bubbles in the course of anodisation.
As mentioned above, one of the main characteristics of NAA is the dependence of its chemical composition on the anodisation conditions. Lee et al. found that NAA structures produced by pulse anodisation between MA and HA regimes in sulphuric acid feature an in-depth chemical composition between MA and HA layers.68 The higher content of impurities and less density of HA-NAA results in a weaker chemical stability against chemical etching as compared to that of MA-NAA layers. Therefore, the combination of MA and HA pulses and subsequent chemical etching enables an enhanced etching contrast between layers for the formation of nanopore-modulated, multi-layered NAA structures. Under controlled etching conditions, this property can be readily used to create 3D NAA–PCs, where nanopore modulations are progressively transformed into lateral holes in the inner walls of the NAA structure, the position of which is established by the HA segment. Further chemical etching can lead to NAA-based slabs in the form of 2D sheets by the total removal of the HA segments. As a proof-of-concept, Lee and co-workers demonstrated the fabrication of a composite structure based on a matrix of polymer nanopillars and NAA slabs, where the MA-NAA layers were supported by polystyrene pillars created by pressure-driven melt-injection after total removal of the HA-NAA layers (Fig. 3c).
The seminal studies summarised in this section established the fundamental knowledge for future developments of NAA-based photonic crystal structures. The utilisation of rationally designed pulse-like anodisation approaches opened a plethora of possibilities to engineer the effective medium of NAA in depth. The advances in this field enabled new research activity in this direction for the application and further development of PCs based on NAA.
Development of nanoporous anodic alumina photonic crystal structures
Structural engineering of the nanoporous structure of NAA in depth enables the generation of PC structures, the most representative examples of which are Fabry–Perót interferometers, distributed Bragg reflectors, gradient-index filters, apodised gradient index filters, microcavities, and optical bandpass filters. Fig. 4 displays illustrations of some NAA–PCs, which can be produced with precision by pulse-like anodisation strategies aiming to engineer the effective medium of NAA. For instance, gradient-index optical filters can be produced by sinusoidal pulse anodisation, in which the effective refractive index of NAA is modulated in a sinusoidal fashion in depth during anodisation. Apodised gradient-index filters can be fabricated by applying apodisation functions to pulse anodisation profiles, where the anodisation amplitude is modified with the anodisation time. Distributed Bragg reflectors are PC structures that feature a stepwise distribution of effective refractive index in depth between high and low values. These PCs have been produced in NAA by stepwise pulse anodisation approaches. Optical microcavities confine light within their structure, which is composed of a cavity section sandwiched between two mirrors, generally distributed Bragg reflectors. NAA-based Fabry–Perót interferometers feature a homogeneous distribution of effective refractive index in depth and have been intensively used as sensing platforms in combination with different techniques.
 Fig. 4  Structural details of NAA–PC structures produced by structural engineering of the effective medium. From left to right: gradient-index filter, optical microcavity, Fabry–Perót interferometer, distributed Bragg reflector, and apodised gradient-index filter. 
Making good use of the method developed by Lee et al.,67 Sulka and co-workers fabricated and demonstrated a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) structure based on pulse-anodised NAA in sulphuric acid with alternating MA and HA voltage pulses (i.e. MA −25 V for 3 min and HA −35 V for 1.5 s) (Fig. 5a).69 The NAA–DBR structure was produced with 50 pulses (i.e. 50 MA–HA layers) and its nanoporous structure was selectively etched to increase the porosity contrast between MA and HA layers. The thickness of the MA and HA layers was estimated to be 750 and 800 nm, respectively. The nanoporous network of the NAA–DBR was selectively infiltrated with polystyrene and poly(methyl methacrylate) through a mask to prevent the etched structure from collapse. The optical properties of the composite NAA–DBR were characterised by analysing the reflection spectrum in the NIR–IR region. Two wide PSBs were reported in the NIR and IR regions of the spectrum (i.e. central wavelengths at ∼1800 and ∼3800 nm, respectively) and the experimental results were validated by theoretical simulations using an ideal DBR structure as a reference.
 Fig. 5  Developments of 3D NAA–PC structures by pulse-like anodisation combining MA and HA anodisation regimes. (a) Fabrication of nanoporous anodic alumina distributed Bragg reflector (NAA–DBR) by Sulka et al.:75 (i) anodisation profile consisting of stepwise potentiostatic pulses between MA and HA regimes in sulphuric acid electrolyte (top) and scheme of the resulting NAA–DBR structure (bottom); (ii) experimental and simulated reflection spectrum of NAA–DBR showing two PSBs. (b) Development of 3D NAA–PCs and polymeric replicas by Martín et al.:76 (i) scheme, digital pictures and SEM cross-sectional images showing details of the structure of 3D NAA–PCs produced by MA–HA stepwise pulse anodisation; (ii) angle-dependence of the optical properties of the resulting composites base on polymers and 3D NAA–PCs. 
Martín et al. used a similar fabrication approach to develop 3D NAA–PC structures by pulse anodisation in sulphuric acid under potentiostatic conditions with limited current density. In this study, stepwise voltage pulses were applied between HA (i.e. 32 V) and MA (25 V) regimes with a current density limit of 27.5 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5b). The nanoporous structure of the pulse-anodised NAA was subsequently widened by wet chemical etching, resulting in a 3D network of interconnected nanopores. These templates were used to create replicas of a series of conjugated polymers, which were found to display similar optical properties than those of their original NAA-based matrices.76
Pioneering pulse-like anodisation strategies aimed at introducing nanopore modulations in depth by switching the anodisation regime between MA and HA conditions. Although these approaches enable the precise modulation of the nanopore geometry in NAA, the generation of PC structures with finely tuned optical properties by MA–HA pulse anodisation is challenging due to the limited controllability of anodisation under HA conditions. The fast growth rate of the oxide layer and its dependence upon the nanopore length, the Joule's heat generation, and low porosity level under HA conditions put some challenges in the controllability of the features of NAA–PCs.42 In recent years, numerous studies have demonstrated that pulse anodisation approaches performed throughout under MA conditions can result in NAA–PCs with finely tuned optical properties. Although the fabrication process of NAA–PCs under mild conditions has some intrinsic limitations (e.g. longer fabrication time due to the slow oxide growth rate, limited diffusion of ionic species with pore length), this method enables the precise engineering of the effective medium of NAA in depth, making it attainable to produce NAA–PCs with versatile PSB across the different spectral regions.
Wang et al. used voltage pulses divided into a linear segment, where the voltage was decreased from 53 to 23 V in 3 min, and a sinusoidal segment, where the anodising voltage was increased from 23 to 53 V in 30 s.77 The anodisation process was performed in oxalic acid electrolyte under mild conditions at 15 °C throughout. The transmission spectrum of the resulting NAA–PCs showed the characteristic PSB, the position of which underwent a blue shift with the pore widening (i.e. from 0 to 20 min). In an extension of this study, the same authors introduced a constant segment between the linear and the sinusoidal sections of the voltage pulses and analysed the effect of the length of this segment on the position of the PSB of NAA–PCs.78 Image analysis revealed that the longer the time of the constant segment at maximum voltage (i.e. 53 V) the longer the period length (i.e. length of layers of high and low refractive index) in the structure of NAA–PCs. As a result, NAA–PCs were found to reflect light at longer wavelengths with the period length (i.e. red shift), which is in good agreement with the Bragg's law. An almost linear relationship between the central wavelength (i.e. PSB position) and the anodising time at constant voltage was established.
Zheng et al. studied the effect of the electrolyte temperature on the position of the PSB of NAA–PCs.79 Using the above-mentioned anodisation conditions, the authors observed a red shift in the central wavelength position with the anodisation temperature from 6 to 18 °C. Their study established that the higher the acid electrolyte temperature the longer the wavelength at which these PC structures reflect light more efficiently. These authors also demonstrated that the position of the PSB can be precisely tuned across the UV-visible-NIR spectrum by the anodisation period in the pulse-like voltage profile.80 The length of the linear decreasing segment was systematically modified from 4 to 7 min. While the position of the central wavelength was red shifted with the anodisation period, the full-width at half maximum (FWHM) decreased slightly.
Su et al. created NAA–PCs heterostructures composed of two stacked NAA–PCs produced with different anodisation periods using voltage pulses composed of a linear segment (decreasing) and a sinusoidal segment (increasing) between different minimum and maximum voltage values.81 The authors demonstrated three types of NAA–PCs structures, where the PSBs were overlapped, staggered, and split by modifying the anodisation period of each stacked NAA–PC in the heterogeneous PC structure (Fig. 6a).
 Fig. 6  Development of 1D NAA–PC structures by pulse-like anodisation under MA regime. (a) Fabrication of NAA–PC heterostructures by Su et al.:81 (i) anodisation profile consisting of voltage control pulses in MA regimes in oxalic acid electrolyte (top) and scheme of the resulting NAA–PC structure with pore branching (bottom); (ii) SEM cross-sectional view of the heterogeneous NAA–PCs produced with two stacked PCs; (iii) transmission spectrum of the NAA–PC structures with overlapped, staggered and split configuration. (b) Fano resonance in NAA–PCs by Shang et al.:82 (i) scheme (top) and transmission spectrum of 1D NAA–PCs (bottom) produced by Shang et al.; (ii) transmission changes in the PSB of NAA–PCs with time after exposure to ethanol gas; (iii) transmission evolution of the PSB (top) and Fano asymmetry parameter (q) after exposure to ethanol gas. (c) Development and analysis of NAA-based PC heterostructures composed of two stacked PCs by Shang et al.:83 (i) anodisation profile (top), scheme (middle) and SEM cross-sectional view (bottom) of the NAA–PC heterostructures; (ii) digital pictures, and forward and backward transmission and reflection spectra of NAA–PC heterostructures. 
Shang et al. reported fano resonance in NAA–PCs produced by voltage compensation method.82 This fabrication process was performed under potentiostatic conditions using a pulse-like anodisation approach under mild conditions, where the voltage pulses were composed of an increasing voltage segment from 23 to 53 V by a sinusoidal wave for 30 s and a linear decreasing voltage segment from 53 to 23 V for 3 min. A compensation factor was progressively applied to the subsequent pulses by increasing the offset of the signal in 0.055 V pulse−1. The authors identified an asymmetric line-shape profile in the PSB in the transmission spectrum of NAA–PCs, which was attributed to fano resonance between the PSB of the PC and the continuum scattering of the whole PC structure (Fig. 6b). The experimental results were validated by theoretical analysis using the transfer matrix method. Using a similar approach than that shown in ref. 81, Shang et al. demonstrated the unidirectional propagation of light in NAA–PC heterostructures composed of two stacked NAA–PCs of different period.83 Transmission and reflection measurements from the top and bottom of these NAA–PCs revealed an unbalanced effect, denoted by a shift in the characteristic PSB (Fig. 6c). This phenomenon was associated with energy loss induced by Rayleigh scattering. The authors demonstrated that the unidirectional propagation of light across these PC structures can be tuned by adjusting the period length in the stacked NAA–PCs.
Rahman et al. analysed the influence of the pore widening time on NAA–PCs produced by a pulse-like anodisation approach under mild conditions in oxalic acid electrolyte.84 In this study, voltage control pulses were composed of a linear increasing voltage ramp segment from 20 to 50 V at a rate of 0.5 V s−1, an interval of constant voltage at 50 V for a given total charge (i.e. integrated current density passed through the system over a period of time) and a linear decreasing voltage ramp segment from 50 to 20 V at a rate of −0.1 V s−1. The position of the central wavelength in the transmission spectrum of NAA–PCs was systematically assessed as a function of the pore widening time (i.e. from 0 to 27 min) and the total charge of the second segment of the voltage pulses (i.e. from 0 to 4 C). Their study established that the central wavelength undergoes a blue shift when the pore widening time is increased, and a red shift with the total charge. The experimental results were explained and validated by the three-layer theoretical model.
Zhiyuan et al. developed and demonstrated the generation of heterogeneous NAA-based PC structures composed of dual periodic layer-by-layer NAA–PCs produced by a sawtooth-like pulse anodisation approach in oxalic acid electrolyte.85 The analysis of the transmission spectrum of these PCs revealed a direct dependence between the position of the PSB and the thickness of each layer. The authors demonstrated that this approach makes it possible to engineer the position and width of the characteristic PSB across the UV-visible-NIR spectrum.
Interferometric colouring of aluminium is a well-known phenomenon and many studies have demonstrated that colours can be readily tuned by modifying the geometric features of thin films based on NAA Fabry–Perót interferometers and metal coatings.86–89 However, using a stepwise pulse anodisation approach in sulphuric acid electrolyte under current control, Yisen et al. demonstrated the fabrication of NAA–DBRs that can efficiently reflect light across the visible region (Fig. 7a).90 The PCs grown onto aluminium substrates displayed vivid colours, which were demonstrated to be tuneable from purple to red by the anodisation period of the stepwise pulsed profile.
 Fig. 7  Structural colouring of aluminium by NAA–PC structures. (a) Fabrication of NAA–DBRs by stepwise pulse anodisation by Yisen et al.:90 (i) anodisation profile consisting of stepwise galvanostatic pulses under MA regime in sulphuric acid electrolyte (top) and scheme of the resulting NAA–DBR structure (bottom); (ii) digital pictures at 0° (left-top) and 45° (left-bottom), and reflection (right-top) and transmission (right-bottom) spectra of the NAA–DBRs. (b) Comparison between structural colouring in high purity and technical grade aluminium substrates by Chen et al.:94 (i) digital pictures at normal incidence of NAA–DBRs produced with different anodisation periods; (ii) reflection spectra of NAA–DBRs produced in high purity (left) and technical grade (right) aluminium substrates. 
Using a similar approach, Chen et al. demonstrated in a series of studies that the interferometric colours displayed by NAA–PCs produced by stepwise pulse anodisation approach in sulphuric acid under galvanostatic conditions can be further tuned by the number of pulses, the acid electrolyte temperature, and the time ratio between the high and low current density segments in the anodisation profile.91–93 These studies established that, while the number of pulses has a direct effect on the intensity of the colour displayed by these PC structures, an increment of the acid electrolyte temperature results in a red shift. These authors also found that the longer the time at high current density the longer the wavelength at which these NAA–PCs reflect light in the visible spectrum (i.e. red shift). The colour of the resulting NAA–DBRs was found to be highly dependent on the chemical composition of the aluminium substrate.94 NAA–PCs were produced on technical grade and high purity aluminium substrates and a systematic analysis revealed that an increment of the anodisation period produces a more significant red shift in the case of NAA–DBRs produced in technical grade aluminium (i.e. longer red shift in the position of the PSB) than that observed in their counterparts produced in high purity aluminium substrates (Fig. 7b). This analysis also established that the FWHM is much narrower in the case of NAA–DBRs produced in high purity aluminium substrates, denoting a specular reflection mechanism. This property was evidenced by the brightness of the resulting PCs, where NAA–PCs produced in technical grade aluminium featured matt finish colour, indicating a diffuse reflection of light.
More recently, Santos and co-workers developed highly versatile NAA bandpass filters (NAA–BPFs) produced by a pseudo-stepwise asymmetric pulse anodisation approach under galvanostatic conditions in sulphuric acid electrolyte at low temperature (i.e. −1 °C).95 The anodisation approach was based on asymmetric stepwise current density pulses from 0.280 to 1.120 mA cm−2. The effect of the anodisation period over the position and FWHM of the PSB of NAA–BPFs was first established. Using this rationale, the authors demonstrated that the combination of stacked NAA–BPFs produced with different anodisation periods (from 500 to 1200 s) can be readily used to create different transmission bands at specific positions across the transmission spectrum of the PC heterostructures. The authors also demonstrated that a progressive modification of the anodisation period in the stacked NAA–BPF structure can be used to engineer the width of the PSB.
Kumeria et al. carried out an exhaustive analysis on the effect of the anodisation profile on the optical properties of NAA–PCs produced by stepwise pulse anodisation approach in oxalic acid.96 In their study, pseudo-sinusoidal pulse voltage profiles under total charge control were used to engineer the effective medium of NAA in depth. Four different anodisation profiles were explored and the properties of the resulting NAA–PCs were assessed and validated by the Looyenga–Landau–Lifshitz effective medium approximation. The results demonstrated that the effective medium of these NAA–PCs can be approximated to optical gradient-index filters (i.e. PC structures with sinusoidal modification of the effective refractive index in depth). The same authors performed an interesting study assessing and comparing the optical properties of these NAA–PCs and NAA-based Fabry–Perót interferometers (i.e. NAA–PCs featuring straight cylindrical nanopores).97 Their results revealed that NAA–PCs with engineered effective medium provide are more sensitive optical platforms towards changes in their effective medium.
Santos et al. carried out a systematic study to establish a rationale towards full controllability of optical signals in NAA gradient-index filters (NAA-GIFs).98 In the study, a sinusoidal pulse anodisation approach under galvanostatic conditions was used for the first time to create NAA–PC structures, where the effective refractive index was modulated in depth in a sinusoidal fashion (Fig. 8a). The effect of the different fabrication parameters (i.e. anodisation period, anodisation amplitude, anodisation offset, number of pulses, electrolyte temperature and pore widening) on the optical properties (i.e. interferometric colour and position of the characteristic PSB) was established. Their study revealed that the optical properties of NAA-GIFs can be precisely controlled across the UV-visible-NIR spectral regions by the fabrication parameters, establishing a comprehensive approach for the development of advanced PC structures based on NAA.
 Fig. 8  Development of NAA–PC structures by complex pulse-like anodisation under MA regime. (a) Development of nanoporous anodic alumina gradient index filters (NAA-GIFs) by sinusoidal pulse anodisation by Santos et al.:98 (i) SEM top and cross-sectional images of NAA-GIFs; (ii) tuneability of the position of the PSB by the anodisation period (Tp) and digital pictures of NAA-GIFs. (b) Effect of apodisation on the features of NAA-GIFs produced by apodised sinusoidal pulse anodisation under MA galvanostatic conditions in sulphuric acid electrolyte by Santos et al.99 (c) Optical encoding of information within the transmission spectrum of NAA–PCs produced by multi-sinusoidal pulse anodisation approach by Santos et al.106 
In an extension of this study, the same authors applied an apodisation strategy to finely tune the PSB features of NAA-GIFs.99 Apodisation is a filtering approach used to suppress the characteristic sidelobes and narrow the width of the PSB of PC structures. Santos et al. analysed the effect of four apodisation functions (i.e. linear positive, linear negative, logarithmic positive and logarithmic negative) in NAA-GIFs produced by sinusoidal pulse anodisation approach (Fig. 8b). Different apodisation factors (i.e. apodisation function, amplitude difference, pore widening time, anodisation period and anodisation time) were analysed systematically by establishing the position and the quality of the PSB of apodised NAA-GIFs. The obtained results revealed that NAA-GIFs with unprecedented narrow PSB in the transmission spectrum can be obtained by this fabrication method. A logarithmic negative apodisation function was found to be the most optimal function to narrow the characteristic PSB of these PC structures.
Macias et al. analysed the effect of an apodised current density profile in NAA-GIFs produced in oxalic acid electrolyte, where the anodisation period was modified from 200 to 300 s and the pore widening time from 0 to 15 min. The effect of these parameters on the PSB in the reflection spectrum was analysed, revealing that the former parameter produced a red shift, and the latter resulted in a blue shift in the central wavelength.100
Inspired by previous works on porous silicon by Sailor and co-workers,101–105 Santos et al. reported the first realisation of optically encoded photonic tags based on NAA–PCs in the form of films and micro-sized particles produced by sinusoidal pulse anodisation under MA conditions in sulphuric acid.106 In this study, multi-sinusoidal anodisation under current density control was used to engineer the effective medium of NAA–PCs in depth. This process involved the generation of a current density-time anodisation waveform that results from the superposition of n-sine waves of different period (Fig. 8c). Different waveforms were created to contain the desired information in the form of an 8-bit ASCII system. The transmission spectrum of the resulting NAA–PCs displayed multiple PSBs precisely positioned across the visible spectrum. The positions of the PSBs were established by the original current density waveform in the anodisation profile. The anodisation conditions used by the authors made it possible to translate the anodisation profiles into in-depth modulations of porosity with precision. The resulting films and micro-sized particles contained encoded information in their transmission spectrum. This method demonstrates the versatility of NAA as a platform to develop advanced PC structures with broad applicability.
Another study by Law et al. demonstrated that the effective medium of NAA can be engineered by a sawtooth-like anodisation profile to create unique NAA–PC structures with controlled optical properties. In their study, the effect of different anodisation parameters (i.e. anodisation period, anodisation amplitude, number of pulses, ramp ratio, and pore widening time) was assessed systematically to attain full controllability of light across the UV-visible-NIR spectrum.107 The period length in the structure of NAA–PCs was found to be a key parameter to control the position of the PSB in these NAA–PCs. An increment of anodisation period and amplitude produced a significant red shift in the position of the PSB, while an increment of the number of pulses resulted in a slight blue shift. In good agreement with previous studies, the position of the PSB of NAA–PCs underwent a blue shift with the pore widening time. The ramp ratio was found to blue-shift the position of the PSB from 0.5 to 0.67 and red-shift it from 0.67 to 2.0.
In a pioneering study, Wang et al. demonstrated the realisation of two types of optical microcavities based on NAA.108 NAA microcavities (NAA-μCVs) were fabricated by pulse anodisation approach in oxalic acid electrolyte under potentiostatic MA conditions. NAA-μCVs were produced by introducing a cavity composed of straight nanopores (i.e. constant effective refractive index) between two highly reflective NAA–DBRs acting as mirrors (NAA-μCVs type I), and by shifting the phase of the anodisation waveform between the top and bottom mirrors (NAA-μCVs type II). The anodisation profile used by Wang and co-workers consisted of asymmetric stepwise voltage pulses between 20 and 50 V, where the voltage was switched directly from 20 to 50 V in a stepwise fashion and from 50 to 20 V by a decreasing ramp at a rate of −0.078 V s−1. This study demonstrated full controllability over the position of the central wavelength across UV-visible-NIR spectrum by the anodisation period in the NAA–DBRs. The maximum quality factor of the optical microcavity fabricated in this study was reported to be ∼24.
Lee et al. developed an optical microcavity based on a NAA–PC heterostructure.109 This structure was divided into two NAA–DBR mirrors, a top NAA–DBR with a constant period length and a bottom NAA–DBR with a graded period length, which was reduced in depth progressively. The anodisation profile consisted in voltage pulses divided into three sections, with a constant step at 53 V for 30 s, a sinusoidal decaying ramp from 53 to 30 V for 90 s, and a continuous voltage step at 30 V for 2 min. The authors demonstrated the tuneability of the gradient of the bottom NAA–DBR by the acid electrolyte temperature, which was modified from 14.5 to 15.5 °C. A pore widening process led to the generation of a 3D NAA–PC structure with interconnected nanopores. The quality factor of the microcavity produced in this study was reported to be 55.
Using a voltage control pulse anodisation approach similar to that reported in previous studies,80–83 Sheng et al. developed NAA-μCVs and analysed the effect of the cavity position, the pore widening time, the electrolyte temperature, and the angle of incidence on the position of the PSB across the visible region.110 Their study demonstrated that the position of the central wavelength can be precisely tuned by these fabrication parameters. The obtained results were validated by theoretical simulations.
Application of nanoporous anodic alumina photonic crystals
As a result of their unique optical properties, NAA–PCs have been extensively used as platforms to develop optical sensing systems.111–115 Shang et al. fabricated NAA–PCs using the pulse-like anodisation approach reported in ref. 77.114 The position of the PSB of the NAA–PCs was located at ∼1300 nm, with a FWHM of 30 nm, and 90% total reflection. The sensing principle of the sensor was based on shifts in the PSB position in the transmission spectrum of NAA–PCs. After exposure to different concentrations of ethanol gas, the PSB of the NAA–PCs underwent red shifts with the concentration of ethanol as well as with the exposure time. The intensity of the PSB of the NAA–PCs was found to decrease with both the concentration of the analyte and the exposure time, in an almost linear fashion till total saturation. Similar results were reported by the same authors in another study, where NAA–PCs produced by a compensation voltage approach were exposed to ethanol, methanol, acetone, and toluene gases.115 The position of the PSB of these NAA–PCs in the transmission spectrum was red-shifted and the intensity reduced after exposure to the gases until the PC structure was completely saturated with condensed gas molecules.
Yan et al. fabricated NAA–PCs by sinusoidal pulse anodisation under galvanostatic conditions in oxalic acid electrolyte.116 A direct relationship between the position and the FWHM of the PSB, and the anodisation period was established. Both features of the PSB were found to be linearly dependent on the anodisation period. The position and intensity of the PSB in the transmission spectrum of NAA–PCs underwent a linear red shift after the infiltration of the nanoporous structure with liquids of increasing refractive index (i.e. water, ethyl alcohol, ethylene glycol, and glycerol).
Kumeria et al. analysed systematically the sensitivity of NAA-GIFs towards changes of refractive index in the medium filling the nanopores.96 Shifts in the position of the characteristic PSB of the NAA-GIFs were assessed by reflection spectroscopy to establish a relationship between the refractive index of the medium filling the nanopores (i.e. aqueous solutions of glucose with concentration ranging from 0 to 1 M) and the PSB position shift. Four NAA–PC structures produced by different anodisation profiles under potentiostatic conditions in oxalic acid electrolyte were assessed and the effect of pore widening established. The NAA-GIFs displayed vivid colours, which were demonstrated to be tuneable across the visible region of the spectrum by the anodisation profile and the pore widening time. The authors identified colour changes after selective infiltration of the nanoporous structure with acetone. In an extension of this study, the same authors developed an optical sensor to detect mercury ions (Hg2+) in aqueous solutions by combining thiol-modified NAA-GIFs as optical sensing platforms with reflection spectroscopy.117 The sensing performance of these PC structures was assessed through a series of tests, establishing a linear working range from 1 to 100 μM, a low limit of detection of 1 μM (i.e. 200 ppb), and a sensitivity of 0.072 nm μM−1. The chemical selectivity of the sensing system was evaluated by exposing the chemically modified PCs to analytical solutions containing interfering metal ions (e.g. Co2+, Mg2+, Ni2+) and complex water matrices such as ultrapure, tap, and river water. The system was found to be highly selective towards Hg2+ even under the presence of interfering elements. This study was further extended by comparing the sensing performance of NAA-GIFs with a structurally engineered effective medium and Fabry–Pérot interferometers featuring straight cylindrical nanopores from top to bottom.97 The sensing performance of these PC structures towards Hg2+ ions revealed that the former type of NAA–PC can provide a twelve-fold higher sensitivity, indicating the suitability of structural engineering to develop highly sensitive optical platforms for sensing applications.
Chen et al. used thiol-modified NAA–DBRs produced by stepwise pulse anodisation under mild conditions in sulphuric acid electrolyte as sensing platforms to detect gold ions (Au3+) in aqueous solutions.91 The sensitivity of a series of NAA–DBRs, produced with anodisation period from 675 to 1170 s and number of pulses from 100 to 200, towards changes in the refractive index of the medium filling the nanopores was assessed by infiltrating the nanoporous structure of these PCs with water, 0.5 M glucose, ethanol, and isopropanol. The analysis revealed that the most sensitive PC structure was that produced with an anodisation period of 1035 s and 150 pulses. This NAA–PC structure was used as a sensing platform to develop an Au3+ sensing system in combination with reflectometric interference spectroscopy (RIfS). The sensitivity of the sensor was 22.16 nm μM−1, achieving a low limit of detection of 0.156 μM (i.e. 30.7 ppb). An extension of this study analysed NAA–DBRs produced with anodisation period from 675 to 1170 s, anodisation temperature from −1 to 3 °C, and ranging ratio of time at high and low current density (i.e. 1:2, 1:4, 1:6, 2:1, 4:1, and 6:1).92 After assessing the sensitivity of these PC structures towards changes in the refractive index of the medium filling the nanopores, the authors established that NAA–DBRs produced with 900 s, 3 °C, and 1:4 were the most sensitive optical platform. These NAA–PCs were chemically functionalised with amino-containing functional molecules to detect vitamin C molecules. The performance of the sensor was a sensitivity of 227 nm mM−1, and a low limit of detection of 20 nM.
As mentioned before, NAA–DBRs produced by stepwise anodisation display vivid colours across the visible spectrum, which undergo changes when the effective medium of these PC structures is altered. Chen et al. envisaged this property to pioneer colorimetric visual sensors based on NAA–DBRs in the form of films and micro-particles.93 First, the visual colorimetric features of NAA–DBR films produced with anodisation period from 675 to 1170 s, and anodisation temperature from −1 to 3 °C, were assessed by image analysis after selective infiltration of their nanoporous structure with ethanol. This analysis revealed that only those NAA–DBRs produced with 1035 s and 1170 s displayed significant colour changes after infiltration. Subsequently, a set of NAA–DBRs produced with 1035 s at −1 °C were chemically modified with thiol-terminated functional groups and exposed to analytical concentrations of Hg2+ ranging from 10 to 250 μM. Image analysis of the NAA–PCs was performed after exposure by decomposing the colour of these NAA–PCs into RGB values. A linear relationship between the blue and green channels and the analyte concentration from 10 to 100 mM was observed, with a sensitivity of 0.81 and 1.25 a.u. mM−1, respectively. As a proof of concept, the authors demonstrated that NAA–DBRs in the form of micro-sized particles also display colour changes after infiltration with isopropanol, opening new opportunities to develop visual sensing platforms at micro-scale.
Santos et al. developed a sensing system for the assessment of affinity between indomethacin molecules (i.e. a drug model) and human serum albumin (HSA) in real-time.98 The sensing system was based on the combination of NAA-GIFs and reflectometric interference spectroscopy (RIfS). These PC structures were produced by sinusoidal pulse anodisation under galvanostatic conditions with an anodisation period of 650 s and 150 pulses. The sensing principle of this system relies on red shifts in the position of the characteristic PSB of these PC structures as a result of the reversible chemical interaction between indomethacin and HSA molecules. The sensor provided a sensitivity of 0.63 nm mM−1, with a low limit of detection of 0.065 mM. In an extension of this study, Nemati et al. performed a systematic assessment of the affinity between HSA-functionalised NAA-GIFs and a series of drug molecules, including sulfadymethoxine, coumarin, warfarin, indomethacin, and salicylic acid.118 Two sensing parameters were assessed, the position of the characteristic PSB and the effective optical thickness of the whole NAA–PCs. A design of experiments strategy was first performed in order to discern the most sensitive optical platforms for each sensing parameter. The study found that the affinity between drugs and HSA is dependent on the sensing parameter used.
Law et al. produced NAA–PCs by sawtooth-like pulse anodisation under galvanostatic conditions and demonstrated the functionality of these PC structures to monitor the formation of self-assembled monolayers of 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid, a thiol-containing molecule.107 The sensing system, based on the combination of gold-coated NAA–PCs and RIfS, provided a means of establishing the kinetics model, which was found to follow a Langmuir isotherm mechanism.
Wang et al. developed a humidity sensor based on NAA-μCVs by monitoring the red shifts in the position of the characteristic PSB in the transmission spectrum after exposure to water vapour.108 The modification of the effective medium of the NAA-μCVs resulted in a total red shift of the PSB of 2.58 nm due to the condensation of water molecules inside their nanoporous structure. The system showed a linear response with the total amount of water within 30 s of exposure.
Lee et al. demonstrated a colorimetric sensor based on NAA-μCVs.109 First, the sensitivity of these NAA–PCs as a function of the acid electrolyte temperature during anodisation was assessed by establishing shifts in the position of the PSB after infiltration with water, anhydrous ethanol, anhydrous n-hexane, and isopropanol. The analysis of these shifts established that the most sensitive PC structure was that produced at 15.5 °C. A colorimetric sensor was developed by comparing the L, a, and b in the CIELab 1931 tristimulus colour space of a NAA-μCV in air (RI 1.0000), water (RI 1.3323), isopropanol (RI 13719), cyclohexane (RI 1.4225), and trichloroethylene (RI 1.4777).
Although the most widely application of NAA–PC structures is optical sensing, recent studies have demonstrated that NAA with a structurally engineered effective medium can be excellent platforms for the development of antireflective coatings for energy harvesting applications. Choi et al. fabricated gradient refractive index (GRIN) coatings based on NAA by stepwise pulse anodisation under potentiostatic conditions, where the anodisation period is modified in a gradient fashion in depth (Fig. 9a).119 The optical properties of the broadband omnidirectional antireflective coating can be precisely controlled by engineering the structure of the NAA–PC. The antireflective coatings exhibited unprecedented antireflection properties, with minimal reflection at any angle of incidence. The integration of NAA-GRIN coatings into an organic solar cell system was demonstrated, revealing a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10.02%, which is 5.03% enhancement as compared to the solar cell counterpart without NAA-GRIN coating.
 Fig. 9  Examples of application of NAA–PC structures. (a) Fabrication of NAA gradient refractive index (GRIN) coatings and integration into organic solar cells by Choi et al.:119 (i) anodisation profile consisting of asymmetric stepwise potentiostatic pulses and scheme showing details of the structure of NAA-GRIN; (ii) device performance with current density vs. voltage curves (left) and power conversion efficiency (right) at different angle of incidence. (b) Development of optical haze based on NAA nanowires by Kang et al.:120 (i) fabrication process of the optical haze by wet chemical etching; (ii) optical characterisation and device integration of haze films as a function of the morphology of the resulting NAA films. 
In another study, Kang et al. developed a high optical haze film composed of self-aggregated alumina nanowires arrays (Fig. 9b).120 The total and diffuse transmittance, and haze value of these photonic films were found to be controllable by the packing density of the alumina nanowires produced by etching NAA in phosphoric acid for times ranging from 43 to 45 min. The photonic films were integrated with a PTB7:PC70BM-based organic photovoltaic solar cell. The PCE was enhanced as compared to the bare device and a direct dependence between the features of the haze film and the PCE feature was established. While the bare device achieved a PCE of 8.17%, haze films produced by 43, 44 and 45 min etching times provided PCEs of 9.01, 8.86 and 8.54%, respectively. This study demonstrates that haze films based on alumina nanowires can provide enhanced power conversion efficiencies for energy harvesting and other optoelectronic applications.
Binary composite heterostructures based on nanopillars of titanium dioxide (TiO2) and cuprous oxide (Cu2O) were produced by a selective etching of NAA thin films used as templates.121 Homogeneously distributed arrays of TiO2 (photoanode) and Cu2O (photocathode) were demonstrated as electrode platforms for artificial photosynthesis using two different reaction centres with an appropriate electron transport chain. On illumination at AM 1.5G, anodic and cathodic photocurrents were observed when the bias voltage from −0.7 to 0.3 V. In another interesting study, Ashley et al. used NAA films as templates to produce semi-conducting metal halide perovskites structures based on nanowires with controlled diameter (50–200 nm).122 Nanostructured thin films based on CH3NH3PbI3, CH3NH3PbBr3, and Cs2SnI6 were produced using this approach. The chemical, structural, crystallographic, and photoluminescence properties of these structures were characterised to demonstrate the feasibility of this fabrication method to generate electrodes for solar cell and photodetection applications. Waleed et al. used similar approach to produce photoelectrodes based on CH3NH3SnI3 nanowires.123 This study established that nanostructuring can lead to a dramatic enhancement of the stability of the photoelectrodes. This phenomenon was attributed to the effective blockage of the diffusion of water and oxygen within the photoelectrode structure. The current–voltage characteristics of the photoelectrodes under light intensity from 0.36 to 1.1 mW cm−2 were analysed, revealing that the current increases linearly with the light intensity in a superlinear fashion.
Conclusions
This review has presented the fundamental and applied developments of NAA–PCs produced by anodisation of aluminium, from pioneering works to recent advances in the field and applications. Over the past twenty years, the applicability of NAA as a platform to develop advanced PC structures has been demonstrated. This nanomaterial offers a plethora of advantages to develop PC structures due to its self-organised nanoporous structure, which can be controlled by the fabrication conditions, and its cost-competitive, controllable, and fully scalable fabrication process. Although pioneering studies demonstrated the functionality of NAA as a PC platform, the complete development of this technology was hindered by the intrinsic limitations of anodisation. The application of pulse-like anodisation strategies paved the way for engineering the effective medium of this nanoporous material in depth by structural engineering, opening new paths for the design and engineering of advanced PCs.
Recent studies have demonstrated that to engineer the structure of NAA is a cost-competitive and scalable approach to produce a set of PC structures with finely tuned optical properties. In spite of recent advances, more systematic experimental investigations will be required to fully develop this technology for future applications. For instance, the design of anodisation strategies that can enable new methods to engineer the effective medium of NAA will be needed to fabricate NAA–PCs with precisely engineered optical properties in the whole range of spectral regions. Although the fabrication of NAA–PCs under mild conditions has been demonstrated as a suitable approach to engineer the effective medium of NAA, more investigations combining mild and hard anodisation conditions are needed to reduce the fabrication time of these PC structures, while attaining a fine control over the optical properties of NAA–PCs. Another factor to consider is the implementation of NAA–PCs into functional systems and on-chip devices that can provide optimal performances for real applications such as optical devices and sensors, optoelectronic and photovoltaic systems, and photonic circuits.
Some proof-of-concept studies have revealed that the integration of NAA–PCs into functional devices can enhance the performances of existing systems by enabling more efficient means of controlling light for specific applications. As a result of its versatility, NAA offers multiple degrees of freedom to control the light–matter interaction, enabling paths to develop innovative PC structures with broad applicability. Therefore, it is likely that future developments of anodisation approaches aiming to engineer the internal structure and their subsequent integration with existing technologies such as microfabrication will open new and exciting opportunities to expand the applicability of this nanomaterials across different fields and disciplines.
Acknowledgements
Support provided by the Australian Research Council (ARC) through the grant number DE140100549, the School of Chemical Engineering, the University of Adelaide (UoA), the Institute for Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), and the ARC Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics (CNBP).
References

          M. García-Matos and L. Torner, The Wonders of Light, Cambridge University Press,  2015 Search PubMed .
H.-G. Park, C. J. Barrelet, Y. Wu, B. Tian, F. Qian and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 622 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan and P. R. Herman, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Bierman, A. Lenert, W. R. Chan, B. Bhatia, I. Celanivic, M. Soljacic and E. N. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1 Search PubMed .
A. P. Mosk, A. Lagendijk, G. Lerosey and M. Fink, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 283 CrossRef CAS .
C. López, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1680 CrossRef .
Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.-S. Song and S. Noda, Nature, 2003, 425, 944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Noda, K. Tomoda, N. Yamamoto and A. Chutinan, Science, 2000, 289, 604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Noda, A. Chutinan and M. Imada, Nature, 2000, 407, 608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-S. Song, S. Noda, T. Asano and Y. Akahane, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 207 CrossRef CAS .

Photonic Crystals and Light Localization in the 21st Century, ed. C. M. Soukoulis, Springer International Publishing,  2001 Search PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Nanoporous alumina: fabrication, structure, properties and applications, ed. D. Losic and A. Santos, Springer International Publishing,  2015 Search PubMed .
T. Kondo, S. Hirano, T. Yanagishita, N. T. Nguyen, P. Schmuki and H. Masuda, Appl. Phys. Express, 2016, 9, 102001 CrossRef .
J. Lin, K. Liu and X. Chen, Small, 2011, 7, 1784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. O. Estevez and V. Agarwal, Porous Silicon Photonic Crystals, in Handbook of Porous Silicon, Springer International Publishing,  2014, pp. 1–10 Search PubMed .

          G. D. Sulka, Highly Ordered Anodic Porous Alumina Formation by Self-Organized Anodizing, in Nanostructured Materials in Electrochemistry, Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh&Co. KGaA,  2008, pp. 1–116 Search PubMed .
W. Lee and J. S. Park, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Masuda, M. Ohya, H. Asoh, M. Nakao, M. Nohtomi and T. Tamamura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, L1403 CrossRef .
H. Masuda, M. Ohya, K. Nishio, H. Asoh, M. Nakao, M. Nohtomi, A. Yokoo and T. Tamamura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 39, L1039 CrossRef CAS .
H. Masuda, M. Ohya, H. Asoh and K. Nishio, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 40, L1217 CAS .

          S. Wernick, R. Pinner and P. G. Sheasby, The Surface Treatment and Finishing of Aluminum and its Alloys, Finishing Publications LTD,  1987 Search PubMed .
R. Kondo, T. Kikuchi, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, Mater. Lett., 2016, 183, 285 CrossRef CAS .
O. Nishinaga, T. Kikuchi, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2748 Search PubMed .
A. Takenaga, T. Kikuchi, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 515 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kikuchi, T. Yamamoto and R. O. Suzuki, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 284, 907 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akiya, T. Kikuchi, S. Natsui, N. Sakaguchi and R. O. Suzuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 471 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akiya, T. Kikuchi, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, E244 CrossRef CAS .
A. Takenaga, T. Kikuchi, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, ECS Solid State Lett., 2015, 4, P55 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kikuchi, O. Nishinaga, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 156, 235 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nakajima, T. Kikuchi, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 321, 364 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kikuchi, O. Nishinaga, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 728 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kikuchi, D. Nakajima, J. Kawashima, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 313, 276 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kikuchi, T. Yamamoto, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 123, 14 CrossRef CAS .
O. Jessensky, F. Müller and U. Gösele, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 1173 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, K. Nielsch and U. Gösele, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 475713 CrossRef .
V. Vega, J. García, J. M. Montero-Moreno, B. Hernando, J. Bachmann, V. M. Prida and K. Nielsh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28682 CAS .
H. Masuda and K. Fukuda, Science, 1995, 268, 1466–1468 CAS .
H. Masuda and F. Hasegwa, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L127–L130 CrossRef CAS .
H. Masuda, K. Yada and A. Osaka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 37, L1340–L1342 CrossRef .
W. Lee, R. Ji, U. Gösele and K. Nielsch, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamamoto, N. Baba and S. Tajima, Nature, 1981, 289, 572 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, W. L. Cai, C. M. Mo, J. Chen, L. D. Zhang and X. G. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 2951 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Huang, X. L. Wu, Y. F. Mei, X. F. Shao and G. G. Siu, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 582 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, F. Xu, Z. Li and W. Zhang, J. Lumin., 2006, 121, 588 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Chen, C. P. Huang, C. G. Chao and T. M. Chen, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 84, 297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Li, M. J. Zheng and L. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 073109 CrossRef .
A. Santos, M. Alba, M. M. Rahman, P. Formentín, J. Ferré-Borrull, J. Pallarès and L. F. Marsal, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 228 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li and K. Huang, J. Lumin., 2007, 127, 435 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Mukhurov, S.
P. Zhvavyi, S. N. Terekhov, A. Y. Panarin, I. F. Kotova, P. P. Pershukevich, I. A. Khodasevich, I. V. Gasenkova and V. A. Orlovich, J. Appl. Spectrosc., 2008, 75, 214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Liu, Y. F. Tu, S. Y. Huang, J. P. Sang and X. W. Zou, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 3370 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stojadinovic, Z. Nedic, I. Belca, R. Vasilic, B. Kasalica, M. Petkovic and L. J. Zekovic, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 256, 763 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vrublevsky, A. Jagminas, S. Hemeltjen and W. Goedel, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 1873 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vrublevsky, A. Jagminas, S. Hemeltjen and W. Goedel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 2013 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santos, V. S. Balderrama, M. Alba, P. Formentín, J. Ferré-Borrull, J. Pallarès and L. F. Marsal, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Huang, L. Pu, Y. Shi, P. Han, R. Zhang and Y. D. Zheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 201118 CrossRef .
L. Cantelli, J. S. Santos and F. Trivinho-Strixino, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 780, 386 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santos, T. Kumeria and D. Losic, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 7904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Theiß, S. Henkel and M. Arntzen, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 255, 177 CrossRef .

          B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of photonics, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2007 Search PubMed .
K. Nielsch, J. Choi, K. Schwirn, R. B. Wehspohn and U. Gösele, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 677 CrossRef CAS .
H. Han, S.-J. Park, J. S. Jang, H. Ryu, K. J. Kim, S. Baik and W. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3441 CAS .
A. Santos, T. Kumeria, Y. Wang and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9991 RSC .
J. Choi, Y. Luo, R. B. Wehrspohn, R. Hillebrand, J. Schilling and U. Gösele, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 8, 4757 CrossRef .
H. Masuda, M. Yamada, F. Matsumoto, S. Yokoyama, S. Mashiko, M. Nakao and K. Nishio, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 213 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee and J.-C. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 485304 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lee, K. Schwirn, M. Steinhart, E. Pippel, R. Scholz and U. Gösele, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lee, R. Scholz and U. Gösele, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lee, J. C. Kim and U. Gösele, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1 Search PubMed .
R. C. Furneaux, W. R. Rigby and A. P. Davidson, Nature, 1989, 337, 47 CrossRef .
W. Cheng, M. Steinhart, U. Gösele and R. B. Wehrspohn, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3493 RSC .
J. M. Montero-Moreno, M. Belenguer, M. Sarret and C. M. Müller, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2529 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schwirn, W. Lee, R. Hillebrand, M. Steinhart, K. Nielsch and U. Gösele, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Sulka and K. Hnida, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 075303 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Martín, M. Martín-González, J. F. Fernández and O. Caballero-Calero, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5130 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, G. T. Fei, M. Wang, M. G. Kong and L. D. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 365601 CrossRef .
W. J. Zheng, G. T. Fei, B. Wang, Z. Jin and L. D. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 706 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zheng, G. T. Fei, B. Wang and L. D. Zhang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, G. T. Fei, Y. Zhang, P. Yan, H. Li, G. L. Shang and L. D. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 2693 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, G. T. Fei, Y. Zhang, H. Li, P. Yan, G. L. Shang and L. D. Zhang, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2011, 28, 2931 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Shang, G. T. Fei, Y. Zhang, P. Yan, S. H. Xu, H. M. Ouyang and L. D. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3601 Search PubMed .
G. L. Shang, Y. Zhang, G. T. Fei, Y. Su and L. D. Zhang, Ann. Phys., 2016, 528, 288 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Rahman, L. F. Marsal, J. Pallarès and J. Ferré-Borrull, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13375 CAS .
L. Zhiyuan, C. Shuoshuo, H. Xing and L. Yi, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2009, 26, 054213 CrossRef .
M. Pashchanka, S. Yadav, T. Cottre and J. J. Schneider, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12877 RSC .
D. Choi, C. K. Shin, D. Yoon, D. S. Chung, Y. W. Jin and L. P. Lee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Zhu, Y. Hu, J. Zheng, J. Chu and W. Huang, J. Nanomater., 2014, 2014, 819432 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, D. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Ma and J. Z. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 305306 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yisen, C. Yi, L. Zhiyuan, H. Xing and L. Yi, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1336 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, A. Santos, Y. Wang, T. Kumeria, C. Wang, J. Li and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7770 RSC .
Y. Chen, A. Santos, Y. Wang, T. Kumeria, J. Li, C. Wang and D. Losic, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19816 CAS .
Y. Chen, A. Santos, Y. Wang, T. Kumeria, D. Ho, J. Li, C. Wang and D. Losic, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, A. Santos, D. Ho, Y. Wang, T. Kumeria, J. Li, C. Wang and D. Losic, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 174, 672 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santos, T. Pereira, C. S. Law and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14846 RSC .
T. Kumeria, M. M. Rahman, A. Santos, J. Ferré-Borrull, L. F. Marsal and D. Losic, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 1837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kumeria, A. Santos, M. M. Rahman, J. Ferré-Borrull, L. F. Marsal and D. Losic, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 1298 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santos, J. H. Yoo, C. V. Rohatgi, T. Kumeria, Y. Wang and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1360 RSC .
A. Santos, C. S. Law, D. W. Chin Lei, T. Pereira and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18360 RSC .
G. Macias, J. Ferré-Borrull, J. Pallarès and L. F. Marsal, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 315 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Cunin, T. A. Schmedake, J. R. Link, Y. Y. Li, J. Koh, S. N. Bathia and M. J. Sailor, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. O. Meade, M. S. Yoon, K. H. Ahn and M. J. Sailor, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1811 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Meade, M. Y. Chen, M. J. Sailor and G. M. Miskelly, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 2618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Chen, S. O. Meade and M. J. Sailor, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2009, 6, 1610 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Meade and M. J. Sailor, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2007, 1, R71 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santos, C. S. Law, T. Pereira and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8091 RSC .
C. S. Law, A. Santos, M. Nemati and D. Losic, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13542 CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Kumeria, F. Ding, A. Evdokiou, D. Losic and A. Santos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9879 CAS .
J. Lee, K. Bae, G. Kang, M. Choi, S. Baek, D.-S. Yoo, C.-W. Lee and K. Kim, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 71770 RSC .
G. L. Shang, G. T. Fei and L. D. Zhang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 435304 CrossRef .
A. Santos, T. Kumeria and D. Losic, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2013, 44, 25 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santos, T. Kumeria and D. Losic, Materials, 2014, 7, 4297 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kumeria, A. Santos and D. Losic, Sensors, 2014, 14, 11878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Shang, G. T. Fei, Y. Zhang, P. Yan, S. H. Xu and L. D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 5285 RSC .
G. Shang, G. Fei, Y. Li and L. Zhang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 703 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yan, G. T. Fei, G. L. Shang, B. Wu and L. D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1659 RSC .
T. Kumeria, M. M. Rahman, A. Santos, J. Ferré-Borrull, L. F. Marsal and D. Losic, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12971 CAS .
M. Nemati, A. Santos, C. S. Law and D. Losic, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 5971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Choi, Y. Yoon, J. Jung, C. W. Ahn, G. J. Lee, Y. M. Song, M. J. Ko, H. S. Lee, B. S. Kim and I.-S. Kang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/adom.201600616 .
G. Kang, K. Bae, M. Nam, D.-H. Ko, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2650 CAS .
L. Wen, R. Xu, Y. Mi and Y. Lei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016 DOI:10.1038/nnano.2016.257 .
M. J. Ashley, M. N. O’Brien, K. R. Hedderick, J. A. Mason, M. B. Ross and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Waleed, M. M. Tavakoli, L. Gu, Z. Wang, D. Zhang, A. Manikandan, Q. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y.-L. Chueh and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Abel Santos
	Dr Abel Santos received his BEng in Chemical Engineering from the Universitat Jaume I (Spain) in 2006, and MEng and PhD degrees in Electronic Engineering from the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Spain) in 2007 and 2011, respectively. In 2014 he was awarded an ARC-DECRA, and currently he is a ‘Research for Impact’ Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering, member of the Institute for Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), and associate investigator of the ARC Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics (CNBP) at the University of Adelaide, where he works on structural engineering of photonic crystals based on nanoporous anodic alumina.

 	Fig. 1  Fabrication, geometric features, structural engineering of effective medium and chemical structure of nanoporous anodic alumina. (a) Two-step anodisation process and structural features of NAA: (i) aluminium substrate; (ii) nanopores nucleation – first step; (iii) nanopores development – first step; (iv) sacrificial oxide layer removal; (v) cross-sectional view of self-organised NAA structure – second step; (vi) tilted 3D view of NAA structure (Lp – nanopores length); (vii) top view of NAA structure (dint – interpore distance and dp – nanopores diameter); (viii) top (right) and cross-sectional (left) SEM images of NAA produced by two-step anodisation process using oxalic acid electrolyte under mild conditions (scale bars = 1 μm and 100 nm, respectively). (b) Structural engineering of effective medium of NAA in depth: (i) aluminium substrate; (ii) sinusoidal anodisation profile; (iii) NAA–PC structure with details of the nanopores geometry; (iv) effective medium approximation. (c) Onion-like chemical structure of NAA: (i) three-layer model proposed by Yamamoto et al.;43 (ii) two-layer model with impurities distribution in depth proposed by Han et al.;63 (iii) TEM image showing details of the chemical composition of the cells in NAA (adapted from ref. 19).	 

 	Fig. 2  Pioneering studies on the optical properties of 2D NAA–PCs. (a) In-plane optical properties of perfectly ordered 2D NAA–PCs (adapted from ref. 20): (i) illustration showing the structure of 2D NAA–PCs produced by master stamp lithography and anodisation with details of the in-plane configuration (top) and Γ–X and Γ–J directions (bottom); (ii) transmission spectra of 2D NAA–PCs for H (top) and E (bottom) polarization light at Γ–X and Γ–J directions; (iii) calculated band-gap structures of 2D NAA–PCs for H (left) and E (right) polarization light. (b) Reflectivity properties of 2D NAA–PCs produced by master stamp lithography followed by direct anodisation (adapted from ref. 65): (i) illustration showing the distribution of impurities in the structure of NAA–PCs; (ii) reflectivity measurements (left) and band structure calculations (right) for different filling factor values; (iii) dependence of the photonic stopband with the filling factor for TE mode (top) and TM mode (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 3  Pioneering developments of pulse-like anodisation by combining mild (MA) and hard (HA) anodisation regimes. (a) First demonstration of structural engineering by Lee et al.:42 (i) master stamp lithography and discontinuous MA–HA pulses by exchange of acid electrolyte and anodisation conditions; (ii) SEM cross-sectional view of MA–HA NAA structure; (iii) SEM images showing top, bottom and cross-sectional details of MA–HA NAA produced by discontinuous pulse anodisation in oxalic acid under potentiostatic conditions. (b) Dynamic pulse-like anodisation combining MA and HA regimes without acid exchanges under potentiostatic conditions in oxalic acid electrolyte by Lee et al.:67 (i) illustration of the pulse-like anodisation process; (ii) SEM cross-sectional images of the resulting NAA structures (scale bars = 500 nm). (c) Dynamic stepwise pulse anodisation between MA and HA regimes using sulphuric acid by Lee et al.:68 (i) scheme of this fabrication process; (ii) tilted (left) and cross-sectional (right) views of the MA–HA NAA structure after wet chemical etching to enhance the porosity contrast between MA and HA layers.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structural details of NAA–PC structures produced by structural engineering of the effective medium. From left to right: gradient-index filter, optical microcavity, Fabry–Perót interferometer, distributed Bragg reflector, and apodised gradient-index filter.	 

 	Fig. 5  Developments of 3D NAA–PC structures by pulse-like anodisation combining MA and HA anodisation regimes. (a) Fabrication of nanoporous anodic alumina distributed Bragg reflector (NAA–DBR) by Sulka et al.:75 (i) anodisation profile consisting of stepwise potentiostatic pulses between MA and HA regimes in sulphuric acid electrolyte (top) and scheme of the resulting NAA–DBR structure (bottom); (ii) experimental and simulated reflection spectrum of NAA–DBR showing two PSBs. (b) Development of 3D NAA–PCs and polymeric replicas by Martín et al.:76 (i) scheme, digital pictures and SEM cross-sectional images showing details of the structure of 3D NAA–PCs produced by MA–HA stepwise pulse anodisation; (ii) angle-dependence of the optical properties of the resulting composites base on polymers and 3D NAA–PCs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Development of 1D NAA–PC structures by pulse-like anodisation under MA regime. (a) Fabrication of NAA–PC heterostructures by Su et al.:81 (i) anodisation profile consisting of voltage control pulses in MA regimes in oxalic acid electrolyte (top) and scheme of the resulting NAA–PC structure with pore branching (bottom); (ii) SEM cross-sectional view of the heterogeneous NAA–PCs produced with two stacked PCs; (iii) transmission spectrum of the NAA–PC structures with overlapped, staggered and split configuration. (b) Fano resonance in NAA–PCs by Shang et al.:82 (i) scheme (top) and transmission spectrum of 1D NAA–PCs (bottom) produced by Shang et al.; (ii) transmission changes in the PSB of NAA–PCs with time after exposure to ethanol gas; (iii) transmission evolution of the PSB (top) and Fano asymmetry parameter (q) after exposure to ethanol gas. (c) Development and analysis of NAA-based PC heterostructures composed of two stacked PCs by Shang et al.:83 (i) anodisation profile (top), scheme (middle) and SEM cross-sectional view (bottom) of the NAA–PC heterostructures; (ii) digital pictures, and forward and backward transmission and reflection spectra of NAA–PC heterostructures.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structural colouring of aluminium by NAA–PC structures. (a) Fabrication of NAA–DBRs by stepwise pulse anodisation by Yisen et al.:90 (i) anodisation profile consisting of stepwise galvanostatic pulses under MA regime in sulphuric acid electrolyte (top) and scheme of the resulting NAA–DBR structure (bottom); (ii) digital pictures at 0° (left-top) and 45° (left-bottom), and reflection (right-top) and transmission (right-bottom) spectra of the NAA–DBRs. (b) Comparison between structural colouring in high purity and technical grade aluminium substrates by Chen et al.:94 (i) digital pictures at normal incidence of NAA–DBRs produced with different anodisation periods; (ii) reflection spectra of NAA–DBRs produced in high purity (left) and technical grade (right) aluminium substrates.	 

 	Fig. 8  Development of NAA–PC structures by complex pulse-like anodisation under MA regime. (a) Development of nanoporous anodic alumina gradient index filters (NAA-GIFs) by sinusoidal pulse anodisation by Santos et al.:98 (i) SEM top and cross-sectional images of NAA-GIFs; (ii) tuneability of the position of the PSB by the anodisation period (Tp) and digital pictures of NAA-GIFs. (b) Effect of apodisation on the features of NAA-GIFs produced by apodised sinusoidal pulse anodisation under MA galvanostatic conditions in sulphuric acid electrolyte by Santos et al.99 (c) Optical encoding of information within the transmission spectrum of NAA–PCs produced by multi-sinusoidal pulse anodisation approach by Santos et al.106	 

 	Fig. 9  Examples of application of NAA–PC structures. (a) Fabrication of NAA gradient refractive index (GRIN) coatings and integration into organic solar cells by Choi et al.:119 (i) anodisation profile consisting of asymmetric stepwise potentiostatic pulses and scheme showing details of the structure of NAA-GRIN; (ii) device performance with current density vs. voltage curves (left) and power conversion efficiency (right) at different angle of incidence. (b) Development of optical haze based on NAA nanowires by Kang et al.:120 (i) fabrication process of the optical haze by wet chemical etching; (ii) optical characterisation and device integration of haze films as a function of the morphology of the resulting NAA films.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
