Simulations of non-monolithic tandem solar cell configurations for electrolytic fuel generation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA04022A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA04022A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13112-13121Simulations of non-monolithic tandem solar cell configurations for electrolytic fuel generation†

        
          
            R. Turner 
            White
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Bijandra 
            Kumar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sudesh 
            Kumari
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Joshua M. 
            Spurgeon
          
        
      *
      Conn Center for Renewable Energy Research, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA. E-mail: joshua.spurgeon@louisville.edu
Received 
      9th May 2017
    , Accepted 6th June 2017First published on 6th June 2017AbstractThe efficient conversion of solar energy to fuels through electrochemical processes requires optimizing the photovoltage and current for an ideal coupling with the electrolysis reaction. A modular architecture for tandem photovoltaics is explored and modeled as a strategy to drive an arbitrary electrolysis reaction from sunlight to produce the maximum fuel product in a day. Non-monolithic tandem solar cells based on Si and organometal halide perovskites are simulated in two-terminal and four-terminal arrangements and coupled with experimental data on water-splitting and CO2 reduction to predict the performance of an integrated solar fuels system. An appropriately designed four-terminal system is modeled to match or exceed the output of a two-terminal system. The four-terminal configuration leads to a 15.8% increase in daily H2 production with a 1.5 eV/1.12 eV system, and a 5.3% increase with a more ideal 1.74 eV/1.12 eV combination. The four-terminal system is also simulated to match the production of formic acid and increase the production of ethylene by 20.4% in a Cu-catalyzed CO2 reduction process compared to a two-terminal tandem arrangement. The effects of series resistance in non-monolithic tandem devices are modeled as well, showing a much greater tolerance to cell width in the four-terminal systems.
Introduction
Solar energy is the most abundant and widely available renewable resource but implementing it as a major factor in the global energy industry will require cost-effective storage to offset the intermittency of sunlight. Solar fuels generation is an attractive option with the advantage of capturing much of the photon energy in the bonds of portable, energy-dense chemical species such as hydrogen or liquid hydrocarbons.1,2 This process can be achieved sustainably at global production scales via the carbon-free electrolysis of water to H2 or via the carbon–neutral combination of water-splitting with electrochemical CO2 reduction to liquid fuels. The bulk of the research in the solar fuels field has focused on photoelectrochemical (PEC) systems in which the active light-absorbing semiconductors are directly integrated with catalysts and immersed in the electrolyte.3–6 However, the conceptual differences in transitioning from a PEC semiconductor/liquid junction to a PEC semiconductor buried junction in liquid to a photovoltaic-driven electrolysis (PV + electrolyzer) are slight, with a detailed theoretical and experimental comparison of analogous systems often favoring the energy-conversion performance of a PV + electrolyzer arrangement.7,8 Relative to a PEC system, a PV outside of the electrolyte driving electrolysis has the advantages of minimizing ohmic losses9 while avoiding semiconductor corrosion,5 parasitic optical absorption in the catalyst layers,10 and light scattering from bubble formation.11,12 There are advantages to integrating the solar and electrolysis components over similar areas, such as more earth-abundant catalysts and/or a water vapor feedstock, which both become possible due to low solar-flux-limited current densities, but these benefits are still feasible in an integrated PV + electrolyzer arrangement.13 Alternatively, other PV + electrolyzer designs have been proposed which vary the electrode to photoabsorber area ratio to optimize the performance under concentrated illumination.14
For a fuel-forming electrolysis reaction to H2 or a hydrocarbon, the stored power in the fuel is equal to the faradaic current times the thermodynamic potential of the reaction, with the excess driving voltage constituting a loss to overcome the kinetic limitations of the reaction (Fig. 1).15 To have the maximum possible PV + electrolyzer solar-to-fuel system efficiency, the photovoltaic performance curve should intersect the electrolyzer load curve near its maximum power point where the solar cell is most efficient. A deviation from this operating point represents an additional energy loss to the system from less than optimum device coupling.
 Fig. 1  Performance of a photovoltaic (blue curve) driving electrolysis (green curve). The operating current, Iop, times the thermodynamic standard potential for the fuel formation reaction, Eofuel, marks the stored power, with losses due to kinetics and operating of the PV away from its maximum power point. 
For a solar cell to drive an electrochemical reaction, it must provide sufficient photovoltage to overcome the thermodynamic reaction potential plus the associated cell overpotentials. In an electrolyzer, the required applied cell voltage is:16,17Vcell = Eo + ηA + ηC + ηIRwhere Vcell is the applied bias, Eo is the thermodynamic electrolysis voltage (i.e., standard cell potential), ηA is the anodic overpotential, ηC is the cathodic overpotential, and ηIR is the overpotential from ohmic resistance losses. The overpotentials are each dependent on the current density and for water-splitting at room temperature at 1 Sun photon-flux-limited current densities (∼10–30 mA cm−2), a minimum voltage of ∼1.5 V (Eo + ηA + ηC = 1.23 V + ∼0.25 V + ∼0.05 V) will need to be applied to the electrolyzer. To provide this photovoltage near the maximum power point, a single junction solar cell would require well over a 2 eV band gap, at which point the device is inherently inefficient due to an inability to absorb most of the visible light of the solar spectrum. The necessary photovoltage can be achieved by connecting several lower band gap solar cells in electrical series side-by-side, however, a tandem combination of semiconductors of complementary band gaps in an optical as well as electrical series configuration enables the highest solar energy conversion efficiencies by more effectively utilizing the solar spectrum. Ideal band gap combinations for such tandem cells have been modeled by several groups, with 1.7 eV + 1.1 eV generally found to be an optimal two band gap combination.18–20 High efficiency multijunction PV in a monolithic stack architecture are well-established21 and numerous efforts have employed these materials as the photoactive components to achieve high solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies in integrated solar water-splitting systems.22–24 These systems, which typically involve high-quality III–V semiconductor stacks, are extremely expensive to fabricate and do not offer a lot of flexibility to tune the current–voltage output. The rigid design, which includes a current output limited by the lowest performing subcell, further suffers from spectral mismatch efficiency losses at non-peak illumination hours.25
For a solar-driven electrosynthetic fuel generation reaction, there is therefore a need for versatility in tuning the operating photovoltage to optimally match the relevant electrolysis load. Voltage regulators, or DC-to-DC converters, exist that can be coupled with a PV module to output a specific DC voltage regardless of their input voltage, as long as the input falls within a certain value range. Such devices, however, add to the balance of systems cost and would be difficult or impractical to utilize in a fully integrated solar fuel generation system. Thus, a modular platform for designing low-cost, efficient tandem photovoltaics tailored to have an output photovoltage complementary to specific electrolysis reactions is highly desirable.
A non-monolithic tandem solar cell architecture, with physically separable subcells, offers the greatest versatility for designing the current–voltage output to match a given electrolysis load. As illustrated schematically in Fig. 2, thin-film photovoltaic elements could be arranged in optical and electrical series without the fabrication expense and materials restrictions associated with a high-quality monolithic stack. Some modeling work has indicated that there are potential advantages to this architecture. When combined non-monolithically, the different subcell layers could be connected in series or parallel at the module level (e.g., top cell to top cell, bottom cell to bottom cell) to provide greater versatility in designing the module to match a specific application. A two-terminal (2T) tandem arrangement will have the top subcell and bottom subcell in electrical series, building photovoltage between semiconductors of complementary bandgaps to produce a single electrical output (Fig. 2a). A four-terminal (4T) configuration, in contrast, restricts the serial connection to the subcell level (i.e., top cell to top cell, bottom cell to bottom cell), building photovoltage separately in each layer among cells of the same bandgap to produce two separate electrical outputs (Fig. 2b). Modeling the possible module configurations of tandem cells found that a sublevel interconnection scheme could be as efficient as standard series-connected subcells while allowing for an overall higher theoretical efficiency than a monolithic series-connected stack with greater flexibility in choice of band gaps.26 The non-monolithic design maintains the tandem benefits of increased efficiency due to spectral splitting among subcells and high photovoltages when the subcells are in electrical series without the need for lattice matching between components or finely controlled tunnel junction layers. Each subcell can be fabricated and optimized independently before tandem assembly. Modularity is thus a primary strength of this device architecture. Recent successful demonstrations of non-monolithic tandem solar cells include efficient four-terminal organometal halide perovskite thin film top cells with Si bottom cells.27–29
 Fig. 2  Schematics of non-monolithic tandem PV arrangements used in the simulations, with the top subcell using transparent conductive oxide (TCO) contacts. (a) Two-terminals with serial connection between top and bottom subcells. (b) Four-terminals with serial connections between units of the same subcell level. 
An analysis of the system performance of possible non-monolithic tandem subcell configurations driving relevant electrosynthetic fuel-forming reactions and compared to the expected output for the standard two-terminal tandem PV-driven arrangement would thus be very informative to solar fuels system design. In particular, the effect of device parameters such as subcell width on the overall solar-to-fuels output are important, since a key performance drawback of the non-monolithic tandem architecture relative to a monolithic stack is increased series resistance resulting from the lateral flow of current through the front and back contacts between subcells. A number of previous modeling efforts using multiphysics software programs have had tremendous success at providing design guidance on the effects of geometrical and materials parameters on the overall performance of integrated photoelectrochemical fuel-generating devices.9,14,30,31 Herein, we have utilized similar methods to simulate the current–voltage performance of various non-monolithic tandem PV configurations, including serial and multi-terminal arrangements, as a function of changing spectra with time of day and device-width-dependent resistance effects. The modeled solar cell energy-conversion behavior was analyzed in conjunction with experimentally measured electrolysis load curves for both H2 generation from water as well as carbon dioxide reduction products using Cu electrocatalysts to investigate how the cumulative mass of fuel products produced throughout a typical day varies depending on the configuration of the tandem photoactive elements.
Experimental
Spectral data
Power density vs. wavelength spectral data vs. time of day was acquired using a spectral calculator using the SPCTRAL2 algorithm available through PV Lighthouse.32 Conditions were selected for a day (modeled as March 25, latitude 22.2°, longitude −85.8°) to provide the PV 1 Sun measurement standard of 1000 W m−2 intensity from the global irradiance at AM1.5 (zenith angle 48.2°, which occurred at 9:03 am) for a perpendicular panel (normal incidence). Subsequent spectra were acquired for each hour of daylight on this date (Fig. S1†).
Photovoltaic parameters
Tandem PV cell performances were modeled based on experimental 1 Sun AM1.5 metrics for Si PV and organometal halide perovskite thin film devices. Bottom subcells were modeled based on crystalline Si (Eg = 1.12 eV, Jsc = 37.2 mA cm−2, Voc = 627 mV).33 Top subcell behavior used either CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite (MAPbI3) behavior (Eg ∼ 1.5 eV, Jsc = 21.3 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.06 V)34 or a mixed cation FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (FA = formamidinium) perovskite behavior with indium tin oxide (ITO) transparent contacts (Eg ∼ 1.74 eV, Jsc = 19.9 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.11 V).29 The top subcell was modeled with 100 nm thick ITO transparent conductive oxide (TCO) front and back contacts, with ITO resistivity (216 μΩ cm) and wavelength-dependent transmittance based on a DC sputtered film in a 0.56% oxygen environment.35
The AM1.5 spectral power density vs. wavelength data was converted to photon flux and multiplied by the ITO transmittance vs. wavelength to determine the flux incident on the top subcell. The above-bandgap photon flux was integrated and multiplied by the electronic charge to determine a maximum photocurrent density. Using the perpendicular, or normal incidence, power density, a quantum efficiency factor was then determined to match this photocurrent density to the reported literature Jsc value above, since these are the illumination conditions used for standard experimental PV measurements. The quantum efficiency factor was then used to integrate spectral data for each time of day to determine the Jscvs. time of day. However, to more accurately assess a real solar fuels system without tracking, the spectral power density for a module with a zero degree tilt angle (flat panel) was used to model the changing performance throughout the day. Thus, the modeled current density at 9 am (∼AM1.5) is less than that reported in the literature because the light is not at normal incidence to the panel. A similar procedure was followed for the bottom subcell, and then subsequent photocurrents determined by integrating the photon flux between the bandgaps of the top and bottom cells. The 1 Sun AM1.5 literature Jsc and Voc values above were used in the ideal diode equation to estimate a dark exchange current density, Jo, for each cell (assuming Jsc = Jph):  
Tandem configuration modeling
Photovoltaic device performance was simulated with the COMSOL Multiphysics® program using the AC/DC electric currents and electric circuits modules. A two-dimensional top subcell was modeled with a p–n junction following the ideal diode equation and with front and back ITO contact layers with properties as listed above with copper busbar contacts at the edge of each ITO layer following the schematic of Fig. 2. The photocurrent value was set manually as determined by the calculation with the spectrum vs. time of day. The Cu busbars on either side of the diode were set as the ground and terminal boundary conditions and the voltage was swept between −0.1 and 5 V to simulate a J–V performance curve. The width of the device was varied when determining the effect of the lateral series resistance in these subcells. Tandem PV configurations were modeled in the COMSOL circuits module by electrically connecting diodes in series, neglecting the resistivity of copper wires between cells. Four-terminal tandem arrangements were thus modeled in two separate simulations, one each for the top and bottom. In all cases, the total width of the top subcell series was the same as the width of the bottom subcell series (Fig. 2). This total unit cell width was varied from 0.1 to 3.5 cm when determining the series resistance effect on the PV performance under illumination.
Electrolyzer behavior
Electrolysis current density vs. potential behavior was measured experimentally. For water-splitting, a commercially available proton exchange membrane reversible fuel cell (Horizon, FCSU-023) was used consisting of two stainless steel grids (one for the anode and one for the cathode), two carbon Toray paper sheets as gas diffusion layers, and one membrane electrode assembly (MEA) with Pt/C catalyst particles on either side of a sulfonated polytetrafluoroethylene (i.e., Nafion) proton-exchange membrane. The active area of the MEA was 5 cm2. The electrolyzer was immersed in a large beaker, providing liquid DI water to both the anode and cathode without active pumping of the fluid. The load curve was measured using an SP-200 Bio-Logic potentiostat by sweeping the voltage at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1.13
The carbon dioxide reduction measurements followed our previously published setup,36 with a custom polycarbonate cell divided into two compartments, a cathode and an anode section, separated by an anion exchange membrane (Selemion AMV). The 0.1 M KHCO3 electrolyte was bubbled with CO2 for 30 min prior to measurements and continuously during experiments to saturate the electrolyte and maintain a constant pH of 6.8. All of the measurements were done at room temperature with a polycrystalline Cu foil (99.99%, Alfa Aesar) cathode and a Pt mesh anode. The reported two-electrode current vs. potential CO2 electrolyzer behavior thus includes membrane and solution resistance losses. Product quantification methods and faradaic efficiency determination have been discussed more thoroughly elsewhere.36,37 Chronoamperometric measurements were made at each potential, and products were quantified by gas chromatography (GC, SRI 8610) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR, Bruker 400 MHz) for the gas and liquid products, respectively. Faradaic efficiency at each potential was calculated by determining the charge required to produce the measured product concentration and dividing by the total charge passed during the time the sample underwent electrolysis.
Solar-to-fuel metrics
The solar-to-fuel efficiency, ηSTF, for each simulation of a tandem PV driving an electrolyzer was determined following the equation:38  where εelec is the faradaic efficiency of the relevant fuel product, Jop is the operating current density per photoactive area, Eofuel is the difference between the formal potentials of the anodic half-reaction (water oxidation at 1.23 V vs. RHE) and the cathodic half-reaction for the fuel species, and Pin is the incident solar power density. Jop was determined by finding the intersection of the PV and electrolyzer curves (Fig. 1). For water-splitting, Eofuel is 1.23 V and for CO2 reduction the cathode half-reaction potentials for each product were taken from the literature (HCOOH, Eo = −0.20 V vs. RHE,39 and C2H4, Eo = 0.08 V vs. RHE37). Pin was calculated for each time of day by integrating the power density spectral data across all wavelengths. For tandem arrangements driving multiple electrolyzers, the total efficiency was the sum of the individual electrolyzers. Cumulative hydrogen and other species produced was determined by converting the partial current density (εelecJop) to a product mass and integrating for the results at each hour of the day.
Results and discussion
MAPbI3/Si for water-splitting
The first modeled system combined Si, an ideal candidate for the 1.1 eV bottom subcell, with the most successful thin film organometal halide perovskite PV to date, methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3).40 MAPbI3 has rapidly improved in the last several years, reaching power-conversion efficiencies >20% and has been demonstrated in a two-cell series to drive water electrolysis at 12.3% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (ηSTH).34 Four-terminal non-monolithic MAPbI3/Si tandem PV have been reported as well.27,28,41Fig. 3a shows the modeled performance for individual MAPbI3 and Si cells, as well as Si filtered by a MAPbI3 top cell with ITO contacts for AM1.5 illumination (48.2° incidence, and thus current density less than literature results at 1 Sun normal incidence). Calculations assume an integrated PV + electrolyzer system with the same active area, although this is not a requirement as demonstrated below in the CO2 reduction system. While neither PV has sufficient photovoltage to split water individually, the two-terminal optical tandem drives the PEM electrolyzer near its maximum power point (at ∼1.5 V). However, because the MAPbI3 band gap of ∼1.5 eV is not the ideal top cell match to Si, the top-cell filtered crystalline Si Jsc limits the tandem combination significantly. Plotting the two-terminal tandem performance with the changing spectra, power density, and angle of incidence as the sun moves through the sky throughout the day leads to a shifting operating point for the PV + electrolyzer system (Fig. 3b). Converting the operating current density for electrolysis to a mass of H2 and integrating across the day leads to a cumulative H2 mass per area as shown in Fig. 3d, culminating in 3.67 × 10−6 kg cm−2 over the whole day for the two-terminal MAPbI3/Si PV.
 Fig. 3  Performance of MAPbI3 and Si tandem arrangements. (a) Individual subcell and two-terminal (2T) tandem PV AM1.5 (9 am) behavior relative to a PEM water electrolyzer. (b) Two-terminal (2T) tandem PV behavior vs. time of day. (c) Four-terminal (4T) tandem PV AM1.5 behavior. (d) Cumulative projected H2 produced by each arrangement throughout the day. Calculations assume an integrated PV + electrolyzer system with the same active area, although this is not strictly required. 
For the four-terminal optical tandem arrangement (Fig. 2b), two series-connected MAPbI3 top cells and three series-connected top-cell filtered Si bottom cells are needed for each layer to have sufficient photovoltage to drive an electrolyzer (Fig. 3c). Note that such cells are connected side-by-side and thus the total current density is reduced by a factor equal to the number of cells in series. However, in the four-terminal arrangement, the top cell layer and the bottom cell layer drive independent electrolysis loads and thus do not limit the current of the other layer, eliminating current mismatch limitations between the top and bottom tandem layers. The performance of the four-terminal layers vs. time of day, and ηSTHvs. time of day for both PV configurations is shown in the ESI in Fig. S2.† The resulting combined cumulative mass of H2 for a four-terminal configuration reaches 4.25 × 10−6 kg cm−2 by the end of the day (Fig. 3d), an improvement of 15.8% in the daily hydrogen production relative to the two-terminal MAPbI3/Si arrangement.
This result demonstrates the versatility of the non-monolithic multi-terminal configuration in designing a PV arrangement to maximize the daily fuel output for an electrolysis system. For the MAPbI3/Si combination, the primary advantage of the four-terminal configuration is in bypassing current matching limitations between the top and bottom subcells, which is significant in this system since the MAPbI3 does not have an ideally matched band gap. Note that this improvement comes at the increased capital expense of using additional electrolyzer components since each layer of the four-terminal PV drives its own electrical load. Engineering of the relative electrolyzer MEA areas to optimize performance, as well as designing for multiple membranes in a single electrolyzer stack could minimize the electrolyzer capital investment. A full techno-economic analysis would need to be performed to estimate the cost and lifetime of the system components necessary for the improved hydrogen production to be advantageous to the final system $ per kg H2.
1.74 eV perovskite/Si for water-splitting
To compare the non-monolithic four-terminal configuration with a two-terminal configuration for a more ideally matched set of band gaps, Si was modeled in combination with the recently reported stable mixed cation perovskite FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (hereafter referred to as the 1.74 eV band gap cell).29 This combination is close to the ideal combination for a two-cell tandem.18–20 The two-terminal 1.74 eV/Si performance vs. time of day for water-splitting is shown in Fig. S3.† In the four-terminal configuration, three Si cells are again needed to split water, while two perovskite top cells provide enough photovoltage (Fig. 4a). The two 1.74 eV perovskite top cells in series drive water-splitting at ∼1.5 V, far from its maximum power point at ∼1.95 V, leading to a large coupling loss (Fig. 1). With the versatile modularity afforded by the non-monolithic multi-terminal configuration, however, any number of series-connected subcells can be connected to drive a number of series-connected electrolyzers to tune the operating point towards the maximum power point for the PV layer. Fig. 4a shows the AM1.5 performance of the 1.74 eV perovskite relative to one, two, or three water electrolyzers in series. The optimum arrangement for operation near the maximum power point was three 1.74 eV perovskite cells driving two series-connected electrolyzers at ∼3.0 V. The J–V performance of this arrangement vs. time of day, as well as ηSTHvs. time of day for the top and bottom subcell layers independently is shown in Fig. S3.†
 Fig. 4  Performance of a mixed cation perovskite PV of Eg = 1.74 eV in tandem with Si. (a) AM1.5 (9 am) behavior of 1.74 eV top cells in series compared to multiple PEM water electrolyzers in series. (b) Solar-to-hydrogen efficiency and (c) cumulative H2 produced throughout the day for two-terminal (2T) and various four-terminal (4T) arrangements. Calculations assume an integrated PV + electrolyzer with the same active areas. 

Fig. 4b and c compares ηSTH and cumulative H2 produced for several four-terminal arrangements to the simple two-terminal performance for this ideally matched system. Note that for N electrolyzers in series, the current produces N times as much H2 as a single electrolyzer. As expected for the arrangements of the top cell layer with one or three electrolyzers in series, the poor coupling for the operating point leads to four-terminal PV + electrolyzer systems which clearly underperform in hydrogen generation relative to the two-terminal tandem. However, the four-terminal system of three 1.74 eV top cells driving two electrolyzers combined with three Si bottom cells driving one electrolyzer actually outperformed the two-terminal tandem arrangement, despite the selection of near-ideal band gaps for the subcells. This system reached a peak ηSTH of 23.5% without much variation throughout the day. The improvement in the daily H2 production was slight, however, increasing 5.3% from the two-terminal rate of 5.14 × 10−6 kg cm−2 to the best four-terminal rate of 5.41 × 10−6 kg cm−2. Again, a full techno-economic analysis would be needed to determine if and under what conditions the increased fuel productivity could justify the increased complexity and capital for the four-terminal system driving multiple electrolyzer MEAs.
Effects of width and series resistance
The preceding performance simulations omitted the effects of series resistance in the contact layers of the top subcell. Because these layers must be highly transparent to prevent significant shading of the bottom subcell, TCO contacts are necessary which can have non-negligible series resistance effects. In the non-monolithic tandem configuration (Fig. 2) in particular, charge-carriers are transported laterally through the contacts and thus the geometric spacing between busbars or cells must be carefully chosen to have acceptable resistance losses. The distribution of current in the photodiode as a function of the device width was simulated in 2D (see Experimental). Fig. 5 shows the resulting effects of this width-dependent series resistance on the water-splitting performance of the two-terminal and best four-terminal configuration of non-monolithic 1.74 eV/Si tandem systems. In both cases, increasing width increases the series resistance which leads to a decreased fill factor without reducing the Voc. Consequently, the operating point for electrolysis increasingly drops below the knee of the diode curve with increasing series resistance, which causes decreased operating current and decreased ηSTH with width.
 Fig. 5  Effects of series resistance on the 1.74 eV/Si tandem in a (a–c) two-terminal and a (d–f) four-terminal arrangement. (a, d) The effect on the AM1.5 (9 am) J–V performance curve as a function of the unit cell width, w, between busbar contacts for (a) a two-terminal tandem vs. one electrolyzer and (d) for the four-terminal top layer of three 1.74 eV cells driving two electrolyzers. (b, e) Solar-to-hydrogen efficiency and (c, f) cumulative H2 production vs. time of day with varying width for (b and c) a two-terminal (1.74 eV/Si) [x1 electrolyzer] and (e and f) a four-terminal 1.74 eV (x3) [x2 electrolyzer]/Si (x3) [x1 electrolyzer]. 
For the same equivalent width, w, of the unit cell of the tandem PV (each section to be driving electrolysis), series resistance is observed to have a greater effect in the two-terminal configuration. For the two-terminal tandem, the fill factor decreased from 0.87 at w = 0.1 cm to 0.48 at w = 3.5 cm, reflected in the corresponding drop in the noontime ηSTH from 22.0 to 5.6%. In contrast, the fill factor of the top layer of the four-terminal tandem decreased from 0.87 at w = 0.1 cm to 0.75 at w = 3.5 cm, with a corresponding drop in the noontime ηSTH (including the Si bottom layer) from 23.4 to 15.9% (Fig. 5). Likewise the four-terminal configuration displayed greater tolerance to the width in the resulting H2 production per day. Though the two- and four-terminal systems start out comparable at 5.14 × 10−6 and 5.40 × 10−6 kg cm−2, respectively, for w = 0.1 cm, the production drops to 1.62 × 10−6 and 4.04 × 10−6 kg cm−2, respectively, at w = 3.5 cm. These results are consistent with the fact that power dissipation due to series resistance increases according to the current squared (Ps,loss = I2Rs), and thus series resistance decreases to the efficiency are magnified at higher currents. In the four-terminal configuration with three 1.74 eV cells per unit width w, the resulting current density passing through the ITO contacts is reduced, leading to less effect on the ηSTH with w. The effect of the magnitude of the current on the series resistance loss is also consistent with the trend toward higher ηSTH at earlier and later hours of the day when the illumination power density and photogenerated current density are much lower. The effect on the fill factor can be seen in example performance curves vs. time of day for w = 1, 2, and 3 cm (Fig. S4†).
Non-monolithic tandem configurations for CO2 reduction
Another route to store intermittent solar energy as fuels is through the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to energy-dense hydrocarbons.42,43 Among metallic electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction, Cu is somewhat unique in that it promotes the direct production of appreciable quantities of hydrocarbons, including CH4 and C2H4.37,44 Unfortunately, the activation barriers for these reactions are still high, and electrolysis at Cu foils can require overpotentials of ∼1 V or more to make significant quantities of hydrocarbons. This overpotential represents a large kinetic loss (Fig. 1) that leads to relatively low energy-conversion efficiencies, and the distribution of carbon products depends strongly on the operating voltage. Fig. 6 shows the total bias applied to a two-electrode Cu-catalyzed CO2 reduction electrolyzer with water oxidation at the anode as measured experimentally, and the corresponding J–V performance and associated product faradaic efficiencies at each potential.
 Fig. 6  Two-electrode Cu-catalyzed CO2 electrolyzer performance with 0.1 M KHCO3. J–V performance curve (black open circles, left axis) overlaid against the corresponding product faradaic efficiencies (right axis). 
For this type of fuel-forming electrolysis device requiring >2 V of applied bias, driving the reaction photoelectrochemically necessitates building more photovoltage than can be achieved with a simple two-junction tandem. In a single monolithic tandem cell, 3 or 4 or more junctions will be needed to reach these voltages, and only very expensive, complex III–V devices have been able to do this efficiently. Furthermore, the design of a solar fuels system will target the maximum production of a desired product, with the PV + electrolyzer intersection point and operating voltage critical to optimizing the faradaic efficiency. Non-monolithic tandem configurations may be particularly appealing in this application for their versatility in tuning the operating point as well as the promise of using the spectral-splitting tandem strategy to outperform a series-connected module of single-bandgap solar cells.
Two scenarios for solar-driven CO2 reduction in this system were simulated, one targeting a HCOOH product and one targeting C2H4. Fig. 7 shows the resulting performance comparison in each case between two-terminal and four-terminal tandem configurations. In the two-terminal arrangement, a single 1.74 eV/Si tandem cell did not produce sufficient photovoltage to reach the target operating point, thus two such tandem cells were put in series to target formic acid, and three were put in series to target ethylene. As before for the four-terminal configurations, the top and bottom layers were independently optimized for the number of series-connected cells to reach the operating voltage while maintaining the same area in the layers of the tandem PV. Connecting solar cells in series side-by-side leads to a concomitant decrease in the total system current density by photoactive area. The solar-limited current density of the resulting PV system is set and only varies with the daily spectra and illumination intensity, meaning that the desired operating point for maximum product faradaic efficiency is not likely to be achieved with a PV and MEA of the same area. However, it is the absolute current, not current density, of the electrolysis load that must be provided by the photoactive component (Fig. 1). In each case then, the area of the associated electrolyzer MEA was scaled accordingly to reach the ideal CO2 electroreduction operating point depending on the desired target product (Fig. 7a and d, see schematic Fig. S5†). For a direct comparison in Fig. 7, the current per area of MEA, JMEA, is presented and the area scaling factor (PV area per MEA area, APV) for each case given in the caption. To optimize the total daily product output, the scaling factor was chosen to provide the ideal operating point at 11 am.
 Fig. 7  Simulation of non-monolithic tandem configurations for Cu-catalyzed CO2 reduction targeting the production of (a–c) formic acid and (d–f) ethylene. (a) Current per associated MEA area, JMEA, at 11 am vs. voltage, V, for a two-terminal (2T) series-connected (1.74 eV/Si) (x2) (APV = 0.25) and four-terminal (4T) top layer 1.74 eV (x3) (APV = 0.38) and bottom layer Si (x6) (APV = 0.75) vs. the CO2 electrolyzer and corresponding (b) solar-to-formic-acid efficiency and (c) cumulative mass product formation per area of PV vs. time of day. (d) JMEA–V curve at 11 am for a two-terminal (2T) series-connected (1.74 eV/Si) (x3) (APV = 0.67) and four-terminal (4T) top layer 1.74 eV (x4) (APV = 0.88) and bottom layer Si (x7) (APV = 1.61) vs. the CO2 electrolyzer and corresponding (e) solar-to-ethylene efficiency and (f) cumulative mass product formation per area of PV vs. time of day. 
The time-dependent variation in the operating point causes a change in both the current density and faradaic efficiency of the products. The PV performance curves vs. time of day for the systems targeting production of formic acid and ethylene are shown in Fig. S6 and S7,† respectively. The resulting daily variation in solar-to-fuel efficiency, based on the current per PV area, is shown for the formic acid case (Fig. 7b) and for the ethylene case (Fig. 7e), along with the corresponding cumulative mass per PV area of species produced throughout the day for each tandem configuration (Fig. 7c and f). Cumulative moles of electrons directed to each product over the day, which is more reflective of the percent of charge passed to each product, is shown in Fig. S8.†
For formic acid production, which had a peak faradaic efficiency at an operating voltage of ∼3.1 V, the two-terminal tandem PV happens to reach the ideal operating condition near its maximum power point. Using the ideal complementary tandem bandgaps, this scenario thus leads to an optimal solar-to-fuel conversion for this particular CO2 electrolyzer. The two-terminal tandem configuration reached a peak solar-to-formic-acid efficiency of 3.21% and produced 1.35 × 10−5 kg HCOOH per cm2 per day. Because the two-terminal configuration was operating near ideal conditions, the four-terminal tandem PV configuration did not outperform it. However, the versatility of this arrangement to tune the operating point while maintaining high solar conversion efficiency allowed the four-terminal system to match the two-terminal system HCOOH production, achieving similar solar-to-formic-acid efficiencies and an equivalent daily mass of HCOOH (Fig. 7c).
For the higher voltage point to maximize ethylene formation (∼3.6 V), on the other hand, the restrictive nature of the two-terminal tandem configuration leads to a less optimal operating point for the PV with a significant coupling loss. The enhanced versatility of the four-terminal configuration to meet the designed operating voltage nearer to the maximum power point of each tandem PV layer, as well as the easing of current matching limitations, led to higher ethylene production performance. Solar-to-ethylene peak efficiencies were 1.81% and 2.09% for two- and four-terminal arrangements, respectively, with corresponding daily mass outputs of 6.48 × 10−7 and 7.80 × 10−7 kg C2H4 per cm2. The non-monolithic tandem PV in the four-terminal configuration thus led to an increase of 20.4% in the daily production of ethylene with this electrolysis system (Fig. 7f). This case study demonstrates how the modularity of the non-monolithic tandem PV architecture can be designed to optimize the solar-to-fuel daily output for an arbitrary electrolysis operating condition. Of course, these efficiencies are still low, which is reflective of the poor kinetics and selectivity in the Cu-catalyzed CO2 reduction system. Even for an improved electrolyzer, however, the four-terminal tandem configuration has the potential to enhance PV + electrolyzer system performance.
Conclusions
The non-monolithic four-terminal tandem solar cell platform thus offers maximum modularity for designing a specific PV system to drive efficient electrolysis at an arbitrary operating point, making it an advantageous architecture for optimizing the full-day fuel production of an integrated PV + electrolyzer solar fuels device. Subcell-level interconnection of these tandems permits the accumulation of photovoltage to drive electrolysis reactions, with the ability to tune the operating potential more carefully than a two-terminal tandem to minimize coupling losses that reduce the solar-to-fuel efficiency. Four-terminal configurations also avoid current matching limitations between subcell layers while maintaining the efficiency benefit of spectral-splitting, a feature that leads to prominent gains for a tandem system with non-ideally matched bandgaps such as MAPbI3 with Si. Even for a tandem PV with ideally complementary band gaps, a well-designed four-terminal configuration was simulated to match or exceed the traditional two-terminal configuration. In a CO2 reduction electrolyzer, with higher required applied bias and potential-dependent product selectivity, the tunability of the four-terminal PV configuration led to equal or better production when targeting different hydrocarbon species.
Of course, the possible benefits of increased solar fuel productivity must be balanced against the tradeoff of the increased complexity of the system design, with additional costs to produce robust multi-terminal interconnected-subcell-level tandem PV devices with reliable contacts and multi-part electrolyzers. A careful techno-economic analysis would be needed to see if a projected increase in fuel production could justify the implementation of a more complex architecture. However, such a system could be economically feasible, considering that a non-monolithic platform would enable the use of materials and processes more scalable than expensive monolithic semiconductor stacks. Single-panel cell interconnection schemes have already been commercialized at low cost for thin-film PV modules, and this process could be leveraged to manufacture subcell layer panels for a multi-terminal tandem. The geometric spacing of busbar contacts is critical to minimizing the series resistance in the TCO layers of these non-monolithic cells, but reduced current density in the subcell layers of a four-terminal arrangement led to less series resistance effect on the device performance. Although the four-terminal configuration requires independent electrolysis loads for the tandem subcell layers, this criteria could be met with electrically isolated areas of MEA in a single electrolyzer to reduce the capital expense. In summary, the simulations herein indicate the possible advantages of integrated multi-terminal tandem PV + electrolyzer solar fuels devices, and show the effects of the design parameters for maximizing the system output.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Conn Center for Renewable Energy Research at the University of Louisville for financial support.
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2811–2824 CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjallstrom, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2056–2070 CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjallstrom, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 134, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haussener, C. X. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9922–9935 CAS .
L. Trotochaud, T. J. Mills and S. W. Boettcher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 931–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Singh, J. C. Stevens and A. Z. Weber, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, E3283–E3296 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Leenheer and H. A. Atwater, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1290–B1294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumari, R. T. White, B. Kumar and J. Spurgeon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1725–1733 CAS .
M. Dumortier and S. Haussener, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3069–3082 CAS .
M. T. Winkler, C. R. Cox, D. G. Nocera and T. Buonassisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, E1076–E1082 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sawada, T. Yamaki, T. Maeno, M. Asano, A. Suzuki, T. Terai and Y. Maekawa, Prog. Nucl. Energy, 2008, 50, 443–448 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons,  2001 Search PubMed .
C. H. Henry, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 4494–4500 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Geisz and D. J. Friedman, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2002, 17, 769–777 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, C. X. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984–2993 CAS .
H. Cotal, C. Fetzer, J. Boisvert, G. Kinsey, R. King, P. Hebert, H. Yoon and N. Karam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 174–192 CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8920–8924 CrossRef CAS .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. X. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 CAS .
R. E. Rocheleau, E. L. Miller and A. Misra, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 3–10 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Nell and A. M. Barnett, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1987, 34, 257–266 CrossRef .
P. Loeper, S.-J. Moon, S. M. de Nicolas, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, S. Nicolay, J. Bailat, J.-H. Yum, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1619–1629 RSC .
J. Werner, G. Dubuis, A. Walter, P. Loeper, S.-J. Moon, S. Nicolay, M. Morales-Masis, S. De Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 407–413 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Horantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Walczak, Y. Chen, C. Karp, J. W. Beeman, M. Shaner, J. Spurgeon, I. D. Sharp, X. Amashukeli, W. West, J. Jin, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Chemsuschem, 2015, 8, 544–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Haussener, S. Hu, C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3605–3618 CAS .
R. E. Bird and C. Riordan, J. Clim. Appl. Meteorol., 1986, 25, 87–97 CrossRef .
K. O. Davis, M. P. Rodgers, G. Scardera, R. P. Brooker, H. Seigneur, N. Mohajeri, N. G. Dhere, J. Wohlgemuth, E. Schneller, N. Shiradkar, A. C. Rudack and W. V. Schoenfeld, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 59, 225–252 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Luo, J. H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Gratzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bender, W. Seelig, C. Daube, H. Frankenberger, B. Ocker and J. Stollenwerk, Thin Solid Films, 1998, 326, 72–77 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, J. P. Brian, V. Atla, S. Kumari, K. A. Bertram, R. T. White and J. M. Spurgeon, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4739–4745 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 CAS .
R. H. Coridan, A. C. Nielander, S. A. Francis, M. T. McDowell, V. Dix, S. M. Chatman and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2886–2901 CAS .
B. Kumar, M. Llorente, J. Froehlich, T. Dang, A. Sathrum and C. P. Kubiak, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 541–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448–2463 CAS .
M. Filipic, P. Loeper, B. Niesen, S. De Wolf, J. Krc, C. Ballif and M. Topic, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A263–A278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kumar, J. P. Brian, V. Atla, S. Kumari, K. A. Bertram, R. T. White and J. Spurgeon, Catal. Today, 2016, 270, 19–30 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 594, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta04022aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Performance of a photovoltaic (blue curve) driving electrolysis (green curve). The operating current, Iop, times the thermodynamic standard potential for the fuel formation reaction, Eofuel, marks the stored power, with losses due to kinetics and operating of the PV away from its maximum power point.	 
Vcell = Eo + ηA + ηC + ηIR

 	Fig. 2  Schematics of non-monolithic tandem PV arrangements used in the simulations, with the top subcell using transparent conductive oxide (TCO) contacts. (a) Two-terminals with serial connection between top and bottom subcells. (b) Four-terminals with serial connections between units of the same subcell level.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Performance of MAPbI3 and Si tandem arrangements. (a) Individual subcell and two-terminal (2T) tandem PV AM1.5 (9 am) behavior relative to a PEM water electrolyzer. (b) Two-terminal (2T) tandem PV behavior vs. time of day. (c) Four-terminal (4T) tandem PV AM1.5 behavior. (d) Cumulative projected H2 produced by each arrangement throughout the day. Calculations assume an integrated PV + electrolyzer system with the same active area, although this is not strictly required.	 

 	Fig. 4  Performance of a mixed cation perovskite PV of Eg = 1.74 eV in tandem with Si. (a) AM1.5 (9 am) behavior of 1.74 eV top cells in series compared to multiple PEM water electrolyzers in series. (b) Solar-to-hydrogen efficiency and (c) cumulative H2 produced throughout the day for two-terminal (2T) and various four-terminal (4T) arrangements. Calculations assume an integrated PV + electrolyzer with the same active areas.	 

 	Fig. 5  Effects of series resistance on the 1.74 eV/Si tandem in a (a–c) two-terminal and a (d–f) four-terminal arrangement. (a, d) The effect on the AM1.5 (9 am) J–V performance curve as a function of the unit cell width, w, between busbar contacts for (a) a two-terminal tandem vs. one electrolyzer and (d) for the four-terminal top layer of three 1.74 eV cells driving two electrolyzers. (b, e) Solar-to-hydrogen efficiency and (c, f) cumulative H2 production vs. time of day with varying width for (b and c) a two-terminal (1.74 eV/Si) [x1 electrolyzer] and (e and f) a four-terminal 1.74 eV (x3) [x2 electrolyzer]/Si (x3) [x1 electrolyzer].	 

 	Fig. 6  Two-electrode Cu-catalyzed CO2 electrolyzer performance with 0.1 M KHCO3. J–V performance curve (black open circles, left axis) overlaid against the corresponding product faradaic efficiencies (right axis).	 

 	Fig. 7  Simulation of non-monolithic tandem configurations for Cu-catalyzed CO2 reduction targeting the production of (a–c) formic acid and (d–f) ethylene. (a) Current per associated MEA area, JMEA, at 11 am vs. voltage, V, for a two-terminal (2T) series-connected (1.74 eV/Si) (x2) (APV = 0.25) and four-terminal (4T) top layer 1.74 eV (x3) (APV = 0.38) and bottom layer Si (x6) (APV = 0.75) vs. the CO2 electrolyzer and corresponding (b) solar-to-formic-acid efficiency and (c) cumulative mass product formation per area of PV vs. time of day. (d) JMEA–V curve at 11 am for a two-terminal (2T) series-connected (1.74 eV/Si) (x3) (APV = 0.67) and four-terminal (4T) top layer 1.74 eV (x4) (APV = 0.88) and bottom layer Si (x7) (APV = 1.61) vs. the CO2 electrolyzer and corresponding (e) solar-to-ethylene efficiency and (f) cumulative mass product formation per area of PV vs. time of day.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta04022a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
