Nucleation mediated interfacial precipitation for architectural perovskite films with enhanced photovoltaic performance   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR08741H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR08741H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2569-2578Nucleation mediated interfacial precipitation for architectural perovskite films with enhanced photovoltaic performance†

        
          
            Yu 
            Yu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Songwang 
            Yang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Lei
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yan 
            Liu
          
        
      *a
aCAS Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 588 Heshuo Road, Shanghai 201899, P. R. China. E-mail: swyang@mail.sic.ac.cn; liuyan@mail.sic.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, P. R. China
Received 
      9th November 2016
    , Accepted 14th January 2017First published on 2nd February 2017AbstractPerovskite films are a promising candidate for future highly efficient and low-cost solar cells. The long diffusion length of charge carriers in the perovskite film makes its architecture fabrication seem unnecessary, while the rapid crystallization process increases the difficulty in its architecture fabrication. Here we show the fabrication of perovskite architectures through a nucleation mediated interfacial precipitation method with the proper immiscible anti-solvent. Consecutively evolved architectures from tri-layer porous films to bilayer dense films are obtained. The interfacial precipitation provides the possibility of controlling the crystallization process of perovskite films, while the secondary nucleation is the origin of the porous architecture. The nucleation mediation can be a novel bottom-up approach to fabricate architectural perovskite films. The tri-layer architectural perovskite film exhibits excellent light absorption in the range of 500–800 nm and good photovoltaic performance with 8.2% enhancement in efficiency compared with the bilayer film for the corresponding solar cells.
Introduction
The certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) for perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has reached 22.1%, which is similar to the level of CdTe solar cells.1 There were significant improvements in the device performance of PSCs over the 8-year period. In 2009, Miyasaka et al. employed organo-lead halide perovskite as a sensitizer to obtain a PCE of 3.8% for a sensitized solar cell with a liquid electrolyte.2 In 2012, Park et al. achieved a stable solid state perovskite solar cell with a PCE of 9.7%, which actually triggered the development of PSCs.3 During the following several years, much attention was paid to the preparation process of high quality perovskite films,4–20 the design of cell structures,21–24 and the selection of the materials composition to enhance the efficiency of PSCs.8,25–31 Due to the long diffusion length of charge carriers in the perovskite absorber layer,32 the morphological design of films in the nanoscale which is often used in dye sensitized solar cells33,34 has not yet attracted much interest for the PSCs.35,36 On the other hand, the rapid crystallization process also increases the difficulty of morphological control of perovskite films.15 Various remarkable methods were developed to prepare dense films without pin-holes and voids.6,10,12–14,18 As a potential low cost solar cell, the solution process plays an important role and PSCs with the highest efficiency were all fabricated by solution processes, especially one-step solution processes.8,19,20
Essentially, perovskite film formed via a solution process by spin-coating can be looked at as a crystallization process from solution. Although the crystallization process finishes in a very short time (usually tens of seconds), many factors, such as the substrate pretreatment,20 concentration of the precursor,36,37 annealing temperature,4,38 dewetting or agglomeration upon annealing,39,40 and the evaporation rate of the solvent,18,41 can subtly affect it. Supersaturation is a key driving force for nucleation and crystal growth. For the conventional one-step solution method, supersaturation usually forms by the natural evaporation of solvents during spin-coating at a relatively low temperature (room temperature), which is not sufficient for nucleation and crystal growth. Thus, the grains need to be further developed during the subsequent annealing process where crystal growth usually takes place. However, the nucleation process is often neglected because it finishes in a very short time, although the nucleation rate is affected by supersaturation to a far greater degree than the crystal growth rate.
Here, we focus our research on the nucleation process and investigate how the nucleation process affects the morphology during film preparation. We find that the nucleation mode plays an important role in the final morphology of films. The classical nucleation theory still works well and there exists a competition among the three nucleation modes of homogeneous nucleation, heterogeneous nucleation and secondary nucleation during the formation of perovskite films on the substrate via the spin-coating process. By changing the driving force of nucleation (supersaturation) and thus mediating the nucleation mode during the crystallization process, films with various morphologies can be controlled. The secondary nucleation is harmful for achieving films with full coverage and good uniformity; however, it can be developed to consecutively tune the architectures of perovskite films by a specially designed interface precipitation process. A novel tri-layer architecture morphology of perovskite films was obtained by controlling the starting time and the duration time of the interface precipitation process. This kind of morphology of perovskite films reveals a superior property in light management and the PCE of the corresponding solar cell increased by 8.2%, compared with that based on the normal dense structure with a smooth surface. The present research opens up a novel route to the performance enhancement of PSCs through the morphological design and architectural fabrication of perovskite films and presents a new understanding of the relationship between the film morphology and the efficiency of PSCs.
Results and discussion
Interface precipitation-based (IP) solution process
For the interface precipitation process for the crystallization of perovskite film during spin-coating, we select a new anti-solvent (e.g., n-hexane) immiscible with the precursor to only increase the supersaturation (Δc = c − c*, where c is the actual concentration of the solution and c* is the equilibrium concentration at a certain temperature) at the anti-solvent/precursor interface by the salting out effect and the evolution of the confined 2D interface provides an opportunity for morphological control of the films. The presence of the interface can be verified by the following experiment. 4 ml n-hexane was carefully dropped on 2 ml saturated precursor solution to avoid a fierce turbulence, distinct liquid–liquid interface formed between n-hexane and the perovskite precursor solution, and the solution in touch with n-hexane blurred instantaneously as recorded in Fig. S1.† For the preparation of perovskite films, the precursor solution was first deposited onto the m-TiO2 substrate, and then 500 μl n-hexane was dropped in one shot at the 6th second during spin-coating. The dripping process lasts for about 2 seconds and then the substrate continues to spin for about 12 seconds. The film was kept transparent yellowish while dripping but gradually turned semi-transparent yellowish at the end of dripping. For comparison, a bulk precipitation (BP) process is carried out by dripping a miscible anti-solvent of ethyl ether during the spin coating, and a natural evaporation process is formed without dripping any anti-solvent (conventional method, CM). XRD patterns of the as-deposited films show the formation of the intermediate (Fig. 1a), and peaks located at 6.82° and 9.46° were the diffraction peaks of MAI·PbI2·DMSO as reported previously12 for CM and IP methods. While for ethyl ether dripping, the peaks attributed to MAI·PbI2·DMSO are quite weak, sharp peaks emerged at 14.22° and 28.58°, indicating its fast transformation into perovskite structures by ethyl ether dripping.6,42 After annealing at 100 °C for 25 min, the colour of the films changes to rough dark black for CM, shiny black for BP, and dark black for IP, which means the formation of perovskite. The XRD patterns of the annealed film confirm the formation of perovskite structures. The sharp peaks emerging at 14.22° and 28.58° correspond to the (101) and (220) crystal planes of tetragonal perovskite, while the signal belonging to PbI2 is detected at 12.62° for films prepared by CM and IP (Fig. 1b).
 Fig. 1  XRD patterns of the as-deposited (a) and annealed (b) films by the conventional one-step solution method (CM), the bulk precipitation-based one-step solution process (BP) and a series of interface precipitation-based one-step solution processes (IP), 500 μl n-hexane dripping at the 6th s and lasting for 2 s (IP-1), 500 μl n-hexane dripping at the 6th s and lasting for 6 s (IP-2), 1000 μl n-hexane dripping at the 6th s and lasting for 12 s (IP-3), and 2500 μl n-hexane dripping at the 6th s and lasting for 24 s (IP-4). The spin-coating procedures are all 5000 rpm for 20 s except IP-4 (5000 rpm for 30 s). The same colour of the curve in (b) represents the same sample as that in (a). 
For IP produced films, Fig. 2a shows the top view of the SEM image of the perovskite film. The surface of the film looks porous and fluctuates uniformly like a wave. Fig. 2b shows the cross-section view of the SEM image of the corresponding film; a double-structured capping layer including a dense layer and a porous surface layer is formed by IP. It is a novel film morphology combining the common dense film prepared by BP (Fig. 2c and d) and the bizarre 3D interconnected porous film prepared by CM (Fig. 2e and f). Considering the bilayer perovskite film definition in the previous research12,39 which consists of an m-TiO2/perovskite mixture layer and a dense perovskite capping layer, the novel perovskite film prepared here is tri-layer, and the text labels mark the underlayer, the dense layer and the upper layer in Fig. 2b.
 Fig. 2  Top-view and section-view SEM images of perovskite films obtained by IP (a, b), BP (c, d) and CM (e, f). IP here was prepared by one-shot dripping of 500 μl n-hexane at the 6th s and lasting for 2 s during spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 20 s. The labels P, D, and M in b, d and f correspond to the porous upper layer (P), the dense layer (D), and the mixed underlayer (M). The scale bars correspond to 1 μm in length in this figure. 
Formation mechanism of architectural films
Supersaturation has a crucial effect on the crystallization process according to the classical nucleation theory. Here the kinetics curves of nucleation and crystal growth are calculated and illustrated in Fig. 3 (the detailed calculation can be found in ESI†).
 Fig. 3  Kinetics curves of nucleation and crystal growth, Δc is the supersaturation (c − c*), and B represents the nucleation rate. The equations are based on classical nucleation theory; the constants (A, E, F), f(θ) in the equations and the details can be found in the ESI†. Δc1, Δc2 indicate a typical supersaturation for CM and BP, respectively. 
For CM, the only way to achieve supersaturation is the natural evaporation of solvents during spin-coating, which is not vigorous and leads to a relatively low supersaturation (Δc1). At this low Δc1, heterogeneous or secondary nucleation is prone to take place. This process is unavoidable for the conventional method without dripping anti-solvents. For example, while spinning the precursor solution without adding DMSO (MAI and PbI2 dissolved in DMF at a 1:1 molar ratio), a dendritic morphology of perovskite films with poor coverage was also achieved due to the relatively low supersaturation (Fig. S2†). For BP, a dramatically increased Δc2 can be achieved due to the accelerated DMF evaporation and the salting out effect by the anti-solvent of ethyl ether. It is able to achieve highly homogeneous nucleation density in the whole precursor solution in a short time, which can suppress the secondary nucleation. For IP, although n-hexane is immiscible with DMF and not as highly volatile as ethyl ether ( is 16.16 kPa at 20 °C,  is 59.06 kPa at 20 °C,  is 1.253 kPa at 40 °C43), the evaporation of DMF can be accelerated modestly compared to CM due to the higher total vapour pressure p (p is close to ) of the mixture and hence the lower boiling point of the mixture compared to either component.41 In addition, n-hexane cannot dissolve the reactant and perovskite, so the supersaturation at the interface region can be dramatically boosted to approximately Δc2 when n-hexane is dropped, which can help achieve a small amount of homogeneous nucleation at the n-hexane/precursor interface.
The IP process can be divided into two stages. At the first stage, the presence of the immiscible anti-solvent can form the confined interface where exist a very high supersaturation (e.g., Δc2). The homogeneous nucleation at the interface dominates the nucleation process with the nuclei falling and packing on the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold, together with subsequent heterogeneous nucleation on TiO2 scaffolds with decreased supersaturation leading to the mixed underlayer and the dense perovskite layer.44 At the second stage, with the disappearance of the anti-solvent, the supersaturation of the whole solution greatly decreases (remarkably lower than Δc2) because of the consumption of the solute by the previous primary nucleation. A new supersaturation of the solution is formed and maintained by the natural evaporation of the solvents, which is similar to the conventional one-step solution process and leads to the secondary nucleation and the final morphology of the porous upper layer with further crystal growth.45 The whole process of this kind of novel IP-based solution method can be schematically represented as shown in Fig. 4. There is no doubt that the starting time and the duration time of dripping are crucial. The starting time should guarantee a certain degree of supersaturation through spin-coating induced solvent evaporation and also be ahead of spontaneous nucleation. The as-deposited film should be maintained the liquid state at this stage. The duration time contributes to the duration of the n-hexane/precursor interface. Limited homogeneous nucleation is caused by the controlled duration time of the interface, and a short duration time is responsible for the insufficient solute diffusion which cannot be ignored if homogeneous nucleation takes place at the interface, differing from BP.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of nucleation and crystal growth processes by the IP method. Here the first five steps take place during the spin-coating process and the last step takes place during the annealing process. 
Consecutive evolution of various architectures
Obviously, adjusting the duration time of the anti-solvent/precursor interface is a strategy to control the morphology of the perovskite films. On increasing the duration time of the anti-solvent/precursor interface, homogeneous nucleation density will be increased, the secondary nucleation will be suppressed and consecutively adjustable morphologies will be obtained. Here we employed different n-hexane dripping procedures to achieve different duration times of the interface and the regular change in the morphology of films is shown in Fig. 5, which was in accordance with the speculation. One-shot dripping of 500 μl n-hexane, sequential dripping of 500 μl n-hexane as well as sequential dripping of 1000 μl n-hexane corresponding to the duration times of 2 seconds, 6 seconds and 12 seconds of dripping were conducted while spin-coating the perovskite precursor solution, respectively. Dripping starting times were all at the 6th s. As the SEM images (Fig. 5a–c) show, the void density decreases with the extension of n-hexane dripping (duration) time, and the surface of perovskite films evolves from a 3D interconnected porous structure to an isolated porous structure. Here we defined these three kinds of morphology as LPT (large porous tri-layer), SPT (small porous tri-layer), and SPB (small porous bilayer) respectively, according to the different pore sizes and void density of the film surface. Their average pore sizes were estimated and listed in Fig. S3.† The evolution of the morphology of perovskite films is believed to be the result of the increased homogeneous nucleation density with prolonged dripping time, which ensured more sufficient interface duration. It was also supported by XRD analysis of the as-deposited films prepared by different n-hexane dripping procedures. As is presented in Fig. 1a, the peaks located at 6.82° and 9.46° demonstrate the formation of MAI·PbI2·DMSO in the three samples. With the increase of n-hexane dripping time, only peaks of MAI·PbI2·DMSO existed and no diffraction peak belonging to perovskite was detected, implying that n-hexane cannot accelerate the transformation of the MAI·PbI2·DMSO intermediate like other conventional anti-solvents. The average grain sizes of the as-deposited films were estimated according to Scherrer's equation. It is clear that with the increase of the duration time of n-hexane, the average grain size decreased from 31.7 nm to 26.0 nm and finally turns to 25.7 nm. Nuclei size is inversely proportional to nuclei numbers when thinking of the same amount of solute during spin-coating. Therefore, the results here indicate that prolonged duration time of the interface gives rise to highly homogeneous nucleation density and restrains the secondary nucleation.
 Fig. 5  SEM images of the adjustable morphologies formed with different n-hexane dripping procedures at the 6th s during spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 20 s. (a) IP-LPT: one-shot dripping 500 μl and lasting for 2 s, (b) IP-SPT: sequentially dripping 500 μl and lasting for 6 s, (c) IP-SPB: sequentially dripping 1000 μl and lasting for 12 s, and (d) sequentially dripping 2500 μl and lasting for 24 s. The scale bars correspond to 1 μm in length. 
So we can expect that if the interface duration time for the IP process is long enough, the homogeneous nucleation density would be high enough to yield a fully dense perovskite film. As our expectation, when the duration time increased to over 24 seconds, a dense perovskite film with a smooth surface was obtained. The SEM image of the dense perovskite film prepared by the IP process is shown in Fig. 5d. The XRD pattern of the as-deposited film was obtained and shown in Fig. 1a. The average grain size estimated by Scherrer's equation is 24.5 nm, smaller than the 25.7 nm obtained with dripping 1000 μl n-hexane at the 6th s and lasting for 12 s, which indicates that higher nucleation density is achieved by a longer n-hexane/precursor interface duration and hence leads to a dense film. Although the BP process is easy to prepare a dense perovskite film, the grain size is smaller than that produced by the IP process. The grain size distributions of dense perovskite films by both methods were estimated according to SEM images as listed in Fig. S4.† A dense perovskite film fabricated by the IP process has a broader grain size distribution and a larger average grain size than that fabricated by the BP process. Prolonging the duration time of the n-hexane/precursor interface makes the homogeneous nucleation density still smaller than BP, which is responsible for the larger average grain size. The successive nucleation at the interface also leads to broader grain size distribution through sequential crystal growth. The crystallinity of the annealed perovskite films prepared by the IP process with different n-hexane dripping procedures was characterized by using the XRD patterns (Fig. 1b). The intensity of the main diffraction peak increases with the increase of n-hexane dripping time and the peaks attributed to PbI2 diminish when the n-hexane duration time of dripping exceeds 12 s, which also evidences the decreased PbI2 residue with the suppression of the secondary nucleation. However, the existence of PbI2 might not deteriorate the photovoltaic performance. In contrast, it acts as a passivation of perovskite layer and enhances the carrier separation as several researchers reported.46 Therefore, the IP process employing an n-hexane/precursor interface can achieve continuous control of the morphology of perovskite films from a tri-layer with a porous surface to a dense film by controlling the primary nucleation density and secondary nucleation. To demonstrate the universality of the IP process, we replace n-hexane by a non-polar solvent of petroleum ether. 500 μl petroleum ether was dropped at the 6th s in one shot during spin-coating, the dripping process lasted for 2 s and the substrate continued to spin for about 12 seconds. The morphologies of the annealed films were checked with SEM images (Fig. S5†). The tri-layer structured morphology of perovskite films was perfectly observed. In addition, the morphology of the perovskite films may be further controlled by the properties of various non-polar anti-solvents with slightly different boiling points, miscibility with DMF or salting out ability.
Role of nucleation modes
It should be noted that there always exist peaks of PbI2 residue in the XRD pattern for porous architecture perovskite films (including CM and IP). In order to explore the origin of the PbI2 residue, we annealed the as-deposited perovskite films from n-hexane dripping at various temperatures of 70, 80, 90, and 100 °C for 25 min, respectively. The XRD pattern of the annealed film is shown in Fig. S6.† The peak intensity of PbI2 decreases with the decrease of the annealing temperature, which indicates the easy mass loss of MAI during annealing from the enlarged surface because of the porous morphology of the film surface. However, PbI2 still existed when the annealing temperature went down to 80 or 70 °C. Considering that PbI2 only exists in the processes where secondary nucleation occurs, we infer that the secondary nucleation may also be one of the origins of the residual PbI2 in the final films, which should be further investigated.
Homogeneous nucleation at the interface can consume the solute of the solution and result in the decrease of supersaturation of the whole solution, which can be evidenced through depositing perovskite films on different substrates of c-TiO2, FTO and glass with various roughnesses via the same deposition process (the same starting time and duration time for dripping of n-hexane), respectively (Fig. 6a–c). On the compact TiO2 substrates, TiO2 nanoparticle induced heterogeneous nucleation and secondary nucleation result in a porous surface morphology of perovskite films. In contrast, for the FTO and glass substrates, the morphology of the films becomes very smooth with single-layer large grains, although there exist pin-holes between some large grains. Due to the high barrier for heterogeneous nucleation on FTO and glass substrates, this kind of morphology reflects the very low homogeneous nucleation density via a controlled IP process; however, it can effectively decrease the supersaturation of the solution and suppress the occurrence of secondary nucleation in the subsequent crystal growth process.
 Fig. 6  Effect of nucleation mode on the morphologies of perovskite films. SEM images of perovskite films deposited on c-TiO2, FTO and glass substrates by IP (a–c), CM (d–f) and BP (g–i) methods, respectively. The films here were prepared by one-shot dripping 500 μl n-hexane at the 6th s and lasting for 2 s during spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 20 s. The scale bars correspond to 1 μm in length. 
Films deposited on different substrates of c-TiO2, FTO and glass were also analysed with SEM images for a conventional one-step method. As shown in Fig. 6d–f, the morphologies of the perovskite films on compact TiO2 layers and FTO layers verify that heterogeneous and secondary nucleation dominate the process successively. On the glass substrate, however, as the  increases with the decrease in the roughness of the substrate,44 few primary nuclei (probably through homogeneous nucleation) formed and more solute was reserved for crystal growth resulting in better coverage. Very large and oriented perovskite grains covered the glass substrate with some small grains (∼100 nm) derived from the secondary nucleation scattered across the underlayer of large grains. The XRD pattern indicates that the oriented perovskite film is nearly single crystal and peaks of the (110), (220) and (440) planes are extremely stronger than those of the other planes (Fig. S7†). Therefore, the secondary nucleation is unavoidable for the conventional one-step solution method, even though on the glass substrate.
All the films deposited on different substrates by the BP process are dense with a smooth surface (Fig. 6g–i), which verifies that the secondary nucleation is suppressed during these processes. With the decrease of the roughness of substrates, however, the average grain size decreases and the size distribution narrows, indicating the increase of homogeneous nucleation density, as shown in Fig. S8.†
It should be noted that many improvements on processing methods were about increasing the supersaturation to obtain high quality films with good coverage. Zhao et al.47 summarized this kind of work and considered that rapid crystallization plays an important role. Here we think that rapid crystallization is actually a large number of primary nuclei forming rapidly, because those methods increase Δc by the salting out or quick evaporation of the solvent to the value that homogeneous nucleation can take place. Applying an anti-solvent,6,12,13 a gas-blow method14 and a hot-casting method20 have been employed to accelerate the nucleation process and they result in high quality perovskite film, which is simultaneously formed during the spin coating process. A very recently reported modified one-step method with flash vacuum18,19 can remove solvent in a very short time and achieve ultra-high Δc to obtain a large amount of homogeneous nuclei, which result in smooth and dense films in a large area with good photovoltaic performance.
Solar cell performance
The optical properties as well as photovoltaic performance of perovskite films prepared by conventional, BP-based and IP-based one-step solution methods were investigated. The Vis-NIR light absorbance spectra of perovskite films prepared by different methods are presented in Fig. 7a. The perovskite film fabricated by the conventional method shows a high absorbance after 550 nm but a low absorption before 550 nm compared to other methods. We attribute the low absorbance before 550 nm to the deficiency of active materials because of the voids while the enhanced absorbance after 550 nm is due to the scattering effect of the voids of the porous morphology of the films. The perovskite film prepared by the IP-based method has higher absorbance than that by BP-based method during the full test range, indicating the enhancement of the light capture ability for the tri-layer architecture. The light capture ability of perovskite films prepared by the IP-based method with different n-hexane dripping procedures is also presented in Fig. 7a. Perovskite solar cells were assembled with the active layers prepared by conventional method, BP and IP processes, respectively. The J–V curves are displayed in Fig. 7b and photovoltaic parameters were statistically analysed and are shown in Fig. 7c. Photovoltaic parameters were gathered from 25 cells (Table S1†). The perovskite solar cell based on the conventional method (CM) shows poor performance (PCE = 2.65%) because the HTM material permeates through the pores of perovskite film and contacts with the mesoporous TiO2 layer to result in serious recombination, whereas the devices based on the light absorber formed by BP and IP methods show excellent performance. The short current densities for all the IP based devices (22.06 mA cm−2 for IP-LPT, 21.52 mA cm−2 for IP-SPT and 20.84 mA cm−2 for IP-SPB, respectively) were significantly increased compared to the BP method (20.70 mA cm−2), which indicated the feasibility of architecture design. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra for BP and IP (SPT) in Fig. S9† indicate that more efficient hole extraction was obtained at enlarged perovskite/HTM interface contact area, which is responsible for the higher FF of IP based devices (64.37% for BP based cells and 68.63% for IP-SPT based cells, respectively). The best performance of cells was achieved by IP-SPT perovskite films. The average PCE was increased from 14.31% for BP films to 15.49% for IP-SPT films, an enhancement of 8.2%. The open circuit voltage (VOC), however, decreased from 1.07 V to 1.05 V. The slight decrease of VOC may be explained by the decreased distance between the perovskite layer and the Ag contact, which decreased the shunt resistance.
 Fig. 7  (a) Vis-NIR absorbance spectra of perovskite films prepared by CM, BP, IP-LPT, IP-SPT, and IP-SPB processes. (b) J–V curves for perovskite solar cells derived from CM, BP, IP-LPT, IP-SPT, and IP-SPB processes. (c) Dependence of JSC, VOC, FF and PCE on the device types including BP, IP-LPT, IP-SPT, and IP-SPB. Data for CM are not list due to its bad performance. (d) IPCE curves of perovskite solar cells fabricated by BP and IP-SPT processes. Integrated current densities are 21.5 and 20.8 mA cm−2 for IP and BP, respectively. 
The increase of current density for IP-SPT based cells is monitored with IPCE (Fig. 7d). The external quantum efficiency (E.Q.E) for the IP-SPT sample was higher than the BP sample at the wavelength range between 500 nm and 800 nm. The integrated current densities match well with those derived from the J–V measurement, justifying the validity of our J–V measurement. The hysteresis of the J–V curve was checked with both forward scan and reverse scan at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The hysteresis index (HI) was calculated according to a previous report.48 Although a slightly decreased hysteresis level was observed for IP-SPT processed devices (HI = 0.105) compared to BP-based devices (HI = 0.106) (Fig. S10†), the hysteresis phenomenon still existed. This may be due to the fact that hysteresis not only depends on the morphology of perovskite films but also on the pore size of m-TiO2 as our previous work reported.49 The faster hole extraction rate at the porous perovskite/HTM interface may be responsible for the relatively low hysteresis level. Steady current output was tracked under the maximum power point as is shown in Fig. S11† and the photocurrent density remained unchanged under illumination for 300 s, suggesting that both structures can achieve efficient and stable perovskite solar cells. Long-term stabilities for BP and IP-SPT based devices (FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/perovskite/sprio/Ag) were measured and are shown in Fig. S12.† Both types of cells exhibit good stability within ∼120 h. However, device efficiencies then drop sharply, which should be attributed to the degradation of the Ag electrode.50
From the above discussion, we can see that the perovskite layers with grains densely packed and without pin-holes play a role in avoiding the direct contact between electron transport material and hole transport material. However, it is not necessary to stick to gaining a very smooth perovskite film entirely for achieving a better PCE. If we can find a new method to deposit the HTM layer to avoid the contact of the HTM layer and the electron transport layer, however, we can still achieve a high efficiency for the corresponding solar cells. The influence of the surface morphology of perovskite films on the photovoltaic performance may be a guide for the design and fabrication of perovskite solar cells with superior architectures. In addition, hydrophobic materials (e.g., long chain alkyl iodides) can be facilely dissolved in non-polar solvents to realize the surface modification of perovskite films with the IP method.
Conclusions
We demonstrated the relationship between the nucleation and morphology of perovskite films by classical nucleation theory. The secondary nucleation is the origin of the porous morphology of perovskite films, while high primary nucleation density (homogeneous nucleation and/or heterogeneous nucleation) can result in dense films with good coverage. The conditions that affect the supersaturation of the solution play crucial roles in the nucleation and the subsequent crystal growth process. Based on the mediation of the nucleation modes, a light capture enhanced architecture for perovskite solar cells was achieved by using a unique n-hexane dripping IP method, which can successively control the film morphologies from a porous tri-layer to a dense bi-layer by modulating the nucleation mode through changing the duration time of the n-hexane/precursor interface. This makes the IP process a versatile method for the deposition of perovskite films with various morphologies. The perovskite films with porous tri-layer architecture prepared by the IP method obtained better light absorption and the performance of the corresponding perovskite solar cells was enhanced, especially for the photocurrent. The present research demonstrates a new concept that a perovskite film combining the advantages of good coverage and an adjustable porous upper layer is beneficial to the further improvement of the cell efficiency. It also opens up a novel way to reconstruct the morphology of perovskite films by nanotechnology to further enhance the efficiency of PSCs.
Experimental
Solar cell fabrication
FTO glasses (Pilkington, 8 Ω □−1) were cleaned successively with a cleaning regent, deionized water, acetone and ethanol using an ultrasonic bath for 15 min. TiO2 compact layers were deposited on substrates by spin-coating a precursor sol at 3000 rpm for 20 s followed by sintering at 510 °C for 30 min. The substrates were soaked in diluted 40 mM TiCl4 solution at 70 °C for 40 min followed by washing with deionized water and ethanol, and then the substrates were dried and sintered again at 510 °C for 30 min. The mesoporous TiO2 layers were deposited by spin-coating TiO2 paste (diluted with ethanol at a weight ratio of 1:4) at 3000 rpm for 20 s and then sintered under the same conditions.
Methylamine iodide (MAI, TCI-98%), lead iodide (PbI2, Sigma-Aldrich) and anhydrous dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich) were dissolved in anhydrous N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich) at a 1:1:1 molar ratio to prepare a 1.42 M perovskite precursor solution. The precursor without adding DMSO was prepared by dissolving MAI and PbI2 at a 1:1 molar ratio in DMF to obtain a 45 wt% solution. The precursor was stirred for 12 h to confirm a clear solution. 20 μl precursor solution was spin coated at 5000 rpm for 20 s, no anti-solvent was dropped on the substrate for the conventional one step method, 0.5 ml ethyl ether and 0.5 ml n-hexane were quickly dripped in 2 s on the mp-TiO2 at the 6th second respectively for the bulk precipitation-based method (BP) and the interface precipitation-based method (IP). For different n-hexane dripping procedures, 0.5 ml and 1 ml n-hexane were slowly dripped on the substrate at the 6th second for 6 s and 12 s respectively when preparing the adjustable porous upper layer. For the dense film produced by the IP process, 20 μl precursor was spin coated at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and 2500 μl n-hexane was successively dropped on the substrate at the 6th s. The as-coated films were annealed at 100 °C for 25 min using a hotplate.
To prepare the HTM layer, 20 μl of sprio-OMeTAD solution (72.3 mg sprio-OMeTAD (Merck) in 1 ml chlorobenzene with 17.6 μl 4-tert-butylpyridine (Sigma-Aldrich) and 21.8 μl lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide(Li-TFS) solution (520 mg Li-TFSI (J&K Scientific Ltd) in 1 ml acetonitrile (Merck)) as additives) was spin coated at 4000 rpm for 30 s. 120 nm Ag electrode was finally thermal evaporated at a rate of 0.2 nm s−1, under a vacuum of 10−5–10−6 Torr.
Characterization
The top-view and cross-section SME images of perovskite films were obtained with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM: FEI, Magellan 400). X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements of the as-coated films and films after annealing were investigated with an Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation under operation conditions of 40 kV and 40 mV at room temperature (step width: 0.02°, scan speed: 4° min−1, 2θ range: 5–60°). The light absorption spectra of perovskite films were recorded with a Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (HITACHI U-3010). Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded on a NanoLog iHR320 device with an excitation wavelength of 457 nm. All the perovskite films measured in this research employed the same mesoporous TiO2 substrate. Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured under AM 1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2 with a Keithley-2420 source meter and a class AAA solar simulator equipped with a 450 W xenon lamp. The scan rate was 100 mV s−1 and the mask area was 0.07 cm2. The light intensity was adjusted using a reference silicon solar cell (Oriel-91150). The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the perovskite solar cells from 300 nm to 900 nm was measured with an SM-250 system (Bunkoh-keiki, Japan) and a Si photodiode (S1337-1010BQ).
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2014AA052002), Shanghai Municipal Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. 16ZR1441000), Shanghai Municipal Sciences and Technology Commission (Grant No. 12DZ1203900) and the Shanghai High & New Technology's Industrialization Major Program (Grant No. 2013-2).
Notes and references

          NREL, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg,  2016.
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, H. Yu, H. Xu and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1120–1126 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, J. Fan, J. Li, Y. Mai and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10399–10405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 CAS .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. Huang, M. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Jiang, Y. Zhou, A. Gray-Weale, J. Etheridge, C. R. McNeill, R. A. Caruso, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Horantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Gao, L.-S. Liang, X.-X. Song, B. Ding, G.-J. Yang, B. Fan, C.-X. Li and C.-J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3704–3710 CAS .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Decoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Gratzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, Z. Xue, Q. Peng, A. K. Chandiran, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Horantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
S. Pang, H. Hu, J. Zhang, S. Lv, Y. Yu, F. Wei, T. Qin, H. Xu, Z. Liu and G. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1485–1491 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. De Marco, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, Z. Liu, L. Meng, E. P. Yao, Y. Liu, A. Schiffer and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1009–1016 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shankar, J. Bandara, M. Paulose, H. Wietasch, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. J. LaTempa, M. Thelakkat and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1654–1659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Im, J. Luo, M. Franckevicius, N. Pellet, P. Gao, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2120–2126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Pascoe, S. Meyer, W. Huang, W. Li, I. Benesperi, N. W. Duffy, L. Spiccia, U. Bach and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1278–1285 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Kim, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 917–922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, Z. Hu, G. Yue, J. Liu, X. Cui, J. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 22015–22022 RSC .
C. Yi, X. Li, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2964–2970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Habibi, A. Rahimzadeh and M. Eslamian, Eur. Phys. J. E, 2016, 39, 30 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Lin, J. Qiao, H. Dong, F. Ma and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22839–22845 CAS .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, W. Wu, A. L. Vasiliev, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8178–8184 CAS .

          G. Liu, L. Ma and J. Liu, Handbook of physical property data in chemistry and chemical industry-Organic Volume, Chemical Industry Press, 1st edn,  2002 Search PubMed .
A. Cacciuto, S. Auer and D. Frenkel, Nature, 2004, 428, 404–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Granasy, T. Pusztai, T. Borzsonyi, J. A. Warren and J. F. Douglas, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 645–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. C. Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
C. Liu, J. Fan, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, L. Yang and Y. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9066–9071 CAS .
J. Shao, S. Yang, L. Lei, Q. Cao, Y. Yu and Y. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7134–7144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500195 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Classical nucleation theory calculation, Fig. S1–S12 and Table S1. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr08741hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  XRD patterns of the as-deposited (a) and annealed (b) films by the conventional one-step solution method (CM), the bulk precipitation-based one-step solution process (BP) and a series of interface precipitation-based one-step solution processes (IP), 500 μl n-hexane dripping at the 6th s and lasting for 2 s (IP-1), 500 μl n-hexane dripping at the 6th s and lasting for 6 s (IP-2), 1000 μl n-hexane dripping at the 6th s and lasting for 12 s (IP-3), and 2500 μl n-hexane dripping at the 6th s and lasting for 24 s (IP-4). The spin-coating procedures are all 5000 rpm for 20 s except IP-4 (5000 rpm for 30 s). The same colour of the curve in (b) represents the same sample as that in (a).	 

 	Fig. 2  Top-view and section-view SEM images of perovskite films obtained by IP (a, b), BP (c, d) and CM (e, f). IP here was prepared by one-shot dripping of 500 μl n-hexane at the 6th s and lasting for 2 s during spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 20 s. The labels P, D, and M in b, d and f correspond to the porous upper layer (P), the dense layer (D), and the mixed underlayer (M). The scale bars correspond to 1 μm in length in this figure.	 

 	Fig. 3  Kinetics curves of nucleation and crystal growth, Δc is the supersaturation (c − c*), and B represents the nucleation rate. The equations are based on classical nucleation theory; the constants (A, E, F), f(θ) in the equations and the details can be found in the ESI†. Δc1, Δc2 indicate a typical supersaturation for CM and BP, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of nucleation and crystal growth processes by the IP method. Here the first five steps take place during the spin-coating process and the last step takes place during the annealing process.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of the adjustable morphologies formed with different n-hexane dripping procedures at the 6th s during spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 20 s. (a) IP-LPT: one-shot dripping 500 μl and lasting for 2 s, (b) IP-SPT: sequentially dripping 500 μl and lasting for 6 s, (c) IP-SPB: sequentially dripping 1000 μl and lasting for 12 s, and (d) sequentially dripping 2500 μl and lasting for 24 s. The scale bars correspond to 1 μm in length.	 

 	Fig. 6  Effect of nucleation mode on the morphologies of perovskite films. SEM images of perovskite films deposited on c-TiO2, FTO and glass substrates by IP (a–c), CM (d–f) and BP (g–i) methods, respectively. The films here were prepared by one-shot dripping 500 μl n-hexane at the 6th s and lasting for 2 s during spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 20 s. The scale bars correspond to 1 μm in length.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Vis-NIR absorbance spectra of perovskite films prepared by CM, BP, IP-LPT, IP-SPT, and IP-SPB processes. (b) J–V curves for perovskite solar cells derived from CM, BP, IP-LPT, IP-SPT, and IP-SPB processes. (c) Dependence of JSC, VOC, FF and PCE on the device types including BP, IP-LPT, IP-SPT, and IP-SPB. Data for CM are not list due to its bad performance. (d) IPCE curves of perovskite solar cells fabricated by BP and IP-SPT processes. Integrated current densities are 21.5 and 20.8 mA cm−2 for IP and BP, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Classical nucleation theory calculation, Fig. S1–S12 and Table S1. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr08741h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
