Envisioned strategy for an early intervention in virus-suspected patients through non-invasive piezo- and pyro-electric-based wearable sensors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA08547B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA08547B
(Perspective)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1887-1909Envisioned strategy for an early intervention in virus-suspected patients through non-invasive piezo- and pyro-electric-based wearable sensors

        
          
            Sujoy Kumar 
            Ghosh
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dipankar 
            Mandal
          
          
        
      *b
aOrganic Nano-Piezoelectric Device Laboratory, Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata 700032, India
bInstitute of Nano Science and Technology, Knowledge City, Sector-81, Mohali, 140306, India. E-mail: dmandal@inst.ac.in
Received 
      31st August 2020
    , Accepted 17th November 2020First published on 17th November 2020AbstractThe intervention of virus-infected persons mainly relies on diagnostic methods, and accordingly COVID-19 is not an exception. Thus, a major research direction in viral diagnosis is aligned towards biological- and biomedical-based approaches. In contrast, there is plenty of scope in wearable devices towards early intervention and continuous health status monitoring. Of particular interest, piezo- and pyro-electric wearable sensors can play a significant role by detecting physiological signals in the virus-affected patients. Remotely monitoring physiological signals, such as temperature, respiration, heart rate and other data is an added advantage, where the integration of artificial intelligence is possible. This can improve clinical decision-making paths. In this perspective, the most relevant piezo- and pyro-electric sensor-based wearable sensors for healthcare monitoring towards the early detection of virus-affected abnormalities are highlighted. To implement these types of sensors, the relevant fundamentals of piezo- and pyro-electricity are also discussed. Additionally, relevant materials and device structures are reviewed in order to understand the pros and cons, and thus further improvement can be applied according to the requirements. The envisioned strategy for the early detection of virus-suspected patients through non-invasive wearable sensors is becoming very important in non-contact-based physiological data collection, particularly in the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.Sujoy Kumar GhoshDr Sujoy Kumar Ghosh received his PhD in 2019 from the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. He obtained his MSc and BSc Degrees in Physics from Jadavpur University in 2012 and 2010, respectively. Currently, he is working as a Post-doctoral Research Associate. His research interest includes flexible piezo-, pyro-, ferro-, tribo- and magneto-electric material-based energy harvesters for self-powered electronics, development of electrospun nano-fibers, organic electronic devices, pressure-temperature sensors, energy storage applications and self-powered photo-detectors.Dipankar MandalDr Dipankar Mandal received his PhD in 2008 from BTU Cottbus, Germany. Prior to that, he obtained his MTech in Materials Science and Eng. (2004) and MSc in Physics (2002) from IIT Kharagpur, India and Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India, respectively. He is currently working as a Scientist in the Institute of Nanoscience and Technology (INST), Mohali, India. He was an Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India from 2008–2017. His research interests include the synthesis of advanced multifunctional materials, flexible electronics, piezo-, tribo-, pyro-, and ferro-electric materials, organic photovoltaics, and electro-spinning systems for the development of new-generation nanofiber fabrication, 3D printing, smart textiles, and non-invasive bio-sensors for healthcare monitoring, and designing mechanical and thermal energy harvesters for self-powered devices and IoTs.
1. Introduction
A common introduction regarding viral diagnosis and limitations is necessary to start discussing the ongoing COVID-19 crisis, which is an infectious respiratory illness caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2.1 The World Health Organization (WHO) officially announced the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic due to its rapid human-to-human transmission.2,3 The basic signs and symptoms of COVID-19 may become noticeable between 2 to 14 days, i.e., the incubation period, after exposure. The common signs and symptoms include body temperature fluctuation during fever, cough, and shortness of breath or difficulty breathing. To date, no reliable vaccines are available in the market for this pandemic, and thus early rapid point-of-care diagnosis, isolation, surveillance and monitoring, and management are crucial. At this stage of emergency, the availability of a cost-effective and easily accessible health-care system is essential for frontline health workers, i.e. doctors, nurses and other medical staff, where clinicians can monitor the heartbeat, body temperature, coughing signal, etc. of COVID-19 patients round the clock without repeated direct physical contact with the patient, which simply prevent the further spread of the virus. To date, the research on COVID-19 mainly is focused on biological and biomedical research, which includes virus identification, gene sequencing, cogent protein structure analysis, development of diagnosis kits, vaccine trials and other medical interventions.4 However, before the invention of a vaccine, it is very important to reduce risks to clinicians and normal people exposed to the virus during treatment because clinicians are in direct contact with the COVID-19 confirmed and suspected patients. Also, many people are not going to hospitals because of the fear of being exposed to the virus.
Accordingly, in this scenario, wearable healthcare monitoring sensors with the help of artificial intelligence (AI) can play a significant role, through which the vital signs of COVID-19 suspected and confirmed patients including respiration rate, heart rate and body temperature can be monitored in real time.
1.1 How can wearable sensors help?
The common individuals are primarily divided into three categories.
(i) Not affected people,
(ii) Suspected cases,
(iii) Confirmed cases.
By continuous and real-time monitoring of physiological signals, initially individuals can be separated as suspected and non-suspected cases. Further monitoring of vital signs can help to separate the COVID-19 suspected cases from the common flu-infected people. The illness caused by the COVID-19 can be roughly divided into two stages. During the first stage, when symptoms are not acute, infected individuals can generally stay at home. For serious cases, this is followed by a second stage with worsening symptoms, in which some patients develop severe pneumonia. In these cases, patients must be admitted to a hospital as quickly as possible. The sooner they receive good medical treatment, the better the prognosis. During the first-stage, patients can engage in self-monitoring using personal healthcare systems primarily by acquiring their temperature, heart rate and respiration rate at home, and to call the health department or their family doctor in case of certain worsening conditions. Overall, wearable sensors can play a significant role in monitoring infected patients in the following manner:
I. The lightweight sensor attached to an individual's body will record their vital signs including respiration rate, heart rate and temperature in real time and send the data through IoT access to the clinician.
II. The data collected by the sensor will be analysed immediately by a computer algorithm. Subsequently, these parameters will be compared with standard values by a healthcare professional every 4–6 hours.
III. Finally, the data can be seen by a medical team, alerting them when a person's health may be deteriorating. A schematic of this process is shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the implementation of wearable healthcare monitoring devices for the early intervention of COVID-19. Health condition-related information is collected via wearable wireless sensors and transmitted to clinicians via an information gateway such as a smart phone. Caregivers can use this information to implement interventions as needed. The applicability of these devices is based on pyroelectric, piezoelectric and hybrid device structures. The progress of pyroelectric and piezoelectric devices extends to electrode design (reproduced from ref. 20 with permission by the publisher), materials design (reproduced from ref. 23 with permission by the publisher), ultrathin structures (reproduced from ref. 57 with permission by the publisher), micropattern structures (reproduced from ref. 89 with permission by the publisher), textile-based wearables (reproduced from ref. 91 with permission by the publisher), stretchable features (reproduced from ref. 34 with permission by the publisher) and biodegradable features (reproduced from ref. 110 with permission by the publisher). Pyro-/piezo-electric hybrid devices have been innovatively designed with stretchable (reproduced from ref. 117 with permission by the publisher), transparent (reproduced from ref. 118 with permission by publisher), all fabric (reproduced from ref. 53 with permission by the publisher), multi-pixel array (reproduced from ref. 119 with permission by the publisher), healthcare (reproduced from ref. 120 with permission by the publisher) and gesture recognition (reproduced from ref. 121 with permission by the publisher) features. 
1.2 Which problems can be solved by wearable sensors?
i. The continuous and real-time monitoring of health status by wearable sensors will not only allow doctors and nurses to respond quicker to the needs of patients and transfer them from the community to hospital when necessary, but also potentially reduce the exposure of healthcare staff to coronavirus.
ii. Reducing contact between individuals in quarantine and health workers will also limit the use of personal protective equipment (PPE).
iii. Reduce the demand for COVID-19 testing kits.
iv. The physiological conditions of clinicians can also be directly recorded and possibly monitored day-by-day because generally, is not possible for the health status of doctors and nurses to be checked regularly by themselves or other medical staffs due to their continuous engagement with patients during this pandemic.
v. Quicker treatment is possible than standard care.
vi. Faster health check-up may reduce unnecessary queues.
2. Current approaches
Currently, very limited approaches have been observed in a few medical industries and academia to implement wearable sensors. For example, a sweat sensor was developed by Epicore Biosystems (Fig. 2a),5 a wearable patch was developed by Sensium for the early detection of patient deterioration (Fig. 2b),6 and thermal imaging wearables were developed by Rokit and used in China to detect COVID-19 (Fig. 2c).7 Furthermore, the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Centre (SPHCC) used the temperature sensor from the California-based connected health start-up VivaLNK to monitor COVID-19 patients (Fig. 2d).8 From the academic side, Imperial College London, in partnership with the National Health Service (NHS) organisation, implemented a sensor to remotely monitor people in quarantine at a special NHS facility near Heathrow airport, for example travellers from abroad or those wishing to travel to return home (Fig. 2e).9 Also, Technical University of Munich (TUM) plans to use ear sensors for continuous healthcare monitoring (Fig. 2f).10
 Fig. 2  (a) Epicore Biosystems sweat sensor (image credit: Epicore Biosystems), (b) Sensium company-based remote healthcare monitoring device (image credit: Sensium), (c) Rokit-developed wearable thermal imaging device (image courtesy: Rokit), (d) VivaLNK temperature sensor to monitor COVID-19 patients (image courtesy: Labor Watch News), (e) Imperial College London-implemented sensor to remotely monitor people in quarantine (image credit: Imperial College London), (f) Technical University of Munich (TUM) ear sensor for continuous healthcare monitoring (image credit: Andreas Heddergott/TUM). 
The main challenge associated with the current wearable sensors lies in their limited wearability, multi-functionality (i.e., individually and simultaneously detecting pressure and temperature), accuracy and low sensitivity. Pressure sensing can be achieved via several transduction mechanisms, such as, piezo-resistive, piezo-capacitive, piezo-electric and tribo-electric mechanisms. Among them, the piezo- and tribo-electric mechanisms are well suited due to their fast response time, high sensitivity and self-powered operation mode. However, despite the tremendous research progress, triboelectric sensors are not typically ideal, considering their long-term instability issues. Thus, more research is needed. On the other hand, piezoelectric sensors are ideally suited as pressure sensors since they show long-term stability. On the other hand, among the temperature transduction mechanisms, thermoelectricity and pyro-electricity show self-powered operation feasibility. However, the temperature sensing response time of thermoelectric sensors is limited by the thermal diffusivity of their material. In contrast to thermoelectric sensors, which depend on a spatial temperature gradient, pyroelectric sensors are highly desirable in the event where thermal gradients are difficult to access or the heat source temperature fluctuates similar to human body temperature variations. In this regard, piezo- and pyro-electric materials are ideal candidates for the development of temperature–pressure dual mode healthcare monitoring devices because in this case, with a single material, all biophysical signals can be detected, which is beneficial for the miniaturization of electronic systems. In this perspective, we will highlight a few novel approaches for piezo- and pyro-electric sensors that show feasibility for healthcare monitoring functionality.
3. Pyroelectric healthcare monitoring sensors
3.1 Fundamentals of pyroelectricity
Pyroelectricity arises from the non-centrosymmetric crystal structure of materials, where a change in temperature (T) results in a change in polarization (P). Thus, the pyroelectric coefficient is described by,11 (1)
Additionally, a change in polarization also generates an output current, which is quantitatively described by (2)where A is the effective area. Evidently, the performance of pyroelectric devices is related with their area and temporal change in temperature, which forms the basis for modern thermal energy conversion devices. Since the pyroelectric current is generated from the change in surface charge density, it can also arise from temperature-induced strain in piezoelectric materials,12 thermal dependence of the dielectric permittivity, and flexoelectric effects13 from thermal gradients in all materials. To harvest thermal waste heat, pyroelectric devices mimic a thermodynamic heat engine. In this case, the polarization corresponds to the volume and the electric field is analogous to the pressure in the working fluid. Several thermodynamic cycles have been proposed for pyroelectric energy conversion. These cycles are represented by polarization (P)–electric field (E) cycles, where the thermal effect on polarization generated by an electric field is represented. Among them, the Brayton (i.e., two isoelectric (2 → 3, 4 → 1) and two adiabatic (1 → 2, 3 → 4) processes, Fig. 3a), Stirling (i.e., two isodisplacement (2 → 3, 4 → 1) and two isothermal (1 → 2, 3 → 4) processes, Fig. 3b), Carnot (two adiabatic (2 →3, 4 → 1) and two isothermal (1 →2, 3 → 4), Fig. 3c) cycles, and Ericsson (or Olsen) cycle (i.e., two isothermal and isoelectric processes, Fig. 3d) represent the most effective and employed thermodynamic cycles for pyroelectric energy conversion.14 The energy conversion efficiency of this cycle is represented as, (3)where TH (TL) is the temperature for the heat source (heat sink), C(T) is the heat capacity and ∮EdP is the total electrical work done (WE).15
 Fig. 3  Polarization vs. electric-field pathways for the (a) Brayton, (b) Stirling, (c) Carnot, (d) Ericsson (or Olsen) cycles (reproduced from ref. 14). 
Additionally, the pyroelectric figure-of-merit can be represented as16 (4)
Thus, a higher energy conversion requires a simultaneous increment in π with a reduction in the dielectric permittivity εr. Additionally, for pyroelectric devices, the maximum power can be represented as , where fmax is the maximum cycling frequency.14 Since the thermal time-constant is higher than the electrical time constant, , where L is the thickness and α is the thermal diffusivity of the material. Thus, , which indicates that thin film devices have a higher power density than bulk devices.
This approach was recently demonstrated by relaxor ferroelectric thin films.17 In addition, a lower specific heat capacity is suitable for higher pyroelectric energy conversion according to eqn (4). However, according to eqn (2), it is evident that a higher  is required for higher pyroelectric current. Apparently, C(T) increases with an increase T. Accordingly, researchers have used several strategies where large heat fluctuations are generated within materials even if the external thermal fluctuation is low. Thus, pyroelectric materials with a lower C(T) can harvest higher .
3.2 Wearable pyroelectric devices

3.2.1 Electrode design. 
To enhance thermal fluctuations within the materials of devices, different electrode designs are necessary. For example, owing to their higher infrared light absorbing property, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were used as an electrode for the fabrication of a higher performance PVDF-based pyroelectric generator (Fig. 4a(i)). The device was stimulated under a 1.45 W cm−2 near infrared (NIR) laser (808 nm) (Fig. 4a(ii)). CNTs showed the largest temperature fluctuations among other electrodes, such as graphene, aluminium (Al) and ITO (Fig. 4a(iii)), which enhanced the temperature-change rate, and finally caused an enhancement in the output current (∼9 nA) (Fig. 4a(iv)).18 Besides CNTs, interconnected graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) were also shown to be efficient an screen-printed electrode (Fig. 4b(i)) with high electrical conductivity and high thermal radiation absorbance capability. Consequently, the electrode further enhanced the pyroelectric energy harvesting ability of PVDF (Fig. 4b(ii)).19 Generally, metal electrodes including Al and gold (Au) have high thermal and electrical conductivity, but low radiation absorbance (∼0.1–0.3). Thus, illuminated thermal energy mostly reflects or transmits at the electrode surface, leading to a small change in temperature in the pyroelectric active material. The graphene ink electrode material absorbed most of the available radiation heat energy, thereby maximizing the rate of change in temperature, dT/dt, which improved the pyroelectric energy harvesting device performance and effectiveness (Fig. 4b(iii)). For the graphene ink/PVDF/Al system, the closed circuit pyroelectric current was improved by 7.5 times, the open circuit voltage by 3.4 times, and the harvested energy by 25 times compared to the standard Al/PVDF/Al system electrode design (Fig. 4b(iv)). However, to use the higher electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity of the metal electrode as an additional benefit, another effective approach was demonstrated by partially covering the PVDF surface by micro patterned Al electrodes, which enhanced the heat transfer and achieved larger temperature fluctuations under an IR bulb (Fig. 4c(i)).20
 Fig. 4  (a) (i) Pyroelectric energy harvesting set up by nIR laser for (ii) carbon nanotube (CNT) electrode with PVDF-based pyroelectric generator and (iii) comparison of generated temperature as well as (iv) output current from the device made of different electrodes of CNT, graphene, Al and ITO (reproduced from ref. 18 with permission by the publisher). (b) (i) Screen printing process of graphene ink on PVDF, showing (ii) higher thermal radiation absorbance capability, which generated a (iii) higher temperature and (iv) output current to the device fabricated using a graphene electrode in comparison to an aluminium electrode (reproduced from ref. 19 with permission by the publisher). (c) (i) Micro patterned electrodes partially covering the PVDF surface which generated a (ii) higher temperature and (iii) higher current output under thermal fluctuations (reproduced from ref. 20 with permission by the publisher). (d) (i) PEDOT-coated P(VDF–TrFE) film for higher temperature generation, which was further hybridized with a (ii) solar cell (reproduced from ref. 21 with permission by the publisher). 
Among several electrode coverage areas (100%, 88%, 70%, 53%, 45%, 28%, and 19%), the devices consisting of 45% and 53% coverage area showed about a 30% larger temperature change (Fig. 4c(ii)). This large temperature changes led to faster rates of change in temperature and a 400% higher voltage (as high as 60 V) and current output performance (Fig. 4c(iii)). Besides, an all-organic approach was demonstrated, where the photothermal effect of PEDOTs was used for pyroelectric energy harvesting by coating them on both sides of P(VDF–TrFE) (Fig. 4d(i)).21 The photothermally driven pyroelectric device was also further hybridized for harvesting solar light (Fig. 4d(ii)).


3.2.2 Materials design. 
Besides the electrode effect to improve the thermal absorbing property, material engineering is also very important to improve dT/dt. Accordingly, an Er3+-modified self-poled PVDF (Er–PVDF) film (Fig. 5a(i)) was demonstrated to exhibit enhanced pyroelectric property.22 Er3+, which is a good absorber of IR light (Fig. 5a(ii)), generated more heat within PVDF under same thermal oscillations, leading to enhanced thermal energy harvesting without any device structure engineering. Thus, under larger thermal fluctuations of ΔT ∼14 K to 24 K, an increase in the output current of 12.5 nA to 15.5 nA was observed (Fig. 5a(iii)). Besides organic materials, inorganic materials have also been proven to be fruitful for pyroelectric energy harvesting.
 Fig. 5  (a) (i) Self-alignment mechanism of Er–PVDF film, which absorbs (ii) higher IR light for the generation of (iii) higher thermal fluctuations (14 K and 24 K) and corresponding output current (reproduced from ref. 22). (b) Heat transfer model in the PMN–PMS–PZT:xAlN ceramics and mechanism of the heat transfer (reproduced from ref. 23 with permission by the publisher). 
For example, a thermally conductive AlN additive dispersed in thermally conductive networks in Pb[(MnxNb1−x)1/2(MnxSb1−x)1/2]y(Zr95Ti5)1−yO3 (lead magnesium niobate–lead antimony–manganese–lead zirconate titanate: PMN–PMS–PZT) ceramics improved the heat transfer and enhance their ferroelectric properties.23 The AlN filler efficiently transfers the diffused thermal wave energy to the thermally homogeneous PMN–PMS–PZT matrix due to the vibrations of the whole chain and phonon scattering (Fig. 5b). To enhance pyroelectricity together with flexibility, the fabrication of organic/inorganic composites has been considered a good strategy. For example, benefitting from the higher pyroelectricity of PZT ceramic powder, a PVDF/PZT composite film showed a 30% enhancement in pyroelectricity (pyroelectric co-efficient of 95 μC m−2 K−1) in comparison to the PVDF film.24 In another approach, researchers observed that potassium–sodium niobate (KNN) powder was also capable of enhancing the pyroelectric co-efficient of a P(VDF–TrFE)/KNN composite-based flexible film up to 68 μC m−2 K−1.25 A drastic improvement was overserved by incorporating BaTiO3 nanoparticles into PVDF.26 The triple-layer PVDF/BaTiO3 nanocomposite possessed a pyroelectric co-efficient as high as 268.49 μC m−2 K−1. Furthermore, a strontium barium niobate, Sr0.3Ba0.7Nb2O6/polyurethane (PU), nanocomposite showed an extraordinary pyroelectric co-efficient of 380 μC m−2 K−1.27 Additionally, a PVDF/lithium tantalate (LT) nanocomposite was also demonstrated to enhance the pyroelectricity of flexible PVDF.28
However, despite the enormous progress in pyroelectric devices, the essential feature required for early intervention in the COVID-19 pandemic is that the devices should be wearable. Masks, which are primarily used for protection from the spread of the virus, is an ideal platform for wearability in the case of pyroelectric devices. The wearable feasibility of a pyroelectric device was demonstrated by attaching a commercially available Al-coated PVDF film to an N95 mask (Fig. 6a(i)).29 Thus, the mask itself works as a wearable breathing sensor by harvesting temperature oscillations generated during human respiration and exhalation (Fig. 6a(ii)). The dynamic process of breathing formed the time-dependent temperature fluctuations of around 12 °C, which generated huge output responses (Fig. 6a(iii)).
 Fig. 6  (a) (i) Wearability demonstration of Al electrode-coated PVDF-based pyroelectric sensor on N95 mask (ii) working mechanism of pyroelectric device as a breathing sensor under (I) inspiration and (II) expiration and (iii) corresponding temperature change as well as generated output voltage from the device (reproduced from ref. 29 with permission by the publisher). (b) Working feasibility of the ultrasensitive PVDF–GO nanofiber-based wearable pyroelectric breathing sensor (reproduced from ref. 32 with permission by the publisher). (c) Sensing performance of pyroelectric device under mouth and nose exhaling process (reproduced from ref. 33 with permission by the publisher). (d) Stretchable pyroelectric device with its FE-SEM image (reproduced from ref. 34 with permission by the publisher). 
Additionally, the harvested output electrical signals were further used to operate commercial electronic gadgets such as a liquid crystal display (LCD) and array of light-emitting diodes (LEDs). In other perspectives, these types of approaches are very useful for monitoring breathing responses, in particular during the COVID-19 pandemic, such as by sensing the change in output responses, clinicians can easily monitor the change in the temperature gradient of the patients. Although a PVDF thin film could be used as a wearable pyroelectric device, nanofiber-based PVDF is required to overcome the limitation of the thermal sensitivity, flexibility and stretchability of PVDF thin films. Thus, to overcome this challenge, an all-fiber pyroelectric nanogenerator was demonstrated, which harvested as low as 2 K temperature variations.30 Furthermore, a highly aligned P(VDF–TrFE)-based pyroelectric energy harvester was also reported, which possesses a very high pyroelectric co-efficient of 68 μC m−2 K−1.31 In one step forward, an electrospun graphene oxide (GO)–PVDF composite nanofiber-based pyroelectric device was demonstrated as a highly efficient breathing sensor, which could detect very mild temperature fluctuations (∼4.5 K) during breathing at room temperature (Fig. 6b).32 Additionally, a commercially available PZT-based self-powered temperature sensor was demonstrated to harvest waste body heat, i.e., heat dissipation from the human body surface and from the process of respiration (Fig. 6c). The sensor could generate a significant output voltage without direct contact between the sensor and the human body.33
Furthermore, for human body conformability, a stretchable pyroelectric device was developed using micropatterned P(VDF–TrFE) on different thermal coefficient substrates such as micropatterned PDMS (Fig. 6d). The device generated stable output responses up to 15% stretchability.34 Besides synthetic organic polymers, several organic natural biomaterials such as fluorapatite/gelatin composite,35 hydroxyapatite thin film,36 natural human skin,37 dentine and cementum,38 hoof tendon39 and dabcoHReO4 fibers40 were also shown to be pyroelectric materials. Owing to their low pyroelectric co-efficient and instability in sufficient temperature gradients, all bio-materials are still not implemented for pyroelectric energy harvesting. In contrast, several inorganic materials such as ZnO nano-wires,41 ZnO thin film,42 KNbO3 nano-wires,43 PZT,44 AlN thin film,45 CdS,46 CdSe,46 BaTiO3,47 and BiFeO3 (ref. 48) possess sufficiently higher pyroelectric coefficient to be applicable as high performance pyroelectric devices. A comparison table is shown in Table 1 to provide an overview of the energy harvesting performances of the developed pyroelectric devices, which may be applicable for monitoring COVID-19 patients in the near future.
Table 1 Summary of the performances of pyroelectric materials




Material
Working conditions (ΔT, dT/dt)
Pyroelectric co-efficient (μC m−2 K−1)
Output current
Reference




PVDF film
35 K
27
190 V, 11 μA

49



PVDF film
2.8 K, 0.014 K s−1
33
60 V, 30 nA

20



PVDF film
25 K, 23 K s−1
27.2
145 V, 120 nA

50



PVDF film
>5 K
27.2
5.7 V, 109 nA

51



P(VDF–TrFE) film
13 K
43.9
13.65 V, 2.69 μA

52



P(VDF–TrFE) film
18.5 K, 100 K s−1


2.48 V, 570 nA cm−2

34



Er–PVDF film
24 K, 2 K s−1
33
15 nA

22



PVDF
12 K, 13 K s−1
27
42 V, 2.5 μA

29



PVDF/PZT
30–50 °C
95
Not mentioned

24



P(VDF–TrFE)/KNN
Not mentioned
68
Not mentioned

25



PVDF/BaTiO3
130 °C
268.49
Not mentioned

26



Sr0.3Ba0.7Nb2O6/polyurethane (PU)
300–335 K
380
Not mentioned

27



PVDF/lithium tantalate (LT)
Not mentioned
147
Not mentioned

28



PVDF nano-fiber
14 K, 1.5 K s−1
0.062
60 pA

30



PVDF nano-fiber
6 K, 10 K s−1


20 nA

53



PVDF–GO nano-fibers
22 K, 2.12 K s−1
0.027
45 pA

32



PVDF–CH3NH3PbI3 nanofibers
38 K, 2.26 K s−1
0.044
18.2 pA

54



Hydroxyapatite thin film
50 °C, 1 °C min−1
12
4 pA

36



Fluorapatite/gelatin
Not mentioned
0.05
Not mentioned

35



Natural human skin
Not mentioned
0.021–0.27
Not mentioned

37



Dentine and cementum
Not mentioned
0.025–0.0015
Not mentioned

38



Hoof tendon
−35 to 85 °C, 14 °C min−1
0.004
Not mentioned

39



dabcoHReO4 fibers
6 K, 0.2 K s−1
8.5
200 pA

40



ZnO nano-wires
30 K, 1.8 K s−1
12–15
0.4 nA

41



ZnO thin film
2 K min−1
10
0.4 pA

42



KNbO3 nano-wires
39 K, 2 K s−1
8
120 pA

43



PZT
45 K, 2.3 K s−1
800
22 V, 171 nA cm−2

44



AlN thin film
Not mentioned
6–8
Not mentioned

45



CdS
25 °C to −196 °C
4
Not mentioned

46



CdSe
25 °C to −196 °C
3.5
Not mentioned

46



BaTiO3
12 K, 0.85 K s−1
225–259
6 V, 80 nA

47



BiFeO3
1.86 K, 0.21 K s−1
Not mentioned
5.5 nA

48






4. Piezoelectric sensors
4.1 Fundamentals of piezoelectricity
Similar to pyroelectricity, the piezoelectric effect implies the generation of electric polarization (P) in some dielectric materials such as crystals, ceramics, and polymers under the application of mechanical stress (σ). The direct piezoelectric effect can be expressed by P = dσ (when E = 0), where E is the electric field, d is the piezoelectric strain constant, which is the intrinsic property of a material, and σ is the applied mechanical stress. The opposite piezoelectric effect can be expressed as ε = dE (when, σ = 0), where ε is the generated strain under an electric field. Additionally, since piezoelectric materials are usually anisotropic, the piezoelectric constitutive equations under a small uniform mechanical strain are given by Pi = (e)ijk(ε)jk, where Pi is the polarization and (e)ijk is the third order piezoelectric tensor.55 The higher the dielectric constant, the higher the piezoelectric constant according to the equation , where kij is the electromechanical coupling constant, and cij is the elastic stiffness constant or simply Young's modulus (Y). Thus, the piezoelectric strain constant (dik) is inversely proportional to the elastic stiffness constant (ckj) as, . This means the softer the material, the higher the piezoelectricity. This is a trade off in the materials, which cannot be achieved simultaneously. Thus, a high dielectric constant with soft materials can show the highest piezoelectric charge and strain constant, which is still challenging to date. Some important piezoelectric constants are as follows:        
To characterize the new materials or composites materials as piezoelectric or ferroelectric, conventionally, researchers check their ferroelectric hysteresis loop and remnant polarization (Pr). Since electrostriction is the origin of piezoelectricity, the electrostrictive strain (ε) hysteresis loop can be evaluated using the following equation: ε = QP2 where the electrostriction coefficient can be evaluated using d33 = 2Qεrε0Pr.51 Conversely, using the Pr value, the longitudinal piezoelectric strain constant, d33, can be easily evaluated considering the macroscopic dimensional effect. In this case, .56 Thus, , where εT = εrε0 is the dielectric permittivity, εr is the measured dielectric constant and ε0 is the vaccum permittivity (∼8.854 × 10−12). Here, gij is the voltage conversion co-efficient, which is defined as . Thus, the figure-of-merit (FoMp) of a piezoelectric material is defined as FoMp = dijgij (Pa−1).
4.2 Wearable healthcare monitoring pressure sensors

4.2.1 Materials design. 
To achieve skin-attachable and practical-to-use health-monitoring devices, power systems should be miniaturized, flexible, and sustainable. Accordingly, an ultrathin PZT film (thickness: ∼4.8 μm) was developed using mechanical exfoliation followed by the inorganic-based laser lift-off technique.57 This film possessing excellent sensitivity (∼0.018 kPa−1) was used as a self-powered epidermal piezoelectric sensor and nicely detected the radial/carotid artery pulse, respiratory activities, and trachea movements and utilized the acquired output voltage from human vital signals for the operation of LEDs and speaker modules (Fig. 7). This type of sensor is ideal for monitoring the health status of COVID-19 patient without any direct contact. However, since thin film-based inorganic sensors are limited by their stretchability, several inorganic nanowire-based piezoelectric materials such as ZnO, PZT, and BaTiO3 are also useful with textile-based electrode materials, leading to high performance energy harvesters and sensors.58–66 A list of the textile-based inorganic piezoelectric materials with their energy harvesting performance is presented in Table 2. Additionally, composite-based energy harvesters with inorganic materials as the main piezoelectric component and organic elastomers as a flexible and stretchable matrix have been enormously used in the energy harvesting research field. For example, a stretchable piezoelectric nanogenerator was realized by encapsulating ZnO nanowires in a parylene C polymer matrix.67 Similarly, several prototype flexible and stretchable piezoelectric energy harvesters were demonstrated using PDMS elastomer-based nanocomposites using various inorganic piezoelectric materials such as BaTiO3 nanoparticles68 and nanowires,69 core–shell structure (Ba,Ca)(Ti,Sn)O3/BaTiO3 (BCTS/BT) micro-crystals,70 PZT nanoparticles71 and nanowires,72 zinc stannate (ZnSnO3) nanocubes,73 KNbO3 nanorods,74 NaNbO3 nanowires,75 polybasic alkaline niobate,76 and (1−x)(Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3)–x(PbTiO3) (PMN–PT) nanowires.77 A super stretchable PMN–PT/MWCNT/PDMS composite-based piezoelectric energy harvester was demonstrated, which generated an outstanding energy harvesting performance (4 V and 500 nA) under strain as high as 200%.78
 Fig. 7  Ultra-thin PZT-based self-powered healthcare monitoring sensor smartly operates LEDs and speaker modules using human vital signals (reproduced from ref. 57 with permission by the publisher). 
Table 2 Summary of the nanofiber-based inorganic piezoelectric materials for a comparison of their energy harvesting performances




Inorganic materials
Electrode
Voltage/current
Power
Reference




PZT
Ag
6 V, 45 nA
1 μW cm−2

58



ZnO
Au-coated textile
8 V, 2.5 μA
Not mentioned (NM)

59



ZnO
Au-coated textile
9.5 mV
NM

60



PZT/Ag/polymer
Ag polymer ink
19 V, 0.54 μA
1.6 W cm−2

61



PZT
Carbon film
60 V, 500 nA
0.356 μW cm−2

62



ZnO
Ag-coated fabric
4 V, 20 nA
NM

63



Yarn intersection ZnO/Pd-covered ZnO
Cu wires
3 mV, 17 pA
NM

64



BaTiO3
Cu wire
1.9 V, 24 nA
NM

65



PZT ribbons
NM
30 pA
NM

66





However, despite the successful application of inorganic/ceramic-based thin film and nanowire-constructed sensors towards healthcare monitoring, the implementation of regular life, lead (Pb)/semiconductor-based materials is still questionable and needs long term observation before delivery to users. On the other hand, PVDF-based organic ferroelectric materials are promising candidates for self-powered integrated smart sensing systems because of their low modulus, intrinsic biocompatibility, flexibility and conformability to almost any geometrical shape and size, and low-cost. Owing to their lower piezoelectricity, several strategies have been employed to improve the device performance. For example, the formation of microporous structures, composite structures, micro-/nano-structures, and nano-/micro fibers.79
To enhance the piezoelectric property, the preparation of PVDF-based nanocomposites with the help of inorganic piezoelectric materials is an ideal design strategy. Accordingly, a rollable energy harvester was proposed using a PVDF/potassium sodium niobate nanoparticle-based nanocomposite, which possessed a piezoelectric co-efficient of 53 pm V−1 and generated an output voltage of 18 V and current output of 2.6 μA under 50 N force.80 Similarly, several PVDF-based composite films were demonstrated, which showed very high energy harvesting performances, such as PVDF/K0.5Na0.5NbO3–BaTiO3 (∼160 V),81 PVDF/Sm–PMN–PT nanowires with intercalation electrode (∼320 μA),82 PVDF/PZT (∼55 V),83 PVDF/CH3NH3PbI3 (∼1.8 V, 37.5 nA under 2 kPa only),84 PVDF/NiO@SiO2 (∼53 V),85 PVDF/3-D MOF (∼143 pC N−1, 8.52 V kPa−1),86 and P(VDF–TrFE)/BaTiO3 (∼45 V).87
In the direction of healthcare monitoring applications, the drug effect on the cardiovascular system was demonstrated using a flexible transducer fabricated from a ferroelectric polymer P(VDF–TrFE–CFE)-based thin film (Fig. 8a(i)).88 Through skin attachment of the transducer via a medical bandage, the wrist pulse and fingertip pulse wave were nicely recorded in real-time (Fig. 8a(ii)). Importantly, the effect of any drug dose to the cardiovascular system was also clearly identified through this type of pressure sensing transducer. In this case, researchers administered glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) to male New Zealand white rabbits, 2.4–2.6 kg, to study the abnormality in their heart rate changes (Fig. 8a(iii)). GTN is an oral medicine to treat angina and heart failure, and consequently has been widely used in clinical practice and emergency medicine. Thus, the detection of the complicated changes in heartbeat signals and breathing rates indicates the capability of this type of sensor to evaluate the effect of cardiovascular drugs, which can play an important role in emergency medicine. Evidently, these types of pressure sensors are urgently needed in this pandemic situation of COVID-19. On the other hand, a highly sensitive (257 mV N−1) and versatile platform for physiological signal monitoring was demonstrated by a nanoimprinting technology-based P(VDF–TrFE)/BaTiO3 composite micro-pillar array (Fig. 8b(i)).89 This sensor could detect and discriminate the breathing intensity such as normal breathing, deep breathing, laboured breathing and gasping (Fig. 8b(ii)). In a different approach, P(VDF–TrFE) nanowires were prepared using an anodized aluminium oxide (AAO) template (Fig. 8c(i)).90 This nanowire-based device exhibited good sensitivity (458.2 mV N−1) and could be used in human motion monitoring such as breathing responses and heartbeat pulse detection (Fig. 8c(ii)).
 Fig. 8  (a) (i) Ferroelectric polymer-based transducer for (ii) pulse wave monitoring under normal condition and (iii) under drug dose condition (reproduced from ref. 88 with permission by the publisher). (b) (i) P(VDF–TrFE)/BaTiO3 composite micro-pillar array as (ii) healthcare monitoring sensor (reproduced from ref. 89 with permission by the publisher). (c) (i) P(VDF–TrFE) nanowire-based (ii) vital sign monitoring sensor (reproduced from ref. 90 with permission by the publisher). 
However, for real-life applications, during the COVID-19 pandemic, light-weight and air-permeable textile-based sensors that can be used day and night are required. This functionality can only be fulfilled by electrospun piezoelectric nanofibers since they possess extraordinary sensitivity. The one-dimensionally (1D) confined nanofibers are in situ poled and stretched due to their unique fabrication procedure. Generally, the dipoles of the PVDF chain are almost perpendicularly oriented to the fiber axis. Consequently, the highly aligned fibers show higher piezoelectricity than that of random fibers.31 Actually, during the fabrication process of aligned nanofibers, high stretching forces are exerted on the electrified solution jets with additional mechanical stretching during collection of the nanofibers. Consequently, in situ poled-stretched nano-fibers with an ultra-high aspect ratio (i.e., several centimetres in length and micro/nano-size diameter) are produced. This dimensional reduction from film to a nano-fiber mat of the same thickness enhances the piezoelectric property and energy conversion efficiency of the nano-harvester owing to the space confinement effect. Additionally, the mixture of nano-fillers in PVDF nanofibers further enhances the dipolar orientations by in situ poling, stretching and interfacial interactions synergistically.91


4.2.2 Electrode design. 
The most challenging factor is the fabrication of electrodes for nanofiber-based devices because nanofibers are highly air permeable. Conventionally, rigid metal plate electrodes are used to prepare the device because electrode deposition is not possible due to the high surface roughness of the nanofiber mat, leading to the formation of a discontinuous film and the conducting paste can easily penetrate the nanofiber mat. However, the use of a metal electrode degrades the device performance over the time due to the large mismatch in mechanical properties (such as Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio) between the piezoelectric component and electrode materials. Accordingly, conducting textile-based electrodes are a suitable choice for device integration. A comparison is shown in Table 3, where it can be observed that metal electrodes are not a good choice as electrode materials, generating a lower electrical output in comparison to conducting fiber-based textile electrode materials, which are compatible with nanofiber-based organic piezoelectric materials.32,53,54,91–108
Table 3 Summary of the nanofiber-based organic piezoelectric materials for comparison of their energy harvesting performances




Electrospun fibers
Electrode
Voltage/current
Power
Ref.




PVDF/graphene oxide
Cu–Ni plated fine knit polyester fabric
7 V
6.2 mW m−2

32



PVDF
Conductive nanofiber membrane (PVP, PEDOT:PSS, ethyl alcohol, ethylene glycol and ionic liquid)
8 V/3.76 μA
Not mentioned

53



PVDF/CH3NH3PbI3
Ni–Cu-coated fabrics
2 V/50 nA
0.8 mW m−2

54



Pt/PVDF
Cu–Ni plated fabrics
30 V/1.38 mA
22 μW cm−2

91



PVDF
Cu foil
76 mV/39 nA
577.6 pW cm−2

92



Random PVDF
Al foil
2.21 V/4 μA
2.24 μW cm−2

93



PVDF
PEDOT-coated PVDF nanofiber
48 V/6.0 μA
8.5 μW cm−2

94



PVDF/NaNbO3
Ag-coated fabric
3.4 V/4.4 μA
Not mentioned

95



ZnO/PVDF
Ag conductive fabric
8.36 V/0.17 μA
77.69 nW cm−2

96



PVDF
Ag-coated fiber
14 V/29.8 μA
5.10 μW cm−2

97



PVDF–TrFE
Ag-coated nylon, CNT sheet
2.6 V/15 nA
1.53 μW cm−2

98



PVDF
PEDOT
1 V/0.15 mA
Not mentioned

99



PVDF
Ni/Cu alloy
51 V/28.5 μA
10.5 μW cm−2

100



PVDF
Ni/Cu alloy
42.5 V
125 μW cm−2

101



BaTiO3/PZT/CNT/PVDF
Carbon-filled polyethylene
6 V/4 nA
Not mentioned

102



PVDF–TrFE
Conductive thread
16.2 mV
Not mentioned

103



PVDF
Cu wire
2.3 V
1.05 nW cm−2

104



PVDF
Ag coated nylon yarn
0.38 V/1.7 μA
14.81 μW cm−2

105



PVDF/BaTiO3
Graphene electrode of 3D micropatterned stretchable substrate
9.3 V, 189 nA
1.76 μW cm−2

106



PVDF
PVDF–rGO
46 V, 18 μA
18.1 μW cm−2

107



PVDF/BaTiO3
Silver-coated nylon yarn
4 V
43.5 μW cm−2

108





Employing this design strategy, a wearable nano-tactile sensor was fabricated using Pt/PVDF-based highly aligned nanofibers as the piezoelectric component and an interlocked micro-fiber-based conducting textile based electrode.91 The device possessed a very high piezoelectric figure of merit (FoMp ≈ 5 × 10−11 Pa−1) in comparison to pure PVDF nanofibers (FoMp ≈ 9.7 × 10−1 Pa−1). Additionally, the sensor exhibited very high sensitivity (∼600 mV N−1), which enabled its use in healthcare monitoring. Of particular interest, this textile-based device served as an epidermal mechano-acoustic device, which could simultaneously capture the signals from articulator muscle groups and acoustic vibrations from the vocal cords (Fig. 9a). Thus, when the device was attached to the throat, it could sensitively monitor the muscle activity of the vocal cord during different physiological activities, such as speech (Fig. 9a), coughing (Fig. 9b), and swallowing (Fig. 9c). As is known, dry cough and tiredness are the most common symptoms of COVID-19, and thus these physiological changes can be accurately detected by this sensor, making it applicable for the early intervention of COVID-19. The output responses (in terms of voltage) generated from the sensor during different physical activities were further analysed by short-term Fourier transform (STFT)/direct Fourier transformation, which selectively indicated the vibrational frequencies of speech (Fig. 9d), and coughing (Fig. 9e). These types of accurate sensing functionality are essential for the real-time monitoring of health status related to COVID-19 suspected/confirmed patients. Also, this sensor accurately detected wrist pulse responses (Fig. 9f). Recent studies have shown that COVID-19 significantly affects the cardiovascular system, causing the heart to beat faster and harder to supply oxygen to major organs, which leads to heart failure and other cardiovascular diseases (CVD).109 Evidently, heartbeat monitoring simultaneously with the detection of body temperature fluctuations can possibly play a major role in the healthcare monitoring of suspected COVID-19 patients.
 Fig. 9  (a) Applications of all-fiber nanogenerator towards healthcare monitoring such as vocal muscle vibrations during (a) speech, (b) coughing, and (c) swallowing and analysis of the responses of (d) speech signals and (e) coughing signals through STFT spectrograms and towards (f) wrist pulse detection (reproduced from ref. 91 with permission by the publisher). 


4.2.3 Biodegradable design. 
In the current pandemic situation, disposable PPE, such as protective suits, facial masks, facial shields, gloves, gowns, and boot covers, are used in large quantities globally and mostly made of plastic materials. This will generate a large amount of waste materials. Therefore, healthcare monitoring sensors should be biodegradable, which will partially reduce the electronic waste.110 Accordingly, to fulfil this requirement, several wearable bio-inspired piezoelectric pressure sensors (i.e., bio-e-skin) have been designed.
A highly sensitive (∼0.8 V kPa−1) and flexible (Fig. 10a) structurally stable ferroelectric and piezoelectric (d33 ∼ 20 pC N−1) (Fig. 10b) fish gelatin nanofiber (GNF)-based sensor was demonstrated as a self-powered healthcare monitoring, ultra-lightweight (ca. 0.6 g cm−1) sensor, which successively monitored several biophysical signals.111 Notably, the read out pulse signals by this skin conformable sensor was as accurate as that measured by a bulky commercially available heartbeat measuring device (Fig. 10c). Using the gelatin nanofiber-based sensor, the radial artery pulse signals were measured under different conditions such as under rest, after exercise and after smoking. By analysing the artery pulse waveforms using parameters such as the time delay (Δtr) between the detected leaks and augmentation index (AIr), the clinicians could easily identify whether the change was normal or abnormal. Therefore, this type of analysis is very fruitful and effective for early intervention in COVID-19-suspected patients since COVID-19 affects the cardiovascular system. Additionally, bio-e-skin was also demonstrated to be useful in robotic prosthesis (Fig. 10d).
 Fig. 10  (a) Electrospun gelatin nano-fiber-based flexible bio-e-skin comprised of (b) ferroelectricity and piezoelectricity was useful towards (c) pulse wave monitoring and (d) robotic prosthesis applications (reproduced from ref. 111 with permission by the publisher). 
Similarly, PLLA-based human skin interactive bio-e-skin exhibited excellent sensitivity (22 V N−1) to harvest biomechanical motions and muscle movement of the oesophagus (the food pipe) and displayed distinct patterns, allowing the signals generated by the oesophagus during drinking and swallowing to be differentiated.112 Also, it could detect and discriminate the speech pattern of male and female voices. Furthermore, several bio-waste materials such as fish skin (d33 ∼ −3 pC N−1, sensitivity ∼27 mV N−1)113 (Fig. 11) and prawn shells (d33 ∼ −2 pC N−1)114 (Fig. 12) after the demineralization process served as piezoelectric materials and directly used as self-powered wearable healthcare monitoring devices, which were capable of sensing subtle pressure variations in radial artery and carotid artery blood pressure. Additionally, other biomaterials such as fish swim bladders (d33 ∼ 22 pC N−1)115 and fish scales (d33 ∼ −5 pC N−1, sensitivity ∼23.5 μV Pa−1)116 were also used as high performance biomechanical motion harvesters.
 Fig. 11  Fish skin-based healthcare monitoring sensor (reproduced from ref. 113 with permission by the publisher). (a) Fabrication process of flexible energy harvester from the raw fish skin. (b) Sensitivity of the device under light weight object (such as butterfly) touches. (c) Radial artery pulse detection by attaching to the wrist (picture in the inset) and (d) carotid artery pulse detection by attaching the neck. 
 Fig. 12  Prawn shell (reproduced from ref. 114 with permission by the publisher)-based skin conformable device towards healthcare monitoring applications. (a) Digital photograph of the prawns and their shells (in the upper inset) with the molecular structure of chitin present in the shell (in the lower inset). (b) FE-SEM images of the demineralised prawn shell consisting of chitin nanofibers (in the left inset). (c) Prawn shell-based healthcare monitoring device. (d) Piezoelectric strain versus electric field hysteresis loop of the prawn shell. (e) Wearable prawn shell-based device attached to the throat (upper panel) and generated output voltage from the device upon repeated coughing (middle panel) with the short-term Fourier transform (STFT) of the output voltage for determining frequency of the coughing (lower panel). (f) (i) Photograph of the device attached to the human wrist (upper panel) for (ii) real-time monitoring of the heartbeat pulse consisting of (iii) typical pulse characteristics with (iv) STFT spectrograms showing the range of frequency of the wrist pulse. 

5. Piezo-/pyro-electric hybrid sensor
Since the pyroelectric effect also generates thermal stress within a material under thermal fluctuations (ΔT) and originates from the polarization change (ΔP), all pyroelectric materials are also piezoelectric. Therefore, it can be written as ΔP = dijσ + πΔT. Thus, it is very obvious that researchers have made several efforts to combine the piezo and pyroelectric effects in one device with one material. Table 4 presents the relevant equations for pyroelectric and piezoelectric devices.
Table 4 The relevant equations for pyroelectric and piezoelectric devices (l is the thickness, A is the area and t represents time)




Parameter
Pyroelectric
Piezoelectric




Charge (Q)

Q = πAΔT

Q = dijAΔσ


Short-circuit current (Isc)








Open-circuit voltage (Voc)








Stored energy (∼½CV2)










Simultaneous monitoring of physiological signals with body temperature fluctuations is the ideal solution for early intervention in the virus/influenza-infected human body. Thus to realize a skin conformable piezo-/pyro-electric hybrid wearable electronic device, a highly stretchable (∼30%) micro-patterned P(VDF–TrFE), as the piezo- and pyro-electric material, and patterned PDMS-carbon nanotube (CNT) composite with graphene nanosheets as the electrode material was constructed (Fig. 13a).117
 Fig. 13  (a) Stretchable graphene nanosheet electrode-based piezo-/pyro-electric hybrid device (reproduced from ref. 117 with permission by the publisher). (b) PVDF-based hybrid energy harvester (reproduced from ref. 118 with permission by the publisher). 
Furthermore, a transparent single-structure tribo-/piezo-/pyro-electric hybrid sensor was developed, which was capable of sensing pressure and temperature simultaneously even under stretching conditions (Fig. 13b). The device could be conformably attached on different parts of the body for real-time monitoring of various human vital signs including breath, heartbeat pulse, breathing and swallowing, and thus capable of being used for the early intervention of COVID-19.118
With one step further, a PVDF-based textile hybrid energy harvester was fabricated, where a PVDF nanofiber membrane was sandwiched between a conductive nanofiber membrane and CNT electrodes (Fig. 14a).53 The conductive nanofiber membrane was prepared by mixing PVP, PEDOT:PSS, ethyl alcohol, ethylene glycol and ionic liquid. The flexibility of the nanogenerator was enhanced by using an electrospun thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) nanofiber membrane as a substrate. This device demonstrated a high performance as a piezo-/pyro-electric energy harvesting device that can concurrently harvest thermal and mechanical energies.
 Fig. 14  (a) PVDF nanofiber and conductive nanofiber membrane electrode-based wearable hybrid device (reproduced from ref. 53 with permission by the publisher). (b) (i) Electrospun PVDF–CH3NH3PbI3-based all-fiber hybrid device showing (ii) mechanical vibration and (iii) thermal fluctuation sensing performance of different frequencies (reproduced from ref. 54 with permission by the publisher). 
In another approach, methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) mixed electrospun PVDF composite nanofiber-based flexible and wearable devices were prepared, which were capable of harvesting mechanical and thermal energies (Fig. 14b(i)).54 This device generated an output power of 0.8 mW m−2 under human touch (Fig. 14b(ii)) and 0.2 mW m−2 power output from non-contact infrared radiation. Notably, this device could sense thermal fluctuations of different arbitrary frequencies (Fig. 14b(iii)), and thus more applicable in real-life healthcare monitoring. In addition to organic wearable devices, several inorganic material-based wearable hybrid devices were demonstrated to be useful for simultaneous healthcare monitoring.
An innovative approach was demonstrated to detect temperature and pressure simultaneously using a ferroelectric BaTiO3-based pyro–piezoelectric sensor system (Fig. 15a).119 A flexible 4 × 4 array sensor system was developed to sense real-time temperature and pressure variations induced by the finger. It was further used for voltage mapping of instantaneous pyro- and piezo-electric signals (Fig. 15b), where each unit of the 4 × 4 array sensor was capable of simultaneously detecting piezo and pyro-electric signals.
 Fig. 15  (a) BaTiO3-based pyro–piezoelectric hybrid energy harvesting and (b) real-time temperature and pressure variations mapping (reproduced from ref. 119 with permission by the publisher). 
Additionally, micropatterned (1−x)Pb(Mg,Nb)O3–xPbTiO3 (PMN–PT) ribbons (fabrication process is shown in Fig. 16a) were also prepared, which possess excellent piezoelectric and pyroelectric properties.120 These ribbons were further utilized to build human activity energy harvesting and monitoring systems. The sensor was conformably attached on the surface of human skin, exhibited high sensitivity for the detection of human body motions and could detect acoustic sounds precisely during coughing (most common symptom of COVID-19) (Fig. 16b). The sensor was used for monitoring temperature-related activities caused for instance by warm water flow and even light illumination (Fig. 16c).
 Fig. 16  (a) PMN–PT ribbons for (b) detecting coughing vibrations and (c) monitoring temperature-related activities such as, dipping sensor attached human finger in warm water (reproduced from ref. 120 with permission by the publisher). 
Furthermore, a scalable ceramic-polymer composite based on three-dimensional (3-D) interconnected piezoelectric PZT micro-foam (Fig. 17a) was introduced for the concurrent harvesting of mechanical and thermal energies.121 This 3-D composite was scalable on a large scale and could be stretched and bent by the fingers with ease without fracture, and highly conformable to different parts of the human body, e.g., shoulders and knees, suggesting its applicability in wearable devices (Fig. 17b). Also, it was shown that its piezoelectric energy harvesting performance was not degraded under long term (2000 cycles) heating–cooling cycles (25–35 °C) and also its pyroelectric energy harvesting performance was not degraded under long term (2000 cycles) compressive strain (∼8%) (Fig. 17b). The coupled output under simultaneous mechanical and thermal fluctuations was significantly enhanced in comparison to the individual piezo- and pyro-electric output (Fig. 17b). Overall, piezo-/pyro-electric hybrid energy harvesters represent efficient devices to simultaneously monitor human physiological signals including human body temperature fluctuations.
 Fig. 17  (a) PZT-based 3-D micro-foam with large-scale processability and conformability to different parts of the human body and (b) mechanical and thermal hybrid energy harvesting feasibility (reproduced from ref. 121 with permission by the publisher). 
6. Conclusion and future outlook
In conclusion, we presented a range of flexible and wearable pressure and temperature dual functional sensors, which can work simultaneously. These sensors are ideal candidates for application as healthcare monitoring sensors for early intervention of COVID-19. Since many companies are working on applying wearable sensors for the remote monitoring of COVID-19 patients, the use of these sensors may work well. Importantly, with one material having multi-sensing capability, several types of health status can be monitored. Also, these sensors are attachable to PPE, which clinicians and other health staff are required to wear. Thus, in hospitals and other COVID-19 prone areas, healthcare monitoring is possible day and night without any interruption. In this regard, the development of smart PPE consisting of wireless communication and integrated temperature-pressure hybrid sensors126 is urgently needed in order to monitor the physiological conditions of patients without compromising protective functions, as proposed in Fig. 18. In this direction, more research is needed to explore wearable piezo-/pyro-electric hybrid sensors and their applicability towards healthcare monitoring functions. Besides organic and inorganic materials, piezoelectric 2D materials are also ideal candidates due to their outstanding advantages in terms of ultrathin, transparency, flexibility, large surface-to-volume ratio, and stackable layers, which are beneficial for the development of lightweight and high-performance multifunctional applications.123 Additionally, triboelectric nanogenerators are also validated to be fruitful for the filtration and deactivation of SARS-CoV-2.124 Furthermore, flexible and rollable magnetoelectric materials also play a significant role in wearable and wireless sensors.125 Therefore, researchers from different sectors, such as, materials scientists, physicists, chemists, engineers, and other related research fields need to be involved more deeply. Since the COVID-19 pandemic is a global challenge, researchers around the globe need to work together to address the many challenges in order to implement wearable healthcare motoring sensors, which can prevent the further spread of COVID-19 and possibly end this crisis in near future.
 Fig. 18  Image showing envisioned smart personal protection equipment (PPE), which is typically used by clinicians in the treatment of COVID-19. The PPE consists of several wearable sensors/devices with wireless healthcare monitoring functionality, which is urgently needed in this current situation (picture courtesy ref. 122). 
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by a grant from the Science and Engineering Research Board (EEQ/2018/001130), Government of India.
References
P. Zhou, X.-L. Yang, X.-G. Wang, B. Hu, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, H.-R. Si, Y. Zhu, B. Li and C.-L. Huang, 
            et al.
          , Nature, 2020, 579, 270–273 CrossRef CAS .

WHO announces COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic,  12.03.2020, http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/health-emergencies/coronavirus-covid-19/news/news/2020/3/who-announces-covid-19-outbreak-a-pandemic Search PubMed.

          WHO, Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Situation Report-153, https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200621-covid-19-sitrep-153.pdf?sfvrsn=c896464d_2, accessed  June 21, 2020 Search PubMed.
B. Udugama, P. Kadhiresan, H. N. Kozlowski, A. Malekjahani, M. Osborne, V. Y. C. Li, H. Chen, S. Mubareka, J. B. Gubbay and W. C. W. Chan, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(4), 3822–3835 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Dormehl, Epicore Biosystem-news and publication, Sweat-analyzing patch could help spot biomarkers linked to COVID-19,  April 14, 2020, https://www.digitaltrends.com/health-fitness/epicore-biosystems-sweat-sampling-patches Search PubMed.

SENSIUM, part of the Surgical Company, https://www.sensium.co.uk/us Search PubMed.

Chinese startup Rokid pitches COVID-19 detection glasses in US, https://techcrunch.com/2020/04/16/chinese-startup-rokid-pitches-covid-19-detection-glasses-in-u-s Search PubMed.

          D. Koh, Combating the spread of coronavirus in China through continuous temperature monitoring,  January 30, 2020, https://www.mobihealthnews.com/news/asia-pacific/combating-spread-coronavirus-china-through-continuous-temperature-monitoring Search PubMed.

          J. Alford, Wearable sensor trialled for remote COVID-19 monitoring,  April 20 2020, https://www.imperial.ac.uk/news/196973/wearable-sensor-trialled-remote-covid-19-monitoring Search PubMed.

COVID-19, Research News: In-ear sensors to help in fight against COVID-19,  April 21, 2020, https://www.tum.de/en/about-tum/news/covid-19/short/article/35988/ Search PubMed.
C. R. Bowen, J. Taylor, E. LeBoulbar, D. Zabek, A. Chauhan and R. Vaish, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3836–3856 RSC .
J. D. Zook and S. T. Liu, J. Appl. Phys., 1978, 49, 4604–4606 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zubko, G. Catalan and A. K. Tagantsev, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2013, 43, 387–421 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pandya, G. Velarde, L. Zhang, J. D. Wilbur, A. Smith, B. Hanrahan, C. Dames and L. W. Martin, NPG Asia Mater., 2019, 11, 26 CrossRef .
R. B. Olsen and D. D. Brown, Ferroelectrics, 1982, 40, 17–27 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sebald, E. Lefeuvre and D. Guyomar, IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, 2008, 55, 538–551 Search PubMed .
S. Pandya, J. Wilbur, J. Kim, R. Gao, A. Dasgupta, C. Dames and L. W. Martin, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 432–438 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhao, W. Jiang, H. Liu, D. Niu, X. Li, W. Liu, X. Li, B. Chen, Y. Shi, L. Yin and B. Lu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8111–8117 RSC .
D. Zabek, K. Seunarine, C. Spacie and C. Bowen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9161–9167 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zabek, J. Taylor, E. Le Boulbar and C. R. Bowen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401891 CrossRef .
T. Park, J. Na, B. Kim, Y. Kim, H. Shin and E. Kim, Photothermally Activated Pyroelectric Polymer Films for Harvesting of Solar Heat with a Hybrid Energy Cell Structure, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11830–11839 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh, M. Xie, C. R. Bowen, P. R. Davies, D. J. Morgan and D. Mandal, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 16703 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, C. R. Bowen, W. Lei, H. Zhang, B. Xie, S. Qiu, M.-Y. Li and S. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5040–5051 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Gao, H. Li, E. Wang, J. Zhang and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 11733–11738 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Luo, Y. C. Yu, Y. Shuai, X. Q. Pan, Q. Q. Wu, C. G. Wu and W. L. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 2288–2292 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Singh, M. S. Gaur, D. Johari, R. Sagar, A. Gupta, A. Sharma, G. Singh and M. Yadav, Ferroelectrics, 2019, 551, 122–132 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Jayalakshmy and J. Philip, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2015, 109, 6–11 CrossRef CAS .
S. Satapathy, P. K. Gupta and K. B. R. Varma, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 055402 CrossRef .
H. Xue, Q. Yang, D. Y. Wang, W. J. Luo, W. Q. Wang, M. S. Lin, D. L. Liang and Q. M. Luo, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh, M. Xie, C. R. Bowen and D. Mandal, AIP Conf. Proc., 2017, 1942, 140025 CrossRef .
L. Persano, C. Dagdeviren, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, S. Girardo 1, D. Pisignano, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1633 CrossRef .
K. Roy, S. K. Ghosh, A. Sultana, S. Garain, M. Xie, C. R. Bowen, K. Henkel, D. Schmeiβer and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2013–2025 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sultana, M. M. Alam, T. R. Middya and D. Mandal, Appl. Energy, 2018, 221, 299–307 CrossRef .
J.-H. Lee, H. Ryu, T.-Y. Kim, S.-S. Kwak, H.-J. Yoon, T.-H. Kim, W. Seung and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500704 CrossRef .
M. Burgener, T. Putzeys, M. P. Gashti, S. Busch, H. Aboulfadl, M. Wübbenhorst, R. d. Kniep and J. Hulliger, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 2814–2819 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Lang, S. A. M. Tofail, A. A. Gandhi, M. Gregor, C. Wolf-Brandstetter, J. Kost, S. Bauer and M. Krause, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 123703 CrossRef .
H. Athenstaedt, H. Claussen and D. Schaper, Science, 1982, 216, 1018–1020 CrossRef CAS .
H. Athenstaedt, Arch. Oral Biol., 1971, 16, 495–501 CrossRef CAS .
M. Braden, A. G. Bairstow, I. Beider and B. G. Ritter, Nature, 1966, 212, 704–705 CrossRef .
D. Isakov, E. de Matos Gomes, B. Almeida, A. L. Kholkin, P. Zelenovskiy, M. Neradovskiy and V. Ya. Shur, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 032907 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, W. Guo, K. C. Pradel, G. Zhu, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS .
C.-P. Ye, T. Tamagawa and D. L. Polla, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 70, 5538–5543 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. H. Jung, B. K. Yun, F. Zhang, K. C. Pradel, W. Guo and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6408–6413 CrossRef CAS .
V. Fuflyigin, E. Salley, A. Osinsky and P. Norris, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 3075 CrossRef CAS .
D. Berlincourt, H. Jaffe and L. R. Shiozawa, Phys. Rev., 1963, 129, 1009–1017 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, K. Zhang and Y. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700622 CrossRef .
J. Qi, N. Ma and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1700622 Search PubMed .
Q. Leng, L. Chen, H. Guo, J. Liu, G. Liu, C. Hu and Y. Xi, Harvesting heat energy from hot/cold water with a pyroelectric generator, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11940–11947 RSC .
F. Gao, W. Li, X. Wang, X. Fang and M. Ma, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 19–26 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Raouadi and O. Touayar, Sens. Actuators, A, 2018, 273, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. H. Lee, H. Ryu, J.-H. Lee, U. Khan, H. Kim, S. S. Kwak and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700702 CrossRef .
M.-H. You, X.-X. Wang, X. Yan, J. Zhang, W.-Z. Song, M. Yu, Z.-Y. Fan, S. Ramakrishna and Y.-Z. Long, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3500–3509 RSC .
A. Sultana, S. K. Ghosh, M. M. Alam, P. Sadhukhan, K. Roy, M. Xie, C. R. Bowen, S. Sarkar, S. Das, T. R. Middya and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27279–27287 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Heywang, K. Lubitz and W. Wersing, Piezoelectricity: Evolution and Future of a Technology, ed. R. Hull Jr, R. M. Osgood, J. Parisi and H. Warlimont, Springer Series in Materials Science,  2008, pp. 157–176, ISBN 978-3-540-68680-4 Search PubMed .
T. Furukawa and N. Seo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 1990, 29, 675 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Park, D. J. Joe, D. H. Kim, H. Park, J. H. Han, C. K. Jeong, H. Park, J. G. Park, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702308 CrossRef .
W. Wu, S. Bai, M. Yuan, Y. Qin, Z. L. Wang and T. Jing, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6231–6235 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, S. M. Kim, H. Son, H. Kim, B. Park, J. Ku, J. I. Sohn, K. Im, J. E. Jang, J.-J. Park, O. Kim, S. N. Cha and Y. J. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8932–8936 RSC .
A. Khan, M. Ali Abbasi, M. Hussain, Z. Hussain Ibupoto, J. Wissting, O. Nur and M. Willander, Piezoelectric nanogenerator based on zinc oxide nanorods grown on textile cotton fabric, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 193506 CrossRef .
A. Almusallam, Z. Luo, A. Komolafe, K. Yang, A. Robinson, R. Torah and S. Beeby, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 146–156 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. He, W. Dong, Y. P. Guo, L. Guan, H. Y. Xiao and H. Z. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 745–753 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Chen and J. S. Guo, Phys. E, 2019, 105, 212–218 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, L. Zhang, Q. Xu, Y. Zheng, Y. Qin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 749–753 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, T. Gao, J. Wang, J. Liao, Y. Qiu, Q. Yang, H. Xue, Z. Shi, Y. Zhao, Z. Xiong and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 298–305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi, J. Kim, T. D. Nguyen, B. Lisko, P. K. Purohit and M. C. McAlpine, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1331–1336 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Dahiya, F. Morini, S. Boubenia, K. Nadaud, D. Alquier and G. Poulin-Vittrant, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700249 CrossRef .
K. I. Park, M. Lee, Y. Liu, S. Moon, G. T. Hwang, G. Zhu, J. E. Kim, S. O. Kim, D. K. Kim, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2999–3004 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. Park, S. B. Bae, S. H. Yang, H. I. Lee, K. Lee and S. J. Lee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8962–8968 RSC .
Y. Sun, Y. Chang, J. Wu, Y. Liu, L. Jin, S. Zhang, B. Yang and W. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3603–3611 RSC .
E. J. Lee, T. Y. Kim, S. Kim, S. Jeong, Y. Choi and S. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1425–1430 RSC .
Q. L. Zhao, G. P. He, J. J. Di, W. L. Song, Z. L. Hou, P. P. Tan, D. W. Wang and M. S. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24696–24703 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Alam, S. K. Ghosh, A. Sultana and D. Mandal, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 165403 CrossRef .
J. H. Jung, C. Y. Chen, B. K. Yun, N. Lee, Y. S. Zhou, W. Jo, L. J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 375401 CrossRef .
J. H. J. H. Jung, M. Lee, J. I. Hong, Y. Ding, C. Y. Chen, L. J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10041 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Jeong, K.-I. Park, J. Ryu, G.-T. Hwang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2620 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Xu, Y. W. Yeh, G. Poirier, M. C. McAlpine, R. A. Register and N. Yao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2393 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Jeong, J. Lee, S. Han, J. Ryu, G.-T. Hwang, D. Y. Park, J. H. Park, S. S. Lee, M. Byun, S. H. Ko and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2866 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan and C. R. Bowen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3091–3128 RSC .
C. Zhang, Y. Fan, H. Li, Y. Li, L. Zhang, S. Cao, S. Kuang, Y. Zhao, A. Chen, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4803–4811 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vivekananthan, N. R. Alluri, Y. Purusothaman, A. Chandrasekhar and S. J. Kim, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15122–15130 RSC .
L. Gu, J. Liu, N. Cui, Q. Xu, T. Du, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, C. Long and Y. Qin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1030 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Wankhade, S. Tiwari, A. Gaur and P. Maiti, Energy Rep., 2020, 6, 358–364 CrossRef .
A. Sultana, P. Sadhukhan, M. M. Alam, S. Das, T. R. Middya and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4121–4130 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dutta, E. Kar, N. Bose and S. Mukherjee, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10505–10516 CrossRef CAS .
K. Roy, S. Jana, S. K. Ghosh, B. Mahanty, Z. Mallick, S. Sarkar, C. Sinha and D. Mandal, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 11477–11489 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, Q. Wu, H. Sun, X. Liu and H. Sui, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 17, 100489 CrossRef .
X. Han, X. Chen, X. Tang, Y.-L. Chen, J.-H. Liu and Q.-D. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3640–3648 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Li, J. Shao, N. An, H. Tian, C. Wang, T. Han, L. Wang and B. Lu, Small, 2017, 13, 1604245 CrossRef .
X. Chen, J. Shao, N. An, X. Li, H. Tian, C. Xu and Y. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11806 RSC .
S. K. Ghosh and D. Mandal, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 245–257 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, C. Pan, L. Lin, J. Huang and Z. Ou, Smart Mater. Struct., 2014, 23, 025003 CrossRef .
J. Fang, X. Wang and T. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11088–11091 RSC .
K. Maity and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18257–18269 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zeng, X. M. Tao, S. Chen, S. M. Shang, H. L. W. Chan and S. H. Choy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2631–2638 RSC .
M. Kim, Y. S. Wu, E. C. Kan and J. Fan, Polymers, 2018, 10, 745 CrossRef .
N. Soin, T. H. Shah, S. C. Anand, J. Geng, W. Pornwannachai, P. Mandal, D. Reid, S. Sharma, R. L. Hadimani, D. V. Bayramol and E. Siores, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1670–1679 RSC .
H. J. Sim, C. Choi, C. J. Lee, Y. T. Kim, G. M. Spinks, M. D. Lima, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2015, 17, 1270–1275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, J. He, H. Wang, K. Qi, N. Nan, X. You, W. Shao, L. Wang, B. Ding and S. Cui, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 12949 CrossRef .
Y. Ahn, S. Song and K.-S. Yun, Smart Mater. Struct., 2015, 24, 075002 CrossRef .
S. Song and K.-S. Yun, Smart Mater. Struct., 2015, 24, 045008 CrossRef .
X. Lu, H. Qu and M. Skorobogatiy, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2103–2114 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yang, Z. Xu, L. K. Chur, A. Behroozfar, M. Baniasadi, S. Moreno, J. Huang, J. Gilligan and M. Minary-Jolandan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24220–24229 CrossRef CAS .
A. Talbourdet, F. Rault, G. Lemort, C. Cochrane, E. Devaux and C. Campagne, Smart Mater. Struct., 2018, 27, 075010 CrossRef .
F. Mokhtari, J. Foroughi, T. Zheng, Z. X. Cheng and G. M. Spinks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8245–8257 RSC .
S. Siddiqui, H. B. Lee, D.-I. Kim, L. T. Duy, A. Hanif and N.-E. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701520 CrossRef .
B. Li, F. Zhang, S. Guan, J. Zheng and C. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6988–6995 RSC .
F. Mokhtari, G. M. Spinks, C. Fay, Z. X. Cheng, R. Raad, J. T. Xi and J. Foroughi, Wearable electronic textiles from nanostructured piezoelectric fibers, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 15 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Zheng, Y. T. Ma, J. Y. Zhang and X. Xie, Nat. Rev. Cardiol., 2020, 17, 259–260 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Hwang, H. Tao, D. H. Kim, H. Y. Cheng, J. K. Song, E. Rill, M. A. Brenckle, B. Panilaitis, S. M. Won, Y. S. Kim, Y. M. Song, K. J. Yu, A. Ameen, R. Li, Y. W. Su, M. M. Yang, D. L. Kaplan, M. R. Zakin, M. J. Slepian, Y. G. Huang, F. G. Omenetto and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2012, 337, 1640–1644 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh, P. Adhikary, S. Jana, A. Biswas, V. Sencadas, S. D. Gupta, B. Tudu and D. Mandal, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 166–175 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sultana, S. K. Ghosh, V. Sencadas, T. Zheng, M. J. Higgins, T. R. Middy and D. Mandal, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 7352–7359 RSC .
S. K. Ghosh and D. Mandal, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8836–8843 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh and D. Mandal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 123701 CrossRef .
S. K. Ghosh and D. Mandal, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 356–365 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh and D. Mandal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 103701 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, M. K. Gupta, T. Y. Kim, D. Y. Lee, J. Oh, C. Ryu, W. J. Yoo, C. Y. Kang, S. J. Yoon, J. B. Yoo and S. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 765–769 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Suna, T.-N. Yanga, C.-Y. Wang and L.-J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 383–390 CrossRef .
K. Song, R. Zhao, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902831 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, F. Yuan, F. Ding and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600540 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, P. Zhao, X. Zhang, K. Han, T. Zhao, Y. Zhang, C. K. Jeong, S. Jiang, S. Zhang and Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2046–2056 RSC .

          https://www.gazprom-neft.com/press-center/news/gazprom_neft_sends_more_than_rub1_million_worth_of_medical_personal_protective_equipment_ppe_to_the_/
        .

          S. K. Ghosh and D. Mandal, in 2D Nanomaterials for Energy Applications, Elsevier,  2020, p. 1 Search PubMed .
B. Ghatak, S. Banerjee, S. B. Ali, R. Bandyopadhyay, N. Das, D. Mandal and B. Tudu, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105387 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh, K. Roy, H. K. Mishra, M. R. Sahoo, B. Mahanty, P. N. Vishwakarma and D. Mandal, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 8, 864–873 CrossRef .
S. K. Ghosh, T. K. Sinha, M. Xie, C. R. Bowen, S. Garain, B. Mahanty, K. Roy, K. Henkel, D. Schmeißer, J. K. Kim and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020 DOI:10.1021/acsaelm.0c00816 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Sujoy Kumar Ghosh	Dr Sujoy Kumar Ghosh received his PhD in 2019 from the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. He obtained his MSc and BSc Degrees in Physics from Jadavpur University in 2012 and 2010, respectively. Currently, he is working as a Post-doctoral Research Associate. His research interest includes flexible piezo-, pyro-, ferro-, tribo- and magneto-electric material-based energy harvesters for self-powered electronics, development of electrospun nano-fibers, organic electronic devices, pressure-temperature sensors, energy storage applications and self-powered photo-detectors.
Dipankar Mandal	Dr Dipankar Mandal received his PhD in 2008 from BTU Cottbus, Germany. Prior to that, he obtained his MTech in Materials Science and Eng. (2004) and MSc in Physics (2002) from IIT Kharagpur, India and Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India, respectively. He is currently working as a Scientist in the Institute of Nanoscience and Technology (INST), Mohali, India. He was an Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India from 2008–2017. His research interests include the synthesis of advanced multifunctional materials, flexible electronics, piezo-, tribo-, pyro-, and ferro-electric materials, organic photovoltaics, and electro-spinning systems for the development of new-generation nanofiber fabrication, 3D printing, smart textiles, and non-invasive bio-sensors for healthcare monitoring, and designing mechanical and thermal energy harvesters for self-powered devices and IoTs.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the implementation of wearable healthcare monitoring devices for the early intervention of COVID-19. Health condition-related information is collected via wearable wireless sensors and transmitted to clinicians via an information gateway such as a smart phone. Caregivers can use this information to implement interventions as needed. The applicability of these devices is based on pyroelectric, piezoelectric and hybrid device structures. The progress of pyroelectric and piezoelectric devices extends to electrode design (reproduced from ref. 20 with permission by the publisher), materials design (reproduced from ref. 23 with permission by the publisher), ultrathin structures (reproduced from ref. 57 with permission by the publisher), micropattern structures (reproduced from ref. 89 with permission by the publisher), textile-based wearables (reproduced from ref. 91 with permission by the publisher), stretchable features (reproduced from ref. 34 with permission by the publisher) and biodegradable features (reproduced from ref. 110 with permission by the publisher). Pyro-/piezo-electric hybrid devices have been innovatively designed with stretchable (reproduced from ref. 117 with permission by the publisher), transparent (reproduced from ref. 118 with permission by publisher), all fabric (reproduced from ref. 53 with permission by the publisher), multi-pixel array (reproduced from ref. 119 with permission by the publisher), healthcare (reproduced from ref. 120 with permission by the publisher) and gesture recognition (reproduced from ref. 121 with permission by the publisher) features.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Epicore Biosystems sweat sensor (image credit: Epicore Biosystems), (b) Sensium company-based remote healthcare monitoring device (image credit: Sensium), (c) Rokit-developed wearable thermal imaging device (image courtesy: Rokit), (d) VivaLNK temperature sensor to monitor COVID-19 patients (image courtesy: Labor Watch News), (e) Imperial College London-implemented sensor to remotely monitor people in quarantine (image credit: Imperial College London), (f) Technical University of Munich (TUM) ear sensor for continuous healthcare monitoring (image credit: Andreas Heddergott/TUM).	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Polarization vs. electric-field pathways for the (a) Brayton, (b) Stirling, (c) Carnot, (d) Ericsson (or Olsen) cycles (reproduced from ref. 14).	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  (a) (i) Pyroelectric energy harvesting set up by nIR laser for (ii) carbon nanotube (CNT) electrode with PVDF-based pyroelectric generator and (iii) comparison of generated temperature as well as (iv) output current from the device made of different electrodes of CNT, graphene, Al and ITO (reproduced from ref. 18 with permission by the publisher). (b) (i) Screen printing process of graphene ink on PVDF, showing (ii) higher thermal radiation absorbance capability, which generated a (iii) higher temperature and (iv) output current to the device fabricated using a graphene electrode in comparison to an aluminium electrode (reproduced from ref. 19 with permission by the publisher). (c) (i) Micro patterned electrodes partially covering the PVDF surface which generated a (ii) higher temperature and (iii) higher current output under thermal fluctuations (reproduced from ref. 20 with permission by the publisher). (d) (i) PEDOT-coated P(VDF–TrFE) film for higher temperature generation, which was further hybridized with a (ii) solar cell (reproduced from ref. 21 with permission by the publisher).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) (i) Self-alignment mechanism of Er–PVDF film, which absorbs (ii) higher IR light for the generation of (iii) higher thermal fluctuations (14 K and 24 K) and corresponding output current (reproduced from ref. 22). (b) Heat transfer model in the PMN–PMS–PZT:xAlN ceramics and mechanism of the heat transfer (reproduced from ref. 23 with permission by the publisher).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) (i) Wearability demonstration of Al electrode-coated PVDF-based pyroelectric sensor on N95 mask (ii) working mechanism of pyroelectric device as a breathing sensor under (I) inspiration and (II) expiration and (iii) corresponding temperature change as well as generated output voltage from the device (reproduced from ref. 29 with permission by the publisher). (b) Working feasibility of the ultrasensitive PVDF–GO nanofiber-based wearable pyroelectric breathing sensor (reproduced from ref. 32 with permission by the publisher). (c) Sensing performance of pyroelectric device under mouth and nose exhaling process (reproduced from ref. 33 with permission by the publisher). (d) Stretchable pyroelectric device with its FE-SEM image (reproduced from ref. 34 with permission by the publisher).	 

PVDF film	35 K	27	190 V, 11 μA	
49

PVDF film	2.8 K, 0.014 K s−1	33	60 V, 30 nA	
20

PVDF film	25 K, 23 K s−1	27.2	145 V, 120 nA	
50

PVDF film	>5 K	27.2	5.7 V, 109 nA	
51

P(VDF–TrFE) film	13 K	43.9	13.65 V, 2.69 μA	
52

P(VDF–TrFE) film	18.5 K, 100 K s−1	
	2.48 V, 570 nA cm−2	
34

Er–PVDF film	24 K, 2 K s−1	33	15 nA	
22

PVDF	12 K, 13 K s−1	27	42 V, 2.5 μA	
29

PVDF/PZT	30–50 °C	95	Not mentioned	
24

P(VDF–TrFE)/KNN	Not mentioned	68	Not mentioned	
25

PVDF/BaTiO3	130 °C	268.49	Not mentioned	
26

Sr0.3Ba0.7Nb2O6/polyurethane (PU)	300–335 K	380	Not mentioned	
27

PVDF/lithium tantalate (LT)	Not mentioned	147	Not mentioned	
28

PVDF nano-fiber	14 K, 1.5 K s−1	0.062	60 pA	
30

PVDF nano-fiber	6 K, 10 K s−1	
	20 nA	
53

PVDF–GO nano-fibers	22 K, 2.12 K s−1	0.027	45 pA	
32

PVDF–CH3NH3PbI3 nanofibers	38 K, 2.26 K s−1	0.044	18.2 pA	
54

Hydroxyapatite thin film	50 °C, 1 °C min−1	12	4 pA	
36

Fluorapatite/gelatin	Not mentioned	0.05	Not mentioned	
35

Natural human skin	Not mentioned	0.021–0.27	Not mentioned	
37

Dentine and cementum	Not mentioned	0.025–0.0015	Not mentioned	
38

Hoof tendon	−35 to 85 °C, 14 °C min−1	0.004	Not mentioned	
39

dabcoHReO4 fibers	6 K, 0.2 K s−1	8.5	200 pA	
40

ZnO nano-wires	30 K, 1.8 K s−1	12–15	0.4 nA	
41

ZnO thin film	2 K min−1	10	0.4 pA	
42

KNbO3 nano-wires	39 K, 2 K s−1	8	120 pA	
43

PZT	45 K, 2.3 K s−1	800	22 V, 171 nA cm−2	
44

AlN thin film	Not mentioned	6–8	Not mentioned	
45

CdS	25 °C to −196 °C	4	Not mentioned	
46

CdSe	25 °C to −196 °C	3.5	Not mentioned	
46

BaTiO3	12 K, 0.85 K s−1	225–259	6 V, 80 nA	
47

BiFeO3	1.86 K, 0.21 K s−1	Not mentioned	5.5 nA	
48


 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Ultra-thin PZT-based self-powered healthcare monitoring sensor smartly operates LEDs and speaker modules using human vital signals (reproduced from ref. 57 with permission by the publisher).	 

PZT	Ag	6 V, 45 nA	1 μW cm−2	
58

ZnO	Au-coated textile	8 V, 2.5 μA	Not mentioned (NM)	
59

ZnO	Au-coated textile	9.5 mV	NM	
60

PZT/Ag/polymer	Ag polymer ink	19 V, 0.54 μA	1.6 W cm−2	
61

PZT	Carbon film	60 V, 500 nA	0.356 μW cm−2	
62

ZnO	Ag-coated fabric	4 V, 20 nA	NM	
63

Yarn intersection ZnO/Pd-covered ZnO	Cu wires	3 mV, 17 pA	NM	
64

BaTiO3	Cu wire	1.9 V, 24 nA	NM	
65

PZT ribbons	NM	30 pA	NM	
66


 	Fig. 8  (a) (i) Ferroelectric polymer-based transducer for (ii) pulse wave monitoring under normal condition and (iii) under drug dose condition (reproduced from ref. 88 with permission by the publisher). (b) (i) P(VDF–TrFE)/BaTiO3 composite micro-pillar array as (ii) healthcare monitoring sensor (reproduced from ref. 89 with permission by the publisher). (c) (i) P(VDF–TrFE) nanowire-based (ii) vital sign monitoring sensor (reproduced from ref. 90 with permission by the publisher).	 

PVDF/graphene oxide	Cu–Ni plated fine knit polyester fabric	7 V	6.2 mW m−2	
32

PVDF	Conductive nanofiber membrane (PVP, PEDOT:PSS, ethyl alcohol, ethylene glycol and ionic liquid)	8 V/3.76 μA	Not mentioned	
53

PVDF/CH3NH3PbI3	Ni–Cu-coated fabrics	2 V/50 nA	0.8 mW m−2	
54

Pt/PVDF	Cu–Ni plated fabrics	30 V/1.38 mA	22 μW cm−2	
91

PVDF	Cu foil	76 mV/39 nA	577.6 pW cm−2	
92

Random PVDF	Al foil	2.21 V/4 μA	2.24 μW cm−2	
93

PVDF	PEDOT-coated PVDF nanofiber	48 V/6.0 μA	8.5 μW cm−2	
94

PVDF/NaNbO3	Ag-coated fabric	3.4 V/4.4 μA	Not mentioned	
95

ZnO/PVDF	Ag conductive fabric	8.36 V/0.17 μA	77.69 nW cm−2	
96

PVDF	Ag-coated fiber	14 V/29.8 μA	5.10 μW cm−2	
97

PVDF–TrFE	Ag-coated nylon, CNT sheet	2.6 V/15 nA	1.53 μW cm−2	
98

PVDF	PEDOT	1 V/0.15 mA	Not mentioned	
99

PVDF	Ni/Cu alloy	51 V/28.5 μA	10.5 μW cm−2	
100

PVDF	Ni/Cu alloy	42.5 V	125 μW cm−2	
101

BaTiO3/PZT/CNT/PVDF	Carbon-filled polyethylene	6 V/4 nA	Not mentioned	
102

PVDF–TrFE	Conductive thread	16.2 mV	Not mentioned	
103

PVDF	Cu wire	2.3 V	1.05 nW cm−2	
104

PVDF	Ag coated nylon yarn	0.38 V/1.7 μA	14.81 μW cm−2	
105

PVDF/BaTiO3	Graphene electrode of 3D micropatterned stretchable substrate	9.3 V, 189 nA	1.76 μW cm−2	
106

PVDF	PVDF–rGO	46 V, 18 μA	18.1 μW cm−2	
107

PVDF/BaTiO3	Silver-coated nylon yarn	4 V	43.5 μW cm−2	
108


 	Fig. 9  (a) Applications of all-fiber nanogenerator towards healthcare monitoring such as vocal muscle vibrations during (a) speech, (b) coughing, and (c) swallowing and analysis of the responses of (d) speech signals and (e) coughing signals through STFT spectrograms and towards (f) wrist pulse detection (reproduced from ref. 91 with permission by the publisher).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Electrospun gelatin nano-fiber-based flexible bio-e-skin comprised of (b) ferroelectricity and piezoelectricity was useful towards (c) pulse wave monitoring and (d) robotic prosthesis applications (reproduced from ref. 111 with permission by the publisher).	 

 	Fig. 11  Fish skin-based healthcare monitoring sensor (reproduced from ref. 113 with permission by the publisher). (a) Fabrication process of flexible energy harvester from the raw fish skin. (b) Sensitivity of the device under light weight object (such as butterfly) touches. (c) Radial artery pulse detection by attaching to the wrist (picture in the inset) and (d) carotid artery pulse detection by attaching the neck.	 

 	Fig. 12  Prawn shell (reproduced from ref. 114 with permission by the publisher)-based skin conformable device towards healthcare monitoring applications. (a) Digital photograph of the prawns and their shells (in the upper inset) with the molecular structure of chitin present in the shell (in the lower inset). (b) FE-SEM images of the demineralised prawn shell consisting of chitin nanofibers (in the left inset). (c) Prawn shell-based healthcare monitoring device. (d) Piezoelectric strain versus electric field hysteresis loop of the prawn shell. (e) Wearable prawn shell-based device attached to the throat (upper panel) and generated output voltage from the device upon repeated coughing (middle panel) with the short-term Fourier transform (STFT) of the output voltage for determining frequency of the coughing (lower panel). (f) (i) Photograph of the device attached to the human wrist (upper panel) for (ii) real-time monitoring of the heartbeat pulse consisting of (iii) typical pulse characteristics with (iv) STFT spectrograms showing the range of frequency of the wrist pulse.	 

Charge (Q)	
Q = πAΔT	
Q = dijAΔσ
Short-circuit current (Isc)	

	


Open-circuit voltage (Voc)	

	


Stored energy (∼½CV2)	

	



 	Fig. 13  (a) Stretchable graphene nanosheet electrode-based piezo-/pyro-electric hybrid device (reproduced from ref. 117 with permission by the publisher). (b) PVDF-based hybrid energy harvester (reproduced from ref. 118 with permission by the publisher).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) PVDF nanofiber and conductive nanofiber membrane electrode-based wearable hybrid device (reproduced from ref. 53 with permission by the publisher). (b) (i) Electrospun PVDF–CH3NH3PbI3-based all-fiber hybrid device showing (ii) mechanical vibration and (iii) thermal fluctuation sensing performance of different frequencies (reproduced from ref. 54 with permission by the publisher).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) BaTiO3-based pyro–piezoelectric hybrid energy harvesting and (b) real-time temperature and pressure variations mapping (reproduced from ref. 119 with permission by the publisher).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) PMN–PT ribbons for (b) detecting coughing vibrations and (c) monitoring temperature-related activities such as, dipping sensor attached human finger in warm water (reproduced from ref. 120 with permission by the publisher).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) PZT-based 3-D micro-foam with large-scale processability and conformability to different parts of the human body and (b) mechanical and thermal hybrid energy harvesting feasibility (reproduced from ref. 121 with permission by the publisher).	 

 	Fig. 18  Image showing envisioned smart personal protection equipment (PPE), which is typically used by clinicians in the treatment of COVID-19. The PPE consists of several wearable sensors/devices with wireless healthcare monitoring functionality, which is urgently needed in this current situation (picture courtesy ref. 122).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
