Flexible 3D carbon cloth as a high-performing electrode for energy storage and conversion  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR09785F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR09785F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5261-5285Flexible 3D carbon cloth as a high-performing electrode for energy storage and conversion

        
          
            Huimin 
            Shi
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guilin 
            Wen
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Nie
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Guanhua 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Huigao 
            Duan
          
          
        
      b
aCenter for Research on Leading Technology of Special Equipment, School of Mechanical and Electric Engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, People's Republic of China. E-mail: glwen@gzhu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Advanced Design and Manufacturing for Vehicle Body, College of mechanical and vehicle engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, 410082, People's Republic of China
Received 
      17th November 2019
    , Accepted 9th January 2020First published on 9th January 2020AbstractHigh-performance energy storage and conversion devices with high energy density, power density and long-term cycling life are of great importance in current consumer electronics, portable electronics and electric vehicles. Carbon materials have been widely investigated and utilized in various energy storage and conversion devices due to their excellent conductivity, mechanical and chemical stability, and low cost. Abundant excellent reviews have summarized the most recent progress and future outlooks for most of the current prime carbon materials used in energy storage and conversion devices, such as carbon nanotubes, fullerene, graphene, porous carbon and carbon fibers. However, the significance of three-dimensional (3D) commercial carbon cloth (CC), one of the key carbon materials with outstanding mechanical stability, high conductivity and flexibility, in the energy storage and conversion field, especially in wearable electronics and flexible devices, has not been systematically summarized yet. In this review article, we present a careful investigation of flexible CC in the energy storage and conversion field. We first give a general introduction to the common properties of CC and the roles it has played in energy storage and conversion systems. Then, we meticulously investigate the crucial role of CC in typical electrochemical energy storage systems, including lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries, lithium–sulfur batteries and supercapacitors. Following a description of the wide application potential of CC in electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, oxygen evolution/reduction, full-water splitting, etc., we will give a brief introduction to the application of CC in the areas of photocatalytically and photoelectrochemically induced solar energy conversion and storage. The review will end with a brief summary of the typical superiorities that CC has in current energy conversion and storage systems, as well as providing some perspectives and outlooks on its future applications in the field. Our main interest will be focused on CC-based flexible devices due to the inherent superiority of CC and the increasing demand for flexible and wearable electronics.Huimin ShiDr Huimin Shi received his B.S. degree in Physics from Lanzhou City University in 2011. In 2014 and 2018, he received his M.S. and Ph.D. in Physics from Northwest Normal University and Hunan University, respectively. He joined Guangzhou University, China, in 2018. Currently, he is an Assistant Professor at the School of Mechanical and Electric Engineering, Guangzhou University, China. His research interests include the synthesis of nanomaterials, micro/nanomanufacturing and the applications of these materials in rechargeable batteries, electrocatalysis, and energy storage and conversion systems.Guilin WenDr Guilin Wen received his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Mechanics from Southwest Jiaotong University, China, in 1998 and 2001, respectively. He is currently a full Professor at the School of Mechanical and Electric Engineering, Guangzhou University, China. His research interests include nonlinear dynamics and intelligent control, materials and structure design, and vibration theory.Yan NieYan Nie is currently a master's student at the College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering and a member of Prof. Huigao Duan's lab, Hunan University, P. R. China. He received his bachelor's degree from Anhui Agricultural University in 2017. Currently, he is engaged in fabricating novel nanomaterials for lithium-ion batteries, optimizing the electrochemical performance, and unveiling the aging mechanism via advanced techniques under the supervision of Dr Guanhua Zhang.Guanhua ZhangDr Guanhua Zhang received her PhD degree from Hunan University, P. R. China in 2016. From 2014 to 2016, she attended Arizona State University, as a visiting PhD student. Currently, she is an Associate Professor at the College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering, and a member of the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Design and Manufacturing for Vehicle Body, Hunan University, P. R. China. Her current research is focused on nanofabrication for energy conversion and storage (including lithium/sodium secondary batteries and supercapacitors), and electrocatalysis.Huigao DuanDr Huigao Duan received his B.S. and Ph.D. in Physics from Lanzhou University in 2004 and 2010, respectively. From 2006 to 2008, he worked as a Researcher at the Institute of Electrical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. From 2008 to 2010, he was a visiting Researcher at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He worked at IMRE, A*STAR, Singapore, as a Research Scientist from 2010 to 2012. He joined Hunan University, China, as a full professor in 2012 and is now a principle investigator at the College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering. His research interests include micro/nanomanufacturing, and micro/nanosystems and their relevant applications.
1. Introduction
Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical energy storage and conversion devices link closely to people's social events and daily life. Along with the rapidly increasing demands for intelligent, portable and wearable electronics, the passion and expectation for flexible energy storage and conversion devices and systems have become unprecedentedly high.1–5 It is widely accepted that the structure and properties of electrodes have a great impact on the performance of electrochemical/photoelectrochemical energy storage and conversion devices.6–9 However, the fabrication and integration of the corresponding flexible electrodes to the devices are always hotspots and challenges in wearable and consumer electronics.10–12
Carbon nanomaterial electrodes play a remarkable role in almost all renewable green energy technologies and fields (i.e., photocatalysis, photoelectrochemistry, electrocatalysis, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC), fuel cells, rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, etc.) due to their outstanding economic, physical and chemical advantages, such as abundant reserves, low cost, high conductivity, excellent thermal stability, strong mechanical stability, high chemical stability, etc.13–16 Diverse species of carbon nanomaterials including carbon nanotubes,17 graphene,13,18–20 porous carbon,21,22 carbon foam,23–25 biomass carbon,26–28 and carbon fibers29,30 have been widely used as important and indispensable parts for energy storage and conversion devices. For instance, graphene and carbon nanotubes are ideal candidates for solar cells as transparent conductive films, which also, in the past decade, have demonstrated remarkable electrochemical performances in various rechargeable batteries and supercapacitors. Porous carbon displays good and attractive performances both in catalysis as supports and as active materials in supercapacitors. Specifically, along with the rapidly demand growing for flexible electrodes and devices, the pivotal applications of carbon nanomaterials in these fields have been demonstrated. In fact, some recently published review articles have discussed the vital applications of carbon nanomaterials from different aspects in the energy field.3,13,14,18,19,22,29–31 To the best of our best, however, none of them reviewed the important role of commercial flexible textile carbon cloth (CC) in energy storage and conversion devices.
Although other carbon-based paper and films, such as electrospun carbon paper and graphene films, have also been widely used in flexible energy storage and conversion devices and even, under certain circumstances, exhibited better electrochemical properties, commercial carbon cloth still has the advantages of higher mechanical strength, lower cost and better fabricating compatibility in large scale commercial applications, especially in flexible energy consuming devices and electronics. In this article, we focus our attention on providing an overview of the crucial role of textile flexible CC in energy storage and conversion devices (Fig. 1). After a brief introduction to the general properties and advantages of flexible CC, its significance as the substrate or collector in electrochemical and photoelectrochemical systems will be presented in an independent section. We will start with the discussion on the application of flexible CC in energy storage devices, mainly including various rechargeable batteries (lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), lithium–sulfur (L–S) batteries, etc.) and supercapacitors (SCs). Following this, the significance of flexible CC in electrocatalysis related applications, such as being used as a catalyst support for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and overall water splitting and as an electrode for fuel cells, will be reviewed. Then, we will present a brief and complete introduction to the high performance of flexible CC in photocatalysis involved areas, including photocatalytic water purification, photoelectrocatalytic water splitting and DSSCs. We will end this review by highlighting the remaining promising prospects and challenges of flexible CC in future flexible energy storage and conversion devices.
 Fig. 1  An illustration showing the typical applications of textile CC. 
2. A brief introduction to carbon cloth
Carbon nanomaterials are one of the most important materials that have been widely studied and applied in various scientific fields due to their distinctive properties. Flexible CC with high chemical stability and mechanical durability is one of the typical carbon materials. Generally, there are several types of CC being investigated widely in energy areas, including commercial CC, CC from various carbonized textile fabrics (such as cotton), none textile CC from carbonized electrospun polymer fiber membrane and CC from other carbon nanomaterial (graphene and carbon nanotubes) formed films.14,32 In this article, for concision, we only focus our discussion on the commercial CC because of its unique features compared to other forms of carbon-based membranes or films.
Commercial CC is generally used as the substrate and conductive collector in electrochemical and photoelectrochemical energy storage and conversion devices.34–38 To better demonstrate its unique properties, we present several digital photographs of commercial CC in Fig. 2. Fig. 2a shows a piece of commercial CC with the size of 40 × 40 cm2 used in our lab (W0S1009, Ce Tech. Co. Ltd Taiwan, China), indicating the reliable yield and fabricating technology of this kind of commercial CC. After being annealed at 600 °C in air (Fig. 2d and e) for 2 h and at 900 °C in nitrogen (N2) for 2 h (Fig. 2f and g), the macroscopic structure and mechanical stability of CC still hold well compared to that of the original CC without any heating process (Fig. 2b and c), indicating its superiority in flexible device applications. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images in Fig. 2h and i show that the commercial CC is a weaved textile composed of thin, continuous, individual and relatively smooth carbon fibers (with diameters of around 10 μm).33 The whole structure itself is a three-dimensional (3D) configuration at the micro-scale, which increases the mechanical strength and specific surface area of the structure. In addition, the space and gaps derived from the unique weaved textile structure are beneficial to mass penetration and exchange during practical applications, especially in a liquid environment, such as in photocatalytic water purification,39–41 water splitting,42–44 HER45–50 and OER51–53 processes. Besides, the carbon fibers can be easily modified into a hydrophilic or hydrophobic surface, enabling them to be an ideal support for various transition metal oxides (TMOs),34,41,54–76 transition metal sulfurs (TMSs)43,77–93 transition metal nitrides (TMNs),33,94–100 transition metal phosphides (TMPs)101–119 and other high-performing active materials.120–143 Also, the carbon fibers can be functionalized with different functional groups for high-performing electrochemical energy devices.29,32,144–152 Therefore, along with the superior thermal stability, high conductivity, excellent acid/alkali-resistance and mechanical stability, commercial CC has become a suitable substrate material in energy storage and conversion applications. The rapid growth of publications related CC in the last decade shown in Fig. 3 also indicates its ever-increasing importance in the area (note that the statistic of publication number with the key words of carbon cloth and carbon fiber cloth ends on December 31, 2019).
 Fig. 2  Digital photographs of commercial CC with an area of 40 × 40 cm2. (a) The digital images show the flexibility, and mechanical and structural stability of commercial CC after general annealing processes: the original CC (b and c), CC annealed at 600 °C in air for 2 h (d and e), and annealed in N2 at 900 °C for 2 h (f and g). (h and i) SEM images of commercial CC.33 Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 (Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved). 
 Fig. 3  The increasing trend of publications related to CC in the past decade (searching Web of Science with the key words “carbon cloth” and “carbon fiber cloth” included in the title). 
3. Carbon cloth for rechargeable energy storage devices
3.1. Lithium-ion batteries
As one of the most epoch-making technologies in human history, the development of LIBs with high energy density and long cycling stability has greatly reshaped our daily life since their initial commercialization in the 1990s. They have been extensively applied in consumer electronics, portable electronics, and smart electronic products, gradually penetrated into the electric vehicle market and entered the utility area for grid-energy storage.6,9,10,153–158 Although tremendous advances have been achieved in the past three decades, the limited specific capacity of the commercial graphite anode (372 mA h g−1) in LIBs still impedes its further applications in higher energy and power density devices and systems. Naturally, the study on anode materials with high specific capacity and cycling stability is always a hot issue in the area. A variety of anode materials, such as silicon, TMOs, TMPs, TMNs and TMSs with high specific capacity have been thoroughly investigated.33,34,65,107,158–160 However, low conductivity and large volume expansion are two main factors that cripple the cycling stability and rate performance of these high specific capacity materials.6,9,11 The addition of binders into the active slurry materials, to enhance the adhesion of active materials to metal collectors and conductivity of the integrated electrode, will partially sacrifice the specific capacity of the devices. Besides, the planar packing structure of active material films on metal collectors hinders the fast transfer and transition of electric ions/electrons, and thus the efficient collection of electrons by electrodes. Omnifarious strategies and structures were put forward to solve or alleviate these challenges, and designing and fabricating binder-free electrodes with active materials directly grown on conductive collectors have been found to be a feasible and promising strategy.7 Together with the violent demands and swift growth of wearable and portable energy devices, the commercial CC has become an optimal candidate for flexible binder-free conductive collectors.
Diverse nanomaterials with various structures have been directly grown on CC as binder-free electrodes for LIBs. According to the microstructure of the supported active nanomaterials, here, we simplified the diverse systems into three categories: one-dimensional (1D) nanowire and nanorod structures, two-dimensional (2D) nanosheet and nanoflake structures, and nanoparticle assembled three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical structures. The 1D nanowire and nanorod structure can be easily grown on a conductive CC substrate by hydrothermal and solvothermal processes. Shen's group synthesized a CC supported hierarchical 3D ZnCo2O4 nanowire array system by a simple hydrothermal route as the binder-free anode electrode for high performance LIBs (Fig. 4a).161 The electrodes display a high specific capacity of 1300–1400 mA h g−1 and a long-term cycling stability of 1200 mA h g−1 capacity retention after 160 cycles. Further flexible full batteries based on ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays on CC exhibited superior flexibility, high electrical stability and excellent electrochemical performances (Fig. 4b). Luo et al. synthesized CC supported TiO2@α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays for high-performance LIBs with the first discharge and charge capacity of 497 mA h g−1 and 422 mA h g−1 at the current density of 120 mA g−1, respectively.162 The composites also show an excellent retention of 480 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles (Fig. 4c and d). Particularly, the authors claimed that there is a synergistic effect between TiO2@α-Fe2O3 and the CC substrate since the total capacity of the TiO2@α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays on CC is larger than the sum of the individual TiO2@α-Fe2O3 and CC under the same circumstances. Besides, the TiO2@MoO3 core/shell nanowire arrays on CC, shown in Fig. 4e and f, also present superior lithium-ion storage performance and outstanding rate properties owing to the unique structure and synergistic effect between TiO2 and MoO3 with an optimized shell.163 Our group demonstrated two ultra-stable LIBs based on a CC supported ZnO/ZnO quantum dots (QDs)/C core/shell structure and porous TiN nanorod arrays.33,164 Both systems display outstanding reversible capability and long-term stability at a large current density. In this material, the directly vertical alignment of nanorods on the conductive CC collector benefits the sufficient infiltration and diffusion of electrolytes, the small diameter nanorods shorten the ion transition and migration paths and the nanorod architecture favors electron collection by the CC collectors.
 Fig. 4  (a) A typical FESEM image of ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays growing on carbon cloth. (b) A digital photo showing the turning on of a mobile phone screen using a foldable battery based on ZnCo2O4/liquid electrolyte/LiCoO2.161 Reproduced with permission from ref. 161 (Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society). The inset in (b) is a schematic illustration showing the fabrication of the hierarchical 3D ZnCo2O4 nanowire array/carbon cloth/liquid electrolyte/LiCoO2 flexible lithium-ion battery. (c) Optical images of the formation processes of TiO2@α-Fe2O3 core/shell arrays on carbon textiles (scale bar: 3 mm), and (d) the corresponding cycling performance of the anodes at a constant current density of 120 mA g−1.162 Reproduced with permission from ref. 162 (Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) A schematic illustration of the structural features of the synergistic TiO2–MoO3 nanowire array and a corresponding SEM image (inset). (f) The cycling response at progressively increasing current densities of the LiCoO2/TiO2–MoO3 full cell.163 Reproduced with permission from ref. 163 (Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim ). 
In comparison, 2D nanosheet and nanoflake materials on CC for energy storage, on the one hand, inherit the merits of the 1D system. On the other hand, owing to the relatively thinner thickness of nanosheets and nanoflakes and larger specific surface areas, the 2D nanomaterials on CC also demonstrate excellent lithium ion storage ability. Ivan P. Parkin's group developed a NiCo2O4@V2O5 core–shell nanosheet array on CC as the cathode for LIBs, in which the NiCo2O4 acts as a conductive frame skeleton (Fig. 5a).165 The designed materials exhibit a theoretical specific capacity of 292.0 mA h g−1 of V2O5 at a current density of 0.1 C, and possess a superior rate capability of about 45% retention at the current density of 20 C according to the total mass of V2O5 active material and NiCo2O4 framework. Moreover, the composites achieved one of the best reported cycling stabilities with only 0.0126% specific capacity decrease per cycle after 500 cycles (Fig. 5b). Deng et al. fabricated a CC supported ordered macroporous structure with few-layered MoS2 nanosheets embedded into the interconnected carbon wall (MoS2/C). The flexible MoS2/C electrode delivers a remarkable specific capacity of 3.428 mA h cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2, and a fast charge/discharge capability of 1.361 mA h cm−2 at the current density of 5 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5c).166 A flexible LIB full cell formed by LiCoO2 and CC supported MoS2/C electrodes shown in Fig. 5d and e exhibits excellent flexibility and high electrochemical performance by lightening a LED light for more than 300 times. In this material, the excellent conductivity and high flexibility of CC enable it to be an ideal candidate for such binder-free substrate and collector components.
 Fig. 5  (a) An SEM image of four NiCo2O4@V2O5 core–shell arrays on carbon cloth, and (b) the cycling performance and corresponding coulombic efficiency of NiCo2O4@V2O5 core–shell arrays and cycling performance of V2O5 nanoparticles measured at a high current density of 10 C.165 Reproduced with permission from ref. 165 (Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (c) The cycling performances of MoS2@C/CC and MoS2/CC (the inset shows the morphology of MoS2@C/CC after 100 cycles). (d) A schematic illustration of a flexible full battery, and (e) a white LED lit by the flexible full battery after 300 bending cycles.166 Reproduced with permission from ref. 166 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). Schematic drawings of (f) a conventional electrode and (g) novel binder-free flexible 3D LTO/carbon textile electrode, and (h) the discharge curves of specific discharge capacities at various rates of the LTO/carbon textile composite and LTO microsphere composite.167 Reproduced with permission from ref. 167 (Copyright © 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (i) A schematic diagram of the degradation of a bare Li electrode and the improved cycling performance mechanism of the Li@CC electrode.168 Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 (Copyright © 2018, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved). 
It is widely accepted that the electrochemical lithium ion storage reactions are greatly influenced by the effective reaction sites and specific surface areas of the active materials. Theoretically, nanoparticles with quite small sizes are ideal candidates for electrodes. However, the limited contact interfaces of active nanoparticles with electrolytes impede the efficient infiltration and fast diffusion of ions to inner materials, and the flexural migrating paths of electrons to metal collectors inhibit their timely collection. There are challenges to directly growing small nanoparticles on flexible CC due to the inherent direction orientation nature during crystal growth. The in situ post-processing of pre-grown layered nanomaterials on CC provides an alternative way to address the problem. The CC supported 3D hierarchical spinel Li4Ti5O12 and LiMnO4 nanocrystal architectures derived from TiO2 and MnO2 nanosheets on carbon textiles by a post-lithiation process were demonstrated by Zhang et al. (Fig. 5f and g).167 The Li4Ti5O12/CC composites applied as binder-free electrodes in LIBs display an initial discharge capacity of 177 mA h g−1 at the current density of 1 C, a little higher than the theoretical capacity of lithium titanate materials (177 mA h g−1), which may result from the insertion of lithium ions into the flexible CC substrate below 1 V. The Li4Ti5O12/CC system also delivers a remarkable and stable rate performance even at the current density of 90 C (Fig. 5h). The hierarchical nanoparticle assembled 3D composites on CC not only improve electron collection, but also facilitate electrolyte filtration owning to the porous structures formed by the interconnected nanoparticles.
In addition to the LIBs, commercial CC also plays a vital role in lithium metal batteries (LMBs).168–171 Recently, a Li@CC anode system developed by Chen et al. demonstrated a highly stable cycling stability after 200 cycles at the current density of 5 mA cm−2, in which the high conductivity CC with an enlarged specific surface area promotes charge transfer and alleviates dendrite growth and volume expansion of LMBs (Fig. 5h).168 Further, the Li@CC-LTO full cell possesses 80% specific capacity retention after 700 cycles at a current density of 2.03 mA cm−2, indicating its excellent electrochemical stability. Similar CC/carbon nanotubes@Li and CC/Li composites and Li-CC/ZnO systems also exhibit remarkable LMB performance, proving the unique superiorities of CC in LMB applications.
3.2. Sodium-ion batteries
The plentiful resource of sodium on the planet enables it to be an alternative substitute for high-cost and rare lithium in next-generation energy storage devices, and the study on SIBs has become thriving and prosperous in the past several years.172–182 Flexible CC-based nanomaterials have drawn much attention due to their excellent SIB performance. Yan and co-workers presented a tube-like flexible and wearable waste carbon textile SIB decorated by industrial waste water (Fig. 6a–c).172 A Prussian blue graphene composite coated Ni-carbon textile SIB electrode demonstrated superior flexibility, electrochemical capacity, rate performance and cycling stability (1800 cycles), proving its huge potential in wearable electronics. Recently, a CC supported ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets@N-doped carbon nanowall array composite derived from a metal organic framework (CC@CN@MoS2) was tested as a self-standing and binder-free anode for SIBs (Fig. 6d), and it displays a high specific capacity of 653.9 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1, excellent rate performance and long-term stability with a capacity retention of 265 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles (Fig. 6f).176 As shown by the Impedance plots in Fig. 6e, in such a system, the flexible conductive CC guarantees the structural integrity and efficient charge collection and transport, inducing the better specific capacity and cycling performance. Besides, Zhou et al. developed a new type of surface modified SnO2 nanocrystal coated CC system for SIB anodes.178 In this system, the soft nature of CC and the nanocrystal SnO2 accommodate the volume expansion during sodium ion insertion, and the following C and Al2O3 layer surface modifications further enhance the electrochemical capacity of the system (Fig. 6g–i). Therefore, upon further exploration of flexible and high-density SIBs, CC will consistently act as a promising candidate for flexible conductive substrates and collectors.
 Fig. 6  (a) A schematic illustration showing the structure of tube-type flexible SIBs. (b) Demonstration of an LED lit by tube-type flexible SIBs, and (c) a digital photograph of the fabricated tube-type flexible SIB.172 Reproduced with permission from ref. 172 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Side-view TEM images of CC@CN@MoS2. (e) Impedance plots and the equivalent circuit (inset) used for the EIS analysis of CC@CN@MoS2 and CC@MoS2 obtained after 100 cycles at 200 mA g−1. (f) Cycling performances at 1 A g−1 of CC@CN@MoS2 and CC@MoS2.176 Reproduced with permission from ref. 176 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (g) An optical image of a flexible SnO2/CC binder free electrode and (h) a cross-section SEM image of a single SnO2 tube. (i) The rate performance of C/SnO2/CC and Al2O3/SnO2/CC.178 Reproduced with permission from ref. 178 (Copyright © 2015, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved). 
3.3. Lithium–sulfur batteries
The gravimetric densities and volumetric energy densities of commercial lithium ion cells, currently, are generally less than 250 W h kg−1 and 650 W h L−1, respectively. For grid storage, the energy density is not critical, while for portable electronics and green energy electric vehicles, the volumetric energy density is often more important.183 There is a widely accepted global target to push the gravimetric and volumetric energy densities of energy devices to around 500 W h kg−1 and >1000 W h L−1, which is a great challenge for the present commercial LIBs and SIBs. As one of the recent hot types of rechargeable batteries, Li–S batteries have become an attractive system since the theoretical capacity of elemental sulfur is as high as 1672 mA g−1.35,184–187 Therefore, Li–S batteries exhibit almost the highest theoretical energy density of all known rechargeable lithium batteries of 2600 W h kg−1. Coupled with the low cost, high natural abundance and environmental friendliness, Li–S batteries seem to be a promising candidate for the above targets. Some CC-based Li–S batteries have displayed their great potential in high energy density systems.
It is well known that there are two main obstacles hindering the realization of high capacity and stable rechargeable Li–S batteries. One is the reduction of Li2Sn resulting from the so-called “shuttle” phenomenon of Li–S systems. The other is electric disconnection due to the formation of insulating and insoluble Li2S and Li2S2 on the sulfur cathodes. The shuttle phenomenon can be alleviated by encapsulating the sulfur with some carbon materials and thus impeding the diffusion of Li2Sn species into the electrolyte. Accordingly, Doron Aurbach's group demonstrated a microporous activated carbon fiber with elemental melted sulfur (ACF-S) system for Li–S batteries, which exhibits an outstanding electrochemical performance with a high discharge capacity greater than 1050 mA h g−1, coulombic efficiency (97%) and good retention.188 The conductive microporous carbon fibers increase the mass of sulfur load per geometric cathode area and promote the penetration of electrolyte, thus enabling excellent electrochemical performance. John B. Goodenough et al. demonstrated another high-performing CC-based Li–S system, which involves a carbon cloth interlayer (CCI) supported tungsten disulfide catalyst (Fig. 7a).189 The existence of WS2 strengthens the adsorption of polysulfides by providing heterogeneous adsorption sites, promoting the charge transfer from metal disulfide to soluble polysulfides. The CC, acting as an interlayer instead of a collector, accelerates the electron transfer between the cathode collector and sulfophilic edge sites of tungsten disulfide nanoparticle adsorbed polysulfides. In addition, the use of the CCI effectively inhibits the loss of soluble polysulfides from the cathode (Fig. 7b and c). The WS2/S–WS2/CCI electrode exhibited a high cycling stability of about 1000 mA h g−1 at the current density of 0.5 C after 500 cycles and a superior rate capability of about 750 mA h g−1 at a current density of 5 C (Fig. 7d). The introduced polysulfide trap, WS2, electronically links the cathode current collector, providing an alternative strategy to synthesize high performance Li–S batteries. Recently, Lu et al. claimed a novel method to manipulate the conversion of polysulfides using strong coupling between Fe3O4 and N-doped activated carbon cloth (Fe3O4-NC@ACC) (Fig. 7e).190 The as-fabricated freestanding and flexible sulfur cathode, with a high sulfur loading of about 4.7 mg cm−2, exhibits an excellent specific capacity of 1316 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C and a long cycling stability of more than 1000 cycles (Fig. 7f). Moreover, the results also confirmed the outstanding soluble lithium polysulfide adsorption capability and Li metal protection of Fe3O4-NC@ACC, contributing to the development of Li–S systems with higher electrochemical performance (Fig. 7g–i). As well as improving the electrochemical performance, ultra-flexible Li–S devices supported by CC exhibited excellent bending and flattening stability, proving the potential application of CC-based Li–S devices in high-performance wearable electronic devices, rollable displays and flexible lighting.
 Fig. 7  (a) A schematic illustration of the fast kinetics of WS2 supported on a carbon cloth interlayer (WS2/CCI). (b) Vial cells with (a) S and (c) WS2/S–WS2/CCI, and (d) the long-term cycling performance at a rate of 0.5 C up to 500 cycles.189 Reproduced with permission from ref. 189 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (e) An SEM image of pyrolyzed Fe3O4-NC@carbon fiber, and (f) the cyclic stability and coulombic efficiency (at 0.2 C) of sulfur impregnated in different composite cathodes as noted. (g–i) The change in electrolyte color for beaker cell Li–S batteries before (left) and after (right) 100 cycles at 1 C. The sulfur cathodes were hosted in (g) Fe3O4-NC@ACC, (h) NC@ACC and (i) ACC.190 Reproduced with permission from ref. 190 (Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Additionally, CC has also exhibited its fundamental and valuable effect in other promising batteries and cells. For example, Zhou's group reported several vital applications of CC in the newly thriving zinc-ion batteries.191–193 Besides, CC has also been investigated in fuel cells,136,144,150,194 Zn–air batteries etc.59,195–200 which all exhibit its excellent electrochemical superiority.
3.4. Electrochemical supercapacitors
Supercapacitors (SCs) are another type of dominant electrochemical storage system with brilliant power density and cycling stability. Different from rechargeable batteries with relatively low power density and limited cycling life, SCs have the merits of ultra-long cycling life, wide operating voltage and high power density, bridging the energy/power gap between traditional dielectric capacitors and high energy storage batteries.201–203 Electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors are two typical types of SCs.8,12,153 The charge storage in EDLCs is achieved by adsorbing electrolyte ions directly onto the surface of active electrode materials, which results in a rapid response to the change in potential without diffusion limitation. Pseudocapacitors were first recognized by Conway, in which the reversible redox reactions at the surface of the proper active electrode materials give rise to much more charge storage compared to EDLCs. Materials with large surface specific surface areas and superior conductivity are preferred in SC systems due to the unique surface charge storage mechanism. Carbon nanomaterials, such as porous carbon, carbon nanotubes, electrospun carbon nanofibers and graphene, are the most representative electrode materials in SCs due to their mechanical and chemical stability, excellent conductivity and low cost.204–208 A few insightful reviews have summarized the indispensable role of various carbon materials in SC systems. To avoid throwing our topic into chaos, we only give a brief introduction to the CC-based SCs here.
The excellent inherent properties of carbon materials make them perfect candidates for electrochemical energy storage systems. The CC-based SC system can be divided into two major categories: the typical EDLC unitary system composed of pure carbon materials (pure CC or/and CC supported carbon nanomaterials) and the pseudocapacitor dominated metal oxide/sulfide supported composite system. As one of the representative EDLC materials, the original specific capacitance of CC is only 1–2 F g−1, lower than that of single-walled carbon nanotubes (100–200 F g−1) and graphene (100–200 F g−1). Various electrochemical activating strategies were proposed to improve the specific capacitance of bare CC. Researchers at the University of California developed a chemical oxidizing followed by two-step reduction process in hydrazine and ammonia to improve the charge storage of CC (Fig. 8a).209 The maximum areal capacitance of a three-electrode activated CC system increased to 88 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1, and 76% capacitance retention was obtained when the scanning rate was increased to 1000 mV s−1. The specific surface area of the original CC was greatly increased during the modifying processes through the controlled exfoliation of carbon fiber without destroying its mechanical strength and flexibility. The activated CC electrode constructed symmetric solid-state supercapacitor (SCC) devices showed a high areal capacitance of 15.3 mF cm−2 at an ultrafast scanning rate of 10000 mV s−1 (Fig. 8b). Meanwhile, two in-series connected SCCs can power a digital timer for almost 4 min (Fig. 8c), demonstrating its potential in potable commercial electronics. Tong's group at Sun Yan-Sen University proposed another simple, effective and time-saving one-step electrochemical activation method by oxidizing CC in a mixed acid solution with a potential of 3 V for 10 min to boost the capacitance performance of commercial CC as the anode for asymmetric supercapacitors (ASCs) (Fig. 8d).210 Benefiting from the pseudocapacitance from the surface introduced functional groups and the increased specific surface area obtained during the electrochemical oxidizing process, the obtained electrochemical activated carbon cloth (EACC) electrode showed a high areal capacitance of 756 mF cm−2 at the current density of 6 mA cm−2 and ignorable capacitance decay after 30000 cycles. A further ASC device with a 2.0 V stable cell voltage composed by an activated CC anode and TiN@MnO2 cathode delivers an excellent energy density of 1.5 mW h cm−3 at the current density of 6 mA cm−2 and a remarkable rate performance at different current densities and an excellent capacitance retention after 70000 cycles (Fig. 8e). Qin and co-workers developed a new N/O-enriched carbon microfiber cloth system with an enlarged specific surface area and porous structure by combining wet-spinning, electrochemical treatment and textile technology.211 The formation of pores and the introduction of electrochemical functional groups to the surface of CC enabled the treated CC electrode to deliver high areal capacitances of 2.36 F cm−2 and 1.70 F cm−2 as positive and negative electrodes, respectively, in 1 M Na2SO4. More interestingly, the constructed large-sized supercapacitor (LSSC) with the size of 2 × 10 cm2 based on CC can be used as the power source and watch band for an electronic watch at the same time, proving its ability to be a component in future Internet of things devices (Fig. 8f–h). In addition, Duan et al. employed another new strategy to improve the electrochemical capacitance of commercial CC through constructing radially aligned porous and ultra-thin carbon nanotube arrays on commercial CC.212 The carbon nanotube arrays greatly increased the surface area of the system, and the ultra-thin thickness (<2 nm) and porous structure accelerated the ion diffusion, endowing constructed system with a high specific capacitance of 208 F g−1 at 10 A g−1 and long cycling stability with a low retention loss of 0.0016% per cycle at the scanning current density of 12 A g−1 after 10000 cycles (Fig. 8i and j). The strategy opens a new window to designing and synthesizing high-performing pure carbon electrochemical SC systems. Recently, Lu's group demonstrated another hierarchical porous architecture of activated porous carbon fiber textile (APCFT) with in situ formed functional oxygen groups, which enlarges the specific surface area of the original carbon fiber textile (CFT) and endows fast ion diffusion, enabling the electrochemical capacitance of APCFT electrode-based devices to reach 1.2 F cm−2 at 4 mA cm−2 (Fig. 8k).213 Meanwhile, the fabricated 2 V flexible solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor device composed of an APCFT anode and TiN@MnO2 cathode delivers an impressive energy density of 4.70 mW h cm−3 and powder density of 2.42 mW h cm−3, respectively. Also, the obtained asymmetric supercapacitor device exhibits good flexibility and stable electrochemical performance under repeating bending and flattening tests, resulting in the long-term cycling stability of almost 90% capacitance retention after 30000 cycles (Fig. 8l and m).
 Fig. 8  (a) A high-resolution TEM image of the exfoliated carbon fibers. (b) Top: A schematic diagram illustrating the architecture of a symmetrical SC device fabricated with the activated CC electrodes; bottom: a digital picture of the SSC device. (c) Digital images showing the digital timer powered by two SSC devices that were connected in series (the charged SSC devices turned on the timer for 3 min 54 s).209 Reproduced with permission from ref. 209 (Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) A TEM image collected at the edge of the EACC-10 carbon fiber. (e) Energy and power density performances of the MnO2@TiN//EACC-10 device demonstrated by a Ragone plot with data of other similar systems.210 Reproduced with permission from ref. 210 (Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (f) The morphological characterization of carbon fiber after shape changing (top) and a structural schematic diagram of planar SC (bottom). (g and h) An electronic watch with the LSSC as the watchband and an electronic watch powered by the LSSC watchband.211 Reproduced with permission from ref. 211 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (i and j) A digital photograph and schematic illustration of the symmetric supercapacitor configuration and the corresponding CV curves of the device at different scan rates.212 Reproduced with permission from ref. 212 (Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (k) An SEM image of APCFT. (l) CV curves collected at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 for the ASC devices under different bending conditions, the inset shows digital pictures of ASC devices with different degrees of bending, and (m) the cycling performance of the APCFT//TiN@MnO2 ASC device measured at 10 mA cm−2.213 Reproduced with permission from ref. 213 (Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
In terms of capacitance performance, pseudocapacitor materials generally perform better than EDLC materials because their surface or near-surface redox reactions can meet the expected large energy and power density demands of commercial applications.214–226 Different from the EDLC mechanism determined unitary carbon nanomaterial SC system, CC supported metal oxide/sulfide composite systems integrate the flexibility and stability of the CC substrate with the diverse topological advantages and high electrochemical capacitance of the supported active materials. For instance, Kwadwo Asare Owusu et al. developed a carbon fiber cloth supported FeOOH nanoparticle (derived from α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles) system with high specific capacitance under different mass loadings (Fig. 9a and b).227 The system also showed outstanding cycling stability (74.6% retention after 10000 cycles) and rate performance (74.6% capacitance retention at 30 A g−1). Furthermore, the author assembled a NiMoO4//FeOOH aqueous asymmetric hybrid supercapacitor (HSC) device, which exhibits a high specific capacitance of 273 F g−1 and energy density of 104.3 W h kg−1 in an extended potential window of 1.7 V. The proposed method demonstrates a possible way to optimize the electrochemical properties of full supercapacitors through using various pseudocapacitive materials with suitable reaction potentials. In addition to this, a unique Al doped hierarchical core-branch cobalt-sulfide-Ni nanotube array structure on CC (CC/H-Ni@Al-Co-S) system developed by Chen's group shows a high specific capacitance of 1830 F g−1 at the scanning rate of 5 mV s−1 and 2434 mV s−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 (Fig. 9c and d).228 The energy density and power density of the corresponding ASC reach a remarkable value of 65.7 W h kg−1 and 765.3 W kg−1, respectively. In such a hybrid system, the synergistic effect of the structural advantage and material superiority significantly improved the electrochemical performance. In addition, the system exhibits excellent flexibility too, exposing its fascinating possibility for use in wearable and flexible devices. Since the energy density of SCs is in direct proportion to the square of the voltage (E = ½CV2), the broadening of cell voltage will contribute to the improvement of energy density of the devices. However, the cell voltage of most current aqueous SCs is about 2 V, and increasing it seems hard. Recently, Nawishta Jabeen et al. found that a CC substrate supported Na0.5MnO2 nanowall array electrode was able to extend the potential window to 0–1.3 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) (Fig. 9f).229 They subsequently constructed a 2.6 V aqueous ASC with an in situ formed Na0.5MnO2 nanowall array cathode and carbon-coated Fe3O4 nanorod array anode, as schematically shown in Fig. 9g, which delivers a high energy density of 81 W h kg−1, as well as remarkable rate performance and cycling stability of more than 10000 cycles (Fig. 9h). As well as concentrating on improving the electrochemical capacitance of SC devices, increasing the mass loading of active materials on electrodes also has great significance in driving the commercial application of current lab-level SC devices. 3D woven CC is another optimal conductive substrate for high loading electrode applications; usually, a typical loading of 8–10 mg cm−2 active material is required for commercial devices. Liu's group recently synthesized a hierarchical architecture composed of ε-MnO2 nanosheets and α-MnO2 nanorod arrays on a CC surface for SCs with the total mass of active materials of 10 mg cm−2.230 The specific capacitance reached as high as 304 F g−1 at 10 mg cm−2, indicating the effective utilization of the active MnO2 materials. The assembled ASCs with the as-prepared MnO2 cathode and vanadium oxide nanoflower anode in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous (or Na2SO4/PVA, solid) electrolyte demonstrated a high volumetric capacitance of 14.85 F cm−3 (14.41 F cm−3, all solid) and high energy density. Different from traditional electrochemical supercapacitors, the integration of dye sensitive solar cells and CC supported ZnO nanorod array SCs provides a promising strategy to achieve self-powered wearable devices (Fig. 9i and j).231
 Fig. 9  (a) An SEM image of α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles on CC. (b) The volumetric energy and power density of the NiMoO4//FeOOH packaged device. (c) The long-term cycling performance of the CC/H-Ni@Al-Co-S electrode at a current density of 10 A g−1 for 10000 cycles (the inset shows an SEM image of the obtained materials).227 Reproduced with permission from ref. 227 (Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature). (d) A schematic illustration displaying the merits of the core-branch CC/H-Ni@Al-Co-S electrode for energy storage. (e) CV curves of the flexible ASC under different bending conditions (the insets show photographic images of the device under different bending states).228 Reproduced with permission from ref. 228 (Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society). (f) An SEM image of Na0.5MnO2 NWAs on a single carbon fiber. (g) Electrode designs and the charge-storage mechanism of the Fe3O4@C anode and the Na0.5MnO2 NWA cathode in the ASC system. (h) Cycling performance of the Na0.5MnO2//Fe3O4@C ASC (the inset shows an optical image of the obtained ASC lighting a 2.2 V LED).229 Reproduced with permission from ref. 229 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (i) A schematic diagram of a stand-alone self-powered system consisting of four series-wound DSSCs, three series-wound flexible SCs and one LED. (j) The leakage current curve of three series-wound SCs charged at 0.5 mA to a potential of 2.4 V and kept at 2.4 V for 5000 s, indicating a small leakage current (the inset shows the voltage profile for three SCs in series when being charged by four DSSCs in series).231 Reproduced with permission from ref. 231 (Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society). 
Pseudocapacitor-based active material/CC plays a key role in high electrochemical performance SCs due to its high capacitance, energy and power density, mechanical and chemical stability and flexibility in flexible and wearable electronics. But the inhibition of electron transition and ion diffusion originating from the detachment of active material from the CC material during bending and twisting will be a challenging issue in practical application.
4. Carbon cloth for electrocatalysis
Electrocatalysis enables lots of sustainable processes for future green technologies, such as OER, HER, fuel cells, water splitting etc., playing a vital role in eco-friendly and clean energy conversion.13,101,232–239 Through reasonable and sophisticated electrocatalyst design and synthesis, molecules such as water, nitrogen and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere can be converted into some higher-value products including hydrogen, ammonia, hydrocarbons and oxygenates.240–244 Electrocatalysts are the key in these energy conversion technologies. The design and synthesis of high performing electrocatalysts with excellent catalytic efficiency, and mechanical and chemical stability are always hot research topics.245,246 Noble metal catalysts (e.g. Pt, Ir, Pd) have proved to be the best electrocatalysts, while their high cost and limited reserve on the planet inhibit their large-scale application in many fields.241 Making the best use of scarce noble metals and developing low cost noble metal-free electrocatalysts with high electrochemical catalytic efficiency are two major strategies to address these problems.247–251 Owing to its inherent high conductivity, mechanical durability, chemical stability and flexibility in surface functional group modification and functionalization, flexible CC has been widely used in electrocatalysis related processes.
4.1 Carbon cloth as a conductive substrate for electrocatalysts
The intrinsic properties and structural features of textile CC make it a superior substrate for the growth of various functional active materials. Especially in electrocatalytic systems, the textile 3D CC structure not only increases the mass loading of catalysts, but also the active reaction area.252 Sun's group reported a CC supported porous CoP nanowire array (CoP/CC) system for an integrated 3D HER cathode over a wide range of 0–14, which exhibits a low onset overpotential (38 mV), small Tafel slope (51 mV dec−1) and long-term durability (Fig. 10a–c).253 The close adhesion between CoP and CC forms their reliable electric contact, benefiting electron transition, and the 3D structure ensures loose and open spaces for efficient electrolyte diffusion. Recently, the same group fabricated a 3D CoSe2 nanowire array as a HER electrode, which also displays excellent electrocatalytic performance.254 Combining surface reorganization engineering can further enhance the HER activity of CC supported CoP nanowires in alkaline media. Motivated by the crucial influence of structure on the electrochemical property of the catalysts, Chen et al. fabricated a wafer-scale MoO2/MoSe2 core–shell nanosheet array on insulating SiO2/Si or conductive carbon cloth substrates based on a two-step chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process (Fig. 10d–h).255 The 2D core–shell nanosheet array on CC electrode demonstrates superior HER performance with a small Tafel slope (49 mV dec−1), a low onset potential (63 mV vs. RHE) and a small overpotential (181 mV vs. RHE). Such outstanding electrochemical performance resulted from the topological advantages of the 2D structure and the facilitated electron transition and ion diffusion by the defect-rich outer layer MoSe2 (Fig. 10i). Besides, the 2D mesoporous SnO2 nanosheets were chemically grown on the CC substrate as a flexible electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction (Fig. 10j–k).256 The high reduction of CO2 into liquid fuels is of great importance in a carbon-neutral energy cycle, mesoporous SnO2 nanosheets on CC provide abundant intrinsic active sites, excellent accessibility of reactive ions and favorable electron transfer paths. The electrocatalytic results indicated that the system demonstrates an incredible partial current density (45 mA cm−2) and a high faradaic efficiency (87.2%) at an overpotential of 0.88 V. Moreover, the whole electrode displays excellent electrocatalytic long-term durability (more than 7200 s) no matter what state the electrode was in, plane, folded or twisted, suggesting its superiority in flexible devices (Fig. 10l).
 Fig. 10  (a) An SEM image of CoP/CC. (b) The polarization curves of CoP/CC, blank CC, and Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, and (c) Tafel plots of CoP/CC and Pt/C.253 Reproduced with permission from ref. 253 (Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society). (d) A schematic illustration of the formation of vertical core–shell MoO2/MoSe2 nanosheet arrays. (e–h) Digital and SEM images of core–shell MoO2/MoSe2 nanosheets on a carbon cloth substrate. (i) Polarization curves of vertical core–shell MoO2/MoSe2 nanosheet arrays on a carbon cloth substrate.255 Reproduced with permission from ref. 255 (Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (j and k) SEM images of porous nanosheets on CC. (l) The i–t curves of a SnO2/CC electrode at −1.6 V after folding or twisting 10 times.256 Reproduced with permission from ref. 256 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
As well as being used as high-performing electrocatalytic systems for HER, the CC-based system also exhibits outstanding performance in other electrocatalytic processes. For instance, Li's group recently developed a porous CoOOH nanosheet array in CC by partial iron substitution for OER.257 Their theoretical density functional theory (DFT) calculation results indicated that the FeO6 octahedron plays a vital role in the improved OER performance, and the stable CC substrate enables the long cycling stability of the whole system in alkaline solution, as well as providing enough space for the growth of the hierarchical active materials (Fig. 11a–c). An Fe–Mn–O hybrid nanosheet electrocatalyst on CC with atomically thin rich defects achieved by Teng and co-workers displays an extremely low overpotential of 273 mV at the current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of 63.9 mV dec−1 for water oxidation, respectively (Fig. 11d and e).258 The ultra-small size of the synthesized catalysts with the lateral sizes of ∼100 nm to 600 nm and the ultra-thin thickness of ∼1.4 nm enables the electrocatalyst to have a high specific surface area, fast electron/ion transition rate and large amount of active sites (Fig. 11f). The tight bonding of active Fe–Mn–O nanosheets on the flexible and stable CC substrate contributes to the superior durability of the whole system in long-term cycling. In addition, the CC-based electrocatalyst is also a significant component for overall water splitting. Recently, Han et al. developed a flexible CC supported bifunctional electrode composed of pyrite-type CoS2 nanosheet arrays decorated by ultra-small Pt nanoparticles for overall water splitting (Fig. 11g and h).259 The authors declared that the designed Pt-CoS2/CC electrocatalyst delivers a superior overpotential of 24 mV (10 mA cm−2) compared to that of commercial Pt/C. Furthermore, the overall water-splitting reaction using a Pt-CoS2/CC bifunctional electrode achieved more than 20 h durability with the current density of 10 mA cm−2 (voltage of 1.55 V), also better than that of the current Pt/C–RuO2 electrocatalyst (Fig. 11i). The excellent electrocatalytic ability of Pt–CoS2/CC comes from the strong metal–substrate interaction caused adsorption between Pt nanoparticles and CoS2 nanosheet and the chemical stability of the substrate. It is noted that the carbon dioxide evolution reaction induced by the oxidation of the CC substrate in these composite systems during the water oxidation-related reactions is ignored due to the intrinsic higher stability of CC compared to the electrocatalytic active materials it supports.
 Fig. 11  (a) LSV plots of various samples. (b) The kinetic energy barrier profiles of the intermediates and products of β-CoOOH, CoO6 (Oh), CoO4 (Td), and FeO6 (Oh) of FexCoyOOH. (c) Durability testing at 10 mA cm−2 for 24 h.257 Reproduced with permission from ref. 257 (Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) An SEM image of Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC. (e) Polarization curves for CC, RuO2/CC, single FeOOH/CC, MnO2/CC, and (f) Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC electrodes (iR corrected) in 1 M KOH at 5 mV s−1.258 Reproduced with permission from ref. 258 (Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (g) A schematic illustration of the preparation procedures of a Pt–CoS2/CC hybrid electrode. (h) An SEM image of Pt–CoS2/CC, and (i) the corresponding continuous water electrolysis of Pt–CoS2/CC at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH for 20 h, with the reaction occurring on two electrodes.259 Reproduced with permission from ref. 259 (Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
4.2 Carbon cloth as a metal-free electrocatalyst for electrocatalysis
Although there are multitudinous types of electrocatalytic systems obtained by binding electrochemically active materials on flexible CC substrates for electrocatalysis. In order to eliminate the exfoliation of active materials from the CC substrate for good, the monolithic carbon material constructed electrocatalytic system is of great interest and could show superiority in practical application. Owing to the unique 3D structure of flexible textile CC, its high chemical and mechanical stability and its remarkable electronic conductivity, metal-free electrocatalysts derived solely from CC have drawn much attention.195,260 Recently, Balogun and co-workers demonstrated a porous 3D monolithic metal-free electrocatalyst directly derived from textile carbon fiber cloth, which was fabricated by thermal reduction and following thermal etching processes (Fig. 12a).261 The obtained self-supporting N doped porous carbon cloth (NiD-PCC) electrode avoids the release of metal ions, exhibiting remarkable HER and overall water splitting performance (Fig. 12b and c). The increased surface area and N-doping provided a number of active reaction sites that enable the porous CC electrocatalyst to exhibit a quite low onset potential (250 mV), a long durability of more than 28 h and a small overpotential of 360 mV at the current density of 10 mA cm−2, opening the door to directly applying 3D flexible CC as a metal-free electrocatalyst in energy conversion and storage. Besides, another high efficiency self-supporting full water splitting electrocatalyst comprising N, P and O tri-doped porous graphite carbon on CC was demonstrated by Xu's group.262 The synthesized hybrid carbon system achieved an excellent basic water splitting with 10 mA cm−2 at the cell voltage of 1.66 V when used as a bifunctional electrode. Benefiting from the outstanding mechanical and chemical stability, the whole electrocatalytic system exhibits remarkable catalytic performance and long-life cycling stability both in neutral and acidic solutions. In various metal-free monolithic carbon cloth electrocatalytic systems, surface defect chemistry enhanced CC electrocatalysts are especially of interest and vital application. Wang's group demonstrated an edge-rich and oxygen-functionalized graphene oxygen electrocatalytic catalyst obtained though in situ exfoliation from textile carbon fibers.263 After treating with Ar plasma, a graphene like material was in situ formed on the surface of CC, which then reacted with oxygen in air, changing into a defect/edge-rich graphene CC composite (Fig. 12d). The system exhibits a larger specific surface area and increased active reaction sites, thus leading to a better electrolyte affinity, mass transport and superior ORR and OER performance. The theoretically calculated overpotential of the obtained plasma-etched CC electrocatalytic electrode is lower than that of pristine CC, and it is comparable to that of general Pt-based electrocatalysts due to the defects and oxygen doping (Fig. 12e). Recently, the same group provided direct evidence of the links between the electrocatalytic activity of a defective carbon catalyst and surface charge based on a highly oriented pyrolytic graphite surface.264 Both the experimental and theoretical calculation results indicated that the surface defect induced localized surface charges contribute to the intrinsic electrocatalytic enhancement of the electrocatalyst (Fig. 12f–i).
 Fig. 12  (a) An SEM image of NiD-PCC. (b) LSV plots of bare carbon cloth//bare carbon cloth (BCC//BCC), Ni nanoparticle embedded carbon//Ni nanoparticle embedded carbon (NiC//NiC) and NiC//NiD-PCC in 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (c) An optical image showing the hydrogen and oxygen bubbles generated on the electrodes of the NiC//NiD-PCC electrolyzer.261 Reproduced with permission from ref. 261 (Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) An SEM image of P-CC. (e) Reaction free energy diagrams of C–OOH defect graphene and volcano plots for the OER and ORR on different sites of armchair and zigzag graphene nanoribbons.263 Reproduced with permission from ref. 263 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (f) The electrochemical cell used for HOPG electrochemical experiments. (g–i) The evolution of overpotential (exchange current) for the ORR (g), OER (h), and HER (i) with charge and intermediate binding energies.264 Reproduced with permission from ref. 264 (Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
The role that CC plays in the electrocatalytic field is far beyond that of a 3D flexible substrate. It can also acts as a high-efficiency electrocatalyst in HER, OER and full water-splitting through some low-cost and simple chemical or physical treatments. The defect or (and) non-metal heteroatom doped monolithic CC system could be one of the most efficient and stable metal-free electrocatalysts in electrocatalytic application.
5. Carbon cloth for photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry
Photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical processes, as clean and eco-friendly technologies, are an indispensable part of energy conversion and storage, especially under the circumstance of fossil fuel shortage (coal, oil and natural gas), environmental pollution and the disruption of ecological balance on the planet. With the assistance of solar light, photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical techniques are effective in pollutant degradation, water purification, CO2 reduction and water splitting upon developing proper photocatalysts. It is well accepted that the efficient generation of photo-induced electron–hole pairs and following effective separation in a photocatalyst are two crucial issues during the photocatalytic reactions, and they are also the biggest challenges in the current study on photoelectrochemical energy conversion and storage.
Although a high photocatalytic degrading efficiency is one of the most important targets in evaluating photocatalysts, high efficiency recycling of catalysts after the photocatalytic reaction to avoid secondary pollution is also highly desired. Constructing photocatalysts with high photocatalytic efficiency, cycling stability and outstanding recycling ability by reasonable morphology and structure design is always a hot issue. As a porous structure, textile CC is a perfect substrate for various photocatalytically active materials. Wang et al. demonstrated an efficient methyl orange degrading photocatalyst obtained by directly growing titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanosheet arrays on a CC substrate (Fig. 13a and b).265 The photocatalytic degrading rate of the CC supported system is more than 3 times higher than that of the rigid fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass photocatalyst under the same conditions (Fig. 13c). The 3D CC not only increases the active material loading, but also promotes mass transport during the photocatalytic reactions, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 13d. By combining the strong plasmon-induced electromagnetic field enhancement of metal nanoparticles, Duan's group designed a highly efficient black hierarchical Au–TiO2 nanorod array photocatalyst on a CC substrate.40 The radially aligned rutile TiO2 nanorod arrays on 3D carbon fibers effectively improve the interaction between incident light and active material, and the catalyst exhibits a more than 5 times higher degrading efficiency than that of the in plane FTO substrate under the same visible-light illumination (Fig. 13e). More importantly, after uninterruptedly stirring in aqueous solution for 60 days, the photocatalytic degrading activity of the Au–TiO2 nanorod arrays on CC showed almost no fading, exhibiting extremely high chemical and mechanical stability and long-term durability in a practical flowing environment (Fig. 13f). The photocatalytic activity of the Au–TiO2 on CC array composite, developed by the same group, was recently further improved through crystal engineering modification, and the obtained high-energy {001}-facet exposed composites not only display high pollutant photocatalytic degrading efficiency and recycling stability, but also high photoelectrochemical activity with a high photocurrent density of 300 μA cm−2 and more than 4 h durability under the illumination of AM 1.5G (Fig. 13g).39 In such a hybrid system, the 3D flexibility ensures the complete recyclability of the photocatalyst, the porous textile structure of CC promotes mass exchange, especially the flow of aqueous reactants, and the high conductivity of CC enables it to be a perfect collector and electrode in facilitating the fast electron transition and efficient collection. Moreover, various other CC-based high-performing photocatalytically active materials, such as C3N4 nanosheets, ZnO–CuO heterojunction, ZnIn2S4/CdIn2S4 nanosheet networks, α-Fe2O3@NiO heterostructures, titania composites etc., all sufficiently inherit the superiorities of the CC substrate in solar light driven pollutant degradation and clean water generation.98,266–269
 Fig. 13  (a, b) SEM and HR-TEM images of uniform and dense arrays of TiO2 NSs grown on carbon fibers at 453 K for 4 h, respectively. (c) A comparison of the photocatalytic degradation rates for MO of TiO2 NSs on carbon fibers (triangles), TiO2 NSs on a FTO substrate (circles), and pure carbon fiber (squares). (d) A schematic representation of the same amount of TiO2 NSs grown on FTO-glass and CF substrates with the same surface area.265 Reproduced with permission from ref. 265 (Copyright © 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (e) The photodegradation of RhB by hierarchical Au–TiO2 NRAs on CC under irradiation by visible light. (f) Long-term stability testing of Au–TiO2 NRAs on CC.40 Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 (Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (g) The photoresponse of TiO2 NS and Au–TiO2 NS under chopped solar-light illumination (AM 1.5G) at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 (Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society). (h) An SEM cross-sectional view of bunched TiO2 NR arrays, and (i) an optical photo of carbon fibers coated by bunched TiO2 nanorod arrays. (j and k) A schematic representation of the configuration of the CF/TiO2 NR array-based tube-shaped 3D DSSC and the corresponding J–V curves of DSSCs based on TiO2 NR arrays and bunched TiO2 NR arrays on CFs.271 Reproduced with permission from ref. 271 (Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society). 
Different from degrading pollutants into nontoxic small molecules, photoelectrochemical technology is one of the most effective and friendly strategies to directly convert inexhaustible solar energy into available clean energy under the assistance of proper photocatalysts. As well as acting as a substrate in photocatalytic polluted water purification, the more important role of CC played in photoelectrochemical energy conversion is serving as a highly conductive 3D collector of a photoelectrochemical electrode.270 The high conductivity of CC enables efficient electron collection and following fast transition in the electrode during the photoelectrochemical energy conversion process. Wang's group displayed another vital application of CC as a collector in a photoelectrochemical energy conversion and storage system.271 A CC supported bunched rutile TiO2 nanorod array structure was used as the photoanode for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) (Fig. 13h and i). The flexibility, conductivity and stability of CC enable it to be a better candidate in nanostructure-based photoelectrochemical energy conversion technology than the rigid FTO substrate. Besides, the excellent fatigue and heat resistance of CC also make it an ideal material for building flexible weave-like solar cells. The binder-free TiO2 nanorod array on CC photoanode exhibits outstanding performance with the open-circuit voltage of 0.61 V, short-circuit current density of 4.58 mA cm−2, fill factor of 0.46 and efficiency of 1.28% under the illumination of 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 (Fig. 13j and k). More importantly, the low cost and stable carbon materials can be a potential substitute for the high cost platinum counter-electrode in DSSCs.271
As well as the crucial applications in photocatalytic, photoelectrochemical and photovoltaic systems, textile CC has also demonstrated vital potential in photo-thermal processes, such as in solar-driven clean water generation and photo-thermal assisted seawater desalination and sewage disposal due to its intrinsic good thermal conductivity, mass transfer and retrievability.272
6. Perspectives and outlooks
In summary, as a low cost material with high conductivity, mechanical and chemical stability, excellent flexibility and a large specific surface area, textile CC has exhibited its widespread abilities in electrochemical energy storage and conversion, electrocatalytic energy generation, photo-assisted environmental purification, photoelectrochemical solar energy conversion and photo-thermal driven clean water generation. Regardless of the various roles played in the aforementioned systems, such as being a conductive collector, active electrode or flexible 3D substrate, CC-based systems indeed exhibit better performance and advantages compared to other systems (such as rigid FTO-based systems and binder-dependent powder electrode systems in the energy storage and conversion field). Especially for flexible electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices, conductive CC-based binder-free electrodes can be directly integrated, which is of great importance for wearable devices and the Internet of Things. However, the large-scale and practical application of current commercial CC still faces several challenges, especially in the energy storage and conversion field. For example, the intrinsic large mass of commercial CC (more than 10 mg cm−2) compared to that of general copper foil (about 0.7 mg cm−2) greatly increases the total mass of the electrode, thus inhibiting the power density and increasing the volume of electrochemical energy storage devices. In addition, higher loads of active materials will cripple the advantages of the CC substrate due to limited electrolyte consumption, overlong radical ion/electron transfer paths to the conductive CC collector, and sluggish ion diffusion in the active materials. Moreover, the volume expansion of the active material and mechanical deformation of the electrode can lead to exfoliation and separation of supported active materials from the CC substrate, which may internally cut off the connection to the electrode, undermining the performance of the devices. Therefore, decreasing the inherent mass of the CC collector, developing novel device encapsulation technologies (such as an all-solid electrochemical energy storage and conversion device), and exploring the effective integration of CC-based electrodes may fully expose its remarkable abilities in flexible, wearable and portable electrochemical and photoelectrochemical electronic devices in the future.
Conflicts of interest
The author declares no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Key Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11832009), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11672104), and the Chair Professor of Lotus Scholars Program in Hunan Province (No. XJT2015408).
References
D. Li, W. Y. Lai, Y. Z. Zhang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704738 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Ren and C. F. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 29, 1805924 CrossRef .
Q. Huang and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800546 CrossRef .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D. H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
L. Li, Z. Lou, D. Chen, K. Jiang, W. Han and G. Shen, Small, 2018, 14, e1702829 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Manthiram, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1063–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mai, X. Tian, X. Xu, L. Chang and L. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11828–11862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307–1338 RSC .
M. Winter, B. Barnett and K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118(23), 11433–11456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, B. Matthews, J. Wang, L. Song, X. Wang and G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 735–753 RSC .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xie, K. Zhang, B. Guo, Q. Liu, L. Fang and J. R. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3820–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Ren, Z. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5159–5223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ma, Y. Yu, M. Sindoro, A. G. Fane, R. Wang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605361 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, S. W. Heo, W. Lee, D. Inoue, Z. Jiang, K. Yu, H. Jinno, D. Hashizume, M. Sekino, T. Yokota, K. Fukuda, K. Tajima and T. Someya, Nature, 2018, 561, 516–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, Y. Chao, Y. Ge, J. Foroughi, Y. Zhao, C. Wang, H. Long and G. G. Wallace, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5063–5071 RSC .
M. Ye, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, Joule, 2018, 2, 245–268 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, S. Zheng, G. Zhang, X. Xiao, X. Li, Y. Xu, H. Xue and H. Pang, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 9, 150–169 CrossRef .
L. Fan, R. Ma, Q. Zhang, X. Jia and B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10500–10505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jayaramulu, D. P. Dubal, B. Nagar, V. Ranc, O. Tomanec, M. Petr, K. K. R. Datta, R. Zboril, P. Gomez-Romero and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705789 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. V. Kaneti, Y. Bando, J. Lin, C. Liu, J. Li and Y. Yamauchi, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 394–407 RSC .
L. Liu, Y. X. Yin, J. Y. Li, S. H. Wang, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706216 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, R. Carter, A. Douglas, L. Oakes and C. L. Pint, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4877–4884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, S. Chen, J. Wang and B. Lu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 43, 129–138 CrossRef .
Z. Ling, Z. Wang, M. Zhang, C. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Dong, S. Liu, Y. Wang and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, B. Y. Guan, S. Gao and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 648–655 RSC .
W. Cao, E. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Ge, X. Yu, H. Yang and B. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 293, 364–370 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, Y. Gao, Z. Xiao, X. Xu, X. Li and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804973 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, K. Xia, H. Wang, X. Liang, Z. Yin and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1801072 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Liu, C. Lv, Y. Li, D. Wei and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1800716 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Gao, N. Song, Y. Zhang and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 8194–8203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, H. Zhang, Z. Chen, T. Wang, L. Wang, W. Zeng, G. Zhang and H. Duan, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 336, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, J. C. Yu, Q. Li, W. Luo, L. Yuan, W. Zhang and Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2870 RSC .
M. Chen, W. Xu, S. Jamil, S. Jiang, C. Huang, X. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Shu, K. Xiang and P. Zeng, Small, 2018, 14, e1803134 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, Q. Wang, X. Wang, Q. Xiang, B. Liang, D. Chen and G. Shen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5453–5462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Q. Huang, L. Niu, D. Wang, C. Yan, Y. She and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606679 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, T. Y. Liu, B. Yao, T. Y. Kou, D. Y. Feng, X. X. Liu and Y. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1700067 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shi, S. Zhang, X. Zhu, Y. Liu, T. Wang, T. Jiang, G. Zhang and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36907–36916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, X. Wang, M. Zheng, X. Wu, Y. Chen, Z. Yang, G. Zhang and H. Duan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600588 CrossRef .
Y. Jiao, Y. Liu, B. Yin, S. Zhang, F. Qu and X. Wu, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
A.-L. Wang, H. Xu and G.-R. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 445–453 CrossRef CAS .
L. An, J. Feng, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, H. Liu, G.-C. Wang, F. Cheng and P. Xi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805298 CrossRef .
S. Surendran and R. K. Selvan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701056 CrossRef .
Q. Li, Z. Xing, D. Wang, X. Sun and X. Yang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2797–2801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Ouyang, J. Xu, S. Chen, R. S. Rawat and H. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600221 CrossRef .
B. Liu, H. Li, B. Cao, J. Jiang, R. Gao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801527 CrossRef .
L.-L. Feng, M. Fan, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, G.-D. Li, H. Chen, W. Chen, D. Wang and X. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6860–6867 RSC .
A.-L. Wang, J. Lin, H. Xu, Y.-X. Tong and G.-R. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16992–16999 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Shi, H. Liu, J. Fu, D. Wei, W. Zeng, Q. Wan, G. Zhang and H. Duan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 292, 727–735 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kou, J. Liu, Y. Li, S. Qu, C. Ma, Z. Song, X. Han, Y. Deng, W. Hu and C. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 796–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, M. Guo, X. Zhang, J. Tu, L. Ding and Y. Cao, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3378–3385 RSC .
T. Chen, S. Li, J. Wen, P. Gui, Y. Guo, C. Guan, J. Liu and G. Fang, Small, 2018, 14, 1700979 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Balogun, Y. Luo, F. Lyu, F. Wang, H. Yang, H. Li, C. Liang, M. Huang, Y. Huang and Y. Tong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9733–9744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Lu, X. Y. Chen, W. Zhou, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14843–14850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ouyang, X. Xia, H. Ye, L. Wang, X. Jiao, W. Lei and Q. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3549–3561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ren, W. Zhou, H. Zhang and C. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 487–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Y. Han, X. Cheng, L. Hu, Y. Zeng, M. Chen, F. Cheng, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3085–3091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sumboja, M. Lübke, Y. Wang, T. An, Y. Zong and Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700927 CrossRef .
X. Xiao, T. Ding, L. Yuan, Y. Shen, Q. Zhong, X. Zhang, Y. Cao, B. Hu, T. Zhai, L. Gong, J. Chen, Y. Tong, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1328–1332 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Wang, M. Yu, Y. Zhu and J. Wu, Carbon, 2017, 125, 375–383 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Cao and Z. B. Han, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1746–1749 RSC .
J. Fei, Y. Cui, J. Li, Z. Xu, J. Yang, R. Wang, Y. Cheng and J. Hang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 13165–13167 RSC .
X. He, R. Li, J. Liu, Q. Liu, R. Chen, D. Song and J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 1573–1583 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, F. Qu and X. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7367–7372 RSC .
Z.-Y. Yu, L.-F. Chen and S.-H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10889 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Hu, Y. Liang, Y. Yang, N. An, Z. Li and H. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15057–15067 RSC .
X. Wu, Z. Han, X. Zheng, S. Yao, X. Yang and T. Zhai, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 410–417 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Xiong, J. P. Tu, X. H. Xia, X. Y. Zhao, C. D. Gu and X. L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7906–7912 RSC .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, W. Cai, W. He, M. Liu, Z. Shao and M. Ni, Small, 2018, 14, e1800225 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, Q. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Wei, S. Wang, Q. Shen and P. Qu, Small, 2018, 14, e1802132 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Gao, W. Yang, J. Wang, N. Song and X. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 306–317 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guan, A. Sumboja, H. Wu, W. Ren, X. Liu, H. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Cheng, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704117 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Guan, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. Fan, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4852–4858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liang, J. Lin, H. Jia, S. Chen, J. Qi, J. Cao, T. Lin, W. Fei and J. Feng, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 248–254 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, B. Liu, C. Zhong, Z. Liu, J. Liu, L. Ma, Y. Deng, X. Han, T. Wu, W. Hu and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700779 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, F. Lu, Y. Xia, H. Wang and X. Kuang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4075–4083 RSC .
T. Chen, S. Li, J. Wen, P. Gui and G. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35927–35935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fang, D. Liu, Q. Lu, X. Sun and A. M. Asiri, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 63, 60–64 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Q. Lu, Y. Luo, X. Sun and A. M. Asiri, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15122–15126 RSC .
J. Miao, F.-X. Xiao, H. B. Yang, S. Y. Khoo, J. Chen, Z. Fan, Y.-Y. Hsu, H. M. Chen, H. Zhang and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, 1–14 Search PubMed .
B. Qu, X. Yu, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, C. Li, Z. Yin and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14170–14175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shang, J.-Q. Chi, S.-S. Lu, B. Dong, X. Li, Y.-R. Liu, K.-L. Yan, W.-K. Gao, Y.-M. Chai and C.-G. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 4165–4173 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, W. Wan, Y. Huang, J. Chen, H. H. Zhou and X. X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5351–5358 RSC .
M. Wu, J. Zhan, K. Wu, Z. Li, L. Wang, B. Geng, L. Wang and D. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14061–14069 RSC .
Z. Xing, X. Yang, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14521–14526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Xia, N. Li, Z. Xu, A. Fisher and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 131–135 RSC .
N. Zhang, S. Gan, T. Wu, W. Ma, D. Han and L. Niu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12193–12202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, W. Li, M. F. Yuen, T.-W. Ng, Y. Tang, C.-S. Lee, X. Chen and W. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 196–204 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, M. Shao, S. H. Yu, X. Wang, Z. Tang, B. Chen, H. Cheng, Z. Lu, D. Chua and H. Pan, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 2, 644–653 CrossRef .
W. Zhu, M. Ren, N. Hu, W. Zhang, Z. Luo, R. Wang, J. Wang, L. Huang, Y. Suo and J. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5011–5020 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zou, Z. Zhang, M. F. Yuen, M. Sun, J. Hu, C.-S. Lee and W. Zhang, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e195–e195 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, C. Zhu, J. Luo, Z. Zeng, C. Guan, C. F. Ng, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Small, 2014, 10, 766–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Balogun, C. Li, Y. Zeng, M. Yu, Q. Wu, M. Wu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 946–953 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Balogun, Y. Zeng, W. Qiu, Y. Luo, A. Onasanya, T. K. Olaniyi and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9844–9849 RSC .
P. Chen, K. Xu, Z. Fang, Y. Tong, J. Wu, X. Lu, X. Peng, H. Ding, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14710–14714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meng, H. Zhong, D. Bao, J. Yan and X. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10226–10231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, T. Zhang, P. Xu, L. Zhang, J. Liu and Z. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 425–431 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, G. Chen, X. Liu, F. Chen, N. Zhang, J. Li, S. Liang, R. Ma and G. Qiu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4432–4439 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Luo, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri, B. Zheng and X. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9550–9554 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Callejas, C. G. Read, C. W. Roske, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6017–6044 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, Q. Liu and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13440–13445 RSC .
Q. Li, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri, P. Jiang and X. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 16806–16811 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, L. Gan, K. Guo, L. Ke, Y. Wei, H. Li, G. Shen and T. Zhai, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8666–8672 RSC .
X. Li, H. Wu, A. M. Elshahawy, L. Wang, S. J. Pennycook, C. Guan and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800036 CrossRef .
T. Liu, L. Xie, J. Yang, R. Kong, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and L. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1840–1845 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ni, G. Chen, X. Liu, J. Han, X. Xiao, N. Zhang, S. Liang, G. Qiu and R. Ma, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 2, 406–412 CrossRef .
D. E. Schipper, Z. Zhao, A. P. Leitner, L. Xie, F. Qin, M. K. Alam, S. Chen, D. Wang, Z. Ren, Z. Wang, J. Bao and K. H. Whitmire, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4051–4059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, L. Gan, R. Zhang, W. Lu, X. Jiang, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun, J. Wang and L. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6617–6621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, R. Zhang, W. Lu, L. He, X. Jiang, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602441 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, Y. Liang, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20579–20584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Ma, F. Qu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 1041–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-D. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, Y.-F. Xu, J.-F. Liao, B.-X. Chen, H.-S. Rao, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7191–7199 RSC .
L. Wen, J. Yu, C. Xing, D. Liu, X. Lyu, W. Cai and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 4198–4203 RSC .
W. Xu, K. Zhao, L. Zhang, Z. Xie, Z. Cai and Y. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 654, 357–362 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, A.-Y. Lu, Y. Zhu, M. N. Hedhili, S. Min, K.-W. Huang, Y. Han and L.-J. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 634–641 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, C. Tang, D. Liu, J. Wang, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7169–7173 RSC .
Y. Cheng, F. Liao, W. Shen, L. Liu, B. Jiang, Y. Li and M. Shao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18977–18982 RSC .
Q. Fu, T. Wu, G. Fu, T. Gao, J. Han, T. Yao, Y. Zhang, W. Zhong, X. Wang and B. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1744–1752 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, K. Cheng, Y. Mo, L. Yu, J. Yin, G. Wang and D. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2012, 217, 562–568 CrossRef CAS .
L. Miao, W. Wang, K. Yuan, Y. Yang and A. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13231–13234 RSC .
Z. H. Huang, Y. Song, X. X. Xu and X. X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25506–25513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Li, Y.-F. Lin, I. T. Chiu and K.-C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24479–24486 RSC .
Y. Luo, M. S. Balogun, W. Qiu, R. Zhao, P. Liu and Y. Tong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13016–13019 RSC .
S. Li, G. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Lu, Q. Yang, L.-Y. Yang, H.-R. Yang, S. Liu, M. Lei and M. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6426–6432 RSC .
Z. Li, W. Shen, C. Wang, Q. Xu, H. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17111–17120 RSC .
J.-Q. Chi, K.-L. Yan, Z. Xiao, B. Dong, X. Shang, W.-K. Gao, X. Li, Y.-M. Chai and C.-G. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 20599–20607 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guan, W. Zhao, Y. Hu, Z. Lai, X. Li, S. Sun, H. Zhang, A. K. Cheetham and J. Wang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2017, 2, 99–105 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Bai, Y. Han, Z. Yu, S. Zhang, G. Wang, J. Wei, Q. Wu and K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36917–36926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Sekhar, G. Nagaraju and J. S. Yu, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 58–67 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sun, C. Wang, W. He, P. Hou and X. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10139–10147 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, S. Zhang, X. Yan, M. Lyu, L. Wang, J. Bell and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15510–15524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, J. Zhan, Y. Zhong, X. Wang, J. Tu and H. J. Fan, Small, 2017, 13, 1602742 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, L. Xie, R. Ge, R. Kong, Z. Liu, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, Y. Yao and Y. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19502–19506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, W. Zhou, J. Jia, T. Xiong, K. Zhou, C. Feng, J. Zhou, Z. Tang and S. Chen, Carbon, 2017, 122, 710–717 CrossRef CAS .
N. Senthilkumar, G. Gnana kumar and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702207 CrossRef .
J. Wang, L. Dong, C. Xu, D. Ren, X. Ma and F. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10851–10859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wen, Y. Sun, C. Zhang, J. Yu, X. Li, X. Lyu, W. Cai and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3835–3842 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yi, W. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li and C. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35039–35046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, S. C. Abbas, Y. Huang, J. Lv, M. Wu and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701448 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, D. Zheng, Z. Wang, X. Zheng, P. Fang, J. Zhu, M. Yu, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1805268 CrossRef PubMed .
N. R. Chodankar, S. Selvaraj, S. H. Ji, Y. Kwon and D. H. Kim, Small, 2019, 15, e1803716 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xia, Y. Zhang, D. Chao, Q. Xiong, Z. Fan, X. Tong, J. Tu, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1559–1568 RSC .
S.-H. Chang, J.-S. Liou, J.-L. Liu, Y.-F. Chiu, C.-H. Xu, B.-Y. Chen and J.-Z. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2016, 336, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, Y. Dong, H. Kang, X. Yang, Q. Wang, J. Niu, S. Wang and P. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 14723–14733 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Horng, Y.-C. Lu, Y.-K. Hsu, C.-C. Chen, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4418–4422 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kordek, L. Jiang, K. Fan, Z. Zhu, L. Xu, M. Al-Mamun, Y. Dou, S. Chen, P. Liu, H. Yin, P. Rutkowski and H. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802936 CrossRef .
R. Li, X. Li, J. Chen, J. Wang, H. He, B. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3981–3989 RSC .
W. Li, T. Wu, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Zhao, G. Liu, G. Wang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11188–11191 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Qiao, C. X. Guo, S. Lim, H. Song and C. M. Li, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 114, 275–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Liu, J. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Zhang, G. Zhang, Q. Liu and H. Duan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122979 CrossRef .
Z. Tang, G. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Shi, D. Wei and H. Duan, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 75–84 CrossRef .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Balogun, W. Qiu, F. Lyu, Y. Luo, H. Meng, J. Li, W. Mai, L. Mai and Y. Tong, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 446–455 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, W. Wang, M. Yi, Q. Chen, C. Xu, D. Cai and H. Zhan, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 354, 454–462 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tian, H. Duan, Y. Guo, H. Li and H. Liu, Small, 2018, e1802226,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201802226 .
H. B. Wu, G. Zhang, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 27–40 RSC .
C. Zhou, J. Lu, M. Hu, Z. H. Huang, F. Kang and R. Lv, Small, 2018, 14, e1801832 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xiong, Z. Cai, L. Qu, P. Zhang, Z. Yuan, O. K. Asare, W. Xu, C. Lin and L. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12625–12630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Q. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Duan, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Yang and B. Lu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 37–45 CrossRef .
B. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Chen, D. Chen, C. Zhou and G. Shen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3005–3011 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, J. Luo, J. Jiang, W. Zhou, H. Yang, X. Qi, H. Zhang, H. J. Fan, D. Y. W. Yu, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6559 RSC .
C. Wang, L. Wu, H. Wang, W. Zuo, Y. Li and J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3524–3533 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, S. Hou, H. Zhang, W. Zeng, F. Yan, C. C. Li and H. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2400–2405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. He, X. Han, R. Zou, T. Zhao, Z. Weng, S. Ho-Kimura, Y. Lu, H. Wang, Z. X. Guo and I. P. Parkin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604903 CrossRef .
Z. Deng, H. Jiang, Y. Hu, Y. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Liu and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603020 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shen, B. Ding, P. Nie, G. Cao and X. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1484–1489 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Han, H. Zhang, D. Sui, Z. Sun, P. Xiao, X. Wang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 222–229 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Z. Pan, Y. Wu, X. Ding, X. Hong, G. Xu, M. Liu, Y. Zhang and W. Li, Nano Res., 2018, 12, 525–529 CrossRef .
S. Liu, X. Xia, Z. Yao, J. Wu, L. Zhang, S. Deng, C. Zhou, S. Shen, X. Wang and J. Tu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800035 CrossRef .
F. Liu, R. Xu, Z. Hu, S. Ye, S. Zeng, Y. Yao, S. Li and Y. Yu, Small, 2019, 15, e1803734 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Zhu, S. Yuan, D. Bao, Y. B. Yin, H. X. Zhong, X. B. Zhang, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603719 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yu, H. Huang, Y. Gan, Y. Xia, C. Liang, J. Zhang, X. Tao and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24256–24266 RSC .
X. Wei, W. Li, J. A. Shi, L. Gu and Y. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27804–27809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Wu, Z. Wu, G. Cui, F. Xie, X. Guo and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9341–9344 RSC .
W. Ren, H. Zhang, C. Guan and C. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702116 CrossRef .
Y. Mo, Q. Ru, J. Chen, X. Song, L. Guo, S. Hu and S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19765–19773 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Fang, M. Ge, J. Rong, C. Shen, A. Zhang, H. A. Enaya and C. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 399–407 CrossRef CAS .
B. Long, J. Zhang, L. Luo, G. Ouyang, M.-S. Balogun, S. Song and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2626–2635 RSC .
C. Delmas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703137 CrossRef .
J. Deng, W.-B. Luo, S.-L. Chou, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701428 CrossRef .
P. K. Nayak, L. Yang, W. Brehm and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 102–120 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu, C. Xu, Z. Sun, S. Wang, H. M. Cheng, F. Li and W. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1603–1609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Z. Wang, C. Qin, X. Wang, H. Xie, Z. Kang and Z. Su, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2689–2697 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, B. D. Adams, H. Pan, L. Zhang, K. S. Han, L. Estevez, D. Lu, H. Jia, J. Feng, J. Guo, K. R. Zavadil, Y. Shao and J.-G. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800590 CrossRef .
T. Lei, Y. Xie, X. Wang, S. Miao, J. Xiong and C. Yan, Small, 2017, 13, 1701013 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Han, Y. Xu, X. Chen, Y.-C. Chen, N. Weadock, J. Wan, H. Zhu, Y. Liu, H. Li, G. Rubloff, C. Wang and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1197–1206 CrossRef CAS .
R. Elazari, G. Salitra, A. Garsuch, A. Panchenko and D. Aurbach, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5641–5644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, B.-C. Yu, J. S. Park, J. W. Choi, C. Kim, Y.-E. Sung and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602567 CrossRef .
K. Lu, H. Zhang, S. Gao, H. Ma, J. Chen and Y. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807309 CrossRef .
B. Tang, L. Shan, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3288–3304 RSC .
F. Liu, Z. Chen, G. Fang, Z. Wang, Y. Cai, B. Tang, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, S. Liang, B. Zhang, G. Fang, D. Ma and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13456–13464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Tsai, C.-C. Wu, C.-Y. Lee and E. P. Shih, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 199–205 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, Z. Yuan, Z. Fang, J. Jian, J. Li, M. Yang, C. Mo, Y. Zhang, X. Hu, P. Li, S. Wang, W. Hong, Z. Zheng, G. Ouyang, X. Chen and D. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800760 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, T. Wang, A. Sumboja, W. Zang, J. Xie, D. Gao, S. J. Pennycook, Z. Liu, C. Guan and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804846 CrossRef .
D. Xu, H. Wang, F. Li, Z. Guan, R. Wang, B. He, Y. Gong and X. Hu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801506 CrossRef .
H.-F. Wang, C. Tang, B. Wang, B.-Q. Li, X. Cui and Q. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 124–130 CrossRef .
J. Liu, C. Guan, C. Zhou, Z. Fan, Q. Ke, G. Zhang, C. Liu and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8732–8739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, D. U. Lee, F. M. Hassan, L. Yang, Z. Bai, M. G. Park and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5617–5622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lv, M. Liu, D. Zhu, L. Gan and T. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705489 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Dong, H. Jin, R. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Feng, C. Yan, S. Chen, S. Wang, J. Wang and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702695 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9233–9280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zeng, L. Wang, H. Shi, G. Zhang, K. Zhang, H. Zhang, F. Gong, T. Wang and H. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8233–8241 RSC .
G. Xiong, C. Meng, R. G. Reifenberger, P. P. Irazoqui and T. S. Fisher, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300515 CrossRef .
S. Wang, B. Pei, X. Zhao and R. A. W. Dryfe, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 530–536 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, K. Chen and D. Xue, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703329 CrossRef .
Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya and L.-C. Qin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23584–23590 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, H. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Ling, M. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2676–2682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Zeng, Y. Han, M. Yu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3572–3578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Qin, S. Peng, J. Hao, Y. Wen, Z. Wang, X. Wang, D. He, J. Zhang, J. Hou and G. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700409 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Zhang, J. Xu, H. Duan and J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3012–3020 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, Y. Lu, S. Shen, Y. Zhong, S. Liu, X. Xia, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806329 CrossRef .
C. Guan, X. Liu, W. Ren, X. Li, C. Cheng and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602391 CrossRef .
Q. Xue, H. Gan, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, H. Li, S. Deng, F. Liu and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703117 CrossRef .
P. Yang, Z. Wu, Y. Jiang, Z. Pan, W. Tian, L. Jiang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801392 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, S. Tang, J. Wu, X. Shi, B. Zhu and X. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601234 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, N. Fu, G. Zhang, M. Xu, W. Lu, L. Zhou and H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605307 CrossRef .
L. Song, X. Cao, L. Li, Q. Wang, H. Ye, L. Gu, C. Mao, J. Song, S. Zhang and H. Niu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700474 CrossRef .
Y. Sui, Y. Zhang, H. Hu, Q. Xu, F. Yang and Z. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800018 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, M. Wu, S. Meng, X. Zang, Z. Dai, W. Si, W. Huang and X. Dong, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500691 CrossRef .
L. Wang, H. Yang, X. Liu, R. Zeng, M. Li, Y. Huang and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6 Search PubMed .
Z. Huang, Z. Zhang, X. Qi, X. Ren, G. Xu, P. Wan, X. Sun and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13273–13279 RSC .
G. Nagaraju, G. S. Raju, Y. H. Ko and J. S. Yu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 812–825 RSC .
M. Yu, Y. Zeng, C. Zhang, X. Lu, C. Zeng, C. Yao, Y. Yang and Y. Tong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10806–10810 RSC .
X. Liu, C. Guan, Y. Hu, L. Zhang, A. M. Elshahawy and J. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, e1702641 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Owusu, L. Qu, J. Li, Z. Wang, K. Zhao, C. Yang, K. M. Hercule, C. Lin, C. Shi, Q. Wei, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14264 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Huang, J. Wei, Y. Xiao, Y. Xu, Y. Xiao, Y. Wang, L. Tan, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3030–3041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jabeen, A. Hussain, Q. Xia, S. Sun, J. Zhu and H. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700804 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Huang, Y. Song, D. Y. Feng, Z. Sun, X. Sun and X. X. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3557–3567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, X. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Ding, P. Qiang, X. Tan, W. Mai, Z. Lin, W. Wu, T. Li, H. Ji, P. Liu, J. Zhou, C. Wong and Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2617–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xing, C. Han, D. Wang, Q. Li and X. Yang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7131–7135 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, B. Hou, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Zhu, A. Thomas and Y. Liao, Small, 2018, 14, e1803232 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tang, J. Wang, L. Guo, X. Teng, T. J. Meyer and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41347–41353 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pu, S. Wei, Z. Chen and S. Mu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 196, 193–198 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pi, T. Wu, D. Zhang, S. Chen and S. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19779–19786 RSC .
X. Long, H. Lin, D. Zhou, Y. An and S. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang, S. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Luo, J. Xiao and H. Chen, Carbon, 2018, 129, 468–475 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng, Q. Liu, J. Tian, X. Sun, Y. He, S. Zhai and A. M. Asiri, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 9866–9871 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14686–14693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Ye, J.-X. Feng and G.-R. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7962–7969 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Wang, Y.-F. Xu, H.-S. Rao, W.-J. Xu, H.-Y. Chen, W.-X. Zhang, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1468–1475 RSC .
A. L. Wang, X. J. He, X. F. Lu, H. Xu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3669–3673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and Y. Luo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 4065–4069 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yao, M. Zhu, F. Jiang, Y. Du, C. Wang and P. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13707 RSC .
C. Xia, Q. Jiang, C. Zhao, M. N. Hedhili and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 77–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pu, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21874–21879 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Pérez, C. Sáez, J. Llanos, P. Cañizares, C. López and M. A. Rodrigo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 12588–12595 CrossRef .
R. Chen, H.-Y. Wang, J. Miao, H. Yang and B. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 333–340 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, H. Cheng, H. Lv, J. Wang, L. Liu, S. Liu, X. Wu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703322 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7587–7590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, J. Shi, J. Hu, A. M. Asiri, Y. Luo and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3877–3881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, G. Liu, W. Zheng, W. Feng, W. Cao, W. Hu and P. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8537–8544 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, L. Chen, G. P. Knowles, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 505–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ye, Z. X. Shi, J. X. Feng, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2672–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Teng, X.-D. Wang, J.-F. Liao, W.-G. Li, H.-Y. Chen, Y.-J. Dong and D.-B. Kuang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802463 CrossRef .
X. Han, X. Wu, Y. Deng, J. Liu, J. Lu, C. Zhong and W. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800935 CrossRef .
S. Dou, L. Tao, R. Wang, S. El Hankari, R. Chen and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705850 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-S. Balogun, W. Qiu, H. Yang, W. Fan, Y. Huang, P. Fang, G. Li, H. Ji and Y. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3411–3416 RSC .
J. Lai, S. Li, F. Wu, M. Saqib, R. Luque and G. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1210–1214 RSC .
D. Li, W. Y. Lai, Y. Z. Zhang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704738 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tao, M. Qiao, R. Jin, Y. Li, Z. Xiao, Y. Wang, N. Zhang, C. Xie, Q. He, D. Jiang, G. Yu, Y. Li and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, F. Zhang, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4761–4764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, H. Cheng, Z. Guo, Q. Zhan, J. Qian and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39661–39669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pal, S. Maiti, U. N. Maiti and K. K. Chattopadhyay, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 1464–1476 RSC .
Y. Wang, F. Wang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11291–11297 RSC .
L. Li, S. Peng, N. Wang, M. Srinivasan, S. G. Mhaisalkar, Q. Yan and S. Ramakrishna, Small, 2015, 11, 2429–2436 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Wang, B. Liu, W. Qiu, J. Zhang, S. Ran, H. Huang, J. Xu, H. Han, D. Chen and G. Shen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8412–8419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, C. Xu, X. Wang, S. Wang, C. Pan, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4437–4441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qiao, J. Wu, H. Li, Y. Xu, L. Ren, K. Lin and W. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7066–7073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Huimin Shi	Dr Huimin Shi received his B.S. degree in Physics from Lanzhou City University in 2011. In 2014 and 2018, he received his M.S. and Ph.D. in Physics from Northwest Normal University and Hunan University, respectively. He joined Guangzhou University, China, in 2018. Currently, he is an Assistant Professor at the School of Mechanical and Electric Engineering, Guangzhou University, China. His research interests include the synthesis of nanomaterials, micro/nanomanufacturing and the applications of these materials in rechargeable batteries, electrocatalysis, and energy storage and conversion systems.
Guilin Wen	Dr Guilin Wen received his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Mechanics from Southwest Jiaotong University, China, in 1998 and 2001, respectively. He is currently a full Professor at the School of Mechanical and Electric Engineering, Guangzhou University, China. His research interests include nonlinear dynamics and intelligent control, materials and structure design, and vibration theory.
Yan Nie	Yan Nie is currently a master's student at the College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering and a member of Prof. Huigao Duan's lab, Hunan University, P. R. China. He received his bachelor's degree from Anhui Agricultural University in 2017. Currently, he is engaged in fabricating novel nanomaterials for lithium-ion batteries, optimizing the electrochemical performance, and unveiling the aging mechanism via advanced techniques under the supervision of Dr Guanhua Zhang.
Guanhua Zhang	Dr Guanhua Zhang received her PhD degree from Hunan University, P. R. China in 2016. From 2014 to 2016, she attended Arizona State University, as a visiting PhD student. Currently, she is an Associate Professor at the College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering, and a member of the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Design and Manufacturing for Vehicle Body, Hunan University, P. R. China. Her current research is focused on nanofabrication for energy conversion and storage (including lithium/sodium secondary batteries and supercapacitors), and electrocatalysis.
Huigao Duan	Dr Huigao Duan received his B.S. and Ph.D. in Physics from Lanzhou University in 2004 and 2010, respectively. From 2006 to 2008, he worked as a Researcher at the Institute of Electrical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. From 2008 to 2010, he was a visiting Researcher at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He worked at IMRE, A*STAR, Singapore, as a Research Scientist from 2010 to 2012. He joined Hunan University, China, as a full professor in 2012 and is now a principle investigator at the College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering. His research interests include micro/nanomanufacturing, and micro/nanosystems and their relevant applications.

 	Fig. 1  An illustration showing the typical applications of textile CC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Digital photographs of commercial CC with an area of 40 × 40 cm2. (a) The digital images show the flexibility, and mechanical and structural stability of commercial CC after general annealing processes: the original CC (b and c), CC annealed at 600 °C in air for 2 h (d and e), and annealed in N2 at 900 °C for 2 h (f and g). (h and i) SEM images of commercial CC.33 Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 (Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).	 

 	Fig. 3  The increasing trend of publications related to CC in the past decade (searching Web of Science with the key words “carbon cloth” and “carbon fiber cloth” included in the title).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A typical FESEM image of ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays growing on carbon cloth. (b) A digital photo showing the turning on of a mobile phone screen using a foldable battery based on ZnCo2O4/liquid electrolyte/LiCoO2.161 Reproduced with permission from ref. 161 (Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society). The inset in (b) is a schematic illustration showing the fabrication of the hierarchical 3D ZnCo2O4 nanowire array/carbon cloth/liquid electrolyte/LiCoO2 flexible lithium-ion battery. (c) Optical images of the formation processes of TiO2@α-Fe2O3 core/shell arrays on carbon textiles (scale bar: 3 mm), and (d) the corresponding cycling performance of the anodes at a constant current density of 120 mA g−1.162 Reproduced with permission from ref. 162 (Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) A schematic illustration of the structural features of the synergistic TiO2–MoO3 nanowire array and a corresponding SEM image (inset). (f) The cycling response at progressively increasing current densities of the LiCoO2/TiO2–MoO3 full cell.163 Reproduced with permission from ref. 163 (Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim ).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) An SEM image of four NiCo2O4@V2O5 core–shell arrays on carbon cloth, and (b) the cycling performance and corresponding coulombic efficiency of NiCo2O4@V2O5 core–shell arrays and cycling performance of V2O5 nanoparticles measured at a high current density of 10 C.165 Reproduced with permission from ref. 165 (Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (c) The cycling performances of MoS2@C/CC and MoS2/CC (the inset shows the morphology of MoS2@C/CC after 100 cycles). (d) A schematic illustration of a flexible full battery, and (e) a white LED lit by the flexible full battery after 300 bending cycles.166 Reproduced with permission from ref. 166 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). Schematic drawings of (f) a conventional electrode and (g) novel binder-free flexible 3D LTO/carbon textile electrode, and (h) the discharge curves of specific discharge capacities at various rates of the LTO/carbon textile composite and LTO microsphere composite.167 Reproduced with permission from ref. 167 (Copyright © 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (i) A schematic diagram of the degradation of a bare Li electrode and the improved cycling performance mechanism of the Li@CC electrode.168 Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 (Copyright © 2018, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A schematic illustration showing the structure of tube-type flexible SIBs. (b) Demonstration of an LED lit by tube-type flexible SIBs, and (c) a digital photograph of the fabricated tube-type flexible SIB.172 Reproduced with permission from ref. 172 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Side-view TEM images of CC@CN@MoS2. (e) Impedance plots and the equivalent circuit (inset) used for the EIS analysis of CC@CN@MoS2 and CC@MoS2 obtained after 100 cycles at 200 mA g−1. (f) Cycling performances at 1 A g−1 of CC@CN@MoS2 and CC@MoS2.176 Reproduced with permission from ref. 176 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (g) An optical image of a flexible SnO2/CC binder free electrode and (h) a cross-section SEM image of a single SnO2 tube. (i) The rate performance of C/SnO2/CC and Al2O3/SnO2/CC.178 Reproduced with permission from ref. 178 (Copyright © 2015, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) A schematic illustration of the fast kinetics of WS2 supported on a carbon cloth interlayer (WS2/CCI). (b) Vial cells with (a) S and (c) WS2/S–WS2/CCI, and (d) the long-term cycling performance at a rate of 0.5 C up to 500 cycles.189 Reproduced with permission from ref. 189 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (e) An SEM image of pyrolyzed Fe3O4-NC@carbon fiber, and (f) the cyclic stability and coulombic efficiency (at 0.2 C) of sulfur impregnated in different composite cathodes as noted. (g–i) The change in electrolyte color for beaker cell Li–S batteries before (left) and after (right) 100 cycles at 1 C. The sulfur cathodes were hosted in (g) Fe3O4-NC@ACC, (h) NC@ACC and (i) ACC.190 Reproduced with permission from ref. 190 (Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) A high-resolution TEM image of the exfoliated carbon fibers. (b) Top: A schematic diagram illustrating the architecture of a symmetrical SC device fabricated with the activated CC electrodes; bottom: a digital picture of the SSC device. (c) Digital images showing the digital timer powered by two SSC devices that were connected in series (the charged SSC devices turned on the timer for 3 min 54 s).209 Reproduced with permission from ref. 209 (Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) A TEM image collected at the edge of the EACC-10 carbon fiber. (e) Energy and power density performances of the MnO2@TiN//EACC-10 device demonstrated by a Ragone plot with data of other similar systems.210 Reproduced with permission from ref. 210 (Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (f) The morphological characterization of carbon fiber after shape changing (top) and a structural schematic diagram of planar SC (bottom). (g and h) An electronic watch with the LSSC as the watchband and an electronic watch powered by the LSSC watchband.211 Reproduced with permission from ref. 211 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (i and j) A digital photograph and schematic illustration of the symmetric supercapacitor configuration and the corresponding CV curves of the device at different scan rates.212 Reproduced with permission from ref. 212 (Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (k) An SEM image of APCFT. (l) CV curves collected at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 for the ASC devices under different bending conditions, the inset shows digital pictures of ASC devices with different degrees of bending, and (m) the cycling performance of the APCFT//TiN@MnO2 ASC device measured at 10 mA cm−2.213 Reproduced with permission from ref. 213 (Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) An SEM image of α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles on CC. (b) The volumetric energy and power density of the NiMoO4//FeOOH packaged device. (c) The long-term cycling performance of the CC/H-Ni@Al-Co-S electrode at a current density of 10 A g−1 for 10000 cycles (the inset shows an SEM image of the obtained materials).227 Reproduced with permission from ref. 227 (Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature). (d) A schematic illustration displaying the merits of the core-branch CC/H-Ni@Al-Co-S electrode for energy storage. (e) CV curves of the flexible ASC under different bending conditions (the insets show photographic images of the device under different bending states).228 Reproduced with permission from ref. 228 (Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society). (f) An SEM image of Na0.5MnO2 NWAs on a single carbon fiber. (g) Electrode designs and the charge-storage mechanism of the Fe3O4@C anode and the Na0.5MnO2 NWA cathode in the ASC system. (h) Cycling performance of the Na0.5MnO2//Fe3O4@C ASC (the inset shows an optical image of the obtained ASC lighting a 2.2 V LED).229 Reproduced with permission from ref. 229 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (i) A schematic diagram of a stand-alone self-powered system consisting of four series-wound DSSCs, three series-wound flexible SCs and one LED. (j) The leakage current curve of three series-wound SCs charged at 0.5 mA to a potential of 2.4 V and kept at 2.4 V for 5000 s, indicating a small leakage current (the inset shows the voltage profile for three SCs in series when being charged by four DSSCs in series).231 Reproduced with permission from ref. 231 (Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) An SEM image of CoP/CC. (b) The polarization curves of CoP/CC, blank CC, and Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, and (c) Tafel plots of CoP/CC and Pt/C.253 Reproduced with permission from ref. 253 (Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society). (d) A schematic illustration of the formation of vertical core–shell MoO2/MoSe2 nanosheet arrays. (e–h) Digital and SEM images of core–shell MoO2/MoSe2 nanosheets on a carbon cloth substrate. (i) Polarization curves of vertical core–shell MoO2/MoSe2 nanosheet arrays on a carbon cloth substrate.255 Reproduced with permission from ref. 255 (Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (j and k) SEM images of porous nanosheets on CC. (l) The i–t curves of a SnO2/CC electrode at −1.6 V after folding or twisting 10 times.256 Reproduced with permission from ref. 256 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) LSV plots of various samples. (b) The kinetic energy barrier profiles of the intermediates and products of β-CoOOH, CoO6 (Oh), CoO4 (Td), and FeO6 (Oh) of FexCoyOOH. (c) Durability testing at 10 mA cm−2 for 24 h.257 Reproduced with permission from ref. 257 (Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) An SEM image of Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC. (e) Polarization curves for CC, RuO2/CC, single FeOOH/CC, MnO2/CC, and (f) Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC electrodes (iR corrected) in 1 M KOH at 5 mV s−1.258 Reproduced with permission from ref. 258 (Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (g) A schematic illustration of the preparation procedures of a Pt–CoS2/CC hybrid electrode. (h) An SEM image of Pt–CoS2/CC, and (i) the corresponding continuous water electrolysis of Pt–CoS2/CC at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH for 20 h, with the reaction occurring on two electrodes.259 Reproduced with permission from ref. 259 (Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) An SEM image of NiD-PCC. (b) LSV plots of bare carbon cloth//bare carbon cloth (BCC//BCC), Ni nanoparticle embedded carbon//Ni nanoparticle embedded carbon (NiC//NiC) and NiC//NiD-PCC in 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (c) An optical image showing the hydrogen and oxygen bubbles generated on the electrodes of the NiC//NiD-PCC electrolyzer.261 Reproduced with permission from ref. 261 (Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) An SEM image of P-CC. (e) Reaction free energy diagrams of C–OOH defect graphene and volcano plots for the OER and ORR on different sites of armchair and zigzag graphene nanoribbons.263 Reproduced with permission from ref. 263 (Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (f) The electrochemical cell used for HOPG electrochemical experiments. (g–i) The evolution of overpotential (exchange current) for the ORR (g), OER (h), and HER (i) with charge and intermediate binding energies.264 Reproduced with permission from ref. 264 (Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a, b) SEM and HR-TEM images of uniform and dense arrays of TiO2 NSs grown on carbon fibers at 453 K for 4 h, respectively. (c) A comparison of the photocatalytic degradation rates for MO of TiO2 NSs on carbon fibers (triangles), TiO2 NSs on a FTO substrate (circles), and pure carbon fiber (squares). (d) A schematic representation of the same amount of TiO2 NSs grown on FTO-glass and CF substrates with the same surface area.265 Reproduced with permission from ref. 265 (Copyright © 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (e) The photodegradation of RhB by hierarchical Au–TiO2 NRAs on CC under irradiation by visible light. (f) Long-term stability testing of Au–TiO2 NRAs on CC.40 Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 (Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (g) The photoresponse of TiO2 NS and Au–TiO2 NS under chopped solar-light illumination (AM 1.5G) at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 (Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society). (h) An SEM cross-sectional view of bunched TiO2 NR arrays, and (i) an optical photo of carbon fibers coated by bunched TiO2 nanorod arrays. (j and k) A schematic representation of the configuration of the CF/TiO2 NR array-based tube-shaped 3D DSSC and the corresponding J–V curves of DSSCs based on TiO2 NR arrays and bunched TiO2 NR arrays on CFs.271 Reproduced with permission from ref. 271 (Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
