High open-circuit voltage under the bulk photovoltaic effect for the chiral smectic crystal phase of a double chiral ferroelectric liquid crystal dope ...  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QM01143J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QM01143J
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 8265-8274High open-circuit voltage under the bulk photovoltaic effect for the chiral smectic crystal phase of a double chiral ferroelectric liquid crystal doped with a fullerene derivative†

        
          
            Masahiro 
            Funahashi
          
        
      ab
aProgram for Advanced Materials Science, Faculty of Engineering and Design, Kagawa University, 2217-20 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0396, Japan. E-mail: funahashi.masahiro@kagawa-u.ac.jp
bHealth and Medical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 2217-14 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0395, Japan
Received 
      13th August 2021
    , Accepted 15th October 2021First published on 15th October 2021AbstractA bulk photovoltaic effect was studied in a chiral smectic crystal phase of a bisfluorophenylterthiophene derivative bearing two lactate moieties doped with a fullerene derivative. The chiral smectic crystal phase was a ferroelectric and macroscopically polarized state that could be formed by cooling the sample from a chiral smectic A phase under a DC bias application. The fullerene derivatives aggregated to form microcrystals which promoted hole–electron dissociation in the polarized smectic phase. The open circuit voltage exceeded 1.2 V and the external quantum efficiency was around 80∼50% under near UV and blue light illumination. This open circuit voltage exceeds those of the organic solar cells using a fullerene-based acceptor. The polarity of the photovoltaic effect could be inverted by the change of the poling bias during the phase transition into the smectic crystal phase. Unlike conventional organic thin film solar cells, the photovoltaic effect was observed in a symmetrical cell consisting of an ITO cathode and anode. Moreover, thick films of around 1–2 μm can be used for the bulk photovoltaic devices. The concentration of the fullerene derivative was only 8 mol%. However, the dissociation of excitons into hole and electrons was promoted because the relative permittivity exceeded 30.
Introduction
Regardless of inorganic or organic solar cells, the driving force for the generation of electrical energy is a local internal electric field produced at a p–n or Schottky junction. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the main contribution to the open-circuit voltages of the junction-based organic solar cells is from the difference between a HOMO level of a p-type semiconductor, ϕ1, and a LUMO of an n-type one, ϕ2. Because of the energy loss (Δ), the open-circuit voltages are limited by the bandgap and are usually less than 1 V. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) of organic thin film solar cells with bulk heterojunction structures is generally described by eqn (1).1,2 Voc = ϕ1 − ϕ2 − Δ(1)
 Fig. 1  Schematics for the (a) conventional photovoltaic effect based on a p–n junction and (b) bulk photovoltaic effect in ferroelectrics. 
The polarity of a cell is determined by the work functions of the cathode and anode. The open-circuit voltage increases with the difference between the LUMO and HOMO levels while conjugated polymers with narrow band gaps are effective at harvesting visible light, resulting in a small difference between the LUMO and HOMO levels.1 Introduction of buffer layers or electrically polarized layers on electrodes for decreasing energy loss have been investigated in order to increase open circuit voltages of organic solar cells.3–6 The current highest value of the open-circuit voltage in the organic solar cells using fullerene-based acceptors is 1.0 V.7 In the solar cells using non-fullerene organic acceptors and hybrid solar cells, open-circuit voltages exceeding 1.0 V have been achieved.8–10 Solar cells with tandem structures which require complicated fabrication processes exhibited open-circuit voltages over 2 V.11
Another approach to fabricate solar cells with high open circuit voltages is the bulk photovoltaic effect of ferroelectric materials. The bulk photovoltaic effect is driven by the internal electric field produced by the spontaneous polarization of ferroelectrics. It can generate a larger voltage than the bandgaps and the polarity can be inverted by the polarity change of the poling bias, as shown in Fig. 1(b).12,13 The Voc in the bulk photovoltaic effect is described by eqn (2), where Pr, d, ε0, and εr are the polarization charge, sample thickness, vacuum permittivity, and relative permittivity, respectively. (2)
However, ferroelectrics are electrical insulators because of the large bandgaps and low charge carrier density. Low photocurrent results in low power conversion efficiency although high open-circuit voltages exceeding 100 V are sometimes obtained.14 Recently, the bulk photovoltaic effect of bismuth ferrite has been studied because it exhibits a relatively large photocurrent and is expected to be multiferroic.15 However, the power conversion efficiency is less than 1%.16
Studies on the bulk photovoltaic effect have been very limited for organic ferroelectrics.17 In dye-doped poly(vinylidene fluoride)18,19 and polycrystalline films of a triphenylene hexabenzoate derivative, high open-circuit voltages much larger than their bandgaps were obtained.20,21 In a charge transfer complex of tetrathiafulvalene and chloranil, directional photocurrent (shift current) was induced because of the non-centrosymmetric structure of the crystals below 80 K although the photovoltaic effect disappeared above 80 K.22 In these studies, power conversion efficiencies were less than 0.1%.
For ferroelectric liquid crystals (FLCs), a chiral smectic C (SmC*) phase consisting of chiral rod-like molecules and polar columnar phases consisting of achiral disk-like molecules have been studied.23–25 Conventional FLCs are insulators and do not exhibit any photovoltaic effects.
Liquid crystals comprising extended π-conjugated units exhibit electronic charge carrier transport as observed in organic semiconductors.26–29 Efficient electronic charge carrier transport has been confirmed in columnar,30–34 smectic,35–37 nematic,38,39 and chiral nematic phases.40 The liquid crystalline (LC) semiconductors have been studied for their applications in electronic devices,41–46 including solar cells.47–51
In FLCs bearing extended π-conjugated units, the electronic charge carrier transport couples with the electrical polarization to create new functional materials.52–56 We have already reported the bulk photovoltaic effect in the oligothiophene-based FLCs above room temperature.57–59 Polarization can be retained in the smectic crystal phase with higher carrier mobility, resulting in the enhancement of the photovoltaic effect in the polarized smectic crystal phase.60,61 ITO electrodes can be used both as a cathode and an anode and chemically unstable metal cathodes are not required. An effective photovoltaic effect was observed in thick samples with a thickness exceeding 1 μm.
Recently, the bulk photovoltaic effect has been reported in the ferroelectric columnar phase of a subphthalocyanine derivative.62,63 Although the photocurrent was generated for visible light illumination, the open-circuit voltage was 0.2 V and the power conversion efficiency for solar light illumination was less than 0.1%.62 The bulk photovoltaic effect was studied in a fullerene-doped FLC and the open-circuit voltage reached 0.5 V. However, the external quantum efficiency was around 2% for near UV light illumination.64
Here, I demonstrate the bulk photovoltaic effect in the chiral smectic crystal phase with a bulk heterojunction structure consisting of a chiral diphenylterthiophene-based liquid crystal bearing lactate moieties and fullerene derivative. The fullerene derivatives aggregated to form microcrystals which promoted hole–electron dissociation in the polarized smectic phase of the chiral π-conjugated liquid crystal. The open-circuit voltage exceeded 1.2 V and the external quantum efficiency was around 50–80% in the near UV and blue light regions. Unlike conventional organic solar cells, films with thicknesses of around 1–2 μm can be used for bulk photovoltaic devices.
Experimental
Materials

Fig. 2 shows the molecular structures of chiral π-conjugated liquid crystal 1, fullerene derivative 2, and FLC 3 reported previously.58 The phase transition temperatures and enthalpies of compounds 1 and 3 are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). Compared to FLC 3, compound 1 has two lactate moieties to increase the polarizability. Compound 1 was synthesized by a procedure reported previously.65 Compound 1 exhibits a chiral smectic A (SmA*) phase between 132 °C and 92.5 °C and a chiral smectic crystal phase (M*) below 92.5 °C. In the M* phase, the LC molecules tilt to the layer normal by 45 degree as observed in a chiral smectic C (SmC*) phase, inducing macroscopic electrical polarization. The M* phase has a long-range positional order with a rectangular symmetry within the smectic layers, and this phase should be the crystal smectic H* or K* phase. The viscosity of the M* phase is so high that a DC bias application does not induce a macroscopic electrical polarization. Polarization inversion is not observed by an AC bias application. However, a macroscopically polarized M* phase is formed when a film in the SmA* phase is cooled to the M* phase under the application of a DC bias.
 Fig. 2  Molecular structures of double chiral ferroelectric chiral π-conjugated liquid crystal 1, fullerene derivative 2, and previously reported FLC 3. 
For doping of fullerene derivative 2 into compound 1, these two compounds are dissolved in toluene and the solvent was evaporated under vacuum. The concentration of compound 2 to compound 1 was 8 mol%. In the case of concentrations higher than 10 mol%, compound 2 did not dissolve homogenously in molten compound 1 at 135 °C.
The mesomorphic properties of the doped samples were characterized by polarizing optical microscopy (Olympus BX53), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, Netzsch Maia 200F), and X-ray diffraction (Rigaku Rapid II). Microcrystals of compound 2 were observed using an electron scanning microscope (SEM, Technex Tiny SEM). Dielectric studies on compound 1 and related materials were conducted using an LCZ meter (NF 2340). The HOMO and LUMO levels of compounds 1–3 were determined by cyclic voltammetry and absorption edges of UV-vis absorption spectra of these compounds.64,65 The energy values are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 HOMO and LUMO levels of compounds 1–3







1


2


3





LUMO (eV)
−2.8
−3.8
−2.7


HOMO (eV)
−5.3
−5.5
−5.4




Characterization of the bulk photovoltaic effect in the M* phase
A cell capillary filled with pure compound 1 or compound 1 doped with compound 2 was heated to 135 °C on a hot stage and cooled to 115 °C, at which the sample was in the SmA* phase. A DC bias was applied to the cell and cooled to 70 °C, at which the sample was in the polarized M* phase. The cells for electrical measurements can be purchased from EHC Company, Japan. Otherwise, they can be fabricated from patterned ITO-coated glass substrates. White light (3.5 W LED, 20 mW cm−2) was illuminated on the cell at 70 °C and induced photocurrent was measured varying the applied voltage. Photocurrent spectra were obtained by the illumination of monochromic light, through a monochromator (Shimadzu SP-150), from a Xe lamp (300 W) on the cell and the photocurrent was measured under zero bias. For these measurements, a source measurement unit (Keithley 6517A) was used. The photo-intensity was measured using a photometer (ADCMT 8230).
The external quantum efficiency (EQE (%)) was calculated from the photocurrent obtained by the illumination of monochromic light using eqn (3), where Jsc (A), Iph (W), and λ (nm) are the short circuit photocurrent, photon intensity, and wavelength of light, respectively. (3)
Determination of carrier mobility
Carrier mobilities were measured by a TOF method.2 A LC cell consisting of two ITO-coated glass plates was placed on a hot stage and heated above the clearing temperature of the LC mixtures. The LC sample was melted and capillary-filled into the cells. A DC voltage was applied to the cell on a hot stage, whose temperature was controlled using a PID thermocontroller with an electrometer (ADC R8252). A pulse laser was illuminated on the LC cell. The excitation source was the third harmonic generation of an Nd:YAG laser (Continuum MiniLite II, wavelength = 356 nm, pulse duration = 2 ns) and the photo-induced displacement currents were recorded using a digital oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS 3044B) through a serial resistor.
The charge carriers generated by pulse laser illumination drift across the sample under the application of a DC bias, inducing a transient photocurrent as a voltage decrease of the serial resistor connected to the digital oscilloscope. When the photo-generated charge carriers arrive at the counter electrode, the transient photocurrent decreases to zero. The transit time of the photo-generated charge carriers can be determined from the kink point in the transient photocurrent curve. The carrier mobility μ was determined by eqn (4), where d, V, and tT are the cell thickness, applied voltage, and transit time, respectively. (4)When an illuminated electrode is biased positively, the mobility of positive charges is determined while that of negative charges is obtained with an illuminated electrode biased negatively.
Results and discussion
Phase transition properties of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2

Fig. 3(a) shows DSC thermograms of pure and doped compound 1. The thermograms of compound 1 doped with compound 2 on heating and cooling are indicated in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The phase transition temperatures of doped compound 1 are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†). The phase transition temperatures from the isotropic to the SmA* phase and from the SmA* to the M* phase for pure compound 1 were 132 °C and 92.5 °C, respectively. For the doped material, the phase transition temperature from the isotropic phase to the SmA* phase decreased to 123 °C although the temperature from the SmA* phase to the M* phase was not affected by doping compound 2 into compound 1. It is noted that an endothermal peak was observed at 112 °C, indicating the formation of microcrystals of compound 2. The microcrystals were retained in the M* phase. For the doped material, molecules of fullerene derivative 2 dispersed homogeneously at the transition from the isotropic phase to the SmA* phase, resulting in the decrease of the transition temperature. However, the molecules of fullerene derivative 2 segregated and the concentration of compound 2 in the matrix of compound 1 was low during the transition from the SmA* phase to the M* phase and the phase transition temperature remained constant.
 Fig. 3  (a) DSC thermograms on heating for compound 1 and that doped with fullerene derivative 2. The heating rate was 10 K min−1. (b) X-ray diffraction patterns of compound 1 doped with compound 2 at 70 °C. 

Fig. 3(b) exhibits X-ray diffraction patterns of compound 1 doped with compound 2. In the doped sample, the diffraction patterns in the low and high angle regions were almost the same as that of pure compound 1 (Fig. S2 and Table S3, ESI†), except for a few peaks at 9.20° and 10.37°. These peaks originated from the microcrystals of fullerene derivative 2. The DSC thermograms and X-ray diffraction patterns indicated that fullerene derivative 2 crystallized in the smectic phases of compound 1.

Fig. 4 displays polarizing optical micrographs of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2. As shown in Fig. 4(a), compound 2 formed aggregates with the size of several μm when the sample was cooled to the SmA* phase. As shown in Fig. 4(b), when the SmA* phase was cooled to the M* phase without application of a DC bias, many defects were formed between polarization domains, indicating the appearance of a macroscopically non-polarized state. The aggregates of fullerene derivative 2 were preserved during the phase transition. Fig. 4(c) displays a polarizing micrograph of a macroscopically polarized M* phase formed during the phase transition from the SmA* phase under the application of a DC bias. The fan-like texture in the SmA* phase was frozen in the polarized M* phase and the formation of the defect lines was suppressed. The fullerene aggregates were also retained in the polarized M* phase. The fullerene aggregates were more clearly recognized under observation with one polarizer, as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†).
 Fig. 4  Polarizing optical micrographs of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2 (8 mol%) at (a) 115 °C (SmA* phase), (b) 70 °C (the M* phase formed without application of a DC bias), and (c) 70 °C (the M* phase formed under application of a DC bias of 30 V for a 2 μm-thick cell). The sample thickness was 2 μm. (d) SEM image of the aggregates of compound 2 formed in the M* phase of compound 1. 

Fig. 4(d) shows the SEM image of the fullerene aggregates. The sample containing the microcrystals of compound 2 was dissolved in acetone which dissolves compound 1 but not the microcrystals of compound 2. The supernatant solution was removed, and the residual precipitates were dispersed on a glass substrate. A Au thin layer was vacuum-deposited on the substrate which was observed by SEM. The SEM image indicated the formation of microcrystals with the size ranging from around several hundred nanometers to several micrometers.
In the smectic phases, electronic carrier transport within the smectic layers is predominant to that along the layer normal.26,27 In the M* phase of compound 1 doped with compound 2 for the TOF measurements and the photovoltaic experiments, the LC molecules aligned parallel to the electrode surfaces, as shown in the micrographic textures (Fig. 4), indicating that the electric field was parallel to the smectic layers in which electronic charge carriers were transported preferentially.
The composites of compound 1 doped with compound 2 were stable at room temperature and the optical textures of the polarized and non-polarized M* phases were retained for several months. In the M* phase, the molecules of compounds 1 and 2 should separate to form the thermodynamically stable M* phase of compound 1 and crystalline particles of compound 2.66 As shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†), the fact that photoluminescence from compound 1 in the M* phase of the composite was not quenched by compound 2 indicated the exclusion of compound 2 from the LC domains of compound 1 in the M* phase.
Carrier transport properties of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2
In the M* phase of pure compound 1, the hole mobility was 1.3 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 70 °C while the electron transport was dispersive and the electron mobility could not be determined, as reported previously.65 In the SmA* phase, the hole mobility was 6.4 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 115 °C although the electron mobility could not be determined because the photocurrent was too small. Compared to the hole transport, the photocurrent for the electron transport was weak in the SmA* and M* phases.65

Fig. 5 shows transient photocurrent curves for holes and electrons in the M* phase at 70 °C in a cell with a thickness of 4 μm. In compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2, electron transport was remarkably enhanced. The hole mobility was slightly decreased to 8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 70 °C, due to the formation of shallow traps by the disordered molecular aggregation induced by fullerene derivative 2. However, the transient photocurrent for electrons increased 100-fold and changed to non-dispersive with an electron mobility of 1.0 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 70 °C, compared to that in the M* phase of non-doped compound 1. This enhancement should be attributed to the formation of microcrystals of fullerene derivative 2. Photocarrier generation efficiency should be increased by charge transfer at the interface between microcrystals of fullerene derivative 2 and the liquid crystalline matrix of compound 1. Electrons should be transported through the microcrystals of fullerene derivative 2.
 Fig. 5  Transient photocurrent curves for (a) holes and (b) electrons in the M* phase (70 °C) of compound 1 doped with compound 2. The sample thickness was 4 μm, and the excitation light was the third harmonic generation of the Nd:YAG laser (λ = 356 nm). 
Both in the polarized and non-polarized M* phases of compound 1 doped with compound 2, the LC molecules aligned parallel to the electrode surface and the electric field matched the direction of the smectic layers in which carrier transport proceeded preferentially. In the polarized and non-polarized M* phases, non-dispersive transient photocurrent curves were obtained, indicating that the defects in the non-polarized M* phase did not work as carrier traps.
Bulk photovoltaic effect in the M* phase of pure compound 1
The main absorption band of pure compound 1 and that doped with compound 2 was in the near UV and blue area. Therefore, the penetration depth of the light contributing to the photovoltaic effect was much less than the sample thickness between 1 and 4 μm. When the illuminated electrode was charged positively (positively polarized state), a hole current contributed to the photovoltaic effect. The positively polarized state was formed by the application of a negative DC bias during the phase transition from the SmA* phase to the M* phase. In contrast, the electron current contributed to it mainly when the illuminated electrode was charged negatively (negatively polarized state).
As reported previously,65 the polarized M* phase of pure compound 1 could be formed by cooling the cell filled with compound 1 from the SmA* phase to the M* phase under the application of a DC bias (30 V for a 2 μm-thick cell). In contrast, the non-polarized M* phase was obtained by cooling the sample without the application of a DC bias.

Fig. 6 shows current–voltage characteristics in the polarized and non-polarized states of pure compound 1. In the polarized M* phase, the dark current characteristic indicated a rectification character both in the positively and negatively polarized states despite the symmetric structure of the cell using an ITO cathode and anode. In the photocurrent characteristic, the photovoltaic effect with an open-circuit voltage of 0.93 V was observed in the negatively polarized state. Moreover, the polarity of the rectification of the dark current and the photovoltaic effect was inverted by the change of the polarity of the DC bias during the phase transition from the SmA* phase to the M* phase. Because of the inferior transport and generation of electrons compared to those of holes in compound 1, the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current in the negatively polarized state were lower than those in the positively polarized state.
 Fig. 6  Current–voltage characteristics of pure compound 1 in the M* phase (a) with polarization treatment and (b) without polarization treatment. The sample thickness was 2 μm and a white LED (20 mW cm−2) was illuminated. 
In contrast, no rectification was observed in the dark current of the non-polarized M* phase. The photocurrent with the illuminated electrode biased positively was larger than the photocurrent with that biased negatively, due to the inferior generation and transport of electrons compared to those of holes. The behavior was photoconductor-like, and no photovoltaic effect was observed in the non-polarized M* phase of compound 1.
The polarity of the photovoltaic effect and rectification of the dark current was contrary to the polarity of the poling DC bias applied during the phase transition from the SmA* phase to the M* phase. The polarity of the photovoltaic effect and the rectification of the dark current was inverted by the change of the polarity of the poling bias. In the non-polarized M* phase, rectification was not observed in the dark current and the photovoltaic effect was negligible. This photovoltaic effect in the polarized M* phase should be attributed to the internal electric field produced by macroscopic polarization of compound 1.
Bulk photovoltaic effect in the M* phase of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2

Fig. 7(a) shows current–voltage characteristics in the polarized and non-polarized states of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2. The polarized M* phase was also formed by cooling the cell filled with compound 1 doped with compound 2 from the SmA* phase to the M* phase under a DC bias (30 V). In the polarized M* phase of compound 1 doped with compound 2, the rectification character was also observed in the dark current, indicating the formation of an asymmetric electric field, as observed in the polarized M* phase of non-doped compound 1. The dark current was enhanced about 10 times compared to that in the M* phase of pure compound 1, indicating the increase of the charge carrier density. The polarity of rectification was inversed between the positively and negatively polarized states.
 Fig. 7  Current–voltage characteristics of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2 in the M* phase (a) with polarization treatment and (b) without polarization treatment. The sample thickness was 2 μm and a white LED (20 mW cm−2) was illuminated. 
The photovoltaic effect in the M* phase of compound 1 was remarkably enhanced by doping compound 2. In the positively polarized state, the short-circuit voltage exceeded 200 μA for white LED illumination (20 mW cm−2). For UV light illumination, the efficiency increased to 80%. The open-circuit voltage reached 0.95 V in the positively and negatively polarized states. The polarity of the photovoltaic effect in the polarized M* phase of the doped sample was inverted between the positively and negatively polarized states. In the positively polarized state, the short-circuit current was 4 times larger than that in the negatively polarized state because of the superior hole transport and generation contributing to the photocurrent in the positively polarized state.
In the positively polarized state, holes generated near the illuminated electrode should be transported through the LC matrix of compound 1. In the negatively polarized state, electrons produced near the illuminated electrode should conduct through crystallites of compound 2. Although the content of compound 2 was only 5 mol%, electron generation should be enhanced by the contamination of compound 1 in the crystallites of compound 2, as reported for the photovoltaic effect of [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) doped with poly(3-hexylthiophene).66,67
In the non-polarized M* phase, the photovoltaic effect was negligible and the behavior was the same as that of photoconductors, as shown in Fig. 7(b). This result indicated that an internal electric field generated by the polarization is required for the photovoltaic effect. In contrast to the non-doped sample, the photocurrent values in positive and negative biases are almost the same. This should be attributed to the improvement of electron generation and transport in the doped sample.
In bulk heterojunction solar cells consisting of p-type conjugated polymers and fullerene-based acceptors, the open-circuit voltages are determined by the HOMO levels of p-type conjugated polymers and the LUMO levels of n-type acceptors.1,3 However, the open circuit voltage did not change by the doping of fullerene derivative 2 in the M* phase of compound 1. This result indicated that this photovoltaic effect in the polarized M* phase of compound 1 should be determined by the electrical polarization of the M* phase but not the HOMO of compound 1 and the LUMO levels of compound 2, as observed in the junction-based conventional photovoltaic effect.
Photocurrent spectra in the polarized M* phase

Fig. 8 shows the photocurrent and UV-vis absorption spectra of pure compound 1 and that doped with fullerene derivative 2. In the polarized M* phase of pure compound 1, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) was less than 1% and the edge of the photocurrent spectrum coincided with the absorption edge, indicating that the photovoltaic effect should be attributed to the absorption of near UV and blue light by compound 1. In the M* phase of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2, the EQE value was increased two orders of magnitude compared to that in the polarized M* phase of pure compound 1 (Fig. 8(a)). In the near UV area, the EQE value exceeded 70%. As shown in Fig. 8(b), the doped material exhibited a weak absorption ranging from 500 nm to 700 nm, which originated from the fullerene core. The photocurrent was enhanced mainly in the wavelength region below 500 nm and a small photocurrent was observed between 500 nm and 700 nm, as shown in Fig. 8(a).
 Fig. 8  (a) Photocurrent spectra of pure compound 1 and that doped with fullerene derivative 2. The spectrum for the non-doped sample was 40 times enlarged. (b) Absorption spectra of pure compound 1 and that doped with fullerene derivative 2. 
The EQE value and photocurrent in the TOF measurements were two orders of magnitude enhanced by the doping of fullerene derivative 2. The formation of microcrystalline aggregates of fullerene derivative 2 in the matrix consisting of compound 1 promotes the dissociation of excitons into holes and electrons. However, the size of the aggregates of compound 2 was several hundred nm to several μm and the distance between the aggregates was several μm in the M* phase of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2, as shown in Fig. 3. These values are much larger than a typical exciton diffusion length in bulk heterojunction solar cells, around several tens of nm.2
The author is able to provide a few plausible factors to enhance the photovoltaic effect. In the M* phase of the doped material, photoluminescence from compound 1 was not efficiently quenched, indicating that most of compound 2 formed aggregates and little amount of compound 2 dissolved in the matrix of compound 1 in the M* phase (Fig. S4, ESI†). Therefore, photocarriers should be generated at the interface between the p-type LC matrix consisting of compound 1 and n-type microcrystals of compound 2. The photoactive area between the LC matrix and the microcrystals should be large to dissociate a substantial portion of excitons, due to the formation of fullerene particles with rough surfaces, as shown in Fig. 4d.
The large permittivity in the M* phase of compound 1 doped with compound 2 exceeded 30, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). This large dielectric constant should promote the delocalization of photogenerated excitons. The strong dipole moment of compound 1 formed a strong local polarization field at the interface between the LC matrix and microcrystals. The dissociation of hole–electron pairs should be enhanced by the polarization field. This process may be assisted by the electrical polarization of microcrystals of compound 2. As reported previously, carrier generation was not increased under the bulk photovoltaic effect of the chiral smectic crystal phase of phenylterthiophene derivative 3 by doping a fullerene derivative.64 The HOMO and LUMO levels of compounds 1 and 3 are not so different, as indicated in Table 1. In contrast to compound 1, the relative permittivity was only 5 in the ferroelectric phase of compound 3 (Fig. S5, ESI†).
Contamination of compound 1 in crystallites of compound 2 should also contribute to the enhancement. It was reported that a photovoltaic effect of [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was remarkably enhanced by contamination of a small amount of poly(3-alkylthiophene).67–69 The photocarrier generation within the microcrystals of compound 2 should be increased by the electron transfer from the contaminated compound 1 to the crystalline aggregates of compound 2.
The ferroelectric polarization field contributes to the transport of photogenerated holes and electrons to the electrodes. On the other hand, it should be noted that carrier generation should be assisted by the local electric field produced at the interfaces between the LC matrix of compound 1 and the microcrystals of compound 2 as well as the macroscopic ferroelectric polarization.
The local electric field at the interfaces of the LC matrix and fullerene microcrystals can also contribute to the open-circuit voltage, as observed in organic thin film solar cells with bulk heterojunctions.2 The difference between the LUMO of compound 2 and the HOMO of compound 1 is 1.5 V (Table 1). Mismatches between the work functions of ITO electrodes and the HOMO level of compound 1 or the LUMO level of compound 2 should cause energy loss (Δ in eqn (1)), reducing the open-circuit voltage. As reported previously, the energy mismatches at the electrodes were reduced by the ferroelectric polarization field in the polarized M* phase.65 In fact, electroluminescence was observed in the polarized M* phase of compound 1 doped with compound 2. This indicates that the energy mismatches at the electrodes should be reduced in the M* phase of compound 1 doped with compound 2. Therefore, the contribution of a bulk heterojunction mechanism under ferroelectric polarization should also be considered.
Effect of sample thickness on the open circuit voltage
In conventional FLCs exhibiting a chiral smectic C (SmC*) phase, the appearance of spontaneous polarization is stabilized by the interaction of FLC molecules with the surface of electrodes. In general, a helical structure originating from the molecular chirality of the LC molecules is unwound in a cell whose thickness is less than the helical pitch, resulting in bistable surface-stabilized FLCs. This suggests polarization relaxation should reduce the open-circuit voltage in thick cells.
The bulk photovoltaic effect in the M* phase of compound 1 doped with compound 2 was studied in cells with a thickness of less than 2 μm. The best result was obtained in a cell with a thickness of 1.5 μm, as shown in Fig. 9(a). The open circuit voltage reached 1.2 V and the short circuit current exceeded 340 μA cm−2 for white LED illumination (20 mW cm−2), which corresponded to a power conversion efficiency of 0.5%.
 Fig. 9  (a) Current–voltage characteristics in the M* phase of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2 at 70 °C in a cell with a thickness of 1.5 μm for white LED illumination (20 mW cm−2). (b) Open circuit voltage as a function of the cell thickness. 

Fig. 9(b) shows the open circuit voltage in the M* phase of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2 as a function of cell thickness. Assuming the simple Gauss' law, an open-circuit voltage should be proportional to the cell thickness, as indicated in eqn (2). However, the open circuit voltage decreased with an increase in the thickness larger than 1.5 μm. Apparently, this behavior is opposed to that of the bulk photovoltaic effect. However, the open circuit voltage increased with an increase in the thickness of the region less than 1.5 μm. In thick cells, the polarization field should be partially relaxed to reduce the open circuit voltage.
In order to obtain high open-circuit voltages, planar electrode arrangements with the gap of around several μm have been used for the bulk photovoltaic effect of inorganic and organic ferroelectrics.12–16,22 Measurements of sandwich-type thin films have been limited.
Origin of the photovoltaic effect
In order to examine the influence of work function difference between the anode and the cathode, the photovoltaic effect in a cell consisting of an ITO anode and an Al cathode was examined. Fig. S6 (ESI†) exhibits current–voltage characteristics in the M* phase of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2 in a cell consisting of ITO and Al electrodes. In the non-polarized M* phase, the rectification character was ambiguous in the dark current in this voltage range, indicating that the internal electric field produced by the potential difference between the ITO anode and the Al cathode was too small because the thickness of the ITO/Al cell was 2 μm. In the polarized M* phase, the photocurrent characteristic was similar to that of a photoconductor and the short circuit current was 4 orders of magnitude smaller than that of the polarized M* phase in an ITO/ITO cell. The open-circuit voltage was 0.51 V which is less than that in an ITO/ITO cell shown in Fig. 7. Because the thick cell was used, the contribution of the potential difference between the ITO anode and the Al cathode should be small compared to the internal field produced by the electrical polarization of compound 1. The Al2O3 layer on the cathode should also decrease the open circuit voltage and the short circuit current.
The induced charge in the polarized M* phase was estimated to be about 20 nC cm−2 based on eqn (2), assuming the relative permittivity of 30, permittivity of vacuum of 8.854 × 10−14 F cm−1, Voc of 1.2 V, and thickness of 1.5 μm. The M* phase of compound 1 was too viscous and the spontaneous polarization could not be determined by a triangular method or Sawyer–Tower technique. Compared to the spontaneous polarization of 70 nC cm−2 in a chiral smectic C phase of compound 3, the polarization of 20 nC cm−2 in the M* phase should be smaller than that of the ideal polarized state where all the dipoles aligned in the M* phase. The electrical polarization should relax in the M* phase considerably.
Conclusions
The bulk photovoltaic effect in the chiral smectic crystal phase of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2 was studied. Compound 1 exhibited a polarized ordered smectic phase with ferroelectricity and produced an internal electric field in a symmetrical cell using an ITO cathode and anode. In the polarized M* phase of the doped sample, fullerene derivative 2 formed microcrystalline aggregates with the size of several μm, which enhance the electron transport. In the polarized M* phase, the open-circuit voltage exceeded 1.2 V and the external quantum efficiency was around 80–50% under near UV and blue light illumination. The polarity of the photovoltaic effect could be inverted by the change of the poling bias during the phase transition to the smectic crystal phase of compound 1.
The large relative permittivity of 30 and heterojunctions between the p-type liquid crystalline matrix and n-type fullerene microcrystals should promote the dissociation of excitons into holes and electrons. Unlike conventional organic thin film solar cells, thick films of around 1–2 μm can be used for bulk photovoltaic devices. For such thick cells, only macroscopic electric polarization can produce an electric field to transport photogenerated charge carriers and potential difference between a cathode and an anode could not contribute to the formation of the internal electric field.
At this stage, compound 1 has an absorption band in the near UV and blue light area and the power conversion efficiency was low for white light illumination. However, the power conversion efficiency could be improved by the extension of the π-conjugated system of the LC molecules and the resulting red shift of the absorption edge of the LC molecules. The mechanism of the photovoltaic effect is completely different from the conventional p–n junction based solar cells. In organic thin film solar cells, various efforts have been made to improve their performance. Most of them are related to a local electric field generated at an interface between the electrode and active layer or p–n interfaces. The author proves that this bulk photovoltaic effect in the chiral liquid crystal compounds could provide new insights to produce high performance solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was financially supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas (Element-Block Polymers, no. 15H00753) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) (no. 15H03797 and 21H01904) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), the Ogasawara Foundation for the Promotion of Science & Engineering, the SEI Group CSR Foundation, the Asahi Glass Foundation, the Salt Science Research Foundation (no. 1715), the Iketani Science and Technology Foundation, and the TEPCO Memorial Foundation. This research was also supported by the ‘Nanotechnology Platform Program’ of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), Japan (Grant No. JPMXP09F19GA0004). The author thanks Dr Akinari Sonoda (AIST, Shikoku) for NMR measurements, Prof. Kusunose (Kagawa Univ.) for DSC measurements, Prof. Shinobu Uemura for SEM observation, and Prof. Tomohiko Ishii (Kagawa Univ.) for X-ray diffraction analysis.
Notes and references
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Polymer solar cells with enhanced open-circuit voltage and efficiency, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649–653 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Köhler and H. Bässler, Electronic Processes in Organic Semiconductors, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2015 Search PubMed .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Open circuit voltage of organic solar cells: an in-depth review, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 391–410 RSC .
R. Po, C. Carbonera, A. Bernardi and N. Camaioni, The Role of Buffer Layers in Polymer Solar Cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 285–310 RSC .
E. Ahlswede, J. Hanisch and M. Powalla, Comparative Study of the Influence of LiF, NaF, and KF on the Performance of Polymer Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163504 CrossRef .
A. Tada, Y.-F. Geng, Q.-S. Wei, K. Hashimoto and K. Tajima, Tailoring organic heterojunction interfaces in bilayer polymer photovoltaic devices, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 450–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Du, X. Bao, Y. Li, D. Liu, J. Wang, C. Yang, R. Wimmer, L. W. Städe, R. Yang and D. Yu, Balancing High Open Circuit Voltage over 1.0 V and High Short Circuit Current in Benzodithiophene-Based Polymer Solar Cells with Low Energy Loss: A Synergistic Effect of Fluorination and Alkylthiolation, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701471 CrossRef .
T. Dai, P. Lei, B. Zhang, A. Tang, Y. Geng, Q. Zeng and E. Zhou, Fabrication of High VOC Organic Solar Cells with a Non-Halogenated Solvent and the Effect of Substituted Groups for “Same-A-Strategy” Material Combinations, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 21556–21564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fan, T. Liu, W. Gao, Y. Xiao, J. Wu, W. Su, X. Guo, X. Lu, C. Yang, H. Yan, M. Zhang and Y. Li, Overcoming the Energy Loss in Asymmetrical Non-Fullerene Acceptor-Based Polymer Solar Cells by Halogenation of Polymer Donors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15404–15410 RSC .
S. Ren, L.-Y. Chang, S.-K. Lim, J. Zhao, M. Smith, N. Zhao, V. Bulović, M. Bawendi and S. Gradečak, Inorganic–Organic Hybrid Solar Cell: Bridging Quantum Dots to Conjugated Polymer Nanowires, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3998–4002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, S. Li, J. Huang, S. Yang, J. Chen, L. Zuo, M. Shi, X. Zhan, C. Z. Li and H. Chen, Nonfullerene Tandem Organic Solar Cells with High Open-Circuit Voltage of 1.97 V, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9729–9734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Glass, D. von der Linde and T. J. Negran, High-voltage bulk photovoltaic effect and the photorefractive process in LiNbO3, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1974, 25, 233 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. H. Koch, R. Munser, W. Ruppel and P. Würfel, Bulk photovoltaic effect in BaTiO3, Solid State Commun., 1975, 17, 847–850 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Butler, J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Ferroelectric materials for solar energy conversion: photoferroics revisited, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 838–848 RSC .
T. Choi, S. Lee, Y. J. Choi, V. Kiryukhin and S.-W. Cheong, Switchable Ferroelectric Diode and Photovoltaic Effect in BiFeO3, Science, 2009, 324, 63–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Yang, J. Seidel, S. J. Byrnes, P. Shafer, C. H. Yang, M. D. Rossell, P. Yu, Y. H. Chu, J. F. Scott, J. W. Ager, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Above-Bandgap Voltages from Ferroelectric Photovoltaic Devices, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 143–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Funahashi, Chiral liquid crystalline electronic systems, Symmetry, 2021, 13, 672 CrossRef CAS .
T. Furukawa, M. Date, E. Fukada, Y. Tajitsu and A. Chiba, Ferroelectric Behavior in the Copolymer of Vinylidenefluoride and Trifluoroethylene, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 19, L109–L112 CrossRef CAS .
T. Furukawa, Ferroelectric properties of vinylidene fluoride copolymers, Phase Transit., 1989, 18, 143–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sasabe, T. Nakayama, K. Kumazawa, S. Miyata and E. Fukada, Photovoltaic Effect in Poly(vinilydene fluoride), Polym. J., 1981, 13, 967–973 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sugita, K. Suzuki and S. Tasaka, Ferroelectric properties of a triphenylene derivative with polar functional groups in the crystalline state, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 212201 CrossRef .
M. Nakamura, S. Horiuchi, F. Kagawa, N. Ogawa, T. Kurumaji, Y. Tokura and M. Kawasaki, Shift current photovoltaic effect in a ferroelectric charge-transfer complex, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Clark and S. T. Lagerwall, Submicrosecond bistable electro-optic switching in liquid crystals, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1980, 36, 899–901 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kishikawa, S. Nakahara, Y. Nishikawa, S. Kohmoto and M. Yamamoto, A Ferroelectrically Switchable Columnar Liquid Crystal Phase with Achiral Molecules: Superstructures and Properties of Liquid Crystalline Ureas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2565–2571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Miyajima, F. Araoka, H. Takezoe, J. Kim, K. Kato, M. Takata and T. Aida, Ferroelectric Columnar Liquid Crystal Featuring Confined Polar Groups within Core-Shell Architecture, Science, 2012, 336, 209–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. O'Neill and S. M. Kelly, Ordered Materials for Organic Electronics and Photonics, Adv. Mater., 2010, 23, 566–584 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kato, M. Yoshio, T. Ichikawa, B. Soberats, H. Ohno and M. Funahashi, Transport of ions and electrons in nanostructured liquid crystals, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17001 CrossRef .
M. Funahashi, Nanostructured Liquid-Crystalline Semiconductors - A New Approach to Soft Matter Electronics, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7451–7459 RSC .
M. Funahashi, Solution-processable electronic and redox-active liquid crystals based on the design of side chains, Flex. Print. Electron., 2020, 5, 043001 CrossRef CAS .
D. Adam, F. Closs, T. Frey, D. Funhoff, D. Haarer, H. Ringsdorf, P. Schuhmacher and K. Siemensmeyer, Transient photoconductivity in a discotic liquid crystal, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 70, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. van de Craats, J. M. Warman, A. Fechtenkötter, J. B. Brand, M. A. Harbison and K. Müllen, Record Charge Carrier Mobility in a Room-Temperature Discotic Liquid-Crystalline Derivative of Hexabenzocoronene, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1469–1472 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ban, K. Nishikawa, K. Ohta, A. M. van de Craats, J. M. Warman, I. Yamamoto and H. Shirai, Discotic liquid crystals of transition metal complexes 29: mesomorphism and charge transport properties of alkylthiosubstituted phthalocyanine rare-earth metal sandwich complexes, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 321–331 RSC .
F. Würthner, C. R. Saha-Müller, B. Fimmel, S. Ogi, P. Leowanawat and D. Schmidt, Perylene Bisimide Dye Assemblies as Archetype Functional Supramolecular Materials, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 962–1052 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Funahashi and A. Sonoda, High electron mobility in a columnar phase of liquid-crystalline perylene tetracarboxylic bisimide bearing oligosiloxane chains, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25190–25197 RSC .
M. Funahashi and J. Hanna, High Carrier mobility up to 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 at ambient temperatures in thiophene-based smectic liquid crystals, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 594–598 CrossRef CAS .
M. Funahashi and J. Hanna, Fast ambipolar carrier transport in smectic phases of phenylnaphthalene liquid crystal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 602–604 CrossRef CAS .
A. Matsui, M. Funahashi, T. Tsuji and T. Kato, Hole Transport in Liquid-Crystalline Polymers with a Polysiloxane Backbone and a Phenylterthiophene Moiety in the Side Chain, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 13465–13472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nuita, J. Sakuda, Y. Hirai, M. Funahashi and T. Kato, Hole Transport of a Liquid-crystalline Phenylterthiophene Derivative Exhibiting the Nematic Phase at Ambient Temperature, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 412–413 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tokunaga, Y. Takayashiki, H. Iino and J. Hanna, Electronic conduction in nematic phase of small molecules, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 033201 CrossRef .
K. L. Woon, M. P. Aldred, P. Vlachos, G. H. Mehl, T. Stirner, S. M. Kelly and M. O'Neill, Electronic Charge Transport in Extended Nematic Liquid Crystals, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2311–2317 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Aldred, A. E. A. Contoret, S. R. Farrar, S. M. Kelly, D. Mathieson, M. O'Neill, W. C. Tsoi and P. Vlachos, A Full Color Electroluminescence Device and Patterned Photoalignment Using Light Emitting Liquid Crystal, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1368–1372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Funahashi, Development of liquid crystalline semiconductors with high carrier mobility and their application to thin-film transistors, Polym. J., 2009, 41, 459–469 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pisula, A. Menon, M. Stepputat, I. Lieberwirth, U. Kolb, A. Tracz, H. Sirringhaus, T. Pakula and K. Müllen, A Zone Casting Technique for Device Fabrication of Field-Effect Transistors Based on Discotic Hexa-peri-Hexabenzocoronene, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 684–689 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. J. M. van Breemen, P. T. Herwig, C. H. T. Chlon, J. Sweelssen, H. F. M. Schoo, S. Setayesh, W. M. Hardeman, C. A. Martin, D. M. de Leeuw, J. J. P. Valeton, C. W. M. Bastiaansen, D. J. Broer, A. R. Popa-Merticaru and S. C. J. Meskers, Large area liquid crystal Monodomain field-effect transistors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2336–2345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Funahashi, F. Zhang and N. Tamaoki, High ambipolar mobility in highly ordered smectic phase of dialkylphenylterthiophene derivative that can be applied to solution-processed organic field effect transistors, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
H. Iino, T. Usui and J. Hanna, Liquid crystals for organic thin-film transistors, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Schmidt-Mende, A. Fechtenkötter, K. Müllen, E. Moons, R. H. Friend and J. D. MacKenzie, Self-Organized Discotic Liquid Crystals for High-Efficiency Organic Photovoltaics, Science, 2001, 293, 1119–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Gregg, Excitonic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4688–4698 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hori, Y. Miyake, N. Yamasaki, H. Yoshida, A. Fujii, Y. Shimizu and M. Ozaki, Solution Processable Organic Solar Cell Based on Bulk Heterojunction Utilizing Phthalocyanine Derivative, Appl. Phys. Express, 2010, 3, 101602 CrossRef .
W. Shin, T. Yasuda, G. Watanabe, Y. S. Yang and C. Adachi, Self-Organizing Mesomorphic Diketopyrrolo-pyrrole Derivatives for Efficient Solution-Processed Organic Solar Cells, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2549–2556 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, Z. Xiao, S. Lu, W. Zajaczkowski, W. Pisula, E. Hanssen, J. M. White, R. M. Williamson, J. Subbiah, J. Ouyang, A. B. Holmes, W. W. H. Wong and D. J. Jones, A molecular nematic liquid crystalline material for high-performance organic photovoltaics, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Anetai, Y. Wada, T. Takeda, N. Hoshino, S. Yamamoto, M. Mitsuishi, T. Takenobu and T. Akutagawa, Fluorescent Ferroelectrics of Hydrogen-Bonded Pyrene Derivatives, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1813–1818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, T. Takeda, N. Hoshino, Y. Suzuki, J. Kawamata and T. Akutagawa, Ferroelectricity of a Tetraphenylporphyrin Derivative Bearing -CONHC14H29 Chains at 500 K, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 123, 22439–22446 CrossRef .
M. Garcia-Iglesias, B. F. M. de Waal, A. V. Gorbunov, A. R. A. Palmans, M. Kemerink and E. W. Meijer, A Versatile Method for the Preparation of Ferroelectric Supramolecular Materials via Radical End-Functionalization of Vinylidene Fluoride Oligomers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6217–6223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Shivakumar, D. Pociecha, J. Szczytko, S. Kapuściński, H. Monobe and P. Kaszyński, Photoconductive bent-core liquid crystalline radicals with a paramagnetic polar switchable phase, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1083–1088 RSC .
T. Sasaki, D. Miyazaki, K. Akaike, M. Ikegami and Y. Naka, Photorefractive Effect of Photoconductive Ferroelectric Liquid Crystalline Mixtures Composed of Photoconductive Chiral Compounds and Liquid Crystal, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8678–8686 RSC .
Y. Funatsu, A. Sonoda and M. Funahashi, Ferroelectric liquid-crystalline semiconductors based on a phenylterthiophene skeleton: effect of introduction of oligosiloxane moieties and photovoltaic effect, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1982–1993 RSC .
A. Seki and M. Funahashi, Photovoltaic effects in ferroelectric liquid crystals based on phenylterthiophene derivatives, Chem. Lett., 2016, 45, 616–618 CrossRef CAS .
A. Seki, Y. Funatsu and M. Funahashi, Anomalous photovoltaic effect based on molecular chirality: influence of enantiomeric purity on the photocurrent response in π-conjugated ferroelectric liquid crystals, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 16446–16455 RSC .
A. Seki and M. Funahashi, Chiral photovoltaic effect in an ordered smectic phase of a phenylterthiophene derivative, Org. Electron., 2018, 62, 311–319 CrossRef CAS .
A. Seki, M. Yoshio, Y. Mori and M. Funahashi, Ferroelectric Liquid-Crystalline Binary Mixtures Based on Achiral and Chiral Trifluoromethylphenylterthiophenes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interface., 2020, 12, 53029–53038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, K. Nakano, M. Nakamura, F. Araoka, K. Tajima and D. Miyajima, Noncentrosymmetric Columnar Liquid Crystals with the Bulk Photovoltaic Effect for Organic Photodetectors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3326–3330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lehmann, M. Baumann, M. Lambov and A. Eremin, Parallel Polar Dimers in the Columnar Self-Assembly of Umbrella-Shaped Subphthalocyanine Mesogens, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2104217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mori and M. Funahashi, Bulk photovoltaic effect in organic binary systems consisting of a ferroelectric liquid crystalline semiconductor and fullerene derivatives, Org. Electron., 2020, 87, 105962 CrossRef CAS .
M. Funahashi and Y. Mori, Linearly polarized electroluminescence device in which the polarized plane can be rotated electrically using a chiral liquid crystalline semiconductor, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 2137–2148 RSC .
J. Zhao, A. Swinnen, G. Van Assche, J. Manca and D. Vanderzande, and Bruno Van Mele, Phase Diagram of P3HT/PCBM
Blends and Its Implication for the Stability of Morphology, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1587–1591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Albes, L. Xu, J. Wang, J. W. P. Hsu and A. Gagliardi, Origin of Photocurrent in Fullerene-Based Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 15140–15148 CrossRef CAS .
A. Melianas, V. Pranculis, D. Spoltore, J. Benduhn, O. Inganäs, V. Gulbinas, K. Vandewal and M. Kemerink, Charge Transport in Pure and Mixed Phases in Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Energ. Mater., 2017, 7, 1700888 CrossRef .
N. C. Nicolaidis, M. F. Al-Mudhaffer, J. L. Holdsworth, X. Zhou, W. J. Belcher and P. C. Dastoor, Contribution of Fullerene Photocurrent Generation to Organic Solar Cell Performance, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 11950–11958 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1qm01143jThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:
Voc = ϕ1 − ϕ2 − Δ	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Schematics for the (a) conventional photovoltaic effect based on a p–n junction and (b) bulk photovoltaic effect in ferroelectrics.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Molecular structures of double chiral ferroelectric chiral π-conjugated liquid crystal 1, fullerene derivative 2, and previously reported FLC 3.	 

LUMO (eV)	−2.8	−3.8	−2.7
HOMO (eV)	−5.3	−5.5	−5.4
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 3  (a) DSC thermograms on heating for compound 1 and that doped with fullerene derivative 2. The heating rate was 10 K min−1. (b) X-ray diffraction patterns of compound 1 doped with compound 2 at 70 °C.	 

 	Fig. 4  Polarizing optical micrographs of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2 (8 mol%) at (a) 115 °C (SmA* phase), (b) 70 °C (the M* phase formed without application of a DC bias), and (c) 70 °C (the M* phase formed under application of a DC bias of 30 V for a 2 μm-thick cell). The sample thickness was 2 μm. (d) SEM image of the aggregates of compound 2 formed in the M* phase of compound 1.	 

 	Fig. 5  Transient photocurrent curves for (a) holes and (b) electrons in the M* phase (70 °C) of compound 1 doped with compound 2. The sample thickness was 4 μm, and the excitation light was the third harmonic generation of the Nd:YAG laser (λ = 356 nm).	 

 	Fig. 6  Current–voltage characteristics of pure compound 1 in the M* phase (a) with polarization treatment and (b) without polarization treatment. The sample thickness was 2 μm and a white LED (20 mW cm−2) was illuminated.	 

 	Fig. 7  Current–voltage characteristics of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2 in the M* phase (a) with polarization treatment and (b) without polarization treatment. The sample thickness was 2 μm and a white LED (20 mW cm−2) was illuminated.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Photocurrent spectra of pure compound 1 and that doped with fullerene derivative 2. The spectrum for the non-doped sample was 40 times enlarged. (b) Absorption spectra of pure compound 1 and that doped with fullerene derivative 2.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Current–voltage characteristics in the M* phase of compound 1 doped with fullerene derivative 2 at 70 °C in a cell with a thickness of 1.5 μm for white LED illumination (20 mW cm−2). (b) Open circuit voltage as a function of the cell thickness.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1qm01143j

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
