Harnessing molecular rotations in plastic crystals: a holistic view for crystal engineering of adaptive soft materials  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00475H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00475H
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8878-8896Harnessing molecular rotations in plastic crystals: a holistic view for crystal engineering of adaptive soft materials

        
          
            Susobhan 
            Das†
, 
      
        
          
            Amit 
            Mondal†
 and 

        
          
            C. Malla 
            Reddy
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Kolkata, 741246, Nadia, West Bengal, India. E-mail: cmallareddy@gmail.com; cmreddy@iiserkol.ac.in
Received 
      22nd July 2020
    First published on 13th November 2020AbstractPlastic crystals (PCs), formed by certain types of molecules or ions with reorientational freedom, offer both exceptional mechanical plasticity and long range order, hence they are attractive for many mechano-adaptable technologies. While most classic PCs belong to simple globular molecular systems, a vast number of examples in the literature with diverse geometrical (cylindrical, bent, disk, etc.) and chemical (neutral, ionic, etc.) natures have proven their wide scope and opportunities. All the recent reviews on PCs aim to provide insights into a particular application, for instance, organic plastic crystal electrolytes or ferroelectrics. This tutorial review presents a holistic view of PCs by unifying the recent excellent progress in fundamental concepts from diverse areas as well as comparing them with liquid crystals, amphidynamic crystals, ordered crystals, etc. We cover the molecular and structural origins of the unique characteristics of PCs, such as exceptional plasticity, facile reversible switching of order-to-disorder states and associated colossal heat changes, and diffusion of ions/molecules, and their attractive applications in solid electrolytes, opto-electronics, ferroeletrics, piezoelectrics, pyroelectrics, barocalorics, magnetics, nonlinear optics, and so on. The recent progress not only demonstrates the diversity of scientific areas in which PCs are gaining attention but also the opportunities one can exploit using a crystal engineering approach, for example, the design of novel dynamic functional soft materials for future use in flexible devices or soft-robotic machines.
Susobhan Das
Susobhan Das obtained his BSc (Chemistry) from the Department of Chemistry of Sitananda College, in 2013 and MSc from Vidyasagar University, Midnapore, West Bengal, India, in 2015. He is currently pursuing his PhD with Prof. C Malla Reddy at the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Kolkata in the domain of solid-state chemistry and smart materials. His current research efforts focus on the design, synthesis and structure–property correlation of mechanically flexible, soft and adaptable Functional Organic Materials, stimuli-responsive crystalline materials and especially Plastic Crystals by employing the knowledge of Crystal Engineering and their promising applications in various advanced emerging fields.
Amit Mondal
Amit Mondal is an IPhD student at the Department of Chemical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Kolkata and is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. C. Malla Reddy. He was graduated with a BSc degree (Chemistry Hons.) from Syamsundar College at The University of Burdwan, West Bengal, India, in 2015. He is working on the structure–property correlation of organic functional materials with a Crystal Engineering approach for specifically designing highly flexible smart crystalline materials. Currently, he is exploring the diverse possibilities of Organic Plastic Crystal systems for use in real life applications (e.g., Adaptable Electronics, etc.).
C. Malla Reddy
C. Malla Reddy (Kothamolgara, Telangana, India, 1975) is Professor at the Department of Chemical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Kolkata. His research group is engaged in establishing structure–mechanical property correlations in molecular crystals and crystal engineering of various functional materials. He has interests in the mechanical aspects of pharmaceutical solids and mechanically adaptable semiconductors, ferroelectrics, piezoelectrics and optical materials.

Key learning points
(1) Aspects of molecular size/shape, crystal structure and energetics of plastic crystals (PCs).
(2) Relationship of PCs with other states of matter, like liquids, liquid crystals, glassy crystals, amphidynamic crystals and ordered crystals.
(3) Exceptional mechanical adaptability, post-deformation long-range order, and facile reversible phase transformations in PCs.
(4) Emerging key applications of PCs in solid-state electrolytes, adaptable ferro-/piezo-/pyroelectrics, barocalorimetry, molecular optics/magnets, etc. and repurposing.
(5) Crystal Engineering approach for designing novel PCs with new properties, beyond their original scope.

1. Introduction
Plastic crystals (hereafter named PCs) are a unique type of crystalline dynamic solids, constituted by rotatable molecules or ions.1,2 The plastic crystalline phase (also known as the rotator phase or orientationally disordered phase), which has been known since the early 20th century, is a peculiar state of matter with both solid- and liquid-like properties.1,2 Normally, the PC phase appears first when a liquid of such materials is cooled. PCs combine seemingly incompatible exceptional mechanical plasticity and crystallinity with a high degree of long-range order.3 Such a combination is rare in molecular materials as most crystalline materials tend to be brittle.4,5 Harnessing the exceptional efficiencies offered by single-crystal-based optical, electrical, magnetic and ferroelectric materials with brittleness becomes nearly impossible for use in devices, particularly in the flexible variants. Rigidity of molecular crystals makes any post-crystallization reconfiguration of particles unthinkable, for instance moulding them into desired shapes (films, rods, helices and other three dimensional shapes). Poor mechanical compliance and reshapability also means poor contact with other components. The tendency of brittle crystals to crack on mechanical impact greatly limits their durability in devices. Realization of these serious mechanical compliance issues of crystalline molecular materials for use in device applications has brought a renewed recent interest in crystal engineering, and not surprisingly led to the birth of a topic, called crystal adaptronics, which aims to mainstream the dynamic, soft crystalline materials for enabling applications in future flexible devices and machines.4–11
PCs are being actively explored as solid electrolytes, for example in lithium ion batteries.12–17 Various other potential applications of PCs in ferroelectrics,18–20 piezoelectrics,20–22 pyroelectrics,20,21 barocalorics,23,24 magnetics,25–27 optics,28etc. (Fig. 1) are quickly transforming PCs from a mere curiosity to extraordinary materials owing to their excellent mechanical softness and many other attractive properties arising primarily due to their dynamic nature and facile reversible order-to-disorder solid–solid phase transformations.
 Fig. 1  General overview of areas of prominence for plastic crystals. 
Despite nearly a century long history and intense current research activity in certain related areas, PCs, surprisingly, remain obscure to most crystal engineers.1,2,6,7 This is despite the fact that many emergent physical properties of PCs have parallels with that of the amphidynamic crystals, molecular machines and mechanically soft molecular crystals, which have attracted the attention of crystal engineering and supramolecular chemistry communities alike.4–8 While PCs are defined by their whole molecular motions, the amphidynamic crystals comprise a static (stator) reference frame and a dynamic (rotator) frame in the constituent covalent or supramolecular unit (the combination is called a rotor).8 The design principles for controlling dynamics in amphidynamic organic and metal organic crystals have significantly advanced. We propose that systematic investigation of the structural aspects of PCs using a crystal engineering approach can increase their scope by many fold.6,8 This could pave the way for utilizing the untapped potential of PCs in various future applications, including in crystal adaptronics. On the other hand, one may learn from PCs and explore amphidynamic crystals for certain unique applications, utilizing their inherent facile order-to-disorder transitions.
There have been a few excellent reviews on PCs in the past 15 years; however, almost all of them have been in focused areas such as organic plastic crystal electrolytes12,16,17 or ferroelectric PCs,19 which mainly cover application potential. This tutorial review aims to provide a holistic view of diverse types of PCs, from the crystal engineering point of view, with a rigorous analysis of the recent advancements in fundamental concepts, such as molecular criteria (shape/size), crystallographic features, energetics, mechanical properties, and so on, which is important for the progression of the field into new unexplored areas. We hope that this review will allow the general readers to follow a succinct discussion on the fundamental advancements and latest breakthrough results in PCs, such as structure–mechanical property correlation, solid electrolytes, adaptable electronics, barocalorimetry, optics and plastic magnetic materials. The holistic view presented here shall also enable the experts from one field to appreciate and utilize the knowledge of PCs developed in other fields. This shall also encourage repurposing the known PCs for another use and seamless transfer of concepts across fields, within the broader umbrella of materials chemistry, which includes crystal engineering and supramolecular chemistry.
2. What is the plastic crystalline phase?
The PC phase was first proposed nearly a century ago (1924) in the context of solid H–Cl,29 which was later examined in a large family of solids formed by molecular systems with nearly globular or cylindrical shapes that enable orientational degrees of freedom. Subsequently, various other systems, including those with ionic species, with diverse sizes and shapes in which at least one component showed reorientational behaviour were also discovered to be plastic.17 As all such materials displayed exceptional plasticity, Timmermans termed them as “plastic crystals”.1,2 An important characteristic of the PCs is the reorientational degrees of freedom of the constituent molecules or ions facilitated by a negligible steric hindrance (or low-energy barrier).1 These features not only cause high plasticity, but also result in several other intriguing properties. PCs have close links to amphidynamic crystals and molecular machines with immense potential for designing smart materials.
2.1 Characteristics of plastic crystals
PCs can be identified by the following empirical criteria.1,2,17
(i) The occurrence of one or more usually reversible order–disorder, solid–solid phase transitions prior to melting, due to the onset of reorientational motion of molecules or ions. The rotational motions may get activated at once by a single phase transformation or progressively via multiple phase transitions, moving from lower symmetry to higher symmetry solid phases.1,2,14,17,18 When all the possible degrees of freedom are obtained, the orientationally disordered molecules assume a perfect isotropic spherical shape, usually resulting in a hexagonal or cubic symmetry phase.1,2 Upon cooling to a sufficiently low temperature, the PCs transition to a lower symmetry phase by symmetry breaking where the molecules/ions adopt preferred orientations.
(ii) PC phases show substantially larger enthalpy changes during order-to-disorder solid phase transitions than the entropy of fusion (ΔSf).1,2 Because, upon cooling the melt to a PC phase, all degrees of freedom are not lost; the ΔSf is much smaller compared to that of the conventional ordered crystals (OCs). Timmermans proposed an empirical limit of ΔSf < 20 J mol−1 K−1 to define the PC phase in molecular crystals,1 although now many exceptions exist.15,17 This implies that most of the heat stored in the material is exchanged during solid-to-solid transition(s) rather than during melting of the PC phase.3,23
(iii) PCs display a relatively higher melting point (Tm) than the conventional OCs of their close isomeric molecules or ions1–3 because a considerable portion of the supplied thermal energy is used for molecular rotations rather than the molecular separation (melting) in PCs.3,23
(iv) PCs show severe plastic flow under stress and high self-diffusion due to the presence of reorientational motion of molecules/ions in high symmetry phases. For example, plastic crystalline materials extrude easily through a hole under pressure at elevated temperature.1,2 Under sufficient mechanical stress, particles of PCs stick to each other (fusion) and form thin films, mediated by the severe plastic flow and self-diffusion.3,18
(v) PCs show high compressibility, as expected from their extreme softness.2,3,23
(vi) PCs also show high vapour pressure close to Tm.1
All these unique properties of PCs are strongly associated with their dynamic orientational disorder or rotator motions. The plastic crystalline state is also known to contain many lattice vacancies as a result of the rotational disorder, contributing to high plasticity and substantial self-diffusion coefficients, which underpin many of their applications.2,12,17
2.2 Plastic crystal forming species
Timmermans and other researchers of the time explored PCs formed by simple neutral molecular systems with a near globular shape and dispersive nature.1,2 For example, the typical systems include solids of certain common chemicals (chloroform, idoform, cyclohexane), hydrogen chloride/bromide/iodide, alkanes, cycloalkanes and their derivatives (adamantanes, cubanes, DABCO, quinuclidine), certain terpinoids, pivalic acid, pentaerythritol and its derivatives, etc. (Scheme 1). Subsequently, binary PC phases with anionic and cationic species, named ionic PCs, have also been explored,17,18 primarily for plastic electrolyte applications. Some examples of ionic PCs include the derivatives of imidazolium, pyrrolidinium, tetraalkylammonium and dihydrogenphosphate, trifluoromethanesulfonate, metallocene based ionic PCs, and so on (Scheme 1). Ionic PCs can be considered as solid-state cousins of ionic liquids.16,17 Many ionic species depart from a near globular shape and cover cylindrical (linear or bent) and disk shapes.
 Scheme 1  Diverse types of molecules and ionic species, well known in the literature on plastic crystalline materials. 
Furthermore, large molecules with disk-like shapes have also been shown to form PC phases.30 In the multicomponent PCs, one or both the ionic components may display dynamic behaviour before Tm. An exhaustive list containing a variety of these PCs is covered in detail in a book by Sherwood2 and in recent reviews.17 Very recently, even colloid crystals, formed by rod-like microscopic particles, have been shown to form PC phases with implications for photonics.31 Predicting whether or not a species will form a PC phase is currently not a trivial task, particularly when the molecules/species deviate from globularity. This is a topic of future research.
2.3 Plastic crystals vs. other states of matter
The peculiar ambivalent order–disorder nature of PCs often causes confusion as to how they are related to isotropic liquids, liquid crystals (LCs), glassy crystals, mechanically compliant crystals and regular OCs (Fig. 2). For instance, early researchers inappropriately portrayed the PC phase as a variant of LCs and some called it a restricted liquid state.2 But subsequent research provided enough evidence to distinguish PCs from other states in terms of the extent of internal order and degrees of freedom available for constituents.2,18
 Fig. 2  Continuum of discrete states of matter from solids to liquids. Liquids are isotropic with no internal order but have both translational and rotational degrees of freedom. LCs have orientational order but no long range order. PCs lack orientational order but have long range order. Regular ordered crystals have both short range and long range order. In the case of isotropic liquids, LCs, PCs and amphidynamic crystals, the light blue shaded background represents the average available space and the red arrows indicate the available degrees of freedom for molecules or ions or fragments (dark blue half/full-dumbbells) in the state. Chicken grid (in plastic crystals, glassy crystals and fully ordered crystals) represents the long range order (lattice). Note: the location of 3D rectangular boxes (containing the letters) represents their position on the plot. 
Isotropic liquids have constituents with full translational and rotational degrees of freedom. Conventional OCs possess a long range order with static molecules or ions. Liquids and OCs occupy the opposite ends of the spectrum (Fig. 2). Typical LCs have orientational order, but lack long range order.30 The constituents in LCs maintain orientational order while possessing some degree of short-range translational and rotational motions.30 Hence, they are fluidic in nature. PCs contain orientationally disordered dynamic molecules/ions (lacking short-range order), whose centers of mass are arranged with a long range order. A fully disordered species in PCs occupies an isotropic spherical space (Fig. 2). Generally, the degrees of freedom in the LCs are higher as compared to PCs. For instance, certain materials of LCs form a crystalline phase via the following order, liquid → LC phase → PC phase → OC phase. Such examples suggest that with respect to molecular motions, the LCs are closer to liquids as compared to PCs.
Glassy crystals have constituents practically frozen with random orientations (static disorder) in structures with long-range order. The glassy crystalline state can often be obtained by flash cooling PCs (so as to avoid orientational ordering). Hence, one may not observe this state naturally during the transformation from OCs to PCs. Certain mechanically soft OCs, e.g., those that bend or change shape without breaking under external mechanical stress or other stimuli, also show solid-state molecular motions (tilting, slippage along a specific crystallographic direction, etc.). However, the molecules in such crystals are generally static in the native state, but become mobile only under certain external stimuli, hence they shall be considered as a subset of the OCs. Considering the diversity of molecular solids in chemistry, it is not always easy to clearly assign a material to a particular state of matter as some overlaps are inevitable.
The phases with long range-order (including PCs and glassy crystals) produce sharp Bragg reflections while the LCs that lack long-range order show very broad Bragg peaks, if any.3,32 In the case of dynamic crystals, such as PCs and glassy crystals, the orientational disorder results in diffuse diffraction/scattering.2,3,32
3. Molecular rotations and energetics
All the materials that form PCs show (i) dynamic orientational disorder and (ii) one or more reversible phase transformation(s) before melting. Various factors, such as the nature of molecules/ions (shape/size), crystal structure and intermolecular interactions, influence the reorientational order of species and energetics in PCs. Unlike the ideal PCs formed by globular species, those formed by non-globular species deviate from many empirical criteria, for example the ΔSf of <20 J mol−1 K−1 (Fig. 3). A critical literature survey suggests that a broader common criterion is required to include diverse types of solids that qualify to be called PCs.
 Fig. 3  DSC thermogram of diethyl(methyl)(isobutyl)phosphonium hexafluorophosphate (inset: ORTEP diagram) showing the increasing degrees of freedom in different phases (IV to I) at different temperatures and the corresponding entropy changes. In Phase IV, only the methyl and ethyl groups of the positive ions rotate but PF6− tumbles; in Phase III, the entire cation rotates along an axis, and the anion tumbles; in Phase II, the whole cation and anion tumble, while the anion can also diffuse (translational freedom); in the higher temperature Phase I, both the ions attain full rotational motions and can diffuse. Here, the blue circle (average available space), black curved arrow (rotational motions), black straight arrow (translational motions) and red arrow (axis of rotation) show different motions of the molecules. Reproduced and modified with permission from ref. 14, Copyright, 2012 the American Chemical Society. 
In the literature of PCs, conventionally, the highest temperature form (before Tm) is named Phase I, then the next highest temperature form is Phase II, and so on (Fig. 3).14 Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) is an effective tool for characterizing the energies (changes in enthalpy and entropy) associated with the solid-to-solid phase transformations as well as melting or fusion.23,24
In Phase I, usually the molecules (or fragments) or ions achieve the highest reorientational and translational (diffusion) degrees of freedom (Fig. 3).14,17 Such PCs obediently follow the ΔSf cut-off criterion (<20 J mol−1 K−1). Those achieving a limited number of degrees of freedom in Phase I may exceed this limit (ΔSf = 20–60 J mol−1 K−1) (Fig. 3 and Fig. 4).15,17 In simple words, the difference between the rotational degrees of freedom available in high temperature Phase I and the melt determines the range/magnitude of ΔSf in PCs.1–3,14,17 In solids with elongated cylindrical or disk shaped molecules/ions, rotations may be limited to that around specific symmetry axes.3,14,15 In the multicomponent or ionic PCs, rotational degrees of freedom may not be available for all the species, as this would depend on the size, shape and noncovalent interactions in the structure.14 In such cases, the rotations in static species are activated only on melting, leading to a higher ΔSf than the Timmermans limit.33 The ionic PCs possessing fully dynamic, isotropic ions in Phase I show ΔSf values in the range of ∼2–30 J mol−1 K−1.14,34 Almost all the PCs reported to date have ΔSf < ∼60 J mol−1 K−1 (Fig. 4).34 It is known that the ΔSf for conventional well-ordered organic crystals is >∼70 J mol−1 K−1.34 Generally, solids that do not show solid-to-solid phase transition(s) and have a ΔSf > ∼80 J mol−1 K−1 can safely be considered as not plastic crystalline phases.33 A variety of systems with varying degrees of orientational motions and the resultant ΔSf range from the literature is shown in Fig. 4 in a simplistic manner. However, further systematic studies on a large number of systems are needed to understand the ΔSf limits for various solids.
 Fig. 4  Correlation between reorientational freedom of molecules/ions (blue spheres) in crystals of the high temperature form (Phase I) and the range of entropy of fusion (ΔSf). Red arrows around blue spheres indicate isotropic reorientational motions of species. The PCs with fully reorientational motions for species (on left) show the lowest ΔSf while the OCs with all static species (on right) show the highest ΔSf values. Multicomponent (ionic or neutral) PCs where only one species undergoes reorientational motions and single component PCs with partial degrees of freedom for molecules (e.g., rotation around only one axis; not shown) show ΔSf values intermediate to the ideal PCs and OCs. 
In general, crystals with low ΔSf values are more plastic than those with a higher ΔSf, with all other conditions being equal.2,14 While the quantitative information from DSC provides important insights into the energies, other complementary techniques, such as solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), diffuse X-ray scattering, neutron scattering, Rayleigh and Brillouin scattering, dielectric and acoustic studies, infrared, Raman studies, etc., are very useful for studying molecular motions in PCs.2,14,17
4. Mechanical adaptability in plastic crystals
The early investigations of the bulk mechanical behaviour of PCs suggest that the plastic deformation proceeds through dislocation movement by slip while the vacancies and the orientational motions play a crucial role in the diffusion.2 Stress–strain responses of bulk samples of many simple globular organic systems show many parallels between PCs and plastic metals.2 Despite plasticity being one of the important aspects of PCs, systematic structure–mechanical property correlation studies are scarce in the recent literature.3
4.1 Structure–mechanical plasticity correlation
PCs with high plasticity can be readily compressed into thin films, while the static ordered crystalline (brittle) phases generally crack and disintegrate under similar conditions.3,18 All the PCs do not necessarily show the same extent of plasticity (or thinning ability) as this depends on the available reorientational degrees of freedom. PCs with low or moderate plasticity may show thinning to some extent, but may eventually develop some cracks. Plasticity gradually increases from low temperature forms to high temperature forms as they become more dynamic and highly symmetric closer to melting.18,20,35 Hence, compressing the solid samples (e.g., using glass slides, steel stubs, spatula, etc.) at different temperatures up to Tm could give an indication of the existence of a PC phase in a material.
Recent excellent examples demonstrate the role of several interlinked factors that influence the mechanical plasticity in PCs. For example, a trimorphic quinuclidium perrhenate (QP), an ionic crystal with globular species, reported by Harada et al., (Fig. 5a) clearly depicts how an increase in temperature progressively increases the internal rotations of ions, crystal symmetry and ultimately the plasticity in different solid forms.18 The ordered low symmetry room temperature (r.t.) Phase III of QP with no molecular rotations is brittle (Fig. 5b). The Phase II, with fully disordered cations and moderately disordered anions, is semi-plastic (Fig. 5c). The high temperature cubic Phase I is exceptionally plastic with fully disordered ions (Fig. 5d). The Phase I crystals can be easily pressed into thin films without any fracture (Fig. 5e). These trends are general and can be found in many other PCs, such as [NMe4][FeCl4], [NMe4][FeCl3Br] (Fig. 5f), 1-Azabicyclo[2.2.1]heptanium perrhenate ([AH][ReO4]), etc.20,35 This leads to interesting electrical properties in these materials, which are discussed later (see Section 6.2).
 Fig. 5  Structure–property correlation in ferroelectric ionic PCs. (a) Molecular structure of quinuclidinium perrhenate, QP (green arrow indicates dipole moment). (b) The ordered crystal structure in Phase III (300 K, orthorhombic, Pmm21). The pseudocubic unit cell area shown in green corresponds to the unit cells of Phase II and Phase I. (c) Crystal structure in Phase II (pseudo-rhombohedral, R3m). Limited rotational motions (anion – grey and cation – white arrows) and the spontaneous polarization (orange arrow) of the crystal along the polar three-fold axis are marked. (d) Structure of PC Phase I (cubic, Pmm) shown along with the isotropic rotator motions of anions (grey arrows) and cations (white arrows). (e) SEM images showing phase-dependent pressure-induced morphology changes of Phase III (brittle) and Phase I (plastic) crystals of QP. (a–e) Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 18, Copyright, 2016 the Springer Nature. (f) Free-standing transparent polycrystalline films of some ionic compounds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35, Copyright, 2018 the American Chemical Society. 
The simple aminoboranes, BH3NMe3, BF3NMe3 and BH3NHMe2, reported by us recently, demonstrate the importance of crystal structure in understanding the mechanical adaptability of PCs.3 They all have very similar molecular formulae with a nearly globular shape (globularity: 0.91, 0.91 and 0.90, respectively), but surprisingly they are not the same in terms of mechanical behaviour. The isostructural pair, BR3NMe3 [R = H, F], form PC phases with exceptional plasticity at r.t., while BH3NHMe2 is an OC and has no PC phase before Tm. In BR3NMe3 crystals, the molecules do not show isotropic orientational disorder at r.t. (trigonal symmetry phase), but the rotation is allowed around the B–N axis. Hence, at r.t., the crystal exists in a lower symmetric plastic phase. Upon heating, the whole-molecule reorientations/isotropic rotations become activated (phase I).3 The crystals of BR3NMe3 can easily be thinned, bent, twisted, coiled and fused together without any visible cracks at r.t. (Fig. 6a–e). These crystals can be cast into any desirable shape using appropriate mechanical stress.3 The fusion of separate pieces of crystals under mechanical stress resembles the fusion of hot metals on mechanical beating (Fig. 6c). Under tensile stress, the crystals elongate significantly and finally disintegrate via necking, which is characteristic of extremely plastic metals like silver and gold (Fig. 6d). Hence, these PCs are extremely malleable (ability to be compressed, for instance into sheets) and ductile (ability to be pulled into wires). Although such detailed qualitative tests have not been performed in the case of single crystals of other known PCs, this could be a general phenomenon in PCs. In contrast, the BH3NHMe2 system with an ordered crystalline phase, however, deforms plastically only on its major face upon the application of an external mechanical stress. These crystals readily fracture when stressed in any other arbitrary direction (Fig. 6f and g), similar to mechanically compliant OCs.
 Fig. 6  Mechanical response of BH3NMe3 (a–e) and BH3NHMe2 (f and g). (a) Thinning and rolling; (b) spring and elongated spring; (c) fusion of ends of two crystals of BH3NMe3 by mechanical stress; (d) necking region of a crystal subjected to tensile stress; (e) twisting; (f) brittle fracture; and (g) 1D plastic bending on different faces of the BH3NHMe2 crystal, showing its extreme, face dependent anisotropic plasticity. Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 3, Copyright, 2020 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Detailed structural analysis, complemented with computed pairwise intermolecular interaction energies, revealed a strong structure–mechanical property correlation and the role of intermolecular interactions in aminoborane systems. The BR3NMe3 pair form high symmetry PCs (rhombohedral, R3m) at r.t., in which molecules rotate around the B–N axis (Fig. 7a).3 The molecules form columns along their B–N axis with strong electrostatic B−⋯N+ interactions while weak dispersive type van der Waals (vdW) forces among adjacent parallel columns act as facile slip planes (Fig. 7b and c). Due to the availability of multiple facile slip planes in the high symmetry crystals, dislocation movement can proceed in multiple directions, making these isostructural aminoboranes exceptionally plastic (Fig. 7d and e). On the other hand, BH3NHMe2 crystallizes in a lower symmetry form (monoclinic, P21/c), with similar molecular columns, but these are connected by multiple strong B–H⋯H–N dihydrogen bonding interactions (Fig. 7f). As a result, the barrier for rotational motion becomes high enough to hinder the PC phase, regardless of the high globularity of the BH3NHMe2 molecule. However, as there exist only vdW contacts in the (10) plane, these crystals undergo anisotropic plastic bending, only on this face, unlike the three dimensional (3D) deformation in PCs. These examples clearly highlight the immense importance of the fine structural details in PCs to predict or design their bulk properties using crystal engineering.
 Fig. 7  Structure–mechanical property correlation in aminoboranes. (a) Allowed molecular rotations in PCs of BR3NMe3; (b) columns formed by BH3NMe3 molecules along the B–N axis; (c) schematic representation of columnar three dimensional packing of BR3NMe3 PCs (white arrows – slip directions; black arrows – deformation direction); (d) crystal structure of BH3NMe3 viewed parallel to columns (dotted lines represent slip planes; red arrows show the direction of slip); (e) general mechanism of tensile elongation. (f) Packing of BH3NHMe2 viewed parallel to columns showing inter-column dihydrogen bonds and the lone facile slip plane. Reproduced and modified with permission from ref. 3, Copyright, 2020 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4.2 Structural order in deformed plastic crystals
Another interesting aspect of PCs (e.g., in BR3NMe3 samples) is the retention of good long-range order in their deformed samples (Fig. 8a–c).2,3 The well-formed transparent regions of certain deformed monolith samples, from compression, elongation or thinning experiments (Fig. 8a–c), have been shown to diffract well and even allow structure determination by single crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD), although the many-fold increase of defects enhances the diffuse scattering component (Fig. 8d–g).3,32 This suggests that despite the large plastic flow of the material, grains maintain a certain degree of alignment in PCs. For instance, randomly oriented microcrystalline powders of PCs, with exceptional mechanical plasticity, such as in BF3NMe3, when mechanically compressed between steel plates, form diffraction quality (single) crystalline monolith films with domains having sufficiently good alignment.3 This is nothing but mechanical fusion of many microcrystals into a well ordered monolith. Plastic flow facilitates high surface contact, which is critical for the fusion of particles. Furthermore, the dynamic nature of molecules with the ability to reorient and diffuse in the solid-state seems to not only cement the surfaces, but also to help the domain alignment in PCs of BR3NMe3. However, more systematic studies employing spatially resolved techniques are needed for unequivocally establishing the microscopic details and generality of the above phenomena.
 Fig. 8  SCXRD studies of mechanically deformed BH3NMe3 samples; (a) a piece of single crystal thinned over ∼500%; (b) uniform stretching of a single crystal by ∼20%; (c) compression of a crystal by ∼10%; (d) 2D and (e) 3D representation of diffraction patterns showing broad peaks (inset shows a mounted crystal, cut from a thin film made by mechanical compression); (f) 2D projection of reconstructed Ewald's sphere viewed along a* and (g) thermal ellipsoid plot (with 50% probability) of crystal structure solved from a sample made by mechanical action. Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 3, Copyright, 2020 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4.3 Quantification of mechanical properties by nanoindentation
Although plasticity is a key property of PCs, quantitative studies on the same are rare in the recent literature. Nanoindentation, a well-established instrumental technique in materials science, allows quantitative assessment of elastic modulus, E (a measure of resistance to elastic deformation), and hardness, H (resistance to plastic deformation)36,37 among other mechanical characteristics using single crystal or thin film samples of small volumes. Hence, this technique can allow systematic evaluation of the structure–mechanical property correlation in single crystalline PCs.
Indentation results on single crystals of BH3NMe3 in the PC phase show three times larger residual displacement compared to that of BH3NHMe2 in the OC phase (Fig. 9), confirming the much softer nature of the former. The quantitative H and E values of BH3NMe3 (∼10 MPa; ∼0.2 GPa) and BH3NHMe2 (∼115 MPa; ∼2.2 GPa) also suggest the much softer nature of the former, which is consistent with its PC phase. Furthermore, smooth penetration of the indenter tip without any sudden displacement bursts (or pop-ins) in the loading portion of the P–h curves of BH3NMe3 indicates its homogeneous plasticity response,3 which is common in soft and ductile materials owing to the presence of a large number of active slip systems. Studies on aminoborane crystals also revealed that they are the softest among crystalline materials. Nevertheless, the range of the hardness of the BH3NMe3 PC phase is an order of magnitude lower than that of the typical ordered molecular crystals or metal organic compounds.38,39
 Fig. 9  Quantitative Nanoindentation data from single crystals of aminoboranes. Load (P)–displacement (h) curves of (a) BH3NMe3 and (b) BH3NHMe2. Notice the much softer nature of the former (PC) compared to the latter (Ordered Crystal). Reproduced with permission from ref. 3, Copyright, 2020 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
5. Plastic crystals vs. crystals with plasticity
It should be noted that plasticity is not exclusive to the rotator or plastic crystalline phases, as the name may imply. Mechanical plasticity or irreversible deformation is a widespread phenomenon in materials and it can occur even in those with no dynamic disorder.4,5 All materials experience initial elastic deformation (reversible), followed by plastic deformation (irreversible) and fracture (disintegration into pieces) when sufficient mechanical stress is applied.36 Depending on the extent to which these properties are displayed, organic crystals can be broadly categorised into the classes of elastic and plastic.4,5 While it is true that almost all crystals of rotator/plastic phases show significant plasticity, there are many ordered organic crystals that also show severe anisotropic plastic deformation. For instance, certain ordered molecular crystals show face-specific plasticity, i.e., irreversible bending on one (1D) or two (2D) crystallographic faces (Fig. 10a).4,5,40–42 Certain crystals, particularly those with 2D bending, can be plastically twisted around the axis of crystal length (Fig. 10b).42 Crystals with flat molecular layers with strong intralyer and weak interlayer interactions undergo severe mechanical plastic shearing deformation due to sliding of layers or slippage parallel to molecular sheets (Fig. 10c). In plastically bendable OCs, exceptional plasticity is limited to certain directions or planes (1D or 2D) of the crystals, due to the presence of a limited number of facile slip planes.4 The 1D or 2D plastically deformable crystals are not obliged to follow any of the empirical criteria of the PC phases. On the other hand, generally, plasticity in PCs is isotropic for all practical purposes and not limited to any one particular direction or plane (3D plasticity), owing to a large number of facile slip planes in their typically high symmetry crystals. Hence, PCs or rotator phases are not to be confused with the irreversibly bendable or other plastically deformable OCs.
 Fig. 10  Ordered organic crystals with anisotropic plastic deformation. (a) Formation of slip planes by molecular units with hydrophobic groups in ordered crystals (left) and the bending mechanism showing the simultaneous slippage of bundles of layers anisotropically on a particular crystallographic plane. The packing is such that the plastic bending in other directions is not possible. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, Copyright, 2016 the American Chemical Society. (b) Plastic twisting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42, Copyright, 2017 the American Chemical Society. (c) Plastic shearing in crystals with flat layered structures with weak interlayer and strong intralyer interactions. Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 4, Copyright, 2018 the American Chemical Society. 
6. Versatility of plastic crystals: their diverse applications
PCs are emerging as attractive materials in various fields, such as solid electrolytes,12–17,33,34,43 ferroelectrics,18–20 piezoelectrics,20–22 pyroelectrics,20,21 barocalorics,23,24 magnetics,25–27 optics28 and so on. The excellent reports in the recent literature not only demonstrate the versatile nature of the PCs but also their expanding scope and unexplored potential in many other areas.
6.1 Plastic crystal electrolytes
Safe, environmentally friendly solid-state electrolytes, particularly ionic PCs, have recently attracted significant attention for the fabrication of advanced fuel cells, batteries and solar cells.12–17 Owing to their appreciable ionic conductivities in the solid-state along with their added advantage of a leakage-free nature, negligible volatility and thermal stability, as compared to the conventional liquid electrolytes, organic ionic PCs have emerged as forerunners among solid electrolytes.12–17,33,34,43 The high plasticity of PCs also facilitates better contact between electrode and electrolyte during volume changes and resists damage from mechanical impact. Thus, PCs offer much needed design flexibility with near-ideal material properties (Fig. 11a).14,17 The research on ionic plastic electrolyte materials is at a much more advanced stage compared to PCs considered for other applications.12–17,33,34,43,44 Since there exist excellent recent reviews by experts on plastic electrolytes covering their characterization, design and applications,12,16,17 here, we highlight only certain unique advantages of the PC phases as electrolyte materials, with an emphasis on the salient features that help other applications in a different context.
 Fig. 11  Typical mechanisms of ionic conductivity in plastic electrolytes. (a) Schematic fuel cell, based on protic organic ionic PCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15, Copyright, 2015 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Ionic conduction via the revolving door (or paddle wheel) mechanism where the transport of ions (e.g., Li+, Na+, H+) occurs through a matrix of rotating ions, such as H2PO4− and SO42−.Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 12, Copyright, 2001 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and ref. 44, the PCCP Owner Societies, Copyright 2010. (c) Grotthuss proton transport mechanism via diffusion and an example of rearrangement of the hydrogen bonds. Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 44, the PCCP Owner Societies, Copyright 2010 and ref. 45, Copyright 2008 the American Chemical Society. 
Co-workers of MacFarlane, Pringle and Forsyth, and others showed that among various solid electrolytes, ionic PCs have better promise. The reorientational motions are thought to drive the high intrinsic ionic conductivity in PCs. Typical mechanisms of ion conductivity include the “revolving door” (paddle wheel) and Grotthuss mechanism (Fig. 11b and c), among others.12,15–17,44,45 Although the mechanistic aspects of ionic conductivity in PCs are still evolving, the transient free volume and various types of defects created by reorientations have been invoked to explain their high ionic mobility.15 For instance, Li2SO412 converts from a static crystalline phase to a plastic phase at 575 °C, triggering rotational motions in sulfate ions. As a result, the Li+ ions can move fast from one site to another with the help of the rotating sulfate anions, which act as revolving doors (Fig. 11b).12,17,44 This increases the mobility of the Li+ cations, leading to significantly high conductivity. Several salts of quaternary alkylammonium cations with high symmetry counter ions form excellent rotator phases.12 The PC phases of NH4Cl, NH4Br, and NH4NO3 all show isotropic rotation of the ammonium cation and cationic diffusion takes place via either a direct or indirect (an interstitial intermediate) vacancy migration process.12 The proton conduction in protic ionic PCs, such as imidazolium and dihydrogen phosphate, has been proposed to follow the Grotthuss (proton hopping) mechanism (Fig. 11c) and the vehicle mechanisms (not shown).15 In many cases, doping PCs with ions (such as Li+) has also been shown to substantially enhance the conductivity.12,13,17
Although significant progress has been made in understanding the role of anions and cations, interaction of ions, etc., in ionic PCs, more emphasis on the crystal structure and quantification of mechanical properties may boost ongoing efforts towards the rational design of solid electrolytes with technologically relevant conductivities and mechanical performance around r.t., for instance, using a crystal engineering approach.
6.2 Adaptable electronics
The exceptional mechanical deformability, long range order, tunable molecular orientations and facile switching abilities offered by PCs with rotatable molecules have recently attracted much attention in electronic materials, such as ferroelectrics, piezoelectrics, pyroelectrics and dielectrics.18–22 This is because PCs not only mitigate the poor processability and mechanical compliance issues often encountered in ordered crystalline inorganic materials, but also provide a new level of design flexibility and promising performances suitable for real life applications.

6.2.1 Plastic ferroelectrics. 
Ferroelectricity is the property of a material with spontaneous polarization, which can be reversibly switched by an external electric field.9–11,18–22 Ferroelectric materials also exhibit pyroelectricity, piezoelectricity, and optical second harmonic generation (SHG), which enable uses as capacitors, energy materials, mechanical sensors, memory devices (ferroelectric random access memories, FeRAMs), radio frequency identification (RFID) cards, optoelectronic materials, etc.18,19 Due to the unique reorientational ability of molecules and mechanical adaptability, PCs have been shown to offer many technological advantages in ferroelectric materials. Furthermore, uniform and highly crystalline thin films or pellets can be fabricated by mechanically compressing the polycrystalline powders of PCs, with retention of efficiencies.
Recently, Xiong et al. and Harada et al. demonstrated in their independent studies that polycrystalline samples of PCs with multiaxial ferroelectricity can offer large polarization responses comparable to that of their single crystals.19,20 This is because of the higher chance of alignment of available multiple equivalent polarization axes in randomly oriented polycrystalline forms of PCs with the applied external electric field (Fig. 12).19,20 High temperature cubic phases possessing isotropic molecules/ions are generally paraelectric, hence a structural phase transition to a lower symmetry phase is necessary for multiaxial molecular ferroelectrics.19,20
 Fig. 12  Crystal structures of [Hdabco]ReO4 in ferroelectric phases. (a) Monoclinic Cm (Phase III; 200-377 K) and (c) Tetragonal P4mm (Phase II; 377-499 K). (b and d) The 24 and 6 equivalent polarization directions available in the two ferroelectric phases III and II, respectively. High temperature Phase I adopts the paraelectric cubic Pmm structure (not shown). Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, Copyright, 2018 the American Chemical Society. 
Globular polar molecules that exhibit PC phases meet most of the requirements of mechanically adaptable ferroelectric crystals, hence one may exploit the large number of PCs known in the literature.18 High plasticity is mostly realized in high symmetry phases (cubic/hexagonal), but they are often paraelectric. Hence, it is challenging to combine both plasticity and ferroelectricity in PCs.18,20 For instance, the ferroelectric Phase II (rhombohedral; R3m) of trimorphic quinuclidinium perrhenate (QP) (Fig. 5a; Fig. 13a), does not show appreciable plasticity (semi-plastic) as only the quinuclidinium cation gains full rotational degrees of freedom while the perrhenate anion has negligible disorder (Fig. 5c).18 However, the high temperature Phase I (cubic, Pmm; Fig. 5d and 13a) has fully dynamic spherical ions, hence it shows exceptional plasticity, allowing the crystalline agglomerates to be mechanically compressed into pellets with ease (Fig. 5e). But the centrosymmetric cubic Phase I is not ferroelectric. However, the high plasticity of Phase I has been used for forming the pellets, which upon cooling transform to the ferroelectric Phase II (Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  Structure–property correlation in ferroelectric ionic PCs and polarization enhancement under an external electric field. (a) Temperature dependent polarization vs. electric field (P–E) hysteresis loops (curves) of quinuclidinium perrhenate (QP) for Phase III (at 340 K), Phase II (345 to 367 K) and Phase I (368 K). (b) P–E loops measured at 365 K on a Phase II pellet sample, as prepared without poling (black curve; initial state); heated to Phase I and cooled to Phase II under poling (Red curve; field-cooled state), and in the absence of poling (Green: annealed state). (c) The high temperature plastic Phase I with randomly distributed polarization axes in grains in its polycrystalline pellets (middle panel) and its transformation to the ferroelectric Phase II by cooling in the absence of poling (upper panel), and in the presence of poling (lower panel). (a–c) Reproduced and modified with permission from ref. 18, Copyright, 2016 the Springer Nature (d) The crystal structure of [NMe4][FeCl4] with 50% thermal ellipsoid probability and direction of the spontaneous polarization (red arrow) in the ferroelectric Phase IV, and the (e) temperature dependent P–E loops measured from polycrystalline films of Phases III and IV. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 35, Copyright, 2018 the American Chemical Society. 
Single crystals can generate electrical polarization uniformly along the direction of the polarization axis. Hence, single crystals with perfectly aligned unit cells show higher ferroelectric performance compared to the pellet samples.18 As the pellets are polycrystalline, the relative orientation of unit cells of grains is expected to be random.18 Hence, the pellets lower the performance, particularly in the conventional ordered organic crystals. PCs can overcome this problem if a poling technique is used. For example, when the pellet samples of QP, made using the plastic Phase I, are transformed to ferroelectric Phase II by cooling in the presence of an external electric field (poling, i.e., field-cooled state, Fig. 13b), the performance was better (Fig. 13b) as compared to that of the cooling in the absence of poling (annealed state, Fig. 13b and c).18 This suggests that when the plastic Phase I with rotatable molecules is cooled to ferroelectric Phase II under electrical poling, the molecules from different domains self-align with respect to the external electrical field and remain so in the less dynamic Phase II (Fig. 13c). Furthermore, due to the highly dynamic nature of the Phase I crystals, the alignment by poling can be done from any axis of the pellet, unlike in conventional ordered organic ferroelectric crystals. Hence, the unique dynamic nature of ions, multiaxiality, and their excellent plasticity make the rotator phases extremely attractive.
Similarly, the ferroelectric properties of pentamorphic ionic PCs, [NMe4][FeCl4] and [NMe4][FeBrCl3], with globular ions were also explored by Harada and co-workers.35 For instance, [NMe4][FeCl4] shows exceptional plasticity and the highest degrees of freedom for both ions in its high temperature Phase I (cubic, Pmm). As we move down the order from Phase I to V, the phases become less symmetric, less plastic and less disordered (Fig. 13d). Phases III and IV are of interest with ferroelectric space groups (orthorhombic, Amm2, Fig. 13e), but are semi-plastic in nature due to moderately dynamic ions. The ferroelectric properties of these phases have been explored by forming pellets using the exceptional plasticity of Phase I at a high temperature (Fig. 5f). The examples covered here highlight the promise of PCs for future adaptable technologies.


6.2.2 Plastic piezo- and pyroelectrics. 
Piezoelectricity is defined as the ability of a material to develop an electric charge upon application of a mechanical stress.21,22,35,46 Pyroelectricity is the ability of a material to show a spontaneous polarization (temporary voltage) when heated or cooled.20,21 These properties have wide ranging applications in sensors, actuators, and other electronic device elements.21,22 The piezoelectric performance is typically expressed by the d33 coefficient, a measure that represents the induced charge per unit force applied in the direction of the polarization.35,46
The free standing mechanically prepared polycrystalline films of Phase III samples of [NMe4][FeCl4] and [NMe4][FeBrCl3] show impressive piezoelectric d33 coefficients of up to 80 pC N-1 and 110 pC N−1, respectively, at r.t. after poling (figures not shown). These values are better than that of the well-known polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF; ∼30 pC N−1).
Studies on [AH][ReO4] suggest easily switchable polarization (small coercive electric fields, Ec, 2–4 kV cm−1) in PCs, which is two orders of magnitude lower than that of PVDF (∼500 kV cm−1) and thus facilitates high-frequency performance, even up to 100 kHz. This sample also shows a large d33 value of 90 pC N−1 and high pyroelectric performance (p = 0.015 μC cm−2 K−1 at 298 K) (Fig. 14a).20 The unprecedentedly high pyroelectric figure of merit, Fv (0.45 m2 C−1), for polycrystalline pellets of [AH][ReO4] is in the range of that of single crystalline triglycine sulphate (TGS, 0.36 m2 C−1) and superior compared to LiTaO3 single crystals (0.14 m2 C−1), both of which are well known precursors utilised in high-performance infrared (IR) sensors (Fig. 14b).21
 Fig. 14  Measurements of piezoelectric and pyroelectric properties. (a) Spontaneous polarization and the pyroelectric coefficient response to temperature change determined by using a polycrystalline pellet of [AH][ReO4]. The gradual decrease in the spontaneous polarization (black curve) with increasing temperature is due to the progressive increase of orientational disorder of the polar [AH]+ cations, which cancels the dipole moments of the polar molecules in the crystals. (b) Comparison of the pyroelectric voltage figure of merit (Fv) values of [AH][ReO4] and other representative pyroelectric materials (inset shows the polycrystalline films of [AH][ReO4]). (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 20, Copyright, 2019 the American Chemical Society (c) Charging curve of the 4.2 μF capacitor using the pyroelectric borane BH3NMe3 from devices made using flexible films (insets); (d) Pyroelectric and piezoelectric coefficient values of BH3NMe3 films at different operational frequencies. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 21, Copyright, 2020 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Recently, Carbery et al. exploited room-temperature plasticity in crystals of BH3NMe3 for piezoelectric and pyroelectric applications.21 The high mechanical deformability of the samples (Fig. 6a–e) facilitated the formation of flexible films (Fig. 14c, inset) that showed potential for thermal energy conversion, thermal sensing, and mechanical sensing with a high open circuit voltage >10 V (output voltage generated upon mechanical action) (Fig. 14c). The piezoelectric coefficient of d33 ≈ 10–16 pC N−1 and pyroelectric coefficient p ≈ 25.8 μC (m−2 K−1) were achieved in the thin films after poling (Fig. 14d), which are significant considering the typical lower values for molecular crystals. A low phase switching bias was also found in these crystals, which is attributed to the PC phase. Also, they demonstrated the utilization of the material in a pyroelectric device by charging a capacitor using its piezoelectric energy harvesting ability (Fig. 14c).21
The above mentioned examples and those reported in the recent literature not only show the growing potential of PCs as flexible multiaxial ferroelectrics but also revealed some precise molecular level crystal engineering strategies for tuning properties. In this direction, Xiong et al. suggested the following two theories.22 One, the “quasi-spherical theory”, which involves lowering of the symmetry of spherical cations to quasi-spherical geometry to achieve a high symmetry paraelectric Phase I that can be reversibly transformed to a lower symmetry polar ferroelectric Phase on changing temperature. Second, the “momentum matching theory”. Fine tuning of noncovalent interactions of oppositely charged ions helps in slowing down the molecular reorientations.22 This helps in the formation of a ferroelectric phase at low temperature with multiaxial ferroelectrics with a large number of equivalent polarization directions. Generally, the ions should be similar in size. And using such crystal engineering principles, Xiong, et al. could design a series of PCs, namely [(CH3)3NCH2X]FeBr4 (X = F, Cl, Br, I), with exceptional piezoelectric energy harvesting properties based on multiaxial ferroelectrics, which have direct relevance for application in the fields of modern energy and electronics.22

6.3 Barocaloric effects: plastic crystals as solid-coolants
Order–disorder solid-to-solid reversible phase transitions, which can be triggered by external effects such as pressure, temperature, electric field or magnetic field, have been topics of interest for a long time due to the practical importance of their inherent latent heat changes.23,24,47 “Baros” means pressure in Greek and “Caloric” means events relating to heat. The heating or cooling effects in a material induced by pressure changes are called barocaloric effects.23 For a material to be used to achieve caloric effects, a large reversible change in isothermal entropy and adiabatic temperature is needed. Caloric materials work based on reversible thermal changes, generally involving phase transitions triggered by pressure/stress (barocaloric effect, BE/elastocaloric effect, eCE), magnetic field (magnetocaloric effect, MCE) and electric field (electrocaloric effect, ECE).23,24
PCs have long been known for their use as thermal energy storage materials.23 Recent reports revealed the immense utility of PCs for achieving barocaloric effects and their potential as solid-coolants to rival the widely used vapour-based refrigeration technologies, involving harmful chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Hence, the PCs with impressive barocaloric effects have great potential in next generation environment friendly refrigeration technologies.23,24 For instance, they show huge isothermal entropy changes and adiabatic temperature changes during the ordered-to-disordered solid-state phase transformations, the magnitude of which is substantially larger than the enthalpy of fusion.1,2,23 The phase transitions are also reversible and occur with ease as the process involves only local orientational changes. Moreover, the extreme mechanical softness and high thermal expansion coefficients of PCs allow phase transitions at relatively small pressures in a reversible manner, which means that a minute pressure can generate a large volume change, leading to colossal entropy changes, unlike many other conventional barocaloric materials.23 Moreover, the barocaloric effects are universal as they are not system specific and can be observed in materials using hydrostatic pressure.
In this direction, Bing et al. and Lloveras et al. independently reported excellent results based on several PCs, such as neopentylglycol (NPG), pentaglycerin (PG) and 2-amino-2-methyl-1,3-propanediol (AMP) (Fig. 15a) and some other closely related compounds.23,24,47 At r.t., NPG crystallizes in a monoclinic lattice (P21/n) with fully ordered molecules having only one configuration. This ordered phase transforms to an fcc lattice (Fmm) at 314 K on heating, leading to an increase of the configurations in the NPG molecule to 60, which includes both rotational and conformational degrees of freedom.24 The structural phase transition can also be done reversibly using a pressure of 200 MPa at 318 K, as supported by both experimental and molecular dynamics simulation data (Fig. 15b and c).23 The highly anharmonic lattice dynamics significantly raise the entropy of the PC phase. The static and dynamic nature of the phases before and after the phase transformation temperature of NPG was studied in detail using several advanced experimental and computational techniques.23,24
 Fig. 15  Comparison of various classes of caloric crystals explored for next-generation solid-state refrigeration technologies. (a) Molecular structures; molecular dynamics simulations show the structure of NPG at 340 K under (b) ambient pressure and (c) 200 MPa (c). Follow the oxygen atoms (red balls) to notice their random arrangements in (b) as compared to the suppressed disorder in (c) under pressure; (d) fusion enthalpy and solid-state transition enthalpy for ordered regular solids (orange shading) and PCs (blue shading): NPG, PG, AMP, PE (Pentaerythritol), TRIS [tris-(hydroxymethyl aminomethane)], and MNP (2-methyl-2-nitro-1-propanol), NMP (2-nitro-2-methyl-1,3-propanediol); (e) compressibility of ordered regular solids and PCs. (f) Absolute values of maximum entropy change, |ΔSmax|, for leading caloric materials. PVDF-TrFE refers to poly(vinylidene fluorideco-trifluoroethylene). Reproduced with permission from ref. 23, Copyright, 2019 the Springer Nature. 
The high pressure differential scanning calorimetry (HP-DSC) measurements of NPG with a pressure change in the range of ambient to ∼90 MPa show a giant entropy change of 384 J kg−1 K−1 at r.t.23,24 The study shows that the maximum entropy change in NPG is achieved with a pressure change as low as about 45 MPa. PG showed an even higher entropy change (479 J kg−1 K−1) in a reversible manner under similar conditions (∼40 MPa), but required a higher operational temperature (350 K). The AMP system also showed exceptionally high entropy changes (629 J kg−1 K−1), however reversibility was poor, requiring a relatively higher operational pressure (600 MPa) as well as working temperature (about 350 K).47 Nevertheless, the values shown in these PCs are nearly tenfold larger than those of other leading caloric materials (Fig. 15d–f). High entropy changes and near r.t. operational cycles with low driving pressures make NPG a potential candidate for immediate real life applications.
These studies suggest that PCs possessing single major reversible ordered-to-disordered phase transitions involving a maximum entropy change in a narrow temperature window in the vicinity of r.t. are preferred for achieving barocaloric effects. Moreover, anharmonic lattice dynamics, underpinned by a combination of both reorientational and conformational degrees of freedom of molecules, can lead to colossal barocaloric effects in the mechanically soft PCs. As the barocaloric materials require the ability to hold the mechanical integrity of materials over a large number of compression cycles, mechanical compliance is a key aspect considering real life technological applications. The abundant availability of a range of environmentally friendly PCs in the literature offers great promise for solid-state refrigeration technologies. This is significant as other well known magnetocaloric or electrocaloric effects studied in the past have faced technological challenges due to their inherent low isothermal entropy changes and large external driving magnetic/electric fields.23 While the research on barocaloric PCs has just begun, one could improve their performance by enhancing the fundamental understanding of PCs in general, for example using systematic crystal engineering studies with more focus on the molecular and supramolecular factors.
6.4 Magnetic plastic crystals
Magnetic materials are important components in many technologies, such as memory storage devices, electro-magnets, sensors, energy devices, etc.25–27,48 Mechanically soft magnetic materials that can work at r.t. can be useful for mechanical sensing, power supply transformers and magnetic field generators.25–27,48 As magnetic PCs may offer unique properties (e.g., multiferroics), the sandwiched (metallocene) organometallic ionic materials have been explored recently. Currently, there are only a few systematic studies on magnetic PCs.25–27,49
Crystalline soft-materials with sufficiently strong intrinsic magnetic properties can facilitate magnetic ordering in the presence of external magnetic fields.48,50 Although magnetic ordering is yet to be realized in PCs, it was demonstrated in liquid crystals (LCs) that the manipulation of molecular order can be achieved using temperature, or magnetic or electric fields (for instance, in liquid crystal displays).48,50 Since the PC state is much more rigid compared to the LC phases, to observe magnetic ordering under practically relevant (weak) magnetic fields, PCs with extremely high magnetic susceptibilities (χT) and high mechanical plasticity will be required.
Magnetically active metallocene salts often exhibit plastic phases owing to the globular shapes of the cations, like M(C5Me5)2, [where, M = Fe, Co]. Mochida et al. carried out systematic studies on several metallocene-based PCs to understand the factors, such as size, shape and symmetry of ions, that influence phase transition temperature (Tt).25–27,49 A series of metallocene-based salts involving the cation [Fe(C5Me5)2] showed that anions with increasing volume show progressively decreasing phase Tt values, as shown in Fig. 16a. This is attributed to the decreased interionic Coulomb interactions with the increase in volume, thus facilitating rotational degrees of freedom for molecules at a relatively lower temperature (Fig. 16a).25 They also suggested that anions with lower symmetry than tetrahedral or octahedral show a higher Tt in salts (Fig. 16a).25 This is reasonable considering that the lower symmetry ions are less globular, leading to higher energy barriers for rotational motions, in contrast to their higher symmetry counterparts with tetrahedral and octahedral ions. A similar correlation has been shown in amphidynamic crystals, where the barrier for rotation significantly decreases with the increase of symmetry of the rotator part from C1 to C6.8 The magnetic PCs formed using the CF3BF3 counter anion with cations (Fe(C5Me4H)2, Fe(C5H4Me)2, FeCp(C5H4Me), and FeCp2, Cp = C5H5) are interesting as they exhibit the plastic phase with the order to disorder phase Tt close to r.t., 266–291 K (Fig. 16b and c).26,27
 Fig. 16  Structure and properties of magnetic PCs. (a) The ordered-to-plastic phase transition temperature Tt in [Fe(C5Me5)2]X (X = the anions in the plot) vs. the volume of the anions. Tetrahedral anions (open circles) and octahedral and other anions (filled circles) are used for the fitting of the curve (grey line) by excluding Tf2N. Packing diagrams of a representative example of (b) the ordered phase of [Fe(C5Me5)2][CH2BrBF3] at 223 K, and (c) the disordered plastic phase of a closely related compound, [Fe(C5H5)2][CH2BrBF3], at 100 K (hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity). Notice that the methylated ferrocenium compound in (b) is static even at 223 K while the compound without a methyl group in (c) is dynamic at a much lower temperature (100 K) due to the lower energy barrier for rotational motion in H–Cp as compared to Me–Cp. (d) A plot of magnetic susceptibility (χT) and temperature of [1][FeCl4] and [1][GaCl4] (1 = Fe(C5Me4H)2) measured under 0.1 T. Insets: Enlarged views around the static-to-plastic phase Tt measured under 1 T show the hysteresis loop of change in χT. (a,d) Reproduced from ref. 25, with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies, Copyright 2018. (b,c) reproduced with permission from ref. 27, Copyright, 2019 the Elsevier. 
They further showed in other salt complexes, containing the cation [Fe(C5Me4H)2] and anions [GaCl4], [FeCl4] and [CH2BrBF3], that at Tt, a very small decrease in magnetic moment was observed, but the change was not significant (Fig. 16d).25,27,49 Hence, Mochida et al. stated “thus, we have not observed a magnetic field orientation effect in paramagnetic plastic crystals to date, though electric field orientation in plastic crystals,18 and magnetic field orientation in magnetic ionic liquids is certainly possible.”27,49 Although these studies reveal the crucial role of shape, size and nature of ions in determining the phase Tt, more detailed quantitative studies, including those on interactions among different species in the crystal structure, are needed for realizing magnetic PCs with practical relevance.
6.5 Plastic nonlinear optics
Molecular optoelectronic devices that can be easily reconfigured in a reversible fashion by application of external stimuli such as pressure, heat or light have wide ranging applications in the fields of photo-switching, biosensors, pressure sensors, etc.28,51 Although PCs have been known for a long time, their possible advantages in optoelectronics, such as nonlinear optical (NLO) properties, have hardly been explored. NLO materials are those that show a polarization density response in a nonlinear fashion to the electric field of light.51 NLO materials with the capability to operate between two or more states can act as switches. An important aspect in such materials is the switching contrast, which is the ratio of second harmonic generation (SHG) intensities of the high-NLO and low-NLO states.28 Solid-state NLO switches with large-contrast NLO activity (or SHG) are very attractive as NLO switches for technological applications.
Recently, Sun et al. conducted studies on a globular compound, 2-(hydroxymethyl)-2-nitro-1,3-propanediol (HNP).28 HNP forms a NLO active (SHG-ON) polar triclinic phase (P1) at r.t. The molecules are static with multiple O–H⋯O hydrogen bonds, except the NO2 group with elongated ellipsoids of O-atoms, indicative of possible rotation of this group perpendicular to its plane (Fig. 17a and b). At a high temperature of 345 K, it exists in a trigonal phase (R3) in which molecules rotate along its three fold C–N axis (Fig. 17c and d) due to the weakening of O–H⋯O hydrogen bonding interactions and the availability of multiple equivalent positions for the molecule around this axis (Fig. 17d).28 At 347 K, it further converts to a high symmetric plastic phase (bcc, centrosymmetric), which is NLO inactive (SHG-OFF). Due to the lower rotational barrier at high temperature, the phase transformation is fully reversible, allowing the excellent switching of NLO effects between the SHG-ON (ordered crystal) and SHG-OFF (PC) states (Fig. 17e).28
 Fig. 17  Molecular motions of HNP molecules and NLO effects in different solid forms. (a and b) The calculated potential energy barriers for the rotations of –NO2 and –CH2OH groups, respectively. (c) The entire molecular rotation and (d) rotation of molecules around the C–N bond axis in the plastic Phase I. (e) Switching of SHG signals between high-NLO (ON) and low-NLO (OFF) states with a change in temperature. (f) ON–OFF cycles show efficient reversible switching of NLO effects. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright, 2015 the American Chemical Society. 
The NLO contrast related to the SHG-ON/OFF switching from static to plastic phase of HNP was found to be exceptionally high with a value of ∼150 (Fig. 17e).28 This is much higher than those of many other well-known solids, such as metal–organic compounds, ferroelectric LC polymers, organic ionic salts, etc. (which go up to 20–40). Moreover, the SHG switching activity was highly reproducible over many cycles (Fig. 17f).28 This is attributed to the mechanical softness and the facile solid-to-solid transitions that occur in PCs via simple short-range orientational order-to-disorder changes without any need for significant changes to the long range order. This case reveals the potential of PCs for achieving excellent NLO switching properties. Further, the high plasticity in materials with other optical properties such as fluorescence, phosphorescence, and waveguide properties could also be explored in a systematic manner for evaluating the possible advantages of PC phases.39,52
7. Plastic crystals formed by giant species
It is commonly perceived that the PC phase is not formed by giant or large non-globular molecules or ions.1,2,12–18 The growing examples of diverse types of molecules/ions, particularly the giant species that form LCs, demonstrate the widening scope of the PC state.30,52–54 There are also many organic and metal coordination complexes with amphidynamic natures, where not all the species show a dynamic behaviour.55,56
7.1 Liquid crystal connection of PCs
There are a wide range of important liquid crystalline materials with attractive optoelectronic properties, some of which are already in use in current technologies.54 Although the molecules or ions of LCs are far more diverse and deviate from globularity (Fig. 18), many LCs have been shown to go through a PC phase before adopting a well ordered crystalline phase upon cooling.30 The majority of the PCs reported belong to the class of discotic LCs (Fig. 18a), typically formed by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.30,52–54 In this class of PCs, the disk-like core groups form ordered columns and the conformationally flexible alkyl side-chains form liquid-like regions. When the discotic LC phases transform to PC phases, columns provide long-range order (Fig. 18b), but rotational and conformational degrees of freedom within the columns remain common to both the phases.29,30,52–54 The discotic LCs that form PC phases upon cooling (Fig. 18c[i–iii]) are termed “plastic columnar discotic phases” as the two states resemble in their columnar structure.54 There are also examples of PCs formed by calamitic LCs, involving rod-like molecules (Fig. 18c[iv]).30
 Fig. 18  PCs formed by LC molecules. (a) Ordered columnar structures formed by disc-like core groups. (b) Variable temperature powder XRD pattern showing the evolution of typical double diffraction peaks (at 18 nm−1) of the PC state (black curve) formed upon cooling the LC phase (red curve) to 30 °C. Inset: molecular structure (left) and 2D XRD of the PC phase (right). (c) Some representative molecular structures of disc-like LC molecules (i, ii, iii) and a rod-like LC molecule (iv). (a and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright, 2007 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, Copyright, 2018 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 
Although several reports of PCs exist in the LC literature, there are hardly any systematic studies on the detailed characterization of the nature or solid-state structure of the PC phases. Hence, this class of examples remains poorly understood. The strong orientational preference of molecules or ions that form LCs, owing to their cylindrical (nematic LCs) or disk-like (discotic LCs) shapes, may limit the number of available degrees of freedom, hence isotropic rotations by the constituents are difficult to achieve in such large systems. The huge library of LC molecular species provides an opportunity for discovering or designing new PCs with attractive electronic and optical properties that have been traditionally explored in LCs. The non-globular shape of these PCs suggests that a variety of shapes and sizes of molecules can be used for designing PCs by undertaking systematic studies. Moreover, despite the large molecular size, a large number of LCs have low Tm values and form PCs near r.t. Hence, these systems can be repurposed or appropriately functionalized for exploration in ferroelectric, piezoelectric or barocaloric applications. It should be noted that in LCs, the side chains are placed such that the close packing is prevented. The key here is the selection of groups that impart both the order and disorder characteristics and the function.
7.2 Coordination complexes
In coordination complexes, although the metal–ligand units are typically large in size, the counter ions often belong to high symmetry globular species with potential to show a dynamic nature, allowing unique applications. In such amphidynamic crystals, the counter anion displacement has been shown to play a crucial role in stabilizing the charge disproportionation state and thus facilitating the efficiency of the memristive and memcapacitive switching devices, which advocates the scope for systematic investigation of rotator mobile phases in the design of efficient and flexible memory devices.56
7.3 Plastic colloidal crystals
While all the other examples discussed so far belong to molecular crystals, colloidal crystals, formed by micrometer size rod-like particles, have also been shown to form the PC state.31 For instance, anisotropic rod-like charged silica particles stabilized under certain specific conditions, pack with long range order, but show orientational disorder, much like the PCs of molecular materials.31 These particles, under an electric field, align in one particular direction to produce a completely ordered colloidal crystalline state, switching from a PC to a fully ordered 3D crystalline state, in a reversible manner. The order–disorder transition mimics the phase transitions in PCs, allowing the switching of properties. These examples, which demonstrate the generality of the PC state and cover different length scales, have attracted much attention in recent times for photonic applications.
8 Conclusions
This tutorial review presents recent advancements in the fundamental understanding of the factors that play a crucial role in the formation of plastic crystalline phases by molecules or ions and their wide ranging applications, including electronics, optics, magnetics, barocalorics and other flexible devices. The unique advantages of PCs mostly arise out of their facile order–disorder phase transformations and exceptional mechanical adaptability owing to their loosely packed crystals. Although molecules or ions with a globular nature and dispersive surfaces are favourites for forming PC phases, the diverse examples known in the literature demonstrate that species with cylindrical, bent, and disk-like shapes, including those with hetero-atoms (polar bonds) and giant sizes, can form PC phases. The key for achieving a PC phase in materials is the availability of a large number of orientations and/or conformations for molecules/ions, separated by low energy barriers in crystalline phases. While the recent examples with giant aromatic species and complex geometrical and chemical natures expand the scope of PCs beyond their original scope, many design principles developed in the fairly advanced amphidynamic crystals involving molecular machines might be of great help for crystal engineering of PCs with unprecedented properties. For instance, one may design hierarchically dynamic crystals to selectively access amphidynamic or fully dynamic natures under different conditions by carefully developing the design principles obtained from amphidynamic materials and crystal engineering. Exploration of a vast library of highly symmetrical globular molecular systems such as calixarenes, molecular cages, and zero-dimensional organometallic complexes, with dispersive surfaces could provide new classes of PCs with technologically relevant properties. One may also explore multicomponent crystals (e.g., cocrystals or host guest crystals), where one or more species show reorientational motions.
Due to their unique properties, PCs may offer several unexplored applications. For example, PCs with the ability to extrude through narrow holes under pressure could be potential candidates for use in 3D printing technologies. The mechanical compatibility of PCs makes them attractive for various types of flexible devices used in light-harvesting, electronics and crystalline soft-adaptronics. The facile and highly reversible phase transitions could be used in mechanochromic applications, sensing, actuation, energy harvesting, etc. To fully realize the potential of PCs, it is important to develop clear design principles by systematically studying the role of molecular shape, size, conformation and symmetry, intermolecular interactions and crystal packing using a crystal engineering approach, for example. Further understanding of the origins of dynamic disorder, energetics and mechanical properties (for example, using the quantitative nanoindentation technique) in complex crystal structures could help to establish a structure–property correlation in PCs, for moving from the currently employed trial-and-error based approaches to a knowledge driven design of novel PCs with unprecedented efficiencies.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
CMR thanks DST, New Delhi for the Swarnajayanti Fellowship (DST/SJF/CSA-02/2014-15) and SERB funding (No: EMR/2017/005008). SD thanks CSIR India (CSIR-SRF, File No. 09/921(0162)/2017-EMR-I) and AM thanks IISER Kolkata (IISER-K/OO/PhD/2019-20/289) for funding and support.
References
J. Timmermans, Plastic crystals: A historical review, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1961, 18, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .

          J. N. Sherwood, The Plastically Crystalline State: Orientationally Disordered Crystals, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, New York,  1979 Search PubMed .
A. Mondal, B. Bhattacharya, S. Das, S. Bhunia, R. Chowdhury, S. Dey and C. M. Reddy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2–12 CrossRef .
S. Saha, M. K. Mishra, C. M. Reddy and G. R. Desiraju, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 2957–2967 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
C. M. Reddy, G. R. Krishna and S. Ghosh, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 2296–2314 RSC  , and references therein.

          G. R. Desiraju, Crystal Engineering: The Design of Organic Solids, Elsevier, New York,  1989 Search PubMed .
P. Naumov, S. Chizhik, M. K. Panda, N. K. Nath and E. Boldyreva, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12440–12490 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.

          Molecular Machines, Topics in Current Chemistry, ed. T. R. Kelly,  2005,  DOI:10.1007/b105501 .
J. F. Scott, Science, 2007, 315, 954–957 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
S. Horiuchi and Y. Tokura, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 357–366 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
P.-P. Shi, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, W.-Q. Liao, Z.-X. Wang, Q. Ye and R.-G. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3811–3827 RSC  , and references therein.
D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 957–966 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
P.-J. Alarco, Y. A. Lebdeh, A. Abouimrane and M. Armand, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 476–481 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
L. Jin, K. M. Nairn, C. M. Forsyth, A. J. Seeber, D. R. MacFarlane, P. C. Howlett, M. Forsyth and J. M. Pringle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9688–9697 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
J. Luo, A. H. Jensen, N. R. Brooks, J. Sniekers, M. Knipper, D. Aili, Q. Li, B. Vanroy, M. Wubbenhorst, F. Yan, L. V. Meervelt, Z. Shao, J. Fang, Z.-H. Luo, D. E. De Vos, K. Binnemans and J. Fransaer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1276–1291 RSC  , and references therein.
A. Basile, M. Hilder, F. Makhlooghiazad, C. P. Gonzalo, D. R. MacFarlane, P. C. Howlett and M. Forsyth, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 170349 Search PubMed  , and references therein.
H. Zhu, D. R. MacFarlane, J. M. Pringle and M. Forsyth, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 126–140 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
J. Harada, T. Shimojo, H. Oyamaguchi, H. Hasegawa, Y. Takahashi, K. Satomi, Y. Suzuki, J. Kawamata and T. Inabe, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 946–952 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Tang, P. F. Li, W. Q. Liao, P. P. Shi, Y. M. You and R. G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8051–8059 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
J. Harada, Y. Kawamura, Y. Takahashi, Y. Uemura, T. Hasegawa, H. Taniguchi and K. Maruyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9349–9357 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, M. A. Hopkins, D. J. Liptrot, H. Khanbareh, P. Groen, X. Zhou, D. Zhang, Y. Bao, K. Zhou, C. R. Bowen and D. R. Carbery, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1–6 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, X.-J. Song, Z.-X. Zhang, D.-W. Fu and R.-G. Xiong, Matter, 2020, 2, 697–710 CrossRef  , and references therein.
B. Li, Y. Kawakita, S. O. Kawamura, T. Sugahara, H. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, S. I. Kawaguchi, S. Kawaguchi, K. Ohara, K. Li, D. Yu, R. Mole, T. Hattori, T. Kikuchi, S.-I. Yano, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Ren, S. Lin, O. Sakata, K. Nakajima and Z. Zhang, Nature, 2019, 567, 506–510 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lloveras, A. Aznar, M. Barrio, P. Negrier, C. Popescu, A. Planes, L. Mañosa, E.-S. Taulats, A. Avramenko, N. D. Mathur, X. Moya and J.-L. Tamarit, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1803 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mochida, M. Ishida, T. Tominaga, K. Takahashi, T. Sakuraib and H. Ohta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 3019 RSC  , and references therein.
H. Kimata, T. Sakurai, H. Ohta and T. Mochida, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 1410–1415 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kimata and T. Mochida, J. Organomet. Chem., 2019, 895, 23–27 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
Z. Sun, T. Chen, X. Liu, M. Hong and J. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15660–15663 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
F. Simon and C. von Simson, Z. Phys., 1924, 21, 168 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laschat, A. Baro, N. Steinke, F. Giesselmann, C. Hagele, G. Scalia, R. Judele, E. Kapatsina, S. Sauer, A. Schreivogel and M. Tosoni, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4832–4887 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
B. Liu, T. H. Besseling, M. Hermes, A. F. Demirors, A. Imhof and A. van Blaaderen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3092 CrossRef .
D. A. Keen and A. L. Goodwin, Nature, 2015, 521, 303–309 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, P. Meakin, N. Amini and M. Forsyth, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2001, 13, 8257–8267 CrossRef CAS .
V. Armel, D. Velayutham, J. Sun, P. C. Howlett, M. Forsyth, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7640 RSC .
J. Harada, N. Yoneyama, S. Yokokura, Y. Takahashi, A. Miura, N. Kitamura and T. Inabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
M. Volel, P. J. Alarco, Y. Abu-Lebdeh and M. Armand, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 1027–1033 CrossRef CAS .
S. Varughese, M. S. R. N. Kiran, U. Ramamurty and G. R. Desiraju, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2701–2712 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
C. Wang and C. C. Sun, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 1149–1153 RSC .
M. Annadhasan, A. R. Agrawal, S. Bhunia, V. V. Pradeep, S. S. Zade, C. M. Reddy and R. Chandrasekar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 55, 2–9 Search PubMed .
M. K. Panda, S. Ghosh, N. Yasuda, T. Moriwaki, G. D. Mukherjee, C. M. Reddy and P. Naumov, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Krishna, R. Devarapalli, G. Lal and C. M. Reddy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13561–13567 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
S. Saha and G. R. Desiraju, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1975–1983 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, L. Xue, S. Xin, K. Park and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5541–5545 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Rana, P. M. Bayley, R. Vijayaraghavan, P. Howlett, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11291–11298 RSC .
T. Ueki and M. Watanabe, Macromolecules, 2008, 41(11), 3739–3749 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guerin, A. Stapleton, D. Chovan1, R. Mouras, M. Gleeson, C. McKeown, M. R. Noor, C. Silien, F. M. F. Rhen, A. L. Kholkin, N. Liu, T. Soulimane, S. A. M. Tofail and D. Thompson, Nat. Mater., 2017, 17, 180–186 CrossRef  , and references therein.
A. Aznar, P. Lloveras, M. Barrio, P. Negrier, A. Planes, L. Manosa, N. D. Mathur, X. Moya and J. L. Tamarit, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 639–647 RSC .
M.-H. Phana and S.-C. Yu, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2007, 308, 325–340 CrossRef .
Y. Funasako, T. Mochida, T. Inagaki, T. Sakurai, H. Ohta, K. Furukawa and T. Nakamura, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4475–4477 RSC .
M. Wang, L. He, S. Zorba and Y. Yin, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3966–3971 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Eaton, Science, 1991, 253, 281–287 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
W. Yuan, X.-K. Ren, M. Li, H. Guo, Y. Han, M. Wu, Q. Wang, M. Li and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6161–6165 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
B. Glüsen, W. Heitz, A. Kettner and J. H. Wendorff, Liq. Cryst., 1996, 20, 627–633 CrossRef  , and references therein.
X. Feng, J. Wu, M. Ai, W. Pisula, L. Zhi, J. P. Rabe and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3033–3036 CrossRef CAS .
S. Horike, D. Umeyama, M. Inukai, T. Itakura and S. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(18), 7612–7615 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goswami, S. P. Rath, D. Thompson, S. Hedström, M. Annamalai, R. Pramanick, R. Ilic, S. Sarkar, S. Hooda, C. A. Nijhuis, J. Martin, R. S. Williams, S. Goswami and T. Venkatesan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 380–389 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Susobhan Das
	Susobhan Das obtained his BSc (Chemistry) from the Department of Chemistry of Sitananda College, in 2013 and MSc from Vidyasagar University, Midnapore, West Bengal, India, in 2015. He is currently pursuing his PhD with Prof. C Malla Reddy at the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Kolkata in the domain of solid-state chemistry and smart materials. His current research efforts focus on the design, synthesis and structure–property correlation of mechanically flexible, soft and adaptable Functional Organic Materials, stimuli-responsive crystalline materials and especially Plastic Crystals by employing the knowledge of Crystal Engineering and their promising applications in various advanced emerging fields.

Amit Mondal
	Amit Mondal is an IPhD student at the Department of Chemical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Kolkata and is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. C. Malla Reddy. He was graduated with a BSc degree (Chemistry Hons.) from Syamsundar College at The University of Burdwan, West Bengal, India, in 2015. He is working on the structure–property correlation of organic functional materials with a Crystal Engineering approach for specifically designing highly flexible smart crystalline materials. Currently, he is exploring the diverse possibilities of Organic Plastic Crystal systems for use in real life applications (e.g., Adaptable Electronics, etc.).

C. Malla Reddy
	C. Malla Reddy (Kothamolgara, Telangana, India, 1975) is Professor at the Department of Chemical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Kolkata. His research group is engaged in establishing structure–mechanical property correlations in molecular crystals and crystal engineering of various functional materials. He has interests in the mechanical aspects of pharmaceutical solids and mechanically adaptable semiconductors, ferroelectrics, piezoelectrics and optical materials.

Key learning points
(1) Aspects of molecular size/shape, crystal structure and energetics of plastic crystals (PCs).
(2) Relationship of PCs with other states of matter, like liquids, liquid crystals, glassy crystals, amphidynamic crystals and ordered crystals.
(3) Exceptional mechanical adaptability, post-deformation long-range order, and facile reversible phase transformations in PCs.
(4) Emerging key applications of PCs in solid-state electrolytes, adaptable ferro-/piezo-/pyroelectrics, barocalorimetry, molecular optics/magnets, etc. and repurposing.
(5) Crystal Engineering approach for designing novel PCs with new properties, beyond their original scope.


 	Fig. 1  General overview of areas of prominence for plastic crystals.	 

 	Scheme 1  Diverse types of molecules and ionic species, well known in the literature on plastic crystalline materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  Continuum of discrete states of matter from solids to liquids. Liquids are isotropic with no internal order but have both translational and rotational degrees of freedom. LCs have orientational order but no long range order. PCs lack orientational order but have long range order. Regular ordered crystals have both short range and long range order. In the case of isotropic liquids, LCs, PCs and amphidynamic crystals, the light blue shaded background represents the average available space and the red arrows indicate the available degrees of freedom for molecules or ions or fragments (dark blue half/full-dumbbells) in the state. Chicken grid (in plastic crystals, glassy crystals and fully ordered crystals) represents the long range order (lattice). Note: the location of 3D rectangular boxes (containing the letters) represents their position on the plot.	 

 	Fig. 3  DSC thermogram of diethyl(methyl)(isobutyl)phosphonium hexafluorophosphate (inset: ORTEP diagram) showing the increasing degrees of freedom in different phases (IV to I) at different temperatures and the corresponding entropy changes. In Phase IV, only the methyl and ethyl groups of the positive ions rotate but PF6− tumbles; in Phase III, the entire cation rotates along an axis, and the anion tumbles; in Phase II, the whole cation and anion tumble, while the anion can also diffuse (translational freedom); in the higher temperature Phase I, both the ions attain full rotational motions and can diffuse. Here, the blue circle (average available space), black curved arrow (rotational motions), black straight arrow (translational motions) and red arrow (axis of rotation) show different motions of the molecules. Reproduced and modified with permission from ref. 14, Copyright, 2012 the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Correlation between reorientational freedom of molecules/ions (blue spheres) in crystals of the high temperature form (Phase I) and the range of entropy of fusion (ΔSf). Red arrows around blue spheres indicate isotropic reorientational motions of species. The PCs with fully reorientational motions for species (on left) show the lowest ΔSf while the OCs with all static species (on right) show the highest ΔSf values. Multicomponent (ionic or neutral) PCs where only one species undergoes reorientational motions and single component PCs with partial degrees of freedom for molecules (e.g., rotation around only one axis; not shown) show ΔSf values intermediate to the ideal PCs and OCs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structure–property correlation in ferroelectric ionic PCs. (a) Molecular structure of quinuclidinium perrhenate, QP (green arrow indicates dipole moment). (b) The ordered crystal structure in Phase III (300 K, orthorhombic, Pmm21). The pseudocubic unit cell area shown in green corresponds to the unit cells of Phase II and Phase I. (c) Crystal structure in Phase II (pseudo-rhombohedral, R3m). Limited rotational motions (anion – grey and cation – white arrows) and the spontaneous polarization (orange arrow) of the crystal along the polar three-fold axis are marked. (d) Structure of PC Phase I (cubic, Pmm) shown along with the isotropic rotator motions of anions (grey arrows) and cations (white arrows). (e) SEM images showing phase-dependent pressure-induced morphology changes of Phase III (brittle) and Phase I (plastic) crystals of QP. (a–e) Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 18, Copyright, 2016 the Springer Nature. (f) Free-standing transparent polycrystalline films of some ionic compounds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35, Copyright, 2018 the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Mechanical response of BH3NMe3 (a–e) and BH3NHMe2 (f and g). (a) Thinning and rolling; (b) spring and elongated spring; (c) fusion of ends of two crystals of BH3NMe3 by mechanical stress; (d) necking region of a crystal subjected to tensile stress; (e) twisting; (f) brittle fracture; and (g) 1D plastic bending on different faces of the BH3NHMe2 crystal, showing its extreme, face dependent anisotropic plasticity. Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 3, Copyright, 2020 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure–mechanical property correlation in aminoboranes. (a) Allowed molecular rotations in PCs of BR3NMe3; (b) columns formed by BH3NMe3 molecules along the B–N axis; (c) schematic representation of columnar three dimensional packing of BR3NMe3 PCs (white arrows – slip directions; black arrows – deformation direction); (d) crystal structure of BH3NMe3 viewed parallel to columns (dotted lines represent slip planes; red arrows show the direction of slip); (e) general mechanism of tensile elongation. (f) Packing of BH3NHMe2 viewed parallel to columns showing inter-column dihydrogen bonds and the lone facile slip plane. Reproduced and modified with permission from ref. 3, Copyright, 2020 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  SCXRD studies of mechanically deformed BH3NMe3 samples; (a) a piece of single crystal thinned over ∼500%; (b) uniform stretching of a single crystal by ∼20%; (c) compression of a crystal by ∼10%; (d) 2D and (e) 3D representation of diffraction patterns showing broad peaks (inset shows a mounted crystal, cut from a thin film made by mechanical compression); (f) 2D projection of reconstructed Ewald's sphere viewed along a* and (g) thermal ellipsoid plot (with 50% probability) of crystal structure solved from a sample made by mechanical action. Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 3, Copyright, 2020 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  Quantitative Nanoindentation data from single crystals of aminoboranes. Load (P)–displacement (h) curves of (a) BH3NMe3 and (b) BH3NHMe2. Notice the much softer nature of the former (PC) compared to the latter (Ordered Crystal). Reproduced with permission from ref. 3, Copyright, 2020 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  Ordered organic crystals with anisotropic plastic deformation. (a) Formation of slip planes by molecular units with hydrophobic groups in ordered crystals (left) and the bending mechanism showing the simultaneous slippage of bundles of layers anisotropically on a particular crystallographic plane. The packing is such that the plastic bending in other directions is not possible. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, Copyright, 2016 the American Chemical Society. (b) Plastic twisting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42, Copyright, 2017 the American Chemical Society. (c) Plastic shearing in crystals with flat layered structures with weak interlayer and strong intralyer interactions. Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 4, Copyright, 2018 the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Typical mechanisms of ionic conductivity in plastic electrolytes. (a) Schematic fuel cell, based on protic organic ionic PCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15, Copyright, 2015 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Ionic conduction via the revolving door (or paddle wheel) mechanism where the transport of ions (e.g., Li+, Na+, H+) occurs through a matrix of rotating ions, such as H2PO4− and SO42−.Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 12, Copyright, 2001 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and ref. 44, the PCCP Owner Societies, Copyright 2010. (c) Grotthuss proton transport mechanism via diffusion and an example of rearrangement of the hydrogen bonds. Reproduced and partially modified with permission from ref. 44, the PCCP Owner Societies, Copyright 2010 and ref. 45, Copyright 2008 the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Crystal structures of [Hdabco]ReO4 in ferroelectric phases. (a) Monoclinic Cm (Phase III; 200-377 K) and (c) Tetragonal P4mm (Phase II; 377-499 K). (b and d) The 24 and 6 equivalent polarization directions available in the two ferroelectric phases III and II, respectively. High temperature Phase I adopts the paraelectric cubic Pmm structure (not shown). Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, Copyright, 2018 the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Structure–property correlation in ferroelectric ionic PCs and polarization enhancement under an external electric field. (a) Temperature dependent polarization vs. electric field (P–E) hysteresis loops (curves) of quinuclidinium perrhenate (QP) for Phase III (at 340 K), Phase II (345 to 367 K) and Phase I (368 K). (b) P–E loops measured at 365 K on a Phase II pellet sample, as prepared without poling (black curve; initial state); heated to Phase I and cooled to Phase II under poling (Red curve; field-cooled state), and in the absence of poling (Green: annealed state). (c) The high temperature plastic Phase I with randomly distributed polarization axes in grains in its polycrystalline pellets (middle panel) and its transformation to the ferroelectric Phase II by cooling in the absence of poling (upper panel), and in the presence of poling (lower panel). (a–c) Reproduced and modified with permission from ref. 18, Copyright, 2016 the Springer Nature (d) The crystal structure of [NMe4][FeCl4] with 50% thermal ellipsoid probability and direction of the spontaneous polarization (red arrow) in the ferroelectric Phase IV, and the (e) temperature dependent P–E loops measured from polycrystalline films of Phases III and IV. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 35, Copyright, 2018 the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Measurements of piezoelectric and pyroelectric properties. (a) Spontaneous polarization and the pyroelectric coefficient response to temperature change determined by using a polycrystalline pellet of [AH][ReO4]. The gradual decrease in the spontaneous polarization (black curve) with increasing temperature is due to the progressive increase of orientational disorder of the polar [AH]+ cations, which cancels the dipole moments of the polar molecules in the crystals. (b) Comparison of the pyroelectric voltage figure of merit (Fv) values of [AH][ReO4] and other representative pyroelectric materials (inset shows the polycrystalline films of [AH][ReO4]). (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 20, Copyright, 2019 the American Chemical Society (c) Charging curve of the 4.2 μF capacitor using the pyroelectric borane BH3NMe3 from devices made using flexible films (insets); (d) Pyroelectric and piezoelectric coefficient values of BH3NMe3 films at different operational frequencies. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 21, Copyright, 2020 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 15  Comparison of various classes of caloric crystals explored for next-generation solid-state refrigeration technologies. (a) Molecular structures; molecular dynamics simulations show the structure of NPG at 340 K under (b) ambient pressure and (c) 200 MPa (c). Follow the oxygen atoms (red balls) to notice their random arrangements in (b) as compared to the suppressed disorder in (c) under pressure; (d) fusion enthalpy and solid-state transition enthalpy for ordered regular solids (orange shading) and PCs (blue shading): NPG, PG, AMP, PE (Pentaerythritol), TRIS [tris-(hydroxymethyl aminomethane)], and MNP (2-methyl-2-nitro-1-propanol), NMP (2-nitro-2-methyl-1,3-propanediol); (e) compressibility of ordered regular solids and PCs. (f) Absolute values of maximum entropy change, |ΔSmax|, for leading caloric materials. PVDF-TrFE refers to poly(vinylidene fluorideco-trifluoroethylene). Reproduced with permission from ref. 23, Copyright, 2019 the Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 16  Structure and properties of magnetic PCs. (a) The ordered-to-plastic phase transition temperature Tt in [Fe(C5Me5)2]X (X = the anions in the plot) vs. the volume of the anions. Tetrahedral anions (open circles) and octahedral and other anions (filled circles) are used for the fitting of the curve (grey line) by excluding Tf2N. Packing diagrams of a representative example of (b) the ordered phase of [Fe(C5Me5)2][CH2BrBF3] at 223 K, and (c) the disordered plastic phase of a closely related compound, [Fe(C5H5)2][CH2BrBF3], at 100 K (hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity). Notice that the methylated ferrocenium compound in (b) is static even at 223 K while the compound without a methyl group in (c) is dynamic at a much lower temperature (100 K) due to the lower energy barrier for rotational motion in H–Cp as compared to Me–Cp. (d) A plot of magnetic susceptibility (χT) and temperature of [1][FeCl4] and [1][GaCl4] (1 = Fe(C5Me4H)2) measured under 0.1 T. Insets: Enlarged views around the static-to-plastic phase Tt measured under 1 T show the hysteresis loop of change in χT. (a,d) Reproduced from ref. 25, with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies, Copyright 2018. (b,c) reproduced with permission from ref. 27, Copyright, 2019 the Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Molecular motions of HNP molecules and NLO effects in different solid forms. (a and b) The calculated potential energy barriers for the rotations of –NO2 and –CH2OH groups, respectively. (c) The entire molecular rotation and (d) rotation of molecules around the C–N bond axis in the plastic Phase I. (e) Switching of SHG signals between high-NLO (ON) and low-NLO (OFF) states with a change in temperature. (f) ON–OFF cycles show efficient reversible switching of NLO effects. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright, 2015 the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  PCs formed by LC molecules. (a) Ordered columnar structures formed by disc-like core groups. (b) Variable temperature powder XRD pattern showing the evolution of typical double diffraction peaks (at 18 nm−1) of the PC state (black curve) formed upon cooling the LC phase (red curve) to 30 °C. Inset: molecular structure (left) and 2D XRD of the PC phase (right). (c) Some representative molecular structures of disc-like LC molecules (i, ii, iii) and a rod-like LC molecule (iv). (a and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright, 2007 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, Copyright, 2018 the Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
