One dimensional nanostructure / nanoparticle composites as photoanodes for dye -sensitized solar cells  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR30347G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR30347G
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2826-2838Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOne dimensional nanostructure/nanoparticle composites as photoanodes for dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Prashant 
            Poudel
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Qiquan 
            Qiao
          
          
        
      *
      Center for Advanced Photovoltaics, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, South Dakota State University, Brookings, South Dakota, USA. E-mail: Qiquan.Qiao@sdstate.edu;  Fax: +1-605-688-4401;   Tel: +1-605-688-6965
Received 
      18th December 2011
    , Accepted 15th February 2012First published on 17th February 2012AbstractDye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) show potential as a low cost alternative to silicon solar cells. Power conversion efficiencies exceeding 12% have been achieved for DSCs. Typical DSCs are based on TiO2 nanoparticle photoanodes, which have numerous grain boundaries, surface defects and trap states as electrons transport from one particle to the other. Such defects and trap states increase back charge transfer (charge recombination) from the photoanode to electrolyte. One dimensional (1D) nanostructures such as nanofibers, nanorods, nanowires, and nanotubes can offer direct and fast electron transport to the electron collecting electrode. However, these 1D nanostructures have a major disadvantage of having insufficient surface area and inefficient dye attachment. To solve this challenge, mixtures of TiO2 nanoparticles and 1D nanostructures (e.g. nanofibers, nanorods, nanowires, and nanotubes) are used to take advantage of the large surface area of nanoparticles and efficient charge transport of 1D nanostructures. In this article, we review the recent developments in using mixtures of 1D nanostructures and nanoparticles as photoanodes for efficient DSCs. Various randomly oriented and vertically aligned 1D nanostructures and their composites with nanoparticles are discussed. Future increase of efficiency in DSCs using 1D nanostructure/nanoparticle composites will rely on the optimization of diameters of 1D nanostructures, control of ratios of 1D nanostructures and nanoparticles, increase of crystallinity, and reduction of surface defects on the 1D nanostructures. This work will provide guidance for designing and growing appropriate 1D nanostructures, and combining them with nanoparticles at an optimal ratio for efficient DSCs.Prashant PoudelPrashant Poudel received his Bachelor Degree in Electrical Engineering from Institute of Engineering, Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, Nepal. He is currently working on Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSCs) under the supervision of Dr Qiquan Qiao at South Dakota State University. His current research includes carbon-based nanostructures as counter electrodes for DSCs.Qiquan QiaoQiquan Qiao obtained his B.S. degree from Hefei University of Technology, M.S. degree from Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Ph.D. degree from Virginia Commonwealth University. In 2006, he joined the group of Prof. John Reynolds at University of Florida as a postdoctoral researcher. In 2007, he joined faculty at South Dakota State University where he established Organic Electronics Laboratory. His current research focuses on organic photovoltaics and dye-sensitized solar cells. He received 2009 Bergmann Memorial Research Award from US–Israel Binational Science Foundation, the 2010 Early Career (CAREER) Award from National Science Foundation, and 2012 Young Investigator Award from SDSU College of Engineering.
1. Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) show great potential as a cost effective alternative to Si solar cells due to their low material and fabrication cost.1–16 A normal DSC is composed of a photoanode and a counter electrode. A liquid electrolyte is filled into the space between the two electrodes.12,17 The photoanode is sensitized by a Ru-dye, porphyrin, organic dye, or inorganic quantum dot, which serves as a light harvester. After light illumination, the sensitizer injects electrons into the photoanode. The sensitizer will be reduced by taking electrons from the electrolyte. Recently the efficiency of DSCs has been increased to ∼12.3% under simulated AM 1.5 global sunlight.18 This new world record efficiency was achieved using a donor–π-bridge–acceptor zinc porphyrin (YD2-o-C8) to replace the commonly used Ru-based dyes as sensitizer and using the Co(II/III)tris(bipyridyl)-based redox to replace the conventional iodide/triiodide redox as electrolyte. The new YD2-o-C8 porphyrin can absorb broader spectrum light across the visible solar spectrum, leading to a larger photocurrent generation than typical Ru-dyes, while the Co(II/III)tris(bipyridyl)-based redox combined with YD2-o-C8 porphyrin significantly reduces the interfacial back electron transfer rate from TiO2 to the oxidized cobalt mediator, which leads to a strikingly high open circuit voltage (Voc) close to 1 V.
Although nanoparticle photoanodes exhibit high surface area for sufficient dye loading, structural disorders and trap defects at the contacts between nanoparticles lead to scattering of free electrons with reduced carrier mobility.19–22 Enhanced electron transport was reported in various one dimensional (1D) nanostructures.23–29 Specific 1D nanostructures, such as TiO2 nanofibers,30,31 TiO2 nanorods32 and nanowires,33–35 TiO2 nanotubes,24,26,36–39 1D hierarchical titanate,40 ZnO nanofibers,41 ZnO nanowires/nanorods,42–49 ZnO nanotubes,24,50,51 and carbon nanofibers coated with TiO2,52 have been extensively used as an alternative to TiO2 nanoparticles to increase electron transport in the photoanode. Some of the 1D nanostructures are doped. For example, TiO2 nanofibers prepared by electrospinning were doped by silver nanoparticles and then used as a photoanode for DSCs;53 ZnO nanofibers prepared by electrospinning and ZnO nanorod arrays synthesized by a simple hydrothermal method were Al-doped for applications in DSCs.41,46 Titanium-decorated ZnO nanowires were also used as a photoanode in DSCs.54 However, the photoanode made of 1D nanostructure alone has constraints such as insufficient surface area and inefficient attachment of dye molecules. Another challenge is poor harvesting of solar light with wavelength longer than 600 nm due to the transmission of incident light through the nano-porous TiO2 photoanode.5 Also some 1D nanostructures including nanofibers or nanorods were used as a separate light scattering layer that was deposited on the TiO2 nanoparticle electrode to increase light absorption. To solve some of the above challenges, mixtures of TiO2 nanoparticles and 1D nanostructures (e.g. nanowires,55,56 nanofibers,22,57,58 nanorods,8,59 and nanofibers60) have been used to take advantage of both the large surface area of nanoparticles and efficient charge transport of 1D nanostructures. The incorporation of 1D nanostructures into nanoparticle films has an impact on the surface area, light absorption (light scattering), charge transport, and porosity.56 An additional advantage of using 1D nanostructure/nanoparticle composites is improved light harvesting caused by light scattering. In addition to the widely used TiO2 and ZnO photoanodes, other metal oxides such as Nb2O5,61,62 Nb5+ doped TiO2,63 SnO2,64,65 SrTiO3,66,67 and Zn2SnO468,69 were also used as photoanodes in DSCs.
In this article, we review the recent developments in using mixtures of 1D nanostructures and nanoparticles as photoanodes for efficient DSCs. Various randomly oriented and vertically aligned 1D nanostructures and their composites with nanoparticles are discussed. First, we discuss light harvesting improvement via scattering caused by the incorporation of 1D nanostructures into nanoparticles. Second, we describe the improvement in charge transport caused by the embedment of 1D nanostructures into nanoparticles. Third, we discuss the enlarged surface area by the incorporation of TiO2 nanoparticles into vertically aligned 1D nanostructures.
2. Incorporation of 1D nanostructures into nanoparticles for improved light harvesting via light scattering
Rayleigh scattering and Mie scattering are two main types of elastic light scattering that involves negligible energy transfer.
Raleigh scattering occurs when the particle size is <10% of the wavelength of incident light. This scattering depends strongly on the particle size and incident light wavelength, in which the scattered light intensity increases as the ratio of particle size to incident light wavelength gets larger. Another characteristic of Raleigh scattering is that it has identical scattered radiation in the forward and reverse directions. When the particle size is larger than 10% of the incident light wavelength, the Mie scattering model is used to describe the intensity of scattered radiation. Mie scattering is roughly independent of wavelength and it is larger in the forward direction than in the reverse direction. The greater the particle size, the higher the intensity of scattered light in the forward direction. Both large spherical particles and 1D nanostructures can be used to make scattering layers on top of the conventional TiO2 nanoparticle electrodes. Ito et al. used TiO2 powder with an average size of ∼160 nm as a second layer that functioned as a light scattering layer.70 Koo et al. reported that large TiO2 spherical particles with diameters in the range of 1–3 μm used as a scattering layer can increase light harvesting for higher performance in DSCs.71 They also studied the particle size effects in the light scattering layer on DSC performance.72
1D nanostructures have also been used as a separate light scattering layer on top of a nanoparticle electrode to improve light harvesting.73–76 Chuangchote et al. used electrospun TiO2 nanofibers with an average diameter of 250 nm as a separate light scattering layer that was directly deposited onto a thick nanoparticle electrode by electrospinning and sol–gel techniques.73 The formed anatase TiO2 nanofibers showed high crystallinity and an average diameter of ∼250 nm. DSC devices using N719 dye and the bilayer nanoparticle/nanofiber electrode achieved an incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of 85% at the wavelength of 540 nm and a power conversion efficiency of 10.3% for a cell area of 0.052 cm2 under 1.5 AM illumination with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Zhu et al. compared DSC performance using rice grain-like TiO2 and nanofiber-shaped TiO2 nanostructures as an effective scattering layer on the nanoparticle electrode.74 The rice grain-like nanostructured scattering layer exhibited a 15.7% increase in efficiency, which is higher than that of the nanofiber scattering layer that showed 9.63% improvement. Yang and Leung reported a triple layer photoanode consisting of a first layer of TiO2 nanoparticles, a second layer of smaller-diameter electrospun nanofibers, and a third layer of bigger-diameter electrospun nanofibers.75 The smaller-diameter nanofiber layer that has a large surface area is used to attach dye to absorb light and transport electrons, while the bigger-diameter nanofiber layer can scatter and trap light to further increase light harvesting.
In addition to the above-discussed separated scattering layer, 1D nanostructures can also be incorporated into TiO2 nanoparticle films to increase light absorption due to light scattering. An additional advantage of blending 1D nanostructures with TiO2 nanoparticles also includes improved charge transport.56 Tan and Wu used a TiO2 nanowire/nanoparticle composite to fabricate dye sensitized solar cells with improved light harvesting due to light scattering.56 They also found that light harvesting enhancement depended on the concentration of the nanowires in the composite.
1D nanostructures can be randomly embedded and distributed in a nanocrystalline TiO2 nanoparticle matrix with respect to the direction of incident light. The composite of 1D nanostructures and nanocrystalline TiO2 nanoparticles can attach dye molecules and are filled with electrolyte as well. Depending on the size/diameters, 1D nanostructures can also effectively scatter the incident light, resulting in enhancement of light harvesting. Joshi et al. studied the diameter effects of 1D nanostructures on light scattering.57 In order to develop a simplified model of light scattering, the following assumptions were made: (1) 1D nanostructures have a finite cylindrical shape without considering effects from their attached dyes and surrounding electrolyte, and (2) incident light shines normally on the cylinder with respect to its axis (Fig. 1). Scattered light intensity at an arbitrary point surrounding the cylinder due to a non-absorbing circular cylinder with a finite size can be calculated using eqn (1) if Rayleigh–Gans approximations are valid, i.e. (1) |m − 1| ≪ 1, where m is the refractive index of the cylinder with respect to its surrounding medium and (2) |m − 1| ≪ 1/(2ka), where a is the radius of the cylinder, k = 2π/λ, and λ is the wavelength of incident light:9 (1)where I0 is the light intensity, λ is the wavelength, r is the distance from an investigated point to the illuminated spot on the nanofiber, m is the 1D nanostructure refractive index, a is the 1D nanostructure radius, J1 is the Bessel function, and θ is the angle between incident light and the direction of “r”.57
 Fig. 1  Simplified diagram of a nanofiber. 
Using eqn (1) and presuming the first term as an arbitrary constant at λ = 570 nm, the scattered light distribution versus θ at different 1D nanostructure diameters was obtained and is shown in Fig. 2. It is mainly the forward scattering that increases as 1D nanostructure diameters get larger. However backward scattering is insignificant with little dependence on the 1D nanostructure diameters. When the 1D nanostructure diameters are <200 nm, light scattering was weak and is shown as a small black circle in Fig. 2. However when these diameters are larger than 200 nm, light scattering became much stronger.57
 Fig. 2  The calculated correlation between the intensity of light scattering and the diameter of 1D nanostructure: 200 nm (black), 250 nm (blue), and 300 nm (red). The length of arrows represents the intensity of scattered light. Incident light penetrates from the left side and is scattered to the right.57 
2.1 TiO2 nanofibers
Joshi et al. incorporated TiO2 nanofibers into a TiO2 nanoparticle film to make a composite photoanode to improve both light harvesting by scattering and charge transport with 1D nanostructures.57 This section will only discuss the improved light harvesting by scattering while the enhanced electron transport will be discussed in the next section. The above results provided a guide in optimizing TiO2 nanofiber diameters in the nanofiber/nanoparticle composites for higher DSC efficiency. Fig. 3 shows that the transmission spectrum in 300–800 nm for a composite containing 15% nanofibers was lower than the TiO2 nanoparticle-only photoanode, suggesting an improvement in light scattering. The thickness is ∼7.5 μm for both the composite and the pure nanoparticle photoanode. The low transmission in the composite in Fig. 3 suggested that ∼7.5 μm is effective to absorb not only short visible (400–600 nm) light, but also long wavelength (600–800 nm) light. Light absorption becomes smaller as the wavelength (e.g. infrared regions) becomes longer in typical Ru-based dyes, leading to a larger light penetration depth (δ).10 To harvest sufficient light in long wavelength regions, the light penetration depth in these regions should be used as the photoanode thickness. The small percentage (<2%) of light transmission in the 600–800 nm region suggested that 7.5 μm was an effective thickness for efficient light harvesting.
 Fig. 3  Comparison of transmission spectra of TiO2 nanoparticles alone (i.e., 0% fiber) with the TiO2 nanoparticle/nanofiber composite containing 15% fibers. Both films have a thickness of ∼7.5 μm.57 
To determine the amount of dye uptake, the dyes on the composite were fully desorbed using a mixture solution of 0.1 M NaOH and ethanol (1:1 ratio by volume). UV-vis absorption spectroscopy and the Beer–Lambert law were used to measure and calculate the concentration of desorbed dyes. Dye uptake in the 15% nanofiber composite decreased merely by 6.17% compared to the pure nanoparticle-based photoanode (Table 1). Fortunately, such a small decrease may be recovered by increased light harvesting due to light scattering. However as the nanofiber percentage increased to 50% or higher, dye uptake decreased by ∼30% or higher.
Table 1 Dye uptake vs. nanofiber percentage in the samples57




Nanofiber percentage (wt%)
(Dye/TiO2)/10−6 mol g−1
Reduction of dye uptake (wt%)




0
123.50
0


15
115.87
6.17


50
89.29
27.69


100
30.49
75.31




TiO2 nanofibers can also be doped by metals such as Ag to increase light harvesting due to the Ag nanoparticle induced plasmon enhanced optical absorption.53 Li et al. used Ag nanoparticle doped TiO2 nanofibers prepared by electrospinning as photoanodes for DSCs. The Ag-doped DSC devices achieved a significantly higher photocurrent density leading to a 25% improved efficiency compared to the undoped devices.
2.2 ZrO2 nanofibers
Park et al. prepared a composite photoanode composed of TiO2 nanoparticles and ZrO2 nanofibers by blending TiO2 nanoparticles (Degussa, P-90) with polyethylene glycol, acetyl acetone, water, Triton X-100, HNO3, and ZrO2 nanofibers in which the concentration of ZrO2 ranged from 0, 3, 5, 7, to 9 wt%.60Fig. 4 represents the UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of the composite photoanode made of 7% nanofibers. It shows that the absorption spectra were broadened to near infrared (NIR) regions with a higher absorption intensity. This indicated that photon absorption can be improved by adding ZrO2 nanofibers. According to an earlier report by Jing et al.,77 ZrO2 nanofibers with a diameter of ∼200 nm were synthesized by a sol–gel process, calcinations of the zirconium oxide/poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) composite nanofibers and the electrospinning technique. As discussed above, such diameters can induce Mie scattering and thus improve light harvesting.
 Fig. 4  Absorption spectra of N719 dye, TiO2 + N719 dye, and TiO2 + ZrO2 + N719 dye. The insets are AFM images of pure TiO2 nanoparticle and ZrO2 nanofiber imbedded TiO2 nanoparticle based dye-sensitized solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. 
2.3 ZnO nanowires
Tan and Wu studied the optical properties of the ZnO nanowire/TiO2 nanoparticle composite films with different concentrations of ZnO nanowires.56 At the same film thickness of ∼10 μm, the films became more opaque as higher concentrations of ZnO nanowires were added into the composite film. The pure TiO2 nanoparticle film (0% ZnO nanowires) was almost transparent. When 5% of ZnO nanowires were added, the composite film became opaque and partially transparent. When 20% ZnO nanowires were embedded, the film became very opaque and the background on the other side of the film could not be seen. As the ZnO nanowire concentration increased to 77%, the film became completely white. As shown in Fig. 5, the diameters of the bundles of ZnO nanowires are up to 200 nm or even higher; this can cause strong light scattering as discussed previously. Therefore, with more ZnO nanowires added, the films exhibited stronger light scattering due to the incorporation of ZnO nanowires, which caused the film to become more and more opaque.
 Fig. 5  Cross-sectional SEM images of films made from (a) pure TiO2 nanoparticles, (b) TiO2 nanoparticles incorporated with 5% ZnO nanowires, (c) TiO2 nanoparticles incorporated with 20% ZnO nanowires, and (d) TiO2 nanoparticles incorporated with 77% ZnO nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. 
It is important to keep a balance between 1D nanostructure (nanorods, nanowires, or nanotubes) diameter and dye uptake in the composite. Typically, a larger diameter reduces the surface area and decreases the dye uptake. The surface area of nanofibers with diameters at hundreds of nanometres is about an order of magnitude smaller than that of nanoparticles with sizes at tens of nanometres.57
Similarly, Tan and Wu studied the reduction of dye attachment in the composite of single crystalline TiO2 nanowires and TiO2 nanoparticles.56 The same trend was observed when increasing the concentration of nanowires in the composite. Compared to the TiO2 nanoparticle alone, the 20 wt% TiO2 nanowire composite only had a 14% lower dye loading; however, dye loading was significantly reduced by 67% when the concentration increased to 77%. Fig. 5 shows cross-sectional SEM images of the nanoparticle only and of the composite film with nanowire concentrations of 5%, 20% and 77% by weight, respectively. It was shown that, at a nanowire concentration of 20 wt% or less, the individual nanowires or their bundles were dispersed in the nanoparticle matrix without perturbing the TiO2 nanocrystal packing. However, when the concentration increased to 77 wt%, the nanowires and their bundles constituted the majority of the composite with little nanoparticle packing present. The large unfilled space shown in Fig. 5d could lead to a substantial reduction of surface area in the composite, thereby causing a much less amount of dye loading for the 77 wt% nanowire composite.
3. Incorporation of 1D nanostructures into nanoparticles for improved charge transport
Electron transport in 1D nanostructures (e.g. nanofibers, nanowires, nanorods and nanotubes) has been studied by various groups.26,59,78–80 Most results showed that such 1D nanostructures exhibited high electron diffusion coefficients and enhanced electron transport.23–28,81
3.1 TiO2 nanofibers/nanorods
Joshi et al. blended electrospun TiO2 nanofibers with conventional TiO2 nanoparticles as an innovative photoanode and substantially improved light harvesting without substantially sacrificing dye attachment (uptake).57 In a later study on the same composite, Wang et al. reported transient photocurrent and photovoltage studies on charge transport in the composite of electrospun TiO2 nanofibers and conventional TiO2 nanoparticles for DSCs.58 They found that charge transport parameters such as charge recombination lifetime, electron transport lifetime, and electron diffusion length were improved by adding TiO2 nanofibers into composite photoanodes. Fig. 6a shows the photovoltage decay (ΔV) and integrated photocurrent decay (ΔQ) for DSC devices using a nanofiber/nanoparticle composite photoanode containing 15 wt% nanofibers under 8 mW cm−2 bias light. By comparing Fig. 6b and c, it can be seen that the recombination lifetime (τe) was much longer than the transport time (τtrans). Therefore the photocurrent decay represented the electron transport and collection time. Both τe and τtrans depend on the illumination light intensity. As shown in Fig. 6b, τe increases as the light intensity decreases in DSCs with different TiO2 nanofiber concentrations of 0 wt%, 15 wt%, 50 wt%, and 100 wt%. Also Fig. 6b shows that τe of the nanofiber/nanoparticle composite photoanodes becomes closer to that of the nanofiber-only photoanode at high light intensity, but it turns out to be closer to that of the nanoparticle-only photoanode at low light intensity. This indicated that the recombination mechanism may be different at different light intensity after adding nanofibers into nanoparticles. Fig. 6b also shows that τe became longer with larger amount of nanofibers in the composite, suggesting that back charge transfer from TiO2 to the I3− ions was reduced with more nanofibers. This might be caused by fewer electron trapping states and/or less confinement of I3− on nanofibers.58Fig. 6c shows that τtrans becomes lower as more nanofibers were added into the composite, indicating that the photoanodes containing more nanofibers had higher charge transport efficiency.
 Fig. 6  (a) Example photocharge (ΔQ) and photovoltage (ΔV) transient for DSCs using a TiO2 nanofiber/nanoparticle composite with 15 wt% nanofibers under a 8 mW cm−2 white light bias. Red curves represent the fitting of their exponential decays. The inset is the photo of a DSC. (b) Charge recombination lifetime (τe) dependence of the bias light intensity. (c) Electron transport time (τtrans) dependence of the bias light intensity. These results were obtained by the exponential fitting of transient photocharge and photovoltage decays. (d) The dependence of electron diffusion length (Ln) calculated from τe, τtrans, and the photoanode thickness on the bias light intensity.58 Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. 
Electron diffusion length (Ln), an average distance electrons can travel before they recombine in the photoanode, can be determined by the recombination lifetime and transport time. Ln is calculated using the equation:22,23  where w and Dn are the photoanode thickness and effective diffusion coefficient, respectively. Fig. 6d shows that Ln depends on light intensity and the ratio of nanofibers in the photoanode. It can be seen that Ln increases with an increasing amount of nanofibers. Typically electron transport in the polycrystalline metal oxides depends on material crystallinity and trapping states between the crystallites/grains.58 As shown in Fig. 7a and b, the electrospun TiO2 nanofibers have highly crystalline grains with connection among grain boundaries and this may result in fewer trapping states.58
 Fig. 7  (a) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of a single electrospun TiO2 nanofiber and (b) scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of nanofibers embedded in nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. 
Electron transport efficiency of TiO2 nanofibers may be further improved by doping with Ag nanoparticles. Li et al. used Ag nanoparticle doped TiO2 nanofibers prepared by electrospinning as photoanodes for DSCs.53 They found that the Ag doped TiO2 nanofiber photoanode exhibited an improved electron collection efficiency as a result of faster electron transport than the undoped samples. In addition, post-treatment with TiCl4 was also conducted on the TiO2 nanofiber/nanoparticle composite to further improve electron transport. Kim et al. reported that the electron diffusion coefficient of the post-treated electrospun nanorods was ∼51% higher than that of the untreated ones, leading to ∼19% improvement of charge collection efficiency.78 Archana et al. found that the electron diffusion coefficient in the TiO2 nanowires, which were formed by sonication from electrospun nanofibers, was orders of magnitude larger than that of TiO2 nanoparticles.79 Saji and Pyo recently reported that the incorporation of 10% TiO2 nanorods in a nanoparticle matrix could lead to reduced charge transport resistance.59
3.2 ZrO2 nanofibers
The conductivities of the composite of ZrO2 nanofibers and TiO2 nanoparticles were measured by a four point probe system. The values of conductivities of the composite having different concentrations of ZrO2 are: pristine (1.42 × 10−9 S cm−1), 3 wt% doped (1.45 × 10−9 S cm−1), 5 wt% doped (1.55 × 10−9 S cm−1), 7 wt% doped (1.83 × 10−9 S cm−1), and 9 wt% doped (1.67 × 10−9 S cm−1). The composite with 7 wt% concentration of ZrO2 nanofibers exhibits the highest conductivity.60
3.3 ZnO nanorods/nanowires
Electron transport between pure TiO2 nanoparticle (NP) photoanode, pure single-crystalline ZnO nanowire (NW) array photoanode, and single-crystalline ZnO-NW array/NP composite photoanode was compared by Ku and Wu using impedance spectroscopy.82 Impedance spectroscopy is an effective tool to study electron transport and recombination at the photoanode (TiO2, ZnO, etc.).23,83 In the ZnO nanorod DSCs at forward bias, electrons are injected from FTO into ZnO nanorods, and then the ZnO nanorods are charged by electrons. Simultaneously, a portion of the injected electrons are lost by charge transfer from ZnO nanorods to I3− in the electrolyte. These processes can be illustrated by the transmission line model shown in Fig. 8a, which has been developed by Bisquert and others previously.23,81,83,84 If L is the ZnO nanorod length, the overall electron transport resistance, interfacial charge transfer resistance, and chemical capacitance in the ZnO nanorod/TiO2 nanoparticle film can be described as Rt (= rwL), Rct (= rk/L), and Cμ (= cμL), respectively.44Fig. 8b shows the Nyquist plots of DSC impedance spectra from mercurochrome-sensitized pure single crystalline ZnO NW (I), mercurochrome-sensitized ZnO NW array/NP composite (II), and N719-sensitized pure TiO2 NPs (III) based photoanodes. As shown in Table 2, the effective diffusion coefficient (Deff) of the ZnO NW/NP composite photoanode is larger than that of the pure TiO2 NP photoanode, but smaller than that of the pure single-crystalline ZnO NW array photoanode. The reason is that TiO2 NPs used either partially mixed or fully as pure NPs have surface defects and trap states that cause electron scattering as electrons transport across these NPs. Multiple trapping/detrapping events still exist at the grain boundaries of the imbedded TiO2 nanoparticles during electron transport in the ZnO NW array/NP composite photoanode. This is similar to the trapping/detrapping events that occur in the pure TiO2 nanoparticle photoanode that increase electron scattering and slow down electron transport.
 Fig. 8  (a) General transmission line model of DSCs. rw is the electron transport resistance in the photoanode, rk is the charge transfer resistance at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, cμ is the chemical capacitance in the photoanode, W1 is the impedance of redox species diffusion in the electrolyte, and R1 and CPt are the charge transfer resistance and capacitance at the Pt/electrolyte interface, respectively. Rs is the sheet resistance consisting of contributions from fluorine doped tin dioxide (FTO) and all resistances in the external circuit. (b) Nyquist plots of DSC impedance spectra from mercurochrome-sensitized pure single crystalline ZnO NW (I), mercurochrome-sensitized ZnO NW array/NP composite (II), and N719-sensitized pure TiO2 NPs (III) based photoanodes. The solid red curves are the fitting results. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. 
Table 2 Comparison of effective diffusion coefficients (Deff) between pure TiO2 nanoparticle (NP) photoanode, single crystalline ZnO NW array/NP composite photoanode, and pure single crystalline ZnO nanowire (NW) array photoanode




Photoanode type
Effective diffusion coefficient (Deff)/cm2 s−1




TiO2 nanoparticle alone
7.2 × 10−5


ZnO NW/NP composite
1.8 × 10−3


ZnO NW array alone
2.1 × 10−4




Al-doping of ZnO nanorods/nanowires may help to increase electron transport along themselves. Yun et al. reported that A13+ ion doped into the ZnO lattice at the divalent Zn2+ site can increase electrical conductivity and support electrons to transport more efficiently in the Al-doped ZnO conduction band.46
In addition, electrolyte composition was found to affect electron transport and recombination on ZnO nanorod based DSCs. Electrolyte effects on electron transport and recombination at ZnO nanorods were studied using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy by Xie et al.44 Various electrolyte compositions were prepared by gradual addition of tert-butylpyridine (TBP) and guanidinium thiocyanate (GuSCN), and replacement of LiI by butyl, methyl imidazolium iodide (BMII). The incorporation of TBP and GuSCN, and the use of BMII to replace LiI retarded charge recombination at the ZnO nanorods/electrolyte interface, elongated electron lifetime (τe), increased electron transport, and decreased collection time (τd) on ZnO nanorods. The electron diffusion coefficient (Dn) and effective diffusion length (Ln) were also improved. The DSC devices using different electrolytes were fabricated and tested; the improvement of open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and IPCE was in good agreement with the findings from the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy results.44
3.4 TiO2 nanotubes
Mor et al. used pure TiO2 nanotubes as photoanodes for DSC application.26Fig. 9a shows a field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) image of TiO2 nanotubes grown on a Ti thin film by anodization. Voltage-decay measurements were conducted to study electron lifetime under open circuit conditions. Under these conditions, the photo-carriers generated by AM 1.5 illumination will decay by recombination. Their decay rate depends on electron lifetime (τe) following the equation as below:  where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, e is the elementary charge, and dVoc/dt is the derivative of Voc transient. Two assumptions were set to use this equation: (1) recombination is related linearly to the first-order kinetic dependence on the concentration of electrons and (2) electrons in the photoanode only recombine with electrolyte (i.e. back charge transfer).26,85 The results shown in Fig. 9b indicate that the highly ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays, compared with the nanoparticle photoanode, exhibited superior electron lifetimes and more effective pathways for electron transport.
 Fig. 9  (a) Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) image of TiO2 nanotubes grown on Ti thin film by anodization and (b) photovoltage decay for DSCs based on TiO2 nanotube and nanoparticle photoanode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. 
Pan et al. used electrochemical impedance spectroscopy to study charge carrier transport and recombination processes in DSCs using TiO2 nanoparticle infiltrated nanotubes as photoanodes.80 They found that the electron lifetime (τe) in the nanoparticle infiltrated nanotubes decreased compared to the pure nanotube photoanode. Electron diffusion length (Ln) of the nanoparticle infiltrated nanotubes was much longer than the physical lengths of nanotubes. This suggested that electrons in the photoanode have a better chance to be collected by the FTO electrode. Table 3 lists reported electron transport properties of some typical 1D nanostructures.
Table 3 Reported electron diffusion coefficients (Dn) and electron mobility (μn) of some typical 1D nanostructures




1D nanostructures
Electron diffusion coefficient (Dn)/cm2 s−1
Electron mobility (μn)/cm2 V−1 s−1
Ref.
Notes




TiO2 nanoparticles
10−8 to 10−4
0.034–4

55,83

 


Bulk TiO2 single crystals
0.5
20

88

Anatase, n-type


TiO2 nanofibers
10−5 to 10−4
 

79,89

 


TiO2 nanowires
 
∼1
 
Rutile, single crystals


TiO2 nanorods
5 × 10−5
 

90

 


TiO2 nanotubes
5.6 × 10−5
 

39

 


ZnO nanoparticles
≤10−4
0.017–0.066

91

 


ZnO nanotubes
0.4
15–17

23

 


ZnO nanowires
0.05–0.5
1–5

91–93

Single crystals


ZnO nanorods
6.09 × 10−5
 

94

 




However there is some debate concerning the use of randomly oriented 1D nanostructures such as nanowires, nanofibers, or nanorods to replace TiO2 nanoparticles to improve charge transport. Wu et al. reported that the effective electron diffusion coefficient in DSCs based on the nanowire-only photoanode and nanoparticle/nanowire composite photoanode with the nanowires randomly (non-vertically) oriented in both cases was smaller than that in the TiO2 nanoparticle-only DSCs.86 Mukherjee et al. studied electron transport in TiO2 nanofibers made by electrospinning and they found that electron diffusion lengths of TiO2 nanofibers were comparable to those of TiO2 nanoparticles but with a lower electron lifetime, which was probably caused by a large number of surface defects.87 Tan and Wu also reported that the nanowire/nanoparticle composite based photoanode with a small proportion of nanowire (< 20 wt%) did not contribute to an enhanced electron transport because there were no nanowire networks formed.56
4. Incorporation of TiO2 nanoparticles into vertically aligned 1D nanostructures for larger surface area
When vertically aligned 1D nanostructures are used to replace TiO2 nanoparticles, their surface area is not large enough to attach sufficient dyes. Therefore, nanoparticles are filled into 1D nanostructures to increase surface area and dye attachement.80,82,95–97
4.1 Nanoparticles infiltration into ZnO nanowires or nanorods
Single-crystalline ZnO NW/ZnO NP composite electrodes were prepared by a simple wet-chemical method for applications in DSCs.82,98 Aligned ZnO NW arrays were synthesized on transparent conducting oxide (TCO) by aqueous chemical bath deposition (CBD). Then ZnO/Zn5(OH)8(CH3COO)2·2H2O [layered basic zinc acetate (LBZA)] nanoparticles were grown in the space between the ZnO NWs. Using the ZnO NW array/NP composite for DSCs, it was found that Jsc was increased due to a considerable enlarged surface area caused by the incorporation of ZnO NPs without sacrificing efficient electron transport of single-crystalline ZnO NWs. The electron density (n) in the ZnO NW/NP composite is larger than that in the ZnO NW array alone, which might be attributed to the larger surface area with more dye attachment and higher light harvesting.82 As discussed earlier, Deff in the ZnO NW/NP composite is lower than that in the ZnO NW array alone photoanode. However, the overall DSC efficiency using a ZnO NW/NP composite photoanode is much higher than the ZnO NW only devices. Therefore, such higher overall DSC performance is mainly caused by the larger Jsc and should be assigned to the larger area from the TiO2 NPs. It was also found that the NP occupying extent within the composite affects the DSC performance.98 An optimal ZnO NP growth period (i.e. NP occupying extent) needs to be found. Ku and Wu reported that at low NP occupying extent, for example in their reported case within an NP growth period shorter than 16 h, the surface area for dye attachment was increased substantially by forming more LBZA/ZnO NPs within the interstitial space in the ZnO NW arrays, leading to an increase in Jsc. However above 16 h, the ratio of the LBZA NPs was increased gradually in the composite and led to really large NPs as well as severe cracks that extended to the FTO substrate.98
ZnO NW/TiO2 NP composite photoanodes can also be prepared by the ultrasonic irradiation assisted dip-coating method reported by Gan et al.99 The ultrasonic irradiation was demonstrated as an effective method to enhance the infiltration of TiO2 NPs in the interstitial space between ZnO NWs. The ultrasonic irradiation assisted ZnO NW/TiO2 NP composite electrodes showed a deeper filling, leading to more dye attachment, stronger light absorption and higher overall conversion efficiency. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements also suggested that the composite photoanode could couple improved electron transport along ZnO NWs and enlarged surface area by filled TiO2 NPs, which were responsible for overall cell performance improvement. Yodyingyong et al. also reported a ZnO NW–NP array hybrid photoanode that improved DSC performance.97Fig. 10a shows an example SEM image representing the attachment of ZnO NPs onto the ZnO NW surface that can absorb more dyes. Fig. 10b illustrates possible electron transport pathways in the NW/NP composite, in which electrons on the NPs transfer to the ZnO NWs and then transport to FTO electrode via the ZnO NWs.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of ZnO NPs on the ZnO NW surface in the ZnO NW/ZnO NP composite photoanode (scale bars = 100 nm) and (b) the diagram showing possible electron pathways in the composite photoanode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. 
ZnO nanorod arrays filled with ZnO nanoparticles were also used as photoanodes for solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells with P3HT as the hole transport layer.96 The ZnO nanorod arrays serve as direct pathways for efficient electron transport, while the filled ZnO nanoparticles in the interstitial ZnO nanorod space provide a large surface area for dye attachment. The performance of devices based on ZnO nanorod arrays filled with nanoparticles has been significantly improved compared with that from the nanorod-only cells. Fig. 11 shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of nanorod arrays only photoanode (a), nanorod arrays partially filled with ZnO nanoparticles (b), nanorod arrays fully filled with ZnO nanoparticles (c), and nanoparticle only photoanode (d).
 Fig. 11  SEM images of (a) nanorod array only photoanode, (b) nanorod array partially filled with ZnO nanoparticles, (c) nanorod array fully filled with ZnO nanoparticles, and (d) nanoparticle only photoanode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. 
It was also reported that Al-doping in ZnO nanorods can change the morphology and dye loading amount. Yun et al. reported that Al-doped ZnO nanorod array based DSCs exhibited a much higher efficiency than undoped devices.46 The authors attributed the performance improvement upon Al-doping to two factors: (1) Al-doped ZnO nanorod arrays have a large surface area for sufficient dye attachment and (2) A13+ ions doped into the ZnO lattice at the divalent Zn2+ site can increase electrical conductivity and support electrons to transport easily in the Al-doped ZnO conduction band. Therefore, Al-doped ZnO nanorods may offer additional advantages when mixed with TiO2 nanoparticles to make composite photoanodes.
4.2 TiO2 nanoparticles infiltration into TiO2 nanotubes
As shown in Fig. 12, TiO2 nanoparticles were infiltrated into TiO2 nanotubes to combine the nanoparticles' large surface area for sufficient dye loading with nanotubes' high electron transport to increase the efficiency of DSCs.80,95 Alivov et al. used TiO2 nanotubes with three different diameters: 40 nm, 80 nm, and 160 nm. Different diameters led to different densities of nanotubes in the array, which provided different ratios of nanoparticles and nanotubes in the composite. The DSC efficiency was significantly increased at 17.4%, 55.6% and 131% for the devices with nanotube diameter at 40 nm, 80 nm, and 160 nm, respectively. The authors also used impedance spectroscopy to investigate the electron lifetime (τe), first-order reaction rate constant for electrons (κeff), electron diffusion length (Ln), and effective diffusion coefficient (Deff). It was found that τ and Deff of the nanotube/nanoparticle composite are smaller compared to their pure nanotube samples, which can be attributed to the TiO2 nanoparticles having a high recombination rate. Therefore, cell performance improvement in the nanotube/nanoparticle composite was mainly attributed to the large surface area for more dye attachment.
 Fig. 12  SEM images of pure TiO2 nanotubes at (a) 300 nm and (b) 100 nm; and SEM images of TiO2 nanotubes filled with TiO2 nanoparticles at (c) 300 nm and (d) 100 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. 
5. Device configuration
Traditional DSCs are based on the TiO2 nanoparticle-only photoanode. However, to achieve highly efficient DSCs, several technological challenges need to be overcome. One is the slow electron transport rate due to trapping defects and structural disorders at the surface contacts among adjacent nanoparticles that can lead to scattering of free electrons and reduction of carrier mobility.3 To improve electron mobility and electron transport rate, 1D nanostructures including TiO2 nanowires, nanorods, and nanotubes have been used to replace TiO2 nanoparticles.3,4 However, the surface area of 1D nanostructures appeared to be much smaller than the TiO2 nanoparticle only devices. This led to insufficient dye attachment. Then mixtures of 1D nanostructures and nanoparticles were used to take advantage of both high electron transport (from 1D nanostructures) and large surface area to attach enough dyes (from nanoparticles). An additional advantage is that the incorporation of 1D nanostructures into nanoparticles can also increase light absorption by light scattering. Typical device structures based on mixtures of 1D nanostructures and nanoparticles include random 1D nanostructures mixed with TiO2 nanoparticles57 and vertically aligned 1D nanostructures infiltrated with TiO2 nanoparticles.82,95Fig. 13a and b show representative device configuration of these two types of composites.
 Fig. 13  DSC devices based on the composite of a 1D nanostructure/nanoparticle from (a) random 1D nanostructure57 and (b) vertically aligned 1D nanostructure. 
High performance DSCs depend on both high electron transport and large surface area. However, high electron transport requires more amount of 1D nanostructures in the composite, which then leads to less amount of nanoparticles in the composite. The inefficient amount of nanoparticles causes insufficient dye attachment and light absorption. Thus a balance between electron transport and light absorption, in other words, a balance must be achieved between the amount of 1D nanostructures and nanoparticles. Various groups varied the ratios between 1D nanostructures and nanoparticles and achieved an optimal ratio for higher device efficiency.57,95
5.1 Randomly oriented 1D nanostructure/nanoparticle composite
The example device structure is shown in Fig. 13a. Joshi et al. used a mixture of TiO2 nanofibers and TiO2 nanoparticles and varied the ratio between their amount to increase DSC efficiency.57 The samples they prepared had different concentrations of TiO2 nanofibers: 0% (nanoparticle only), 15% nanofibers, 50% nanofibers and 100% (nanofiber only). Fig. 14 shows top view SEM images of the nanofiber/nanoparticle composite with different concentrations of nanofibers.
 Fig. 14  Top view SEM images of the composite with a nanofiber ratio of (a) 0 wt%; (b) 15 wt%; (c) 50 wt%; and (d) 100 wt%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. 

Fig. 15 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) curves with varied concentrations of TiO2 nanofibers in the composite. The DSCs made of 15 wt% nanofiber composite exhibited a Jsc of 16.8 mA cm−2 and efficiency (η) of 8.8%. However, the cells made of pure TiO2 nanoparticles showed a Jsc of 11.4 mA cm−2 and η of 6.1%. This indicated a significant increase in η. Also the DSCs based on pure TiO2 nanofibers gave a very low cell performance (Jsc = 5.7 mA cm−2 and η = 2.9) due to a significantly reduced dye loading.57 More recently, Hwang et al. also prepared TiO2 nanofibers from a mixture of titanium-tetra-isopropoxide and polyvinyl pyrrolidone using electrospinning.22 They then used TiO2 nanofibers as an additive into the TiO2 nanoparticle photoanode and increased DSC efficiency by up to 20% compared to that of the devices using a TiO2 nanoparticle only photoanode.
 Fig. 15  Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of DSCs based on nanofiber/nanoparticle composites containing different concentrations of nanofibers at 0 wt%, 15 wt%, and 100 wt%.57 
5.2 Vertically aligned 1D nanostructure infiltrated with nanoparticles
TiO2 or ZnO NPs were infiltrated into the interstitial space between the nanorods or both interstitial and inner space of nanotubes to increase the surface area for sufficient dye loading.80,82,95–97 The example device structure is shown in Fig. 13b. Pan et al. formed TiO2 NPs with a size of 10 nm into the TiO2 nanotubes by a hydrothermal method in which they immersed TiO2 nanotubes into an aqueous TiCl4 solution in an enclosed autoclave having a Teflon vessel.80 Dye loading in the TiO2 NP filled nanotubes was found to increase by more than twice compared to that in the pure TiO2 nanotube based photoanode. Three different lengths of nanotubes including 8, 13, and 20 μm were prepared and then infiltrated with TiO2 nanoparticles by the hydrothermal method. After filling with TiO2 nanoparticles, the DSC efficiencies were increased by 152%, 107% and 49% for 8, 13, and 20 μm long TiO2 nanotubes, respectively. The largest increase in DSC efficiency found in the shortest nanotube (8 μm) was attributed to the limited attachment of dye, which is the dominant limiting factor for low Jsc.80 As the nanotubes get longer, they themselves have larger surface area and can absorb more light; this is the reason that the efficiency improvement becomes less as the nanotube length increases. In addition, a ZnO nanowire array–nanoparticle (NW–NP) composite was also used as the photoanode for DSCs by Yodyingyong et al.97 The NPs induced enriched surface area for more dye loading and the NWs caused higher charge transport, which worked together to increase the overall DSC performance. The overall DSC efficiency was 4.2% for the ZnO NW–NP composite photoanode, which was much higher than 1.58% for ZnO NW only based DSCs and 1.31% for ZnO NP only based cells that are sensitized by N3 dye.
6. Summary and outlook
Currently, DSC devices with the highest efficiencies above 12% are still fabricated based on TiO2 nanoparticle only photoanodes.18 One obvious reason is that TiO2 nanoparticle photoanodes have a large surface area as well as exposed (1 0 1) planes that ideally chemisorb dyes.100 Although pure 1D nanostructures can probably increase electron transport, device performance improvement caused by increased electron transport cannot recover the reduction of final device efficiency due to their significant loss of surface area in the photoanode. To solve such a challenge, composites of nanoparticles and 1D nanostructures (e.g. nanowires, nanofibers, nanorods, and nanofibers) have been used to take advantage of the large surface area of nanoparticles and efficient charge transport of 1D nanostructures. Both randomly oriented and vertically aligned 1D nanostructures have been used to make a composite photoanode. In the randomly oriented 1D nanostructure/nanoparticle composite, the 1D nanostructure may need to form a network or percolation pathway for electron transport.56 Vertically aligned 1D nanostructures filled with nanoparticles are typically considered as an ideal structure for a photoanode. However, it is quite a challenge to fully fill nanoparticles into the interstitial space of 1D nanostructures because the nanoparticle size may be large and/or aggregate into large particles. If particle aggregation can be prevented, reducing the nanoparticle size can help to fill more nanoparticles into the 1D nanostructure pores. However, the smaller nanoparticle sizes typically increase grain boundaries and defect sites that may reduce the charge transport between the nanoparticles before they arrive at 1D nanostructures.100 One promising approach that can be used to fully fill nanoparticles into 1D nanostructure pores is to in situ grow nanoparticles in the pores.80,82,98
It is still in debate whether a 1D nanostructure/nanoparticle composite photoanode will reach a cell efficiency comparable to or higher than the world record efficiency from nanoparticle only devices. On the one hand, this is questionable because the world record efficiencies of DSCs, such as the recently reported 12.3% efficiency and previously reported 11%, were all achieved from the nanoparticles alone photoanode. However, on the other hand it is still very encouraging because it has been reported in many papers56,57,60 that 1D nanostructure/nanoparticle composite photoanode based cells have exhibited higher efficiencies than nanoparticle only devices in the specific comparison between these two photoanodes. As discussed in the previous sections, 1D nanostructure/nanoparticle composite electrodes have been reported to have advantages including enhanced photon harvesting by light scattering and improved charge transport caused by continuous charge pathways. Further increase in DSC efficiency will need to consider the diameters of 1D nanostructures, ratios of 1D nanostructures and nanoparticles in the composite, crystallinity and surface defects in 1D nanostructures. The increase of diameters of 1D nanostructures (e.g., nanorods, nanofibers, nanowires) can enhance Mie scattering that can increase photon absorption; the decrease of ratios between 1D nanostructures and nanoparticles can minimize the reduction of surface area in the composite for dye loading; and the coating of 1D nanostructures with insulating or wide-bandgap semiconductors such as HfO2 and Al2O3 can passivate the surface defects.101,102
DSC efficiency depends on Jsc, Voc, and FF by the equation as below:  Here Ps is the incident light intensity. Jsc is directly related to dye bandgap, dye absorption spectrum, and charge transport; while Voc is dependent on the energy difference between the quasi-Fermi levels of the photoanode materials and redox potential of the electrolyte. So low bandgap and wide absorption spectrum dyes, and efficient charge transport are needed to increase Jsc. Pushing the quasi-Fermi level of the photoanode materials closer to the dye LUMO but still having sufficient energy offset (e.g. 0.2–0.4 eV) for electron injection and moving the electrolyte redox potential closer to the dye HOMO but still having sufficient energy offset (e.g. 0.2–0.3 eV) for hole injection are intrinsically required to increase Voc.103 In addition, the back charge transfer from photoanode to electrolyte also needs to be suppressed to increase Voc and FF. Recently a new world record efficiency of ∼12.3% in DSCs under simulated AM 1.5 global sunlight has been achieved.18 This was accomplished by using a donor–π-bridge–acceptor zinc porphyrin to replace commonly used Ru-based dyes as sensitizer (YD2-o-C8) and using a Co(II/III)tris(bipyridyl)-based redox electrolyte to replace conventional iodide/triiodide redox. The new YD2-o-C8 porphyrin can absorb a broader spectrum of light across the visible region, leading to a larger photocurrent and Jsc generation than typical Ru-based dyes; while the Co(II/III)tris(bipyridyl)-based redox is more suitably matched with dye HOMO, resulting in a higher Voc. In addition, the combination of Co(II/III)tris(bipyridyl)-based redox and YD2-o-C8 porphyrin significantly suppressed the interfacial back electron transfer from TiO2 to the oxidized cobalt mediator, causing a further strikingly high Voc and FF. Based on these advantages of 1D nanostructure–nanoparticle composites, we believe such a composite photoanode has a great potential to further increase its efficiencies by combining with broad absorption spectrum porphyrins and Co(II/III)tris(bipyridyl)-based redox electrolyte that have recently achieved a world record efficiency of 12.3% in nanoparticle only DSCs.18
Acknowledgements
This study was partially supported by the NSF/EPSCoR program (grant no. 0903804) and by the State of South Dakota, the NSF-CAREER project (award no. ECCS-0950731), SD BoR CRGP, and the NASA EPSCoR program (grant no. NNX09AP67A). We also acknowledge Daren Daroux for drawing the 3D pictures shown in Fig. 13 and TOC.
Notes and references
F. Xu and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 818–841 CAS .
H. Q. Jiang, S. Sakurai and K. Kobayashi, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, F13–F16 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Wu, X. Lin, T. H. Wang, J. S. Qiu and T. L. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2308–2315 CAS .
X. Mei, S. J. Cho, B. Fan and J. Ouyang, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 395202 CrossRef .
P. Joshi, Y. Xie, M. Ropp, D. Galipeau, S. Bailey and Q. Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 426–429 CAS .
P. Atienzar, M. de Victoria-Rodriguez, O. Juanes, J. C. Rodriguez-Ubis, E. Brunet and H. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4718–4726 CAS .
W. B. Hou, P. Pavaskar, Z. W. Liu, J. Theiss, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4650–4655 CAS .
J. Y. Liao, B. X. Lei, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4079–4085 CAS .
N. Martsinovich and A. Troisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4473–4495 CAS .
M. F. Xu, D. F. Zhou, N. Cai, J. Y. Liu, R. Z. Li and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4735–4742 CAS .
P. Joshi, L. Zhang, Q. Chen, D. Galipeau, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3572–3577 CAS .
Y. Xie, P. Joshi, M. Ropp, D. Galipeau, L. F. Zhang, H. Fong, Y. J. You and Q. Q. Qiao, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2009, 13, 903–909 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu, X. Cai, X. Fan, Z. L. Wang and D. C. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3379–3383 CAS .
C. Jeffryes, J. Campbell, H. Y. Li, J. Jiao and G. Rorrer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3930–3941 CAS .
D. J. Lipomi and Z. A. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3314–3328 CAS .
J. Preat, A. Hagfeldt and E. A. Perpete, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4537–4549 CAS .
A. Listorti, C. Creager, P. Sommeling, J. Kroon, E. Palomares, A. Fornelli, B. Breen, P. R. F. Barnes, J. R. Durrant, C. Law and B. O'Regan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3494–3501 CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. Liu, M. J. Pellin, T. J. Marks and J. T. Hupp, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2862–2866 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, T. Xu, Y. Ito, U. Welp and W. K. Kwok, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20521–20526 CAS .
K. J. Hwang, J. W. Lee, J. Y. Park and S. I. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 1522–1524 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, M. S. Goes, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 4015–4021 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2183–2187 CrossRef CAS .
A. Belaidi, T. Dittrich, D. Kieven, J. Tornow, K. Schwarzburg and M. Lux-Steiner, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2008, 2, 172–174 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 215–218 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, K. W. Tan, G. Q. Lo, A. K. K. Kyaw and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 143101 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, M. Nagai, T.-C. Chang and J.-J. Shyue, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2467–2471 CAS .
S. H. Kang, S. H. Choi, M. S. Kang, J. Y. Kim, H. S. Kim, T. Hyeon and Y. E. Sung, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 54–58 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Song, D. K. Kim, K. J. Ihn, S. M. Jo and D. Y. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 1861 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, R. Zhu, L. Ke, X. Liu, B. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Small, 2010, 6, 2176–2182 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Huang, G. Zhou, L. Fang, L. P. Hu and Z. S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2145–2151 CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata, J. Takao, J. Jiu, M. Sakamoto and F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14943–14949 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781–3786 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vomiero, V. Galstyan, A. Braga, I. Concina, M. Brisotto, E. Bontempi and G. Sberveglieri, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3408–3413 CAS .
L. L. Li, Y. J. Chen, H. P. Wu, N. S. Wang and E. W. G. Diau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3420–3425 CAS .
L. D. Sun, S. Zhang, X. Wang, X. W. Sun, D. Y. Ong and A. K. K. Kyaw, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2240–2248 CAS .
J. R. Jennings, A. Ghicov, L. M. Peter, P. Schmuki and A. B. Walker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13364–13372 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 2003–2009 CAS .
S. N. Yun and S. Lim, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 273–279 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 789–795 CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, P. Joshi, S. B. Darling, Q. Chen, T. Zhang, D. Galipeau and Q. Qiao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17880–17888 CAS .
J.-J. Wu, G.-R. Chen, H.-H. Yang, C.-H. Ku and J.-Y. Lai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 213109 CrossRef .
S. Yun, J. Lee, J. Chung and S. Lim, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2010, 71, 1724–1731 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Guerin and T. Pauporte, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2971–2979 CAS .
J. S. Bendall, L. Etgar, S. C. Tan, N. Cai, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel and M. E. Welland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2903–2908 CAS .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 19–34 CAS .
J. Han, F. Fan, C. Xu, S. Lin, M. Wei, X. Duan and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 405203 CrossRef .
A. B. F. Martinson, T. W. Hamann, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4458–4467 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y.-T. Kuo, K. J. Klabunde, C. Rochford, J. Wu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1645–1649 CAS .
J. Li, X. Chen, N. Ai, J. Hao, Q. Chen, S. Strauf and Y. Shi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 514, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Kim, Y. C. Park, J. Lee, W. S. Shin, S.-J. Moon, J. Park and J. Kim, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 1548–1551 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wu, G. R. Chen, C. C. Lu, W. T. Wu and J. S. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 105702 CrossRef .
B. Tan and Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15932–15938 CrossRef CAS .
P. Joshi, L. Zhang, D. Davoux, Z. Zhu, D. Galipeau, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1507–1510 CAS .
X. Wang, S. Karanjit, L. Zhang, H. Fong, Q. Qiao and Z. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 082114 CrossRef .
V. S. Saji and M. Pyo, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 6542–6546 CrossRef CAS .
K.-h. Park, E.-m. Jin, H.-b. Gu, S.-d. Yoon, E.-m. Han and J.-j. Yun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 023302 CrossRef .
F. Lenzmann, J. Krueger, S. Burnside, K. Brooks, M. Grätzel, D. Gal, S. Rühle and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6347–6352 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guo and M. A. Aegerter, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 351, 290–294 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jose, V. Thavasi and S. Ramakrishna, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 289–301 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ramasamy and J. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22032–22037 CAS .
Z. Tebby, T. Uddin, Y. Nicolas, C.l. Olivier, T. Toupance, C. Labrugère and L. Hirsch, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1485–1491 CAS .
F. Lenzmann, J. Krueger, S. Burnside, K. Brooks, M. Gratzel, D. Gal, S. Ruhle and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6347–6352 CrossRef CAS .
S. Burnside, J.-E. Moser, K. Brooks, M. Grätzel and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 9328–9332 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tan, E. Toman, Y. Li and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4162–4163 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lana-Villarreal, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5549–5556 CAS .
S. Ito, P. Chen, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Liska, P. Pechy and M. Gratzel, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 603–612 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Koo, Y. J. Kim, Y. H. Lee, W. I. Lee, K. Kim and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Koo, J. Park, B. Yoo, K. Yoo, K. Kim and N.-G. Park, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 677–683 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chuangchote, T. Sagawa and S. Yoshikawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 033310 CrossRef .
P. Zhu, A. S. Nair, S. Yang, S. Peng and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12210–12212 RSC .
L. Yang and W. W.-F. Leung, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4559–4562 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujihara, A. Kumar, R. Jose, S. Ramakrishna and S. Uchida, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 365709 CrossRef .
N. Jing, M. Wang and J. Kameoka, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol., 2005, 18, 503–506 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Lee, M. Y. Song, S.-Y. Jang, S. M. Jo, S.-Y. Kwak and D. Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21453–21457 CAS .
P. S. Archana, R. Jose, C. Vijila and S. Ramakrishna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21538–21542 CAS .
X. A. Pan, C. H. Chen, K. Zhu and Z. Y. Fan, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 235402 CrossRef .
C. He, Z. Zheng, H. Tang, L. Zhao and F. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10322–10325 CAS .
C.-H. Ku and J.-J. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 093117 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Gratzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210–25221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and I. Mora-Seró, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13550–13559 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Wu, G.-R. Chen, C.-C. Lu, W.-T. Wu and J.-S. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 105702 CrossRef .
K. Mukherjee, T.-H. Teng, R. Jose and S. Ramakrishna, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 012101 CrossRef .
L. Forro, O. Chauvet, D. Emin, L. Zuppiroli, H. Berger and F. Levy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 633–635 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mukherjee, T. H. Teng, R. Jose and S. Ramakrishna, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 012101 CrossRef .
E. Y. Kim, W. I. Lee and C. M. Whang, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2011, 32, 2671–2676 CrossRef .
K. H. Yu and J. H. Chen, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, B. Jiang, R. Schaller, J. Wu and J. Jiao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11375–11380 CAS .
C. He, L. Zhao, Z. Zheng and F. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18730–18733 CAS .
Y. Alivov and Z. Y. Fan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 063504 CrossRef .
T. H. Lee, H. J. Sue and X. Cheng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 517 CrossRef .
S. Yodyingyong, Q. F. Zhang, K. Park, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Y. Zhou, D. Triampo and G. Z. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 073115 CrossRef .
C. H. Ku and J. J. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 505706 CrossRef .
X. Y. Gan, X. M. Li, X. D. Gao, F. W. Zhuge and W. D. Yu, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 4809–4812 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91–109 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shanmugam, M. F. Baroughi and D. Galipeau, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 2678–2682 CrossRef CAS .
T.-C. Tien, F.-M. Pan, L.-P. Wang, C.-H. Lee, Y.-L. Tung, S.-Y. Tsai, C. Lin, F.-Y. Tsai and S.-J. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 305201 CrossRef .
M. Gratzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 3–14 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Prashant Poudel	Prashant Poudel received his Bachelor Degree in Electrical Engineering from Institute of Engineering, Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, Nepal. He is currently working on Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSCs) under the supervision of Dr Qiquan Qiao at South Dakota State University. His current research includes carbon-based nanostructures as counter electrodes for DSCs.
Qiquan Qiao	Qiquan Qiao obtained his B.S. degree from Hefei University of Technology, M.S. degree from Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Ph.D. degree from Virginia Commonwealth University. In 2006, he joined the group of Prof. John Reynolds at University of Florida as a postdoctoral researcher. In 2007, he joined faculty at South Dakota State University where he established Organic Electronics Laboratory. His current research focuses on organic photovoltaics and dye-sensitized solar cells. He received 2009 Bergmann Memorial Research Award from US–Israel Binational Science Foundation, the 2010 Early Career (CAREER) Award from National Science Foundation, and 2012 Young Investigator Award from SDSU College of Engineering.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Simplified diagram of a nanofiber.	 

 	Fig. 2  The calculated correlation between the intensity of light scattering and the diameter of 1D nanostructure: 200 nm (black), 250 nm (blue), and 300 nm (red). The length of arrows represents the intensity of scattered light. Incident light penetrates from the left side and is scattered to the right.57	 

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of transmission spectra of TiO2 nanoparticles alone (i.e., 0% fiber) with the TiO2 nanoparticle/nanofiber composite containing 15% fibers. Both films have a thickness of ∼7.5 μm.57	 

0	123.50	0
15	115.87	6.17
50	89.29	27.69
100	30.49	75.31

 	Fig. 4  Absorption spectra of N719 dye, TiO2 + N719 dye, and TiO2 + ZrO2 + N719 dye. The insets are AFM images of pure TiO2 nanoparticle and ZrO2 nanofiber imbedded TiO2 nanoparticle based dye-sensitized solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60.	 

 	Fig. 5  Cross-sectional SEM images of films made from (a) pure TiO2 nanoparticles, (b) TiO2 nanoparticles incorporated with 5% ZnO nanowires, (c) TiO2 nanoparticles incorporated with 20% ZnO nanowires, and (d) TiO2 nanoparticles incorporated with 77% ZnO nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Example photocharge (ΔQ) and photovoltage (ΔV) transient for DSCs using a TiO2 nanofiber/nanoparticle composite with 15 wt% nanofibers under a 8 mW cm−2 white light bias. Red curves represent the fitting of their exponential decays. The inset is the photo of a DSC. (b) Charge recombination lifetime (τe) dependence of the bias light intensity. (c) Electron transport time (τtrans) dependence of the bias light intensity. These results were obtained by the exponential fitting of transient photocharge and photovoltage decays. (d) The dependence of electron diffusion length (Ln) calculated from τe, τtrans, and the photoanode thickness on the bias light intensity.58 Reproduced with permission from ref. 58.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of a single electrospun TiO2 nanofiber and (b) scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of nanofibers embedded in nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) General transmission line model of DSCs. rw is the electron transport resistance in the photoanode, rk is the charge transfer resistance at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, cμ is the chemical capacitance in the photoanode, W1 is the impedance of redox species diffusion in the electrolyte, and R1 and CPt are the charge transfer resistance and capacitance at the Pt/electrolyte interface, respectively. Rs is the sheet resistance consisting of contributions from fluorine doped tin dioxide (FTO) and all resistances in the external circuit. (b) Nyquist plots of DSC impedance spectra from mercurochrome-sensitized pure single crystalline ZnO NW (I), mercurochrome-sensitized ZnO NW array/NP composite (II), and N719-sensitized pure TiO2 NPs (III) based photoanodes. The solid red curves are the fitting results. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82.	 

TiO2 nanoparticle alone	7.2 × 10−5
ZnO NW/NP composite	1.8 × 10−3
ZnO NW array alone	2.1 × 10−4

 		 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) image of TiO2 nanotubes grown on Ti thin film by anodization and (b) photovoltage decay for DSCs based on TiO2 nanotube and nanoparticle photoanode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26.	 

TiO2 nanoparticles	10−8 to 10−4	0.034–4	
55,83
	 
Bulk TiO2 single crystals	0.5	20	
88
	Anatase, n-type
TiO2 nanofibers	10−5 to 10−4	 	
79,89
	 
TiO2 nanowires	 	∼1	 	Rutile, single crystals
TiO2 nanorods	5 × 10−5	 	
90
	 
TiO2 nanotubes	5.6 × 10−5	 	
39
	 
ZnO nanoparticles	≤10−4	0.017–0.066	
91
	 
ZnO nanotubes	0.4	15–17	
23
	 
ZnO nanowires	0.05–0.5	1–5	
91–93
	Single crystals
ZnO nanorods	6.09 × 10−5	 	
94
	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of ZnO NPs on the ZnO NW surface in the ZnO NW/ZnO NP composite photoanode (scale bars = 100 nm) and (b) the diagram showing possible electron pathways in the composite photoanode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97.	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM images of (a) nanorod array only photoanode, (b) nanorod array partially filled with ZnO nanoparticles, (c) nanorod array fully filled with ZnO nanoparticles, and (d) nanoparticle only photoanode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of pure TiO2 nanotubes at (a) 300 nm and (b) 100 nm; and SEM images of TiO2 nanotubes filled with TiO2 nanoparticles at (c) 300 nm and (d) 100 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95.	 

 	Fig. 13  DSC devices based on the composite of a 1D nanostructure/nanoparticle from (a) random 1D nanostructure57 and (b) vertically aligned 1D nanostructure.	 

 	Fig. 14  Top view SEM images of the composite with a nanofiber ratio of (a) 0 wt%; (b) 15 wt%; (c) 50 wt%; and (d) 100 wt%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57.	 

 	Fig. 15  Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of DSCs based on nanofiber/nanoparticle composites containing different concentrations of nanofibers at 0 wt%, 15 wt%, and 100 wt%.57	 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
