Stable hybrid organic/inorganic photocathodes for hydrogen evolution with amorphous WO 3 hole selective contacts   - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6FD00216A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00216A
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 433-448Stable hybrid organic/inorganic photocathodes for hydrogen evolution with amorphous WO3 hole selective contacts†

        
          
            Alessandro 
            Mezzetti
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Fumagalli
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Antonio 
            Alfano
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Daniele 
            Iadicicco
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Maria Rosa 
            Antognazza
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Fabio 
            di Fonzo
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Nano Science and Technology@PoliMi, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Pascoli 70/3, 20133 Milano, Italy. E-mail: fabio.difonzo@iit.it
bPolitecnico di Milano, Dipartimento di Fisica, P.zza L. da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy
cPolitecnico di Milano, Dipartimento di Chimica, Materiali e Ingegneria Chimica "Giulio Natta", Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133 Milano, Italy
dPolitecnico di Milano, Dipartimento di Energia, Via Ponzio 34/3, 20133 Milano, Italy
Received 
      10th October 2016
    , Accepted 20th October 2016First published on 20th October 2016AbstractPhotoelectrochemical H2 production through hybrid organic/inorganic interfaces exploits the capability of polymeric absorbers to drive photo-induced electron transfer to an electrocatalyst in a water environment. Photoelectrode architectures based on solution-processed organic semiconductors are now emerging as low-cost alternatives to crystalline inorganic semiconductors based on Si, oxides and III–V alloys. In this work, we demonstrate that the stability of a hybrid organic/inorganic photocathode, employing a P3HT:PCBM blend as photoactive material, can be considerably improved by introducing an electrochemically stable WO3 hole selective layer, paired with a TiO2 electron selective layer. This hybrid photoelectrode exhibits a photocurrent of 2.48 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE, +0.56 VRHE onset potential and a state-of the art operational activity of more than 10 hours. This work gives the perspective that photoelectrodes based on organic semiconductors, coupled with proper inorganic selective contacts, represent a sound new option for the efficient and durable photoelectrochemical conversion of solar energy into fuels.
Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) conversion of radiant energy from the Sun into useable and storable chemical fuels remains a great challenge that has been pursued by researchers for the last 40 years.1 Nevertheless, the quest for a technologically viable carbon-free energy cycle, coupling fuels derived directly from the sun with chemical-to-electrical energy conversion systems like fuel cells, is still unmet. Despite the theoretical simplicity of the physico-chemical mechanisms involved, even the production of the simplest solar fuel, H2, via H2O reduction at a semiconductor-liquid junction has been proven to be an extremely challenging problem, especially when material properties are concerned.2 To be technologically and economically viable, any developing PEC technology needs to respond to four main characteristics: sustainability, cost-effectiveness, stability and safety.3 Model studies4,5 recently investigated a solar-refinery scenario (plant-scale energy production systems based on renewable PEC chemical fuels synthesis on the GW scale) in order to quantify the minimal requirements of applicability of a future, realistic, PEC technology. The most important system parameters affecting the net produced energy were determined to be the solar-to-fuel (STF, or STH in the case of H2 production) conversion efficiency and the service life of the PEC cells. With STH efficiency of 20% and PEC cell life span of 20 years, an energy payback time of around 3 years, and output–input energy balance ratio around 3 (at plant level), is estimated.5 Unsurprisingly, these figures do not differ much than the operational requirements posed over the more mature PV modules technology.6 As pointed out in recent reviews on state-of-the-art PEC systems,7 the major unmet shortcoming is the electrode stability, while STH efficiencies are rapidly growing towards the desired ideal requirements.8 In order to raise operational PEC lifetime from minutes to hours, the community focused in the last years on the development of photocathode architectures based on cheap, efficient but often inherently electrochemically unstable materials, separated from the aqueous environment by increasingly refined protective layers.9 Despite the excellent results achieved, the unavoidable drawback of this approach is the sudden system failure caused by imperfections in the protective coatings. Very recently, alternative approaches to PEC H2 production based on organic semiconducting polymers (OSP) have emerged:10,11 organic photoelectrochemical (OPEC) and hybrid organic/inorganic photoelectrochemical (HOPEC) systems. Earlier reports on purely organic H2 evolving photocathodes (OPEC) reported poor performances for simple architectures (i.e. bare or catalyzed bulk heterojunctions in contact with water electrolyte)12 with photocurrent densities in the sub-mA cm−2 range and unproven stability. Very recent developments in photocathode architectures, mainly related to properly engineered charge extraction layers, managed to overcome the threshold of 1 mA cm−2 photogenerated current density at positive bias, approaching the realm of inorganic systems based on comparable band gap absorbers. Nevertheless, all reports failed to show performance retention under extended operation.10,13–17 In several studies it has been recognized that the degradation of the hole selective layer (HSL), upon interaction with the aqueous electrolyte during operation, represented one of the main drawbacks leading to the observed short lifetime, lasting from several minutes to about one hour. In some cases the choice of an inherently unstable and hygroscopic contact layer like PEDOT:PSS13–15 photocurrent fading and interfaces degradation in unprotected devices. In a recent HOPEC demonstration, the stability of the P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction (BHJ) was confirmed, while the major source of instability of the device was found in the intercalation behaviour of MoO3 and its irreversible reduction into sub-stoichiometric phases (MoO3−xOHx, MoO2) with unfavourable energy alignment.10 Lately, Comas-Rojas et al.18 demonstrated state-of-the-art H2 photogeneration using a conventional P3HT:PCBM BHJ architecture enclosed between a solution-processed cuprous iodide hole selective layer and a Pt-decorated nanostructured TiO2 electron selective layer (ESL). This architecture showed initial photocurrents as high as 8 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE and t = 0 s, decaying 50% after 20 minutes of operation at 0 VRHE (with a two-fold improvement with the device modified with a PEI protective layer), IPCE above 50%, near 100% faradaic efficiency and an ideal ratiometric power-saved figure of merit equal to 1.21% (and 1.45% with PEI addiction). The CuI layer is observed to exhibit irreversible degradation reactions when in direct contact with the aqueous electrolyte at operational voltages, but it is found stable in the final photoelectrode architecture, when buried under the BHJ, TiO2/Pt and the PEI layers. The observed degradation is attributed to the TiO2–Pt interface failure, due to the action of H2 bubbles, a consequence of the high current densities generated.
With the goal of increasing the HOPEC lifetime into the days range, we focused on developing a hole selective contact stable in acidic electrolyte. Among the common high work-function oxides investigated in OPV (MoO3, V2O5 and NiO) the excellent electrochemical stability and insolubility in water19,20 of WO3 points at its exploitation as a hole selective layer. As a consequence, here we demonstrate for the first time a HOPEC architecture based on an amorphous WO3 HSL with an operational lifetime above 10 h.
Experimental
Photoelectrode fabrication
Indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates (dimensions 20 × 15 mm, visible transmittance 85%, sheet resistance 15 Ω sq−1) are cleaned by successive sonication baths (30 minutes) in DI water with Hellmanex™ 3%, DI water, isopropanol and acetone. The substrates are thence dried with N2 flow and left overnight at 300 °C in muffle furnace in order to remove all possible residual impurities. Right before the magnetron sputtering deposition, the ITO-coated glasses are plasma-treated in an inductively coupled reactor for 20 minutes (100 W RF power, 40 Pa of O2 gas process pressure). The donor–acceptor bulk heterojunction (BHJ) used as organic active layer of the hybrid photocathodes is realized using P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) avg. Mn 15000–45000, electronic grade, Sigma Aldrich) as the donor and PC60BM ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, 99.5% purity, NanoC) as the acceptor. P3HT and PCBM solutions (25 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene, ACS grade) are separately prepared and stirred overnight at 60 °C. A 1:1 blend of P3HT:PCBM is obtained by mixing the donor and acceptor solutions and stirring overnight on a hotplate at 60 °C in order to achieve complete mixing. The fabrication process starts with the deposition of the amorphous WO3 hole selective layer (HSL) via reactive magnetron sputtering deposition using a pulsed-DC magnetron source (Angstrom Science, Onyx II). The deposition process takes place in a vacuum chamber previously evacuated in the order of 3 × 10−3 Pa and then filled with background gas, a mixture of Ar/O2 (flow rates ratio 70:30) with a total pressure of 1 Pa. The films of amorphous WO3 are obtained starting from a W target (Testbourne, purity 99.99%) that reactively oxidizes in the plasma thanks to the oxygen content of the background gas. The as-deposited amorphous WO3 films are treated with an additional 20 minutes of a plasma cleaning process before the BHJ deposition. The BHJ active layer is deposited by spin coating on top of the selective contact using a Laurell Tech. Corp. spin coater, dropping 90 μL of solution on the substrates and by tuning the rotation speed and acceleration in order to obtain a 200 nm-thick BHJ. The electron selective contact (ESL) and the catalyst layer are deposited by means of pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and magnetron sputtering using a physical mask in order to obtain an active area of approximately 0.9 cm2. The ESL consists of a 100 nm-thick film of amorphous TiO2 deposited via PLD starting from a TiO2 target (Kurt. J. Lesker, purity 99.99%) ablated in an Ar/H2 atmosphere (H2 molar content 3.1%, total pressure 15 Pa) with a pulsed excimer laser (Coherent KrF; λ = 248 nm) with a total energy fluence of 2.0 J cm−2. The platinum catalytic layer is then deposited via magnetron sputtering using a Pt target (Testbourne, purity 99.99%) and an operating pressure of 15 Pa of Ar. In order to activate and segregate the polymer blend once protected between the two selective contacts, a 10 minute thermal treatment is performed on the completed devices at 130 °C on a hotplate inside an oxygen-free nitrogen glovebox.
Material characterizations
Absorption and transmittance spectra of the devices are acquired using a Perkin-Elmer Lambda 1050 UV-visible spectrometer. The range of wavelength for spectra acquisition is set between 350 nm and 750 nm. Cross section images of the devices are acquired with a Zeiss SUPRA40 field-emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) using an operating voltage of 5 kV and a working distance of 2.5 mm. The work function evaluation is carried out using a Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPSP020, KP Technologies Inc.), performing the measurements in air and at room temperature and using a gold surface with known work function (WF = 4.8 eV) as the reference for the probe potential. Height and phase maps of ITO and ITO/WO3 layers are obtained by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) using an Agilent 5500 Atomic Force Microscope in tapping mode. Scans were performed over a length scale of 5 × 5 μm2 at a scan rate of 0.3 lines per s. Root Mean Squared (RMS) roughness values were calculated from AFM topography images using Gwyddion 2.35 software.
Electrochemical measurements
Photoelectrochemical characterization is performed in a quartz electrochemical cell using an Autolab PGSTAT302N potentiostat controlled through Nova1.8 (Metrohm) software. The system is coupled with a 300 W Xe light source equipped with AM filters (Lot quantum design, model LS0306) calibrated to 1 sun, with illumination used in a continuous or chopped regime. The cell is arranged in a three-electrode configuration with the device as the working electrode (WE), a Pt wire as the counter electrode (CE) and an Ag/AgCl electrode filled with saturated KCl solution (0.1976 V versus the standard hydrogen electrode at 25 °C) as the reference electrode (RE). All the electrochemical measurements are performed in an aqueous solution of H2SO4 (Sigma-Aldrich, 98–95% purity) of calibrated pH and the voltage scale of the electrochemical measurements is adjusted using the Nernst correction. The solution is bubbled with N2 gas for at least 1 hour before each experiment in order to remove the dissolved molecular oxygen. The photocathodes are then immersed in the electrolyte and positioned with the glass side towards the illumination. The electrochemical characterization includes linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), chronoamperometry (CA) and cyclic voltammetry (CV). For the LSV measurements the device is probed from its open circuit potential (OCP) to 0 VRHE under chopped light illumination with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The performance trend over time is evaluated through CA by applying a fixed voltage and measuring the photocurrent yield. CV tests are performed over a potential window between 0 and 1 VRHE with different number of cycles in order to test the fatigue resistance of the WO3 layer and evaluate their redox activity.
Results and discussion
Design and fabrication of hybrid organic–inorganic photocathode
As already reported in literature, organic photocathodes exhibit better performance when the photoactive organic semiconductor is coupled with interfacial layers.14 The same concept has been widely demonstrated for organic photovoltaic devices, in which a variety of interfacial layers have been studied in order to optimize charge extraction and built-in potential gradient.21 In HOPEC applications the two selective contacts (hole-selective layer HSL and electron-selective layer ESL) need to satisfy the whole range of optoelectronic requirements already identified in OPVs as well as an additional set of electrochemical and photoelectrochemical constrains in order to perform durably and efficiently.10,16 The correct energy alignment between the conduction/valence bands of the selective contacts with respect to the HOMO/LUMO levels of the organic active material is significant for building the barrier-free potential that separates and injects the photogenerated charges.22 Charge selectivity, also defined by the relative band position of both p- (CB > LUMO) or n-type (VB < HOMO) interfacial layers in contact with the OSP, is important to reduce electron and holes’ recombination and leak currents.23,24 Furthermore, to avoid losses in the incident photonic flux, selective contacts should be as transparent as possible in the spectral range of absorption of the organic material in order to maximize photogeneration and their surface roughness at the interface must be minimized in order to increase shunt resistance and reduce leak currents.25 Lastly, the selective contacts need to display strong (photo)electrochemical stability in the aqueous electrolytes where the device operates.
Since they efficiently satisfy these requirements, TiO2 and its sub-stoichiometric phases are considered materials of choice in PEC or HOPEC applications in order to cover the role of ESL.9,26,27 On the other hand, finding an appropriate material for HSL proved to be a less straightforward task.
In this work a compact layer of amorphous WO3 deposited by reactive magnetron sputtering is proposed as an efficient n-type, high work function, HSL. The underlying idea, as compared with former OPEC and HOPEC photocathode architectures,11,13–15,17,18,28 is the exploitation of the strong WO3 chemical stability in an aqueous environment in order to avoid interface degradation issues and achieve longer device lifetimes under photoelectrochemical operation.
Hence, we developed an H2 evolving photocathode architecture in which the photoactive P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction lies in-between a WO3 and a TiO2 charge selective layer (Fig. 1a): amorphous WO3 works as an n-type, hole selective layer and amorphous TiO2 as the electron selective layer and catalyst support. Upon exciton separation at the P3HT:PCBM interfaces within the BHJ, the built-in field drives photogenerated electrons towards the PCBM/TiO2 interface from where they are further transported towards the TiO2/Pt/electrolyte interface where they are consumed in order to reduce protons and evolve H2. On the other side, the proposed architecture exploits the hole-harvesting properties of the WO3/P3HT bilayer, where an n-type semiconductor with a high work function (WF 5.0 eV) is coupled with a p-type conjugated polymer with a lower ionization energy (IE 4.85 eV) in order to efficiently extract the hole carriers and repel the electron carrier, thus reducing the recombination process at the interface. One of the drawbacks of tungsten trioxide, chosen as HSL material, lies in its high band-gap. In fact, stoichiometric WO3 presents an extremely low charge carrier concentration that severely hinders efficient electron injection from the HSL to the BHJ. This problem can be solved through an electrochemical intercalation process, in which protonated and partially reduced states are induced in the WO3, thus achieving an improvement in its charge carrier concentration by several order of magnitude (approximately from 1018 cm−3 to 1021 cm−3).29
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematics of the energetic structure of the hybrid photocathode showing the band-edge position of the different layers and the redox levels of the water-splitting reactions; the direction of the arrows indicates electron injection at interfaces. (b) High resolution scanning electron micrograph cross-sectional image of the different layers composing the photocathode architecture. Cross sectional images of the as deposited electrode and the same device imaged after 10 hours of chronoamperometry are depicted respectively on the left and right halves of panel b. The individual layers composing the photocathode architecture are, from bottom to top: ITO transparent conductive oxide, hole selective WO3 layer, P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction, electron selective a-TiO2 layer and Pt catalyst layer. 
The complete architecture (Fig. 1b) realizes coupling solution-processed fabrication techniques, such as spin coating of the organic photoactive P3HT:PCBM blend and PVD processes such as reactive magnetron sputtering for the amorphous WO3, deposited over ITO-coated glass, pulsed laser deposition for the amorphous TiO2 nanostructured film and p-DC magnetron sputtering for the thin Pt catalytic layer. Particular care is taken in employing the PVD techniques in soft-landing regimes30 for the deposition of the inorganic overlayers on top of the BHJ, in order to preserve the polymeric semiconductor functionalities31 and maintain a good control over oxide nanostructure and stoichiometry.32
Characterization of the WO3 hole-selective layer
The chemical stability of the amorphous WO3 layer19,20,33 is verified in acidic electrolyte via an electrochemical measurement performed on a HSL-only sample (ITO-covered glass with a 100 nm-thick WO3 film) in order to assess the electrochemical properties of the individual layer in a simulated operational environment. 100-cycles of cyclic voltammetry are performed on the sample within the 0–1 VRHE potential window (Fig. 2a) where the photocathode will be operated during H2 evolution experiments. The resulting current profile shows neither signs of irreversible oxidation/reduction peaks nor significant drifts thus confirming the electrochemical stability of the material in a broad range of operational conditions. The reversible oxidation/reduction peaks visible in the CV curves of Fig. 2a are interpreted as a reversible intercalation/de-intercalation process. During the forward scans toward the cathodic potential, the amorphous WO3 undergoes protonation where the H+ cations present in the acid solution are interstitially intercalated in the oxide lattice. Upon application of an anodic bias, the intercalated protons are completely extracted from the oxide without damaging the film, most likely thanks to its amorphous structure.34
 Fig. 2  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of ITO/WO3 (100 nm) films measured at 20 mV s−1 scan rate in aqueous electrolyte (pH 1.37, H2SO4, 0.1 M). The plot represents sample curves of a 100-cycles experiments. (b) Work function of ITO/WO3 (100 nm) films measured by Kelvin probe force microscopy before (as deposited films) and after electrochemical intercalation (pH 1.37 H2SO4, 1 M for two different intercalation times, 60 seconds and 10 hours). The measured work function of plasma treated ITO films and the P3HT work function are shown for comparison. Absolute work function values on the y-axis refer to the vacuum energy. 
As shown by Zhao et al.,35 the intercalation of protons electrochemically induces an increase in the majority carrier concentration, resulting in higher conductivity and improved electron charge transport. Kelvin probe force microscopy measurements (Fig. 2b) show a reduction of the work function as the material undergoes the intercalation process since electrochemical intercalation with protons strengthens the n-type nature of the material and thus its work function shifts towards the vacuum level accordingly (Fig. 2b). In fact, proton intercalation is known to modify the transition metal oxide (MO) density of states mainly via the creation of sub-bandgap defect states. Hydrogenation will usually proceed via the formation of metal-like hydride phases (HyMOx), where the injected hydrogen atoms are expected to form interstitial or bound states (i.e. forming –OH groups). Such intercalated phases are believed to be responsible for the formation of gap states via polaronic36 (reversible) or oxygen vacancy (irreversible) formation mechanisms37,38 that lead to the observed modifications of the MO film optoelectronic properties. In the case of our WO3 films, by keeping the sample under cathodic bias once the intercalation process has reached its saturation, a slow process of irreversible intercalation leads to the formation of deep reduced states29 within the material, further shifting the work function towards the vacuum level. The increased barrier for electron injection that results from the irreversible intercalation and consequent WO3 film reduction can be ascribed as one of the causes behind the slow performance degradation during long term measurements.
Photoelectrochemical properties of hybrid organic–inorganic photocathode
The photoelectrochemical performances of the hybrid photocathode architecture are probed through chronoamperometry (Fig. 3a) performed at an applied bias of 0.20 VRHE, the voltage of the maximum power point for the device, as extrapolated from the corresponding linear sweep voltammetry curves (Fig. S1†). Together with the long operational stability, allowing the device to produce photogenerated current for a time span of more than 10 hours, the most interesting characteristic of the CA signal is the low (few nA) values of the dark current, further pointing to the absence of parasitic reduction processes and the non-monotonicity (e.g. dynamic) nature of the temporal current profile. A possible explanation for the latter aspect is detailed in the following discussion. Before the measurement starts and any voltage is applied, the device is at equilibrium in the electrolytic solution at its open circuit voltage. The energy level alignment of the pristine amorphous WO3 layer with respect to the adjacent P3HT layer efficiently minimizes the electron injection barrier at the interface, as reported by Greiner et al.22 in the case of a semiconducting oxide with a work function higher than the ionization energy of the polymer (WFWO3 > IEP3HT). Despite a favourable energy alignment thermodynamically allowing facile charge injection at the oxide/organic interface, in the first instants after polarization (at t = 0 s during chronoamperometry) the majority carrier density in the pristine amorphous WO3 layer is low and thus fails to efficiently harvest the incoming photogenerated holes at the oxide/organic interface. In this case, the parasitic recombination between photogenerated carriers within the BHJ is high and dominates the device behaviour (i.e. very low current density of the polarized device, J = 0.4 mA cm−2 at t = 0 s). When the chronoamperometry measurement starts, a constant cathodic bias is applied to the device and the amorphous WO3 layer intercalates protons until saturation. In terms of electron injection barrier, the intercalated amorphous WO3/P3HT interface now displays an energy level alignment less favourable than for the situation at t = 0 faced by the pristine, non-intercalated WO3 (Fig. 3b), but this negative feature is likely compensated by an increase in the majority carrier density which can stretch an interval of even 2 or 3 orders of magnitude.35 Given the barrier effect offered to proton diffusion by the upper layers of the device (BHJ/TiO2/Pt) the effect of the intercalation develops slowly and reaches its maximal efficacy within the first 2 hours of the chronoamperometry (Fig. 3a), where the photocurrent density increases from 0.4 mA cm−2 up to the saturation value of 1.28 mA cm−2 thanks to the overall improved electron charge transport in HSL. As reported by Fumagalli et al.10 for a similar architecture exploiting another n-type, high work function HSL layer (MoO3) exhibiting similar energetics, during the intercalation process the faradaic efficiency of the device is far below 100% since most of the available H+ ions are taken by the WO3 film and cannot contribute to the hydrogen evolution reaction at the catalytic interface. As the intercalation process saturates, the device reaches the full faradaic efficiency and can efficiently operate as a photocathode for hydrogen evolution. After 8 hours of continuous operation at the maximum power point potential, the device shows a loss in photocurrent density of only 30% of its peak value. The device long term stability confirms the key importance of a durable HSL in the hybrid photocathode architecture. The device dark current, measured once every hour during chronoamperometry by shutting the solar light source for 120 s, remains stable in the range of nanoamperes and thus confirms the absence of chemically-driven degradation of the photocathode in its working environment.
 Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrent density in potentiostatic operation for the full hybrid photo-electrode architecture ITO/WO3 (100 nm)/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Pt measured under AM1.5 light illumination (1000 W m−2) at a fixed potential of +0.20 VRHE. At certain operation times the illumination is suspended for a period of 2 minutes to show dark currents. (b) Energy levels alignment of the WO3/P3HT interfaces before (left) and after (right) the electrochemical intercalation process. 
High resolution SEM pictures (Fig. 1b) taken of a photocathode before and after 10 hours of chronoamperometry are displayed side-by-side. Other than clearly depicting the layered architecture employed, the SEM image shows neither differences nor signs of degradation between the pristine device and the measured one. As previously mentioned, the slow-paced degradation of the photocurrent is probably due to the heightened electron injection barrier induced by the deep intercalation and reduction of the amorphous WO3.
Optimization of the WO3 selective layer thickness
The photocathode architecture with a 100 nm-thick amorphous WO3 layer described in the former paragraphs, results from a parametric study on the HSL thickness aimed to optimize the overall device in terms of operational parameters such as photocurrent density, onset potential (defined in this work as the potential a cathodic photocurrent of at least 10 μA cm−2 is measured) and a maximum power point. Photocathodes fabricated with a different thickness of the amorphous WO3 layer are measured via linear sweep voltammetry (Fig. 4) in order to probe their electrochemical characteristics. The J–V curves of the devices show that both the photocurrent density and the onset potential (Table 1) increase with increasing thickness of the HSL and reach a maximum for the device with 100 nm of amorphous WO3. Since the photoelectrochemical measurements are performed on photocathodes in a three-electrode configuration, we introduce an adequate figure of merit, the ratiometric power saved at the maximum power point (Φsaved),39 extrapolated from the LSV curves in order to assess the photocathode performances and compare them with other devices described in existing OPEC literature.15,18 The solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency, considered as the ratio between the output power stored in form of H2 gas and the solar radiant input power measured for a complete photoelectrode (photocathode and photoanode) in a two-electrode PEC cell configuration at zero bias under standard AM 1.5G illumination, is usually considered the key metric for estimating system-level efficiencies in PEC solar-to-fuel conversion.4 Since, from a rigorous point of view, the STH cannot be calculated when only half reactions are involved, we exploited Φsaved as a practical figure of merit that is useful to evaluate the performances of single-component photoelectrodes driving only water splitting half-reactions. Qualitatively Φsaved can be considered as an indicator of the advantage of employing solar power and an active photoelectrode to drive the fuel PEC evolution reaction at a certain current measured at the electrode Vmpp, with respect to the voltage needed for a selected dark electrode to maintain the same current. For the specific case of the HER driven by a photocathode at its maximum power point (mpp) with respect to an ideally non-polarizable dark electrode (i.e. the RHE), the functional form of Φsaved is expressed in eqn (1): Φsaved = ηFJmppVmpp/Ps(1)as derived from the calculations of Coridan et al.39 and where ηF is the faradic efficiency (assumed to be 100%), Jmpp and Vmpp are the current density and the voltage at the maximum power point and Ps is the incident solar power density (1000 W m−2). The 100 nm-thick device achieves a photocurrent of 1.23 mA cm−2 at the maximum power point voltage of 0.20 VRHE. As a result, the ideal ratiometric power saved is calculated to be 0.25%. The actual values of Jmpp, Vmpp and Φsaved for photoelectrodes with different WO3 HSL thickness are shown in Table 1.
 Fig. 4  Photoelectrochemical device characterization showing photocurrent–voltage characteristics (linear sweep voltammetry) measured in 0.1 M H2SO4 solution at pH 1.37, under chopped AM1.5 light illumination (100 W cm−2) for a series of hybrid organic photocathode architectures realized varying the thickness of the amorphous WO3 hole selective layer. 
Table 1 Photocathodes photoelectrochemical figures of merit extracted from current–potential characteristics of different device architectures realized by varying the thickness of the WO3 hole selective layer. The table contains current density measured at 0 VRHE (J@0 V RHE), photocurrent onset potential (OP), current density at the maximum power point (Jmpp), voltage at the maximum power point (Vmpp) and ratiometric power saved figure of merit (Φsaved)




Thickness (nm)

J
@0 V RHE (mA cm−2)

V
OP (VRHE)

J
mpp (mA cm−2)

V
mpp (VRHE)

Φ
saved (%)




200
1.685
0.455
0.844
0.179
0.151


100
2.485
0.561
1.229
0.201
0.246


30
1.865
0.484
0.761
0.182
0.138


10
0.263
0.326
0.102
0.125
0.013


5
0.131
0.268
0.045
0.121
0.006


No HSL
0.055
0.195
0.021
0.114
0.002




We observed that, when the oxide thickness is increased above this optimal value, devices likely start to suffer from an increased series resistance that affects the onset potential and shifts the whole photocurrent profile towards cathodic values, as shown by J–V characteristics measured with the 200 nm-thick WO3 HSL device. On the other hand, the loss in PEC performances that occurs for a thickness of amorphous WO3 HSL below 100 nm may be attributed to two different factors. The first one is related to the formation of a Schottky junction at the TCO/HSL interface, as a material with quasi-metallic properties such as the ITO coupled with an n-type semiconductor such as the amorphous WO3. The depletion layer that occurs due to the Fermi level alignment and the bending of the conduction band is completely located within the semiconductor and severely hinders the electron charge transport when oxide film thickness is comparable with the depletion layer width. Using both experimentally measured values for the bilayer work functions and parameters taken from literature for WO3 carrier concentration35 and for relative dielectric permittivity εr, the depletion layer for the ITO/amorphous WO3 junction is calculated (eqn S(1)†) to be around 10 nm in width in our experimental conditions. This value is in good agreement with the meagre performances of the devices with 5 and 10 nm of amorphous WO3, whose thickness is comparable with the depletion width and thus cannot efficiently inject charges in the adjacent polymer. Accordingly, we observe that the 30 nm-thick WO3 HSL device is able to deliver a significant amount of photocurrent as not all of its HSL thickness is completely depleted and a region with a high electron carrier density is present at the polymer interface. As the HSL thickness increases, the effect of the depletion layer at the TCO interface becomes less important and the performance peaks for the 100 nm-thick devices. For thicker HSL layers (200 nm) we again observe a decrease in onset potential and photocurrent that we attributed to the increasing effect of series resistance of the oxide HSL.
The second reason behind the performance loss for devices fabricated with thin WO3 layers is postulated to be the presence of pinholes and defects in the amorphous WO3 film below a critical thickness. Due to these defects and pinholes, the polymer could percolate through the amorphous WO3 layer and come in contact with the ITO beneath, thus preventing the HSL from performing its intended function. As widely reported in similar studies,10,18 removing any selective contact within an organic photocathode architecture leads to a marked loss in performance which can be of orders of magnitude in terms of photocurrent and hundreds of mV in terms of onset potential. The deposition of a conformal and continuous film of amorphous WO3 on the supporting layer of ITO is confirmed by atomic force microscopy images that show the surface morphology (Fig. 5) and phase (Fig. S2†) signal (related to the chemical signature of the surfaces) of non-deposited ITO surfaces (Fig. 5a) and ITO/WO3-covered samples with different thicknesses (Fig. 5b–d), starting from the 5 nm-thick film. From both the phase and morphology maps the coverage of the substrate is evident for the 100 and 30 nm WO3 samples. The 5 nm film instead shows only distinct phase differences from the ITO substrate while the amplitude maps suggest that negligible changes in the surface morphology were induced by the HSL layer deposition. It is known that films deposited via magnetron sputtering are not free from defects and pinholes, especially in the case of an amorphous material deposited at low temperature that does not undergo any thermal post-deposition treatment. Since no thermal annealing occurs after the deposition that could relax and remove internal defects, amorphous films need to exceed a certain thickness to drastically reduce the chance of pinholes cutting through their entire thickness. As the ITO supporting layer has an average roughness of 3 nm, amorphous WO3 films with comparable thickness have a high chance of suffering from pinholes and non-conformal coating. These observations support the discussion about the poor performance of photocathodes fabricated with the thinner HSL layers.
 Fig. 5  Atomic force microscopy amplitude images showing surface morphology of (a) bare ITO and (b–d) ITO/WO3 with different WO3 HSL thicknesses (5 nm, 30 nm and 100 nm respectively). 
Trying to minimize the thickness of the amorphous WO3 up to the optimal operative value is not only important from an electrical point of view but it is important in order to minimize the optical absorption of the HSL and thus ensure its transparency. The HSL optical properties are especially important in this study as the photocathode is illuminated from the glass side due to reflection losses induced by the presence of the metallic Pt catalysts. Spectrophotometer measurements (Fig. 6) show the absorption spectra of the ITO/amorphous WO3 films, which accounts for over 10% absorbed incident light in the spectral range of the polymer blend absorption, whose spectrum is reported as a reference. The excellent transparency of the employed HSL is thus confirmed for thicknesses up to 200 nm and it is not significantly affected from extended operation of the devices (Fig. S3†) and from intercalation processes occurring to the WO3 layers.
 Fig. 6  Spectroscopic analysis of photocathodes components showing UV-Vis-nIR absorbance spectra of different ITO/WO3 layers with different oxide thickness. ITO-coated glass substrate (grey line) and ITO/P3HT:PCBM (black dashed line) are plotted as references. 
As a future development, the proposed photocathode architecture could benefit, both in terms of costs and integration in a tandem electrode architecture, from the substitution of the metallic Pt catalysis layer with a non-precious and transparent hydrogen evolution reaction catalyst, such as a molecular catalyst40,41 or an inorganic complex.42,43
Conclusions
In this work we investigated the potential of organic semiconductors as active materials in hybrid organic/inorganic photocathode architectures for H2 production from aqueous electrolytes. This study demonstrates that appropriate material selection both in terms of the photoactive materials (conjugated organic polymers, P3HT:PCBM) and contact layers (metal oxides, WO3 and TiO2) allows the realization of electrochemically stable devices with continuous illumination PEC operation in aqueous acidic electrolyte lasting for more than 10 hours. As a practical figure, the photocurrent decreases by 30% from its initial value after 8 hours of operation. This result represents, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, the state of the art in terms of stability for unprotected organic based electrosynthetic cells for H2 evolution. Optimized photocathodes exhibit a maximum photocurrent above 2.48 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE and an onset potential as high as +0.56 VRHE, showing performances of the same order of magnitude of recently reported best performing organic photocathodes.
Increased device stability is achieved by the introduction of previously investigated hybrid organic inorganic photocathode architectures of the water insoluble WO3 n-type HSL. The photoelectrochemical performances of the proposed architecture were investigated and compared with recent reports from literature and the effect of the WO3 layer thickness is assessed and optimized.
The study further examined the importance of the careful choice of materials employed as selective contacts, taking into account both the need of performance improvement and the harsh environment of water splitting experiments. We can foresee that with new and more compatible HSL and ESL choice of components, stable operation at photocurrents close to the maximum achievable with selected organic photoactive polymers, is achievable. With these results in mind, future developments in the HOPEC field can be naturally directed towards the exploration of the wide selection of organic semiconductors developed for OPVs that will open up the possibility to fabricate large area, solution processed multi-junction configurations with optimized photoanodes and photocathodes for renewable and low cost direct conversion of solar energy into hydrogen.
Author contribution
A. M. and F. F. fabricated the devices and executed the material property characterizations, and A. M and A. A. carried out electrochemical experiments. D. I. performed the AFM analysis, F. D. F and F. F. designed the experiments and F. D. F. with M. R. A. supervised the work. All authors contributed to interpretation of results and manuscript drafting.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the EU through the Future and Emerging Technologies (FET) programme under the FP7, Collaborative Project 309223 (PHOCS, Photogenerated Hydrogen by Organic Catalytic Systems).
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. van de Krol and M. Gratzel, Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production, Springer,  2012 Search PubMed.
J. R. McKone, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983 CAS .
R. Sathre, C. D. Scown, W. R. Morrow, J. C. Stevens, I. D. Sharp, J. W. Ager, K. Walczak, F. A. Houle and J. B. Greenblatt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(10), 3264–3278 CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, Z. Ye and X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15824–15837 CAS .
J. Gu, Y. Yan, J. L. Young, K. X. Steirer, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Nat. Mater., 2015, 15, 456 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hu, N. S. Lewis, J. W. Ager, J. Yang, J. R. McKone and N. C. Strandwitz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24201–24228 CAS .
F. Fumagalli, S. Bellani, M. Schreier, S. Leonardi, H. Rojas, A. Ghadirzadeh, G. Tullii, A. Savoini, G. Marra, L. Meda, M. Gratzel, G. Lanzani, M. Mayer, M. R. Antognazza and F. Di Fonzo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 2178–2187 Search PubMed .
T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, R. Brisse, C. Laberty-Robert, S. Campidelli, R. de Bettignies, V. Artero, S. Palacin and B. Jousselme, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2706 CAS .
G. M. Suppes, P. J. Fortin and S. Holdcroft, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, H551–H556 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haro, C. Solis, G. Molina, L. Otero, J. Bisquert, S. Gimenez and A. Guerrero, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6488–6494 CAS .
A. Guerrero, M. Haro, S. Bellani, M. R. Antognazza, L. Meda, S. Gimenez and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3666–3673 CAS .
T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, R. Brisse, R. Cornut, V. Artero and B. Jousselme, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 150721161652007 Search PubMed .
T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, R. Brisse, S. Campidelli, R. Cornut and B. Jousselme, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4831–4839 CAS .
A. Morozan, T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, B. Jousselme and V. Artero, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 355401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Rojas, S. Bellani, F. Fumagalli, G. Tullii, S. Leonardi, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. Grätzel, G. Lanzani, F. Di Fonzo and M. R. Antognazza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 2–4 Search PubMed .
M. Williams, Drug Dev. Res., 2013, 74, 339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balandeh, A. Mezzetti, A. Tacca, S. Leonardi, G. Marra, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, L. Meda and F. Di Fonzo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6110–6117 CAS .
L. M. Chen, Z. Xu, Z. R. Hong and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2575–2598 RSC .
M. T. Greiner, M. G. Helander, W.-M. Tang, Z.-B. Wang, J. Qiu and Z.-H. Lu, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 76–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Ratcliff, B. Zacher and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem.Lett., 2011, 2, 1337–1350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoon, H. Kim, E. Y. Shin, I. G. Bae, B. Park, Y. Y. Noh and I. Hwang, Org. Electron., 2016, 32, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Yip and A. K.-Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994 CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673 CAS .
L.-H. Lai, W. Gomulya, M. Berghuis, L. Protesescu, R. J. Detz, J. N. H. Reek, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19083–19090 CAS .
M. Vasilopoulou, L. C. Palilis, D. G. Georgiadou, A. M. Douvas, P. Argitis, S. Kennou, L. Sygellou, G. Papadimitropoulos, I. Kostis, N. a. Stathopoulos and D. Davazoglou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1489–1497 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fumagalli, J. Martí-Rujas and F. Di Fonzo, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 569, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
A. Luzio, F. G. Ferré, F. Di Fonzo and M. Caironi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1790–1798 CrossRef CAS .
L. Passoni, L. Criante, F. Fumagalli, F. Scotognella, G. Lanzani, F. Di Fonzo, N. Science, T. Polimi, I. Italiano, V. G. Pascoli and D. Fisica, ACS Nano, 2014, 12167–12174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stubhan, N. Li, N. A. Luechinger, S. C. Halim, G. J. Matt and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1433–1438 CrossRef CAS .
R. Giannuzzi, M. Balandeh, A. Mezzetti, L. Meda, P. Pattathil, G. Gigli, F. Di Fonzo and M. Manca, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3(11), 1614–1622 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, E. Olide and F. E. Osterloh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 162, H65–H71 CrossRef .
M. F. Saenger, T. Höing, B. W. Robertson, R. B. Billa, T. Hofmann, E. Schubert and M. Schubert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 1–11 CrossRef .
S. J. Calero, P. Ortiz, A. F. Oñate and M. T. Cortés, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 4922–4930 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, M. Su, Z. Zheng, Y. Wang, L. Gong, F. Xie, W. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Luo, P. Liu, N. Xu, S. Deng, H. Chen and J. Chen, ACS Nano, 2015, 10(1), 1662–1670 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Coridan, A. C. Nielander, S. a. Francis, M. T. McDowell, V. Dix, S. M. Chatman and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2886–2901 CAS .
C.-Y. Lee, H. S. Park, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 1–5 Search PubMed .
T. E. Rosser, M. A. Gross, Y.-H. Lai and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4024–4035 RSC .
Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Britto, J. D. Benck, J. L. Young, C. Hahn, T. G. Deutsch and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2044–2049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6fd00216aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematics of the energetic structure of the hybrid photocathode showing the band-edge position of the different layers and the redox levels of the water-splitting reactions; the direction of the arrows indicates electron injection at interfaces. (b) High resolution scanning electron micrograph cross-sectional image of the different layers composing the photocathode architecture. Cross sectional images of the as deposited electrode and the same device imaged after 10 hours of chronoamperometry are depicted respectively on the left and right halves of panel b. The individual layers composing the photocathode architecture are, from bottom to top: ITO transparent conductive oxide, hole selective WO3 layer, P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction, electron selective a-TiO2 layer and Pt catalyst layer.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of ITO/WO3 (100 nm) films measured at 20 mV s−1 scan rate in aqueous electrolyte (pH 1.37, H2SO4, 0.1 M). The plot represents sample curves of a 100-cycles experiments. (b) Work function of ITO/WO3 (100 nm) films measured by Kelvin probe force microscopy before (as deposited films) and after electrochemical intercalation (pH 1.37 H2SO4, 1 M for two different intercalation times, 60 seconds and 10 hours). The measured work function of plasma treated ITO films and the P3HT work function are shown for comparison. Absolute work function values on the y-axis refer to the vacuum energy.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrent density in potentiostatic operation for the full hybrid photo-electrode architecture ITO/WO3 (100 nm)/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Pt measured under AM1.5 light illumination (1000 W m−2) at a fixed potential of +0.20 VRHE. At certain operation times the illumination is suspended for a period of 2 minutes to show dark currents. (b) Energy levels alignment of the WO3/P3HT interfaces before (left) and after (right) the electrochemical intercalation process.	 
Φsaved = ηFJmppVmpp/Ps	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Photoelectrochemical device characterization showing photocurrent–voltage characteristics (linear sweep voltammetry) measured in 0.1 M H2SO4 solution at pH 1.37, under chopped AM1.5 light illumination (100 W cm−2) for a series of hybrid organic photocathode architectures realized varying the thickness of the amorphous WO3 hole selective layer.	 

200	1.685	0.455	0.844	0.179	0.151
100	2.485	0.561	1.229	0.201	0.246
30	1.865	0.484	0.761	0.182	0.138
10	0.263	0.326	0.102	0.125	0.013
5	0.131	0.268	0.045	0.121	0.006
No HSL	0.055	0.195	0.021	0.114	0.002

 	Fig. 5  Atomic force microscopy amplitude images showing surface morphology of (a) bare ITO and (b–d) ITO/WO3 with different WO3 HSL thicknesses (5 nm, 30 nm and 100 nm respectively).	 

 	Fig. 6  Spectroscopic analysis of photocathodes components showing UV-Vis-nIR absorbance spectra of different ITO/WO3 layers with different oxide thickness. ITO-coated glass substrate (grey line) and ITO/P3HT:PCBM (black dashed line) are plotted as references.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6fd00216a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
