Perovskite-quantum dot hybrid solar cells: a multi-win strategy for high performance and stability  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA09434G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA09434G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 4487-4509Perovskite-quantum dot hybrid solar cells: a multi-win strategy for high performance and stability

        
          
            Ke 
            Huang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Junlong 
            Liu†
b, 
      
        
          
            Jianjuan 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Wenchao 
            Zhao
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Kui 
            Zhao
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Zhihua 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *a
aTianjin Key Laboratory of Indoor Air Environmental Quality Control, School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University-International Information Port of China Mobile Joint Research Center for Green Smart New Infrastructure, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China. E-mail: zhuazhou@tju.edu.cn
bHebei University of Technology, Tianjin 300401, China. E-mail: yuanjianjuan@163.com
cCo-Innovation Center of Efficient Processing and Utilization of Forest Resources, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, China. E-mail: wenchaozhao@njfu.edu.cn
dKey Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Advanced Energy Devices, Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710119, China. E-mail: zhaok@snnu.edu.cn
Received 
      4th December 2022
    , Accepted 20th January 2023First published on 24th January 2023AbstractSolution-processed solar cells have witnessed unparalleled progress in the past decade owing to their great potential in countering global warming and high competitiveness in light and flexible electronics. Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and quantum dot (QD) solar cells are two representative emerging photovoltaic technologies that are highly complementary in terms of their optical and electrical properties. Herein, a critical review of the state-of-the-art hybrid perovskite-QD solar cells is presented with the aim of advancing their commercial applications. First, the working principles of hybrid perovskite-QD structures are discussed in detail with a focus on hybrid fundamentals. Subsequently, QD passivation with a perovskite matrix and perovskite passivation with QDs are outlined to highlight the great benefits of this hybrid strategy. An in-depth discussion is presented on the three main hybrid device structures, and corresponding worldwide research efforts to enhance the performance and stability of these promising hybrid solar cells. Lastly, the current challenges and future insights are presented to contribute toward further success in developing efficient and stable hybrid solar cells.Ke Huang is currently a graduate student at the School of Environmental Science & Engineering, Tianjin University, under the direction of Prof. Shilei Lv. She earned her Bachelor degree in Thermal Engineering from Tianjin University in January 2015. Her research focuses on solar cells, radiative sky cooling, renewable energy and energy saving in buildings.Junlong LiuJunlong Liu is currently a senior student at the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Hebei University of Technology. He participated in the Early Admissions Scheme under the direction of Prof. Jianjuan Yuan. His research interest is focused on solar cells and plasma spray coatings.Jianjuan YuanJianjuan Yuan is an Associate Professor at Hebei University of Technology in China. She received her PhD degree from the School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University. Her current interests include battery thermal management, radiative sky cooling, renewable energy and energy saving in buildings.Zhihua ZhouZhihua Zhou is a Professor at Tianjin University in China. She received her PhD degree from the School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University. Her current interests include solar cells, radiative sky cooling, renewable energy and energy saving in buildings.
1. Introduction
With the overuse of fossil fuels, energy shortage and greenhouse gas emissions have become the major global challenges of the 21st century. Energy supply contributes to greenhouse gas emissions, accounting for 70% of the total anthropogenic CO2.1,2 The International Energy Agency (IEA) stated a goal of setting the global temperature rise to below 1.5 K to reach net zero by 2050, which spurred an unprecedented boom in renewable energy. To fulfill this target, solar energy holds great promise for carbon neutrality in the near future as it is the earth's most abundant renewable energy source with a scale of tens of terawatts. Solar photovoltaics (PVs), converting solar energy to electricity, have achieved great progress due to their high potential to support the future energy supply.3–8 In 2020, global solar PV generation presented a significant increase of 156 TW h, corresponding to a 23% growth rate, which still fell behind the set growth target by IEA between 2020 and 2030 (24%).1 Moreover, the cumulative solar PV generation reached ∼820 TW h, significantly lower than the set 6970 TW h in 2030, which certainly required more policy ambition and efforts from the public and private sectors.9
Despite the encouraging breakthroughs and great progress, upscaling PV deployment still faces severe challenges. Today's mainstream commercialized photovoltaics, crystalline silicon solar cells have delivered the unprecedented benchmark with high efficiency of ∼23% in a panel, high stability of over 20 years, and low cost of ∼0.2 $ per W, which enabled their leading market share of ∼95%.10–12 Nevertheless, crystalline silicon PVs lack competitiveness in light and flexible electronic devices, which offer a great chance for solution-processed solar cells, e.g., perovskite solar cells (PSCs),13–16 organic solar cells (OSCs)17–21 and quantum dot solar cells.22–26 Over the past few years, PSCs have aroused burgeoning interest due to their high light-absorption coefficient, long diffusion lengths (over 1 μm), and high defects tolerance, enabling the unparalleled performance advancement from 3.8% in 2009 to over 25.5% for single-cell and over 29.0% for perovskite/silicon tandems.5,27–29 With the facile solution process, the PSC modules demonstrated a superior levelized cost of electricity over that of crystalline silicon PVs. Despite the striking progress, the commercial applications of PSCs still face the bottleneck stemming from their instability, especially compared with the benchmark lifetime of over 20 years for crystalline silicon PVs.30–32
Halide perovskite materials for PSCs generally have a soft ionic lattice and unstable components with hydrogen bonds or van der Waals interactions, which are vulnerable to various aging stressors, e.g., oxygen, moisture, heat, illumination and electrical bias. Under multi-stressors, halide perovskites form various types of defects, which markedly compromise their high optoelectronic properties. For instance, halide perovskites are prone to react with ambient molecules (H2O and O2) and decompose at elevated temperatures. Under solar illumination, the formed oxygen radicals further accelerate the degradation of halide perovskites.32 Solar illumination also exacerbates ion migration in perovskite films, which will further induce more defects at the grain boundary and interface, and markedly reduce the photovoltaic performance. Additionally, unfavorable tolerance factors stemming from incompatible A-site ions will induce the transition from the cubic phase to non-perovskite phase, leading to the accelerated degradation of perovskite materials.33,34
To address the unstable issues from ambient stressors, cesium is employed to replace organic cations (MA+ and FA+), and indeed exhibits improved stability.40,41 Nevertheless, Cs+ will aggravate the phase separation of the all-inorganic perovskite structure at room temperature stemming from the reduced tolerance factor, compared to organic cations.42,43 Instead, quantum dots or nanocrystal structures can markedly improve the phase stability of the all-inorganic perovskite via high surface energy and surface strain.44–47 For instance, CsPbX3 nanocrystals have been reported to be stored for months in the perovskite phase under ambient conditions.48 Moreover, lead chalcogenide QDs generally present superior stability over perovskite structures in ambient conditions due to their covalent lattice and great passivation.49–51 With these benefits, lead chalcogenide QD solar cells have been reported to retain over 90% of the initial performance after one year of ambient storage.52
Additionally, when reducing the material crystallite size to Bohr excitonic radius, some novel and promising properties emerge from the quantum confinement effect. With the decrease in QD size, electronic levels can be engineered from continuous forms to discrete ones, which can significantly modulate their optical and electrical properties (Fig. 1a).53–55 Lead chalcogenide QDs have been reported to exhibit broad and tunable absorption even up to 2000 nm with the increase in size, which can offer great complementarity with most of the high-performance halide perovskite materials (Fig. 1b and c).36,56 For perovskite QDs, broad absorption or photoluminescence can also be realized via composite halogen components from ultraviolet to near-infrared lights (Fig. 1d).37,44,57 Compared to bulk materials, nanocrystal structures also bear matchless superiority in engineering electrical properties via surface ligands. For instance, lead chalcogenide QDs generally exhibit great tunability in energy level alignment via surface ligands (Fig. 1e), which can endow the promising quantum junction, resulting in marked advances in QD solar cells.38,50,58 Concerning the distinct merits of perovskite and QDs, the hybrid strategy has great application potential for high-performance and stable solution-processing solar cells.59,60
 Fig. 1  Optical and electrical properties of lead chalcogenide and perovskite quantum dots (QDs). (a) Schematic of the electronic structure of semiconductors from bulk material to QDs with different sizes. (b) Schematic of the structure of lead chalcogenide and perovskite QDs. (c) Broad and tunable absorbance spectra of lead chalcogenide QDs with the increase of size. (d) The picture of perovskite QDs in solution, and the corresponding photoluminescence with different halogen elements. (e) Energy landscape of lead chalcogenide QDs with different ligands. (a) Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2016, AAAS. (c) Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Reproduced with permission.38,39 Copyright 2017 and 2020, Springer Nature. 
Here, we presented a detailed review covering the recent progress on hybrid QD-perovskite strategy, aiming to further advance the commercial applications of hybrid solar cells. Firstly, the working principles of hybrid QD-perovskite structures are discussed in detail, mainly from lattice matching, electrical and optical properties. Subsequently, QD passivation with perovskite matrix is outlined for further performance improvement of QD solar cells. Moving forward, perovskite passivation with QDs is highlighted for their great potential in enhancing the stability of PSCs. Additionally, three main hybrid device structures, including bulk-heterojunction, bilayer structure and tandem structure, are systematically summarized and the corresponding successive research efforts are discussed in detail for the further performance and stability improvement of PSCs. Finally, the remaining open challenges and our insights into the corresponding research directions are presented to further advance the progress of hybrid solar cells.
2. Working principles
For most perovskite solar cells, there is still nearly 30% of the solar energy that is unexploited.61,62 On the contrary, lead chalcogenide QDs exhibit a broad tunability of absorption even up to 2000 nm, which can offer great potential to harvest the unavailable solar energy from perovskites. Additionally, the high lattice matching between perovskite and lead chalcogenide QDs offers a powerful platform for the hybrid strategy.63,64 Accordingly, hybrid perovskite-QD structures have witnessed great progress with the worldwide efforts on QD passivation, perovskite passivation, hybrid solar cells with bulk heterojunction, bilayer structure and tandem structure.
2.1 Optical and electrical properties
We firstly present the comparison of the optical and electrical properties of perovskites and QDs. The typical ABX3 perovskite lattice is plotted in Fig. 1b, where the A-site can be Cs+, MA+ and FA+ cations, B-site can be Pb+, Sn+ and Ge+, and the X-site can be Cl−, Br− and I−. The ideal perovskite lattice is a highly symmetrical cubic structure, with A, B and X ions located at the vertex, cube center and face center, respectively. B-site ions coordinate with 6 X-site ions to form an octahedral structure, and A-site ions coordinate with 12 X-site ions to form a tetrahedral structure. The crystal structure can directly determine the optical and electrical properties of perovskites. According to the theoretical prediction, perovskite is a direct band-gap semiconductor, where the valence band is predominantly the 5p orbital of I− and 6s2 orbital of Pb+, while the conduction band is the hybrid of 6p orbital of Pb+ and 5s and 5p orbitals of I−. Due to the high symmetry and direct band-gap, perovskites have a high optical absorption coefficient of ∼105 cm−1, enabling the superior performance of electrical devices. Additionally, the strong anti-bond s–p coupling of Pb+ and I− and the weak p–p coupling enable the great defect tolerance of perovskites, delivering a long carrier diffusion length of ∼100 μm for the single crystal and ∼1 μm for polycrystalline films. Moreover, the effective mass of electrons and holes in the perovskite film is highly similar (∼0.23–0.29), enabling bipolar carrier migration characteristics with a high mobility of 1–30 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the single crystal and over 100 cm2 V−1 s−1 for polycrystalline films.
Compared with the bulk counterparts, QD materials generally have size-dependent optical and electrical properties when the spatial extent of the electronic wave functions approaches their Bohr exciton radius. With this mechanism, QDs present a completely different energy landscape distribution from that of bulk semiconductors with a discrete (quantized), atomic-like density of states, enabling the significantly broad bandgap and absorption blueshifts. PbS/Se QDs have a cubic crystalline structure, where S or Se atoms are located at the octahedral face-center of Pb atoms. Therefore, QDs generally have two (111) and (100) lattice facets, and the ratio of the two facets can be controlled via the variation of the QD size. Additionally, PbS/Se QDs have a high absorption coefficient of 104–105 cm−1, indicating that 1 μm QD films can absorb 90% of solar illumination. Different from perovskites, the effective mass of electrons is slightly lower than that of holes, and the mobility of PbS/Se QDs can only reach ∼10−2–10 cm2 V−1 s−1, resulting in a moderate diffusion length with a scale of ∼102–103 nm (Table 1).
Table 1 Optoelectronic parameters of QD and bulk perovskite materials






Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Lifetime (μs)
Diffusion length (nm)
Exciton binding energy (eV)
Optoelectronic parameter control




QDs
10−3–10−2
10−3–102
102–103
0.1–0.3
Size-tuning; ligand tuning


Bulk perovskites
1–102
10–102
103–105
0.01–0.2
Compositional tuning




2.2 Hybrid principles
We proceed to present a detailed discussion on the working principles of hybrid perovskite-QD structures. It is well accepted that lattice matching is one of the critical parameters for heteroepitaxial growth between epitaxial layers and substrates. For perovskite QDs employed in PSCs, the intrinsic lattice matching offers a great benefit for the realization of high-performance devices, e.g., great passivation. For the combination of lead chalcogenide QDs and perovskite, the great success stems from the atom-scale crystalline coherence between perovskite and lead chalcogenide QDs.65,66 The evident mismatch will result in strain, which will be released via the formation of defects or 3D islands at the corresponding interface. Here, we only present the discussion of hybrid principles on the ‘‘dots-in-perovskite-matrix” structure. The detailed synthesis process has been reviewed in detail before.63,67 Density functional theory calculations revealed that the (100) facet of the PbS QDs matches well with the (110) facet of perovskites, and the corresponding interface-formation energy is deduced to be less than 10 meV Å−2. This facilitates the epitaxial growth of perovskite on PbS QDs without the formation of interfacial and in-gap defects, leading to great QD passivation.65 The pioneering work by the Sargent group has provided the first experimental observation of high lattice matching between PbS QDs and MAPbI3 perovskites.65 High-resolution transmission electron microscopy revealed that the d-spacing value of the (224) plane of the MAPbI3 perovskite (2.2 Å) matches well with that of the (202) plane of PbS (2.1 Å), enabling the facile epitaxy for constructing a ‘‘dots-in-perovskite-matrix” structure.
Additionally, most the high-performance perovskites present a broad bandgap, which can generally form a type I heterojunction with the commonly used lead chalcogenide QDs, facilitating carrier transport from the perovskite matrix to QDs. For instance, when the QD loading reaches ∼28%, the photoelectrons and holes generated in the broad-bandgap perovskites are transported with 80% efficiency to the QDs, which can produce bright-light emission from the infrared-bandgap QDs. This is significantly higher than those of pure QDs and QDs with the NaI matrix.65 Despite the benefit of the high-loading perovskites for light emission, QD passivation requires the thin-layer perovskites for high QD coupling, which will reduce the block of carrier transport for pure QDs, thereby affording high-performance QD solar cells. A recent report by the Sargent group demonstrated that efficient carrier transport in the ‘‘dots-in-perovskite-matrix” structure endowed a record photovoltaic performance for QD solar cells.64 On the contrary, hybrid solar cells with a bulk-heterojunction generally require low-loading QDs for high-performance PSCs. A small number of QDs can work as effective seed-like nucleation sites to modulate the nucleation and growth of perovskite crystals, thereby increasing crystal domains and coverage, which will enhance the carrier diffusion lengths and result in excellent reproducibility of the efficient perovskite devices.68,69
Except for the high lattice matching from atom-scale crystalline coherence, ‘‘dots-in-perovskite-matrix” structures generally exhibit enhanced electrical properties over pure QDs, e.g., mobility, trap density and diffusion length. Perovskite materials generally afford low trap density and high mobility, therefore resulting in high diffusion length, which jointly enables the great photovoltaic performance of PSCs.63,70 Benefiting from the benefits of perovskites, hybrid perovskite-QD structures can afford enhanced electrical properties, which can be leveraged to build high-efficiency hybrid solar cells with bulk-heterojunction and bilayer structures. Liu et al. demonstrated that the QDs-in-CsPbBr3−xIx perovskite can present high lattice matching and a doubled increase of mobility over pure QDs, therefore resulting in markedly improved photovoltaic performance.66 Hybrid perovskites and QDs with bilayer structures also require a favorable type-II energy level alignment for efficient electron and hole transport, which plays a critical role in high-performance hybrid solar cells.
Perovskites and lead chalcogenide QDs can also fulfill complementary absorption, which can be leveraged to harvest infrared light via the broad absorption tunability of QDs. Nevertheless, perovskites generally cannot offset the absorption valley of lead chalcogenide QDs, which is markedly distinct from hybrid QD-organic structures. For the QD and perovskite blend or layered structures, complementary absorption has a great impact on their optoelectronic devices. For instance, the ‘‘dots-in-perovskite-matrix” structure can exhibit strong absorption beyond the wavelength over 1000 nm with only 25% QD loading. Additionally, hybrid structures present clearly enhanced absorption in visible bands stemming from perovskites. More importantly, it is worth mentioning that the broad absorption of lead chalcogenide QDs can afford the additional PCE of ∼5% for high-performance PSCs, providing a promising route to further enhance photovoltaic performance.61,71
We proceed to deliver a brief outline of the working principles for hybrid QD-perovskite structures, mainly from lattice matching, and electrical and optical properties. Lattice matching affords excellent interface quality, thereby paving the way for great QD passivation with perovskites and hybrid solar cells with bulk-heterojunction. Electrical and optical properties are the critical prerequisite for all hybrid QD-perovskite structures, especially for hybrid solar cells with tandem structures, offering great promise to further enhance the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.
3. QD passivation
Given the high lattice matching, perovskite materials can offer a promising route to manipulate the passivation of lead chalcogenide QDs. Since the first demonstration of the ‘‘dots-in-perovskite-matrix” structure,65 QD passivation with perovskites has witnessed rapid progress in the past few years. In 2015, Peng et al. successfully fabricated MAPbI3 perovskites-capped PbS QDs by solid state ligand exchange (SSLE) process using acetonitrile solvent, and perovskite ligands can fully replace the original mixed ligands of oleate and oleylamine, which is expected to deliver high photovoltaic performance.72 Nevertheless, the developed QD solar cells can only achieve an inferior PCE of ∼5.3%, mainly due to the existence of pinholes stemming from the layer-by-layer SSLE process. On account of the unfavorable SSLE process, Yang et al. reported that the perovskite matrix can also enable the facile QD inks with great passivation, which can address the major roadblock in the commercialization of QD solar cells.73 Perovskite shells can be grown via the phase transition ligand exchange (PTLE) process and simultaneously increase the solubility of QDs in polar solvents, therefore developing high-performance QD inks. They employed perovskite precursors of MAI and PbI2 in DMF to replace the intrinsic OA ligands of PbS QDs and form perovskite shells after annealing, which can offer great passivation over the existing MAI ligands. With this benefit, the developed solar cells can afford a record PCE of ∼9% with significantly reduced hysteresis, compared with MAI ligands.
It is well established that MAPbI3 perovskites exhibit poor stability in humid air, which has placed some restrictions on their applications for stable PbS QDs. Instead, all-inorganic CsPbX3 perovskites generally exhibit great air stability, and have emerged as promising building blocks for advanced PSCs.30,41,74 For QD passivation, CsPbX3 perovskites exhibit great superiority in terms of performance and stability. For instance, Zhang et al. developed the ‘‘dots-in-perovskite-matrix” structure with PbI2 and CsI ligands on PbS QDs via the low-temperature and solution-processed PTLE process.75 The high lattice matching between the PbS QDs and CsPbI3 perovskites enabled the great passivation of PbS QDs via epitaxial induced growth. Therefore, the improved passivation greatly reduces trap-state assisted recombination, leading to a high photovoltaic performance of ∼10.5% and markedly enhanced stability both under long-term illumination and storage under ambient conditions. Nevertheless, a majority of all-inorganic CsPbX3 perovskites suffer from an undesired phase transition near room temperature from the favorable cubic phase to non-perovskite orthorhombic phase in ambient conditions, which has placed great restrictions on their photovoltaic applications. This can be explained by the slightly small size of Cs+, resulting in the reduced Goldschmidt tolerance factor. On account of this challenge, Liu et al. revealed that the ‘‘dots-in-perovskite-matrix” structure can significantly enhance the stability of CsPbX3 perovskites in the air by an order of magnitude, compared with the pristine perovskites.66 The developed perovskite structures can be kept well for more than six months at ambient conditions (25 °C and ∼30% humidity) and over five hours at 200 °C. Moreover, the perovskite matrix can prevent the oxidation of QD surfaces and reduce the corresponding agglomeration at 100 °C by a factor of five, compared with the pure QD counterparts. Accordingly, the matrix-protected QD presented a photoluminescence quantum efficiency of 30% for QD films at infrared bands, and the corresponding QD solar cells delivered a high PCE of ∼12.6% and significantly improved stability under maximum power point (MPP) condition, over the pure QD counterparts.
Additionally, mix-cation perovskites have presented great flexibility in modulating optical and electrical properties, which have enabled noteworthy superiority in terms of photovoltaic performance and stability. Recently, Albaladejo-Siguan et al. developed the triple-cation perovskites including Cs+, MA+ and FA+ for QD passivation through epitaxial induced growth, which can form favorable energetic alignment to the QD core, resulting in reduced recombination without compromising transport.76 The developed perovskite-matrix QD solar cells can achieve a maximum PCE of 11.3% and maintain 96% of their initial performance after 1200 h shelf storage, which is markedly higher than their all-inorganic CsPbX3 counterparts. Despite the great benefit of the PLTE process, the spontaneous nucleation of perovskite precursors incorporated in QD inks will lead to thick perovskite shells (several perovskite crystal unit cells). This would thus result in barriers for interdot charge-carrier transport between QDs, which still places great restrictions on the further performance improvement of QD solar cells. Concerning this challenge, Sun et al. recently introduced a robust post-treatment strategy with FAI/FABr after forming QD films to achieve thin perovskite shells (Fig. 2a).64 Accordingly, the monolayer of the perovskite matrix can offer better QD passivation, reduce the carrier-tunneling distance and enhance interdot coupling, thereby exhibiting a sharper absorption exciton peak (Fig. 2b). Moreover, the QDs with a monolayer-perovskite matrix exhibited significantly improved mobility and double diffusion length, compared to the untreated QD counterparts (Fig. 2c). The developed perovskite-matrix QD solar cells can deliver a striking PCE of ∼13.8%, which is still the record value in this field (Fig. 2d). Additionally, Yang et al. proceeded to develop the monolayer-perovskite matrix strategy with guanidinium and pseudohalide to provide better QD passivation.77 The introduced pseudohalide can offer the effective replacement of surface oxygen species and additional filling of defective sites, while the guanidinium cations provide epitaxial perovskite bridges to reconstruct the oxidized QD surface and enhance electronic coupling. These benefits jointly enable efficient and stable QD solar cells with the Jsc over 30 mA cm−2, an EQE of ∼80% at excitonic peaks, and stable operation under humid and ambient conditions.
 Fig. 2  QD passivation with perovskite shells. (a) Schematic of post-treatment strategy with FAI/FABr to form the monolayer perovskite bridge for strong coupling. (b) Absorbance of QD films before and after FABr treatment. (c) Mobility of the QD films without and with FAI and FABr treatment. (d) Photovoltaic performance of QD solar cells with and without FABr treatment. (e) Schematic of PbS QDs with 2D perovskites. (f–g) Inhomogeneity of the matrix increases the structural and energetic disorder (f), and the 2D perovskites improves the QD homogeneity (g). (a–d) Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Except for the great passivation via 3D perovskites, 2D perovskites offer additional freedom to further program the inter-particle spacing at atomic scale, therefore improving the QD packing density and reducing the structural and energetic disorder in solid films (Fig. 2e–g). Xu et al. developed a matrix engineering strategy with a hybrid inorganic-amine coordinating complex to form high-quality 2D perovskite shells for QD passivation.23 With this strategy, the developed 2D perovskite-matrix QD films exhibit significantly enhanced carrier diffusion length, therefore resulting in nearly double thicknesses and a record Jsc over 32 mA cm−2 for PbS QDs with an excitonic peak of ∼1.3 eV. The perovskite matrix also exhibits great superiority in the passivation of PbSe QDs with a large Bohr exciton radius, resulting in stronger electronic coupling. Hu et al. introduced the mixed halide CsPb(Br/I)3 perovskites via epitaxial growth to improve the QD passivation.78 Accordingly, the developed perovskite-matrix QD solar cells can achieve the enhanced PCE of ∼9.2%, significantly higher than the existing record value of 8.2% for PbSe QD solar cells. Nevertheless, the photovoltaic performance of PbSe QD solar cells still lags far behind that of the PbS counterparts, indicating the urgent need of more research efforts for further improved passivation.
From the above discussion, we can hold that the ‘‘dots-in-perovskite-matrix” structure can be implemented via the facile processing in QD inks or QD films from post-treatment strategy for great QD passivation, and therefore enable the high photovoltaic performance of QD solar cells. The perovskite matrix can also offer great freedom to modulate the inter-particle spacing at the atomic scale, and further enhance the QD coupling and improve the carrier diffusion length. This would result in increasing the thickness of active layers and the corresponding photovoltaic performance. Nevertheless, the instability stemming from perovskites on lead chalcogenide QDs still draws worldwide concern, and more research efforts should be devoted to countering this challenge. The perovskite matrix for PbSe QDs and direct-synthesis lead chalcogenide QDs should also draw more attention to further advance the commercial applications of this technology.
4. Perovskite passivation
Owing to the low-temperature processing of PSCs, there exist abundant defects, which will markedly compromise their performance and reduce the stability in operation. Successive efforts have been devoted to developing various strategies to provide great passivation mainly from elemental passivation and molecular modification.79,80 Some promising metal ions, including cesium (Cs), strontium (Sr) and rubidium (Rb) have been reported to markedly reduce the defect density, and therefore enhance the PSC performance and stability.81–84 For molecular passivation, some organic materials, e.g., poly-vinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and small molecule acceptors have been introduced in perovskite bulks or interfaces to suppress the formation of defects and reduce the density of mid-traps.85–89
Perovskite QDs with a great number of elements and organic ligands hold great potential in simultaneously achieving elemental passivation and molecular passivation for PSCs. With these benefits, Zheng et al. developed a facile strategy with inorganic perovskite QDs for distributing elements and surface ligands in bulk perovskite films, which can significantly reduce the defect density and enhance the perovskite passivation (Fig. 3a).90 Fourier-transform photocurrent spectroscopy offered convincing evidence that perovskite films with QD treatment can achieve a steeper absorption onset, indicating significant reduction of the band tail and mid trap (Fig. 3b and c). Therefore, perovskite QD treatment can mitigate the energy disorder of bulk perovskites, narrow the band-tail states, and reduce mid-gap states, resulting in higher quasi-Fermi level splitting and open-circuit voltage. With 0.25 wt% of QDs treatment, the developed PSCs can markedly improve PCE to ∼21.5%. Furthermore, the device stability is demonstrated by retaining ∼80% of its initial performance under 500 h continuous illumination in thermal and moisture stressors (Fig. 3d and e).
 Fig. 3  Perovskite passivation with QDs. (a) Schematic of post-treatment by perovskite QDs in anti-solvent. (b) Schematic of the impact of tail states and mid-gap states on device Voc. (c) The mid-gap and band tail of bulk perovskites with/without QD treatment. (d) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with the treatment of different content QDs. (e) Stability of PSCs with/without QD treatment under continuous AM 1.5 light illumination. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Similarly, Gao et al. also employed CsPbBr3 QDs in anti-solvent to further improve the performance and stability of PSCs. With the introduction of perovskite QDs, the quality of perovskite films can be greatly improved, which can reduce charge recombination and improve charge transfer.91 Moreover, perovskite QDs can induce the formation of a passivation layer, enabling the lower defect density and higher open-circuit voltage. With these benefits, the developed PSCs with QD treatment can achieve a champion PCE of ∼20.5% and high device stability. The developed PSCs retain 90% of its initial efficiency under 500 h storage in ambient without any encapsulation. Perovskite QDs can not only offer great passivation, but also improve the quality of perovskite films, resulting in great improvement in the device performance and stability. We have summarized the performance of QD and perovskite solar cells with better passivation in Table 2.
Table 2 The performance of QD and perovskite solar cells with better passivation






Solar cell structure

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




QD passivation
ITO/TiO2/PbS-MAPbI3 QD/MoO3/Au
0.60
22.0
40.0
5.3

72



The control
0.40
12.1
33.0
1.6

72



ITO/ZnO/PbS-MAPbI3/PbS-EDT QD/Au
0.61
21.8
67.9
8.95

73



The control
0.55
18.0
52.7
5.33

73



ITO/ZnO/PbSe-CsPbBr0.5I1.5/PbS-EDT QD/Au
0.56
25.7
64.0
9.2

78



The control
0.51
24.1
60.0
7.4

78



ITO/ZnO/PbS-CsPbI3/PbS-EDT QD/Au
0.64
24.5
67.0
10.5

75



The control
0.63
23.9
60.0
9.1

75



ITO/ZnO/PbS-Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3/PbS-EDT QD/Au
0.59
28.9
66.4
11.3

76



The control
0.61
24.6
56.3
8.4

76



ITO/ZnO/PbS-2D perovskites/PbS-EDT QD/Au
0.65
29.0
63.8
12.0

23



The control
0.60
27.0
67.8
11.0

23



ITO/ZnO/PbS-CsPbBrxI3−x/PbS-EDT QD/Au
0.64
28.9
68.4
12.6

66



The control
—
—
—
—
—


ITO/ZnO/PbS-GuPbI3/PM6/MoO3/Ag
0.62
31.8
65.1
12.8

77



The control
0.60
31.1
64.5
12.0

77



ITO/ZnO/PbS-FAPbBr3/PbS-EDT QD/Au
0.65
30.0
71.0
13.8

64



The control
0.63
28.0
67.0
11.8

64



Perovskite passivation
FTO/PTAA/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu
1.13
23.0
80.3
20.9

90



The control
1.06
23.2
74.4
18.3

90



FTO/TiO2/FAxMA1-xPbI3/CsPbI3 QDs/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
1.05
24.3
71.0
18.56

92



The control
1.05
20.9
69.0
15.2

92



ITO/PTAA/FAxMA1−xCsPbI3/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Cu
1.19
23.0
77.0
21.0

93



The control
1.13
22.8
74.3
19.1

93



FTO/TiO2/Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/CsPbBr1.85I1.15 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.14
23.4
79.0
21.1

94



The control
1.09
23.4
76.0
19.5

94



FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/CsPbBr3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.13
22.8
79.2
20.46

91



The control
1.08
22.6
76.1
18.5

91



FTO/SnO2/(FAPbI3)x(MAPbBr3)1−x/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.10
23.63
80.4
20.32

95



The control
1.02
23.46
79.5
18.5

95





5. Hybrid device structures
5.1 Bulk-heterojunction
In this section, we present a detailed discussion on the recent efforts of hybrid perovskite-QD blending structures with the focus of the improvement of photovoltaic performance and stability. It is well established that one of the major challenges in fabricating high-performance PSCs is the preparation of high-quality films with favorable morphology, high crystallinity, and minimum pinhole.65,66,96 QDs can offer great freedom in modulating the nucleation and growth of crystals, thereby paving the way for desired morphology.97 Moreover, the challenge of perovskite stability has drawn worldwide attention to further advance the commercial applications of this technology. Hybrid perovskite-QD blending structure also exhibits a promising potential to address the stability issues, e.g., phase stability and air stability.
To enhance the performance of PSCs, Li et al. developed a facile route to prepare perovskite films via intermixing a small amount of precursor-capped inorganic PbS QDs during film growth.69 The original oleic acid ligands for QD passivation are intentionally replaced with MAI on the QD surface to engineer the interfaces, and therefore facilitate perovskite growth. The dispersed MAI-capped inorganic PbS QDs act as effective seed-like sites to accelerate the formation of perovskite lattice structures (Fig. 4a). Accordingly, the nucleation and growth during perovskite crystallization were modulated with the increased crystal domains, enhancing the coverage and uniformity. With these benefits, the developed hybrid perovskite-QD solar cells can achieve a significantly improved photovoltaic performance of ∼17.4% with only 1.0 wt% PbS QDs incorporation (Fig. 4b). The more detailed mechanism can be attributed to the well-dispersed PbS QDs in the perovskite precursors facilitating the formation of lead-halide octahedrons on the QD surface. This can suppress the number of nucleation sites near the electron transport layer (ETL) surface, leading to the growth of larger crystalline domains. Han et al. also reported a facile one-step approach to synthesize high-quality hybrid perovskite-QD films with favorable morphology.68 They reported that the developed hybrid films can greatly improve the carrier mobility and exhibit broad absorption to the near-infrared band from PbS QDs. The enhanced perovskite crystallization was also observed with the enlarged grain size, reduced fragmentized grains and improved characteristic peak intensity. With these benefits, the developed hybrid solar cells can present a high PCE of 18.6%, corresponding to an improvement of 14%, compared to that of the pure MAPbI3 counterparts.
 Fig. 4  Hybrid PbS QD and perovskite bulk-heterojunction. (a) Nucleation and growth routes of perovskite crystal thin films with MAI-capped PbS QDs. (b) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with different QD contents. (c) Photographs of the water contact angles on perovskite films with/without PbSe QDs. (d) Time-resolved PL of perovskite films with/without PbSe QDs. (e) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with/without PbSe QDs. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c–e) Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
A hybrid perovskite-QD structure can also offer promising access to improve the stability of PSCs. Benefiting from the desired size of FA+ for a favorable tolerance factor and broad absorption range, formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3) perovskites have great application potential in building high-performance PSCs.99 Nevertheless, the stability issues have raised great concerns when advancing the commercial applications of this technology. Even processing in inert conditions, there still exist serious stability issues for FAPbI3 perovskites because the α-black phase can easily convert to the non-perovskite phase at room temperature, and it is also challenging to stabilize in ambient conditions. With these issues in mind, Salim et al. proposed that the long-term stability of FAPbI3 PSCs can be significantly improved when prepared under ambient conditions.100 The time in which the efficiency drops to 80% of the initial value (T80) increased from 21 days (in N2) to 112 days (in ambient). This can be attributed to the presence of Pb–O bonds, which can block the propagation of α-phase perovskites. More strikingly, the introduction of PbS QDs with different concentrations (0.5–5 mg mL−1) into perovskites prepared in ambient conditions further improved the long-term stability to 145 days (T80) when stored under ambient conditions. With these benefits, the developed hybrid solar cells can achieve a champion PCE of 19.4% for FAPbI3 PSCs with 1 mg mL−1 PbS QDs when prepared under ambient conditions with RH = 40–60%. Additionally, Wang et al. developed a synthetic strategy to construct the CsPbI3 and PbSe QDs bulk heterostructure, which can also improve the storage stability against moisture, benefiting from the hydrophobic protective coating from PbSe QDs (Fig. 4c).98 Moreover, the addition of PbSe QDs can not only increase the solar absorption of PSCs, but also offer the improved passivation of the perovskite QD surface, resulting in lower trap density and prolonged exciton lifetimes (Fig. 4d). Accordingly, the developed hybrid solar cells can deliver a champion PCE of 13.9%, significantly higher than that of 10.2% of the pure perovskite counterparts (Fig. 4e).
Perovskite QDs also have promising application potential in hybrid perovskite-QD structures. Generally, QDs can diffuse into bulk perovskites, which can enhance the passivation of the defects at the surface and grain boundaries. Recently, Yang et al. reported that hybrid perovskite-QD films had a uniform surface and improved crystal quality, which can exhibit a similar surface potential of perovskite films without deep-dark points (Fig. 5a and b).93 With the benefit, the developed PSC presented a high PCE exceeding 21% for triple-cation PSCs. Recently, Xie et al. employed the multi-cation halide perovskite QDs to passivate the ionic defects at the surface and boundary, which can markedly reduce the defect density of perovskite films (Fig. 5c).95 Therefore, the perovskite films with QD passivation presented improved PL intensity and carrier lifetime, indicating the high quality of the perovskite films (Fig. 5d). The developed PSCs exhibited improved Voc and device performance from ∼19.5% to 21% (Fig. 5e). More strikingly, the PSC devices achieved higher stability over the control even at high humidity and high temperature (Fig. 5f).
 Fig. 5  Hybrid QD and perovskite bulk-heterojunction. (a) Scanning electron microscope images of the bulk perovskite with QD treatment and the control. (b) Kelvin probe force microscopy images of the bulk perovskite with QD treatment and the control. (c) Defect energy distribution of perovskite with QDs and the control. (d) Steady-state photoluminescence spectra of perovskite with QDs and the control. (e) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with QDs and the control. (f) PSC stability with/without QDs under high humidity. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c–f) Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
Despite the promising progress, there exists an urgent need to inspire further worldwide research efforts on hybrid perovskite-QD structures for high-performance and high-stability PSCs. Hybrid structures can not only enhance solar energy harvesting via broadening the absorption range, but also modulate the crystallinity of perovskites to achieve the favorable morphology for high-performance PSCs. More importantly, the phase and ambient stability of PSCs can be markedly improved with this hybrid strategy, which is highly critical for the commercial applications of PSCs.
5.2 Bilayer structure
There also emerged some attempts on the PbS QD/perovskite bilayer structure for high-performance hybrid solar cells. For PSCs, the conventional hole transport layers (HTL), spiro-MeOTAD has great superiority in improving device performance.101,102 Nevertheless, the stability issues stemming from doping have placed great restrictions on their commercial applications. It is well established that PbS QDs present high stability under MPP or storage in ambient conditions, even without encapsulation. With this benefit, PbS QDs are expected to hold great potential as promising HTLs for high-performance PSCs. Moreover, the low cost of QD HTLs also facilitates the industrial production of PSCs. Li et al. successfully introduced PbS QDs in mesoporous MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells, and the developed hybrid solar cells with inverted structure can achieve a PCE of ∼8%.103 They claimed that PbS QDs can form a favorable energy level matching with perovskites, therefore improving the carrier extraction and reducing the charge recombination between perovskites and electrodes. Moreover, the stable QD HTLs can significantly enhance the stability of PSCs with slight degradation after 100 h illumination in ambient conditions. Hu et al. also introduced PbS QDs as the effective HTL for PSCs with planar heterojunction.104 Further engineering the energy level of QDs can enable the favorable band alignment with perovskites, thereby resulting in efficient hole extraction. Accordingly, the developed hybrid solar cell can deliver a champion PCE of 7.5% with the absorption extended to 1000 nm.
Compared to PbS QDs, perovskite QDs bear great potential in enhancing the performance and stability of PSCs. With the narrow emission, high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) and tunable emission wavelength, perovskite QDs have drawn worldwide research efforts in the application of light-emitting diodes (Fig. 6a–c).37,44 When employed in PSCs, perovskite QDs can work as downshifting layers and the modified layers between perovskite and HTLs.106–108 Due to the orthogonal processing, perovskite QDs and bulk perovskites endure great compatibility. Chen et al. recently employed CsPbBr3 QDs as downshifting layers, which can work for ultraviolet blocking and conversion, therefore significantly improving device efficiency and stability (Fig. 6d).105 The developed PSCs can deliver a high PCE of 20.8% and a lifetime of over 100 h under ultraviolet illumination. Moreover, perovskite QDs can markedly reduce the hysteresis effect in PSCs, resulting in low dependence on scan rates (Fig. 6e and f). Additionally, the electrode layers and interface layers in PSCs generally bring about the parasitic absorption in ultraviolet bands, which not only compromises the photovoltaic performance, but also markedly reduces the stability of PSCs. Wang et al. synthesized the Mn doping CsPbCl3 QDs with a high PLQY of ∼60% and a large Stokes shift of over 200 nm, resulting in an efficient downshift of ultraviolet light into visible light at ∼590 nm.107 With the developed QDs on the front of PSCs, the developed device can achieve a high photovoltaic performance of ∼18.5% and retain ∼97% of the initial efficiency after 100 h ultraviolet illumination. The developed perovskite QDs can also be used for the performance improvement of organic and silicon solar cells.
 Fig. 6  Perovskite QDs and their application in downshifting. (a) Photoluminescence spectra and the corresponding pictures of composition-tuned perovskite QDs under ultraviolet illumination. (b) Absorption and photoluminescence spectra of CsPbBr3 QDs. (c) Emission of CsPbX3 QDs plotted on CEI chromaticity coordinates and most common color standards, including LCD TV and NTSC TV. (d) The device structure of PSCs with perovskite QDs. (e) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with different scanning rates. (f) Stability of PSCs with perovskite QDs under ultraviolet illumination. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2017, AAAS. (c) Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2019, Wiley. 
Due to the congener in terms of crystal structure and stoichiometry, perovskite QDs have great application in the modification of bulk perovskites for high performance and stability. In 2016, Cha et al. incorporated the modified MAPbBr3−xIx QD layer between bulk perovskites and HTLs, enabling greatly improved hole transport.110 With the favorable energy level alignment, the developed PSCs presented significant improvements in the fill factor, Jsc, and photovoltaic performance. Zai et al. also demonstrated that CsPbBr3 QDs can markedly improve the carrier transport between the bulk perovskite and HTL, resulting in great photovoltaic performance.111 Except for accelerating the carrier transport, perovskite QDs can also be used to passivate defects and suppress interfacial recombination, therefore reducing the energy loss of PSCs. Akin et al. employed inorganic CsPbBr1.85I1.15 perovskite QDs to modify the interface between the bulk perovskites and HTLs, which can improve the Voc by ∼50 mV, therefore enabling hysteresis-free and high-performance PSCs.94 More strikingly, the developed PSCs with perovskite QDs exhibited high shelf-stability against ambient humidity, retaining ∼91% of the initial efficiency over 30 days. The operation stability has also been improved greatly with 94% retention of the initial performance over hours, mainly stemming from high moisture resistivity and suppressed ion migration.
Interface engineering with perovskite QDs can also help alleviate the degradation issues stemming from the doping spiro-MeOTAD. Liu et al. employed CsPbI3 QDs as the modified layers between the bulk perovskite and spiro-MeOTAD, which can simultaneously enhance perovskite passivation and carrier transport.92 Moreover, the developed PSCs presented significantly improved photovoltaic performance from 15.17 to 18.56% with high moisture stability and operation stability. Additionally, recent work by Cheng et al. presented a clear clarification of the function of perovskite QDs between bulk perovskites and HTLs, including trap-state passivation, energy level alignment and orientation regulation (Fig. 7a).109 They introduced a perovskite QD modified-layer between bulk perovskites and various HTLs (P3HT, PTAA and spiro-OMeTAD), resulting in significantly improved performance and stability. The main reason can be attributed to perovskite QDs offering great passivation of bulk perovskites with greatly reduced defect density and enhanced carrier transport (Fig. 7b and c). More importantly, Raman spectra indicated that perovskite QDs can enhance the regularity and crystallinity of organic HTLs, resulting in high hole mobility and carrier transport (Fig. 7d and e), which are responsible for the improved filling factor (Fig. 7f).
 Fig. 7  Perovskite QDs as modified layers between perovskite and HTLs. (a) Schematic of the PSC structure with a perovskite QD modified layer. (b) Steady photoluminescence spectra of the bulk perovskite with perovskite QD and P3HT HTL. (c) Space-charge-limited current measurement of PSC devices with/without perovskite QDs. (d) Hole mobilities of varied organic HTLs with/without perovskite QDs. (e) Raman spectra of P3HT with/without QDs. (f) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with P3HT or P3HT and perovskite QDs. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
Some recent reports indicated that when perovskite QDs were coated on bulk perovskites, a proper band-edge bending intermediate layer would form, which was favorable for carrier transport. Bian et al. developed hybrid perovskite-QD solar cells with promising CsPbI3 QDs.112 With the benefits of perovskite QDs, all-inorganic CsPbBrI2 perovskites solar cells with high stability can achieve a champion photovoltaic performance of 14.4%. Without any encapsulation, the developed PSCs exhibited slight degradation after 3 weeks of storage under 60% humidity. Recently, FAPbI3 perovskites have witnessed rapid development due to their high phase stability and broad absorption.113,114 Nevertheless, FAPbI3 perovskite solar cells suffer from notorious degradation under aging stressors, e.g., oxygen, moisture and heat. Generally, Cs incorporation can be employed to improve perovskite stability, but the effectiveness of this strategy is compromised, owing to the low solubility of Cs in bulk FAPbI3 perovskites. To counter this issue, perovskite QDs can be used to incorporate Cs into bulk FAPbI3. Que et al. first developed the Cs1−xFAxPbI3 alloy QDs via mixing CsPbI3 and FAPbI3 QDs (Fig. 8a and b), which can be used to incorporate Cs into bulk FAPbI3 perovskites.115 The developed PSC exhibited a hysteresis-free photovoltaic performance of ∼20% and a high storage stability even under 90% relative humidity (Fig. 8c–e).
 Fig. 8  Perovskite QDs for stable PSCs. (a) Photoluminescence spectra of CsPbI3 and FAPbI3 QDs. (b) XRD patterns of CsPbI3, FAPbI3 and the mixing Cs0.57FA0.43PbI3 QDs. (c) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with/without perovskite QDs. (d) Absorbance variation as a function of storage time (at 650 nm). (e) The stability of PSCs with/without perovskite QDs under high humidity. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
We proceed to offer a brief discussion on hybrid perovskite-QD bilayer structures. On the one hand, the moderate mobility and high defect density of lead chalcogenide QDs have greatly blocked the performance improvement of PSCs. More research efforts should be devoted to enhancing QD passivation, and we can gain a lot of inspiration from the success of QD HTLs in QD solar cells. On the other hand, perovskite QDs exhibit great application potential for the performance and stability improvement of PSCs. Especially for stability, perovskite QDs can be used to greatly alleviate the degradation issues from moisture, oxygen, heat and ultraviolet, therefore advancing the commercial applications of PSCs.
5.3 Tandem structure
On account of the limited solar harvesting range for high-performance perovskite materials, there still exists a great amount of solar energy that is unavailable, which greatly blocks the further performance improvement of PSCs.8,44,116–118 Commercial single-crystal silicon solar cells generally can harvest solar energy up to ∼1100 nm,10,11,119 which can provide complementary absorption for PSCs. The corresponding tandem solar cells recently have achieved the strikingly improved photovoltaic performance over 29%.120,121 Nevertheless, conventional silicon materials require stringent and complex processing conditions, compromising the superiority of solution processing for PSCs. Meanwhile, it is still challenging to achieve low-bandgap (<1.1 eV) perovskites with high performance and stability for back-cells. Compared to perovskites and single-crystal silicon, lead chalcogenide QDs can harness most of the solar energy even up to 2000 nm via facile bandgap tunability,35,122–126 indicating the great potential as the back-cells for PSCs (Fig. 9a and b). Moreover, with the joint efforts, low-bandgap QDs have witnessed rapid progress in terms of passivation. With these benefits, some pioneering reports have evaluated the performance of tandem solar cells with lead chalcogenide QD as back-cells. Karani et al. developed a tandem solar cell based on halide perovskite front-cell and QD back-cell, and both materials offered bandgap tunability and solution processability.127 A theoretical PCE of 43% under 1 sun illumination was achieved with bandgaps of 1.55 eV for perovskites and 1.0 eV for QDs. They underlined that inter-subcell coupling contributed significantly to the ultimate PCE via photon recycling (>11% absolute gain). They further demonstrated that a PCE of 29.7% can be achieved when considering the state-of-the-art perovskite and QD solar cells.
 Fig. 9  Infrared QD solar cells with front filters. (a) QD solar cell device with perovskite or Si filters. (b) AM 1.5 Solar illumination and the main operating range of the perovskite, c-Si and QD technologies and the absorbance curves of infrared QD with different sizes. (c and d) Photovoltaic performance and EQE curves of the perovskite front cell and QD back cell in the 4T tandem structure. (a) Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2019, Wiley. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
The premise of this promising tandem structure is the rapid progress of low-bandgap QD passivation. Compared to the optimized-bandgap QDs for high-performance QD solar cells (∼1.3 eV), low-bandgap QDs (∼1 eV) have slightly larger sizes with significantly increased (100) facets and reduced (111) facets, indicating that the existing passivation strategies may be not available for the low-bandgap ones.128,129 Concerning this challenge, the Sargent group has contributed a lot to developing high-performance low-bandgap QDs as back-cells for perovskite front-cells. In 2016, Kiani et al. developed the first low-bandgap QD ink with the PTLE strategy using mixed methyl-ethyl-ketone and hexylamine, which can be deposited in a single step, resulting in an active layer of 200 nm thickness and a RMS roughness below 1 nm.130 The developed infrared solar cells can achieve a PCE of 3.5% under full solar-spectrum illumination and an additional PCE of 0.4% through a silicon filter with a low Voc of ∼0.29 V and a Jsc of ∼2.4 mA cm−2. To further enhance the passivation of low-bandgap QDs, the Konstantatos group developed the hybrid inorganic-organic ligand exchange for PbS QDs with ZnI2 and MPA.131 The developed infrared solar cells can achieve a PCE of up to 7.9% under full solar-spectrum illumination with an external quantum efficiency of 80% at 1.35 μm. Moreover, an additional 3.3% PCE was achieved by harnessing solar radiation beyond 750 nm with a MAPbI3 perovskite filter.
Despite the benefit, the infrared solar cells with low-bandgap QDs still suffer from low Voc and Jsc, leading to the limited application potential as the back-cells for PSCs and silicon solar cells. On account of the tough issue, Kim et al. proposed a new surface management strategy targeting the passivation of both (100) and (111) facets with the distinct choices of cations and anions (Na+ and I−). This can reduce both Stokes shift (∼47 meV) and Urbach tail (∼29 meV), resulting in the markedly improved QD passivation and colloidal stability.128 Therefore, the developed infrared solar cells can achieve an improved Voc of over 0.43 V and a Jsc of ∼3.2 mA cm−2. Moreover, the group further developed a novel strategy with multi-bandgap PbS QDs to simultaneously improve Voc and Jsc of infrared solar cells.132 They engineered the density of states to achieve a large quasi-Fermi level splitting and a tailored optical response. By selectively introducing the large-bandgap QDs within the small-bandgap QDs, the developed infrared solar cell can achieve the significantly improved Voc of 0.45 V and Jsc of ∼3.7 mA cm−2, resulting in a record PCE of 0.95% with silicon filter. Additionally, they proceeded to develop a facile strategy with short-chain carboxylates as a steric hindrance controller, which can facilitate ligand exchange for low-bandgap QDs.62 Accordingly, the net energy barrier to replace the original capping ligands with lead halide anions was markedly decreased with short carboxylates, which can offer great passivation and improved packing density and monodispersity. Benefiting from this strategy, the developed infrared solar cell can achieve an additional PCE of ∼0.96% with a high Jsc of ∼4.1 mA cm−2. To further enhance the performance of infrared solar cells, the group designed an effective strategy based on the complementarity of PbI2, PbBr2 and PbCl2, in terms of QD passivation and mobility.129 They introduced the mixed lead-halide ligands to offer great QD passivation with the reduced Stokes shift and enhanced charge transport. With this strategy, the developed infrared solar cell can deliver a record Voc of over 0.46 V and a Jsc of ∼4.4 mA cm−2, delivering a champion PCE of 1.17% with a silicon filter.
Except for various passivation strategies from the ligand exchange process, there also emerge some research studies for the synthesis of low-bandgap QDs.71,134,135 The Zhang group recently developed a novel synthesis of low-bandgap QDs (0.65–1 eV) from ZnS nanorods via cation exchange, which can enable high monodispersity, ease-of-size control, in situ passivation and high stability.71 Therefore, infrared solar cells based on the developed QDs of 0.95 eV can achieve a high PCE of 10.0% under AM 1.5G solar illumination, a perovskite-filtered PCE of 4.2%, and a silicon-filtered PCE of 1.1% with a Jsc of ∼4.4 mA cm−2. The group also contributed a facile strategy to address the challenge of low Voc and Jsc, stemming from the contradiction between surface passivation and electronic coupling.134 The strategy can decouple the restriction via epitaxially coating a thin PbS shell over PbSe QDs combined with in situ halide passivation. With the benefit of the protection from the PbS shell and in situ halide passivation, the developed infrared solar cell can achieve a silicon-filtered PCE of 1.24% with a record Jsc of ∼6.4 mA cm−2 and a Voc of ∼0.35 V.
To further advance the progress of low-bandgap QDs, it is extremely essential to design a favorable device structure for high-performance infrared solar cells under silicon or perovskite filters. Some pioneering reports have contributed to developing highly transparent infrared electrodes, metal back electrodes and high-efficiency HTLs.133,136,137 With regard to low infrared-transparent electrodes, e.g., indium tin oxide (ITO) and fluorine tin oxide (FTO), Baek et al. developed the high-conductivity infrared-transparent electrodes based on oxide/metal/oxide multilayers, which can allow for low sheet resistance and simultaneously maintain IR transparency.137 Accordingly, the developed infrared electrode exhibited a high transmittance of over 70% even for wavelength ranges from 1000–1800 nm, which can deliver a silicon-filtered PCE of 0.96%, significantly higher than that with ITO (∼0.55%). Moreover, to maximize the absorption of infrared light, it is essential to employ micrometer QD thicknesses, exceeding the carrier diffusion lengths of QD films. To address this issue, Baek et al. designed the nanostructured metal back-electrodes and conformally coated them with MoO3/Ag, resulting in efficient charge extraction.133 The developed back-electrodes can endow a record EQE of 86% at the excitonic peak (1250 nm), and enable a record silicon-filtered PCE of 1.34% with a high Jsc of ∼5.6 mA cm−2 and a Voc of ∼0.43 V.
Developing high-efficiency HTLs can also offer a promising route to address the above issue. Kim et al. developed a stable QD ink in nonpolar solvents for high-performance HTLs, which can form the graded architecture with polar QD ink.61 With this alignment, the developed infrared solar cell can afford a superior silicon-filtered PCE of over 1.0% with a high Jsc of ∼4.2 mA cm−2 and a Voc of ∼0.37 V. More strikingly, when working as back cells for PSCs, forming 4-terminal (4T) tandem solar cells, the developed graded devices can offer the additional PCEs of 5.0% and 3.9% with 300 nm and 600 nm perovskite long-pass filters (∼1.58 eV), respectively. With regard to this challenge, the group proceeded to develop orthogonal-processing QD inks by introducing aromatic ligands to form multifunctional multilayer QD films, which can replace the conventional EDT-capping QD HTLs.58 Therefore, the developed infrared solar cells can deliver an EQE of 84% at the excitonic peak (1210 nm) and a record silicon-filtered PCE of 1.43%. They further developed the 4T tandem solar cells with semitransparent perovskite (1.63 eV), and achieved a high PCE of ∼22% with the developed infrared QD back cells (Fig. 9c and d).
There also emerge some reports for further investigation of 4T tandem solar cells with perovskite front cells and QD back cells. Manekkathodi et al. firstly performed the detailed-balance calculation, which can deliver a theoretical PCE of ∼45% by stacking perovskite (1.75 eV) and QDs (0.9 eV) under 1-sun illumination (Fig. 10a and b).138 To examine the actual performance, they further introduced a dielectric–metal-dielectric electrode consisting of a metal film sandwiched between dielectric (MoO3) layers, which can modulate the infrared transmittance of the front semi-transparent perovskite solar cells. Accordingly, the back QD solar cells can form complementary absorption and enhance the PCE of PSCs from 17.6% to 20.2% (Fig. 10c), indicating the great potential of low-bandgap QDs in tandem solar cells. Additionally, Chen et al. recently reported that a Lewis base can reduce the trap density of the prepared perovskite films and enhance the electron-diffusion length to 2.3 μm, which can enhance solar harvesting and afford a high PCE of 19.0% for 1.63 eV semi-transparent perovskite cells (Fig. 10d). They further investigated the QD back cells with organic HTLs, which can form the complementary absorption with QDs and improve the photovoltaic performance from 12.1% to 13.0% with the Jsc from 28.6 to 31.3 mA cm−2 (Fig. 10e and f), respectively. Accordingly, the QD back cells can boost the PCE of 4 T tandem solar cells to 24%, a champion value for this structure.
 Fig. 10  Tandem perovskite and QD solar cells with the 4T structure. (a) and (d) Schematic of the 4T tandem device. (b) Calculated PCE of the hybrid 4T tandem solar cells as a function of front cell and back cell bandgaps. (c) and (f) EQE curves of the perovskite front cell and QD back cell in the 4T tandem structure. (e) Absorption spectrum of QDs and organics with complementarity. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
All of the above discussions are only for infrared QD solar cells with perovskite or silicon filters, forming 4 T tandem solar cells, which still cannot reveal the actual performance of low-bandgap QDs as back-cells with perovskite front cells. Tavakoli et al. recently developed highly efficient and stable monolithic (2T) perovskite/PbS QD tandem solar cells (Fig. 11a).140 They firstly employed ZnO nanowires passivated by SnO2 as an electron transporting layer for the PSC front cell, delivering a high PCE of 18.3%. Subsequently, they performed the surface passivation of 0.92 eV PbS QDs by CdCl2, which can enable a PCE of 8.46% with the improved Voc. Accordingly, the developed 2T and 4T tandem solar cells can achieve the high PCEs of 17.1% and 21.1%, respectively (Fig. 11b–d). More strikingly, hydrophobically stable QD back cells can significantly enhance the stability of PSCs with operational stability over 500 h under continuous illumination with only 6% PCE loss and impressive ambient stability after the storage of 70 days without encapsulation (Fig. 11e).
 Fig. 11  Tandem perovskite and QD solar cells with 2T structure. (a) Schematic of the tandem perovskite and QD solar cells. (b) Photovoltaic performance of the tandem perovskite and QD solar cells with different QDs. (c) EQE curves of the perovskite front cell and QD back cell in the 2T tandem structure. (d) Photovoltaic performance of the tandem perovskite and QD solar cells, semi-transparent PSC and filtered QDs. (e) Operational stability test of the 2T-tandem perovskite/PbS QDs device under illumination. (b–e) Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2021, Wiley. 
Despite the rapid progress of low-bandgap QDs as back-cells for PSCs, there is still no demonstration of high-performance 2T tandem solar cells, exceeding single semi-transparent PSCs. Low-bandgap QDs back-cells can offer promising routes to further enhance the photovoltaic performance and stability of PSCs. Nevertheless, limited research efforts have been devoted to the investigation of 2T and 4T tandem solar cells, resulting in slow progress in the realization of high-performance tandem solar cells with low-bandgap QDs. More worldwide efforts should be spurred to further advance the progress of this promising tandem structure. The performance of the hybrid QD and perovskite solar cells is summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 The performance of hybrid QD and perovskite solar cells, including bulk heterojunction, bilayer structure and tandem structure






Solar cell structure

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




Bulk-heterojunction
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3:PbS/P3HT/Pt
0.88
6.3
49.3
4.9

141



The control
0.76
4.1
34.5
1.91

141



ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3:PbS/Spiro-MeOTAD/Ag
0.56
22.8
55.0
7.0

142



The control
0.61
17.4
58.9
6.3

142



FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3:PbSe/Spiro-MeOTAD/Ag
1.21
16.8
68.6
13.9

98



The control
1.08
14.0
67.7
10.2

98



FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx:PbS/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
1.07
21.1
77.0
17.4

69



The control
0.99
21.0
68.0
14.1

69



FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3:PbS/Spiro-MeOTAD/Ag
1.03
23.5
77.2
18.6

68



The control
1.02
21.9
73.1
16.3

68



ITO/SnO2/FAPbI3:PbS QD/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
1.06
24.3
76.0
19.6

100



The control
1.02
22.9
76.0
18.0

100



ITO/PTAA/FAxMA1−xCsPbI3/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Cu
1.17
22.9
74.0
19.8

93



The control
1.13
22.8
74.3
19.1

93



FTO/SnO2/(FAPbI3)x(MAPbBr3)1−x/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.10
23.63
80.4
20.32

95



The control
1.02
23.46
79.5
18.5

95



Bilayer structure
ITO/TiO2/PbSe QD/CsPbBr3/Au
0.48
24.0
62.4
7.2

143



The control
0.39
25.2
50.0
4.8

143



ITO/PbS QD/MAPbI3/PCBM/Al
0.86
12.1
72.0
7.5

104



The control
0.63
10.9
37.0
2.6

104



FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PbS QD/Au
0.87
18.7
49.0
7.9

103



The control
0.76
16.8
43.0
5.5

103



CsPbCl3:Mn QDs/ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.10
22.0
76.3
18.3

107



The control
1.10
21.2
76.6
18.0

107



ITO/SnO2/FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/CsPbBr3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.12
23.5
78.0
20.56

111



The control
1.09
22.7
74.9
18.0

111



FTO/SnO2/FAPbI3/CsxFA1−xPbI3 QD/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.12
24.4
76.0
20.82

115



The control
1.12
24.2
73.6
19.95

115



FTO/CsPbBr3 QDs/TiO2/CsPbIxBr3−x/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.06
24.6
79.6
20.8

105



The control
1.06
23.3
79.7
19.7

105



FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br/CsPbI3 QDs/PTAA/Au
1.2
15.26
78.7
14.45

112



The control
1.19
11.8
78.3
11.0

112



FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Perovskite QDs/P3HT/Au
1.15
23.49
78.3
21.1

109



FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Perovskite QDs/PTAA/Au
1.12
22.7
75.8
19.2

109



FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Perovskite QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.12
22.97
77.1
19.9

109



The control
1.06
22.46
67.5
16.0

109



FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/CsPbIxBr1−x QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
0.95
19.5
72.0
13.2

110



The control
0.94
18.1
61.0
10.3

110



FTO/TiO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3/CsPbI3QDs/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
1.05
24.3
71.0
18.56

92



The control
1.05
20.9
69.0
15.2

92



FTO/TiO2/Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/CsPbBr1.85I1.15 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.14
23.4
79.0
21.1

94



The control
1.09
23.4
76.0
19.5

94



Tandem structure
Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.27
2.6
57.0
0.4

130



The control
—
—
—
—
—


Si filter/SiNx/SiO2/SiNx/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.35
2.5
54.4
0.48

136



The control
0.35
1.6
55.3
0.31

136



Si filter/PEI/Ag/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.38
3.9
65.5
0.96

137



The control
0.37
2.4
62.4
0.55

137



Perovskite filter/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.38
14.6
60.0
3.33

131



Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.32
3.44
61.0
0.67

131



The control
—
—
—
—
—


Si filter/ITO/ZnO PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.40
3.70
66.0
0.95

132



The control
0.35
3.20
61.0
0.67

132



Si filter/ITO/ZnO/low-bandgap PbS-I/high-bandgap PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.37
4.20
64.0
1.0

61



Perovskite filer/ITO/ZnO/low-bandgap PbS-I/high-bandgap PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.45
19.8
58.0
5.0

61



The control
0.35
4.0
62.0
0.85

61



Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PBDTTT-E-T/MoO3/Ag
0.43
5.60
56.0
1.34

133



The control
0.43
4.4
57.0
1.08

133



Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.43
3.20
65.2
0.9

128



The control
0.38
2.60
61.3
0.6

128



Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbSe-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.35
6.78
54.6
1.31

135



The control
0.29
6.1
54.0
0.95

135



Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbSe/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au
0.35
6.38
55.8
1.24

134



The control
0.24
5.83
46.8
0.65

134



ITO/ZnO/ZnONWs/SnO2/Perovskite/CuPC/Au/MoO3/sputtered ITO/ZnO NCs/PbS QDs/Au
1.55
16.3
69.0
17.1

140



The control
—
—
—
—
—




6. Summary and outlook
Given the rapid progress of solution-processing solar cells, QDs with broad tunability of bandgap, size-dependent optical and electrical properties can offer unparalleled benefits for a hybrid strategy with PSCs. Herein, we presented a detailed review covering the recent progress in developing high-performance and stable hybrid perovskite-QD solar cells with the aim to advance their commercial applications. We firstly discussed the working principles of hybrid perovskite-QD structures, revealing their combination fundamentals. An in-depth discussion on QD passivation with perovskite matrix was delivered to further enhance the performance of QD solar cells. Moreover, perovskite passivation with QDs was highlighted to reduce the defect density, and therefore enhance the performance and stability of PSCs. Additionally, hybrid QD-perovskite solar cells with bulk-heterojunction, bilayer structure and tandem structure were systematically summarized to offer some critical insights into advancing the commercial applications of hybrid solar cells. Bulk-heterojunction with QDs can offer a promising strategy to modulate the crystallinity of perovskites, markedly enhancing their photovoltaic performance and stability. Additionally, bilayer structures have delivered great success in enhancing perovskite passivation and reducing tiresome degradation issues. More strikingly, tandem structures with QDs are expected to further advance the performance of PSCs to new records and offer promising routes to address the stability issues. To further boost the performance and stability of hybrid solar cells, we proceed to present a brief discussion on the challenges and our detailed insights (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Summary of the research directions for the further breakthrough of hybrid perovskite-QD solar cells. 
6.1 Material design and development
Perovskite-QD structures hold great potential in developing novel photovoltaic materials with high performance. For lead chalcogenide QDs, there still exists a high defect density of ∼1016 cm−3, resulting in severe nonradiative recombination and low open-circuit voltage.26,144,145 It is highly essential to devote more research efforts to developing new passivation strategies to further reduce the defect density.146–150 The perovskite matrix can provide great freedom in modulating the inter-particle spacing at the atomic scale and further enhance QD coupling, which can offer great complementarity with organic ligands to balance the trade-off between QD passivation and carrier transport. For perovskite solar cells, further performance breakthroughs can be achieved by developing promising perovskite-QD materials with broader solar absorption, which generally present high voltage loss from more defects.45,151–156 Therefore, more careful design considerations should be devoted to balancing light absorption and voltage loss for perfect perovskite materials. Additionally, photovoltaic materials have achieved unparalleled progress with machine learning,157–162 which can also offer great benefits for the design of perovskite-QD materials.
6.2 Perovskite-QD crystallization
It is well established that QDs can greatly modulate the crystallinity of perovskites to achieve favorable morphology for high-performance PSCs.91,93,95 Despite the benefits, QD seed crystals may also bring unfavorable crystallinity of perovskites, compromising their high photovoltaic performance and stability. Moreover, the lack of a deep understanding of the crystallization mechanism and the kinetic process has greatly impeded the application of this hybrid strategy. More fundamental research studies are encouraged to further encourage interest in developing a novel crystallization control strategy for high-performance perovskite-QD hybrid solar cells. Additionally, QDs with a great number of elements and ligands can work as carriers for perovskite doping or passivation. It is desirable to investigate the detailed crystallization process of perovskite-QD with different ligands, especially for QDs with PbI2 ligands, which can not only offer the lead and iodine sources, but also enhance the crystallinity of perovskites.
6.3 Device engineering
Although perovskite/QD device structures have witnessed great progress in the past few years, there still exist some critical issues for further performance breakthroughs. The moderate mobility and high defect density of lead chalcogenide QDs have greatly blocked the progress of this strategy in terms of developing undoped hole transport layers. More research efforts can be devoted to developing great QD passivation, which can draw a lot of inspiration from the success of QD HTLs. On the other hand, perovskite QDs exhibit great application potential in improving the performance and stability of PSCs. Especially for PSC stability, perovskite QDs can be used to greatly alleviate the degradation issues from moisture, oxygen, heat and ultraviolet, which can advance the commercial application of PSCs. The matchings between perovskite QDs and bulk perovskites in terms of passivation and energy level alignment play a critical role in further performance improvement of this strategy. For tandem structures, low-bandgap lead chalcogenide QD back-cells can not only offer promising routes to further improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, but also provide favorable routes to significantly enhance their air stability. Nevertheless, limited research efforts have been devoted to the investigation of 2T and 4T tandem solar cells, resulting in moderate-performance tandem solar cells with low-bandgap QDs. More worldwide efforts should be spurred to further advance the progress of this promising tandem structure.
6.4 Design concept for further breakthrough of PSCs
In the past decade, PSCs have undergone great progress with a record PCE of over 25.5%, approaching their theoretical efficiency.4,5,114 The top-notch PSCs generally employ the promising FAPbI3 with a low bandgap of ∼1.5 eV, resulting in markedly improved short-circuit current density. To make a further breakthrough, it is highly desirable to enhance the mono-crystallization of FAPbI3 perovskites to reduce the defects and increase the band-edge absorption. Nevertheless, FAPbI3 perovskite solar cells suffer from great challenges of degradation under aging stressors, e.g., oxygen and moisture. QDs have been reported to enhance perovskite crystallization and stability against water and oxygen.90,95,115 The introduction of QDs into FAPbI3 perovskites may endow great potential in achieving breakthrough efficiency of over 26%. To this end, it is favorable to further enhance the lattice matching and charge transport between the FAPbI3 perovskites and QDs. Moreover, developing QD passivation with mixed FAI and PbI2 is highly critical to achieving this target, and the pioneering reports66,76,103 on QD passivation may offer some inspiration for this design concept.
We fully believe that the above research insights will encourage further development of hybrid solar cells and advance the commercialization progress. A hybrid strategy may also bring new opportunities for photodetectors,163,164 light-emitting diodes165–168 and other functional sensors.169–172
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to especially acknowledge the financial support by Tianjin Municipal Science and Technology Bureau of China (No. 21JCZDJC0060).
References
B. Chen and E. H. Sargent, Matter, 2022, 5, 1322–1325 CrossRef .
M. Victoria, N. Haegel, I. M. Peters, R. Sinton, A. Jäger-Waldau, C. del Cañizo, C. Breyer, M. Stocks, A. Blakers, I. Kaizuka, K. Komoto and A. Smets, Joule, 2021, 5, 1041–1056 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lin, J. Xu, M. Wei, Y. Wang, Z. Qin, Z. Liu, J. Wu, K. Xiao, B. Chen, S. M. Park, G. Chen, H. R. Atapattu, K. R. Graham, J. Xu, J. Zhu, L. Li, C. Zhang, E. H. Sargent and H. Tan, Nature, 2022, 603, 73–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, I. W. Choi, B. P. Darwich, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, J. H. Lee, B. Walker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, A. Hagfeldt, D. S. Kim, M. Grätzel and J. Y. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Min, D. Y. Lee, J. Kim, G. Kim, K. S. Lee, J. Kim, M. J. Paik, Y. K. Kim, K. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. J. Shin and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2021, 598, 444–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Burlingame, X. Huang, X. Liu, C. Jeong, C. Coburn and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2019, 573, 394–397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, D. Walter, Y. Ren, M. Tebyetekerwa, Y. Wu, T. Duong, Q. Lin, J. Li, T. Lu, M. A. Mahmud, O. L. C. Lem, S. Zhao, W. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Shen, L. Li, F. Kremer, H. T. Nguyen, D. Y. Choi, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole and T. P. White, Science, 2021, 371, 390–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jeong, I. W. Choi, E. M. Go, Y. Cho, M. Kim, B. Lee, S. Jeong, Y. Jo, H. W. Choi, J. Lee, J. H. Bae, S. K. Kwak, D. S. Kim and C. Yang, Science, 2020, 369, 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Zhang, W. Guo, W. Xiang and A. Hagfeldt, Matter, 2021, 4, 528–551 CrossRef CAS .
A. Razzaq, T. G. Allen, W. Liu, Z. Liu and S. De Wolf, Joule, 2022, 6, 514–542 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yan, A. Cuevas, I. Michel, C. Zhang, Y. Wan and X. Zhang, Joule, 2021, 5, 811–828 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ballif, F. J. Haug, M. Boccard, P. J. Verlinden and G. Hahn, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2022, 7, 597–616 CrossRef .
J. A. Christians, P. Schulz, J. S. Tinkham, T. H. Schloemer, S. P. Harvey, B. J. T. De Villers, A. Sellinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress, K. Domanski, B. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, E. A. Alharbi, M. Graetzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 568–574 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prasanna, T. Leijtens, S. P. Dunfield, J. A. Raiford, E. J. Wolf, S. A. Swifter, J. Werner, G. E. Eperon, C. de Paula, A. F. Palmstrom, C. C. Boyd, M. F. A. M. van Hest, S. F. Bent, G. Teeter, J. J. Berry and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 939–947 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, S. Tao, Y. Chen, X. Niu, C. K. Onwudinanti, C. Hu, Z. Qiu, Z. Xu, G. Zheng, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Liu, Y. Lun, J. Hong, X. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Xie and Y. Gao, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, S. Li, X. Liu, S. Zhang, M. Ghasemi, Y. Xiong, J. Hou and H. Ade, Joule, 2019, 3, 443–458 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, H. Hu, M. Ghasemi, T. Wang, B. A. Collins, J. H. Kim, K. Jiang, J. H. Carpenter, H. Li, Z. Li, T. McAfee, J. Zhao, X. Chen, J. L. Y. Lai, T. Ma, J. L. Bredas, H. Yan and H. Ade, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 253–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, Z. Chen, Q. Zhang, Z. Fei, R. Henry, M. Heeney, B. T. O'Connor, W. You and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808153 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, Q. Zhang, S. Li, C. Wang, Z. Jiang, J. Hou, W. You and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705485 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Li, S. Mukherjee, J. H. Carpenter, O. Awartani, X. Jiao, J. Hou and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602000 CrossRef .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, O. Voznyy, M. Liu, A. R. Kirmani, G. Walters, R. Munir, M. Abdelsamie, A. H. Proppe, A. Sarkar, F. P. García De Arquer, M. Wei, B. Sun, M. Liu, O. Ouellette, R. Quintero-Bermudez, J. Li, J. Fan, L. Quan, P. Todorovic, H. Tan, S. Hoogland, S. O. Kelley, M. Stefik, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 456–462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, O. Voznyy, R. Sabatini, F. P. García De Arquer, R. Munir, A. H. Balawi, X. Lan, F. Fan, G. Walters, A. R. Kirmani, S. Hoogland, F. Laquai, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 258–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Qiao, K. Zhou, J. Wang, R. Gui, K. Xian, M. Gao, H. Yin, X. Hao, Z. Zhou and L. Ye, Small, 2022, 18, 2201387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, K. Xian, L. Ye and Z. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, J. Jeong, H. Lu, T. K. Lee, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. Liu, I. W. Choi, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, H. B. Kim, S. I. Mo, Y. K. Kim, H. Lee, N. G. An, S. Cho, W. R. Tress, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, J. Y. Kim, M. Grätzel and D. S. Kim, Science, 2022, 375, 302–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al-Ashouri, E. Köhnen, B. Li, A. Magomedov, H. Hempel, P. Caprioglio, J. A. Márquez, A. B. M. Vilches, E. Kasparavicius, J. A. Smith, N. Phung, D. Menzel, M. Grischek, L. Kegelmann, D. Skroblin, C. Gollwitzer, T. Malinauskas, M. Jošt, G. Matič, B. Rech, R. Schlatmann, M. Topič, L. Korte, A. Abate, B. Stannowski, D. Neher, M. Stolterfoht, T. Unold, V. Getautis and S. Albrecht, Science, 2020, 370, 1300–1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Miyasaka, A. Kulkarni, G. M. Kim, S. Öz and A. K. Jena, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902500 CrossRef CAS .
B. Roose, Q. Wang and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803140 Search PubMed .
N. Li, X. Niu, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8235–8286 RSC .
J. Chen, D. Jia, E. M. J. Johansson, A. Hagfeldt and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 224–261 RSC .
J. Yuan, A. Hazarika, Q. Zhao, X. Ling, T. Moot, W. Ma and J. M. Luther, Joule, 2020, 4, 1160–1185 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Kagan, E. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2016, 353, 6302 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Moreels, Y. Justo, B. De Geyter, K. Haustraete, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2004–2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Choi, F. P. García de Arquer, A. H. Proppe, A. Seifitokaldani, J. Choi, J. Kim, S. W. Baek, M. Liu, B. Sun, M. Biondi, B. Scheffel, G. Walters, D. H. Nam, J. W. Jo, O. Ouellette, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, S. O. Kelley, Y. S. Jung and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Z. Fan, A. H. Proppe, F. P. G. De Arquer, D. Rossouw, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, M. Liu, G. Walters, R. Quintero-Bermudez, B. Sun, S. Hoogland, G. A. Botton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1325 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Faheem, B. Khan, C. Feng, M. U. Farooq, F. Raziq, Y. Xiao and Y. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 290–320 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Q. Xue, Q. Yao, N. Li, C. J. Brabec and H. L. Yip, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000183 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiang and W. Tress, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, X. Li, Y. Li and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1971–1996 RSC .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Protesescu and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Science, 2017, 358, 745–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, H. M. Jang, S. Kim, S. H. Jo and T. W. Lee, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 837–849 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Akkerman, G. Rainò, M. V. Kovalenko and L. Manna, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 394–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, M. Hao, S. Ding, P. Chen and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2105958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, J. W. Lee, Z. Dai, R. Wang, S. Nuryyeva, M. E. Liao, S. Y. Chang, L. Meng, D. Meng, P. Sun, O. Lin, M. S. Goorsky and Y. Yang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1866–1878 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, M. Liu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16016 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, A. Stavrinadis, T. Lasanta, D. So and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16035 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, H. J. Song, M. Shim and C. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 404–431 RSC .
S. W. Baek, S. H. Lee, J. H. Song, C. Kim, Y. S. Ha, H. Shin, H. Kim, S. Jeong and J. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2078–2084 RSC .
H. Lu, G. M. Carroll, N. R. Neale and M. C. Beard, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 939–953 CAS .
L. Duan, L. Hu, X. Guan, C. H. Lin, D. Chu, S. Huang, X. Liu, J. Yuan and T. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100354 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Smith, J. M. Luther, O. E. Semonin, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 183–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, M. J. Choi, G. Sharma, M. Biondi, B. Chen, S. W. Baek, A. M. Najarian, M. Vafaie, J. Wicks, L. K. Sagar, S. Hoogland, F. P. G. de Arquer, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Liu, K. Xian, K. Zhou, J. Wu, S. Li, W. Zhao, Z. Zhou and L. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 1013–1038 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Wang, H. Li, K. Zhou, R. Gui, K. Xian, Q. Qi, X. Yang, Y. Chen, W. Zhao, H. Yin, K. Zhao, Z. Zhou and L. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2201975 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, O. Ouellette, O. Voznyy, M. Wei, J. Choi, M. J. Choi, J. W. Jo, S. W. Baek, J. Fan, M. I. Saidaminov, B. Sun, P. Li, D. H. Nam, S. Hoogland, Z. H. Lu, F. P. García de Arquer and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803830 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, F. Che, B. Sun, O. Voznyy, A. Proppe, R. Munir, M. Wei, R. Quintero-Bermudez, L. Hu, S. Hoogland, A. Mandelis, A. Amassian, S. O. Kelley, F. P. Garciá De Arquer and E. H. Sargent, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1225–1230 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, Z. Yang, J. Xu and G. Cao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 374, 279–313 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, A. Johnston, C. Xu, M. Wei, Z. Huang, Z. Jiang, H. Zhou, Y. Gao, Y. Dong, O. Ouellette, X. Zheng, J. Liu, M. J. Choi, Y. Gao, S. W. Baek, F. Laquai, O. M. Bakr, D. Ban, O. Voznyy, F. P. García de Arquer and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2020, 4, 1542–1556 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, X. Gong, R. Comin, G. Walters, F. Fan, O. Voznyy, E. Yassitepe, A. Buin, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2015, 523, 324–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. Chen, C. S. Tan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, A. H. Proppe, R. Munir, H. Tan, O. Voznyy, B. Scheffel, G. Walters, A. P. T. Kam, B. Sun, M. J. Choi, S. Hoogland, A. Amassian, S. O. Kelley, F. P. García de Arquer and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2019, 570, 96–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, J. M. Pina, Y. Hou and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 12, 2100774 CrossRef .
J. Han, S. Luo, X. Yin, Y. Zhou, H. Nan, J. Li, X. Li, D. Oron, H. Shen and H. Lin, Small, 2018, 14, 1801016 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, C. Chang, Y. Wang, C. Lin, D. Wang, J. Lin, C. Chen, H. Sheu, H. Chia, W. Wu, U. Jeng, C. Liang, R. Sankar, F. Chou and C. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 1282–1289 RSC .
G. W. Guglietta, B. T. Diroll, E. A. Gaulding, J. L. Fordham, S. Li, C. B. Murray and J. B. Baxter, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1820–1828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, S. Liu, K. Wang, X. Yang, L. Lian, Z. Zhang, J. He, G. Liang, S. Wang, M. Tan, H. Song, D. Zhang, J. Gao, J. Tang, M. C. Beard and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907379 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, A. Dong and Z. Liang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 3, 1500432 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, A. Janmohamed, X. Lan, F. P. García De Arquer, O. Voznyy, E. Yassitepe, G. H. Kim, Z. Ning, X. Gong, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7539–7543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tu, J. Wu, G. Xu, X. Yang, R. Cai, Q. Gong, R. Zhu and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Phuyal, J. Du, L. Tian, V. A. Öberg, M. B. Johansson, U. B. Cappel, O. Karis, J. Liu, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702049 CrossRef .
M. Albaladejo-Siguan, D. Becker-Koch, A. D. Taylor, Q. Sun, V. Lami, P. G. Oppenheimer, F. Paulus and Y. Vaynzof, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 384–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, S. C. Cho, S. Lee, J. W. Yoon, W. H. Jeong, H. Song, J. T. Oh, S. G. Lim, S. Y. Bae, B. R. Lee, M. Ahmadi, E. H. Sargent, W. Yi, S. U. Lee and H. Choi, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1649–1660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, Z. Zhang, R. J. Patterson, S. B. Shivarudraiah, Z. Zhou, M. Ng, S. Huang and J. E. Halpert, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800234 CrossRef .
S. Akin, N. Arora, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, R. H. Friend and M. I. Dar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903090 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902650 CrossRef .
D. Y. Son, S. G. Kim, J. Y. Seo, S. H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Ren, B. Liu, R. Munir, X. Zhu, D. Yang, J. Li, Y. Liu, D. M. Smilgies, R. Li, Z. Yang, T. Niu, X. Wang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2095–2102 RSC .
D. Pérez-del-Rey, D. Forgács, E. M. Hutter, T. J. Savenije, D. Nordlund, P. Schulz, J. J. Berry, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9839–9845 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J. D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zuo, H. Guo, D. W. DeQuilettes, S. Jariwala, N. De Marco, S. Dong, R. DeBlock, D. S. Ginger, B. Dunn, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700106 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Yue, M. Cai, F. Xie, E. Bi, A. Islam and L. Han, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16148 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. Dai, S. Chandrabose, K. Chen, K. Liu, M. Qin, X. Lu, J. M. Hodgkiss, H. Zhou and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14938–14944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, F. Xie, H. Chen, X. Yang, H. Su, M. Cai, Z. Zhou, T. Noda and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701073 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zheng, J. Troughton, N. Gasparini, Y. Lin, M. Wei, Y. Hou, J. Liu, K. Song, Z. Chen, C. Yang, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, J. Pan, J. Chen, A. A. Zhumekenov, T. D. Anthopoulos, Y. Han, D. Baran, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Joule, 2019, 3, 1963–1976 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Y. Wu, H. Lu, C. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Bai, L. Yang, W. W. Yu, Q. Dai and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 517–526 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, M. Hu, X. Zhou, J. Wu, L. Zhang, W. Kong, X. Li, X. Zhao, S. Dai, B. Xu and C. Cheng, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 552–561 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, R. Su, D. Luo, Q. Hu, F. Zhang, Z. Xu, Z. Wang, J. Tang, Z. Lv, X. Yang, Y. Tu, W. Zhang, H. Zhong, Q. Gong, T. P. Russell and R. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104189 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akin, Y. Altintas, E. Mutlugun and S. Sonmezoglu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 557–566 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xie, P. Vashishtha, T. M. Koh, P. C. Harikesh, N. F. Jamaludin, A. Bruno, T. J. N. Hooper, J. Li, Y. F. Ng, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sytnyk, S. Yakunin, W. Scho, R. T. Lechner, M. Burian, L. Ludescher, N. A. Killilea, A. Youse, D. Kriegner, J. Stangl, H. Groiss and W. Heiss, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1246–1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Ngo, I. Suarez, R. S. Sanchez, J. P. Martinez-Pastor and I. Mora-Sero, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14379–14383 RSC .
S. Wang, C. Bi, A. Portniagin, J. Yuan, J. Ning, X. Xiao, X. Zhang, Y. Y. Li, S. V. Kershaw, J. Tian and A. L. Rogach, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2401–2410 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aynehband, M. Mohammadi, K. Thorwarth, R. Hany, F. A. Nüesch, M. D. Rossell, R. Pauer, J. M. Nunzi and A. Simchi, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 15746–15754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Muhammed Salim, S. Masi, A. F. Gualdrón-Reyes, R. S. Sánchez, E. M. Barea, M. Kreĉmarová, J. F. Sánchez-Royo and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3511–3521 CrossRef PubMed .
H. D. Pham, T. C. J. Yang, S. M. Jain, G. J. Wilson and P. Sonar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903326 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Kim, H. Choi, M. Kim, J. Lee, S. Y. Son and T. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903403 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Zhu, Y. Huang, J. Wei, F. Liu, Z. Shao, L. Hu, S. Chen, S. Yang, J. Tang, J. Yao and S. Dai, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9902–9907 RSC .
L. Hu, W. Wang, H. Liu, J. Peng, H. Cao, G. Shao, Z. Xia, W. Ma and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 516–518 Search PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Wu, L. Liu, Y. Gao, X. Chen, W. Bi, X. Chen, D. Liu, Q. Dai and H. Song, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802046 CrossRef PubMed .
X. X. Feng, X. D. Lv, Q. Liang, J. Cao and Y. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 16236–16242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Gao, Y. Li and S. F. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1479–1486 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, A. Najar, K. Wang, M. Du and S. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2022, 2104577, 2104577 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Cheng, R. He, S. Nie, C. Zhang, J. Yin, J. Li, N. Zheng and B. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 5855–5866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cha, P. Da, J. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Chen, F. Xiu, G. Zheng and Z. S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8581–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zai, C. Zhu, H. Xie, Y. Zhao, C. Shi, Z. Chen, X. Ke, M. Sui, C. Chen, J. Hu, Q. Zhang, Y. Gao, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 30–38 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bian, D. Bai, J. Zhang, S. F. Liu, H. Bian, D. Bai, Z. Jin, K. Wang, L. Liang, H. Wang and J. Zhang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1500–1510 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hui, L. Chao, H. Lu, F. Xia, Q. Wei, Z. Su, T. Niu, L. Tao, B. Du, D. Li, Y. Wang, H. Dong, S. Zuo, B. Li, W. Shi, X. Ran, P. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Wu, C. Ran, L. Song, G. Xing, X. Gao, J. Zhang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Science, 2021, 371, 1359–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Zhang, X. Guo, C. Lu, J. Wei and J. Fang, Science, 2022, 375, 434–437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Que, Z. Dai, H. Yang, H. Zhu, Y. Zong, W. Que, N. P. Padture, Y. Zhou and O. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1970–1975 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. Il Seok, M. D. McGehee, E. H. Sargent and H. Han, Science, 2018, 361, 1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, T. Buonassisi, M. Grätzel, A. Abate, W. Tress and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2017, 358, 739–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. Ibrahim Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Qi, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Science, 2019, 365, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Ashouri, E. Köhnen, B. Li, A. Magomedov, H. Hempel, P. Caprioglio, J. A. Márquez, A. B. M. Vilches, E. Kasparavicius, J. A. Smith, N. Phung, D. Menzel, M. Grischek, L. Kegelmann, D. Skroblin, C. Gollwitzer, T. Malinauskas, M. Jošt, G. Matič, B. Rech, R. Schlatmann, M. Topič, L. Korte, A. Abate, B. Stannowski, D. Neher, M. Stolterfoht, T. Unold, V. Getautis and S. Albrecht, Science, 2020, 370, 1300–1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, E. Aydin, J. Yin, M. De Bastiani, F. H. Isikgor, A. U. Rehman, E. Yengel, E. Ugur, G. T. Harrison, M. Wang, Y. Gao, J. I. Khan, M. Babics, T. G. Allen, A. S. Subbiah, K. Zhu, X. Zheng, W. Yan, F. Xu, M. F. Salvador, O. M. Bakr, T. D. Anthopoulos, M. Lanza, O. F. Mohammed, F. Laquai and S. De Wolf, Joule, 2021, 5, 3169–3186 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Liu, N. Huo, F. Li, M. Gu, X. Ling, Y. Zhang, K. Lu, L. Han, H. Fang, A. G. Shulga, Y. Xue, S. Zhou, F. Yang, X. Tang, J. Zheng, M. Antonietta Loi, G. Konstantatos and W. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5136 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, N. Yazdani, M. Yarema, M. Jansen, V. Wood and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 548–558 CrossRef .
M. Hao, Y. Bai, S. Zeiske, L. Ren, J. Liu, Y. Yuan, N. Zarrabi, N. Cheng, M. Ghasemi, P. Chen, M. Lyu, D. He, J. H. Yun, Y. Du, Y. Wang, S. Ding, A. Armin, P. Meredith, G. Liu, H. M. Cheng and L. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Healy, J. D. Bredehoeft, R. L. Wesson, H. Helm, H. Poitrenaud, A. Etchecopar, R. L. Wesson, W. W. Rubey, N. Lapusta, J. Rice, P. Bernard, A. Kohli, I. Das and M. Mcclure, Science, 2015, 348, 1226–1229 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. WDanylo Zherebetskyy, Y. Zhang, N. Bronstein, C. Thompson, D. Britt, M. Salmeron, P. Alivisatos and L.-W. Wang, Science, 2014, 344, 1380–1384 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Karani, L. Yang, S. Bai, M. H. Futscher, H. J. Snaith, B. Ehrler, N. C. Greenham and D. Di, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 869–874 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, F. Che, J. W. Jo, J. Choi, F. P. García de Arquer, O. Voznyy, B. Sun, J. Kim, M. J. Choi, R. Quintero-Bermudez, F. Fan, C. S. Tan, E. Bladt, G. Walters, A. H. Proppe, C. Zou, H. Yuan, S. Bals, J. Hofkens, M. B. J. Roeffaers, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805580 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Z. Fan, N. T. Andersen, M. Biondi, P. Todorović, B. Sun, O. Ouellette, J. Abed, L. K. Sagar, M. J. Choi, S. Hoogland, F. P. G. de Arquer and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kiani, B. R. Sutherland, Y. Kim, O. Ouellette, L. Levina, G. Walters, C. T. Dinh, M. Liu, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, A. J. Labelle, A. H. Ip, A. Proppe, G. H. Ahmed, O. F. Mohammed, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 183105 CrossRef .
Y. Bi, S. Pradhan, S. Gupta, M. Z. Akgul, A. Stavrinadis and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704928 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Sun, O. Ouellette, F. P. García de Arquer, O. Voznyy, Y. Kim, M. Wei, A. H. Proppe, M. I. Saidaminov, J. Xu, M. Liu, P. Li, J. Z. Fan, J. W. Jo, H. Tan, F. Tan, S. Hoogland, Z. H. Lu, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4003 CrossRef PubMed .
S. W. Baek, P. Molet, M. J. Choi, M. Biondi, O. Ouellette, J. Fan, S. Hoogland, F. P. García de Arquer, A. Mihi and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901745 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu, C. Zhang, S. Li, Y. Xia, K. Wang, K. Xiong, H. Tang, L. Lian, X. Liu, M. Y. Li, M. Tan, L. Gao, G. Niu, H. Liu, H. Song, D. Zhang, J. Gao, X. Lan, K. Wang, X. W. Sun, Y. Yang, J. Tang and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006864 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tan, J. Zhang, S. Liu, K. Xiong, K. Wang, G. Liang, M. Y. Li, H. Tang, X. Yang, Z. Huang, L. Lian, K. Wang, L. Gao, H. Song, D. Zhang, J. Gao, X. Lan and J. Tang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3376–3386 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Ouellette, N. Hossain, B. R. Sutherland, A. Kiani, F. P. García De Arquer, H. Tan, M. Chaker, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 852–857 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Baek, O. Ouellette, J. W. Jo, J. Choi, K. W. Seo, J. Kim, B. Sun, S. H. Lee, M. J. Choi, D. H. Nam, L. N. Quan, J. Kang, S. Hoogland, F. P. García De Arquer, J. Y. Lee and E. H. Sargent, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2908–2913 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manekkathodi, B. Chen, J. Kim, S. W. Baek, B. Scheffel, Y. Hou, O. Ouellette, M. I. Saidaminov, O. Voznyy, V. E. Madhavan, A. Belaidi, S. Ashhab and E. Sargent, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26020–26028 RSC .
B. Chen, S. W. Baek, Y. Hou, E. Aydin, M. De Bastiani, B. Scheffel, A. Proppe, Z. Huang, M. Wei, Y. K. Wang, E. H. Jung, T. G. Allen, E. Van Kerschaver, F. P. García de Arquer, M. I. Saidaminov, S. Hoogland, S. De Wolf and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, H. T. Dastjerdi, P. Yadav, D. Prochowicz, H. Si and R. Tavakoli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010623 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang and W. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 577–584 CrossRef CAS .
V. Q. Dang, M. Byun, J. Kang, C. Kim, P. H. Jung, Y. D. Kim, N. E. Lee and H. Lee, Org. Electron., 2017, 50, 247–254 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, W. Chen, J. Yang, X. Wen, B. Wang, N. Kobamoto, L. Yuan, J. A. Stride, G. J. Conibeer, R. J. Patterson and S. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601773 CrossRef .
C. H. M. Chuang, A. Maurano, R. E. Brandt, G. W. Hwang, J. Jean, T. Buonassisi, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3286–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Gilmore, Y. Liu, W. Shcherbakov-Wu, N. S. Dahod, E. M. Y. Lee, M. C. Weidman, H. Li, J. Jean, V. Bulović, A. P. Willard, J. C. Grossman and W. A. Tisdale, Matter, 2019, 1, 250–265 CrossRef .
C. Ding, F. Liu, Y. Zhang, S. Hayase, T. Masuda, R. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Yao, Z. Zou and Q. Shen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3224–3236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, D. Kim, O. P. Morris, D. Zhitomirsky and J. C. Grossman, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2838–2845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Biondi, M. J. Choi, Z. Wang, M. Wei, S. Lee, H. Choubisa, L. K. Sagar, B. Sun, S. W. Baek, B. Chen, P. Todorović, A. M. Najarian, A. Sedighian Rasouli, D. H. Nam, M. Vafaie, Y. C. Li, K. Bertens, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, F. P. García de Arquer and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, M. J. Choi, J. Kim, F. Dinic, P. Todorovic, B. Sun, M. Wei, S. W. Baek, S. Hoogland, F. P. García de Arquer, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, T. Gao, X. Pan, M. Kamenetska and S. M. Thon, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, J. A. Christians, S. P. Harvey, P. N. Ciesielski, L. M. Wheeler, P. Schulz, L. Y. Lin, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao4204 CrossRef PubMed .
A. F. Gualdrón-Reyes, S. Masi and I. Mora-Seró, Trends Chem., 2021, 3, 499–511 CrossRef .
L. Hu, Q. Zhao, S. Huang, J. Zheng, X. Guan, R. Patterson, J. Kim, L. Shi, C. H. Lin, Q. Lei, D. Chu, W. Tao, S. Cheong, R. D. Tilley, A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, J. M. Luther, J. Yuan and T. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, A. Hazarika, X. Chen, S. P. Harvey, B. W. Larson, G. R. Teeter, J. Liu, T. Song, C. Xiao, L. Shaw, M. Zhang, G. Li, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2842 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xue, R. Wang, L. Chen, S. Nuryyeva, T. H. Han, T. Huang, S. Tan, J. Zhu, M. Wang, Z. K. Wang, C. Zhang, J. W. Lee and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900111 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ling, J. Yuan, X. Zhang, Y. Qian, S. M. Zakeeruddin, B. W. Larson, Q. Zhao, J. Shi, J. Yang, K. Ji, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Duhm, J. M. Luther, M. Grätzel and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yılmaz and R. Yıldırım, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105546 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, M. He and S. Shao, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105380 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kirman, A. Johnston, D. A. Kuntz, M. Askerka, Y. Gao, P. Todorović, D. Ma, G. G. Privé and E. H. Sargent, Matter, 2020, 2, 938–947 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, N. Rolston, A. C. Flick, T. W. Colburn, Z. Ren, R. H. Dauskardt and T. Buonassisi, Joule, 2022, 6, 834–849 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Howard, E. M. Tennyson, B. R. A. Neves and M. S. Leite, Joule, 2019, 3, 325–337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, B. Pradhan, S. Gaur and J. Thomas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901891 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. Gao, J. Kim, Z. Zhou, D. S. Chung, H. Yin and L. Ye, Mater. Today, 2021, 51, 475–503 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Wang, K. Xian, W. Zhao, Z. Zhou, S. Li and L. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2023, 59, 260 RSC .
H. Tsai, S. Shrestha, R. A. Vilá, W. Huang, C. Liu, C. H. Hou, H. H. Huang, X. Wen, M. Li, G. Wiederrecht, Y. Cui, M. Cotlet, X. Zhang, X. Ma and W. Nie, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 843–849 CrossRef .
S. O. Jeon, K. H. Lee, J. S. Kim, S. G. Ihn, Y. S. Chung, J. W. Kim, H. Lee, S. Kim, H. Choi and J. Y. Lee, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Chan, M. Tanaka, Y. T. Lee, Y. W. Wong, H. Nakanotani, T. Hatakeyama and C. Adachi, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, S. Kim, A. Kakekhani, J. Park, J. Park, Y. H. Lee, H. Xu, S. Nagane, R. B. Wexler, D. H. Kim, S. H. Jo, L. Martínez-Sarti, P. Tan, A. Sadhanala, G. S. Park, Y. W. Kim, B. Hu, H. J. Bolink, S. Yoo, R. H. Friend, A. M. Rappe and T. W. Lee, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
V. Adinolfi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2017, 542, 324–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jung, N. Ahn and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 643–655 CrossRef CAS .
S. Izawa and M. Hiramoto, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 895–900 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Whitworth, M. Dalmases, N. Taghipour and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 738–742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
	Ke Huang is currently a graduate student at the School of Environmental Science & Engineering, Tianjin University, under the direction of Prof. Shilei Lv. She earned her Bachelor degree in Thermal Engineering from Tianjin University in January 2015. Her research focuses on solar cells, radiative sky cooling, renewable energy and energy saving in buildings.
Junlong Liu	Junlong Liu is currently a senior student at the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Hebei University of Technology. He participated in the Early Admissions Scheme under the direction of Prof. Jianjuan Yuan. His research interest is focused on solar cells and plasma spray coatings.
Jianjuan Yuan	Jianjuan Yuan is an Associate Professor at Hebei University of Technology in China. She received her PhD degree from the School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University. Her current interests include battery thermal management, radiative sky cooling, renewable energy and energy saving in buildings.
Zhihua Zhou	Zhihua Zhou is a Professor at Tianjin University in China. She received her PhD degree from the School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University. Her current interests include solar cells, radiative sky cooling, renewable energy and energy saving in buildings.

 	Fig. 1  Optical and electrical properties of lead chalcogenide and perovskite quantum dots (QDs). (a) Schematic of the electronic structure of semiconductors from bulk material to QDs with different sizes. (b) Schematic of the structure of lead chalcogenide and perovskite QDs. (c) Broad and tunable absorbance spectra of lead chalcogenide QDs with the increase of size. (d) The picture of perovskite QDs in solution, and the corresponding photoluminescence with different halogen elements. (e) Energy landscape of lead chalcogenide QDs with different ligands. (a) Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2016, AAAS. (c) Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (d) Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Reproduced with permission.38,39 Copyright 2017 and 2020, Springer Nature.	 

QDs	10−3–10−2	10−3–102	102–103	0.1–0.3	Size-tuning; ligand tuning
Bulk perovskites	1–102	10–102	103–105	0.01–0.2	Compositional tuning

 	Fig. 2  QD passivation with perovskite shells. (a) Schematic of post-treatment strategy with FAI/FABr to form the monolayer perovskite bridge for strong coupling. (b) Absorbance of QD films before and after FABr treatment. (c) Mobility of the QD films without and with FAI and FABr treatment. (d) Photovoltaic performance of QD solar cells with and without FABr treatment. (e) Schematic of PbS QDs with 2D perovskites. (f–g) Inhomogeneity of the matrix increases the structural and energetic disorder (f), and the 2D perovskites improves the QD homogeneity (g). (a–d) Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Perovskite passivation with QDs. (a) Schematic of post-treatment by perovskite QDs in anti-solvent. (b) Schematic of the impact of tail states and mid-gap states on device Voc. (c) The mid-gap and band tail of bulk perovskites with/without QD treatment. (d) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with the treatment of different content QDs. (e) Stability of PSCs with/without QD treatment under continuous AM 1.5 light illumination. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

QD passivation	ITO/TiO2/PbS-MAPbI3 QD/MoO3/Au	0.60	22.0	40.0	5.3	
72

The control	0.40	12.1	33.0	1.6	
72

ITO/ZnO/PbS-MAPbI3/PbS-EDT QD/Au	0.61	21.8	67.9	8.95	
73

The control	0.55	18.0	52.7	5.33	
73

ITO/ZnO/PbSe-CsPbBr0.5I1.5/PbS-EDT QD/Au	0.56	25.7	64.0	9.2	
78

The control	0.51	24.1	60.0	7.4	
78

ITO/ZnO/PbS-CsPbI3/PbS-EDT QD/Au	0.64	24.5	67.0	10.5	
75

The control	0.63	23.9	60.0	9.1	
75

ITO/ZnO/PbS-Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3/PbS-EDT QD/Au	0.59	28.9	66.4	11.3	
76

The control	0.61	24.6	56.3	8.4	
76

ITO/ZnO/PbS-2D perovskites/PbS-EDT QD/Au	0.65	29.0	63.8	12.0	
23

The control	0.60	27.0	67.8	11.0	
23

ITO/ZnO/PbS-CsPbBrxI3−x/PbS-EDT QD/Au	0.64	28.9	68.4	12.6	
66

The control	—	—	—	—	—
ITO/ZnO/PbS-GuPbI3/PM6/MoO3/Ag	0.62	31.8	65.1	12.8	
77

The control	0.60	31.1	64.5	12.0	
77

ITO/ZnO/PbS-FAPbBr3/PbS-EDT QD/Au	0.65	30.0	71.0	13.8	
64

The control	0.63	28.0	67.0	11.8	
64

Perovskite passivation	FTO/PTAA/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu	1.13	23.0	80.3	20.9	
90

The control	1.06	23.2	74.4	18.3	
90

FTO/TiO2/FAxMA1-xPbI3/CsPbI3 QDs/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	1.05	24.3	71.0	18.56	
92

The control	1.05	20.9	69.0	15.2	
92

ITO/PTAA/FAxMA1−xCsPbI3/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Cu	1.19	23.0	77.0	21.0	
93

The control	1.13	22.8	74.3	19.1	
93

FTO/TiO2/Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/CsPbBr1.85I1.15 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.14	23.4	79.0	21.1	
94

The control	1.09	23.4	76.0	19.5	
94

FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/CsPbBr3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.13	22.8	79.2	20.46	
91

The control	1.08	22.6	76.1	18.5	
91

FTO/SnO2/(FAPbI3)x(MAPbBr3)1−x/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.10	23.63	80.4	20.32	
95

The control	1.02	23.46	79.5	18.5	
95


 	Fig. 4  Hybrid PbS QD and perovskite bulk-heterojunction. (a) Nucleation and growth routes of perovskite crystal thin films with MAI-capped PbS QDs. (b) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with different QD contents. (c) Photographs of the water contact angles on perovskite films with/without PbSe QDs. (d) Time-resolved PL of perovskite films with/without PbSe QDs. (e) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with/without PbSe QDs. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c–e) Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Hybrid QD and perovskite bulk-heterojunction. (a) Scanning electron microscope images of the bulk perovskite with QD treatment and the control. (b) Kelvin probe force microscopy images of the bulk perovskite with QD treatment and the control. (c) Defect energy distribution of perovskite with QDs and the control. (d) Steady-state photoluminescence spectra of perovskite with QDs and the control. (e) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with QDs and the control. (f) PSC stability with/without QDs under high humidity. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c–f) Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Perovskite QDs and their application in downshifting. (a) Photoluminescence spectra and the corresponding pictures of composition-tuned perovskite QDs under ultraviolet illumination. (b) Absorption and photoluminescence spectra of CsPbBr3 QDs. (c) Emission of CsPbX3 QDs plotted on CEI chromaticity coordinates and most common color standards, including LCD TV and NTSC TV. (d) The device structure of PSCs with perovskite QDs. (e) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with different scanning rates. (f) Stability of PSCs with perovskite QDs under ultraviolet illumination. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2017, AAAS. (c) Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  Perovskite QDs as modified layers between perovskite and HTLs. (a) Schematic of the PSC structure with a perovskite QD modified layer. (b) Steady photoluminescence spectra of the bulk perovskite with perovskite QD and P3HT HTL. (c) Space-charge-limited current measurement of PSC devices with/without perovskite QDs. (d) Hole mobilities of varied organic HTLs with/without perovskite QDs. (e) Raman spectra of P3HT with/without QDs. (f) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with P3HT or P3HT and perovskite QDs. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Perovskite QDs for stable PSCs. (a) Photoluminescence spectra of CsPbI3 and FAPbI3 QDs. (b) XRD patterns of CsPbI3, FAPbI3 and the mixing Cs0.57FA0.43PbI3 QDs. (c) Photovoltaic performance of PSCs with/without perovskite QDs. (d) Absorbance variation as a function of storage time (at 650 nm). (e) The stability of PSCs with/without perovskite QDs under high humidity. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Infrared QD solar cells with front filters. (a) QD solar cell device with perovskite or Si filters. (b) AM 1.5 Solar illumination and the main operating range of the perovskite, c-Si and QD technologies and the absorbance curves of infrared QD with different sizes. (c and d) Photovoltaic performance and EQE curves of the perovskite front cell and QD back cell in the 4T tandem structure. (a) Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2019, Wiley. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  Tandem perovskite and QD solar cells with the 4T structure. (a) and (d) Schematic of the 4T tandem device. (b) Calculated PCE of the hybrid 4T tandem solar cells as a function of front cell and back cell bandgaps. (c) and (f) EQE curves of the perovskite front cell and QD back cell in the 4T tandem structure. (e) Absorption spectrum of QDs and organics with complementarity. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  Tandem perovskite and QD solar cells with 2T structure. (a) Schematic of the tandem perovskite and QD solar cells. (b) Photovoltaic performance of the tandem perovskite and QD solar cells with different QDs. (c) EQE curves of the perovskite front cell and QD back cell in the 2T tandem structure. (d) Photovoltaic performance of the tandem perovskite and QD solar cells, semi-transparent PSC and filtered QDs. (e) Operational stability test of the 2T-tandem perovskite/PbS QDs device under illumination. (b–e) Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2021, Wiley.	 

Bulk-heterojunction	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3:PbS/P3HT/Pt	0.88	6.3	49.3	4.9	
141

The control	0.76	4.1	34.5	1.91	
141

ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3:PbS/Spiro-MeOTAD/Ag	0.56	22.8	55.0	7.0	
142

The control	0.61	17.4	58.9	6.3	
142

FTO/TiO2/CsPbI3:PbSe/Spiro-MeOTAD/Ag	1.21	16.8	68.6	13.9	
98

The control	1.08	14.0	67.7	10.2	
98

FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx:PbS/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	1.07	21.1	77.0	17.4	
69

The control	0.99	21.0	68.0	14.1	
69

FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3:PbS/Spiro-MeOTAD/Ag	1.03	23.5	77.2	18.6	
68

The control	1.02	21.9	73.1	16.3	
68

ITO/SnO2/FAPbI3:PbS QD/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	1.06	24.3	76.0	19.6	
100

The control	1.02	22.9	76.0	18.0	
100

ITO/PTAA/FAxMA1−xCsPbI3/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Cu	1.17	22.9	74.0	19.8	
93

The control	1.13	22.8	74.3	19.1	
93

FTO/SnO2/(FAPbI3)x(MAPbBr3)1−x/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.10	23.63	80.4	20.32	
95

The control	1.02	23.46	79.5	18.5	
95

Bilayer structure	ITO/TiO2/PbSe QD/CsPbBr3/Au	0.48	24.0	62.4	7.2	
143

The control	0.39	25.2	50.0	4.8	
143

ITO/PbS QD/MAPbI3/PCBM/Al	0.86	12.1	72.0	7.5	
104

The control	0.63	10.9	37.0	2.6	
104

FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PbS QD/Au	0.87	18.7	49.0	7.9	
103

The control	0.76	16.8	43.0	5.5	
103

CsPbCl3:Mn QDs/ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.10	22.0	76.3	18.3	
107

The control	1.10	21.2	76.6	18.0	
107

ITO/SnO2/FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/CsPbBr3 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.12	23.5	78.0	20.56	
111

The control	1.09	22.7	74.9	18.0	
111

FTO/SnO2/FAPbI3/CsxFA1−xPbI3 QD/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.12	24.4	76.0	20.82	
115

The control	1.12	24.2	73.6	19.95	
115

FTO/CsPbBr3 QDs/TiO2/CsPbIxBr3−x/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.06	24.6	79.6	20.8	
105

The control	1.06	23.3	79.7	19.7	
105

FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br/CsPbI3 QDs/PTAA/Au	1.2	15.26	78.7	14.45	
112

The control	1.19	11.8	78.3	11.0	
112

FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Perovskite QDs/P3HT/Au	1.15	23.49	78.3	21.1	
109

FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Perovskite QDs/PTAA/Au	1.12	22.7	75.8	19.2	
109

FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Perovskite QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.12	22.97	77.1	19.9	
109

The control	1.06	22.46	67.5	16.0	
109

FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/CsPbIxBr1−x QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	0.95	19.5	72.0	13.2	
110

The control	0.94	18.1	61.0	10.3	
110

FTO/TiO2/FAxMA1−xPbI3/CsPbI3QDs/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	1.05	24.3	71.0	18.56	
92

The control	1.05	20.9	69.0	15.2	
92

FTO/TiO2/Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/CsPbBr1.85I1.15 QDs/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.14	23.4	79.0	21.1	
94

The control	1.09	23.4	76.0	19.5	
94

Tandem structure	Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.27	2.6	57.0	0.4	
130

The control	—	—	—	—	—
Si filter/SiNx/SiO2/SiNx/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.35	2.5	54.4	0.48	
136

The control	0.35	1.6	55.3	0.31	
136

Si filter/PEI/Ag/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.38	3.9	65.5	0.96	
137

The control	0.37	2.4	62.4	0.55	
137

Perovskite filter/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.38	14.6	60.0	3.33	
131

Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.32	3.44	61.0	0.67	
131

The control	—	—	—	—	—
Si filter/ITO/ZnO PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.40	3.70	66.0	0.95	
132

The control	0.35	3.20	61.0	0.67	
132

Si filter/ITO/ZnO/low-bandgap PbS-I/high-bandgap PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.37	4.20	64.0	1.0	
61

Perovskite filer/ITO/ZnO/low-bandgap PbS-I/high-bandgap PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.45	19.8	58.0	5.0	
61

The control	0.35	4.0	62.0	0.85	
61

Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PBDTTT-E-T/MoO3/Ag	0.43	5.60	56.0	1.34	
133

The control	0.43	4.4	57.0	1.08	
133

Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.43	3.20	65.2	0.9	
128

The control	0.38	2.60	61.3	0.6	
128

Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbSe-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.35	6.78	54.6	1.31	
135

The control	0.29	6.1	54.0	0.95	
135

Si filter/ITO/ZnO/PbSe/PbS-I/PbS-EDT/Au	0.35	6.38	55.8	1.24	
134

The control	0.24	5.83	46.8	0.65	
134

ITO/ZnO/ZnONWs/SnO2/Perovskite/CuPC/Au/MoO3/sputtered ITO/ZnO NCs/PbS QDs/Au	1.55	16.3	69.0	17.1	
140

The control	—	—	—	—	—

 	Fig. 12  Summary of the research directions for the further breakthrough of hybrid perovskite-QD solar cells.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
