Push–pull triarylamine additives that enhance dye sensitized solar cell performance   - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA40986D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA40986D
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15626-15629Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPush–pull triarylamine additives that enhance dye sensitized solar cell performance†

        
          
            Akshay 
            Kokil
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            J. Matthew 
            Chudomel
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Paul J. 
            Homnick
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Paul M. 
            Lahti
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Jayant 
            Kumar
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Advanced Materials, University of Massachusetts Lowell, One University Avenue, Lowell, MA 01854, USA. E-mail: jayant_kumar@uml.edu;   Tel: 1 978 934 3788
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 104 Lederle Graduate Research Tower A, 710 North Pleasant Street, Amherst, MA 01003, USA. E-mail: lahti@chem.umass.edu;   Tel: 1 413 545 4890
cArmy Research Laboratory, Adelphi Laboratory Center, Adelphi, MD 2078, USA
Received 
      26th February 2013
    , Accepted 12th July 2013First published on 12th July 2013AbstractA new strategy was developed for improving basic dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) performance, using push–pull organic triarylamines with tunable frontier energy levels as additives in the DSSC electron shuttling electrolyte solution. A significant improvement in the device performance was observed and attributed to improved dye regeneration and hole transport.
Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are of notable interest due to reported power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) up to 12%.1 However, improvement in DSSC efficiencies since early reports has been challenging to realize.2 In a typical DSSC the energy harvesting process occurs as shown in Fig. 1: photoexcitation of a light-harvesting sensitizing dye (point 1); injection of an electron from the dye excited state into the conduction band of a semiconductor metal oxide (points 2–3); dye regeneration by reduction to its original neutral state at the counter electrode (point 4) through a redox shuttle process (point 5).3 A frequently used shuttle is an I−/I3−, iodide/triiodide containing solution, which provides hole transport from the dye to the counter electrode by the redox equilibrium between I− and I2. The separation and mobility of both electrons and holes are crucial to the overall PCE of DSSCs. Efforts to improve DSSC PCEs have focused on various parts of this complex energy gathering and electron transport sequence, which can be challenging to improve compared to previously optimized schemes.
 Fig. 1  DSSC operating processes schematic, including role of additives discussed in this article. Blue levels represent conduction bands (lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals for molecules), black and green levels are valence bands (highest occupied molecular orbitals for molecules). Points 1–5 are described in the text. Arrows show direction of electron flow (opposite to hole flow direction). 
To enhance energy gathering and charge-pair generation processes, various organometallic ruthenium complexes and organic dyes have been used as sensitizers.3,4 For example, Sellinger and coworkers described5 new fluorene-based triarylamine molecular hole transport materials designed for better DSSC performance by improved incorporation into the metal oxide nanopores in comparison to the much-used analogue 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)-9,9′-spirobi-fluorene (spiro-MeOTAD). In addition, pairs of dyes that relay energy by Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) were reported as a means to broaden the energy range for DSSC absorption and energy harvesting at point 1 in Fig. 1. Indeed, PCE improvements of 26–28% were obtained by using sets of energy relay dyes.6–9 However such FRET-based strategies are limited by the number of dye pairs that can effectively be utilized in a cell.
Additional recent, promising results have also been reported by altering the electrochemical processes in DSSCs. Improving the open circuit voltage (VOC) of a solar cell is desirable, to improve the cell's energy-generating potential. The VOC can be associated with the energy difference between the electron quasi-Fermi level (EF) of a metal oxide like TiO2 and the equilibrium redox potential (EREDOX) of the electrolyte shuttle10 (Fig. 1). N-Heterocyclic organic electrolyte additives, such as 4-tert-butylpyridine, have been reported to increase VOC.11 The increase was attributed to a shift of EF to higher energies, with surface passivation of the nanoporous titania electrode to suppress undesirable electron-hole recombination.12 The short circuit current densities (JSC) of these devices were reportedly unaffected by incorporation of the additives in the electrolyte; however their overall PCEs increased due to the increase in VOC. Use of redox couples other than iodide/triiodide has also been reported to give improved device performance.13,14
Here, we describe a new strategy for enhancing DSSC performance by using “push–pull” triarylamine-based organic additives as part of the iodide/triiodide redox electrolyte. This strategy is attractive because (1) the additives are not attached to the nanoporous anatase titania electrode material, thus avoiding multiple processing steps to infuse the anatase with the additives; (2) the additive design strategy is versatile for testing a wide variety of compounds or combinations of compounds; and (3) the push–pull design for the additives allows tuning of their electrochemical potentials to fit specific DSSC configurations. In this work, multiple push–pull triarylamine additives were investigated, and gave significant improvements in PCE that are attributed to improved dye regeneration and hole transport.
A fairly common DSSC configuration was used for all experiments in this study. The DSSCs were fabricated on fluorine-doped tin oxide covered glass substrates (sheet resistance 15Ω/□) with an active area of 0.125 cm2. The dye Z907 ((cis-bis(isothiocyanato)(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)(4,4′-di-nonyl-2′-bipyridyl)-ruthenium(II)) adsorbed on a 10 μm thick nanoporous anatase TiO2 electrode (without a scattering layer or any co-adsorbant) was employed as the sensitizer.15 Electrolyte solutions containing 0.8 M 1-propyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide plus 0.15 M I2 in 3-methoxypropionitrile were utilized. DSSC test devices were fabricated according to literature protocols using a platinized fluorine doped SnO2 glass counter electrode.16 The experimental details are given in the ESI.†
The chemical structures of the organic push–pull additives tested in this study are shown in Fig. 2: their syntheses have been previously reported.17,18 The absorption spectra of the additives are compared to that of Z907 in Fig. 2. The molar absorptivity of Z907 is much higher than that of the additives (see ESI†), and only 9DAAA has better absorption in a region where the dye Z907 has limited absorption. However, at the additive concentrations used (as described below), the optical density contribution of any of these additives is quite small relative to that of Z907. Cyclic voltammetry half-wave potentials were used to establish the additive HOMO energies EHOMO using the equation: EHOMO = −(4.8 + [oxidation potential in volts]) eV.19,20 The band gaps Eg were estimated from the absorption spectral maxima and were added to EHOMO to obtain the energies of the additives’ lowest unoccupied molecular orbital energies ELUMO. Detailed optical data and oxidation potentials used in this process are provided in the ESI.†
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of the push–pull triarylamine additive molecules with normalized absorption spectra of Z907 sensitizing dye and the triarylamine additive molecules. 
To determine the effects of each triarylamine additive on DSSC performance, the device characteristics for a standard control cell were first measured. For precise, direct comparisons between devices with a specific additive and control cells without additive, aliquots of additive in acetonitrile were added to the electrolyte in the same control cell and measurements repeated. This procedure avoids problems of variance in comparing the performance between different devices, by having all photoconversion evaluations based on one device with only the additive concentration being varied.
The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra for the various devices are similar to the absorption spectrum of Z907 and do not change significantly upon addition of the additives. Representative IPCE traces for DSSCs using DAAFO and DAAFOPV as additives are shown in Fig. 3. These results indicate that the current in the device is primarily generated from the photo-excitation of Z907 and not from the absorption by the additive molecules. But, significant increases in the IPCE yields are observed upon addition of the triarylamine additives to the electrolyte solution as exemplified in Fig. 3, even though the additive concentrations used here are 100-fold lower than the N-heterocycle concentrations utilized in other DSSCs.
 Fig. 3  IPCE spectra for DSSCs with increasing amounts of DAAFO (left) and DAAFOPV (right) in the redox couple solution. 
DSSC J–V curves using the triarylamine additives DAAFO and DAAFOPV are displayed in Fig. 4. Additional data for DSSC characteristics of all of the additive-enhanced cells is summarized further in the ESI.† The control cell using neat acetonitrile without additive in the electrolyte solution (Fig. 4, top left) gave decreased PCE and fill factor, with severely reduced JSC and a steady VOC. This is expected for simple dilution of the iodide/triiodide redox couple in the electrolyte: there are no changes to the overall energetics of either the dye or the anatase. By comparison, cells with the electrolyte push–pull additives gave improved DSSC photoconversion performance up to 1–3 mM, above which there was no further improvement. This is exemplified by the power curves for DSSCs with addition of DAAFO and DAAFOPV into the iodide/triiodide electrolyte, in Fig. 4. A significant improvement in the device JSC is observed, while the VOC remains almost constant. In contrast, previous reports using N-heterocycle additives for DSSC enhancement show increased VOC with no increase in the JSC.11 In the present work, JSC increased by 30% and 26% for DAAFO and DAAFOPV, respectively, versus control cells without additives. The improvement in the current output of the device correlates with the improved IPCE in Fig. 3. The improved JSC was the major contributor to raising the device PCEs by 33% with DAAFO and 30% with DAAFOPV relative to the control cells without additives. Similar improvements in the JSC with unchanged VOC were also observed for DSSCs containing the electrolyte additives 910BAA and BDAAFO. However, unlike the behavior for the other additives, JSC remained steady for 9DAAA, while VOC increased (Fig. 4, bottom right).
 Fig. 4  Current density versus voltage (J–V) curves for DSSCs incorporating acetonitrile (top left), DAAFO (top right), DAAFOPV (bottom left) and 9DAAA (bottom right). The arrows in plots display increasing acetonitrile (top left) and “push–pull” triarylamine additives. 
The possibility of FRET type energy transfer involving the additives was considered, from the higher energy additive LUMOs to the dye LUMO, enhancing light harvesting and increasing the DSSC performance. However, the extinction coefficient of the Z907 MLCT band centered at 526 nm is around 3–9 times higher than the long wave absorption of the additive molecules (see ESI†). All of the additive molecules absorb in a similar wavelength region as Z907 (Fig. 2), except for 9DAAA with long wave absorption at 442 nm that gives minimal complementary absorption to that of Z907. Also, the low concentrations of additives used in the electrolyte solutions make their effective optical densities in the DSSCs quite low compared to the high optical density of the adsorbed Z907. Finally 9DAAA and 910BAA give very poor photoluminescence in solvents of polarity similar to the DSSC conditions (about 1% quantum efficiency), and the other additive molecules show no observable luminesce in such solvents (see ESI†). Hence, the observed improvement in device performance through a FRET mechanism is ruled out. The additive molecules do not possess any “anchoring” groups, so the nanoporous TiO2 electrode could not be sensitized by adsorbing the push–pull triarylamines. Test cells fabricated using only additive molecules as possible sensitizers (i.e. without Z907) did not display any appreciable JSC or VOC and were not observed to harvest any light. Hence the observed increase in IPCE in Fig. 3 cannot be attributed to co-sensitization by the push–pull molecules; IPCE measurements with and without additives simply track the absorption spectral profile of Z907 as a function of wavelength of incident light. Due to these multiple lines of evidence, it is quite unlikely that the observed photoconversion improvement with the additives came from improved spectral energy harvesting.
Consequently, other effects must give the observed PCE improvements. The EHOMO of the push–pull molecules lies between the Z907EHOMO and iodide/triiodide EREDOX (Fig. 1). Hence, the additives could provide additional or alternate pathways for hole transport to regenerate Z907 either along with or instead of the iodide/triiodide couple. This would be consistent with the improved IPCE and JSC values observed for all additives except 9DAAA. The JSC is known to be directly proportional to the overall efficiency of the dye regeneration process.21 For DSSCs using the iodide/triiodide redox couple, regenerative electron transfer to a dye occurs in 10−6 s.22,23 By comparison, the solid state triarylamine hole transporter spiro-MeOTAD gives dye regeneration three orders of magnitude faster than the iodide/triiodide redox couple. Dye regeneration ranging from nanoseconds to sub-nanoseconds has been reported with spiro-MeOTAD.24 The latter finding encouraged our investigation of the triarylamines in this study as electron shuttles.
All of the additives used in this investigation have their highest occupied molecular orbital energies (EHOMO) situated between EHOMO of the sensitizer dye Z907 and EREDOX of the iodide/triiodide redox shuttle; these energies are −5.40 eV and −4.85 eV, respectively. The range of the additive EHOMO energies – shown as a band in Fig. 1 – allows the additives to take part in shuttling electrons from iodide/triiodide to the dye, as displayed at points 5a–5b in Fig. 1. However, control experiments utilizing only the additives in the electrolyte solution without iodide/triiodide yielded quite poor device performance, so the individual push–pull additives alone do not provide effective hole transport. Boschloo and Hagfeldt have pointed out3 the critical role of the iodide/triiodide electron shuttle process in well functioning DSSCs. More efficient dye regeneration by a cascade type, multi-step electron shuttle involving the iodide/triiodide redox couple and the push–pull additives to regenerate Z907 could therefore account for the observed increase in IPCE values as well as the JSC. The fact that the improvement is maximized at relatively low additive concentration suggests a saturation of kinetics among multiple electron shuttle reactions. The variations in JSC improvements could be due to differences in the interplay of electron shuttle steps, and the relative abilities of the additives versus the iodide/triiodide redox couple to interact with the dye and the TiO2 surface. Although more extensive mechanistic investigation for the observed improvement in DSSC performance is still under way, the experimental results suggest that the additives lead to improved sensitizer regeneration due to their individual electronic push–pull effects.
The qualitatively different DSSC performance behavior for additive 9DAAA – increase in VOC instead of JSC – indicates that despite being a push–pull triarylamine like the others, DSSC behavior is altered by 9DAAA through a different mechanism. VOC increases with decreased electron-hole recombination, and increasing lifetime of the charge separated state.22,25 The increased VOC with added 9DAAA thus may be due to decreased recombination in the device, either due to surface passivation of the nanoporous titania (thereby changing EF for TiO2) or to decreased iodide/triiodide reduction by electrons at TiO2. Further investigations are underway to help clarify the reason for the difference, but clearly the improvement in JSC observed for most of the triarylamines of this study is not just a matter of adding any organic triarylamine.
Among the push–pull additives tested in this study, those incorporating the fluorenone unit showed the largest JSC improvements. We speculate that this is attributable to its stronger electron acceptor nature, which allows a greater range of electrochemical push–pull tunability than in 9DAAA or 910BAA. Hole-transport materials whose behavior is modulated with fluorenones would thus seem to offer new possibilities for use in DSSCs and related devices.
Conclusions
Several push–pull triarylamines significantly improved the DSSC performance in low concentration as additives to the iodide/triiodide electrolyte solution. The push–pull molecules were designed to have oxidation potentials (EHOMO) between those of standard DSSC dye Z907 and the commonly used iodide/triiodide redox couple. For all but one of the electrolyte push–pull additives, JSC improved with additive concentration, with fill factor and VOC remaining steady. A number of effects, such as increased dye regeneration efficiency and reduced recombination rate, could drive the observed results. The improvements appear to arise from assisting multiple electron shuttle processes that augment the iodide/triiodide shuttle, since the additives alone are not effective replacements for iodide/triiodide or the sensitizer and other factors may well contribute to the net behavior.
It is appropriate to caution that, since the complex interplay of photoinduced charge generation and electrochemistry in DSSCs requires simultaneous optimization of multiple variables, use of these same additives with other sensitizer dyes and/or in other configurations that already have been significantly optimized may not necessarily yield the same improvement seen in these particular DSSCs for IPCE and JSC values. But, the improvements in DSSC performance metrics in this investigation compare favorably to those previously reported, including results from McGehee and coworkers,6,7 Grimes et al.,9 Boschloo et al.,12 and Driscoll et al.26 Push–pull triarylamines thus offer possibilities for improving DSSC performance by a new, general strategy using similar molecular additives as part of the diverse array of DSSC formulations that are being pursued for solar cell development.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported as part of Polymer-Based Materials for Harvesting Solar Energy, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC0001087.
Notes and references
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788 CrossRef .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tokuhisa and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 831 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, I.-K. Ding, T. Giovenzana, J. T. Bloking, M. D. McGehee and A. Sellinger, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1455 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Hardin, E. T. Hoke, P. B. Armstrong, J. H. Yum, P. Comte, T. Torres, J. M. J. Fréchet, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 406 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yum, B. E. Hardin, S. J. Moon, E. Baranoff, F. Nüesch, M. D. McGehee, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9277 CrossRef CAS .
L. Etgar, J. Park, C. Barolo, V. Lesnyak, S. K. Panda, P. Quagliotto, S. G. Hickey, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Eychmüller, G. Viscardi and M. Grätzel, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2748 RSC .
K. Shankar, X. Feng and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 788 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 13 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphrey-Baker, E. Müller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo, L. Häggmann and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13144 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, N. Chamberland, L. Breau, J.E. Moser, R. Humphrey-Baker, B. Marsan, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 385 CrossRef CAS .
T. Daeneke, T. H. Kwon, A. B. Holmes, N. W. Duffy, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 211 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Grätzel, Nature Photon., 2003, 2, 402 CAS .
Y. G. Kim, J. Walker, L. A. Samuelson and J. Kumar, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 523 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Chudomel, B. Yang, M. D. Barnes, M. Achermann, J. T. Mague and P. M. Lahti, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 8361 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Homnick and P. M. Lahti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11961 RSC .
T. Johansson, W. Mammo, M. Svensson, M. Andersson and O. Inganäs, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1316 RSC .
C. M. Cardona, W. Li, A. E. Kaifer, D. Stockdale and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2367 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann and J. W. Ondersma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 370 CAS .
S. N. Mori, W. Kubo, T. Kanzaki, N. Masaki, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 3522 CAS .
J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6561 CAS .
B. Bach, Y. Tachibana, J. E. Moser, S. A. Haque, J. R. Durrant, M. Grätzel and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 7445 CrossRef .
L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1861 CrossRef CAS .
K. Driscoll, J. Fang, N. Humphry-Baker, T. Torres, W. T. S. Huck, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4981 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, current density versus voltage curves, IPCE spectra, DSSC characteristics, optical and electrochemical data, cyclic voltammograms. See DOI: 10.1039/C3RA40986DThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  DSSC operating processes schematic, including role of additives discussed in this article. Blue levels represent conduction bands (lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals for molecules), black and green levels are valence bands (highest occupied molecular orbitals for molecules). Points 1–5 are described in the text. Arrows show direction of electron flow (opposite to hole flow direction).	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of the push–pull triarylamine additive molecules with normalized absorption spectra of Z907 sensitizing dye and the triarylamine additive molecules.	 

 	Fig. 3  IPCE spectra for DSSCs with increasing amounts of DAAFO (left) and DAAFOPV (right) in the redox couple solution.	 

 	Fig. 4  Current density versus voltage (J–V) curves for DSSCs incorporating acetonitrile (top left), DAAFO (top right), DAAFOPV (bottom left) and 9DAAA (bottom right). The arrows in plots display increasing acetonitrile (top left) and “push–pull” triarylamine additives.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, current density versus voltage curves, IPCE spectra, DSSC characteristics, optical and electrochemical data, cyclic voltammograms. See DOI: 10.1039/C3RA40986D

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
