Molecular mechanisms of thermal instability in hybrid perovskite light absorbers for photovoltaic solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA05356B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA05356B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17765-17779Molecular mechanisms of thermal instability in hybrid perovskite light absorbers for photovoltaic solar cells†

        
          
            Mingchao 
            Wang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Vallabh 
            Vasudevan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shangchao 
            Lin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jacek 
            Jasieniak
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Salvy P. 
            Russo
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Nick 
            Birbilis
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Nikhil V. 
            Medhekar
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Faculty of Engineering, Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. E-mail: mingchao.wang@monash.edu; nikhil.medhekar@monash.edu
bInstitute of Engineering Thermophysics, School of Mechanical and Power Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
cARC Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science, School of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, Victoria 3001, Australia
dCollege of Engineering and Computer Science, Australian National University, Acton ACT 2601, Australia
Received 
      27th May 2020
    , Accepted 9th August 2020First published on 10th August 2020AbstractThe organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have been widely explored as key functional components for energy harvesting/conversion applications due to their superior photovoltaic properties. However, material stability issues, such as temperature induced instability of hybrid perovskite crystals during normal device operating conditions, limit their practical application. Here we conduct molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the thermal instability in pristine as well as defective crystals of the prototypical organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite, methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3). We show that the accumulation of tilting and splitting of PbI6 octahedra with increasing temperatures initiates the instability in pristine MAPbI3 crystals. Point defects can accelerate the inception of local lattice instability, and the crystals with such defects in the concentration range typically observed in perovskite-based devices undergo an irreversible instability at much lower temperatures. Two-dimensional defects such as grain boundaries in polycrystalline MAPbI3 crystals further decrease their crystal instability temperature to about 550 K, in good agreement with experimental measurements. Finally, we demonstrate that thermal instability in MAPbI3 thin films originates from their free surfaces at much lower temperatures due their increased free energies. We also investigate the structural evolution of the local lattice and show that Born and Lindemann crystal instability criteria coincide in initiating the instability. The key insights obtained from this work can usher a rational design of highly stable hybrid perovskites for their robust and reliable photovoltaic applications.
1. Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites have rapidly emerged as promising light absorbers in the next-generation of highly efficient solar cells owing to their superior power conversion efficiency.1,2 For example, the demonstrated power conversion efficiency of single junction hybrid perovskite solar cells has increased from ∼12% to ∼22.0% in just the last five years.3,4 Incorporating perovskites as light absorbers on top of silicon solar cells in two- and four-terminal tandem configurations has further raised the efficiency up to 26% and ∼23.6%, respectively.5,6 However, recent studies have shown that various processing and operating conditions (for example, type of device architecture, deposition/evaporation routes during processing, operating temperature, moisture and UV exposure) are likely to trigger thermal, mechanical and chemical instabilities in active hybrid perovskite absorber crystals, resulting in the performance degradation and failure of solar cell devices.7,8 These material stability issues pose a serious challenge to the commercialization of perovskite-based solar cells, since at present they cannot maintain an uninterrupted 25 year-long operation that is essential for their commercial feasibility.9
Among various material instabilities in hybrid perovskites, the instability caused by exposure to higher temperatures plays a key role in their practical operation, since any type of thin-film photovoltaic module is expected to experience temperatures as high as 85 °C during its standard operation.10 Recently, experimental studies have reported on the thermal decomposition, followed by the sublimation of the prototype hybrid perovskite methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3), and showed that it generally decomposes into ionic and organic components.11 However, these studies provide little clarity on the thermal decomposition temperature,11,12 as well as the sublimation reactions, largely due to the widely varying experimental conditions.13–15 In general, the first step of the MAPbI3 decomposition is likely the onset of an instability in the crystal, followed by the chemical decomposition of organic cations. For example, thermogravimetric measurements demonstrated that the crystal decomposition of MAPbI3 powders starts within the temperature range of 520 K to 690 K, subsequently followed by the formation of gaseous byproducts.11,14,16–21 In contrast, conductive atomic force microscopy analyses showed that polycrystalline MAPbI3 decomposes at a lower temperature (∼360 K) in the nitrogen environment after 24 hours.22 Even though environmental factors may play a role in the thermal stability of hybrid perovskites, these contradicting results can be attributed to the yet unclear molecular-level mechanisms in the thermally-induced instability of the MAPbI3 crystal. As for the thermal behavior of non-prototypical hybrid perovskites, very recent reports have suggested that low-dimensional structures23 and the substitution of MA with formamidinium24 or caesium25 can efficiently improve the thermal stability of mixed-halide perovskites. Therefore, a clearer understanding of the underlying mechanisms of the thermal instability of MAPbI3 can be expected to enable an optimal design and synthesis of stable hybrid perovskites.
For the practical applications of hybrid perovskites, their thermal stability is greatly influenced by the presence of intrinsic defects in their crystal structures. Solution-processed hybrid perovskites inevitably contain point defects (i.e. vacancies)26,27 and structural disorders, such as free surfaces and twin or grain boundaries in polycrystalline thin films.28,29 Experiments have indicated that these structural defects degrade the stability and performance of the functional devices, to the level much below that of defect-free hybrid perovskites.30–32 For instance, it has been suggested that the disorder-weakened Pb–I bonding network at grain boundaries can accelerate the crystal and chemical decomposition of polycrystalline MAPbI3.32 Electric field and light can further enhance ion migration in MAPbI3, due to the intrinsic structural defects, especially of I− ions with a low migration energy barrier (∼0.1 eV).33–35 Such enhanced ion migration is believed to result in the observed current–voltage hysteresis phenomena36,37 and switchable photovoltaic effects38 in the MAPbI3-based photovoltaic solar cells. Although recent studies have confirmed the resilience of electronic properties of MAPbI3 to point defects,39,40 a quantitative understanding of the relationship between structural defects and crystal stability in hybrid perovskites is not yet available.
In addition to experimental measurements, recent computational studies have also reported the degradation of hybrid perovskites. For example, first-principles calculations have shown that the formation of partial Schottky defect (charge neutral MAI0 vacancy) is energetically favorable in MAPbI3, and possibly leads to the decomposition of MAPbI3.39 Under humid conditions, the [PbI2]0-terminated surface is more stable than the [MAI]0-terminated surface, which undergoes a rapid dissolution process41 and forms hydrated compound MAPbI3·H2O.42 However, the underlying atomic-scale mechanisms of the dynamic process of the crystal degradation in hybrid perovskites have been rarely investigated by first-principles calculations, due to the intrinsic length- and time-scale limitations. Alternatively, large-scale classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been successfully conducted to explore fundamental properties of MAPbI3,43–45 as well as its water-induced degradation,46,47 showing good agreement with experimental results.
To understand the underlying mechanisms of thermal instability in hybrid perovskite light absorbers, here we perform classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to investigate the thermal-induced crystal instability of the prototype hybrid perovskite MAPbI3. We examine the role played by a range of intrinsic crystalline defects, including point vacancies, free surfaces and twin or grain boundaries, in controlling the stability of MAPbI3 crystals. We first construct the relationship between the onset of the instability and the corresponding microstructural evolution in the defect-free MAPbI3 crystal induced by elevated temperatures. Our atomistic simulations demonstrate that a gradually increasing tilt in the PbI6 octahedra and breaking of the octahedral network initiates a local instability in the crystal structure, which progressively spreads further in the pristine MAPbI3 crystal. Point defects can accelerate the accumulation and coalescence of these local lattice instabilities, and as a result facilitate an irreversible instability at lower temperatures. In addition, twin and grain boundaries trigger the instability of MAPbI3 crystals at much lower temperature than the point defects, in some cases, lower than by as much as 200 K compared to defect free crystals. We further apply Born and Lindemann criteria to develop a fundamental understanding of the thermal instability in MAPbI3 crystals. Finally, our kinetic and thermodynamic investigation confirms that the crystal instability in thin films initiates from their free surfaces, again at a much lower temperature compared to the bulk crystal. These fundamental insights into the thermal instability in MAPbI3 and the role played by various intrinsic defects, can inspire optimal design of robust and high-performance hybrid perovskite photovoltaics.
2. Computational methods
2.1 Simulation of thermal instability
To fully capture the slow dynamics of crystal decomposition of MAPbI3, atomic-level molecular dynamics simulations at significantly large time and length scales are required to allow a predictive modeling of thermal stability, which are typically out of reach for the most first principles based methods. Therefore, here we perform classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations incorporating temperature-induced anharmonic effects. All our MD simulations are carried out using the open-source code LAMMPS48 and classical potential MYP1, which is calibrated to accurately describe the interatomic interactions in the complex organometallic structure of MAPbI3.43,46 In the MYP1 potential, the pairwise interactions between (Pb, I)–(Pb, I) and (Pb, I)–(C, N) pairs are modeled by Buckingham and coulombic potentials, while Lennard–Jones (LJ) and coulombic potentials are employed to define the intra-/inter-molecular interactions of MA molecules.46 The detailed potential parameters for all intra-/inter-molecular interactions used in our MD simulations are given in Table S1 in ESI.† Although these potentials do not explicitly include the bond angle interactions, when compared to experiments and first-principles calculations, they reproduce fundamental structural, dynamical and physical properties of MAPbI3, such as its phase diagram,43,46 thermal transport,44 crystallization,49 point-defect diffusivity,35 as well as elastic and fracture behavior.45 The particle–particle particle–mesh (PPPM) method50 is adopted here to treat long-range coulombic interaction via the reciprocal space, since this method is significantly faster than the regular Ewald summation method.51 The cutoff distance of 1 nm is used for all short-range (Buckingham and LJ) and long-range (coulombic) interactions. A time step of 0.5 fs is selected for all MD simulations.
To investigate the thermal stability behavior of MAPbI3, various material models of the bulk crystal structure, with defects such as vacancies and grain boundaries, as well as of thin films with free surfaces, are considered in this work. Recent first principles calculations have shown that charge neutral (100) surfaces of cubic MAPbI3 are energetically stable compared to surfaces with other crystalline orientations, and their electronic structures also contribute to the long carrier lifetimes in solar cell devices.52,53 Thus we consider two stable, charge neutral (100)/[MAI]0- and (100)/[PbI2]0-terminated surfaces in our thin film models. As mentioned earlier, since structural defects, and in particular, point defects such as vacancies are inevitably introduced in MAPbI3 during synthesis process, we also study the influence of ionic MA+ (VMA) and I− (VI) point vacancies and the charge neutral MAI0 (VMAI) vacancy on the thermal stability of MAPbI3. In order to compare the results obtained from the model to experimental conditions, we have also considered bicrystal models as well as polycrystalline models with randomly oriented grain boundaries. In order to identify the mechanisms of thermal instability in MAPbI3, we simulate the thermal-induced crystal instability of both MAPbI3 bulk crystals and thin films at elevated temperatures and analyze their corresponding microstructural evolution at the molecular level. All simulation models are first equilibrated at room temperature for 1 ns, and then gradually heated to a higher temperature (much below instability temperature Tc) at a heating rate of 0.5 K ps−1. To ensure that models are fully equilibrated, they are heated further with an incremental temperature of 2.5 K up to Tc, and equilibrated for 50 ps at every incremental step (an approximate heating rate of 0.05 K ps−1) under an NPT ensemble with an isotropic pressure of 1 bar using the Nosé–Hoover thermostat and barostat.54,55 It should be noted that the heating rate in simulations is significantly higher than that in the experiments. Such unrealistically rapid heating can lead to the artificial out-of-equilibrium states of the MAPbI3 crystal, resulting in the accelerated material degradation at much lower value of Tc. Following previous work,56 the selected heating rate of 0.05 K ps−1 here minimizes out-of-equilibrium distortions of the crystal for a reasonable prediction of Tc for MAPbI3. The atomic configurations from all models are then used to explore the microstructural evolution during the thermal instability process.
2.2 Calculation of elastic properties
In order to understand the mechanisms of structural instability in hybrid perovskites, we evaluate the elastic properties of MAPbI3 bulk crystals to explore their lattice instability based on the Born criterion.57,58 We employ the direct method based on constant volume MD simulations to predict the elastic constants of cubic MAPbI3 crystals at 0 K as well as at elevated temperatures. Under a small strain εxx = e, we have the following relations for the cubic crystal symmetry: σxx = C11e, σyy + σzz = 2C12e(1)Atomic normal stresses σxx, σyy and σzz are obtained from the ensemble averages, and elastic constants C11 and C12 can be calculated from eqn (1). C44 can be obtained from the relation τxy = C44e. For cubic MAPbI3, the elastic constants C11 and C12 and C44 are averaged along all three directions. In our NVT simulations, we have explicitly calculated both the stress-fluctuation and thermal contributions to the temperature dependent elastic properties using the expression59,60 (2)where σ is atomic stress, V is the total volume of the simulation model, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, the tensor indices i, j, k, l can be simplified by Voigt's notation. The first term is the contribution from the stress fluctuation, and the second term Cijkl is the kinetic (thermal) contribution, which can be expressed as: (3)Here we have calculated the stress-fluctuation term by time averaging and the thermal term by the analytical expression eqn (3).
2.3 Calculation of amplitude of atomic vibrations and phonon dispersion
To understand the thermal-induced crystal instability of MAPbI3 by thermodynamic Lindemann criterion, we estimate the amplitudes of atomic vibrations of different ionic species. Simulation models are first fully relaxed till they reach their equilibrium states under NPT ensemble. The mean square displacements (MSDs) of ionic species on short time scales are calculated according to the equation: (4)where N is the total atom number; 〈…〉 denotes the average value over all atoms; ri(0) and ri(t) are i-axis positions at time 0 and t. The calculated MSDs is nearly constant with respect to time and contains only the vibrational but not the diffusional contribution. Then, the amplitude of atomic vibration is obtained as the root mean square displacements. To obtain phonon dispersion curves at finite temperatures, we calculated the dynamical matrix from MD simulations based on fluctuation-dissipation theorem, see Section S2 in ESI† for more details.61
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Thermal instability of MAPbI3 bulk crystal
We first investigate the thermal instability of pristine, defect-free MAPbI3 bulk crystal. As seen in Fig. 1b and animation V1, with increasing temperature, the atomic structure of MAPbI3 undergoes a sharp transition from the crystalline to a disordered state at a critical temperature Tc, followed by the loss of MA ions as reported in several experiments.11,12Tc therefore characterizes the initiation of a thermal instability of the crystal or the phase transition from the crystalline structure. In such first-order transitions, the mean atomic volume undergoes a sharp increase at the critical temperature Tc.62 Consequently, tracking changes in the mean atomic volume Ω (defined as the total volume divided by the number of MA+, Pb2+, and I− species) as a function of temperature enables the determination of Tc as shown in Fig. 1b. It is clear that MAPbI3 crystal becomes unstable at ∼1050 K with a critical value of Ωcr ∼ 57.7 Å3. To understand the evolution of the crystal structure during the onset of thermal instability, we also evaluate temperature dependent translational order parameter η as, (5)where kq is the reciprocal lattice vector, rn is the position vector of atom n, N is the total number of atoms in the simulation model. η equals 1 in the ideal crystal state at 0 K, while it fluctuates near zero in the fully disordered state. As seen in Fig. 1b, a sudden drop of η from 0.32 to 0 at Tc ∼1050 K represents a crystalline to disordered phase transition. Fig. 1c shows the variation of several microstructural parameters such as the tilting angle and the coordination numbers with temperature. It is evident that increasing temperature results in a progressively increasing tilting of the PbI6 octahedra, which is revealed by a steady reduction in the average Pb–I–Pb octahedral tilting angle θ at the rate of 0.0158° K−1. Such tilting deformation of octahedra is relatively homogeneous with a small average fluctuation Δθave of 1.8°.
 Fig. 1  Thermal instability and evolution of crystal structure in pristine MAPbI3. (a) Atomistic configuration of MAPbI3 crystal at room temperature. θ denotes the Pb–I–Pb octahedral tilting angle. (b) The mean atomic volume (ω), translational order parameter (η), and lindemann ratios for Pb (δPb) and I (δI) ions as a function of temperature. (c) Averaged octahedral tilting angle (θave), and coordination numbers for Pb (nPb) and I (nI) ions as a function of temperature. (d) Atomic structure of MAPbI3 crystal close to the critical transition temperature Tc, at T = 1050 (left) and 1052.5 K (right). The dashed orange circles highlight the dangling Pb–I bonds of partial PbI6 octahedra in the MAPbI3 crystal. 
The analysis of the radial distribution functions (see S1 and Fig. S1 in ESI†) and the coordination numbers (N) demonstrates that although PbI6 octahedra are highly stretched and distorted (average bond lengths of Pb–I and I–I pairs at temperatures above 800 K are much larger than at 300 K), the octahedral network is largely intact with a very small fraction of partial octahedra (i.e. PbI4 and PbI5) and a corresponding small decrease in the average coordination of Pb and I ions. This high degree of crystalline integrity is maintained until the temperature reaches a critical value Tc∼1050 K, after which a large number of structural defects quickly turn the crystal into its disordered phase, with NPb ≈ 5.84 and NI ≈ 1.87 (Fig. 1d). It should be noted that such microstructural evolution of MAPbI3 during crystal decomposition is characteristically different than in other classes of materials such as metals63,64 and colloidal crystals.65 For instance, several studies have shown that the formation and migration of point/localized defects or dislocations driven by thermal fluctuation initiates the crystal instability of pristine crystals of Cu and Al, unlike the tilting and breaking of octahedral network that dominates the crystal instability of the pristine MAPbI3 crystal.63,64
3.2 Effect of point defects on the thermal instability of MAPbI3 crystals
Since MAPbI3 is experimentally found to have large defect concentrations—for example, the concentration of partial Schottky MAI0 vacancy can be as large as 3.82% (ref. 39)—we now explore the influence of three types of vacancies, namely, I− (VI), MA+ (VMA), and MAI0 (VMAI), on the thermal instability of the MAPbI3 crystal (see animations V2 for VI, V3 for VMA, and V4 for VMAI). Fig. 2a shows that the increasing concentration of point vacancies leads to a remarkable reduction in Tc of MAPbI3. In particular, VMAI defect results in a lower Tc than VI and VMA at the same level of vacancy concentration, indicating a strong mixed-vacancy effect on the thermal stability of the crystal. As shown in Fig. 2b, the critical values of atomic mean volume of defective MAPbI3 (Ωcr) are largely independent of both the defect concentration and the ionic species, and are close to that of a perfect crystal Ωcr of ∼57.7 Å3. Such near equal magnitudes of Ωcr for defect-free and defective MAPbI3 crystals indicate that Ωcr is an intrinsic indicator of the thermally induced crystal instability in MAPbI3. As shown in Fig. S2 in ESI,† for temperatures below Tc, due to additional free volume, point vacancies lead to increase in the Ω of defective MAPbI3 compared to that of the perfect crystal at the same temperature, consequently leading to a lower temperature for the onset of crystal instability of MAPbI3 with increasing vacancy concentration. This feature describing the crystal instability in hybrid perovskite crystals is consistent with several classes of materials (for example, FCC metals), where the critical atomic volume is independent of the path by which its material phase is achieved, whether by heating the perfect crystal or via introducing point defects.46
 Fig. 2  Thermal instability and evolution of crystal structure in MAPbI3 with point defects. (a and b) Show the predicted critical thermal instability temperature (Tc) (a), and the critical values of mean atomic volume (ωcr) (b) with respect to the vacancy concentration kV. (c and d) Show the microstructural parameters, such as the averaged critical tilting angle (θavecr) (c) and the critical value of the coordination number for Pb ions (ncrPb) at Tc with respect to kV (d). Several types of point defects, including I− (VI), ma+ (VMA), and MAI0 (VMAI) vacancies are considered here. 
Next we study the microstructural evolution of MAPbI3 crystals with point defects during their thermal-induced crystal instability. Fig. 2c and d exhibit the variation of critical microstructural parameters such as the tilting angles and the coordination numbers. Fig. 2c shows that VMAI induces a much lower critical value of θave (θcrave) than VI and VMA defects at the same concentrations, revealing a significant tilting of PbI6 octahedra before the onset of the instability. However, the analysis of critical coordination numbers shown in Fig. 2d demonstrates that VMAI maintains a better octahedral network than VI as reflected by the much smaller value of NcrPb. A seemingly contrasting trend between θcrave and NcrPb highlights that the tilting of PbI6 octahedra rather than the integrity of the octahedral network itself dominates the thermal stability behavior of MAPbI3 crystals. To establish this intrinsic relationship further, we also evaluate the temperature-dependent phonon properties of MAPbI3 crystals for temperatures up to Tc (see S2 Section in ESI† for details). Lattice dynamics simulations at 0 K reported in the literature have predicted negative frequency phonon modes at both R and M points in the Brillouin zone,44 associated with certain metastable low symmetry structures that can be reached by the tilting of PbI6 octahedra.66 As shown in Fig. 3, however, thermal fluctuations at temperatures above 300 K generate a more uniform distribution of MA ion orientation and suppress those local lower-symmetry structures, thus exhibiting positive frequencies at R and M point. With increasing temperature, we can see the reduced frequencies of some phonon modes in both pristine and defective MAPbI3 crystals. These softened phonon modes indicate large vibration amplitudes of the crystal structure, which can be attributed to certain local crystal deformation, such as tilting, distortion or splitting of PbI6 octahedra.
 Fig. 3  Phonon dispersion curves of pristine and defective MAPbI3 with point defects. (a) Pristine and (b and c) defective hybrid perovskite MAPbI3 with I− (b) and MA+ (c) vacancy defects at a concentration of kV = 0.025 at different temperatures. All phonon branches are determined within the first brillouin zone. r, γ, m and x represent the (0.5 0.5 0.5), (0 0 0), (0.5 0.5 0), and (0 0.5 0) points in the reciprocal space. Acoustic and optical phonon modes are indicated by red and blue colors, respectively. 
We next briefly discuss a unique feature of the phonon properties in MAPbI3 crystals with point defects. In the case of VI defects the obvious fluctuations in phonon dispersion curves (Fig. 3b) are associated with the diffusive I− ions, which possess a remarkable ionic diffusivity compared with the almost negligible diffusion of Pb2+ and MA+ ionic species.35 The much lower frequencies of optical phonon modes at the Γ point, which are related to the larger crystal vibration amplitudes, also indicate the stronger diffusion of I− ions in the crystal.67 Moreover, phonon frequencies at both R and M points approach to zero with increasing temperature. This points to a severe tilting of PbI6 octahedra, in good agreement with our previous analysis of the tilting angles in VI-defective MAPbI3. In the case of VMA defect, phonon frequencies at the Γ point are much larger, and there is a small decrease in the frequencies at R and M points. This trend in the shapes of phonon dispersion curves is associated with a constrained diffusion of all ionic species and the tilt of PbI6 octahedrons. As for the mixture of VI and VMA, they concurrently contribute to the greater ion diffusion and the severe tilting of PbI6 octahedra, leading to the lattice instability of MAPbI3 crystal at a much lower crystal instability temperature Tc.
3.3 Thermal instability of MAPBI3 thin films—the effect of free surfaces
Since MAPbI3 absorber layers in perovskite-based solar cells are normally synthesized by the inexpensive solution-based fabrication methods, two-dimensional defects such as free surfaces, grain boundaries and twin boundaries grain boundaries inevitably exist in the as-fabricated MAPbI3 thin films and can impact the structural stability. We first investigate the influence of stable, low energy, charge-neutral [MAI]0 and [PbI2]0 free surfaces on the thermal stability of MAPbI3 (see animations V5 for [MAI]0 and V6 for [PbI2]0 in ESI†). Fig. 4a shows the variation of the mean atomic volume Ω for models with [MAI]0 and [PbI2]0 free surfaces with increasing temperature. It can be seen that the thermal instability of the hybrid perovskite surfaces is characterized by a sudden change in the trend of the mean atomic volume at the crystal instability temperature (Tc) of ∼600 K and ∼635 K for [PbI2]0 and [MAI]0 surfaces, respectively, representing the onset of the transition from the crystalline to an amorphous liquid phase. However, in contrast to the instability in bulk MAPbI3 crystals, this transition is much more gradual due to a layer-by-layer crystal decomposition. The snapshots of atomic configurations in Fig. 4b show the microstructural evolution of both free surfaces during such partial decomposition process.
 Fig. 4  Thermal decomposition and microstructural evolution of [MAI]0- and [PbI2]0-terminated MAPbI3 thin films. (a) The mean atomic volume (ω) as a function of temperature (T). (b) Snapshots of the atomic configurations of partial and complete decomposition of [MAI]0 and [PbI2]0 free surfaces as highlighted in (a). (c) In-plane layer order parameter ηlayer for [MA]n+ and ionic ([PbI2]0 and [I]n−) components in the [MAI]0-terminated thin film, as a function of the distance from the free surface (z). (d) In-plane layer order parameter ηlayer for [MA]n+ and ionic ([PbI2]0 and [I]n−) components in [PbI2]0-terminated thin film, as a function of the distance from the free surface (z). 
To further understand this layer-by-layer crystal decomposition, we define the in-plane layer order parameter ηlayer as, (6)where kq is the in-plane reciprocal lattice vector in each layer, rn is the position vector of atom n, N is the total number of ions in the [PbI2]0 layer, as well as MA+ and ionic components ([MA]n+ and [I]n− partial layers) in the [MAI]0 layer. As in the case of the bulk crystal, the extremum ηlayer values of 0 and 1 represent the amorphous and crystalline states of each layer at 0 K. As shown in Fig. 4c for the [MAI]0-terminated surface, at the temperatures below the onset of instability (temperature less than 635 K), the surface [MA]n+ partial layer are generally less ordered (smaller values of the parameter ηlayer) than the surface [I]n− partial layer and other subsurface layers in the bulk. Furthermore, the zigzag fluctuation of ηlayer for ionic components ([PbI2]0 layers and [I]n− partial layers) in the subsurface layers indicates that the [MAI]0 subsurface layers are more disordered than the [PbI2]0 subsurface layers. As the temperature exceeds the instability temperature of 635 K, the [MAI]0 surface and the several subsurface layers become progressively disordered as a precursor to the instability of the crystal. The [PbI2]0-terminated surface (see Fig. 4d) exhibits a similar behavior to that of [MAI]0-terminated surface, except the crystal decomposition of the [PbI2]0 surface initiates at a lower temperature of 600 K.
From a thermodynamic point of view, a MAPbI3 thin film with free surfaces is energetically less stable than the MAPbI3 bulk crystal, and thus has much higher total free energy.68,69 Moreover, since such thin films with free surfaces report a small decrease of layer order parameters ηlayer before the initiation of the thermal instability, we assume that the variation of entropy contribution to the total free energy with temperature is negligible. According to Fig. S3,† the free energy increase due to surfaces leads to the reduction of crystal instability temperature Tc of thin films with both [PbI2]0 and [MAI]0 surfaces.68 This can also apply to the size effect on the Tc of micro and nanoparticles, meaning that smaller particles have higher free energy per volume and thus a lower Tc.70,71 When temperature is at or above Tc, an amorphous layer starts to nucleate at the free surfaces since the amorphous phase is more energetically stable than the crystalline phase (see Fig. S3a in ESI†). In a solid-amorphous coexisting film, its free energy changes from Gfilm to , where ΔGinterface = 2γeff/r, and γeff is the effective interfacial free energy, r being the effective radius of the crystalline–amorphous interface.72,73 The decomposed MAPbI3 thin film has r = ∞ and . The invariance of free energy of the coexistence determines that the amorphous layer grows continuously until it consumes the entire model. Such continuous crystal decomposition process in thin films is different from that in the bulk crystals with nanovoids. According to the equation , the bulk crystal with nanovoids (negative curvature) have lower free energy  compared to that of perfect bulk crystal Gbulk-void.73 Consequently, the amorphous or liquid layer in the nanovoids stays stable in the absence of enough driving force to grow continuously (see Fig. S3b in ESI†). It should be noted that after the breaking of the octahedral network, organic components will quickly sublimate and the rest part will form PbI2 clusters, which is consistent with a two-step decomposition reaction process observed in experiments.11,12 However, an investigation into sublimation reactions and the formation of PbI2 clusters is beyond the scope of this study, which can be further explored using quantum mechanical simulations.
Among two MAPbI3 surfaces considered here, the [PbI2]0 surface is less energetically stable than the [MAI]0 surface, due to its higher surface enthalpy as suggested by earlier estimates in the literature (by ∼0.45 eV/surface unit cell).68 Consequently the instability of the crystal structure at the surface can be expected to set in at a lower temperature. The stability of [MAI]0 surface is associated with its surface reconstruction,74,75 where the rearranged orientation of surface MA+ cations strengthens their interactions with surface I− anions and weakens the surface polarity.74 In terms of the reduced Tc by vacancies and free surfaces, defective hybrid perovskite absorber layers in practical solar cells can have much lower thermal instability temperature, which should be further experimentally validated in future studies. Our predictions of the layer by layer degradation from MAPbI3 surfaces are in good agreement with recent first-principles calculations, which indicates that such surface-initiated layer-by-layer decomposition represents the lowest energy pathway for material decomposition.76 However, an accurate estimation of byproducts after the crystal decomposition of MAPbI3 crystals (for example, NH3(g) + CH3I(g))13–15) is out of reach of the empirical potential utilized in this work.
3.4 Mechanisms of thermal instability in MAPbI3 bulk crystals and thin films
To gain a deeper understanding of the temperature-induced instability, we explore the mechanisms for thermal instability in the simplest cases of bulk crystals and thin films of MAPbI3. In general, two mechanisms, as described by Born and Lindemann criteria, have been proposed to understand the phase instability of crystals. Born criterion stipulates a mechanical instability resulting from the lattice instability57,58 and a spontaneous generation of structural defects inside the bulk solids.56,64 Such rigidity catastrophe arises at Tc when one of the two elastic shear moduli C44 and C′ = (C11–C12)/2vanishes, C11, C12 and C44 being the elements of elastic constant matrix for the cubic crystal.57 We therefore calculate both atomic volume (Ω) and temperature (T) dependent elastic constants and shear moduli of bulk MAPbI3. Here the strain (Ω) loading at 0 K is equivalent to thermal (T) loading due to the temperature induced volume expansion.

Fig. 5a illustrates that the shear modulus C′ is much smaller than C44 for all values of Ω in the pristine MAPbI3 crystal. Both C44 and C′ shear moduli decrease with increasing Ω, and C′ decreases to nearly zero as the temperature approaches to Tc due to the melting-induced lattice instability. Interestingly, a small rise of C′ above Tc results from the liquid phase of bulk MAPbI3. Fig. 5b–d show the effect of point vacancies on C′ of defective MAPbI3. We can see in some cases (for example, for I− vacancies at the concentration of 0.024 in Fig. 5b) the shear modulus C′ shows a non-uniform downward trend with respect to Ω. It is interesting to note that the calculated values of C′ do not show strong correlation with the type and even the concentration of point vacancies in the range of concentrations considered in this work. Such an observation can be attributed to the local lattice reconstruction caused by point defects may not soften the overall lattice stiffness. Similar to the pristine MAPbI3 crystal, C′ for MAPbI3 crystals with point defects are also close to zero as Ω approaches its critical value. C′ is also much smaller than C44 for all temperatures. Fig. 6 shows similar trend that the shear modulus C′ decreases with temperature, and reduces to almost zero when temperature approaches Tc, owing to the accumulation of local lattice instabilities within MAPbI3 crystals. The temperature ranges in Fig. 6 correspond to much larger values of Ω (>56 Å3) in Fig. 5, and thus present smaller values of C′ in Fig. 5. It can be noted that the contributions of stress fluctuations and temperature to the shear moduli can be neglected, since these can be estimated to be ∼0.1 GPa (see Computational methods), which is about one order of magnitude smaller than the shear moduli.
 Fig. 5  Shear moduli of pristine and defective MAPbI3 crystals with respect to mean atomic volume. (a) The shear moduli C44 and C′ of pristine bulk MAPbI3 with respect to the mean atomic volume (ω). (b–d) The shear modulus C′ of defective bulk MAPbI3 with (b) I− (VI), (c) MA+ (VMA), and (d) MAI0 (VMAI) vacancies with respect to the mean atomic volume (ω) for different vacancy concentrations kV. 
 Fig. 6  Shear moduli C′ of defective MAPbI3 crystals with respect to temperature. Various types of vacancies, including I− (VI), MA+ (VMA), and MAI0 (VMAI), as well as vacancy concentrations kV in the range of 0.006 to 0.03 are considered, respectively. 
The second criterion of the crystal instability, the Lindemann criterion, stipulates a thermodynamic instability of inhomogeneous solids, which initiates at structural defects such as vacancies and free surfaces.56,77–79 Crystal instability is initiated by a vibrational instability when the so-called Lindemann ratio (δ) between the amplitude of atomic vibration (equaling to root mean square displacement RMSD) and average nearest-neighbor distance reaches to a critical value δcr. Such value depends on the nature of interatomic interactions, magnitude of quantum effects and crystal structures.80,81 In MAPbI3 thin films, Fig. 7 shows that [PbI2]0 and [MAI]0 surfaces have larger amplitudes of atomic vibrations than interior subsurface layers before crystal instability. The instability of thin films starts when ions at free surfaces reach their irreversible atomic vibrations, and the critical values of δ, in good agreement with the analysis of the layer order ηlayer presented earlier that shows the crystalline to amorphous phase transition starts from free surfaces. Such thermodynamic analysis of surface decomposition is also consistent with earlier discussion on free energy as to why the crystal decomposition of MAPbI3 thin films starts from their free surfaces.
 Fig. 7  Lindemann ratio of [MAI]0- and [PbI2]0terminated MAPbI3 thin films. Layer average lindemann δlayer of [MA]n+ and ionic ([PbI2]0 and [I]n−) components in (a) [MAI]0-terminated and (b) [PbI2]0-terminated thin films, as a function of distance from the free surface (z), as a function of distance from the free surface (z). z denotes the distance from the free surface as shown in Fig. 4. 
We next discuss the relationship between the Lindemann criterion and microstructural evolution during the crystal instability of MAPbI3 bulk crystals. It has been demonstrated that both Born and Lindemann criteria coincide for monoatomic bulk solids, where the crystal decomposition is initiated by local lattice instabilities.56,82 If an atom has its Lindemann ratio larger than δcr, it is defined as a Lindemann particle and generates local lattice instability. The accumulation and coalescence of these Lindemann particles govern the homogeneous instability nucleation inside the crystal.56 Such kinetic mechanism can also be applied to the pristine MAPbI3 crystal, and correlates with its microstructural evolution during the crystal decomposition. As discussed earlier, thermal energy can activate a strong tilting of PbI6 octahedra. Owing to the central position of Pb ions within the octahedra, Pb ions have smaller amplitudes of atomic vibration and thus a smaller average value of δ than I ions (see Fig. 1b). With increasing temperature, some I ions reach their δcr and become Lindemann particles. This corresponds to the breaking of the octahedral network by splitting of the PbI6 octahedron. The accumulation of octahedral network defects (Lindemann particles of I− ions) finally gives rise to a global lattice instability of the whole structure. In the defective MAPbI3 crystals, ions in the vicinity of vacancies are less constrained by the electrostatic interactions, and have larger amplitudes of atomic vibrations compared to those in the pristine crystal (see Fig. S4 in ESI†). Thus the accumulation of the local lattice instabilities in defective crystals is faster than in the pristine crystal, resulting in the global lattice instability of defective crystals at lower temperature.
3.5 Thermal instability in polycrystalline MAPbI3 crystals
Finally, we investigate the impact of two-dimensional defects such as twin boundaries and grain boundaries of the instability of MAPbI3 crystals by considering bicrystal and polycrystal models of varying grain sizes. Fig. 8 presents the key results for a bicrystal as well as a polycrystalline structure for brevity, whereas the determination of critical temperatures Tc at which the crystal instability occurs in other polycrystalline cases are illustrated in detail in Fig. S5 in ESI.† It can be seen that in the simpler case of bi-crystalline MAPbI3, for twin boundaries of both Σ5(2 1 0) and Σ10(3 1 0)) orientations, Tc is approximately 640 K, which is much lower than that in the case of pristine crystal structure (∼1050 K) as well as the crystal with point defects at large concentrations (840–960 K) As for the polycrystalline MAPbI3, randomly oriented GBs further decrease Tc to within the range of 550 K to 570 K. Interestingly, these predicted values for Tc are quite close to the instability temperature (from 520 K to 690 K) measured by thermogravimetric analysis (520–690 K).11,14,16–21 An analysis of the microstructural evolution of grain boundaries indicates that with increasing temperature, the concentration of point defects as well as the size of the amorphous regions in the vicinity of grain boundaries increasing, triggering the thermal instability of MAPbI3 polycrystals at a much lower temperature. The good agreement between our computational and previous experimental results confirms the validity of our atomistic modelling of thermal instability of MAPbI3.
 Fig. 8  Thermal instability in bicrystals and polycrystals. Atomistic configurations, as well as the mean atomic volume (ω) and averaged coordination number of Pb ions (NPb) with respect to temperature for (a) MAPbI3 bicrystal with the symmetric twin boundaries of orientations σ5(2 1 0), and σ10(3 1 0), and (b) two polycrystal models with the average grain size of 25 nm3. Different grains are represented by different colors for visual clarity. 
3.6 Summary of thermal instability in MAPbI3

Fig. 9 summarizes the critical temperatures for the onset of the instability in MAPbI3 crystals for all cases considered in our work and compares against the typical range of experimental values reported in the literature. It is evident that, in general, two-dimensional defects such as free surfaces and twin/grain boundaries are responsible for the early onset of the instability of MAPbI3 crystals. Remarkably, Tc values predicted for single crystal thin films or polycrystals are within the range of experimental values as shown in Fig. 9. We emphasize that the models presented here consider only one type of defect at a time. In contrast, the polycrystalline thin films used in experiments are characterized by a multitude of such defects, all occurring simultaneously. As a result, the interplay between various kinds of defects (in particular, a triple junction of grain boundaries with free surfaces) is likely to lead to a much earlier onset of the crystal instability, with much lower Tc than reported here. Furthermore, here we have ignored the effect of defect migration on the stability of MAPbI3 crystal, as the time scale for the defect migration is much longer than that of the simulations. Since elevated temperatures accelerate the migration of defects and subsequently, the formation of aggregated defect clusters (i.e. nanovoids),31,35 it can be anticipated that considering kinetics of defects can also lead to an earlier onset of crystal instability with lower Tc values.
 Fig. 9  Critical temperature Tc for thermal instability in pristine and defective MAPbI3 crystals. MAPbI3 models include pristine single crystal, single crystals with point defects, thin films, and poly-crystals. The dashed line represents the upper limit of Tc, namely Tc of single crystal MAPbI3. The green area represents the wide range of Tc reported in thermogravimetric experiments.11,14,16–21 
We have demonstrated here that the thermal instabilities in MAPbI3 crystals are closely associated with their microstructural evolution such as tilting and splitting of PbI6 octahedra. This suggests that a design of new hybrid perovskites with enhanced thermal stability should in principle be possible by suppressing the tilting of their octahedra. For example, one can substitute few or all of the ionic components (MA+, Pb2+, I−) of prototype MAPbI3 by other ionic species, such as formamidinium (HNCHNH3+, or FA+), Cs+, Br−, or Cl−. Few recent studies have experimentally found that substituting MA+ ions by a low doping concentration of larger ions (i.e. FA+) can enhance their thermal stability, which can be attributed to a global locking of PbI6 octahedra.24,83,84 Our simulations also show that the thermal instability of hybrid perovskites initiates from their intrinsic structural defects, and greatly reduce the applicability of such materials at elevated temperatures. This highlights the importance of further exploring the material design strategies, such as surface passivation or interface strengthening, to minimize the detrimental influence of intrinsic defects on the thermal stability of hybrid perovskites. Furthermore, strategies such as lowering perovskite dimensions or increasing the valence charge of ions, can suppress defect/ion migration and clustering, thereby further improving the material stability.31,85
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we investigated the molecular mechanisms of structural instability in MAPbI3 bulk crystals and polycrystalline thin films. Large-scale MD simulations show that pristine MAPbI3 crystal maintains its crystalline integrity until a critical temperature (Tc) as large as ∼1050 K, at which it undergoes a crystalline to amorphous phase transition. We establish the underlying relationships between the thermal instability and microstructural evolution in MAPbI3 crystals. With increasing temperature, the thermal instability in MAPbI3 crystals is preceded by a continuous softening of their octahedral network, associated with the tilting and splitting of PbI6 octahedra. Point vacancies, especially the partial Schottky MAI0 vacancies, accelerate the initiation of local lattice instability, leading to the crystal decomposition of MAPbI3 crystals at much lower temperatures (i.e. a decrease in Tc of ∼250 K for MAI0 vacancies at a concentration of 3%). The predictions of phonon modes confirm the tilting and splitting of PbI6 octahedra in defective MAPbI3 crystals. We also explored the thermal instability in bi-crystalline and polycrystalline MAPbI3 crystals and demonstrated that grain boundaries can reduce the crystal instability temperature to about 550 K, close to the experimental measurement by thermogravimetric analysis. Our results suggest that both Born (mechanical) and Lindemann (thermodynamic) criteria coincide in governing the thermal instability by the initiation and accumulation of local lattice instabilities. Consistent with Lindemann criterion, thermal instability in thin films originates from their free surfaces at much lower temperatures due the increased free energies of MAPbI3 thin films. Specifically, thermal instability initiates from the charge neutral (100)/[MAI]0 surface at lower temperature than that from the (100)/[PbI2]0 surface. The analysis of the thermal instability in the prototypical hybrid perovskite MAPbI3 presented here can provide guidance on the optimal selection and rational design of hybrid perovskite functional components with enhanced thermal stability for efficient and stable energy harvesting and conversion applications. Furthermore, the analysis presented here can also be extended to study the low-dimensional perovskites, which have recently been demonstrated with an improved stability compared to their three-dimensional counterparts.23
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
M. W., N. B. and N. V. M. acknowledge support from the Monash University Cluster, the Australian National Computing Infrastructure (NCI), and the Pawsey Supercomputing Centre for high performance computing, and the financial support from Australian Research Council's Discovery Project scheme (DP160103661). S. L. acknowledges startup funding from the Energy and Materials Initiative from the Florida State University and funding from the National Science Foundation (NSF-CBET-1708968).
References
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, T. Jesper Jacobsson, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 710–727 RSC .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs, E.-C. Wang, T. C. Kho, K. C. Fong, M. Stocks, E. Franklin, A. Blakers, N. Zin, K. McIntosh, W. Li, Y.-B. Cheng, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700228 CrossRef .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-K. Kim, Y. H. Min, S. Noh, E. Cho, G. Jeong, M. Joo, S.-W. Ahn, J. S. Lee, S. Kim, K. Ihm, H. Ahn, Y. Kang, H.-S. Lee and D. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 4645 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Meng, J. You and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, Y. Qin and Q. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2017, 121, 1169–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 RSC .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dualeh, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3250–3258 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, Z. Hawash, S. R. Raga, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3406–3410 RSC .
A. Ciccioli and A. Latini, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3756–3765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dimesso, M. Dimamay, M. Hamburger and W. Jaegermann, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6762–6770 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dualeh, P. Gao, S. I. Seok, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6160–6164 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Nenon, J. A. Christians, L. M. Wheeler, J. L. Blackburn, E. M. Sanehira, B. Dou, M. L. Olsen, K. Zhu, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2072–2082 RSC .
A. E. Williams, P. J. Holliman, M. J. Carnie, M. L. Davies, D. A. Worsley and T. M. Watson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19338–19346 RSC .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Hörantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486 CrossRef CAS .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. Guo, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700841 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K.-H. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1312–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .
X. Li, M. Ibrahim Dar, C. Yi, J. Luo, M. Tschumi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, H. Han and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, Y. Bai, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 516–522 RSC .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, E. Debroye, K. Janssen, H. Naiki, C. Steuwe, G. Lu, M. Moris, E. Orgiu, H. Uji-i, F. De Schryver, P. Samorì, J. Hofkens and M. Roeffaers, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 561–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Delugas, C. Caddeo, A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2356–2361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Meloni, T. Moehl, W. Tress, M. Franckevičius, M. Saliba, Y. H. Lee, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 193 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Walsh, D. O. Scanlon, S. Chen, X. G. Gong and S.-H. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1791–1794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
E. Mosconi, J. M. Azpiroz and F. De Angelis, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4885–4892 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, M.-G. Ju and W. Liang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 23174–23183 RSC .
A. Mattoni, A. Filippetti, M. I. Saba and P. Delugas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 17421–17428 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang and S. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5297–5306 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, M. Wang and S. Lin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11044–11057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Caddeo, M. I. Saba, S. Meloni, A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9183–9190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, J. Wang, M. Wang and S. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 23584–23594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Plimpton, J. Comput. Phys., 1995, 117, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Zhao, M. Wang and S. Lin, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 6201–6211 CrossRef CAS .

          R. W. Hockney and J. W. Eastwood, Computer Simulation Using Particles, crc Press,  1988 Search PubMed .

          M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of Liquids, Oxford university press,  1989 Search PubMed .
C.-J. Tong, W. Geng, Z.-K. Tang, C.-Y. Yam, X.-L. Fan, J. Liu, W.-M. Lau and L.-M. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3289–3295 CrossRef CAS .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Han and Y. Tateyama, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 554–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nosé, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 81, 511–519 CrossRef .
W. G. Hoover, Phys. Rev. A, 1985, 31, 1695–1697 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Jin, P. Gumbsch, K. Lu and E. Ma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 055703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Born, J. Chem. Phys., 1939, 7, 591–603 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wolf, P. R. Okamoto, S. Yip, J. F. Lutsko and M. Kluge, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 5, 286–301 CrossRef .
J. R. Ray, Comput. Phys. Rep., 1988, 8, 109–151 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, K. V. Workum, J. D. Schall and J. A. Harrison, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 18, S1737–S1750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Kong, G. Bartels, C. Campañá, C. Denniston and M. H. Müser, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2009, 180, 1004–1010 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Tallon, Philos. Mag. Lett., 1979, 39, 151–161 CrossRef CAS .
A. Samanta, M. E. Tuckerman, T.-Q. Yu and W. E, Science, 2014, 346, 729–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Forsblom and G. Grimvall, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Peng, Z. Zheng and Y. Han, Science, 2012, 338, 87–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Whalley, J. M. Frost, Y.-K. Jung and A. Walsh, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 146, 220901 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wakamura, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 11593–11599 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, F. Gao, S. Gao and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14949–14955 RSC .
W. Luo and W. Hu, Phys. B, 2013, 425, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Alarifi, M. Atiş, C. Özdoğan, A. Hu, M. Yavuz and Y. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12289–12298 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Mei and K. Lu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2007, 52, 1175–1262 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Bai and M. Li, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 151102 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-M. Bai and M. Li, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2284–2289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. She, M. Liu and D. Zhong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1126–1131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jagielski, S. Kumar, M. Wang, D. Scullion, R. Lawrence, Y.-T. Li, S. Yakunin, T. Tian, M. V. Kovalenko, Y.-C. Chiu, E. J. G. Santos, S. Lin and C.-J. Shih, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaaq0208 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fan, H. Xiao, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, H.-C. Cheng, S.-J. Lee, G. Wang, Z. Feng, W. A. Goddard, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Joule, 2017, 1, 548–562 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lindemann, Phys. Z., 1910, 11, 609 CAS .
R. W. Cahn, Nature, 1986, 323, 668–669 CrossRef .
R. N. Barnett and U. Landman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 3226–3239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. Stillinger and T. A. Weber, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1980, 22, 3790–3794 CrossRef CAS .
R. Agrawal and D. A. Kofke, Mol. Phys., 1995, 85, 23–42 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Cahn, Nature, 2001, 413, 582–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
F. C. Hanusch, E. Wiesenmayer, E. Mankel, A. Binek, P. Angloher, C. Fraunhofer, N. Giesbrecht, J. M. Feckl, W. Jaegermann, D. Johrendt, T. Bein and P. Docampo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2791–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Deng and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1571–1572 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta05356bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
σxx = C11e, σyy + σzz = 2C12e	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 1  Thermal instability and evolution of crystal structure in pristine MAPbI3. (a) Atomistic configuration of MAPbI3 crystal at room temperature. θ denotes the Pb–I–Pb octahedral tilting angle. (b) The mean atomic volume (ω), translational order parameter (η), and lindemann ratios for Pb (δPb) and I (δI) ions as a function of temperature. (c) Averaged octahedral tilting angle (θave), and coordination numbers for Pb (nPb) and I (nI) ions as a function of temperature. (d) Atomic structure of MAPbI3 crystal close to the critical transition temperature Tc, at T = 1050 (left) and 1052.5 K (right). The dashed orange circles highlight the dangling Pb–I bonds of partial PbI6 octahedra in the MAPbI3 crystal.	 

 	Fig. 2  Thermal instability and evolution of crystal structure in MAPbI3 with point defects. (a and b) Show the predicted critical thermal instability temperature (Tc) (a), and the critical values of mean atomic volume (ωcr) (b) with respect to the vacancy concentration kV. (c and d) Show the microstructural parameters, such as the averaged critical tilting angle (θavecr) (c) and the critical value of the coordination number for Pb ions (ncrPb) at Tc with respect to kV (d). Several types of point defects, including I− (VI), ma+ (VMA), and MAI0 (VMAI) vacancies are considered here.	 

 	Fig. 3  Phonon dispersion curves of pristine and defective MAPbI3 with point defects. (a) Pristine and (b and c) defective hybrid perovskite MAPbI3 with I− (b) and MA+ (c) vacancy defects at a concentration of kV = 0.025 at different temperatures. All phonon branches are determined within the first brillouin zone. r, γ, m and x represent the (0.5 0.5 0.5), (0 0 0), (0.5 0.5 0), and (0 0.5 0) points in the reciprocal space. Acoustic and optical phonon modes are indicated by red and blue colors, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Thermal decomposition and microstructural evolution of [MAI]0- and [PbI2]0-terminated MAPbI3 thin films. (a) The mean atomic volume (ω) as a function of temperature (T). (b) Snapshots of the atomic configurations of partial and complete decomposition of [MAI]0 and [PbI2]0 free surfaces as highlighted in (a). (c) In-plane layer order parameter ηlayer for [MA]n+ and ionic ([PbI2]0 and [I]n−) components in the [MAI]0-terminated thin film, as a function of the distance from the free surface (z). (d) In-plane layer order parameter ηlayer for [MA]n+ and ionic ([PbI2]0 and [I]n−) components in [PbI2]0-terminated thin film, as a function of the distance from the free surface (z).	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 5  Shear moduli of pristine and defective MAPbI3 crystals with respect to mean atomic volume. (a) The shear moduli C44 and C′ of pristine bulk MAPbI3 with respect to the mean atomic volume (ω). (b–d) The shear modulus C′ of defective bulk MAPbI3 with (b) I− (VI), (c) MA+ (VMA), and (d) MAI0 (VMAI) vacancies with respect to the mean atomic volume (ω) for different vacancy concentrations kV.	 

 	Fig. 6  Shear moduli C′ of defective MAPbI3 crystals with respect to temperature. Various types of vacancies, including I− (VI), MA+ (VMA), and MAI0 (VMAI), as well as vacancy concentrations kV in the range of 0.006 to 0.03 are considered, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  Lindemann ratio of [MAI]0- and [PbI2]0terminated MAPbI3 thin films. Layer average lindemann δlayer of [MA]n+ and ionic ([PbI2]0 and [I]n−) components in (a) [MAI]0-terminated and (b) [PbI2]0-terminated thin films, as a function of distance from the free surface (z), as a function of distance from the free surface (z). z denotes the distance from the free surface as shown in Fig. 4.	 

 	Fig. 8  Thermal instability in bicrystals and polycrystals. Atomistic configurations, as well as the mean atomic volume (ω) and averaged coordination number of Pb ions (NPb) with respect to temperature for (a) MAPbI3 bicrystal with the symmetric twin boundaries of orientations σ5(2 1 0), and σ10(3 1 0), and (b) two polycrystal models with the average grain size of 25 nm3. Different grains are represented by different colors for visual clarity.	 

 	Fig. 9  Critical temperature Tc for thermal instability in pristine and defective MAPbI3 crystals. MAPbI3 models include pristine single crystal, single crystals with point defects, thin films, and poly-crystals. The dashed line represents the upper limit of Tc, namely Tc of single crystal MAPbI3. The green area represents the wide range of Tc reported in thermogravimetric experiments.11,14,16–21	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta05356b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
