Strategies for enhancing the photocurrent, photovoltage, and stability of photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00997J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00997J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4979-5015Strategies for enhancing the photocurrent, photovoltage, and stability of photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting†

        
          
            Wooseok 
            Yang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rajiv Ramanujam 
            Prabhakar
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jeiwan 
            Tan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            S. David 
            Tilley
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Jooho 
            Moon
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Yonsei University, 03722 Seoul, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jmoon@yonsei.ac.kr
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. E-mail: david.tilley@chem.uzh.ch
Received 
      28th May 2019
    First published on 4th September 2019AbstractTo accelerate the deployment of hydrogen produced by renewable solar energy, several technologies have been competitively developed, including photoelectrochemical (PEC), photocatalytic, and photovoltaic-electrolysis routes. In this review, we place PEC in context with these competing technologies and highlight key advantages of PEC systems. After defining the unique performance metrics of the PEC water splitting system, recently developed strategies for enhancing each performance metric, such as the photocurrent density, photovoltage, fill factor, and stability are surveyed in conjunction with the relevant theoretical aspects. In addition, various advanced characterization methods are discussed, including recently developed in situ techniques, allowing us to understand not only the basic properties of materials but also diverse photophysical phenomena underlying the PEC system. Based on the insights gained from these advanced characterization techniques, we not only provide a resource for researchers in the field as well as those who want to join the field, but also offer an outlook of how thin film-based PEC studies could lead to commercially viable water splitting systems.
Wooseok Yang
Wooseok Yang received his BS in 2012 from the Department of Ceramic Engineering and his PhD in 2018 from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea. His PhD thesis is devoted to solution-processed p-type semiconductors for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. Currently, he is working in Prof. Jooho Moon's group as a postdoctoral researcher. He has continued to research the fabrication of PEC devices based on earth-abundant constituents and scalable solution-processing to realize efficient solar energy conversion.
Rajiv Ramanujam Prabhakar
Rajiv Ramanujam Prabhakar is currently a PhD student at the University of Zurich in the group of Prof. David Tilley. He received his BSc in Physics from the National University of Singapore and MEng in Materials Science and Engineering from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His current research interests are on developing earth-abundant chalcogenide materials for solar fuel generation.
Jeiwan Tan
Jeiwan Tan is currently a PhD candidate at the Materials Science and Engineering, Yonsei University in the group of Prof. Jooho Moon. He received his BS degree from Yonsei University in 2014. His current research interests are focused on fabricating solution-processed semiconductors and their interface engineering for photoelectrochemical water splitting.
S. David Tilley
S. David Tilley attained a Bachelor's in Chemistry from the University of Georgia, USA in 2002, and obtained a PhD in Chemistry from the University of California, Berkeley in 2007. He received training in photoelectrochemistry at the EPFL, Switzerland, from Prof. Michael Graetzel, and was the Group Leader of the hydrogen subgroup in the Graetzel Laboratory from 2012 to 2014. Since 2015, he has been a tenure-track Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Zurich, Switzerland.
Jooho Moon
Jooho Moon is a professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea. He holds an MS and a PhD in materials science and engineering from the University of Florida. He did his postdoctoral research in the Materials Processing Center at MIT from 1996 to 1998. He was awarded a Japan Society of the Promotion of Science (JSPS) fellowship in 1998. He joined the faculty at Yonsei University in 2000. His research interests include ink-jet printing of self-assembling colloids and functional nanoparticles, printed electronics and displays, solid-oxide fuel cells, perovskite solar cells, and water splitting. He has co-authored more than 230 publications in peer-reviewed journals and he has also served as an associate editor of ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces since 2015.
1. Introduction
The generation of storable fuels from abundant sunlight and water is one of the great challenges of the modern age. The average amount of solar power striking just the Earth's deserts is 7650 TW,1 and the conversion of only 0.6% of this desert solar resource would enable humanity to meet the projected 43 TW energy demand for the year 2100.2 Framed in this way, it seems obvious that we will sooner or later have an energy system relying heavily on solar energy. However, there are challenges that hinder its rapid adoption, such as the intermittent nature of solar energy striking the Earth's surface, and the relatively low power density (∼1000 W m−2), necessitating large areas of solar energy conversion devices. The dominant technology for solar energy conversion is currently silicon-based photovoltaics (PV), whose price has fallen dramatically in recent years.3 However, when the cost of energy storage is considered (e.g., batteries), the total costs remain uncompetitive with fossil fuel resources. Thus, improvements in both solar energy conversion as well as the storage of this energy are needed to accelerate its deployment into the energy market.
The storage of solar energy for day/night cycles will likely be met with new scalable battery technologies,4,5 but the only efficient solution for long-term (e.g., seasonal) storage is fuels.6 The simplest solar fuel is molecular hydrogen (H2), arising from the splitting of water into its constituent elements with light energy. Renewable H2 will also be needed for large-scale industrial processes that currently rely on fossil-derived H2, such as the Haber–Bosch process.7 Currently, the vast majority of H2 is produced from fossil fuels. Approximately half is produced from natural gas, using steam methane reforming (SMR) without carbon capture; 30% is obtained during the refining process of petroleum; 18% is produced from coal; and only 4% is produced through water electrolysis.8 It is estimated that if SMR were scaled up, H2 could be produced for $1.25 per kg H2.9 Of course, this figure does not account for the eventual costs related to releasing CO2 into the atmosphere. However, to compete on a purely economic basis, efficient and stable solar water splitting reactors will need to be fabricated very cheaply.10 In a recent technoeconomic analysis, Pinaud et al. calculated that, depending on the system architecture, solar H2 could be produced at a cost of $1.60–$10.40 per kg H2.9
There are several potential methods for generating solar hydrogen. Starting from the most technologically advanced solar energy conversion technology, PV, one can imagine varying degrees of adaptation for water splitting, as shown in Fig. 1.11 On one extreme is commercial PV panels connected to commercial electrolyzers via an electrical grid (Fig. 1g). On the other extreme is a wireless, water splitting “artificial leaf,” which is a light absorbing panel submerged in water that generates hydrogen on one face and oxygen on the other (Fig. 1a).12 The PV + electrolysis approach is at a much higher technological readiness level (TRL) than the integrated PEC approach due to the maturity of both PV and electrolyzer technologies. An in-depth comparison between these two approaches was recently reported by Ardo et al.13 The authors argue that in the medium term (∼10 years), the PEC technology most likely to succeed is thin film-based approaches that leverage current semiconductor manufacturing knowledge. However, in the long term, more advanced approaches such as photocatalytic particles (which currently has a very low TRL level) may be cost effective, even cheaper than fossil fuel-derived hydrogen.
 Fig. 1  Various configurations of semiconductor film-based water splitting, illustrating a gradual transition in six steps from (a) the simplest monolithic PEC device to (g) the most complicated PV-cell through the grid. Republished with permission from ref. 11 from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2014. 
Although decoupled PV + electrolysis is conceptually simpler (e.g., Fig. 1f and g), there are distinct advantages to integration that may give an advantage to photoelectrochemical (PEC) systems (e.g., Fig. 1b). Integrated systems such as PEC offer the opportunity to use thermal management to improve the efficiency of the system. The aqueous electrolyte solution cools the illuminated semiconductor, keeping the photovoltage high, while the electrocatalyst/solution is heated, which lowers the overpotential (discussed further in Section 6).14 Both of these effects lead synergistically to a higher theoretical efficiency than decoupled systems.
A recent technoeconomic analysis compared PV + electrolysis to a theoretical, “integrated” panel-based PEC system on the plant-level scale (10000 kg H2 per day).15 The authors found that for the same overall plant efficiency of 9.8%, hydrogen could be produced more cheaply with the PEC plant, although the PV + electrolysis plant regained the advantage when supplemented with grid electricity when the PV output was low or absent. It should be noted that most electrical grids worldwide rely heavily on fossil energy and thus the hydrogen generated in this way would have a partial fossil energy contribution. The difference in price between PEC ($11.4 kg−1) and stand-alone (i.e., no-grid) PV + electrolysis ($12.1 kg−1) arises from the lower balance-of-systems (BOS) costs in the PEC system, because the light absorber and electrocatalytic unit are integrated into the same device. The authors concluded that no technological advancements based on currently demonstrated technology would be sufficient to produce H2 cheaply enough to compete with H2 produced from fossil energy without a price on carbon.
However, in addition to the film-based approaches analyzed above, another possibility is to use photocatalytic (PC) particles that carry out the overall water splitting reactions on the particle surface.16,17 It has been estimated that a particle-based approach could produce hydrogen for as little as $1.60 kg−1.9Fig. 2 shows both single-particle and dual-particle systems for overall water splitting, which consist of an oxygen evolution half reaction and a proton reduction half reaction (eqn (1)–(3)): Oxygen evolution reaction (OER): H2O → 1/2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− + 1.23 V/NHE(1) Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER): 2H+ + 2e− → H2 0 V/NHE(2) Overall water splitting: H2O → H2 + 1/2O2 −1.23 V(3)where NHE is the normal hydrogen electrode.
 Fig. 2  (a) Single-particle photocatalyst that carries out overall water splitting. (b) Dual-particle photocatalytic system in which an oxygen-evolving photocatalyst particle is coupled to a hydrogen-evolving photocatalyst through a redox mediator dissolved in the electrolyte solution. CBM: conduction band minimum; VBM: valence band maximum; Eg: bandgap energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18 from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. 
In the single-particle system, the OER and HER reactions take place on the same particle (Fig. 2a), whereas in the dual-particle system, the OER particle is connected to the HER particle through an electron relay (redox mediator) in solution (Fig. 2b).18 Upon absorption of a photon with energy greater than the bandgap (Eg), an electron is excited from the valence band to the conduction band, generating an electron–hole pair. The electron diffuses in the conduction band to the reduction co-catalyst, where the HER takes place, and the hole diffuses in the valence band to the oxidation co-catalyst, where the OER takes place. For the single-particle system, the conduction and valence bands of the semiconductor must straddle the thermodynamic potentials for the HER and OER reactions to accomplish overall water splitting (Fig. 2a). In the dual-particle system, the redox mediator relaxes the constraints, as the voltages of both particles sum to provide the driving force for overall water splitting (Fig. 2b).
Although the fields of PEC and PC water splitting have been developing somewhat independently of one another, the underlying photophysics are nearly identical, and insights gained in one field can benefit the other. For particle suspension-based systems, identifying the limitations under operando conditions is particularly challenging. Typically, gas evolution rates are measured and correlated with the material properties of the particles at equilibrium in the dark or compared with different additives in the electrolyte (hole- or electron-scavengers). For new materials, the determination of basic properties such as the band positions with respect to the electrolyte is also challenging in particle-based systems.17,19 For thin-film-based systems, the illumination conditions can be more easily controlled, and there is more flexibility in terms of spectroscopic and operando (non-equilibrium) characterization (discussed in Section 5).20 New materials can be easily characterized and optimized using a variety of techniques for understanding the underlying photophysical properties of each new system, thereby providing opportunities for rapidly improving the efficiency and stability. Some recent reviews in this field have focused on semiconducting materials,21 earth-abundant EC/PEC catalysts,22 heterogeneous photocatalysts,18 thin-film materials,20 large-scale implementation,16 and protection strategies.23 In this review, we specifically focus on recent strategies for photoelectrode optimization and on advanced characterization methods for thin-film electrodes, to provide a resource for researchers in the field and for those who want to join the field, paving the way for ever more efficient water splitting cells. The strategies mainly concentrate on improving the photocurrent, photovoltage, fill factor, and stability of PEC systems. We envision that the findings from these PEC studies could be exploited in PC particle suspension systems to generate solar hydrogen at even lower cost than fossil hydrogen.
2. Theory and definitions
To recognize the efficiency metrics that are conventionally used in water splitting, it is important to understand the thermodynamics of the H2, O2, and H2O system, and particularly the hydrogen combustion reaction to liquid water (eqn (4)). After all, it is the energy that can be extracted from solar fuels to do useful work that is of interest, and this can be used as a basis for calculating the water splitting efficiency. H2 + 1/2O2 → H2O (liquid) + energy(4)
The higher heating value (HHV) of H2 is 285.8 kJ mol−1, which is the total energy released upon combustion of the gases at 25 °C after the products have returned to 25 °C, accounting for the latent heat of vaporization in the combustion product (i.e., water). However, the Gibbs free energy (ΔG°) for eqn (4) is only 237.2 kJ mol−1, which is the maximum amount of high-quality (i.e., low-entropy) energy that can be extracted from the reaction between H2 and O2 (e.g., operating a fuel cell to generate electricity, which is a high quality and low-entropy energy). The low-entropy of electricity indicates that electricity is a more useful energy than others (such as thermal energy) in terms of generating work. For a fuel cell reaction, we can therefore write: H2 + 1/2O2 → H2O (liquid) + 237.2 kJ mol−1 (electricity) + 48.6 kJ mol−1 (heat)(5)The above equation indicates that all fuel cells generate heat in addition to electricity, and that this heat is also stored in the H2 molecule.24
We can now consider the reverse reaction, which is the storage of energy in the H2 molecule: H2O (liquid) + 237.2 kJ mol−1 (electricity) + 48.6 kJ mol−1 (heat) → H2 + 1/2O2(6)This equation indicates that a certain amount of electricity as well as a certain amount of heat will be stored in the H2 molecule upon electrolytic water splitting. The Gibbs free energy of 237.2 kJ mol−1 translates to 1.23 eV per electron, and thus 1.23 V is the thermodynamic voltage for overall water splitting. To drive the reaction forward at a reasonable rate, an excess of potential, or an overpotential, is required. The excess potential is converted to heat, which is the usual source of the heat that also ends up stored in the hydrogen. The HHV of 285.8 kJ mol−1 translates to 1.48 V, which is the thermoneutral potential for an electrolytic cell operating at 25 °C (i.e., the potential at which no excess heat is generated). This implies that the liquid water in an electrolyzer operating between 1.23 and 1.48 V will actually cool down and absorb heat from the surroundings. Although this HHV might be more relevant for applications in which hydrogen is used for combustion, it is usually the free energy that is of greater interest (i.e., work that can be done using a fuel cell). Thus, the efficiency for water splitting conventionally uses the thermodynamic voltage of 1.23 V when calculating the amount of energy stored in the hydrogen molecule upon (photo)electrolysis of water.
According to eqn (6), 237.2 kJ mol−1 of high-quality (low-entropy) energy is required to carry out water splitting, and in photoelectrolysis, this energy is supplied in the form of light. A minimum photon energy of 1.23 eV (per electron) is therefore required (corresponding to wavelengths <1010 nm). Thus, for a water splitting cell based on a single semiconductor material, the semiconductor must generate a photovoltage >1.23 V (and practically much more, if the reaction is to occur at a reasonable rate). The theoretical maximum photovoltage that a semiconductor can produce is ∼400 mV less than the bandgap under standard conditions,25 and therefore the bandgap should be >1.6 V (and, again, practically much more to drive the reaction at a reasonable rate). However, there is a tradeoff between the size of the bandgap and the amount of light that can be absorbed, with large bandgaps absorbing less light, and therefore having lower efficiencies. Fig. 3 shows the bandgaps and band positions for several materials that have been investigated for PV and PEC, which will be discussed in this review.
 Fig. 3  Conduction band and valence band positions for important semiconductors discussed in this review on the RHE scale. 
One can see from Fig. 3, for instance, that iron oxide has a relatively small bandgap for an oxide material, but the conduction band edge is too positive (on the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) scale) to achieve unassisted water splitting (i.e., without an additional electrical bias). Similarly, the conduction band of Sb2Se3 is suitable for hydrogen evolution, but the valence band is not positive enough to achieve oxygen evolution. The non-ideal band positions of most materials with respect to the thermodynamic water splitting potentials is one reason why it is advantageous to use two photoabsorbers in series. In this way, each semiconductor needs to have only one band (either the conduction or the valence band) that is suitable for the respective reaction. Fig. 4a depicts an n-type material that is suitable for use as a photoanode in a water splitting cell.26 When light with energy greater than the bandgap is incident on a photoanode, electron–hole pairs are generated, and owing to the band bending (i.e., electric field) at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface (upward band bending of the conduction and valence bands), the holes move toward the surface where water oxidation takes place. The electrons are collected at the metal cathode, where protons are reduced to form molecular hydrogen. The opposite mechanism occurs in a photocathode, where a p-type semiconductor is employed as the light absorber, and electrons are driven toward the surface owing to the band energetics (and holes away from the surface) at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. The electrons reduce the proton to evolve hydrogen gas at the photocathode surface, and the holes move to the back contact and to the counter electrode, where water oxidation takes place. Moreover, two photoabsorbers with different bandgaps (one photoanode and one photocathode) can absorb different portions of the solar spectrum, which greatly increases the maximum theoretical efficiency that can be obtained (Fig. 4b).27 By engineering a photoanode and photocathode in a tandem-cell configuration with complimentary light absorption characteristics, the full spectrum of the sun could be harvested, yielding higher photoconversion efficiencies.
 Fig. 4  (a) Semiconductor photoanode band energetics. (b) Tandem cell with photoanode and photocathode with complimentary absorption to maximize efficiency. Eg: bandgap, Δμex: quasi Fermi level splitting, hν: photon energy, e−: electron, h+: hole. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26 from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2013. 
Increasing the efficiency is the most important aspect for decreasing the cost of solar fuel from solar energy conversion devices, owing to the area-dependent costs for all of the components of the device (e.g., light absorbers, catalysts, BOS, etc.),15 although there is a trade-off between the number of photoabsorbers in series (enabling higher theoretical efficiencies) and increasing cost of the system due to the increased complexity. However, as water splitting always involves two (photo)electrodes, one for hydrogen evolution and the other for oxygen evolution, the use of tandem photoelectrodes is practical and the gain in efficiency in going from one to two photoabsorbers is worthwhile, as discussed in more detail below.
The primary metric for water splitting is the solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency (STH), which gives the fraction of the incident solar power that is stored in the H2 (eqn (7)). As mentioned above, the Gibbs free energy is used for the hydrogen, with the corresponding voltage of 1.23 V, which represents the amount of high-quality (low-entropy) work that can be extracted from the H2. The STH efficiency is distinct from the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PV cells, in that the PCE is a function of both the photovoltage and photocurrent, whereas in water splitting, the STH efficiency is a function of only the photocurrent (with the voltage fixed at 1.23 V). The excess voltage that is required to split water at a reasonable rate is lost as heat and does not enter into the efficiency calculation. The STH efficiency will therefore always be lower than the PCE efficiency for a given photoabsorber.28 (7)where J is the photocurrent density, Pin is the power of the incident light, and ηeff is the faradaic efficiency for hydrogen evolution. It should be emphasized that eqn (7) is only valid when the photocurrent corresponds to hydrogen and oxygen evolution in the absence of sacrificial reagents, i.e., when oxygen is evolved at the counter electrode with a faradaic efficiency of 1. From eqn (7), it follows that to maximize the STH efficiency, one needs only to maximize the photocurrent. However, to maximize the photocurrent of a water splitting system, the photovoltage and the fill factor of the photoelectrodes also need to be maximized. Fig. 5 shows the photocurrent density vs. potential (J–V) curves of a hydrogen-evolving photocathode and an oxygen-evolving photoanode that can be paired to achieve unassisted water splitting with light energy only. In Fig. 5a, it is shown how the J–V curves of a non-ideal photocathode and photoanode (dotted lines) could be improved to the more ideal J–V curve characteristics (solid lines), using the strategies mentioned in this review (see Section 4). The operation point of a tandem PEC cell is the current-matching point of the photoanode and photocathode (where the J–V curves of the photocathode and photoanode intersect at the green point in Fig. 5a). This operation point could be increased by enhancing the photocurrent and photovoltage of the photoelectrodes. Another important factor that is rather neglected in the field of PEC water splitting is the fill factor of the photoelectrodes. The fill factor reflects how fast the saturation photocurrent can be obtained after the onset potential (the steeper the slope, the better the fill factor). Fig. 5b shows how two photoelectrodes with the same photocurrent and photovoltage achieve different efficiencies based on the fill factor, with a higher fill factor leading to higher operating photocurrents and therefore higher efficiency. It should be noted that this energetic picture is the same whether carrying out water splitting in a thin-film-based PEC cell, where one can easily measure the power curves of the different semiconductor materials, or with tandem photocatalytic particles, where such energetic pictures are quite difficult to experimentally obtain.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photocurrent density vs. potential curves of a photocathode and photoanode, showing enhancement in photovoltage and photocurrent. (b) Photocurrent density vs. potential curves of a photocathode and photoanode, showing improvement in fill factor. 
Having defined the key concepts and important parameters of PEC water splitting, in the following section we will highlight the progress over the years in improving the photocurrent, photovoltage, fill factor, and stability of photoelectrode materials for water splitting.
3. Progress over the years
3.1 Recent advances in PV-grade materials for PEC water splitting
The first demonstration of water splitting using sunlight was reported by Honda and Fujishima in 1972, with TiO2 as the light absorbing semiconductor.29 However, its application was limited owing to its wide bandgap of 3.2 eV that enabled the absorption of only ultraviolet photons of the solar spectrum. This led to the search for semiconductors with bandgaps in the range 1.0–2.0 eV that could absorb in the visible spectrum of the sun. Fig. 6 depicts the progress achieved over the years with high-quality and expensive semiconductor materials for water splitting. The first major breakthrough came from John Turner and coworkers with a GaInP2 photocathode and a GaAs photovoltaic in 1998, which showed 12.4% STH conversion efficiency.30 Ever since this discovery, the major photocathodes were GaInP2 and InP, with which photocurrent densities on the order of 30 mA cm−2 could be obtained.31 Simultaneously, other solar cell materials such as Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 (CIGS) and CuInS2 (CIS) were also developed as photocathodes.32,33 Some of these material combinations are already approaching the theoretical maximum efficiency for water splitting based on the relevant bandgaps (Fig. 6). However, the fabrication costs are much too high for widespread deployment, and some contain non-earth-abundant elements such as indium (e.g., InP and GaInP2), for which scalability is questionable. Thus, researchers have been searching for new earth-abundant and low-cost materials prepared by simple and scalable techniques, to achieve low-cost water splitting on a very large scale.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of realized limiting STH efficiencies and historic development of dual bandgap systems. The analysis refers to a theoretical benchmarking value ηtheo and considers the top and bottom cell bandgaps for the respective photolysis cells; also shown are the institutions of the contributing research teams. Abbreviations: NREL – National Renewable Energy Laboratory, USA; ISE – Institute for Solar Energy, Germany; JCAP – Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, Caltech, USA; TU-I – Ilmenau University of Technology, Germany; HZB – Helmholtz Zentrum Berlin, Germany. The bar chart on the right indicates the achieved efficiency with respect to the respective theoretical limit (ηtheo*). Reprinted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Recent advances in earth-abundant materials for PEC water splitting
Cu2O was a major candidate as an earth-abundant light absorber, but it suffered from severe photocorrosion, which degraded the PEC performance in a matter of few minutes, and was considered unsuitable for PEC water splitting.35 The major breakthrough for Cu2O photocathodes was achieved in 2011 when it was stabilized using a TiO2 protection layer, which yielded increased photocurrents and longer stability.36 The application of atomic layer deposition (ALD) protection layers was a significant development in the PEC water splitting field, as it boosted the stability of many photocathodes. The current record-setting photocurrents were obtained with a Ga2O3 buffer layer using Cu2O nanowire photocathodes.37 Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTS), a low-cost and earth-abundant material that can be prepared by simple methods such as electrodeposition, has started to receive more attention. One of the best-performing CZTS water splitting demonstrations was reported by the Domen group in 2015, which showed photocurrent densities of ∼9 mA cm−2 using a CdS/In2S3 buffer layer.38 A tandem CZTS PEC with BiVO4 was demonstrated by Huang et al., reaching over 1% STH with a HfO2 protective layer.39 Photocurrents in excess of 17 mA cm−2 were obtained with a CZTS photocathode by doping with Cd.40 Another earth-abundant chalcogenide, WSe2, was also investigated as a photocathode by Nathan Lewis and co-workers, and high photocurrent densities were obtained (>25 mA cm−2).41 However, the WSe2 photocathode needed to be synthesized by chemical vapor transport as a single crystal, which is not a scalable technique. Therefore, there were attempts to prepare WSe2 by more simple and scalable techniques by Sivula's group at EPFL, but the photocurrents were low (<2 mA cm−2).42Fig. 7 depicts the recent advances in earth-abundant materials for water splitting (photocathodes, photoanodes, and tandem).
 Fig. 7  Progress with earth-abundant materials for PEC (recent developments). 
Another avenue of research in PEC water splitting, is the replacement of Pt as an HER catalyst with earth-abundant materials. One of the major candidates to replace Pt is MoS2, which exhibits good HER activity.43 One of the important studies that utilize MoS2 as a catalyst was reported by Laursen et al., where a silicon photocathode was shown to exhibit very high and stable photocurrents for five days.44 It was shown that crystalline MoS2 prepared by the sulfurization of Mo metal was more stable than electrodeposited MoSx. However, Gu et al. improved the stability of an amorphous MoSx catalyst, by forming a graded catalytic layer by Ar annealing with a TiO2 layer.45 This yielded the improved stability of the MoSx catalyst, as shown with a 20 h stability test.
To achieve unassisted water splitting, a tandem PEC cell with a photocathode and a photoanode must be fabricated to provide the >1.6 V potential for water splitting (including the thermodynamic and kinetic overpotentials). Ideally, the bandgap of the photoanode would be ∼2.0 eV to achieve the highest STH efficiency when coupled with a 1.2 eV bandgap photocathode. Some of the materials that fulfill this bandgap requirement are Fe2O3, BiVO4, and Ta3N5. Fe2O3 was very promising owing to its low cost, earth-abundance, and ease of fabrication. However, iron oxide is severely limited by bulk recombination losses and a minority carrier diffusion length less than 10 nm.46 Despite trying different strategies such as nanostructuring, surface passivation, and doping, the theoretical maximum photocurrent density of 12 mA cm−2 has not been achieved over years of research and the onset potential still remains very low. However, BiVO4 has shown greater promise than Fe2O3, despite having a larger bandgap. In 2014, Kim et al. demonstrated remarkable photocurrent densities close to ∼5 mA cm−2 and good onset potentials of ∼0.2 V vs. RHE.47 In 2016, the Domen group exhibited excellent stability (1000 h) using Mo-doped BiVO4 at a low potential of 0.4 V vs. RHE, making a significant leap in the stability of these photoelectrodes.48 Although the bandgap of BiVO4 is not ideal (2.4 eV) for the photoanode, there are significant efforts now focused on reducing the bandgap by doping with metals such as Sb.49 Very recently, Pan et al. demonstrated a Cu2O–BiVO4 tandem cell (all-oxide and earth-abundant) with 3% STH.37 Another potential candidate for a photoanode is Ta3N5, with a bandgap of 2.1 eV.50,51 The best performance in terms of photocurrent density (12 mA cm−2) was reached using Ta3N5 photoanodes, but they suffer from low onset potential (due to more negative flat band position than water reduction potential) and stability.52 Nurlaela et al. developed Ta3N5 photoanodes on Mg:GaN followed by NH3 and N2 annealing and improved the photocurrent onset. However, this decreased the photocurrent and the stability of these photoanodes remains an issue.53
From this section, it is evident that there is still much scope for improvement of the PEC performance of these photocathodes and photoanodes, particularly in terms of the photovoltage and stability. Only upon addressing these issues would one expect PEC water splitting to become a commercially viable technique for solar hydrogen production. In the following section, certain strategies and characterization methods for addressing these issues will be discussed.
3.3 Emerging earth-abundant materials for PEC water splitting
Besides the materials discussed above, there are many new emerging materials for PEC water splitting that have been gaining interest in the recent years. A new promising semiconductor for water splitting is Sb2Se3, as first reported in 2017.54 Sb2Se3 photocathodes have recently shown great promise for PEC H2 production, owing to the material's high optical absorption and good electrical transport properties.55,56 In contrast to other emerging materials such as Cu2O, it has been proven to be resistant to photocorrosion under full one-sun illumination in 1 M H2SO4, yielding high photocurrents (>16 mA cm−2) after coating with an earth-abundant MoSx catalyst.57
CuFeO2 has attracted research interest due to its earth abundant elemental composition and favorable band gap of 1.5 eV. Read et al. reported a favorable onset of 0.98 VRHE, but the photocurrent decreased rapidly due to photocorrosion.58 Prévot et al. employed a host–guest approach in order to improve its stability and charge extraction using CuAlO2 as a scaffold.59 This yielded higher photocurrent density (1.95 mA cm−2 at 0.4 VRHE) due to favorable charge separation achieved by CuAlO2. Time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) studies on CuFeO2 have revealed relatively good carrier mobilities (0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1) and carrier lifetime (200 ns).60 Despite this, these materials have been limited by very low photovoltages (0.35 V) and this could be attributed to the poor quality of the surface (large density of surface states resulting in Fermi-level pinning).61 Therefore, to develop these materials further new synthesis and surface passivation strategies must be investigated to address the low photovoltage issue. Another material with similar elemental composition as CuFeO2 but a different crystal structure is CuFe2O4 (spinel). However, spinel CuFe2O4 also exhibited Fermi level pinning with short diffusion lengths (4 nm) and slow charge transfer rates, as evidenced by intensity modulated photovoltage/photocurrent spectroscopy and photoelectrochemical impedance spectroscopy.62
CuBi2O4 has gained interest in recent years as a p-type semiconductor for hydrogen evolution. Berglund et al. reported a comprehensive study on the crystal structure and electrical transport properties of CuBi2O4 to evaluate its applicability for PEC.63 However, due to photocorrosion of CuBi2O4 (reduction of Cu2+ to Cu+), the photocurrents were unstable and decreased gradually. Additionally, the photocurrent densities were also low due to poor hole transport, resulting in recombination. In order to improve charge separation, Wang et al. synthesized gradient doped CuBi2O4 by varying the copper vacancies.64 Due to gradient doping, there was increased internal band bending and larger charge carrier diffusion lengths. Wang et al. were also able to improve the device stability by employing a TiO2 protection layer and extending the stability to a few hours.
As described above, copper based oxides usually are hindered by corrosion due to reduction of Cu2+ to Cu+. Iron based oxides comprised of earth abundant elements are more resistant to corrosion. One such promising emerging material is CaFe2O4. Ida et al. prepared CaFe2O4 powders by thermal oxidation of calcium acetate and iron nitrate at 1050 °C and showed high photocurrents (1 mA cm−2 at 0.2 V vs. RHE and stability for 6 h).65 However, one main drawback of this material was low charge carrier mobility (0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1).66 To improve the bulk charge carrier mobility, Morikawa et al. doped CaFe2O4 with Ag to provide high symmetry around the Fe atom.66 This Ag doping improved not only the carrier mobility but also the absorption onset, yielding higher photocurrents as compared with undoped samples.
Another class of emerging earth abundant materials are those investigated for PV applications and employed for PEC water splitting. These materials include Cu2BaSnS4 (CBTS) and Cu2S, which have shown good PV performance. This offers an advantage of using similar device architecture as PV for PEC applications with minor modifications. Most interesting one among them would be CBTS. Investigation into CBTS was performed to reduce defect-mediated recombination in CZTS by replacing Zn with Ba. In doing so, the formation of anti-site defects could be reduced due to the disparity in the size of the constituent elements (Cu, Ba and Sn).67,68 Ge et al. showed a PEC device with CBTS/Pt with ∼4 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE.69 Ge et al. also improved the PEC performance of CBTS by incorporation of Se.70 By incorporation of overlayers (CdS buffer layer, TiO2 protection layer), the Yan group further improved the photocurrent density and photovoltage.71 However, these materials still have a long way to go to rival CZTS based PEC performance. Binary sulfides such as Cu2S have recently been investigated for PEC applications. Yu et al. synthesized Cu2S photocathodes by cation exchange of CdS and then coating a CdS buffer layer followed by TiO2 protection layers.72 This yielded photocurrent densities of ∼6 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. However, these photocurrent densities are still far behind the photocurrents obtained with Cu2S solar cells, suggesting there is still room for improvement in Cu2S PEC systems.73
4. Strategies for enhancing photocurrent, photovoltage, and stability
Prior to a full-scale literature survey on the strategies, it should be noted that each performance metric is not completely separate. There certainly are some strategies to enhance both the photocurrent and photovoltage simultaneously, for example, whereas other strategies only influence the photocurrent without any noticeable change in the photovoltage. Hereafter, we focus on the performance metric that is dominantly affected by each strategy, with respect to the theoretical perspective. It is also worth mentioning that although the fill factor is certainly an important performance metric for achieving high STH, as discussed in Section 2, the values are not reported in most PEC water splitting studies. In general, the enhancement of the fill factor appears to accompany the improvement of the photocurrent and/or photovoltage. Therefore, we will not include a separate subsection for the fill factor, but simply comment in the case of a noticeable enhancement in the fill factor, along with the other performance metrics.
4.1 Strategies for enhancing photocurrent
The photocurrent density exhibited by photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting is primarily determined by the bandgap energy (Eg) of the semiconductor. As shown in Fig. 8a, the theoretical maximum photocurrent is calculated by integrating the solar flux (Air Mass 1.5 Global) over the wavelengths the semiconductor can absorb, with an assumption of 100% incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE). Therefore, one simple way to increase the maximum photocurrent is to reduce the Eg of the semiconductor. Moreover, the IPCE is generally less than unity, owing to certain limiting factors briefly described in Fig. 8b. One of the photocurrent loss factors that may occur at the first stage is the reflection of the incident light at the photoelectrode surface without absorption. Transmission is another loss factor, which follows incomplete light absorption caused by the small Eg and the mismatch between the absorption coefficient (α) and the thickness of the semiconductor. The low photocurrent can also be attributed to electrical losses that make the photogenerated charges unable to contribute the electrochemical reaction. Thus, many researchers have tried to overcome these limiting factors by maximizing the light absorption of the semiconductor as well as reducing the electrical losses.
 Fig. 8  (a) Theoretical maximum photocurrent density depending on the bandgap of semiconductors calculated by assuming 100% IPCE and AM 1.5G solar photon flux. (b) Possible photocurrent loss mechanisms in a real photoelectrode. 

4.1.1 Heteroatom doping. 
TiO2, which is the earliest semiconducting material for PEC water splitting, has a relatively large Eg near 3.0–3.2 eV, such that it can absorb only UV light (up to 380–425 nm) and yield a maximum photocurrent below 1.5 mA cm−2. Therefore, much research effort has been devoted to reducing the bandgap of TiO2 to enable visible light harvesting by using anionic, cationic, and co-doping of heteroatoms.74–79 As manifested by experimental and theoretical studies, doping heteroatoms into TiO2 could simultaneously enhance the light absorption and electrical properties by creating shallow donor and/or acceptor levels.80–82 For example, Yang et al. synthesized two different “black TiO2” photoelectrode by doping sulfur to the partially reduced shell (TiO2−x) of rutile (R-) and anatase TiO2 (A-TiO2) nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 9a.83 After annealing at 600 °C under an H2S atmosphere, the A-TiO2 was converted to the rutile structure surrounded by sulfur, which was denoted as R′-TiO2-S, and the sulfur doping to R-TiO2 was named R-TiO2-S. The sulfur-doped TiO2 showed significantly enhanced light absorption as the color changed to light brown and black, as shown in Fig. 9b. Because the A-TiO2 was more prone to the reduction by Al than rutile, the R′-TiO2-S obtained from the A-TiO2, had a thicker sulfide film on its surface, and thereby absorbed more light than R-TiO2-S (Fig. 9c). As a result, the R′-TiO2-S photoanodes showed improved light absorption, enabling significantly enhanced photocurrent density (Fig. 9d). Similarly, TiO2 photoanodes doped with metal cations and carbon have been also studied. For example, Zetian Mi and coworkers investigated the influence of transition-metal doping on the properties of TiO2, revealing that Fe doping is the most effective route to increase the photocurrent density of TiO2 photoanodes (Fig. 9e).79 They demonstrated that Fe doping not only enhances the visible light absorption, but also increases the charge carrier density of TiO2, whereas Co and Mn doping show detrimental effects on the charge carrier density of TiO2. The Zheng group also reported a method to co-dope TiO2 with W and C by sequentially annealing W-precursor-coated TiO2 nanowires in flame under CO gas.78 As shown in Fig. 9f, the (W,C)-co-doped TiO2 photoanode showed double the saturation water oxidation photocurrent compared with un-doped TiO2 and outperformed the mono-doped samples. The author attributed the enhanced photocurrent to the improved electrical conductivity and activity toward OER due to the synergistic effects of co-doping. It is noteworthy that the onset potential in Fig. 9 was relatively uninfluenced by the doping, indicating that the enhancement in the optical and electrical properties mainly affects the photocurrent density.
 Fig. 9  Doping strategies in TiO2 photoanodes for enhancing photocurrent density. (a) Two schematic synthetic routes and (b) photographs of core–shell black rutile TiO2. (c) Absorbance spectra of R-TiO2, R-TiO2-S, and R′-TiO2-S with different sulfidation times. (d) Chopped J–V curves of R′-TiO2, R-TiO2-S, TiO2-S, and R-TiO2 photoanodes under simulated solar light illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83, Copyright (2013), American Chemical Society. (e) J–V curves of Fe-, Mn-, and Co-doped TiO2 photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79, Copyright (2012), Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) J–V curves of W- and C-doped TiO2 photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78, Copyright (2010), Nature Publishing Group. 
Doping strategies enabling enhanced optical and electrical properties have also been applied to other relatively small-bandgap n-type semiconductors, such as Fe2O3 (Eg ∼ 2.2 eV)84 and BiVO4 (Eg ∼ 2.4 eV).85 Owing to the polaron-hopping conduction mechanism of metal oxides (i.e., carriers in metal oxides tend to be localized as small polaron forms),86 the mobility of majority carriers (electrons) in metal oxides is generally low. Therefore, various doping strategies have been developed to improve the electrical conductivity of n-type oxide semiconductors. Although numerous metal cations have been tested as dopants for BiVO4, only Mo and W have been generally recognized as the most effective dopants.87 The density functional theory calculation results reported by Yan et al. showed that shallow donors for BiVO4 are created by doping Mo and W,88 and the increased donor concentration resulted in significantly enhanced conductivity of BiVO4, as proved in the fundamental analysis of dopants using single-crystalline BiVO4.89 Recently, Baek et al. found that Gd metal can act as an effective dopant to enhance the efficiency and selectivity of BiVO4 photoanodes for water oxidation to H2O2.90 In addition to the metal cation doping, hydrogen and nitrogen doping, both of which improved the electrical properties of BiVO4, were employed to enhance the photocurrent of BiVO4 photoanodes.86,91,92Fig. 10a shows the effects of Mo and hydrogen doping on the PEC performance of BiVO4 photoanodes, as investigated by Kim et al.91 The enhanced photocurrent density by the doping was attributed to the increased charge carrier density (ND) obtained by the slope of the Mott–Schottky plot (Fig. 10b). Co-doping in Fe2O3 was also reported as an effective strategy for enhancing the photocurrent. As shown in Fig. 10c, (Co,Sn)-co-doped Fe2O3 revealed much higher photocurrent density and similar onset potential compared with pristine Fe2O3.93 It was claimed that Sn doping mainly contributes to the increased carrier density, as manifested by the Mott–Schottky plot (Fig. 10d), whereas Co doping improves the surface kinetics of OER. When a small amount of Bi dopant was added into WO3 (Eg ∼ 2.7 eV), which is another n-type semiconductor for PEC water splitting, a similar trend of increased ND and enhanced photocurrent was observed.94 Doping strategies have been also applied to p-type semiconductors for PEC water splitting. For example, Kang et al. reported Ag doping into a CuBi2O4 photocathode, revealing an enhanced photocurrent density.95 The origin of the enhanced photocurrent was ascribed to the increased hole concentration upon Ag doping, similarly to in the photoanodes. Ag was proven as an effective dopant to CuGaSe2 (CGSe). As shown in Fig. 10e, 5.9% doping of Ag into CGSe enhanced the photocurrent density significantly, and the onset potential was slightly shifted in the anodic direction.96 The simultaneous enhancement of both the photocurrent and onset potential originates from the increased carrier concentration in conjunction with the valence band maximum shift toward a more favorable band position for the development of an increased anodic onset potential. On the contrary, Cd doping into CuZnSnS4 (CZTS) photocathodes resulted in a greatly enhanced photocurrent density, whereas the onset potential was slightly shifted toward the cathodic direction (Fig. 10f).40 The enhanced photocurrent density was due to the improved mobility and carrier lifetime of the CZTS layer, whereas the undesirable “spike-like” conduction band offset with respect to CdS by the doping gave rise to an onset potential drop. Thus, it can be concluded that the doping strategies mainly influence the optical and electrical properties, such as carrier concentration, mobility, and diffusion length, thereby resulting in enhanced photocurrent density, and the doping also likely affects the band position of the semiconductor, leading to shifts in the onset potential.
 Fig. 10  Doping strategies in other materials for enhancing photocurrent density. (a) J–V curves and (b) Mott–Schottky plot of H- and Mo-doped BiVO4 photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91, Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society. (c) J–V curves and (d) Mott–Schottky plot of Co- and Sn-doped Fe2O3 photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93, Copyright (2017), Elsevier. Chopped J–V curves of (e) Ag-doped CGSe (Reprinted with permission from ref. 96, Copyright (2014), Royal Society of Chemistry) and (f) Cd-doped CZTS photocathodes (Reprinted with permission from ref. 40, Copyright (2018), Elsevier). 


4.1.2 Adjusting morphologies and orientations. 
When semiconducting materials have strongly anisotropic electrical properties depending on the crystallographic orientation, the photocurrent density may be influenced by their morphology and crystalline orientation. For example, Sb2Se3, which recently emerged as a low-cost p-type semiconductor for photocathodes, has a strong anisotropy, with higher mobility along the [001] direction compared with the [010] and [100] directions. Therefore, adjusting the crystallographic orientation and the morphology of Sb2Se3 affects the device performance, as similarly proven in early studies on Sb2Se3 solar cells.97,98Fig. 11a shows the PEC performance of three different Sb2Se3 photocathodes obtained by solution processing with different mixing ratios of thioglycolic acid (TGA) to ethanolamine (EA).99 As the relative amount of TGA to EA decreased (from TGA 40 to TGA 5), the photocurrent was greatly enhanced with negligible change in the photovoltage. The high photocurrent density resulted from the efficient charge transport through the well-aligned short Sb2Se3 nanorods along the vertical [001] direction, whereas the poorly aligned long Sb2Se3 nanowires were unable to collect the charge carriers, as shown by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) observations (Fig. 11b–g). The photocurrent of Sb2Se3 photocathodes was improved by varying the relative amount of selenium to antimony precursor in different solvent mixtures of 2-mercaptoethanol and ethylenediamine. The resulting Sb2Se3 exhibited a compact film-like morphology with [001] orientation, revealing high photocurrent density.100 The crystallographic-orientation-dependent photocurrent density was also reported in BiVO4 photoanodes. Li et al. recently fabricated BiVO4 photoanodes comprising microcrystal arrays aligned in either the parallel or perpendicular direction to an FTO substrate via a recrystallization method (Fig. 11h and i).101 They successfully demonstrated that a [010]-oriented BiVO4 photoanode generated a photocurrent 2.9 times higher than that of its [121]-oriented counterpart (Fig. 11j), owing to the crystallographic-orientation-dependent charge transport behavior in BiVO4, as supported by theoretical calculations. Epitaxially grown single-crystalline BiVO4 films revealed orientation-dependent photocurrent density.102 Song et al. also reported that the photocurrent density of a [010]-oriented BiVO4 photoanode was much higher than that of its [001]-oriented counterpart, because of a significant enhancement in charge transport. For more details on the charge carrier transport behavior of BiVO4 crystal, interested readers can refer to the recent perspective by Zhang et al.103 as well as the recent comprehensive review by Kim et al.85 Not only the crystallographic orientation but also the crystal domains within nanoparticle aggregates can affect the photocurrent density of photoelectrodes. Warren et al. found that the photocurrent density of Fe2O3 photoanode depends on the annealing condition (Fig. 11k), and the photocurrent difference originates from the different charge transport depending on the nature of the crystal domain, as shown in Fig. 11l and m.104 According to their interpretations of dark-field transmission electron microscopy and c-AFM, in the higher performance sample, many fewer mosaics per nanoparticle aggregate and a large number of aggregates with a single principal crystallographic orientation were observed. They concluded that the reduced number of high-angle grain boundaries, which impede electron transport, was the reason for the improved photocurrent density. These considerations clearly indicate that the enhanced charge carrier transport in semiconductors can improve the photocurrent density of PEC devices.
 Fig. 11  Strategies for enhancing photocurrent density by controlling the crystallographic orientation. (a) Chopped J–V curves of three different Sb2Se3 nanostructure photocathodes. (b and e) SEM, (c and f) topography, and (d and g) current map images of (b–d) TGA 5 Sb2Se3 and (e–g) TGA 40 Sb2Se3 nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99, Copyright (2018), John Wiley and Sons Inc. SEM images with schematic illustrations of (h) perpendicular array and (i) parallel array of BiVO4 photoanodes. (j) J–V curves of [010]-BiVO4 and [121]-BiVO4 without (solid line) and with (dashed line) a hole scavenger (e.g., Na2SO4). Reprinted with permission from ref. 101, Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. (k) J–V curves of Fe2O3 photoelectrodes, showing photocurrent (solid lines) and dark current (dashed lines) for electrodes prepared at heater-set temperature/air flow rates of 475 °C/2 L min−1 (red) and 545 °C/2 L min−1 (blue). Illustration of (l) a nanoparticle aggregate and (m) c-AFM analysis examines the charge transport properties with respect to the crystal domain orientation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104, Copyright (2013), Springer Nature. 


4.1.3 Thickness control and one-dimensional (1D) nanostructuring. 
The number of absorbed photons is not only determined by the bandgap of the semiconductor, but also by its thickness. To fully harvest the solar spectrum, the thickness of the semiconductor absorber should be larger than the penetration depth of incident light, which is represented by the inverse of the absorption coefficient. When optimizing the thickness of the semiconductor, the minority carrier diffusion length should also be considered: if the minority carrier diffusion length is smaller than the thickness of the semiconductor, the photo-excited charge carriers would recombine, regardless of how many photos the film absorbs. Thus, with the semiconductor films thicker than the optimum thickness, the photocurrent density could be saturated (or even lower than those of their thinner counterparts), although they can certainly absorb more photons. For example, because the electron diffusion length of solution-processed Cu2O is 200 nm or less,105 a 500 nm-thick Cu2O photocathode revealed a nearly identical photocurrent density compared to a 260 nm-thick device, despite its greater absorption (Fig. 12a and b).106 To harvest the un-absorbed photons by thin Cu2O, a thick Au layer was used as a reflector at the bottom of the Cu2O, or additional absorbing layers can be placed to fabricate a tandem device or dual-absorber photocathode.107 Nanostructured absorbers could provide an efficient strategy to enhance the photocurrent density of Cu2O photocathodes by resolving the incompatibility between the light absorption and the charge diffusion length. Luo et al. reported a fabrication method for phase-pure Cu2O nanowire on an FTO substrate by anodizing a metallic Cu thin film followed by annealing under an Ar atmosphere.105 After optimizing the fabrication procedure and the overlayer protection, the Cu2O nanowire photocathode revealed a photocurrent density enhanced by approximately 25% compared with its Cu2O thin-film counterpart (Fig. 12c–e). The 1D nanostructure strategies for enhancing the photocurrent density have been applied to photoanode materials such as Ta3N5 nanorod arrays obtained by a template-assisted preparation method.108 The Domen group reported that the photocurrent density from vertically aligned Ta3N5 nanorods was 3.2 times higher than that of a planar Ta3N5 photoelectrode, as shown in Fig. 12f–h. The enhanced photocurrent density resulted from a short charge carrier diffusion length as well as better light absorption owing to the nanorod structure.
 Fig. 12  Thickness control and 1D nanostructuring strategies. (a) Cross-section SEM images and (b) chopped J–V curves of Cu2O thin films with different thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106, Copyright (2015), John Wiley and Sons. (c) Top and (d) cross-section SEM images of Cu2O nanowires. (e) J–V curves of Cu2O nanowire and Cu2O thin-film photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105, Copyright (2016), American Chemical Society. Cross-section SEM images of (f) Ta3N5 thin film and (g) Ta3N5 nanorod array. (h) J–V curves of Ta3N5 thin-film and nanorod photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108, Copyright (2012), John Wiley and Sons. 


4.1.4 Reducing reflection. 
In addition to the 1D nanowire strategy, more complicated structures have been studied for enhancing light absorption and reducing surface reflection by multiple scattering. For example, Shi et al., fabricated BiVO4-decorated WO3 helix nanostructures obtained by oblique-angle deposition.109 It was demonstrated by a theoretical simulation that the helix nanostructure is advantageous for improved light absorption compared with other structures such as thin films, stacks of nanoparticles, and nanorods (Fig. 13a). The boosted optical property of the helix nanostructure with less reflectance was further verified by experimental observations (Fig. 13b). The inverse opal (IO) nanostructure is another interesting architecture for photoelectrodes, owing to multiple light scattering and its short carrier diffusion length. A CuFeO2 IO structure was fabricated by using a polystyrene microsphere template.110 Both computational simulations and measured optical properties clearly showed that the CuFeO2 IO structure enabled greatly enhanced visible light absorption, whereas planar CuFeO2 revealed drastically reduced absorption with increasing wavelength (Fig. 13c and d). The reflection of incident light on the top surface of the photoelectrode, particularly in crystalline wafer-based materials, such as Si and GaAs, could result in a possible loss in photocurrent density. Therefore, strategies for reducing the reflectance have been investigated. Oh et al. reported nanoporous black Si (bSi) by metal-assisted etching, enabling significantly lower reflectivity over the entire solar spectrum (Fig. 13e and f) and thereby a high saturated photocurrent density of −36 mA cm−2, which was 1.2 times higher than that of a polished Si photocathode.111 In addition, Cheng et al. demonstrated the greatly reduced reflectivity of a GaAs-based dual junction photoelectrode and an improved photocurrent density by depositing a crystalline A-TiO2 layer and small Rh catalyst nanoparticles.34 It was confirmed that the crystalline A-TiO2 interlayer can serve as an efficient antireflection coating and a supportive layer for the catalysts, as shown in Fig. 13g. The antireflective ability of TiO2 resulted in a 28% increase in the photocurrent density of the photoelectrode, reaching the benchmark STH efficiency of 19.3% (Fig. 13h). Note that the earlier study on the use of TiO2 as an antireflective coating was performed by Seger et al., showing an increase of approximately 25% in the photocurrent density of Si photocathodes.112 A reflector on the back-side of the photoelectrode has also been investigated. A Bragg reflector, capable of reflecting short-wavelength photons (λ < 500 nm), was incorporated on the back-side of a BiVO4/WO3 composite photoanode, enabling 7.1% STH in conjunction with dye-sensitized solar cells.113
 Fig. 13  Complicated nanostructures for reducing surface reflectance. (a) Distribution of the electric field magnitude at the WO3 surface of a thin film, stack of nanoparticles, nanorod, and nanohelix. (b) Specular and diffuse reflectance of a 6 μm WO3 thin film and a nanohelix array as a function of the difference between the angle of the detector and the angle of incidence. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109, Copyright (2014), Springer Nature. (c) Comparison of the simulated cross-section electric field and the distribution of the electromagnetic waves at 400, 500, and 600 nm in inverse opal (IO) CuFeO2 and planar CuFeO2. (d) Absorption and diffusive reflectance of the planar and IO CuFeO2 on FTO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110, Copyright (2019), Johns Wiley and Sons. (e) Cross-section SEM image of nanoporous Si fabricated by one-step metal-assisted etching process. (f) Measured total hemispherical optical reflectance of polished Si and nanoporous Si in air, and calculated reflectance of polished Si in water. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111, Copyright (2011), Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Reflectivity of dual-junction tandem solar cells with and without TiO2 and Rh catalyst. (h) Comparison of the output characteristics of tandem device with and without TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright (2018), Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.1.5 Reducing resistance. 
During PEC device fabrication, undesirable electrical resistance can be generated at the wiring, electrolyte, and interfaces of each material. These undesirable resistive components generally result in reduced photocurrent density and lower fill factor simultaneously. Therefore, reducing these resistive components is another effective strategy for augmenting the photocurrent density and fill factor. Fig. 14a and b show the PEC performance of Pt/CdS/CIGS photocathodes in various electrolytes tested by Kobayashi et al.114 As the concentration of Na phosphate/sulfate buffer electrolyte increased by a factor of ten (from 0.04 M to 0.4 M), the conductivity of the electrolyte increased from 14 to 72 mS cm−1, indicating the reduced resistance of the electrolyte. A similar conductivity increment was observed in a K-based buffer electrolyte. With the higher conductivity of the electrolytes, both the photocurrent density and fill factor were significantly increased. It is noticeable that the onset potentials in all electrolytes were nearly identical (∼0.7 VRHE), implying that the resistance of the electrolyte mainly affected the photocurrent density and the fill factor.
 Fig. 14  Reducing reflectance of PEC devices for enhancing photocurrent density. J–V curves of Pt/CdS/CIGS photocathodes in (a) a sodium phosphate buffer and (b) a potassium phosphate buffer with different total concentrations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114, Copyright (2018), Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) J–V curves of Pt/M/CdS/CIGS electrodes (M = none, Ti, Mo, and Mo/Ti). (d) Schematics of mechanism for hydrogen evolution on the surfaces of photocathodes coated with a thin metal layer, showing efficient carrier injection to the Pt catalyst via the thin metal layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33, Copyright (2013), Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Cross-section SEM image of Sb2Se3 photocathode with Cu:NiOx hole-selective layer. (f) J–V curves of Sb2Se3 photocathodes with three different HSLs: bare FTO, NiOx/FTO, and Cu:NiOx/FTO. Current maps of (g) NiOx and (h) Cu:NiOx on an FTO substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115, Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. 
The resistance at the interface between the photoelectrode and the catalyst could also be responsible for the limited photocurrent density and fill factor. Kumagai et al. examined the role of a thin metallic layer between the CdS/CIGS photoelectrode and Pt catalyst.33 They found that a binary Mo/Ti layer resulted in an enhancement of approximately 20% in the photocurrent at 0 VRHE (Fig. 14c). The Ti layer was expected to make intimate contact with the underlying CdS/CIGS photoelectrode, whereas the Mo assisted in the uniform deposition of the Pt catalyst. The thin metallic layer was capable of providing effective in-plane charge transfer to assist the photo-excited electrons in reaching the Pt catalyst, as shown in Fig. 14d. In addition to the resistance at the top of the electrode, that at the bottom could be another limiting factor for the photocurrent density and fill factor. Fig. 14e shows the SEM image of an Sb2Se3 photocathode with a Cu-doped NiO (Cu:NiO) hole-selective layer (HSL), and the PEC performance of Sb2Se3 photocathodes with/without the (Cu-doped) NiO hole HSLs is shown in Fig. 14f.115 By inserting a Cu:NiO HSL, the photocurrent density was improved to 17.5 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. The enhancement by Cu doping was derived from the increased electrical conductivity of NiO, as shown in the c-AFM images (Fig. 14g and h), in conjunction with the favorable band alignment. Representative strategies for enhancing the photocurrent density are summarized in Table 1. In short, because most of the photocurrent losses are related to optical and electrical losses, reducing these losses by doping, nanostructuring, orientation control, and inserting conductive layers enables approaching the theoretical maximum photocurrent. The recent review by Kim et al.16 summarized the currently achieved photocurrent density by photoelectrode materials (Fig. S1 in the ESI†). It is clearly shown that for relatively large Eg semiconductors, such as TiO2 and WO3, the theoretical maximum photocurrent was already achieved whereas there is ample space for further improvement in small Eg semiconductors. Therefore, achieving high photocurrent density close to the theoretical maximum for small Eg semiconductors is an important issue in future studies.
Table 1 Representative strategies for enhancing photocurrent density




Electrode configuration
Electrolyte (pH)
Photocurrent (mA cm−2)
Note
Ref.




Bold text represents the main strategy in the device and the classification of strategies is indicated in the note column.




FTO/S:TiO2
1 M NaOH (13.6)
4.5 @ 1.23 VRHE
Doping

83



FTO/Fe:TiO2 NR
1 M KOH (13.5)
2.92 @ 1.23 VRHE
Doping

79



FTO/(W,C):TiO2 NW
1 M KOH (13.5)
1.8 @ 1.23 VRHE
Doping

78



FTO/H, 3% Mo:BiVO4/Co-Ci
KPi buffer (7)
4.8 @ 1.23 VRHE
Doping

91



FTO/(Co,Sn):Fe2O3
1 M KOH (13.6)
1.25 @ 1.23 VRHE
Doping

93



Mo/Ag:CuGaSe2/CdS/Pt
0.1 M Na2SO4 (9.5)
8.1 @ 0 VRHE
Doping

96



Mo/Cd:CuZnSnS4/TiMo/Pt
1 M K2HPO4 + KH2PO4 (7)
17 @ 0 VRHE
Doping

40



FTO/Au/Sb2Se3(TGA5)/TiO2/Pt
0.1 M H2SO4 (1)
12.5 @ 0 VRHE
Adjusting orientations, short and well-aligned Sb2Se3 nanostructures

99



FTO/[010]-BiVO4/CoBi
1 M Kbi (9)
1.3 @ 1.23 VRHE
Adjusting orientations

101



STO/[010]-BiVO4
0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2SO3
2.29 @ 1.23 VRHE
Adjusting orientations

102



FTO/Cu2O-NW/AZO/TiO2/RuOx
0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.1 M KH2PO4 (5)
10 @ −0.3 VRHE
Nanostructuring, nanowires

105



Ta/Ta3N5-NR/IrO2
0.5 M Na2SO4 (13)
3.8 @ 1.23 VRHE
Nanostructuring, nanorods

108



FTO/helical-WO3/(W,Mo):BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH
0.5 M K2SO4 in phosphate buffer (7)
5.35 @ 1.23 VRHE
Nanostructuring

109



FTO/IO CuFeO2/C60/CoFe LDH
1 M NaOH (13.5)
5.2 @ −0.1 VRHE
Nanostructuring, inverse opal

110




Nanoporous Si
0.5 M H2SO4 (0)
36 @ −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl
Nanostructuring

111



RuOx/GaAs/GaInAs/GaInP/AlInP/AlInPOx/TiO2/Rh
Strong acid (0)
15 @ 0 V vs. RuO2
Reducing reflectance

34



Mo/CIGS/CdS/Pt

0.4 M K2SO4 + 0.4 M K2HPO4 + 0.4 M KH2PO4 (6.8)
28 @ 0 VRHE
Reducing resistance

114



Mo/CIGS/CdS/Mo/Ti/Pt
0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2HPO4 + 0.25 M NaH2PO4 (6.8)
30 @ 0 VRHE
Reducing resistance

33



FTO/Cu:NiO/Sb2Se3/TiO2/Pt
0.1 M H2SO4 (1)
17.5 @ 0 VRHE
Reducing resistance

115






4.2 Strategies for enhancing photovoltage
The energetics at the semiconductor–liquid junction (SCLJ) were studied at the early stage of the PEC research, decades ago.116 At the SCLJ, the equilibration of the chemical potentials for the semiconductor and the electrolyte produces an electric field capable of separating photogenerated electron–hole pairs. In the case of a “buried junction” photoelectrode, in which the generation of the photovoltage is decoupled from the SCLJ, the photovoltage emerges from the difference in the Fermi level (EF) between two solid-state materials. In both cases, the photovoltage is limited by the electrons’ and holes’ quasi-Fermi level (EqFn and EqFp) difference at the interfaces under full solar illumination, as illustrated in Fig. 15. Thus, maximizing the EqF difference is a crucial issue in boosting the photovoltage. At the SCLJ, EF pinning by the surface state is widely referred to as the culprit in reducing the degree of the EqF splitting (Fig. 15d). The surface states likely form at the semiconductor surface owing to the different nature of the surface from the bulk semiconductor and the energy level of the surface state is often located within the bandgap, leading narrow splitting of the EqF. In addition, non-ideal band alignments between semiconductor materials in a buried junction can also cause less EqF splitting, eventually leading to a low photovoltage (Fig. 15h). Prior to scrutinizing the literature, the difference between the terms “onset potential” and “photovoltage” needs to be clarified. Although the definition of the onset potential has been variously defined, in general, the onset potential represents the x-intercept of the photocurrent density vs. potential curve. Even in the case in which a high photovoltage is generated in the semiconductor, the onset potential can be low owing to a large overpotential, which represents how much additional voltage must be applied to obtain a given current density. We will discuss the strategies for reducing overpotential as well as forming band bending to achieve a high onset potential in Section 4.2.3. Note that although “high onset potential” is not synonymous with “high photovoltage” in a strict sense, the improvement of the “onset potential” in this review is used with a similar meaning to the enhanced photovoltage. The dual working electrode (DWE) technique measures the onset potential and photovoltage simultaneously, as discussed in Section 5.4.3. It should also be noted that the “improved onset potential” means the shift of onset potential toward the cathodic (negative voltage) direction in a photoanode and toward the anodic (positive voltage) direction in a photocathode. The strategies for enhancing photovoltage include the use of “overlayers,” which broadly means heterofunctional materials deposited on the light absorbing semiconductors. If the overlayer forms a p–n junction with the semiconductor, it is called a “junction layer.” If the overlayer has a catalytic activity toward either HER or OER, it can be referred to as a “catalytic layer” or simply a “catalyst.”
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustrations for the photovoltage (Vph) generation at (a–d) the semiconductor–liquid junction with an example of a photoanode and (e–h) the buried junction with an example of a photocathode. (a and e) Pre-equilibrium energy levels including conduction band edge (ECB), valence band edge (EVB), Fermi energy (EF), and redox energy level in the electrolyte (E0). (b and f) Dark and (c and g) illuminated equilibrium states in ideal cases, showing quasi-Fermi level (EqF) splitting to the quasi-Fermi levels for electrons (EqFn) and holes (EqFp). Possible photovoltage losses due to (d) surface state and (h) band energy mismatching. 

4.2.1 Passivation of surface state. 
The Fe2O3 photoanode is widely known as a typical example of surface-state-induced photovoltage loss. The evidence of surface states in Fe2O3 was provided by several advanced techniques, such as electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, intensity modulation photocurrent spectroscopy, and transient absorption, which will be further discussed in Section 5. Thus, by passivating (or sometimes referred to as removing) surface states of Fe2O3, the photovoltage can be improved with strong band bending. Depositing passivation overlayers is one of the efficient strategies for increasing the photovoltage of a Fe2O3 photoanode. For example, Grätzel and Sivula et al. reported that the deposition of ultrathin (0.1 to 2 nm) ALD-derived Al2O3 resulted in a decrease in the onset of as much as 100 mV, whereas TiO2 with an identical thickness showed no beneficial effect.117 The subsequent deposition of Co2+ ions as a catalyst further decreased the onset potential (Fig. 16a). Electrochemical impedance and photoluminescence spectroscopy clearly demonstrated that the enhancement in the onset potential was due to the passivation of surface states. The same group also reported that oxides of group-13 elements (Al2O3, Ga2O3, and In2O3), deposited by relatively inexpensive chemical bath deposition (CBD), can be used as overlayers for enhancing the photovoltage of Fe2O3 photoanodes.118 Among them, a Ga2O3 overlayer exhibited the most shifted onset potential because the corundum structure released the lattice strain of the ultrathin hematite layer, as shown Fig. 16b. In addition, Wang and coworkers reported that NiFeOx decoration by the photochemical metal–organic deposition (PMOD) method induced a significant cathodic shift in Fe2O3 photoanodes, owing to the minimization of the surface Fermi level pinning effect (Fig. 16c).119 Appropriate heat treatment has also been applied for improving the onset potential of Fe2O3 photoanodes. Zandi et al. observed a cathodic shift in the onset potential of as much as 300 mV by annealing ALD-Fe2O3 at 800 °C (Fig. 16d).120 This cathodic shift was attributed to the reduced surface states and Fermi level pinning, similar to the overlayer strategies. The Li group developed a more effective synthetic method for preparing surface-passivated Fe2O3 photoanodes by directly oxidizing an Fe foil in an H2/O2 flame at ca. 1700 K.121 As shown in Fig. 16e, the HS-10S sample, which was an Fe2O3 photoanode prepared by heating an iron foil in the flame for 10 s, exhibited the lowest onset potential of 0.58 VRHE. The low onset potential was due to the passivated surface states and the gradient structure of the hematite photoanode during the high-temperature flame treatment. It should be noted that all the aforementioned strategies for passivating the surface states influence mainly the photovoltage enhancement, and the photocurrent is relatively unaffected or sometimes even decreases.
 Fig. 16  Photovoltage enhancement by passivation of surface states. J–V curves of hematite photoanodes showing the effect of (a) Al2O3 and cobalt treatment (reprinted with permission from ref. 117, Copyright (2011), Royal Society of Chemistry), (b) Ga2O3 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 118, Copyright (2011), Royal Society of Chemistry), (c) NiFeOx catalyst (Reprinted with permission from ref. 119, Copyright (2013), John Wiley and Sons), (d) heat treatment (reprinted with permission from ref. 120, Copyright (2014), American Chemical Society), and (e) H2–O2 flame treatment (Reprinted with permission from ref. 121, Copyright (2014), Royal Society of Chemistry). 


4.2.2 Improving band alignment. 
As mentioned previously, the photovoltage in “buried junction” photoelectrodes is determined by the junction of the two different semiconductor materials, similar to photovoltaic devices. Hence, choosing an appropriate heterojunction layer, as well as an appropriate buffer layer, is crucial for achieving a high photovoltage. For example, Cu2O, which is one of the well-investigated abundant photocathode materials, is known to have a small conduction band offset when forming a junction with Ga2O3 in comparison with AZO, as shown in Fig. 17a and b.37 This favorable band alignment between Cu2O and Ga2O3 enabled a significant increase in the photovoltage, which was 0.5 V higher than that of an AZO/Cu2O junction-based photocathode (Fig. 17c). A high photovoltage from a Ga2O3/Cu2O junction was demonstrated in an earlier study of a Cu2O-based photovoltaic cell, revealing a high open-circuit voltage of 1.2 V.122 In addition, the photovoltage of an Sb2Se3 photocathode, which is another abundant photocathode material, can be improved by inserting an n-type CdS layer between the Sb2Se3 and TiO2.100 As the CdS deposition time increased, the onset potential of the Sb2Se3 photocathode gradually increased and became saturated after 3 min (Fig. 17d). The enhancement in the photovoltage resulted from the reduced band-energy mismatch, as shown in Fig. 17e. Recently, PEC cells based on organic semiconductors have been attracting interest owing to the unique opportunities to carefully tune the optoelectronic properties, as well as their low-cost processing.123 In this relatively young field, a number of junction materials for improving the photovoltage have been investigated. For example, Steier et al. reported the performance of a P3HT/PCBM photocathode with the use of electron- and hole-selective layers with favorable band alignment with P3HT/PCBM (Fig. 17f and g).124 Compared with the without-CuI device (RuOx/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/FTO), the full device (RuOx/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/CuI/FTO) revealed a very high photovoltage, indicating the importance of band alignment to boost the photovoltage, as shown in Fig. 17h. Rojas et al.125 also demonstrated that the photovoltage of organic photocathodes was mainly governed by the junction between TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/CuI, and the use of a Pt catalyst was critical to achieving a high photocurrent density. For the hole-extraction layer for P3HT/PCBM photocathodes, Bourgeteau et al. investigated various materials such as PEDOT:PSS, reduced graphene oxide (rGO), NiOx, and MoOx.126 The photovoltage of the MoOx-based P3HT/PCBM photocathode revealed the highest photovoltage of 0.56 VRHE, compared with 0.34 VRHE of the photocathode without MoOx, owing to the high work function of MoOx. These examples clearly show that adopting appropriate materials for better band alignment is an effective strategy for boosting the photovoltage in PEC photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 17  Photovoltage enhancement by improving band alignment. Equilibrium band-edge diagrams of (a) AZO/Cu2O and (b) Ga2O3/Cu2O heterojunctions. (c) J–V curves of Cu2O nanowire photocathode with RuOx/TiO2/AZO and RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37, Copyright (2018), Springer Nature (d) chopped J–V curves of Pt/TiO2/CdS/Sb2Se3 photocathodes with different thicknesses of CdS interlayer (the arrows indicate the onset potential). (e) Approximate energy schematics showing favorable band alignment among Sb2Se3, CdS, and TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100, Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic showing relative bandgaps and band edge positions, (g) cross-section SEM image, and (h) chopped J–V curves of P3HT:PCBM-based photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124, Copyright (2016), Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) J–V curves of PEC device with the structure Pt/TiO2/PA/Al2O3/p-Si with different PA (phosphonic acid) concentrations used for spin coating of the dipole layer. J–V curves of (j) TiO2/Sb2Se3 and (k) TiO2/Cu2O photoelectrodes with and without PA dipole layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright (2019), Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A new strategy for improving the band alignment was recently reported by Wick-Joliat et al., and involves the use of dipole layers at the interface of p- and n-type materials to shift the band edges with respect to one another.127 In contrast to the vast majority of work with dipoles, which focuses on monolayers,128,129 it was found that the photovoltage in a p-Si/TiO2 heterojunction device could be tuned over a range of 400 mV by controlling the thickness of a spin-coated phosphonic acid (H3PO3) dipole layer, from monolayers up to multilayers, with 2 nm-thick dipole layers giving the most dramatic shift (with no loss in the fill factor), as shown in Fig. 17i. The strategy was also determined to be effective to increase the photovoltage of heterojunction devices based on emerging materials such as Cu2O and Sb2Se3 (Fig. 17j and k).


4.2.3 Depositing catalytic overlayers. 
Apart from p–n junctions, reducing the overpotential for electrochemical reactions is also an important issue for shifting the onset potential toward favorable directions (i.e., shift to more negative potentials for the photoanode and shift to more positive potentials for the photocathode), as mentioned above. Because most of the light absorbing semiconductors for PEC water splitting have a large overpotential for HER/OER, electrocatalysts with lower overpotential for HER/OER are generally required in efficient photoelectrodes. Thus, it is obvious that more active catalysts enable shifting the onset potential of photoelectrodes toward favorable directions. For example, because Pt has higher catalytic activity toward HER compared with MoSx, a Pt-decorated CIGS photocathode revealed a more positive onset potential compared with photocathodes based on MoSx, (Fig. 18a and b).130 However, Pt is an expensive and rare element and is not suitable for forming an efficient buried junction. In this respect, depositing low-cost semiconductor overlayers with catalytic activity as well as the capability of forming p–n junctions has been studied as a simple and efficient way to enhance the onset potential. Kwon et al. developed a synthetic method for wafer-scale n-type MoS2, with catalytic activity toward HER, which was transferred to p-type semiconductor substrates such as p-Si, p-GaAs, and p-GaP.131Fig. 18c shows that the onset potential of p-Si photocathodes gradually shifted toward the positive region until the thickness of the n-type MoS2 film reached 13 nm. One reason for the enhanced onset potential was ascribed to the increased HER activity of 13 nm-thick MoS2, as manifested by the lowest Tafel slopes in Fig. 18d. In addition to the HER activity, the band bending in the n-MoS2/p-Si heterostructures was investigated by using ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. 18e). The energy band diagram for the n-MoS2/p-Si is illustrated in Fig. 18f. The band bending owing to the n-MoS2/p-Si junction was suggested to be another origin of the enhanced onset potential. The catalytic activity of the n-type MoS2 can be further improved by tuning the precursor powder during the chemical vapor deposition reduction process, as shown in Fig. 18g.132 With the improved catalytic properties, the onset potential of the p-Si photocathode was further increased to 0.3 VRHE (Fig. 18h). Similar examples were also reported, including WS2 films on p-Si photocathodes. With 23 nm-thick WS2 films, the onset potential was shifted toward the anodic direction by 0.5 V with respect to that of bare a p-Si photocathode.133 Some examples of the strategies for enhancing the photovoltage are listed in Table 2. In summary, the photovoltage is restricted by the energetic mismatch due to the surface state or inappropriate band structures. Therefore, many strategies for improving the energetic match have been developed, as well as reducing the overpotential to electrochemical reactions. Fig. S2 in the ESI† shows previously reported photovoltage achieved by some of the representative photoelectrode materials with guide lines of Eg, Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit, and SQ-1.134 While most photocathode materials are located between SQ limit and SQ-1, most photoanode materials are below the SQ-1 line. Thus, enhancing photovoltage of photoanodes should be further studied by exploring proper junction materials as well as employing efficient OER catalysts on top of photoanodes.
 Fig. 18  Photovoltage enhancement by using catalysts. (a) Cross-section SEM image of CIGS photocathode. (b) J–V curves of bare CIGS, Pt/TiO2/ZnO/CdS/CIGS, and MoSx/TiO2/ZnO/CdS/CIGS photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130, Copyright (2015), John Wiley and Sons. (c) J–V curves of MoS2/p-Si photocathodes with different thicknesses of MoS2. (d) Tafel slopes of MoS2 layers plotted as log(j) against potential vs. RHE. (e) UPS and XPS spectra of p-Si, 13 nm-thick MoS2/P-Si, and reference Au foil. (f) Schematic of energy band diagram of MoS2/p-Si heterojunction photocathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131, Copyright (2016), Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematics showing sulfur-doped molybdenum phosphides. (h) J–V curves of sulfur-doped molybdenum phosphide-coated Si photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132, Copyright (2017), Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 2 Representative strategies for enhancing photovoltage




Electrode configuration
Electrolyte (pH)
Photovoltage
Note
Ref.




Bold text represents the main strategy in the device.





Co

2+

/Al

2

O

3
/α-Fe2O3/FTO
1 M NaOH (13.6)
0.8 VRHE
Passivation of surface state

99




Co

2+

/Ga

2

O

3
/α-Fe2O3/FTO
1 M NaOH (13.6)
0.75 VRHE
Passivation of surface state

100




NiFeO


x

/α-Fe2O3/FTO
1 M NaOH (13.6)
0.62 VRHE
Passivation of surface state

101



α-Fe2O3(800 °C)/FTO
1 M NaOH (13.6)
0.7 VRHE
Passivation of surface state, annealing at 800 °C

102



α-Fe2O3(HT-10S)/FTO
1 M NaOH (13.6)
0.58 VRHE
Passivation of surface state, heating in a H2–O2 flame for 10 s

102



RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O/Cu
0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.1 M phosphate solution (5)
1 VRHE
Improving band alignment

35



Pt/TiO2/CdS/Sb2Se3/Au
0.1 M H2SO4 (1)
0.47 VRHE
Improving band alignment

82



RuOx/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/CuI/FTO
0.5 M Na2SO4 + NaH2PO4 + NaOH (5)
0.5 VRHE
Improving band alignment

106



MoS3/P3HT:PCBM/MoOx/ITO
0.5 M H2SO4 (0)
0.5 VRHE
Improving band alignment

108



Pt/TiO2/PA/Al2O3/p-Si
1 M H2SO4 (0)
0.48 VRHE
Improving band alignment, dipole layer

109



Phosphonic acid



MoS

2

13 nm/p-Si
0.5 M H2SO4 (0)
0.17 VRHE
Catalytic overlayer

113




S:MoP/p-Si
0.5 M H2SO4 (0)
0.28 VRHE
Catalytic overlayer

114



S/P = 0.33





4.3 Strategies for enhancing stability
Stability is one of the paramount challenges for the commercialization of PEC water splitting. Whereas commercial PVs operate stably for over 20 years, achieving high stability in PEC devices is a daunting task. One of the origins for the instability of PEC devices is the photocorrosion of the semiconductor materials, which occurs when photogenerated charges drive the self-oxidation (or reduction) of the materials rather than the water splitting reaction, as reported by Bard and others.135,136 One strategy to achieve high stability is to find materials that are intrinsically stable toward corrosion. The advantage of these emerging stable materials, including CuFeO2,110,137,138 CuBi2O4,63,139–141 and Sb2Se3,142,143 is related to the lower complexity of the device fabrication by excluding the use of a protective layer, thereby reducing the overall cost of the device. A detailed discussion on semiconducting materials without protective layers can be found in a recent review on emerging trends in PEC solar energy conversion.144 In addition to photocorrosion, there are certain other factors causing the instability of PEC water splitting devices related to the interfaces of the semiconductors, catalysts, and the electrolytes. One of the widely applied strategies for enhancing the stability is using protection layers capable of physical separation of the semiconductor materials from the electrolyte. Because reviews on the use of protective layers in PEC water splitting were already reported a few years ago,23,145 we tried herein to survey the recently developed protective layer strategies as well as other strategies.

4.3.1 Recently developed protective layer strategies. 
Since a comprehensive review on protective layers for stable water splitting was published in early 2017,23 several new protective layer strategies have been developed as well as certain other fundamental studies. One of the fundamental studies investigating the properties of TiO2 protective layers was performed by Moehl et al. with two different deposition temperatures for ALD (120 and 150 °C) and varying thicknesses ranging from 1 to 217 nm using the common ALD-TiO2 precursor tetrakis-dimethylaminotitanium (TDMAT).146 They demonstrated that the depositions at both temperatures showed similar properties in terms of light absorption, doping density of ∼1020 cm3, and flatband potential, and thicknesses greater than 50 nm were required for pinhole-free protective layers over large areas, as verified by cyclic voltammetry measurements (Fig. 19a). In addition, Hannula et al. reported that the stability of the ALD-TiO2 layer at +1.23 V vs. RHE could be much improved by thermal treatment at 500 °C, as shown in Fig. 19b.147 The better stability was related to the thermally induced formation of O− species within TiO2, which behaved essentially as electronic defects in the anionic framework. ALD-TiO2 layers were also used to protect organic photocathodes. Steier et al. reported that the deposition temperature of TiO2 by using TDMAT could be effectively lowered to 80 °C, and successfully employed low-temperature TiO2 processing for protecting P3HT/PCBM photocathodes.124 The low-temperature TiO2-protected organic photocathode revealed stability over 3 h in an acidic electrolyte. Similar to previous works on TiO2 protective layers on Cu-based chalcogenide photocathodes,148,149 ALD-TiO2 was also recently applied to Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 (CIGS) photocathodes (NiMo/TiO2/CdS/CIGS) by Baek et al., demonstrating that TiO2 protection was advantageous under various pH conditions, as shown in Fig. 19c and d.150 Catalyst/TiO2/CdS/absorber structures have been widely employed in recently emerging earth-abundant sulfide and selenide photocathodes,151 such as Sb2Se3,56,100 Cu2S,72 Cu2BaSn(S,Se)4,152 and GeSe.153 It should be noted that TiO2 on top of the p-type semiconductors acts not only as a protective layer, but also as an n-type overlayer, enabling improvements in both the photocurrent and onset potential. Apart from the ALD-TiO2, other materials have been recently employed as a single protective layers of PEC water splitting. Tin oxide, which has been previously reported as a protective layer on semiconductor p–n junctions,154 was recently applied to form a semiconductor–insulator–semiconductor junction on top of chemically oxidized n-type Si (Fig. 19e and f).155 The SnOx/SiOx/n-Si junction, obtained by the spray-deposition of SnOx, showed excellent stability over 100 h in both strongly acidic and alkaline electrolytes, as shown in Fig. 19g. Ultrathin (1–2 nm) Al2O3 layer was tested as a protective layer for GaN photoelectrodes.156 Despite the slightly decreased initial photocurrent density upon the deposition of thin Al2O3, owing to its high resistivity, the photocurrent of Al2O3-coated samples retained a nearly constant value, whereas a bare GaN sample exhibited a rapidly decreasing photocurrent. In addition, a ZnS layer on top of a CdS/CZTS junction improved the photocurrent density and stability,157 similarly to the protective TiO2,148,158 In2S3,159 and HfO239 on top of CdS/CZTS.
 Fig. 19  Recently investigated single protective layer strategies. (a) Cyclic voltammetry of TiO2 protective layers with the different ALD layer thicknesses deposited at 120 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 146, Copyright (2017), American Chemical Society. (b) Stability test of amorphous-TiO2-protected Si photoelectrode with different heat treatments. Photographs in the inset illustrate the surface at the end of the stability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. Stability test of CIGS photocathodes with and without TiO2 protective layers in (c) pH 6.5 and (d) pH 14 electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150, Copyright (2018), John Wiley and Sons. (e) High-resolution TEM image of SnOx/SiOx/n-Si interface. (f) TEM image of SnOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanode. (g) Stability test of SnOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanodes at 0.61 V vs. RHE in 1 M KOH and 1 M H2SO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155, Copyright (2018), John Wiley and Sons. 
Apart from the normal protective layer strategies in which co-catalysts are simply attached on top of the protective layer, more complicated protective strategies such as embedded/graded catalysts have been recently developed. For example, Li et al. developed TiO2-passivated Pt strategy in Si nanowire (SiNW) photocathodes by successively depositing Pt nanoparticles and 15 nm ALD-TiO2.160 The resulting sandwich structure of TiO2/Pt/SiNW (Fig. 20a) revealed greatly enhanced stability in 0.5 M H2SO4 compared with the without-TiO2 sample (Fig. 20b). In addition, a dual-TiO2-layer strategy was also reported in which Pt catalysts were sandwiched between the two layers of TiO2 (TiO2/Pt/TiO2).161 Yang et al. fabricated black silicon (bSi) photoelectrodes by depositing the first 20 nm-thick TiO2 layer and Pt nanoparticles on top of nanoporous Si, followed by the deposition of a very thin (2 nm) second TiO2 layer, as shown Fig. 20c. The sandwiched structure (TiO2/Pt/TiO2/bSi) exhibited much better stability compared with all the other structures, such as TiO2/Pt/bSi, Pt/TiO2/bSi, and Pt/bSi (Fig. 20d and e). Similar to the sandwiched structure of the protective layer and catalysts, alloying of the protective layer and catalysts was also demonstrated. The Chidsey group reported TiO2–IrOx alloys enabling corrosion-resistant water oxidation.162 A Si photoanode with TiO2–IrOx alloys was fabricated by varying the number of ALD cycles for each precursor and the resulting photoanode was stable for 12 h of continuous water oxidation in 1 M H2SO4 at high photovoltage. In addition, Gu et al. studied a graded catalytic-protective layer by annealing an amorphous-MoSx/TiOx–GaInP2 stack at 450 °C.45 As shown in the scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)-energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) images, a large degree of interpenetration among MoSx, TiO2, and GaInP2 was observed after annealing, whereas a relatively clear boundary existed in the sample prior to annealing (Fig. 20f and g). The GaInP2 photocathode with the graded catalytic-protective layer (g-MoSx/TiO2–GaInP2) revealed significantly improved stability compared with the ungraded sample (a-MoSx/TiOx–GaInP2), as shown in Fig. 20h.
 Fig. 20  Complicated protective layer strategies for enhancing stability. (a) Schematic showing passivated Pt strategy with TiO2/Pt/p-Si structure. (b) Stability test of planar Si, TiO2/Pt/SiNW, Pt/planar Si, and Pt/SiNW photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160, Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society (c) schematic showing dual protective layer strategy with TiO2/Pt/TiO2/bSi structure. (d) Stability test of TiO2/Pt/TiO2/bSi and Pt/bSi photocathodes and (e) photocurrent retention of the four structures after 24 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161, Copyright (2019), John Wiley and Sons. STEM-EDS line profiling of (f) a-MoSx/TiOx–GaInP2 before annealing and (g) g-MoSx/TiO2–GaInP2 after annealing. (h) Stability test of a-MoSx/TiOx–GaInP2, g-MoSx/TiO2–GaInP2, and PtRu–GaInP2 photocathodes in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45, Copyright (2017), Springer Nature. 


4.3.2 Improving protective layer/catalyst interface. 
Because electrochemical catalysts are generally required for efficient photoelectrodes in the most cases, the instability of PEC devices can be caused by poor adhesion between the catalyst and protective layers. Several strategies have been recently developed to improve the quality of such interfaces. For example, delaminated Pt catalysts from the top surface of TiO2-protected P3HT:PCBM photocathodes were observed by Rojas et al., as shown in Fig. 21a.125 They additionally coated a solution-processed polyethyleneimine (PEI) on top of Pt catalysts to prevent the delamination. As a result, the stability of the photocathodes was much improved: ∼60% of the photocurrent loss appeared after 50 min in the PEI coated sample, whereas a similar loss was observed after 20 min in the without-PEI sample, as indicated by the vertical double arrows in Fig. 21b and c. The detachment of the Pt catalyst can be also found elsewhere, as demonstrated by the fact that the performance of photoelectrodes can be fully recovered after the replatinization, i.e., re-deposition of a fresh layer of the Pt catalyst.99,143,163 Similarly, adopting catalysts capable of robustly binding with protective layers has been considered as an effective strategy for promoting stability. For example, ruthenium oxide (RuOx) is known as an alternative co-catalyst for hydrogen evolution, showing robust binding with ALD-TiO2.164 As shown in Fig. 21d, RuOx deposited on ALD-TiO2 revealed improved stability under the alternating potential step, whereas a rapid degradation was observed in its Pt counterpart. With this strong binding, a Cu2O photocathode with RuOx retained 90% of the photocurrent over 50 h, which was much longer than 20 has obtained with a Pt co-catalyst (Fig. 21e and f).165 Amorphous molybdenum sulfide, denoted as MoS2+x, acted as a robustly bound co-catalyst.166 The MoS2+x was deposited on top of a Cu2O/AZO/TiO2 junction, as shown in Fig. 21g. The MoS2+x-decorated Cu2O photocathode revealed a much higher stability compared with its Pt counterpart in a wide range of pH, as shown in Fig. 21h.
 Fig. 21  Robust binding catalysts for enhanced stability. (a) SEM image of Pt/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/CuI/FTO photocathode after stability test, showing the delaminated Pt. Stability test of hybrid photocathode (b) without and (c) with polyethyleneimine (PEI) protective layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125, Copyright (2016), Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Potential step experiment of Pt/TiO2/AZO/FTO and RuOx/TiO2/AZO/FTO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164, Copyright (2013), John Wiley and Sons. Stability test of Cu2O photocathodes with (e) Pt and (f) RuOx co-catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165, Copyright (2014), Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Cross-section SEM image of MoS2+x/TiO2/AZO/Cu2O photocathode. (h) Stability test of Cu2O photocathode with Pt and MoS2+x co-catalysts in various pH electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166, Copyright (2014), Springer Nature. 
Inserting a functional layer between catalysts and protective layers can also improve the quality of the interface. For example, Koo et al. inserted rGO between a Pt catalyst and a CdS overlayer on top of CIGS photocathodes (Fig. 22a).167 It was determined that rGO played a catalyst-binder role in assisting the stability of the CIGS photocathode by preventing the detachment of the Pt catalyst (Fig. 22b). Fullerene (C60), a similar carbon derivative, was also reported as an inter-layer between Pt and TiO2 for enhancing the stability of PEC photocathodes.168 As shown in Fig. 22c, inserting C60 before depositing Pt on top of a TiO2/Sb2Se3 junction resulted in greatly enhanced stability up to 10 h. It was confirmed that C60 acted as a photoelectron transfer promoter, preventing the photocorrosion by the accumulated photoelectrons in the TiO2 layer, while promoting the transfer of photoelectrons to the electrolyte, as illustrated in inset of Fig. 22c. The stability of Si photoelectrodes can also be maintained by inserting a multifunctional layer underneath the electrochemical catalysts. Vijselaar et al. developed a spatioselective method for depositing a nickel silicide (NiSi) interlayer between the catalyst and Si microwires.169 The NiSi interlayer was successfully deposited to protect the Si nanowires, assisting electron transfer to the NiMo catalyst, while minimizing light intervention, allowing for stable operation of the Si photocathodes in strong alkaline electrolytes over 12 days. In addition, the Ni/NiOx interlayer was also adopted as a bridging layer, which is capable of strongly bonding with the NiFe-layered double hydroxide (LDH) co-catalyst on top of Si photocathodes (Fig. 22d).170 Guo et al. demonstrated that the formation of NiOx underneath the NiFe-LDH enabled significantly prolonged stability owing to the similarities in material composition and structure. Without the NiOx formation, most of the NiFe-LDH on the surface was peeled off after the first scan (Fig. 22e), whereas the NiOx-containing sample revealed excellent stability over 60 h in a strong alkaline electrolyte (Fig. 22f).
 Fig. 22  Inserting a functional layer for enhancing stability. (a) Schematic illustration of Pt/rGO/CdS/CIGS photocathode (rGO: reduced graphene oxide). (b) Stability test of CIGS photocathodes with and without rGO layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167, Copyright (2018), John Wiley and Sons. (c) Stability test of Sb2Se3 photocathodes with and without C60 layer between Pt and TiO2. Inset shows the schematic illustration of photoelectron transfer mechanism through C60. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168, Copyright (2019), John Wiley and Sons. (d) Cross-section schematic and energy band alignment of NiFe-LDH/NiOx/Ni/SiOx/p-Si/n+Si photoanode. (e) Photograph of photoanode without NiOx after the first J–V scan, showing delamination of the co-catalyst. (f) Stability test of NiFe-LDH/NiOx/Ni/SiOx/p-Si/n+Si photoanode in 1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. 


4.3.3 Controlling the dissolution during PEC operation. 
Although the degradation of the photoelectrode can occur by the interaction between the electrode and the electrolyte, most of the strategies for enhancing the stability focused on the electrode part. It has been known that the condition of the electrolyte (such as pH) could affect the stability of PEC devices, but tuning the electrolyte composition and the dissolution reaction control during PEC operation have recently emerged as attractive strategies permitting stable operation of PEC devices. For example, the Choi group presented a strategy to guarantee long-term stability of BiVO4 photoanodes by adding some amount of V5+ of the form V2O5 into the electrolyte.171 By simply adding V2O5 into the 1.0 M borate buffer electrolyte, without any change to the BiVO4 photoanodes, the device was operated with high stability, without a noticeable decrease in the photocurrent up to 60 h, and the initial performance was nearly identical (Fig. 23a and b). Without the addition of V2O5, both Bi and V were dissolved in the electrolyte with the decreased XRD peaks after the stability test, as shown in Fig. 23c and d. By contrast, with V2O5 addition, no significant changes in the XRD data were observed after the stability test and negligible dissolution of Bi was observed (Fig. 23e and f). In addition, the Domen group presented an in situ catalyst regeneration process leading to the remarkable stability of a BiVO4 photoanode up to 1100 h.48 As shown in Fig. 24a and b, when Ni was used as the contact layer for a NiFe oxygen evolution catalyst (OEC)-decorated BiVO4 photoanode (NiFe-OEC/Mo:BiVO4/Ni/Sn), the photoelectrode exhibited exceptional stability without noticeable degradation up to 400 h, whereas the photocurrent continuously decreased after 20 h in case of a Ti contact layer (NiFe-OEC/Mo:BiVO4/Ti/Sn). The stability enhancement is ascribed to in situ catalyst regeneration, which consists of the following successive reactions: the dissolution of Ni2+ ions from the Ni contact layer, the PEC deposition of Ni-OEC, the incorporation of Fe2+, and the self-regeneration of NiFe-OEC during long-term operation (Fig. 24c). This in situ regeneration of the NiFe-OEC was further demonstrated by the fact that the photocurrent of the Mo:BiVO4/Ti/Sn electrode (i.e., without catalyst) was increased by the sudden addition of 0.5 μM of Ni2+ into the electrolyte, resulting in the formation of NiFe-OEC on the photoelectrode surface (Fig. 24d). It was also reported that the concentration of the Ni2+ in the electrolyte should be less than 1 μM for site-specific regeneration of catalysts, as shown in Fig. 24e. The aforementioned strategies for enhancing stability are summarized in Table 3, including single (or complex) protective layer strategies, the use of a robust binding catalyst, improving the interface between the catalyst and the protective layer, and controlling the dissolution during PEC operation. Fig. S3 in the ESI† shows previously reported stability of photoanode and photocathode, as summarized by Bae et al.23 It is evident that most photocathodes were stably operated in acidic electrolytes while most photoanodes revealed good stability in basic electrolytes. Thus, achieving high stability of photocathodes in strongly basic condition and vice versa are important research topics. Additionally, most of the highly stable photoelectrodes over 10 days are Si-based photoelectrodes, presumably due to its smooth surface allowing highly conformal protection (and/or self-passivation of the Si for pinhole areas in imperfect protective layers). Therefore, strategies for enhancing the stability of other thin film-based materials having a relatively rough surface should be further investigated, as well as actively seeking materials that are photocorrosion resistant in aqueous media, which reduces the required degree of conformality for any overlayers.
 Fig. 23  Enhancing stability by tuning electrolyte composition. (a) J–V curves and (b) stability test of NiOOH/FeOOH/BiVO4 photoanodes in 0.1 M potassium borate buffer (pH 9.3) with and without the addition of V2O5. XRD (c and e) and ICP analysis (d and f) of photoanodes before and after stability test (c and d) without and (e and f) with V2O5 in the electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171, Copyright (2017), Springer Nature. 
 Fig. 24  
In situ catalyst regeneration. (a) Stability test of a NiFe-OEC/Mo:BiVO4/Ni/Sn photoanode in a fresh 1 M borate buffer. The inset shows a SEM image of the electrode after 400 h water splitting. (b) Stability test of a NiFe-OEC/Mo:BiVO4/Ti/Sn photoanode in a fresh 1 M borate buffer. (c) Schematic illustration of NiFe-OEC self-generation and in situ regeneration. (d) Photocurrent change in a Mo:BiVO4/Ti/Sn electrode upon a sudden addition of 0.5 μM Ni2+ at 1 V vs. RHE in a fresh 1 M borate buffer. (e) Schematic comparison of the site-specific catalyst regeneration and non-site-specific catalyst deposition process in a 1 M borate buffer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright (2016), Springer Nature. 
Table 3 Representative strategies for enhancing stability




Electrode configuration
Electrolyte (pH)
Stability (retained current density)
Note
Ref.




Bold text represents the main strategy in the device.




Ni–Mo/TiO2/CdS/CIGS/Mo
0.5 M NaPi + 0.5 M Na2SO4 (6.5)
100 min (100%)
Protective layer

150



1 M NaOH (14)
20 min (∼10%)
Protective layer


NiFeOOH/SnOx/SiOx/n-Si
1 M KOH (14)
>100 h
Protective layer

155



E-Pt/μPt/SnOx/SiOx/n-Si
1 M H2SO4 (0)
>100 h
Protective layer



TiO

2

/Pt/SiNW
0.5 M H2SO4 (0)
2 h (100%)
Protective layer, silicon nanowire

160



TiO2/Pt/TiO2/bSi
0.5 M H2SO4 (0)
24 h (87%)
Protective layer, black silicon

161




g-MoS


x


/TiO

2
–GaInP2
0.5 M H2SO4 (0)
20 h (∼85%)
Protective layer, graded MoSx–TiO2

45




PEI/Pt/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/CuI/FTO
0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.1 M Na2SO4 (1)
50 min (60%)
Robust binding catalyst, polyethyleneimine

125




RuO


x

/TiO2/AZO/Cu2O/Au/FTO
0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.1 M KH2PO4 (5)
53 h (90%)
Robust binding catalyst

165




MoS

2+x
/TIO2/AZO/Cu2O/Au/FTO
0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.2 M potassium hydrogen phthalate buffer (4)
10 h (∼95%)
Robust binding catalyst

166



Pt/rGO/CdS/CIGS/Mo
0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2HPO4 + 0.5 M NaH2PO4 (6.8)
7 h (100%)
Inserting a functional layer

167



Pt/C60/TiO2/Sb2Se3/Au/FTO
0.1 M H2SO4 (1)
10 h (98%)
Inserting a functional layer

168



NiMo/NiSi/n+p-Si
1 M KOH (14)
12 h (100%)
Inserting a functional layer

169



NiFe-LDH/NiOx/Ni/SiOx/n+p-Si
1 M KOH (14)
68 h (100%)
Inserting a functional layer, Ni–Fe layered double hydroxide

170



NiOOH/FeOOH/BiVO4/FTO

V

2

O

5
 + 1 M borate buffer
60 h (100%)
Controlling the dissolution

171




NiFe-OEC/Mo:BiVO4/Ni/Sn
1 M borate buffer
1100 h (100%)
Controlling the dissolution, 11 runs of 100 h operation

48






5. Advanced characterization methods of thin films for PEC water splitting
As the fundamental device characterization tools for PEC water splitting, various advanced characterization techniques have been developed by researchers around the world, as schematically summarized in Fig. 25. With the thin-film semiconductor configuration, we can precisely monitor the dynamics of the photogenerated carriers from their generation by light absorption to recombination or transfer. Moreover, the electrochemical reactions at the semiconductor surface can be elucidated during the operating condition with fully integrated devices. One of the supreme advantages of PEC research is that the advanced characterization methods allow us to understand the detailed operation mechanisms, eventually leading to the development of efficient solar fuel production as well as scientific advances. It must be mentioned that some of the following techniques can be also applied to the powder-type photocatalysts, but it is obvious that the film-type electrode is capable of providing unrivaled scientific merits as the PEC platform allows us to investigate infinitesimal changes in the photoelectrodes as functions of a wide variety of external conditions such as applied potential, light illumination intensity/wavelength, and heterojunction formation. There are many advanced characterization methods that are available for studying thin films under operando conditions, which help to quickly identify the problems in these (composite) materials. Such characterization with photocatalytic particles, however, is much more challenging. For instance, if a new semiconductor light-absorbing particle is coupled with an HER and OER co-catalyst and a low rate of gas evolution is observed, the issue could be bulk recombination, surface recombination, or interface recombination at either or both co-catalysts. This is not at all to say that studying particle systems is not worthwhile. From one perspective, thin-film studies can be seen as model systems for the particle systems that will eventually have a high efficiency and low cost for solar hydrogen production.
 Fig. 25  Schematic illustrating various advanced characterization methods for PEC water splitting discussed in Section 5. 
5.1 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a valuable tool for studying PEC and PV systems, and can shed light on the internal electronic structure as well as resistive components and interfaces in semiconductor systems. The challenging aspect of EIS is to find an equivalent circuit (EC) model that accurately describes the underlying (photo)physical processes of the system. Bisquert and co-workers have pioneered these efforts for PEC systems, with a detailed analytical model that accounts for the potential-dependent kinetics of recombination and charge transfer processes of both electrons and holes, including charge transfer over trap states (as well as from the band edge).172,173 The power of EIS for determining the mechanisms of water splitting systems was demonstrated by studies with hematite, which is a relatively simple system (n-type semiconductor in direct contact with an aqueous electrolyte). Klahr and Gimenez et al. initially studied well-defined thin-film hematite photoanodes that were deposited by ALD.174 The key role of surface states in the charge transfer step was identified. With EIS, it was possible to measure the potential-dependent charging of the trap state, which preceded the onset of the photocurrent, providing evidence for the requirement of hole accumulation in trap states to initiate water oxidation (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 26  Potential-dependent resistance and capacitance for charge transfer over a trap state for water oxidation on hematite photoanodes. Rct,trap: charge transfer resistance through a trap state; Ctrap: capacitance of trap state; J: water oxidation photocurrent density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 174, Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society. 
A follow-up study investigated ALD-deposited hematite photoanodes that were coated with a cobalt–phosphate (Co–Pi) water oxidation catalyst.175 The authors observed that the Co–Pi catalyst collected and stored photogenerated charges from the hematite, which reduced surface state recombination and thereby led to increase water oxidation efficiency. Le Formal et al. carried out mechanistic studies on nanostructured hematite by EIS in combination with transient absorption and transient photocurrent (TPC) spectroscopy.176 The combination of techniques could help to identify the different processes in the EI spectra. Notably, a quantitative agreement among all three methods was found, and revealed the presence of long-lived holes (milliseconds) on the surface at potentials just positive of the flatband. As the rate constant for water oxidation is slower than that, an increased positive bias is required to slow down recombination sufficiently to achieve water oxidation, giving insight into the origin of the late onset of the photocurrent in this material. Steier et al. used EIS to evaluate the effects of different underlayers and overlayers on thin-film hematite photoanodes.177 For instance, an increase in doping (conductivity) was observed when using Nb2O5 and SiOx underlayers, whereas a Ga2O3 overlayer had the effect of shifting the energy of the surface trap to a more negative potential, enabling an earlier onset potential for water oxidation. Riha et al. used EIS to identify that an ultrathin cobalt oxide layer deposited by ALD dramatically reduced the resistance to charge-transfer at the interface, which was not an effect of surface-state passivation, providing evidence that the cobalt ions in this case actually functioned as a water oxidation catalyst.178
A resistance-based analysis using EIS was recently reported by Moehl et al.,179 which gave insight into complex, multilayer photoelectrodes. It was shown that even if the complete EC were unknown, an analysis of the potential-dependent resistances enabled a deep insight into the working of the device. This type of analysis represents a powerful new method for analyzing complex, multilayer systems, for rapidly identifying problematic interfaces/materials and measuring the effects of different performance-improving treatments.
5.2 Transient photophysical characterization

5.2.1 Transient photocurrent spectroscopy. 
TPC measurements have been used to study the charge carrier dynamics and trapping of charge carriers in solar cell research.180,181 Such measurements could also be adapted to PEC water splitting cells to investigate the fundamental limitations of the photoelectrodes.182 Typically, the current response of the system under investigation is monitored as the light source is modulated periodically (on and off). By fitting the transient decays and extracting time constants, the plausible decay mechanisms for the photoelectrode could be studied and hence the recombination and accumulation of charge carriers in the semiconductor could also be understood. One of the important papers related to photocurrent transient measurements was published by Le Formal et al.183Fig. 27a shows a typical TPC response of a hematite photoanode, describing how to obtain the transient maximum photocurrent (ΔJmax) and new steady-state photocurrent (ΔJss) under a certain applied potential. By studying the TPC response under water oxidation conditions and in the presence of a hole scavenger, one could easily observe the absence of the transient decays in the photoelectrode with the hole scavenger, which was an indication that no charge accumulates at the surface upon a light pulse (Fig. 27b). As shown in Fig. 27c, ΔJmax and ΔJss can be estimated as a function of the applied potential. The distance (D in nm) at which the active photogenerated holes originate inside the hematite can be calculated by using the equation given below (Fig. 27d): (8)where α is the absorption coefficient at a particular wavelength (470 nm in this case) and Jpulseintensity is the photon flux converted in terms of the current density. Using the distance, the effective diffusion length can be calculated from the equation below: (9)where ε is the relative dielectric constant, ε0 is the permittivity of vacuum, e is the electronic charge, ND is the donor density, Vfb is the flatband, Vappl is the applied potential, and LD,eff is the diffusion length. From the TPC amplitudes obtained using a sacrificial agent, the diffusion lengths of hematite can be estimated.
 Fig. 27  Schemes explaining the data treatment of photocurrent transients for the following cases: (a) Photocurrent transients measured in 1 M NaOH. (b) Photocurrent transients measured in 1 M NaOH + 0.5 M H2O2. (c) Steady-state amplitudes of the photocurrent transient and transient peak height (ΔJss in filled markers/solid lines and ΔJmax in open markers/dotted lines) measured in two different electrolytes are shown as a function of the applied potential, with respect to RHE. (d) Distance D (in nm) representing the distance inside the hematite film thickness at which the active photogenerated holes originate is shown as a function of the square root of the difference between the applied potential Vappl and the flatband potential Vfb; linear fits of this distance D are shown as dotted lines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 183, Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society. 
By combining dual-working electrode technique with TPC measurements, Laskowski et al. showed that photocurrent transients on catalyzed photoanodes are influenced not solely by surface state loading/emptying, but also by the catalyst's redox-activity.184 Furthermore, Dumortier et al. developed a numerical model to explain TPC phenomena in a TiO2 photoanode, which was separated by a membrane from a Pt dark cathode.185 It was revealed by both numerical modeling and the transient phenomena that the reaction in the cell followed two pathways. One was the rapid charging of surface states and the subsequent formation of acidic titanol groups at the TiO2/H2O interface, and the second was the transfer process of H+ ions at the TiO2/Nafion interface. Combining TPC with other methods could be very useful in furthering the fundamental understanding of PEC water splitting devices, as discussed above as well as in the section below.


5.2.2 Transient absorption spectroscopy. 
In transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS), the time evolution of the photogenerated charge concentration is measured by monitoring the changes in the photoinduced absorption.186 A pump pulse (usually above the bandgap excitation) is incident on the semiconductor to excite the semiconductor. After a time-delay, a probe pulse is incident on the semiconductor and its signal is usually monitored in either transmission or reflection mode. By monitoring the probe signal as a function of different delay times, information with regard to the decay of the photogenerated excitation can be obtained. Fig. 28a shows a scheme illustrating the basic principle of TAS and Fig. 28b shows an experimental transient absorption spectrum of a Fe2O3 photoanode with different metal dopants.187 TAS helps to understand the recombination, trapping, and reaction of photogenerated electrons and holes. The Durrant group has exploited this technique for studying the recombination and carrier trapping mechanisms in different materials.186 Pendlebury et al. have shown that in hematite photoanodes, the limiting factor is not the slow water oxidation kinetics, but rather the fast electron–hole recombination using a combination of TPC and TAS. By investigating the bias dependence of the electron and hole dynamics, they concluded that the bias dependence of water oxidation arises from the electron density dependence of electron–hole recombination. Using TAS, Barosso et al. showed the impact of external bias on the relative rates of charge carrier trapping, recombination, and interfacial transfer in hematite photoanodes for water oxidation.188 TAS could also be used to study the effect of various treatments on the PEC performance of different photoelectrodes. For instance, Yang et al. showed that after acetic acid treatment of hematite photoanodes, the bulk and surface recombination losses decreased, resulting in the improvement of the PEC performance.189 They were able to infer that the rate of loss of trapped electrons accelerated upon acid treatment, by monitoring the rate of recovery of the 575 nm bleach signal (which is attributed to trapped electrons).
 Fig. 28  (a) Scheme showing the basic principle of transient absorption spectroscopy (showing an ideal ΔA vs. time plot). (b) Transient absorption spectra of Fe2O3, Fe2O3–Sn, Fe2O3–Ti, and Fe2O3–SnTi probed at 575 nm following excitation at 355 nm (pump). Reprinted with permission from ref. 187, Copyright (2018), Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Ma et al. used TAS and TPC to show that in BiVO4 photoanodes, the improvement in the photocurrent onset upon the introduction of CoPi was due to suppressed recombination rather than improved water oxidation catalysis.190 The TAS spectra of unmodified BiVO4 and CoPi-coated BiVO4 were examined. From Fig. 29a, the time constants (τTAS2) were determined from the TAS decay, where these time constants are attributed to the back electron–hole recombination. It is clear that the time constants are higher for CoPi-treated samples when compared with bare samples, showing evidence for reduced back electron–hole recombination. However, at strong anodic bias, the time constants are similar for both samples. At strong anodic bias, the back electron–hole recombination is suppressed and the time constant is totally dependent on water oxidation kinetics. Because the time constants are the same at strong anodic bias, it can be concluded that the water oxidation kinetics has not been affected significantly by to the CoPi treatment.
 Fig. 29  (a) Time constants from transient absorption and transient photocurrent decays vs. applied potential. Filled circles and squares: τTAS2, time constants from the exponential decay phase (eqn (2) in the paper) for unmodified (red) and CoPi-modified (blue) BiVO4 photoanodes. Empty circles and squares: τTPC, the time constants of negative transient current, for unmodified (red) and CoPi-modified (blue) BiVO4 photoanodes, in the TPC measurements, obtained from fits using eqn (3) in the paper. (b) Amplitude of the slow transient absorption decay phase φTAS2vs. applied potential; red triangles: unmodified BiVO4; blue diamonds: CoPi-modified BiVO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 190, Copyright (2015), Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.2.3 Time-resolved analyses. 
In PEC water splitting devices, the electrochemical reactions are driven by successive processes such as light absorption, charge generation, separation of the generated charges, and charge transfer to the electrolyte side. There are time-resolved techniques for monitoring the charge carrier dynamics on various timescales after their generation by light absorption. These time-resolved techniques are useful for not only identifying the liming factors, but also comparing the properties of a new material with well-established materials.
5.2.3.1 Time-resolved terahertz conductivity. 
Time-resolved terahertz conductivity (TRTC) is an attractive technique for measuring time-dependent photoconductivity with sub-ps time resolution, owing to the high frequency of THz electric fields. Some examples of TRTC analysis for investigating semiconductor materials for PEC water splitting are shown in Fig. 30. The carrier dynamics involved in an Sb2Se3 nanostructure were investigated with a pump–probe, in which an optical pump was used to excite the semiconductor, as shown in Fig. 30a.55 The resulting transients of the transmitted THz probe pulse were subsequently measured as a function of the pump–probe delay. The transmitted THz signal exhibited fast initial decays with time constants of 16.1 and 32.1 ps, depending on the light illumination intensities (Fig. 30b and c). It was calculated that the THz mobility and diffusion length were in the ranges of 18–600 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 50–400 nm, respectively. The mobility and diffusion length of the Sb2Se3 nanostructure were much higher than the THz results of electrodeposited Cu2O, whose mobility and diffusion length were 3.6–8.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 25–60 nm, respectively.191 Despite the high initial mobility of the Sb2Se3 nanostructure, the THz lifetimes (16–32 ps) were relatively short compared with those of Cu2O (147–176 ps). The origin of the short lifetimes was attributed to the 1D-morphology-driven carrier localization resulted from the complicated nanostructures. In addition, TRTC analysis was used to investigate photoanode materials, such as BiVO4.192 For example, Ziwritsch et al. investigated the evidence of hole-polaron formation in BiVO4 by TRTC.193 The frequency-dependent conductivity spectra of THz analysis can provide insight into the nature of carrier transport and localization. As shown in Fig. 30d, there was a noticeable peak in the THz mobility spectra at 300 K, indicative of carrier localization in BiVO4. The peak vanished at low temperature (Fig. 30e), implying the existence of polarons in which thermally assisted hopping conduction occurs, as predicted by the theoretical calculation.194 The results were fitted with a Drude–Smith model in conjunction with a damped harmonic oscillator model, from which the origin of the localization was ascribed to possible vibrations between Bi3+ and VO43− units along the [012] direction, as shown in the inset of Fig. 30f.
 Fig. 30  Examples of time-resolved terahertz conductivity (TRTC) analysis for PEC water splitting. (a) Schematic showing the experimental setup of TRTC with an optical pump–probe. Temporal decay of the pump-induced change in THz transmission upon excitation of Sb2Se3 nanostructures with fluences of (b) 340 μJ cm−2 and (c) 10 μJ cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. THz combined electron–hole mobility spectra of BiVO4 films measured at different delay times at (d) 300 K and (e) 83 K. Stars represent real data points and open circles indicate imaginary data points. (f) THz combined electron–hole mobility spectrum of a W-doped BiVO4 film at 10 ps delay time fitted with the Drude–Smith model at lower frequencies and the damped oscillator model at higher frequencies. Inset shows the vibration of Bi3+ and VO43− along the [012] direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193, Copyright (2016), American Chemical Society. 
5.2.3.2 Time-resolved microwave conductivity. 
Time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC), which is another pump–probe method, has a similar working principle to TRTC. However, owing to its lower frequency compared with THz, carrier dynamics in a longer time window (∼ns) can be investigated by TRMC. Jang et al. demonstrated the mechanism of the enhanced charge transport properties of BiVO4 due to a mild hydrogen treatment by comparing TRMC results in conjunction with theoretical calculations.86 As shown in Fig. 31a, H:BiVO4 revealed a much longer lifetime compared with pristine and W:BiVO4. Another advantage of TRMC analysis is its ability to quantify the density of trap states in a semiconductor. The TRMC signal can be expressed as the product of the absorbance-normalized quantum yield (Φ) and the sum of the electron and hole mobilities (∑μi). In the Φ∑μivs. light intensity curves, a linearly increasing trend was observed in H:BiVO4 with the decreasing light intensity, whereas BiVO4 showed the maximum sigma value (Fig. 31b). The decreasing tendency at a lower intensity was indicative of the presence of trap states, as confirmed by TRMC analysis, from which hydrogen treatment reduced the trap states in BiVO4, contributing to the enhancement in both carrier lifetime and PEC performance. This TRMC analysis was also used to compare the charge transport behavior in mesoporous and dense WO3 photoanodes,195 as well as to investigate the charge transport kinetics in manganese oxides (MnOx, Mn2O3, Mn3O4) for water oxidation.196
 Fig. 31  Examples of time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) analyses for PEC water splitting. (a) TRMC signals of BiVO4, W:BiVO4, and H:BiVO4. (b) TRMC signals as a function of incident photons for BiVO4 and H:BiVO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, Copyright (2017), John and Wiley and Sons. (c) TRPL emission decay spectra of Sb2Se3 on three different substrates. (d) Energetics schematic showing band energy positions. The holes are extracted from the Sb2Se3 photocathode to the back contact of either FTO or Au/FTO, as indicated by the white arrows. The orange arrows represent the excitation and radiative–nonradiative recombination of the photocarriers, and the red arrows represent possible recombination at the back interfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. 
5.2.3.3 Time-resolved photoluminescence. 
Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) is another useful tool to provide information about carrier dynamics in a semiconductor material, which has been widely applied to thin-film PVs.197 Although the timescale of TRPL overlaps with that of TRMC, from sub-ns to μs, depending on the materials properties, different information on the material can be obtained from the two analyses, owing to the different operation mechanisms. Because the light-induced change in the reflected microwave in TRMC analysis is sensitive to the presence of mobile carriers, the TRMC signal provides comprehensive information about the carriers, such as mobility and lifetime. In TRPL analysis, however, the radiative and nonradiative recombination lifetimes of photoexcited electrons and holes can be determined by measuring the luminescence signals resulted from recombination. In addition, charge injection behavior into the adjacent layers can also be investigated by TRPL by monitoring the influence of a quenching layer, because the lifetime of photoexcited charge carriers decreases if the excited carriers can be effectively injected into the neighboring layers. With this technique, the optimal contact layer with the semiconductor can be selected based on the understanding of efficient charge injection. For example, charge injection into bottom contacts on an Sb2Se3 photocathode was recently investigated.55Fig. 31c shows the TRPL results from Sb2Se3 nanostructures with and without a bottom contact, in which all spectra were fitted with a biexponential function with fast (τ1) and slow (τ2) lifetime components. Although τ2 largely decreased from 0.61 to 0.26 ns as the bottom contact was inserted, relatively similar values of τ1 (0.12–0.15 ns) were obtained, regardless of the samples. The authors attributed the origin of τ1 to nonradiative decay due to trap states. In addition, the origin of τ2 was ascribed to the time for the radiative interband recombination, indicative of the more-efficient photogenerated hole extraction through the Au layer, as shown in Fig. 31d.

5.3 Intensity-modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy
Intensity-modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopies (IMPS/IMVS) are techniques to measure periodic modulations in the photocurrent and photovoltage in response to a small sinusoidal perturbation of the light intensity over a wide range of frequencies. Although these techniques were utilized to analyze the charge carrier dynamics in dye-sensitized solar cells over the last 20 years,198 they have recently enabled determining the rate constants of charge recombination and transfer in fully working PEC devices. The rate constant determination can shed light on the operation mechanism, such as the role of co-catalysts in photocathodes, as well as allow us to understand the performance-limiting factors such as surface recombination and/or sluggish charge transfer. For example, the Wang group undertook the IMPS analysis for hematite photoanodes prepared by three different methods of ALD (denoted as aH), solution synthesis (denoted as sdH), and re-growth treatment (denoted as rgH).199 At a given applied potential, the rate constants of charge transfer (ktrans) and surface recombination (krec) were obtained from the IMPS graph, as presented in the Nyquist plot in Fig. 32a. They integrated the rate constants as a function of the applied potential, as shown in Fig. 32b, and concluded that the performance of the hematite photoanodes was primarily determined by the reduced surface recombination rather than the improved charge transfer. The same group also revealed the dual role of co-catalysts on silicon photocathodes using IMPS, in which an interplay of faster charge transfer kinetics and reduced recombination contributed to the improved onset potential.200 In contrast to IMPS, IMVS probes changes in the photovoltage as a function of the frequency of the perturbing light intensity under an open-circuit condition. Using IMPS and IMVS, the dual role of the RuOx co-catalyst on Sb2Se3 photocathodes was also elucidated.55 With an increase in the increasing negative potential for the RuOx/TiO2/Sb2Se3 photocathode, an increased ktrans was observed, whereas krec decreased (Fig. 32c). In addition, the peak at a high frequency in the Bode plot showing the maximum value of the imaginary photovoltage represents krec, whereas the peak at a lower frequency (∼1 Hz) is related to ktrans (Fig. 32d). The IMPS and IMVS results led to the conclusion that the RuOx co-catalyst was advantageous for reducing surface recombination and enhancing charge transfer. IMVS was also used to understand the stability-improving mechanism in Sb2Se3 photocathodes by a C60 photoelectron transfer promoter.168 As the frequency of light perturbation was swept from the high to the low region, the photovoltage in a Pt/C60/TiO2/Sb2Se3 cell decreased rapidly, whereas a saturated photovoltage was observed in the Pt/TiO2/Sb2Se3 cell (Fig. 32e). This implied that the C60 layer inserted at the Pt/TiO2 interface facilitates the transfer of photoelectrons from the absorber layer to the Pt co-catalyst, even in the absence of an applied overpotential, thereby preventing the photocorrosion of TiO2 and eventually enhancing the stability of Sb2Se3 photocathodes.
 Fig. 32  Examples of intensity-modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) for PEC water splitting. (a) IMPS Nyquist plots of hematite samples prepared by three different methods, (ALD (denoted as aH), solution synthesis (denoted as sdH), and re-growth treatment (denoted as rgH)). (b) Rate constants of three hematite photoanodes extracted from IMPS data at different applied potentials (rate constant for recombination: krec, rate constant for charge transfer: ktran). Reprinted with permission from ref. 199, Copyright (2016), Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) krec and ktran of Sb2Se3 photocathode as a function of the applied potential, extracted from the IMPS data. (d) The imaginary component of the complex photovoltage in the IMVS of TiO2/Sb2Se3 and RuOx/TiO2/Sb2Se3 photocathodes. The blue arrows represent the changes after RuOx deposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. (e) Photovoltage variation as a function of the frequency of the light-intensity perturbation via IMVS analyses for Pt/TiO2/Sb2Se3 and Pt/C60/TiO2/Sb2Se3 photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168, Copyright (2019), John Wiley and Sons. 
5.4 
          In situ analyses
Although the basic theory of PEC water splitting is well established, the characterization of photoelectrodes under operation and the identification of problematic materials or interfaces that limit the performance is of critical importance. Recently, the interface of the light-absorbing semiconductor material with the HER or OER co-catalyst has come under intense scrutiny, as this interface has been identified as a bottleneck in many systems. The fact that this interface, for example, is problematic in some systems and not in others indicates that each new system (light-absorber + co-catalyst) must be thoroughly characterized to identify problem areas. This is increasingly important as there are many new materials being studied every year. In the following sections, we highlight the utility of several different advanced in situ characterization methods for studying thin-film materials.

5.4.1 
            In situ ambient pressure X-ray spectroscopy. 
XPS is a useful tool to probe the elemental composition, oxidation states, and electronic structures of the elements within a material by analyzing the interaction between the X-ray source and the constituent elements. To minimize the scattering of electrons by gas molecules, XPS generally requires high-vacuum (∼10−8 millibar) or ultrahigh-vacuum (<10−9 millibar) conditions, which makes it inapplicable the water splitting process under realistic conditions. However, the development of ambient-pressure XPS (APXPS) allows us to directly investigate the energetics at SCLJ under the electrochemical potential control in association with an operating PEC cell. As shown in a schematic illustration of the operando APXPS setup (Fig. 33a),201 we can measure the kinetic energy of photoelectrons that are emitted from semiconductors in contact with ultrathin (∼13 nm) meniscus electrolyte films. The electrolyte was under an applied potential (U) and all binding energies were measured with respect to the shared Fermi energy of the analyzer and working electrode, as both shared a common ground (Fig. 33b). With this experimental technique, Lichterman et al. observed a clear shift in the binding energy of the O 1s and Ti 2p electrons in ALD-TiO2-deposited p-Si under different applied potentials, as shown in Fig. 33c.202 By carefully analyzing these shifts, the authors were able to quantify the semiconductor accumulation, depletion, and Fermi level pinning by defect states, which agreed well with the theoretically expected behavior at the SCLJ, as shown in Fig. 33d. Not only APXPS, but also other X-ray based spectroscopies, such as X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), K-edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (XAFS), X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES), and X-ray reflectivity have been performed under operando conditions to understand the carrier transfer as well as the intermediate chemical states during (photo)electrochemical reactions. More detailed information on in situ X-ray spectroscopy can be found in the recent review paper by Cen et al.203
 Fig. 33  
In situ ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (APXPS) for PEC water splitting. Schematic illustrations of the (a) operando APXPS setup (Reprinted with permission from ref. 201, Copyright (2016), Elsevier) and (b) the principal arrangement of p+-Si/TiO2/H2O(liq.)/H2O(gas) to the analyzer front cone, and the energy band relations of the system under applied potential U. (c) APXPS data and fitted peaks for the O 1s and Ti 2p peaks at potential between +0.4 V and −0.14 V vs. Ag/AgCl for a bare p+-Si/TiO2 electrode. (d) Schematic energy diagram of the TiO2/liquid junction, showing band edge shift, band bending, and the Fermi level pinning. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202, Copyright (2015), Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.4.2 
            In situ infrared spectroscopy. 
Although X-ray spectroscopy can probe the chemical states and electronic structure of materials, owing to its relatively high energy, infrared (IR) spectroscopy allows us to gain information on the vibration of molecules, because molecules absorb specific frequencies near the IR regions. The reaction mechanism of catalytic reactions, as well as the presence of the reaction intermediates, have been understood by IR spectroscopy in the field of heterogeneous catalysis. Although high-vacuum conditions are unnecessary for IR spectroscopy, conducting IR spectroscopic analysis under practical water splitting conditions is considered a challenging task owing to strong IR absorption by water molecules. Recently, Zandi and Hamann successfully demonstrated the presence of intermediates on an Fe2O3 photoanode surface during PEC water oxidation using in situ attenuated total reflectance (ATR)-IR spectroscopy.204 Schematic pictures of the custom-made ATR-IR cell are shown in Fig. 34a and b. Fig. 34c and d show IR absorption spectra obtained during a water oxidation reaction on an Fe2O3 photoanode with/without light illumination. A prominent peak at 898 cm−1 was observed at the positively applied potentials with respect to the onset of the water-oxidation current (1.7 VRHE and 1.25 VRHE in the dark and under illumination, respectively). They assigned this peak to the high-valent iron–oxo (FeIVO) intermediate species as the product of the first hole-transfer reaction on the hematite surface. This provided the first experimental evidence of an H2O-oxidation intermediate on a semiconductor under PEC operation, which was consistent with previous theoretical studies on the nature of the surface properties of hematite.
 Fig. 34  
In situ infrared spectroscopy for PEC water splitting. (a) Schematic and (b) photographic images of the setup used for operando infrared measurement for hematite working electrode. (c) Infrared spectra of hematite scanned at constant applied potential in the dark. (d) Infrared spectra of hematite scanned at constant applied potential under illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204, Copyright (2016), Springer Nature. 


5.4.3 Dual working electrode. 
Light-absorbing semiconductors typically require the addition of electrocatalysts on their surfaces to reduce the kinetic overpotential for water splitting reactions. To elucidate the origin of the improvement in such systems, the effect of the surface catalyst on the generated photovoltage must be understood. Toward this end, the dual working electrode (DWE) technique has emerged as a powerful method for characterizing light-absorbing semiconductor materials with surface co-catalysts. Recently, Lin and Boettcher used this technique to characterize two different types of junctions that are generated when adding a surface catalyst.205 The first, so-called “adaptive” junction, occurs when the surface catalyst is redox-active and ion-permeable (e.g., Ni(OH)2), where the effective Schottky barrier height changes as the oxidation state of the catalyst changes. The second kind of junction maintains a constant barrier height, and occurs when the surface catalyst is dense and ion-impermeable (e.g., IrOx). The second working electrode was formed by evaporating a thin, porous gold layer on top of the surface catalyst of a TiO2 photoanode. The potential of the surface catalyst could be then measured as a function of the potential applied to the TiO2 photoanode. The DWE technique has also been used to identify the origin of performance differences among n-Si photoanodes coated with different thicknesses of Ni metal, where the beneficial effects of a partial surface oxidation of Si to SiOx were identified, owing to localized high barrier regions that enable higher photovoltage.206 For certain emerging materials such as Fe2O3 and BiVO4, there is typically the question as to whether the surface catalyst actually increases the kinetics of the charge transfer reaction, or simply acts as a storage medium for minority charge carriers, giving lower recombination.207 The DWE technique can aid in distinguishing these two phenomena. For instance, Qiu et al. demonstrated that a Ni0.8Fe0.2Ox catalyst on iron oxide photoanodes acts as both a catalyst and a hole-collecting contact for oxygen evolution.208 As discussed in the stability section, many high-performance semiconductors are coated with a TiO2 protective layer to prevent photocorrosion. Cui et al. showed that the DWE technique can be used to measure the photovoltage of TiO2-protected buried junctions with a surface contact for the second working electrode that is remote from the active area, thereby removing any confounding effects of an additional metal layer on the surface.209 Thus, the PV output of the water splitting electrode could be deconvoluted from the electrocatalytic performance, enabling the identification of problems with either the electrocatalyst or the buried junction. In this way, the authors were able to find an intrinsic instability in the promising Cu2O/Ga2O3 junction, as the photovoltage decayed with time, even in dry PV measurements. Finally, important insights have been obtained by studying DWE in conjunction with transient techniques.184


5.4.4 
            In situ scanning probe techniques. 
Scanning-probe techniques, such as scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM), scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM), and electrochemical atomic force microscopy (EC-AFM), have been developed as fascinating tools for understanding PEC water splitting reactions. In situ scanning-probe techniques are generally defined as techniques utilizing a probe scanning the surface of a sample, where the interactions between the probe and the surface of the sample are recorded under operando conditions as a function of the probe position. These techniques can provide valuable spatially resolved information on the electrochemical reactions on the surface of the semiconductor in a PEC system. In SECM measurements, the tip of an ultramicroelectrode (UME) is positioned close to the surface of the working electrode, and its potential is held more positive than the RHE potential, such that H2 evolved from the working electrode presents oxidation at the tip of the UME (Fig. 35a). Esposito et al. verified that H2 evolution at Si-based metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) photocathodes could be enhanced by inversion channel charge collection and H spillover.210 The SPCM and SECM images in Fig. 35b and c illustrate that photocurrent at positive potentials is mainly generated for optical excitation near the edges of collectors. On the contrary, at more negative potentials of +0.12 VRHE (Fig. 35d and e) and −0.1 VRHE (Fig. 35f and g), significant photocurrent and UME tip current, representing the H2 evolution, were observed for nearly all positions. Most importantly, SECM maps suggest that H2 is evolved not only from the collector surface, but also from the surrounding SiO2. To account for this observation, they proposed the spillover-assisted evolution of H2 in conjunction with efficient lateral transport of minority carriers through the inversion layer, as depicted in Fig. 35h. In addition to the theoretical prediction, the hydrogen spillover phenomenon in an electrochemical H2 evolution system was experimentally observed for the first time.
 Fig. 35  
In situ scanning probe techniques for PEC water splitting. (a) Schematic side-view of scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM) and scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) setups. (b, d and f) SPCM EQE image and (c, e and g) SECM ultramicroelectrode tip current images recorded with the photocathode held at three different applied potentials. (h) Schematic side-view of Pt/Ti/SiO2/p-Si(100) photocathode, illustrating the proposed scheme for lateral transport of photogenerated electrons through an inversion channel and hydrogen spillover-assisted H2 evolution. H* represents the spill-over species. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210, Copyright (2013), Springer Nature. (i) Schematic and (j and k) photograph of potential-sensing electrochemical AFM setup with cantilever. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215, Copyright (2017), Springer Nature. 
Although SPCM and SECM analyses have also been used in various semiconductor systems, such as TiO2,211 SrTiO3,212 WSe2,213 and BiVO4,214 the techniques require information of at least the topography or potential, which makes them difficult to apply to systems for which both the surface topography and potential are unknown. In this respect, a contact-based potential-sensing (PS)-EC-AFM technique to directly measure the surface electrochemical potential in heterogeneous electrochemical systems under operando conditions was recently developed by the Boettcher group.215 They employed a conductive nanotip on top of an electrically insulated AFM cantilever, as shown in Fig. 35i. Images of the custom EC-AFM cell and bottom illumination-allowing stage, reference electrode, and Pt counter electrode are shown in Fig. 35j and k. This system allowed investigating the electrical conductivity of CoPi, which was unable to be studied by macroscopic potential-sensing techniques. It was confirmed that for both planar and mesostructured hematite samples, CoPi is oxidized at a rate commensurate with the junction photocurrent under high potential to drive water oxidation, indicating that CoPi acts as a hole-collecting contact and OEC. It was also determined that the PS-EC-AFM technique could be applicable to various other electrochemical systems, such as for investigating the presence of a spatially inhomogeneous interfaces in Ni-protected Si, corrosion processes, and operation of batteries and fuel cells.

6. Conclusion and outlooks
Solar energy-driven technologies for hydrogen production from water splitting have been intensively investigated, as they promise to provide clean and cost-competitive alternatives to traditional fossil fuel-based hydrogen production. To accelerate the deployment of solar hydrogen, various system configurations for solar hydrogen production have been competitively developed, such as PEC water splitting cells, PC systems, and PV-electrolysis systems. In this review paper, we have emphasized the importance and novelty of PEC water splitting systems, which are generally classified as intermediate configurations in terms of efficiency and complexity, by scrutinizing recently developed strategies as well as advanced characterization methods. Owing to its intermediate nature, PEC water splitting is sometimes criticized by skeptics as inefficient (compared with PV-electrolysis) or costly (compared with PC). As we discussed in Section 1, the degree of integration of the PV and catalyst varies from the fully (wireless) and partially (wired catalyst) integrated device to non-integrated PV-electrolysis configurations. In general, non-integrated PV-electrolysis has been considered as the most practical configuration, owing to the highest STH efficiency and technological maturity of PV and electrolyzers. However, a recent report by Haussener highlights the importance of thermal management in integrated systems such as PEC.14 The authors demonstrated that the highest current density of 0.88 A cm−2 can be achieved while maintaining the STH above 15% in a concentrated integrated PEC (CIPEC) system. This is possible by careful thermal management that employs conduction and forced convection to cool the photoabsorber (preventing loss of photovoltage) and to heat (with excess heat from the photoabsorber) the catalytic site, which lowers the overpotential of the electrocatalytic reaction. The high current density from the CIPEC system, which is much higher than that of previously reported PV-electrolysis systems, provides the rationale for the integration of PV and catalyst components from the commercial perspective. Although the effect of thermal management is particularly pronounced in architectures involving concentrated irradiation, it is also beneficial at one-sun illumination. This thermal management strategy is one major advantage of integrated systems such as PEC over separated PV + electrolysis systems.
Another advantage associated with the PEC system is its scientific uniqueness, as it can offer a unique platform to reveal insights into semiconductor physics, catalysis, reaction mechanisms, and charge transport/transfer processes involved in the PEC reactions. Such an in-depth understanding can be gained by the interpretation of the advanced device characterizations, such as photocurrent, photovoltage, and other light-perturbation-induced variations. By contrast, the elucidation of the photophysical processes occurring in particulate PC systems is much more challenging. This valuable information contributes not only to realizing efficient solar fuel production through appropriate feedback, but also to exploring new materials and shifting the direction of research from water splitting toward more advanced scientific applications, such as value-added oxidations at the photoanode (vide infra). Thus, we believe the scientific findings obtained from PEC systems will allow the particulate photocatalyst system, which is relatively cheaper but less efficient, to be further developed and eventually enable the realization of efficient and economical solar fuel production (Fig. 36).
 Fig. 36  Schematic illustrating the importance of PEC research by highlighting the advantages for device characterization. 
Another possible research direction in the solar fuels field is to reduce the cost and device complexity in high-performing PEC cells. The highest STH of commercial multijunction monolithic PEC cells has reached 19%, which is much higher than the target STH for commercialization, but the technology is still far from commercialization owing to its high cost and complexity. Nevertheless, the development of high-performing PEC devices has been worthwhile, as they have demonstrated that the target efficiency can be realized by PEC devices. Thus, it is reasonable to suggest that practical solar hydrogen production from PEC is attainable by resolving the cost and scalability issues. By combining the strategies developed in high-performing PEC cells with efforts to explore abundant materials, such as light absorbers151 and co-catalysts,22 as well as efforts to achieve large-scale implementation,16 we believe that the realization of efficient and cost-effective solar fuel production could be feasible.
As mentioned above, the value of PEC system is not limited to hydrogen production through water splitting, and it facilitates the development of new applications based on electrochemical reactions driven by photo-excited charges. As summarized in the recent editorial by Song Jin,216 solar energy conversion via PEC devices can be exploited not only for water splitting and CO2 reduction, but also for producing value-added chemicals, such as oxidants, biomass-derived chemicals, and complex organic molecules, such as H2O2,217 H2S2O8,218 and 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid,219,220 as well as carrying out sophisticated reactions such as C–H activation on valuable organic substrates.221 Moreover, owing to the similarity among their principles, thoroughly investigated fundamental studies in PEC water splitting, such as SCLJ, charge transfer mechanisms, and the nature of surface states, can also promote the further development of regenerative cells, such as dye-sensitized solar cells and solar flow batteries (SFBs). SFBs were developed recently by integrating regenerative PEC cells and redox flow batteries, which are especially promising for large-scale grid-level energy storage owing to their intrinsic scalability and low cost.222 Thus, research in the PEC water splitting field has promoted photoelectrochemistry and solar hydrogen production, and will be a cornerstone for various advanced applications of solar energy conversion. As another research field, we are also witnessing that the applications of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials have been expanding to light-emitting diodes, photodetectors, lasers, memories, and transistors, from their original application field of PVs.223 Regardless of how many applications emerge and although nobody knows which will be the champion of hybrid perovskites that could become commercially viable, researchers must continue to study hybrid perovskite PVs, and their fundamental findings will provide valuable insight for emerging applications. Likewise, in the PEC field, we hope this review paper, surveying the strategies for enhancing performance as well as the advanced characterization methods in PEC water splitting research, will be a great help not only for realizing economically viable solar hydrogen production, but also for researchers in the emerging field of advanced PEC research.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) grant funded by the Government of Korea grant (Grant No. 2012R1A3A2026417), the Swiss National Science Foundation (AP Energy Grant # PYAPP2 160586), and the University of Zurich through the URPP LightChEC.
References
D. Abbott, Proc. IEEE, 2010, 98, 42–66 CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Battaglia, A. Cuevas and S. De Wolf, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1552–1576 RSC .
L. Li, Y. Zheng, S. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Shao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2310–2340 RSC .
G. L. Soloveichik, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11533–11558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Pfromm, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2017, 9, 034702 CrossRef .

          A. Körner, C. Tam, S. Bennett and J. Gagné, International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 2015.
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 RSC .
T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 387–399 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjällström, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2056–2070 RSC .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ardo, D. F. Rivas, M. A. Modestino, V. S. Greiving, F. F. Abdi, E. A. Llado, V. Artero, K. Ayers, C. Battaglia, J.-P. Becker, D. Bederak, A. Berger, F. Buda, E. Chinello, B. Dam, V. D. Palma, T. Edvinsson, K. Fujii, H. Gardeniers, H. Geerlings, S. M. H. Hashemi, S. Haussener, F. Houle, J. Huskens, B. D. James, K. Konrad, A. Kudo, P. P. Kunturu, D. Lohse, B. Mei, E. L. Miller, G. F. Moore, J. Muller, K. L. Orchard, T. E. Rosser, F. H. Saadi, J.-W. Schüttauf, B. Seger, S. W. Sheehan, W. A. Smith, J. Spurgeon, M. H. Tang, R. van de Krol, P. C. K. Vesborg and P. Westerik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2768–2783 RSC .
S. Tembhurne, F. Nandjou and S. Haussener, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 399 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J.-W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908–1971 RSC .
S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17050 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
Y. He, T. Hamann and D. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2182–2215 RSC .
K. Sivula and R. Van De Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bae, B. Seger, P. C. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1933–1954 RSC .

          D. Stolten, Hydrogen and fuel cells: fundamentals, technologies and applications, John Wiley & Sons,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 174 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Sivula and M. Graetzel, Photoelectrochemical water splitting: materials, processes and architectures, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2013 Search PubMed .
M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 CrossRef .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Lee, K. Takei, J. Zhang, R. Kapadia, M. Zheng, Y.-Z. Chen, J. Nah, T. S. Matthews, Y.-L. Chueh, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10760–10764 CrossRef CAS .
Gunawan, W. Septina, S. Ikeda, T. Harada, T. Minegishi, K. Domen and M. Matsumura, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8941–8943 RSC .
H. Kumagai, T. Minegishi, N. Sato, T. Yamada, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8300–8307 RSC .
W.-H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, M. M. May, J. Ohlmann, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth, T. Hannappel, H. A. Atwater and H.-J. Lewerenz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. de Jongh, D. Vanmaekelbergh and J. J. Kelly, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 486–489 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, J. H. Kim, M. T. Mayer, M.-K. Son, A. Ummadisingu, J. S. Lee, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 412 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiang, Gunawan, T. Harada, Y. Kuang, T. Minegishi, K. Domen and S. Ikeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13691–13697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Huang, K. Wang, L. Yu, T. H. Nguyen, S. Ikeda and F. Jiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1875–1881 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Tay, H. Kaneko, S. Y. Chiam, S. Lie, Q. Zheng, B. Wu, S. S. Hadke, Z. Su, P. S. Bassi, D. Bishop, T. C. Sum, T. Minegishi, J. Barber, K. Domen and L. H. Wong, Joule, 2018, 2, 537–548 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, A. P. Pieterick, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 223–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, M. S. Prévot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7596 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Laursen, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, B. Seger, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg and I. Chorkendorff, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20000–20004 RSC .
J. Gu, J. A. Aguiar, S. Ferrere, K. X. Steirer, Y. Yan, C. Xiao, J. L. Young, M. Al-Jassim, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16192 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Ahn, M.-J. Kwak, J.-S. Lee, K.-Y. Yoon and J.-H. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19999–20003 RSC .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kuang, Q. Jia, G. Ma, T. Hisatomi, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, T. Yamada, A. Kudo and K. Domen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16191 CrossRef .
A. Loiudice, J. Ma, W. S. Drisdell, T. M. Mattox, J. K. Cooper, T. Thao, C. Giannini, J. Yano, L.-W. Wang, I. D. Sharp and R. Buonsanti, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6733–6740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, James E. Thorne, Cheng H. Wu, P. Ma, C. Du, Q. Dong, J. Guo and D. Wang, Chem, 2016, 1, 640–655 CAS .
H. Hajibabaei, D. J. Little, A. Pandey, D. Wang, Z. Mi and T. W. Hamann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15457–15466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Chun, A. Ishikawa, H. Fujisawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, M. Kawai, Y. Matsumoto and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1798–1803 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nurlaela, Y. Sasaki, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15265–15273 RSC .
J. Kim, W. Yang, Y. Oh, H. Lee, S. Lee, H. Shin, J. Kim and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2180–2187 RSC .
W. Yang, S. Lee, H.-C. Kwon, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park, Y. Oh, H. Choi and J. Moon, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11088–11097 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Li, Q. Chen, Z. Zhen, X. Jiang, M. Zhong, F. Zhang and H. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12753–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Prabhakar, W. Septina, S. Siol, T. Moehl, R. Wick-Joliat and S. D. Tilley, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23139–23145 RSC .
C. G. Read, Y. Park and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Prévot, Y. Li, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3018–3026 RSC .
M. S. Prévot, X. A. Jeanbourquin, W. S. Bourée, F. Abdi, D. Friedrich, R. van de Krol, N. Guijarro, F. Le Formal and K. Sivula, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4952–4962 CrossRef .
Y. J. Jang and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1835–1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, F. L. Formal, F. Boudoire, L. Yao, K. Sivula and N. Guijarro, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1669–1677 RSC .
S. P. Berglund, F. F. Abdi, P. Bogdanoff, A. Chemseddine, D. Friedrich and R. van de Krol, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4231–4242 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, W. Septina, A. Chemseddine, F. F. Abdi, D. Friedrich, P. Bogdanoff, R. van de Krol, S. D. Tilley and S. P. Berglund, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15094–15103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ida, K. Yamada, T. Matsunaga, H. Hagiwara, Y. Matsumoto and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17343–17345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sekizawa, T. Nonaka, T. Arai and T. Morikawa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10969–10973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hong, W. Lin, W. Meng and Y. Yan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4828–4834 RSC .
Z. Xiao, W. Meng, J. V. Li and Y. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6406–6419 RSC .
J. Ge, Y. Yu and Y. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 583–588 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, P. J. Roland, P. Koirala, W. Meng, J. L. Young, R. Petersen, T. G. Deutsch, G. Teeter, R. J. Ellingson, R. W. Collins and Y. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 916–920 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Yu, L. Pan, M.-K. Son, M. T. Mayer, W.-D. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 760–766 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Hall, R. W. Birkmire, J. E. Phillips and J. D. Meakin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1981, 38, 925–926 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, F. Wang, S. Zhu, Y. Xu, Q. Liang and Z. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 530, 403–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Cho, C. H. Lee, Y. Feng, M. Logar, P. M. Rao, L. Cai, D. R. Kim, R. Sinclair and X. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1723 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, Z. Chen, H. Jin, C. Cao, J. Li and Z. Mi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17820–17827 RSC .
W.-J. Yin, H. Tang, S.-H. Wei, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Turner and Y. Yan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 045106 CrossRef .
Y. Gai, J. Li, S.-S. Li, J.-B. Xia and S.-H. Wei, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 036402 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, Z. Liu, F. Lin, G. Zhou, J. Wu, W. Duan, B.-L. Gu and S. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 193103 CrossRef .
C. Yang, Z. Wang, T. Lin, H. Yin, X. Lü, D. Wan, T. Xu, C. Zheng, J. Lin and F. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17831–17838 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Tamirat, J. Rick, A. A. Dubale, W.-N. Su and B.-J. Hwang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 243–267 RSC .
J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1806938 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Jang, D. Friedrich, S. Müller, M. Lamers, H. Hempel, S. Lardhi, Z. Cao, M. Harb, L. Cavallo, R. Heller, R. Eichberger, R. van de Krol and F. Abdi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701536 CrossRef .
K. P. S. Parmar, H. J. Kang, A. Bist, P. Dua, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1926–1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, S.-H. Wei, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Turner and Y. Yan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 155102 CrossRef .
A. J. Rettie, H. C. Lee, L. G. Marshall, J.-F. Lin, C. Capan, J. Lindemuth, J. S. McCloy, J. Zhou, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11389–11396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Baek, T. Gill, H. Abroshan, S. Park, X. Shi, J. K. Norskov, H. S. Jung, S. Siahrostami and X. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 720–728 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, Y. Jo, J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. J. Kang, Y. H. Lee, D. S. Kim, Y. Jun and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11820–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim, Y. Ping, G. A. Galli and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Du, Q. Peng, J. Yang, Y. Wen, B. Shan and R. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 29140–29149 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kalanur, I.-H. Yoo, K. Eom and H. Seo, J. Catal., 2018, 357, 127–137 CrossRef .
D. Kang, J. C. Hill, Y. Park and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4331–4340 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6167–6174 RSC .
Y. Zhou, L. Wang, S. Chen, S. Qin, X. Liu, J. Chen, D.-J. Xue, M. Luo, Y. Cao, Y. Cheng, E. H. Sargent and J. Tang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 409 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, D.-B. Li, K. Li, C. Chen, H.-X. Deng, L. Gao, Y. Zhao, F. Jiang, L. Li, F. Huang, Y. He, H. Song, G. Niu and J. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17046 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, J. Ahn, Y. Oh, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park, H. C. Kwon, J. Kim, W. Jo and J. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702888 CrossRef .
J. Park, W. Yang, Y. Oh, J. Tan, H. Lee, R. Boppella and J. Moon, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 517–526 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Y. Liu, W. Shi, C. Shao, S. Wang, C. Ding, T. Liu, F. Fan, J. Shi and C. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 825–831 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, M. J. Seo, T. H. Lee, Y.-R. Jo, J. Lee, T. L. Kim, S.-Y. Kim, S.-M. Kim, S. Y. Jeong, H. An, S. Kim, B. Y. Lee, D. Lee, H. W. Jang, B.-J. Kim and S. Lee, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5952–5962 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang and M. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 834–843 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Warren, K. Voïtchovsky, H. Dotan, C. M. Leroy, M. Cornuz, F. Stellacci, C. Hébert, A. Rothschild and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, L. Steier, M.-K. Son, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dias, M. Schreier, S. D. Tilley, J. Luo, J. Azevedo, L. Andrade, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, A. Mendes and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501537 CrossRef .
W. Niu, T. Moehl, W. Cui, R. Wick-Joliat, L. Zhu and S. D. Tilley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702323 CrossRef .
Y. Li, T. Takata, D. Cha, K. Takanabe, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 125–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, I. Y. Choi, K. Zhang, J. Kwon, D. Y. Kim, J. K. Lee, S. H. Oh, J. K. Kim and J. H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oh, W. Yang, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park and J. Moon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1900194 CrossRef .
J. Oh, T. G. Deutsch, H.-C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1690–1694 RSC .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, H. Jeong, S. J. Oh, M. Ma, K. Zhang, J. Kwon, I. T. Choi, I. Y. Choi, H. K. Kim, J. K. Kim and J. H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kobayashi, N. Sato, M. Orita, Y. Kuang, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3003–3009 RSC .
H. Lee, W. Yang, J. Tan, Y. Oh, J. Park and J. Moon, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 995–1003 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Turner, J. Chem. Educ., 1983, 60, 327 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Formal, N. Tetreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 737–743 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, F. Le Formal, M. Cornuz, J. Brillet, N. Tétreault, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2512–2515 RSC .
C. Du, X. Yang, M. T. Mayer, H. Hoyt, J. Xie, G. McMahon, G. Bischoping and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12692–12695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zandi and T. W. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1522–1526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, X. Zong, Z. Wang and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23544–23548 RSC .
Y. S. Lee, D. Chua, R. E. Brandt, S. C. Siah, J. V. Li, J. P. Mailoa, S. W. Lee, R. G. Gordon and T. Buonassisi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4704–4710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Steier and S. Holliday, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21809–21826 RSC .
L. Steier, S. Bellani, H. C. Rojas, L. Pan, M. Laitinen, T. Sajavaara, F. Di Fonzo, M. Grätzel, M. R. Antognazza and M. T. Mayer, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1915–1920 RSC .
H. C. Rojas, S. Bellani, F. Fumagalli, G. Tullii, S. Leonardi, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. Grätzel, G. Lanzani, F. Di Fonzo and M. R. Antognazza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3710–3723 RSC .
T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, R. Brisse, S. Campidelli, R. Cornut and B. Jousselme, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4831–4839 RSC .
R. Wick-Joliat, T. Musso, R. R. Prabhakar, J. Loeckinger, S. Siol, W. Cui, L. Sévery, T. Moehl, J. Suh, J. Hutter, M. Lannuzzi and S. D. Tilley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1901–1909 RSC .
B. A. MacLeod, K. X. Steirer, J. L. Young, U. Koldemir, A. Sellinger, J. A. Turner, T. G. Deutsch and D. C. Olson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11346–11350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Smith, I. D. Sharp, N. C. Strandwitz and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2851–2862 RSC .
J. Luo, Z. Li, S. Nishiwaki, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, P. Cendula, Y. H. Lee, K. Fu, A. Cao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. E. Romanyuk, S. Buecheler, S. D. Tilley, L. H. Wong, A. N. Tiwari and M. Gratzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501520 CrossRef .
K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, Y.-S. Shim, D. H. Kim, T. Kim, W. Sohn, J.-M. Jeon, C.-H. Lee, K. T. Nam, S. Han, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2240–2248 RSC .
K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, J. Lee, K. Hong, W. Sohn, D. M. Andoshe, K. S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Han, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15534–15542 RSC .
K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, K. Hong, D. M. Andoshe, J. M. Suh, C. Kim, K. S. Choi, J. H. Oh, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, MRS Commun., 2017, 7, 272–279 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Mayer, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 2, 104–110 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 59–75 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen and L.-W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Prévot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1359–1367 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Oh, W. Yang, J. Kim, S. Jeong and J. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14078–14087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, M. Griep, Y. Choi and D. Chu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3331–3334 RSC .
F. Wang, A. Chemseddine, F. F. Abdi, R. van de Krol and S. P. Berglund, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12838–12847 RSC .
A. Song, P. Plate, A. Chemseddine, F. Wang, F. Abdi, M. Wollgarten, R. van de Krol and S. Berglund, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9183–9194 RSC .
R. R. Prabhakar, W. Septina, S. Siol, T. Moehl, R. Wick-Joliat and S. D. Tilley, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23139–23145 RSC .
J. Kim, W. Yang, Y. Oh, H. Lee, S. Lee, H. Shin, J. Kim and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2180–2187 RSC .
S. D. Tilley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802877 CrossRef .
S. Hu, N. S. Lewis, J. W. Ager, J. Yang, J. R. McKone and N. C. Strandwitz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24201–24228 CrossRef CAS .
T. Moehl, J. Suh, L. Sévery, R. Wick-Joliat and S. D. Tilley, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43614–43622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hannula, H. Ali-Löytty, K. Lahtonen, E. Sarlin, J. Saari and M. Valden, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1199–1208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, Y. Oh, J. Kim, M. J. Jeong, J. H. Park and J. Moon, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, T. Minegishi, L. Zhang, M. Zhong, M. Nakabayashi, G. Ma, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, S. Ikeda, N. Shibata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11808–11812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baek, M. Zafar, S. Kim, D. H. Kim, C. W. Jeon, J. Lee and K. Yong, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3679–3688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang and J. Moon, ChemSusChem, 2018, 12, 1889–1899 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, D. Shin, E. Ngaboyamahina, Q. Han, C. B. Parker, D. B. Mitzi and J. T. Glass, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 177–183 CrossRef .
K. Wang, D. Huang, L. Yu, K. Feng, L. Li, T. Harada, S. Ikeda and F. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3090–3097 CrossRef CAS .
J. Azevedo, S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, M. Stefik, C. Sousa, J. P. Araújo, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and M. T. Mayer, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Moreno-Hernandez, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801155 CrossRef .
H. Kim, H. Bae, S. W. Bang, S. Kim, S. H. Lee, S.-W. Ryu and J.-S. Ha, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, A206–A215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, D. Huang, L. Yu, H. Gu, S. Ikeda and F. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 536, 9–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yokoyama, T. Minegishi, K. Jimbo, T. Hisatomi, G. Ma, M. Katayama, J. Kubota, H. Katagiri and K. Domen, Appl. Phys. Express, 2010, 3, 101202 CrossRef .
F. Jiang, T. Harada, Y. Kuang, T. Minegishi, K. Domen and S. Ikeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13691–13697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, P. Zhang, X. Song and L. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18560–18565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, J. A. Aguiar, M. Fairchild, W. Vakki, S. Younan, Y. Zhou, L. Zhuo and J. Gu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 1802085 CrossRef .
O. L. Hendricks, R. Tang-Kong, A. S. Babadi, P. C. McIntyre and C. E. Chidsey, Chem. Mater., 2018, 31, 90–100 CrossRef .
L. Rovelli, S. D. Tilley and K. Sivula, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8018–8024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, J. Azevedo, M. Stefik and M. Graetzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
J. Azevedo, L. Steier, P. Dias, M. Stefik, C. Sousa, J. Araujo, A. Mendes, M. Graetzel and S. Tilley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4044–4052 RSC .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Koo, S. Byun, S. W. Nam, S. Y. Moon, S. Kim, J. Y. Park, B. T. Ahn and B. Shin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705136 CrossRef .
J. Tan, W. Yang, Y. Oh, H. Lee, J. Park, R. Boppella, J. Kim and J. Moon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900179 CrossRef .
W. Vijselaar, R. M. Tiggelaar, H. Gardeniers and J. Huskens, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1086–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guo, A. Batool, G. Xie, R. Boddula, L. Tian, S. U. Jan and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1516–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Lee and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 53 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bertoluzzi and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2517–2522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bertoluzzi, P. Lopez-Varo, J. A. Jiménez Tejada and J. Bisquert, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2873–2879 RSC .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, T. Hamann and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4294–4302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. W. Hamann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16693–16700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Le Formal, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Cornuz, S. D. Tilley, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2564–2574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Steier, I. Herraiz-Cardona, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7681–7688 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Riha, B. M. Klahr, E. C. Tyo, S. Seifert, S. Vajda, M. J. Pellin, T. W. Hamann and A. B. F. Martinson, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2396–2405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Moehl, W. Cui, R. Wick-Joliat and S. D. Tilley, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2067–2075 RSC .
S. Wood, D. O'Connor, C. W. Jones, J. D. Claverley, J. C. Blakesley, C. Giusca and F. A. Castro, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mokhtarimehr and S. A. Tatarkova, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2017, 34, 1705–1712 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 753–769 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Formal, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26707–26720 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. L. Laskowski, J. Qiu, M. R. Nellist, S. Z. Oener, A. M. Gordon and S. W. Boettcher, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1995–2005 RSC .
M. Dumortier, T. Bosserez, J. Rongé, J. A. Martens and S. Haussener, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3705–3714 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, M. Barroso, K. Sivula, J. Ye, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug, J. Tang and J. R. Durrant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6304–6312 RSC .
G. X. Pei, J. H. Wijten and B. M. Weckhuysen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 9806–9811 RSC .
M. Barroso, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2724–2734 RSC .
Y. Yang, M. Forster, Y. Ling, G. Wang, T. Zhai, Y. Tong, A. J. Cowan and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3403–3407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, F. Le Formal, A. Kafizas, S. R. Pendlebury and J. R. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20649–20657 RSC .
A. Paracchino, J. C. Brauer, J.-E. Moser, E. Thimsen and M. Graetzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7341–7350 CrossRef CAS .
K. Butler, B. Dringoli, L. Zhou, P. Rao, A. Walsh and L. Titova, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18516–18523 RSC .
M. Ziwritsch, S. n. Müller, H. Hempel, T. Unold, F. F. Abdi, R. van de Krol, D. Friedrich and R. Eichberger, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 888–894 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2321–2337 RSC .
S. Hilliard, G. Baldinozzi, D. Friedrich, S. Kressman, H. Strub, V. Artero and C. Laberty-Robert, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 145–153 RSC .
A. Ramírez, D. Friedrich, M. Kunst and S. Fiechter, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 568, 157–160 CrossRef .
A. A. Baloch, F. H. Alharbi, G. Grancini, M. I. Hossain, M. K. Nazeeruddin and N. Tabet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 26805–26815 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schlichthörl, S. Huang, J. Sprague and A. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 8141–8155 CrossRef .
J. E. Thorne, J.-W. Jang, E. Y. Liu and D. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3347–3354 RSC .
J. E. Thorne, Y. Zhao, D. He, S. Fan, S. Vanka, Z. Mi and D. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 29653–29659 RSC .
H.-J. Lewerenz, M. F. Lichterman, M. H. Richter, E. J. Crumlin, S. Hu, S. Axnanda, M. Favaro, W. Drisdell, Z. Hussain, B. S. Brunschwig, Z. Liu, A. Nilsson, A. T. Bell, N. S. Lewis and D. Friebel, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 711–719 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Lichterman, S. Hu, M. H. Richter, E. J. Crumlin, S. Axnanda, M. Favaro, W. Drisdell, Z. Hussain, T. Mayer, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis, Z. Liu and H.-J. Lewerenz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2409–2416 RSC .
J. Cen, Q. Wu, M. Liu and A. Orlov, Green Energy Environ., 2017, 2, 100–111 CrossRef .
O. Zandi and T. W. Hamann, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Laskowski, M. R. Nellist, R. Venkatkarthick and S. W. Boettcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 570–579 RSC .
B. Moss, F. S. Hegner, S. Corby, S. Selim, L. Francàs, N. R. López, S. Giménez, J.-R. N. Galán-Mascarós and J. R. Durrant, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 337–342 CrossRef .
J. Qiu, H. Hajibabaei, M. R. Nellist, F. A. Laskowski, T. W. Hamann and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1015–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cui, W. Niu, R. Wick-Joliat, T. Moehl and S. D. Tilley, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6062–6067 RSC .
D. V. Esposito, I. Levin, T. P. Moffat and A. A. Talin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zigah, J. Rodríguez-López and A. J. Bard, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12764–12772 RSC .
B. H. Simpson and J. N. Rodríguez-López, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14865–14868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Velazquez, J. John, D. V. Esposito, A. Pieterick, R. Pala, G. Sun, X. Zhou, Z. Huang, S. Ardo, M. P. Soriaga, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 164–175 RSC .
B. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Xiao and Y. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1606–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Nellist, F. A. Laskowski, J. Qiu, H. Hajibabaei, K. Sivula, T. W. Hamann and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 46 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2610–2612 CrossRef .
K. Mase, M. Yoneda, Y. Yamada and S. Fukuzumi, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 913–919 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1093–1101 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Cha and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Liu, L. Dang, Z. Xu, H.-Q. Yu, S. Jin and G. W. Huber, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5533–5541 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Liardet, J. Luo, D. Ren, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, H. C. Fu, L. Li, M. Cabán-Acevedo, J. H. He and S. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13104–13108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, Y. Jiang, Y. Jiang, Y. Guo, Y. Liu and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 141, 1406–1414 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cs00997jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Wooseok Yang
	Wooseok Yang received his BS in 2012 from the Department of Ceramic Engineering and his PhD in 2018 from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea. His PhD thesis is devoted to solution-processed p-type semiconductors for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. Currently, he is working in Prof. Jooho Moon's group as a postdoctoral researcher. He has continued to research the fabrication of PEC devices based on earth-abundant constituents and scalable solution-processing to realize efficient solar energy conversion.

Rajiv Ramanujam Prabhakar
	Rajiv Ramanujam Prabhakar is currently a PhD student at the University of Zurich in the group of Prof. David Tilley. He received his BSc in Physics from the National University of Singapore and MEng in Materials Science and Engineering from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His current research interests are on developing earth-abundant chalcogenide materials for solar fuel generation.

Jeiwan Tan
	Jeiwan Tan is currently a PhD candidate at the Materials Science and Engineering, Yonsei University in the group of Prof. Jooho Moon. He received his BS degree from Yonsei University in 2014. His current research interests are focused on fabricating solution-processed semiconductors and their interface engineering for photoelectrochemical water splitting.

S. David Tilley
	S. David Tilley attained a Bachelor's in Chemistry from the University of Georgia, USA in 2002, and obtained a PhD in Chemistry from the University of California, Berkeley in 2007. He received training in photoelectrochemistry at the EPFL, Switzerland, from Prof. Michael Graetzel, and was the Group Leader of the hydrogen subgroup in the Graetzel Laboratory from 2012 to 2014. Since 2015, he has been a tenure-track Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Zurich, Switzerland.

Jooho Moon
	Jooho Moon is a professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea. He holds an MS and a PhD in materials science and engineering from the University of Florida. He did his postdoctoral research in the Materials Processing Center at MIT from 1996 to 1998. He was awarded a Japan Society of the Promotion of Science (JSPS) fellowship in 1998. He joined the faculty at Yonsei University in 2000. His research interests include ink-jet printing of self-assembling colloids and functional nanoparticles, printed electronics and displays, solid-oxide fuel cells, perovskite solar cells, and water splitting. He has co-authored more than 230 publications in peer-reviewed journals and he has also served as an associate editor of ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces since 2015.

 	Fig. 1  Various configurations of semiconductor film-based water splitting, illustrating a gradual transition in six steps from (a) the simplest monolithic PEC device to (g) the most complicated PV-cell through the grid. Republished with permission from ref. 11 from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2014.	 
Oxygen evolution reaction (OER): H2O → 1/2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− + 1.23 V/NHE	(1)
Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER): 2H+ + 2e− → H2 0 V/NHE	(2)
Overall water splitting: H2O → H2 + 1/2O2 −1.23 V	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Single-particle photocatalyst that carries out overall water splitting. (b) Dual-particle photocatalytic system in which an oxygen-evolving photocatalyst particle is coupled to a hydrogen-evolving photocatalyst through a redox mediator dissolved in the electrolyte solution. CBM: conduction band minimum; VBM: valence band maximum; Eg: bandgap energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18 from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018.	 
H2 + 1/2O2 → H2O (liquid) + energy	(4)
H2 + 1/2O2 → H2O (liquid) + 237.2 kJ mol−1 (electricity) + 48.6 kJ mol−1 (heat)	(5)
H2O (liquid) + 237.2 kJ mol−1 (electricity) + 48.6 kJ mol−1 (heat) → H2 + 1/2O2	(6)

 	Fig. 3  Conduction band and valence band positions for important semiconductors discussed in this review on the RHE scale.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Semiconductor photoanode band energetics. (b) Tandem cell with photoanode and photocathode with complimentary absorption to maximize efficiency. Eg: bandgap, Δμex: quasi Fermi level splitting, hν: photon energy, e−: electron, h+: hole. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26 from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2013.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photocurrent density vs. potential curves of a photocathode and photoanode, showing enhancement in photovoltage and photocurrent. (b) Photocurrent density vs. potential curves of a photocathode and photoanode, showing improvement in fill factor.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of realized limiting STH efficiencies and historic development of dual bandgap systems. The analysis refers to a theoretical benchmarking value ηtheo and considers the top and bottom cell bandgaps for the respective photolysis cells; also shown are the institutions of the contributing research teams. Abbreviations: NREL – National Renewable Energy Laboratory, USA; ISE – Institute for Solar Energy, Germany; JCAP – Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, Caltech, USA; TU-I – Ilmenau University of Technology, Germany; HZB – Helmholtz Zentrum Berlin, Germany. The bar chart on the right indicates the achieved efficiency with respect to the respective theoretical limit (ηtheo*). Reprinted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Progress with earth-abundant materials for PEC (recent developments).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Theoretical maximum photocurrent density depending on the bandgap of semiconductors calculated by assuming 100% IPCE and AM 1.5G solar photon flux. (b) Possible photocurrent loss mechanisms in a real photoelectrode.	 

 	Fig. 9  Doping strategies in TiO2 photoanodes for enhancing photocurrent density. (a) Two schematic synthetic routes and (b) photographs of core–shell black rutile TiO2. (c) Absorbance spectra of R-TiO2, R-TiO2-S, and R′-TiO2-S with different sulfidation times. (d) Chopped J–V curves of R′-TiO2, R-TiO2-S, TiO2-S, and R-TiO2 photoanodes under simulated solar light illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83, Copyright (2013), American Chemical Society. (e) J–V curves of Fe-, Mn-, and Co-doped TiO2 photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79, Copyright (2012), Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) J–V curves of W- and C-doped TiO2 photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78, Copyright (2010), Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  Doping strategies in other materials for enhancing photocurrent density. (a) J–V curves and (b) Mott–Schottky plot of H- and Mo-doped BiVO4 photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91, Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society. (c) J–V curves and (d) Mott–Schottky plot of Co- and Sn-doped Fe2O3 photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93, Copyright (2017), Elsevier. Chopped J–V curves of (e) Ag-doped CGSe (Reprinted with permission from ref. 96, Copyright (2014), Royal Society of Chemistry) and (f) Cd-doped CZTS photocathodes (Reprinted with permission from ref. 40, Copyright (2018), Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 11  Strategies for enhancing photocurrent density by controlling the crystallographic orientation. (a) Chopped J–V curves of three different Sb2Se3 nanostructure photocathodes. (b and e) SEM, (c and f) topography, and (d and g) current map images of (b–d) TGA 5 Sb2Se3 and (e–g) TGA 40 Sb2Se3 nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99, Copyright (2018), John Wiley and Sons Inc. SEM images with schematic illustrations of (h) perpendicular array and (i) parallel array of BiVO4 photoanodes. (j) J–V curves of [010]-BiVO4 and [121]-BiVO4 without (solid line) and with (dashed line) a hole scavenger (e.g., Na2SO4). Reprinted with permission from ref. 101, Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. (k) J–V curves of Fe2O3 photoelectrodes, showing photocurrent (solid lines) and dark current (dashed lines) for electrodes prepared at heater-set temperature/air flow rates of 475 °C/2 L min−1 (red) and 545 °C/2 L min−1 (blue). Illustration of (l) a nanoparticle aggregate and (m) c-AFM analysis examines the charge transport properties with respect to the crystal domain orientation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104, Copyright (2013), Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Thickness control and 1D nanostructuring strategies. (a) Cross-section SEM images and (b) chopped J–V curves of Cu2O thin films with different thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106, Copyright (2015), John Wiley and Sons. (c) Top and (d) cross-section SEM images of Cu2O nanowires. (e) J–V curves of Cu2O nanowire and Cu2O thin-film photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105, Copyright (2016), American Chemical Society. Cross-section SEM images of (f) Ta3N5 thin film and (g) Ta3N5 nanorod array. (h) J–V curves of Ta3N5 thin-film and nanorod photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108, Copyright (2012), John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  Complicated nanostructures for reducing surface reflectance. (a) Distribution of the electric field magnitude at the WO3 surface of a thin film, stack of nanoparticles, nanorod, and nanohelix. (b) Specular and diffuse reflectance of a 6 μm WO3 thin film and a nanohelix array as a function of the difference between the angle of the detector and the angle of incidence. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109, Copyright (2014), Springer Nature. (c) Comparison of the simulated cross-section electric field and the distribution of the electromagnetic waves at 400, 500, and 600 nm in inverse opal (IO) CuFeO2 and planar CuFeO2. (d) Absorption and diffusive reflectance of the planar and IO CuFeO2 on FTO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110, Copyright (2019), Johns Wiley and Sons. (e) Cross-section SEM image of nanoporous Si fabricated by one-step metal-assisted etching process. (f) Measured total hemispherical optical reflectance of polished Si and nanoporous Si in air, and calculated reflectance of polished Si in water. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111, Copyright (2011), Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Reflectivity of dual-junction tandem solar cells with and without TiO2 and Rh catalyst. (h) Comparison of the output characteristics of tandem device with and without TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright (2018), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Reducing reflectance of PEC devices for enhancing photocurrent density. J–V curves of Pt/CdS/CIGS photocathodes in (a) a sodium phosphate buffer and (b) a potassium phosphate buffer with different total concentrations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114, Copyright (2018), Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) J–V curves of Pt/M/CdS/CIGS electrodes (M = none, Ti, Mo, and Mo/Ti). (d) Schematics of mechanism for hydrogen evolution on the surfaces of photocathodes coated with a thin metal layer, showing efficient carrier injection to the Pt catalyst via the thin metal layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33, Copyright (2013), Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Cross-section SEM image of Sb2Se3 photocathode with Cu:NiOx hole-selective layer. (f) J–V curves of Sb2Se3 photocathodes with three different HSLs: bare FTO, NiOx/FTO, and Cu:NiOx/FTO. Current maps of (g) NiOx and (h) Cu:NiOx on an FTO substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115, Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society.	 


FTO/S:TiO2	1 M NaOH (13.6)	4.5 @ 1.23 VRHE	Doping	
83

FTO/Fe:TiO2 NR	1 M KOH (13.5)	2.92 @ 1.23 VRHE	Doping	
79

FTO/(W,C):TiO2 NW	1 M KOH (13.5)	1.8 @ 1.23 VRHE	Doping	
78

FTO/H, 3% Mo:BiVO4/Co-Ci	KPi buffer (7)	4.8 @ 1.23 VRHE	Doping	
91

FTO/(Co,Sn):Fe2O3	1 M KOH (13.6)	1.25 @ 1.23 VRHE	Doping	
93

Mo/Ag:CuGaSe2/CdS/Pt	0.1 M Na2SO4 (9.5)	8.1 @ 0 VRHE	Doping	
96

Mo/Cd:CuZnSnS4/TiMo/Pt	1 M K2HPO4 + KH2PO4 (7)	17 @ 0 VRHE	Doping	
40

FTO/Au/Sb2Se3(TGA5)/TiO2/Pt	0.1 M H2SO4 (1)	12.5 @ 0 VRHE	Adjusting orientations, short and well-aligned Sb2Se3 nanostructures	
99

FTO/[010]-BiVO4/CoBi	1 M Kbi (9)	1.3 @ 1.23 VRHE	Adjusting orientations	
101

STO/[010]-BiVO4	0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2SO3	2.29 @ 1.23 VRHE	Adjusting orientations	
102

FTO/Cu2O-NW/AZO/TiO2/RuOx	0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.1 M KH2PO4 (5)	10 @ −0.3 VRHE	Nanostructuring, nanowires	
105

Ta/Ta3N5-NR/IrO2	0.5 M Na2SO4 (13)	3.8 @ 1.23 VRHE	Nanostructuring, nanorods	
108

FTO/helical-WO3/(W,Mo):BiVO4/FeOOH/NiOOH	0.5 M K2SO4 in phosphate buffer (7)	5.35 @ 1.23 VRHE	Nanostructuring	
109

FTO/IO CuFeO2/C60/CoFe LDH	1 M NaOH (13.5)	5.2 @ −0.1 VRHE	Nanostructuring, inverse opal	
110


Nanoporous Si	0.5 M H2SO4 (0)	36 @ −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl	Nanostructuring	
111

RuOx/GaAs/GaInAs/GaInP/AlInP/AlInPOx/TiO2/Rh	Strong acid (0)	15 @ 0 V vs. RuO2	Reducing reflectance	
34

Mo/CIGS/CdS/Pt	
0.4 M K2SO4 + 0.4 M K2HPO4 + 0.4 M KH2PO4 (6.8)	28 @ 0 VRHE	Reducing resistance	
114

Mo/CIGS/CdS/Mo/Ti/Pt	0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2HPO4 + 0.25 M NaH2PO4 (6.8)	30 @ 0 VRHE	Reducing resistance	
33

FTO/Cu:NiO/Sb2Se3/TiO2/Pt	0.1 M H2SO4 (1)	17.5 @ 0 VRHE	Reducing resistance	
115


 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustrations for the photovoltage (Vph) generation at (a–d) the semiconductor–liquid junction with an example of a photoanode and (e–h) the buried junction with an example of a photocathode. (a and e) Pre-equilibrium energy levels including conduction band edge (ECB), valence band edge (EVB), Fermi energy (EF), and redox energy level in the electrolyte (E0). (b and f) Dark and (c and g) illuminated equilibrium states in ideal cases, showing quasi-Fermi level (EqF) splitting to the quasi-Fermi levels for electrons (EqFn) and holes (EqFp). Possible photovoltage losses due to (d) surface state and (h) band energy mismatching.	 

 	Fig. 16  Photovoltage enhancement by passivation of surface states. J–V curves of hematite photoanodes showing the effect of (a) Al2O3 and cobalt treatment (reprinted with permission from ref. 117, Copyright (2011), Royal Society of Chemistry), (b) Ga2O3 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 118, Copyright (2011), Royal Society of Chemistry), (c) NiFeOx catalyst (Reprinted with permission from ref. 119, Copyright (2013), John Wiley and Sons), (d) heat treatment (reprinted with permission from ref. 120, Copyright (2014), American Chemical Society), and (e) H2–O2 flame treatment (Reprinted with permission from ref. 121, Copyright (2014), Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 17  Photovoltage enhancement by improving band alignment. Equilibrium band-edge diagrams of (a) AZO/Cu2O and (b) Ga2O3/Cu2O heterojunctions. (c) J–V curves of Cu2O nanowire photocathode with RuOx/TiO2/AZO and RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37, Copyright (2018), Springer Nature (d) chopped J–V curves of Pt/TiO2/CdS/Sb2Se3 photocathodes with different thicknesses of CdS interlayer (the arrows indicate the onset potential). (e) Approximate energy schematics showing favorable band alignment among Sb2Se3, CdS, and TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100, Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic showing relative bandgaps and band edge positions, (g) cross-section SEM image, and (h) chopped J–V curves of P3HT:PCBM-based photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124, Copyright (2016), Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) J–V curves of PEC device with the structure Pt/TiO2/PA/Al2O3/p-Si with different PA (phosphonic acid) concentrations used for spin coating of the dipole layer. J–V curves of (j) TiO2/Sb2Se3 and (k) TiO2/Cu2O photoelectrodes with and without PA dipole layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright (2019), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Photovoltage enhancement by using catalysts. (a) Cross-section SEM image of CIGS photocathode. (b) J–V curves of bare CIGS, Pt/TiO2/ZnO/CdS/CIGS, and MoSx/TiO2/ZnO/CdS/CIGS photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130, Copyright (2015), John Wiley and Sons. (c) J–V curves of MoS2/p-Si photocathodes with different thicknesses of MoS2. (d) Tafel slopes of MoS2 layers plotted as log(j) against potential vs. RHE. (e) UPS and XPS spectra of p-Si, 13 nm-thick MoS2/P-Si, and reference Au foil. (f) Schematic of energy band diagram of MoS2/p-Si heterojunction photocathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131, Copyright (2016), Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematics showing sulfur-doped molybdenum phosphides. (h) J–V curves of sulfur-doped molybdenum phosphide-coated Si photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132, Copyright (2017), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 



Co

2+

/Al

2

O

3
/α-Fe2O3/FTO	1 M NaOH (13.6)	0.8 VRHE	Passivation of surface state	
99


Co

2+

/Ga

2

O

3
/α-Fe2O3/FTO	1 M NaOH (13.6)	0.75 VRHE	Passivation of surface state	
100


NiFeO


x

/α-Fe2O3/FTO	1 M NaOH (13.6)	0.62 VRHE	Passivation of surface state	
101

α-Fe2O3(800 °C)/FTO	1 M NaOH (13.6)	0.7 VRHE	Passivation of surface state, annealing at 800 °C	
102

α-Fe2O3(HT-10S)/FTO	1 M NaOH (13.6)	0.58 VRHE	Passivation of surface state, heating in a H2–O2 flame for 10 s	
102

RuOx/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O/Cu	0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.1 M phosphate solution (5)	1 VRHE	Improving band alignment	
35

Pt/TiO2/CdS/Sb2Se3/Au	0.1 M H2SO4 (1)	0.47 VRHE	Improving band alignment	
82

RuOx/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/CuI/FTO	0.5 M Na2SO4 + NaH2PO4 + NaOH (5)	0.5 VRHE	Improving band alignment	
106

MoS3/P3HT:PCBM/MoOx/ITO	0.5 M H2SO4 (0)	0.5 VRHE	Improving band alignment	
108

Pt/TiO2/PA/Al2O3/p-Si	1 M H2SO4 (0)	0.48 VRHE	Improving band alignment, dipole layer	
109

Phosphonic acid

MoS

2

13 nm/p-Si	0.5 M H2SO4 (0)	0.17 VRHE	Catalytic overlayer	
113


S:MoP/p-Si	0.5 M H2SO4 (0)	0.28 VRHE	Catalytic overlayer	
114

S/P = 0.33

 	Fig. 19  Recently investigated single protective layer strategies. (a) Cyclic voltammetry of TiO2 protective layers with the different ALD layer thicknesses deposited at 120 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 146, Copyright (2017), American Chemical Society. (b) Stability test of amorphous-TiO2-protected Si photoelectrode with different heat treatments. Photographs in the inset illustrate the surface at the end of the stability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. Stability test of CIGS photocathodes with and without TiO2 protective layers in (c) pH 6.5 and (d) pH 14 electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150, Copyright (2018), John Wiley and Sons. (e) High-resolution TEM image of SnOx/SiOx/n-Si interface. (f) TEM image of SnOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanode. (g) Stability test of SnOx/SiOx/n-Si photoanodes at 0.61 V vs. RHE in 1 M KOH and 1 M H2SO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155, Copyright (2018), John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 20  Complicated protective layer strategies for enhancing stability. (a) Schematic showing passivated Pt strategy with TiO2/Pt/p-Si structure. (b) Stability test of planar Si, TiO2/Pt/SiNW, Pt/planar Si, and Pt/SiNW photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160, Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society (c) schematic showing dual protective layer strategy with TiO2/Pt/TiO2/bSi structure. (d) Stability test of TiO2/Pt/TiO2/bSi and Pt/bSi photocathodes and (e) photocurrent retention of the four structures after 24 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161, Copyright (2019), John Wiley and Sons. STEM-EDS line profiling of (f) a-MoSx/TiOx–GaInP2 before annealing and (g) g-MoSx/TiO2–GaInP2 after annealing. (h) Stability test of a-MoSx/TiOx–GaInP2, g-MoSx/TiO2–GaInP2, and PtRu–GaInP2 photocathodes in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45, Copyright (2017), Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 21  Robust binding catalysts for enhanced stability. (a) SEM image of Pt/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/CuI/FTO photocathode after stability test, showing the delaminated Pt. Stability test of hybrid photocathode (b) without and (c) with polyethyleneimine (PEI) protective layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125, Copyright (2016), Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Potential step experiment of Pt/TiO2/AZO/FTO and RuOx/TiO2/AZO/FTO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164, Copyright (2013), John Wiley and Sons. Stability test of Cu2O photocathodes with (e) Pt and (f) RuOx co-catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165, Copyright (2014), Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Cross-section SEM image of MoS2+x/TiO2/AZO/Cu2O photocathode. (h) Stability test of Cu2O photocathode with Pt and MoS2+x co-catalysts in various pH electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166, Copyright (2014), Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 22  Inserting a functional layer for enhancing stability. (a) Schematic illustration of Pt/rGO/CdS/CIGS photocathode (rGO: reduced graphene oxide). (b) Stability test of CIGS photocathodes with and without rGO layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167, Copyright (2018), John Wiley and Sons. (c) Stability test of Sb2Se3 photocathodes with and without C60 layer between Pt and TiO2. Inset shows the schematic illustration of photoelectron transfer mechanism through C60. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168, Copyright (2019), John Wiley and Sons. (d) Cross-section schematic and energy band alignment of NiFe-LDH/NiOx/Ni/SiOx/p-Si/n+Si photoanode. (e) Photograph of photoanode without NiOx after the first J–V scan, showing delamination of the co-catalyst. (f) Stability test of NiFe-LDH/NiOx/Ni/SiOx/p-Si/n+Si photoanode in 1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Enhancing stability by tuning electrolyte composition. (a) J–V curves and (b) stability test of NiOOH/FeOOH/BiVO4 photoanodes in 0.1 M potassium borate buffer (pH 9.3) with and without the addition of V2O5. XRD (c and e) and ICP analysis (d and f) of photoanodes before and after stability test (c and d) without and (e and f) with V2O5 in the electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171, Copyright (2017), Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 24  
In situ catalyst regeneration. (a) Stability test of a NiFe-OEC/Mo:BiVO4/Ni/Sn photoanode in a fresh 1 M borate buffer. The inset shows a SEM image of the electrode after 400 h water splitting. (b) Stability test of a NiFe-OEC/Mo:BiVO4/Ti/Sn photoanode in a fresh 1 M borate buffer. (c) Schematic illustration of NiFe-OEC self-generation and in situ regeneration. (d) Photocurrent change in a Mo:BiVO4/Ti/Sn electrode upon a sudden addition of 0.5 μM Ni2+ at 1 V vs. RHE in a fresh 1 M borate buffer. (e) Schematic comparison of the site-specific catalyst regeneration and non-site-specific catalyst deposition process in a 1 M borate buffer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright (2016), Springer Nature.	 


Ni–Mo/TiO2/CdS/CIGS/Mo	0.5 M NaPi + 0.5 M Na2SO4 (6.5)	100 min (100%)	Protective layer	
150

1 M NaOH (14)	20 min (∼10%)	Protective layer
NiFeOOH/SnOx/SiOx/n-Si	1 M KOH (14)	>100 h	Protective layer	
155

E-Pt/μPt/SnOx/SiOx/n-Si	1 M H2SO4 (0)	>100 h	Protective layer

TiO

2

/Pt/SiNW	0.5 M H2SO4 (0)	2 h (100%)	Protective layer, silicon nanowire	
160

TiO2/Pt/TiO2/bSi	0.5 M H2SO4 (0)	24 h (87%)	Protective layer, black silicon	
161


g-MoS


x


/TiO

2
–GaInP2	0.5 M H2SO4 (0)	20 h (∼85%)	Protective layer, graded MoSx–TiO2	
45


PEI/Pt/TiO2/P3HT:PCBM/CuI/FTO	0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.1 M Na2SO4 (1)	50 min (60%)	Robust binding catalyst, polyethyleneimine	
125


RuO


x

/TiO2/AZO/Cu2O/Au/FTO	0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.1 M KH2PO4 (5)	53 h (90%)	Robust binding catalyst	
165


MoS

2+x
/TIO2/AZO/Cu2O/Au/FTO	0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.2 M potassium hydrogen phthalate buffer (4)	10 h (∼95%)	Robust binding catalyst	
166

Pt/rGO/CdS/CIGS/Mo	0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2HPO4 + 0.5 M NaH2PO4 (6.8)	7 h (100%)	Inserting a functional layer	
167

Pt/C60/TiO2/Sb2Se3/Au/FTO	0.1 M H2SO4 (1)	10 h (98%)	Inserting a functional layer	
168

NiMo/NiSi/n+p-Si	1 M KOH (14)	12 h (100%)	Inserting a functional layer	
169

NiFe-LDH/NiOx/Ni/SiOx/n+p-Si	1 M KOH (14)	68 h (100%)	Inserting a functional layer, Ni–Fe layered double hydroxide	
170

NiOOH/FeOOH/BiVO4/FTO	
V

2

O

5
 + 1 M borate buffer	60 h (100%)	Controlling the dissolution	
171


NiFe-OEC/Mo:BiVO4/Ni/Sn	1 M borate buffer	1100 h (100%)	Controlling the dissolution, 11 runs of 100 h operation	
48


 	Fig. 25  Schematic illustrating various advanced characterization methods for PEC water splitting discussed in Section 5.	 

 	Fig. 26  Potential-dependent resistance and capacitance for charge transfer over a trap state for water oxidation on hematite photoanodes. Rct,trap: charge transfer resistance through a trap state; Ctrap: capacitance of trap state; J: water oxidation photocurrent density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 174, Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society.	 
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 27  Schemes explaining the data treatment of photocurrent transients for the following cases: (a) Photocurrent transients measured in 1 M NaOH. (b) Photocurrent transients measured in 1 M NaOH + 0.5 M H2O2. (c) Steady-state amplitudes of the photocurrent transient and transient peak height (ΔJss in filled markers/solid lines and ΔJmax in open markers/dotted lines) measured in two different electrolytes are shown as a function of the applied potential, with respect to RHE. (d) Distance D (in nm) representing the distance inside the hematite film thickness at which the active photogenerated holes originate is shown as a function of the square root of the difference between the applied potential Vappl and the flatband potential Vfb; linear fits of this distance D are shown as dotted lines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 183, Copyright (2012), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Scheme showing the basic principle of transient absorption spectroscopy (showing an ideal ΔA vs. time plot). (b) Transient absorption spectra of Fe2O3, Fe2O3–Sn, Fe2O3–Ti, and Fe2O3–SnTi probed at 575 nm following excitation at 355 nm (pump). Reprinted with permission from ref. 187, Copyright (2018), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Time constants from transient absorption and transient photocurrent decays vs. applied potential. Filled circles and squares: τTAS2, time constants from the exponential decay phase (eqn (2) in the paper) for unmodified (red) and CoPi-modified (blue) BiVO4 photoanodes. Empty circles and squares: τTPC, the time constants of negative transient current, for unmodified (red) and CoPi-modified (blue) BiVO4 photoanodes, in the TPC measurements, obtained from fits using eqn (3) in the paper. (b) Amplitude of the slow transient absorption decay phase φTAS2vs. applied potential; red triangles: unmodified BiVO4; blue diamonds: CoPi-modified BiVO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 190, Copyright (2015), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  Examples of time-resolved terahertz conductivity (TRTC) analysis for PEC water splitting. (a) Schematic showing the experimental setup of TRTC with an optical pump–probe. Temporal decay of the pump-induced change in THz transmission upon excitation of Sb2Se3 nanostructures with fluences of (b) 340 μJ cm−2 and (c) 10 μJ cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. THz combined electron–hole mobility spectra of BiVO4 films measured at different delay times at (d) 300 K and (e) 83 K. Stars represent real data points and open circles indicate imaginary data points. (f) THz combined electron–hole mobility spectrum of a W-doped BiVO4 film at 10 ps delay time fitted with the Drude–Smith model at lower frequencies and the damped oscillator model at higher frequencies. Inset shows the vibration of Bi3+ and VO43− along the [012] direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193, Copyright (2016), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  Examples of time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) analyses for PEC water splitting. (a) TRMC signals of BiVO4, W:BiVO4, and H:BiVO4. (b) TRMC signals as a function of incident photons for BiVO4 and H:BiVO4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, Copyright (2017), John and Wiley and Sons. (c) TRPL emission decay spectra of Sb2Se3 on three different substrates. (d) Energetics schematic showing band energy positions. The holes are extracted from the Sb2Se3 photocathode to the back contact of either FTO or Au/FTO, as indicated by the white arrows. The orange arrows represent the excitation and radiative–nonradiative recombination of the photocarriers, and the red arrows represent possible recombination at the back interfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Examples of intensity-modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) for PEC water splitting. (a) IMPS Nyquist plots of hematite samples prepared by three different methods, (ALD (denoted as aH), solution synthesis (denoted as sdH), and re-growth treatment (denoted as rgH)). (b) Rate constants of three hematite photoanodes extracted from IMPS data at different applied potentials (rate constant for recombination: krec, rate constant for charge transfer: ktran). Reprinted with permission from ref. 199, Copyright (2016), Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) krec and ktran of Sb2Se3 photocathode as a function of the applied potential, extracted from the IMPS data. (d) The imaginary component of the complex photovoltage in the IMVS of TiO2/Sb2Se3 and RuOx/TiO2/Sb2Se3 photocathodes. The blue arrows represent the changes after RuOx deposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. (e) Photovoltage variation as a function of the frequency of the light-intensity perturbation via IMVS analyses for Pt/TiO2/Sb2Se3 and Pt/C60/TiO2/Sb2Se3 photocathodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168, Copyright (2019), John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 33  
In situ ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (APXPS) for PEC water splitting. Schematic illustrations of the (a) operando APXPS setup (Reprinted with permission from ref. 201, Copyright (2016), Elsevier) and (b) the principal arrangement of p+-Si/TiO2/H2O(liq.)/H2O(gas) to the analyzer front cone, and the energy band relations of the system under applied potential U. (c) APXPS data and fitted peaks for the O 1s and Ti 2p peaks at potential between +0.4 V and −0.14 V vs. Ag/AgCl for a bare p+-Si/TiO2 electrode. (d) Schematic energy diagram of the TiO2/liquid junction, showing band edge shift, band bending, and the Fermi level pinning. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202, Copyright (2015), Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 34  
In situ infrared spectroscopy for PEC water splitting. (a) Schematic and (b) photographic images of the setup used for operando infrared measurement for hematite working electrode. (c) Infrared spectra of hematite scanned at constant applied potential in the dark. (d) Infrared spectra of hematite scanned at constant applied potential under illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204, Copyright (2016), Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 35  
In situ scanning probe techniques for PEC water splitting. (a) Schematic side-view of scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM) and scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) setups. (b, d and f) SPCM EQE image and (c, e and g) SECM ultramicroelectrode tip current images recorded with the photocathode held at three different applied potentials. (h) Schematic side-view of Pt/Ti/SiO2/p-Si(100) photocathode, illustrating the proposed scheme for lateral transport of photogenerated electrons through an inversion channel and hydrogen spillover-assisted H2 evolution. H* represents the spill-over species. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210, Copyright (2013), Springer Nature. (i) Schematic and (j and k) photograph of potential-sensing electrochemical AFM setup with cantilever. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215, Copyright (2017), Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 36  Schematic illustrating the importance of PEC research by highlighting the advantages for device characterization.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cs00997j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
