The molecular nature of photovoltage losses in organic solar cells  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CC04020G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CC04020G
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3702-3716Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsThe molecular nature of photovoltage losses in organic solar cells

        
          
            Cody W. 
            Schlenker
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Mark E. 
            Thompson
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Center for Energy Nanoscience, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, 90089, USA. E-mail: mthompso@usc.edu
Received 
      22nd September 2010
    , Accepted 5th January 2011First published on 1st February 2011AbstractSince the inception of heterojunction organic photovoltaic research the organic/organic interface has been thought to play a crucial role in determining the magnitude of the open-circuit voltage. Yet, the task of defining the molecular properties dictating the photovoltage delivered by these devices, that employ mixed or neat layers of different organic molecules to convert incident photons to electricity, is still an active area of research. This will likely be a key step in designing the new materials required for improving future device efficiencies. With the intent to underscore the importance of considering both thermodynamic and kinetic factors, this article highlights recent progress in elucidating molecular characteristics dictating photovoltage losses in heterojunction organic photovoltaics.
Cody W. Schlenker
Cody W. Schlenker received his BS degree in Chemistry in 2004 from Linfield College in McMinnville, Oregon. He recently completed his doctoral work in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Southern California working with Professor Mark E. Thompson. Dr Schlenker's research has focused primarily on materials and devices relevant to solar energy conversion. Of specific interest are molecular aspects of interlayer excitation- and charge-transfer reactions that lead to photocurrent generation in organic photovoltaic devices, as well as the development of nanostructured composites, and alternative transparent electrode materials for solar energy collection.
Mark E. Thompson
Mark E. Thompson is Professor of Chemistry at the University of Southern California. Dr Thompson received his BS degree in Chemistry in 1980 (U.C. Berkeley) and his PhD in chemistry in 1985 (California Institute of Technology). He spent 2 years as a postdoctoral fellow in the Inorganic Chemistry laboratory at Oxford University. Prof. Thompson took a position in the chemistry department at Princeton University in 1987, as an assistant professor, and moved to the University of Southern California in 1995. His research interests involve the study of new materials and devices for electroluminescence, solar energy conversion, chemical/biological sensing and catalysis.
1. Introduction
While high efficiency photovoltaic (PV) solar energy conversion is technologically feasible, the high cost of solar panels is an impediment to the technology's wide deployment.1 Lowering their cost is critical in establishing a PV platform as a practical carbon neutral route to meeting the global energy demand.2–4 With predicted power conversion efficiencies of ηp = 10–15%5,6 and the potential for low cost manufacturing, organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices have garnered considerable attention7–9 as an energy source that could be cost competitive with fossil fuels. Significant achievements have been seen over the last 20 years in the field of organic electronics, with the demonstrated success in commercializing organic light emitting diodes10 and the advent of high performance organic field effect transistor devices11–13 and sensors.14 Currently, however, demonstrated OPV device performance lags behind that of its counterpart technologies and falls short of the predictions for practical efficiencies. There is strong evidence to suggest that the present limit to improved device efficiency lies in balancing robust spectral coverage, leading to high current density, with augmented energy level offsets, leading to enhanced open-circuit voltage (Voc).
There are a considerable number of photons in the near-infrared (NIR) and infrared (IR) regions of the solar spectrum that are currently uncollected in a typical OPV. The short circuit current density (Jsc, V = 0) could be markedly improved by converting these photons to electrical charges. However, since obtaining a high maximum output power density (Pmax) corresponding to high power conversion efficiency (ηp) also requires maintaining large Voc, care must be taken when considering low-energy absorbing materials, so that improved photon collection does not come at the expense of electric potential. Therefore, it is compelling to explicitly scrutinize the origin of operational voltage losses in OPV devices.
This article is intended to introduce a molecular perspective on the present state of the art for OPV devices. First, we describe the characteristics of archetypal materials used in OPV devices from a photochemical standpoint, highlighting their excitonic character and electrical behavior. Second, we discuss recent demonstrations of enhanced open-circuit voltages as they primarily relate to molecular properties, and discuss their scientific and technological implications.
While this article is meant to emphasize the benefit that examining a wide array of materials for use in OPV devices can lend to our fundamental understanding of the involved processes, it is in no way intended as a comprehensive review of the range of materials and device architectures that have been explored. The molecular materials illustrated in Scheme 1 are used here to describe the properties of OPVs, however, there are a large number of both molecular and polymeric materials that have been reported for application to OPV. The reader is referred to several exceptional recent reviews for more detailed information regarding materials and OPV devices.7,8,15–21
 Scheme 1  Donor materials 1–10 and acceptor materials A and B described in this article. 
2. Excitonic materials
In conventional semiconductor (Si, GaAs, CdTe, etc.) photovoltaic devices, the site of photon absorption intimately shares its valence electrons with its neighbors in a strong covalent network. Therefore, the wave function of the resulting excited state can be spatially delocalized over many lattice sites. The electronic excited state resulting from photon absorption by the condensed phase material is termed an exciton. The energy required to dissociate this exciton into a free hole and electron is quite small, on the order of kT,22–24 the thermal energy available at room temperature. Optical excitation of organic molecules, such as those depicted in Scheme 1, does not directly generate free electron and hole pairs. This is because strong covalent bonding exists only intramolecularly, while the local intermolecular interactions in the condensed phase organic material are comparatively weak. The excited state in such a system is spatially localized, generally on a single molecule. These excitons typically have energies 0.3–1.0 eV below that of the free electron and hole. As a result, OPV device operation often exhibits features reminiscent of molecular excitation- and charge-transfer reactions, retaining relatively well defined vibronic features associated with the isolated molecule.
Dielectric constants in organic semiconductors are commonly a factor of four or more lower than their inorganic counterparts. Thus, the inchoate charge separation induced during photon absorption is relatively unscreened by the surrounding dielectric. The coulombic attraction between opposing partial charges of the electronically excited molecule results in an energetic stabilization of the exciton compared to the free electron and radical anion (electron polaron) or cation (hole polaron) species. Both of these effects work in concert to produce energetically bound and spatially localized Frenkel-type excitons with binding energies on the order of 0.5–1.5 eV in organic materials.25 Thus, room temperature optical excitation in conjugated organic materials leads to excitons, while generally leading to free charges in an inorganic semiconductor device.
A molecule in its electronically excited state can be a potent oxidizing agent, as well as a potent reducing agent. The efficient photoinduced charge transfer required for converting solar photons to electrical or chemical energy may be realized at the interface between an excited-state electron donor (D) and a well chosen electron acceptor (A). This interface, termed the D/A heterojunction, is the contact point where a charge transfer event between two different materials can take place. The D/A heterojunction in its various configurations is the defining feature central to contemporary organic solar cell devices, as depicted in Fig. 1. The chemical potential energy gradient in organic D/A OPVs controls the photoconversion process in the device.26 As a result, an ongoing research effort has evolved toward developing an understanding of the specific molecular features that dictate the operational photovoltage of OPV devices.
 Fig. 1  Contemporary organic solar cell devices are based on donor–acceptor heterojunction architectures. (a) Energy level diagram. (b) Planar heterojunction configuration. (c) Bulk heterojunction configuration. 
3. Photoelectrochemical processes
The fundamental photon to electrical energy conversion in simple D/A systems can be conceptualized as six photochemical or electrochemical processes. We will appeal to the molecular nature of the transient species at each step to characterize the physical phenomenon of current generation as a set of chemical equilibria depicted in Fig. 2. (1) The absorption of a photon leads to a localized exciton with energy E00 on either the donor (D*) or acceptor (A*). (2) This exciton diffuses to the donor–acceptor interface via an energy transfer mechanism (i.e. no net transport of mass or charge occurs). (3) Charge transfer quenching of the exciton at the D/A interface produces a coulombically bound charge transfer (CT) state in the form of a donor–acceptor complex (D+A−), sometimes referred to as a geminate pair, polaron pair, exciplex, or CT exciton. For generality, we will refer to this species as the charge transfer state. (4) Subsequent charge separation proceeds to produce fully ionized D+ (hole) and A− (electron) polaron species. (5) Transport of opposite polarity carriers in the donor and acceptor layers proceeds via self-exchange between localized hopping sites. (6) Electrical contacts facilitate charge collection in the external circuit, by regenerating the neutral ground state molecular species. The thermodynamic and kinetic factors associated with each of these chemical processes ultimately determine the power conversion efficiency of the fabricated device. We will explain these processes in more detail as reversible chemical reactions with associated reactants, products, and changes in free energy and kinetic equilibria in the following sections.
 Fig. 2  (a) Photoinduced charge transfer in organic solar cells involving (1) exciton generation, (2) exciton diffusion, (3) charge transfer state generation. Note that processes analogous to 1–3 may also occur in the acceptor material. (b) The motion of photogenerated charges involving (4) charge separation, (5) charge transport, (6) charge collection. (c) The forward progress for the dynamic equilibria involved in steps 1–4 must also compete with several alternative relaxation pathways that do not lead to photocurrent generation. 
Here we illustrate the situation for an optically excited donor and an acceptor in its ground state, however, it is important to note that a similar process can take place with an optically excited acceptor and a ground state donor. Utilizing photoexcitation of both the donor and acceptor materials is important to achieving the broadest possible coverage of the solar spectrum.
3.1 
          Photon absorption
Optical excitation in conjugated organic systems involves transitions between orbitals with substantial wave function overlap. As a result, the absorption features for these materials often possess exceptionally high oscillator strength. Indeed, the optical and electrical properties of many materials used in OPVs have implications for a diverse set of disciplines due to their intense optical transitions and good carrier conductivities. Among the most widely studied are the metal phthalocyanines, reported for use in nonlinear optics,27 as sensitizers for photodynamic therapy,28,29 and in organic thin film transistors.12,13 In a related, but non-optoelectronic application, copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) is used as the pigment in many blue car paints, illustrating its high absorptivity and environmental stability.30 This means that an extremely thin film can still absorb a substantial fraction of the incident solar photons. As we will discuss, this is important since photon absorption doesn't directly produce free carriers, the excitons have to diffuse to the D/A interface and low mobility charges need to be collected at opposing terminals.
Due to strong vibronic coupling, excitation energy absorbed in excess of the energy of the lowest vibronic state (E00) is transferred as heat to the surrounding medium as the site relaxes to the lowest energy exciton. In amorphous thin films, common in OPVs, the spectral bands associated with this excitonic state tend to be broadened and bathochromically shifted, while retaining a similar vibronic structure to the molecular species. We will consider the excitonic species as a molecular excitation, with energy E00 numerically equal to the thin film spectral intersection of excitation and emission for fluorescent materials.
For many π-conjugated organic molecules the oscillator strength of electronic transitions can be very high compared with conventional inorganic semiconductors. As a result a relatively thin film of molecules can absorb a substantial fraction of the incident solar photon flux (Φ). This is demonstrated in Fig. 3 by the absorption coefficients (α) for an archetypal organic D/A pair active region, CuPc/C60, compared with gallium arsenide (GaAs),31 a direct band gap material, and crystalline silicon (c-Si),32 an indirect band gap material, both of which are commonly used in conventional inorganic solar cell devices. Consequently, assuming a two-pass optical path in each case and calculating the percentage of solar photons captured by 1000 Å of each of these three active layers, we see that at 630 nm, near the peak of the solar spectral irradiance, a typical organic D/A pair captures roughly 90% of the incident solar photons, while GaAs and c-Si capture only 50% and 10% respectively. Note that for the organic D/A pair, this estimate is rather conservative, as there exist promising molecular materials with substantially higher α compared with CuPc/C60.33 Nonetheless, from Fig. 3 one may conclude that OPV active layer thicknesses on the nanometre length scale are sufficient for efficient photon capture, in contrast to active layer thicknesses of several microns required for c-Si. Thus, with significantly thinner films that absorb the same fraction of light, far less material is necessary for OPV devices, making the energy and charge conduction requirements less stringent.
 Fig. 3  Solar photon flux Φ (derived from ASTM G173-03 AM1.5G spectral irradiance) is plotted as a function of wavelength in the top panel. The absorption coefficient α for the active region of an archetypal organic donor/acceptor pair, CuPc/C60 (solid red trace, Organic D/A), is compared in the intermediate panel with that of gallium arsenide (dashed black trace, GaAs), a direct band gap semiconductor and both are contrasted with crystalline silicon (dotted blue trace, c-Si), an indirect band gap semiconductor. The bottom panel illustrates the percentage of solar photons captured by 1000 Å active layers with α identical to those in the middle panel, assuming a two-pass optical path. 
3.2 Exciton diffusion
Even though the optical densities of organic OPV materials are very high, short exciton diffusion lengths severely limit the amount of absorbed light that may be converted to photocurrent. Thus, it is important to understand the nature of exciton diffusion in organic materials and the limitation it imposes on OPV performance.
In the general case, any molecule in the device may undergo direct optical excitation, however efficient charge transfer only occurs where there is direct electronic coupling between the donor and acceptor. This means that the energy absorbed by a donor molecule not intimately coupled or adjacent to an acceptor molecule by direct orbital overlap must be transferred through the medium to the D/A heterojunction in order to contribute to the photocurrent. This energy transfer process, called exciton diffusion, may occur via a dipolar mechanism or an electron exchange mechanism.
The length over which excitation can propagate prior to decay of the exciton population to 1/e (roughly 35%) of its initial value is the exciton diffusion length (LD). Ideally, the percentage of the solar photon flux absorbed within LD of the D/A heterojunction will be 100%. In practice, however, this can be as low as 10%, due to short exciton diffusion length in many organic materials. This means that in a film thick enough to absorb nearly all of the incident photons, 90% of the resulting excitons are more than an exciton diffusion length from the D/A interface. In this case a substantial fraction of the absorbed photons lead to excitons that do not undergo charge transfer and subsequent charge separation. As a result, researchers have attempted to circumnavigate this problem by developing bulk-heterojunction architectures consisting of interdigitating nanoscale phase-segregated donor and acceptor regions. As illustrated in Fig. 1, such a structure is attractive for ensuring that excitons are formed within LD of the D/A interface. The photocurrent generated by such bulk-heterojunction devices can be substantial, however, their performance is directly linked to local heterogeneity on the nanometre length scale. The characterization and control of these features is currently a major limitation to bulk-heterojunction device performance.34,35
Both mechanisms of exciton diffusion, coulombic and electron exchange, are current topics of scientific interest. The former results from resonant interaction between transition dipole moments of the excited and ground state molecules and can occur on length scales considerably larger than the sum of their van der Waals radii. This form of energy migration is known as Förster resonance excitation transfer (FRET) and is the primary mechanism for singlet exciton diffusion in OPVs. The FRET process can be visualized as a direct extension of the interaction between the electric field of a photon and the π-system of a molecule. The elementary rate for this process may be expressed as kFRET = 8.8 × 10−28 mol(jK2/n4τor6), where n is the index of refraction of the medium, τo is the radiative lifetime of the energy donor, r is the intermolecular separation, j is the spectral overlap integral, and K is an orientation factor. In practice, predicting exciton dynamics using the above expression is complicated by conformational distortion, molecular disorder, and the presence of trap states in the structures used in OPV devices.36–38 Consequently, there is significant interest in developing accurate methodologies for probing exciton dynamics37,39 in OPV structures.16,40–47
The other non-trivial mechanism for exciton diffusion arises from electron exchange between a chromophore in its electronically excited state and a ground state molecule in close proximity. This process, known as Dexter excitation transfer (DET), occurs through direct wave function overlap and is, therefore, limited to length scales on the order of the van der Waals radii of the two molecules. In conjugated organic molecules Dexter transfer is the primary mechanism for triplet exciton diffusion. Although the formal rate dependence for DET is proportional to the spectral overlap integral and attenuates as kDET ∝ exp(−2r), it contains terms that cannot be easily related to physically measurable quantities. Therefore, it is difficult to adequately address even the elementary rate of triplet exciton diffusion in the general case and the utility of triplet exciton diffusion in OPVs is a current area of interest.48–50
3.3 Charge transfer
Following exciton diffusion to the D/A interface, efficient charge transfer quenching of the excited state must occur in order to yield the desired photoresponse. In principle, the thermodynamic requirements for this process are straightforward; the energy of an exciton interacting with a charge acceptor must be greater than the CT state energy. In practice, however, assigning enthalpic quantities associated with the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) in condensed phase organic materials is often complicated by sample degradation.51–53 Additionally, the physics of semiconductor devices has historically been discussed in terms of band models for covalent crystalline materials, where the free electron approximation is appropriate, which is not the case for most organic systems. Terms like conduction band, LUMO, electron affinity, transport level, and optical LUMO are often inappropriately taken to be interchangeable. Significant attention53–65 has been given to developing a physically relevant energy level description for organic electronic materials, where it is more appropriate to discuss weakly interacting molecules in condensed phase low dielectric media.
Of particular importance to formation of the CT state is the energy of the excited state. When a molecule at the D/A interface becomes electronically excited by FRET, DET, or photon absorption, it may take part in a charge transfer reaction with the adjacent charge acceptor molecule. The thermodynamic requirements to form the geminate CT state species (D+A−) at the D/A interface can be understood by considering the change in enthalpy for the photoinduced charge transfer reaction D* + A → (D+A−). The ionization energy of the excitonic state (Ei*), sometimes referred to as the ‘optical LUMO,’ is an extremely useful quantity for assessing whether forward electron transfer will be exothermic. Succinctly, Ei* is the oxidation potential of the excited state [(D*)0/+], which can be used to determine which acceptors will engage in efficient charge transfer with D*. A value for Ei* may be obtained from the combination of ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and UV-vis absorption/emission spectroscopy by numerically subtracting −E00 from the ionization energy of the neutral ground state species, Ei* = Ei − (−E00). If the resulting value of Ei* is greater than the electron affinity (Ea) of the acceptor, then the photoinduced forward electron transfer reaction will be exothermic. A similar calculation of an acceptor exciton's electron affinity (Ea*) may be made to assess whether acceptor exciton dissociation will be exothermic. Thus, one can also define an ‘optical HOMO’ for OPV acceptors from the electron affinity and E00, which can be used to assess which donors will be appropriate for dissociation of an exciton in a given acceptor.
Although a cogent kinetic description for the charge generation process is still developing, during exciton dissociation, some generalized charge transfer (CT) state54 is thought to form. Very little screening of charge takes place, since the dielectric constant, εm ≈ 3, of the surrounding medium is relatively low, and the attractive electrostatic potential energy Ec = q2/4πεoεmr between the D+A− pair is on the order of 25 kJ mol−1 for an average spacing of r = 20 Å. This means that the coulombic stabilization of the CT state is roughly 10 times greater than kT at room temperature and, if not efficiently surmounted, can severely limit the output power of OPV devices by markedly reducing the fill factor (section 4.).
3.4 Charge separation
Once formed, the CT state may decay through one of two basic reversible pathways, excluding photochemical degradation. In the first, regeneration of some neutral species (excited state or ground state) may occur. This process, referred to as recombination because it involves combining separated charges, can be a major loss mechanism. The second is the preferred pathway for CT state decay in which a series of electron self-exchange reactions occurs between the partial cation (anion) of the CT complex and the surrounding neutral ground state donor (acceptor) molecules. A major experimental challenge in this area is the development of ultrafast two-dimensional optical spectroscopies with interfacial specificity to reliably characterize the electronic coupling and CT state dynamics for a broad range of materials and architectures.66–69
3.5 Charge transport
The weak intermolecular electronic coupling that exists in conjugated organic materials acts not only to localize their excitons, but their charge carriers as well. Consider two photogenerated charges, each 100 Å from the D/A interface. Since at this distance Ec = q2/4πεoεmr ≈ kT, these charges may be regarded as coulombically separated in a typical organic semiconductor. Thus, we may crudely approximate the energy of the hole as the Ei of the donor and the energy of the electron as Ea of the acceptor. Since there is minimal extended band structure in these materials, transport of charge proceeds via a localized hopping mechanism characterized by a radical ion that polarizes the surrounding neutral molecules. The rate of this hopping process may be expressed70,71 in terms of nonadiabatic Marcus theory for electron transfer to account for the electronic coupling of the polarized neutral ground state species to the radical ion and the internal reorganization energy required for this pair to reach the same geometry. The amorphous nature of the organic materials used in OPVs gives each molecule a unique environment, leading to inhomogeneity in the local field experienced by each molecule. This inhomogeneity leads to carrier trapping sites in these amorphous materials, decreasing the charge transport rates below those given by a Marcus-type treatment of intermolecular charge transfer. The use of crystalline materials in OPVs is being explored, which would eliminate carrier traps of this type and improve OPV performance.62,70,72–74
3.6 Charge collection
Photovoltaic solar energy conversion requires efficient delivery of photogenerated charges to an electrical load resistance in the external circuit. This is generally accomplished in the case of OPV devices by sandwiching the absorbing materials between a substrate-supported transparent conducting oxide (TCO) electrode, such as tin-doped indium oxide (ITO), and a metal counter electrode, deposited by thermal evaporation. The nature of the electrical contacts employed in device preparation is largely determined by interface states between the electrode and the organic materials and can strongly impact device performance. Properties of this organic/electrode interface are an area of substantial interest since the density of states profile in this region of the device can be quite complex due to interface chemical and polarization effects.53,55,56,75 Furthermore, even when a system meets the thermodynamic requirements for charge collection, it has been suggested that one should expect finite surface recombination velocities.76
4. Electrical behavior
Although the operation principles of OPV devices are inherently dissimilar to a typical pn junction device, the electrical characterization procedures to obtain their performance metrics are the same as illustrated in Fig. 4. In this section we briefly address electrical measurement and analysis. The basic electrical measurement consists of connecting the device to an external power source, applying a dc voltage (V), and measuring the electrical current density (J). Generally, it is desirable to perform such a measurement while sweeping the applied voltage from V < 0 (reverse bias) to V > 0 (forward bias). The electrochemical implication of this formalism is that under reverse bias, the organic material is reduced at the anode and oxidized at the cathode, while under forward bias, the organic material is oxidized at the anode and reduced at the cathode.
 Fig. 4  Simulated solar cell electrical behavior in the dark (dotted traces) and under illumination (solid black and red traces). The black traces represent a device with a markedly lower dark current than that of the device represented by the red traces. The sharp inflection points in the semi-log plots (upper panel) are the points where the current switches from positive to negative. Also illustrated in the linear representation (lower panel) is the power output of the devices as a function of voltage (blue line), given by the product of J and V. The fill factor (FF) is the maximum output power, Pmax, divided by the product of Jsc and Voc (FF = Pmax/JscVoc). The FF is often represented as the ratio of area of the filled gray rectangle (Pmax) to unfilled gray rectangle (Jsc × Voc). 
In the dark, the device behaves as a diode, exhibiting saturated current density (Js), flowing with limited voltage dependence under reverse bias, while an exponential rise (rectification) in current density is observed beyond some applied forward bias. For a relatively simple case involving no resistive losses, the voltage dependence upon rectification and the magnitude of this saturation current density (Js) under reverse bias are intimately related according to J = Js exp[(qV/nkT) − 1], where q, k, and T are the elementary charge, Boltzman's constant, and temperature, respectively. Ideality factors of n ≈ 2 are common for organic devices and are associated with current voltage relationships dominated by recombination.5,77–79 While this relationship is an oversimplification, it suggests that Js relates the voltage-dependence of the current density under forward and reverse bias. For the former, Fig. 5 represents the processes leading to Js. The magnitude of Js will depend in most cases on the rate (kinj) of carrier injection from the electrodes, charge mobility of the materials, and the rate (krec) of net charge recombination at the donor/acceptor interface (D+ + A− → D0 + A0). Note that D0 and A0 need not be ground state species. As we will see, the saturation current is integral in determining the magnitude of the open-circuit voltage.
 Fig. 5  Recombination losses under forward bias in an OPV device. Holes injected from the anode Fermi level (EF,A) into the HOMO level (Ei) of the donor and electrons injected from the cathode (EF,C) into the LUMO level (Ea) of the acceptor are transported to the D/A interface. Coulombic attraction between holes and electrons yields the (D+A−) CT state with energy ECT. The recombination reaction (D+A−) → D + A occurs with rate constant krec, consisting of both radiative and non-radiative components. 
Upon illumination, the photogeneration processes discussed in section 3 lead to an increase in the CT state density at the D/A interface. When a reverse bias is applied at the external contacts, conversion of the photogenerated D+ and A− ions back to the neutral species at the electrodes results in the measured photocurrent density under illumination depicted in Fig. 4. Again, for the ideal case, under illumination the voltage dependence of the current density is given by J = Js exp[(qV/nkT) − 1] − Jph, where Jph is the photogenerated current density. At zero applied bias J = −Jph and the corresponding short circuit current density (Jsc) is shown in Fig. 4. From the above J(V) dependence, we may express the open circuit photovoltage as Voc = q−1nkT ln(Jsc/Js + 1) since J = 0. Here, for a simplified case, we arrive at the most basic photovoltage expression. For n ≈ 2, the magnitude of the photovoltage depends simply on a ratio of rates, where Jsc represents how frequently photogenerated charges are collected and Js represents how frequently charges recombine.
In practice, resistive effects and physical aberrations can complicate device characterization. Generally, one may estimate the importance of these non-idealities by modeling device data according to an equivalent circuit as shown in Fig. 6. Incorporating all specific series resistive elements as Rs, and all specific parallel resistance as Rp one obtains the expression: (1)for the current density as a function of voltage under illumination. Developing a physically relevant interpretation for the commonly observed phenomenological J(V) behavior16,80,81 represented by eqn (1) is an active area of OPV device research.78,79,82–86
 Fig. 6  Single diode equivalent circuit model commonly employed in estimating solar cell losses. 
At voltages 0 < V < Voc, the photovoltaic device under illumination supplies power density (P = J × V) to the external circuit (cf. lower panel of Fig. 4, blue trace in first quadrant). The point of maximum output power density is denoted by Pmax in Fig. 4 and corresponds to the area of the filled gray rectangle in quadrant four of the lower panel. A useful quantity for comparing the maximum output power relative to the photocurrent and photovoltage produced by any particular device is the fill factor, given by FF = Pmax/Jsc × Voc. The FF may be visualized as in Fig. 4 as the fractional area of the unfilled gray rectangle (i.e. peak values for J and V, but available power at these points = 0) occupied by the filled gray rectangle. Typical FF values for OPVs range from 0.3 to 0.7. Finally, the power conversion efficiency (ηp) is calculated as the numerical quotient of Pmax and the total integrated spectral irradiance (ETotal), giving ηp = Pmax/ETotal. Note that precise standards of measurement and calibration have been developed, including spectral mismatch correction, for accurately reporting ηp. The active researcher is admonished to diligently adhere to them, as outlined in the literature,87–90 whenever reporting OPV performance metrics.
5. Open-circuit voltage
In the preceding sections we introduced general operational and electrical principles of OPV devices. The remainder of this article will be devoted to developing a molecular interpretation of the properties that influence their operational photovoltage. Considering photons near the peak of the solar spectrum, ∼2.0 eV (∼600 nm), are typically efficiently absorbed in OPV devices, but common values for qVoc are only in the range of 0.5–1.0 eV, device efficiencies may be substantially improved by understanding the origin of photovoltage losses in these devices.
Furthermore, a substantial photon flux exists below 2.0 eV in the solar spectrum. Without understanding the origin of the photovoltage losses, developing materials to efficiently harvest these low energy photons may ultimately lead to an efficiency limiting trade-off between enhanced photocurrent and enhanced photovoltage. Consequently, it is compelling to develop a molecular description of the operational open-circuit voltage in OPV devices to understand the losses in an electrochemical context. By simply eliminating voltage losses, efficiencies greater than double those of present devices may be achievable.
Based on early observations of the photovoltaic effect in laminated organic systems,91 the first modern bilayer OPV device92 was noted to exhibit a photovoltage that was only weakly dependent, in both magnitude and polarity, on the nature of the electrical contacts. Rather, the reported Voc was dictated largely by the nature of the organic/organic interface. This observation led to the later proposal93 that the Voc is determined by the offset in frontier orbital energies for the removal of an electron from the HOMO of the donor and placing it in the LUMO of the acceptor. Consequently, data have been generated which shows a correlation of the frontier molecular orbital energy levels with device performance, particularly Voc.5,94–97 Nevertheless, structural variations on the molecular level are known to substantially impact electron transfer kinetics in chemical98–100 and biological101,102 systems. The voltage produced by solution-based photoelectrochemical cells has also been linked to charge transfer rates.103,104 Thus, the key efficiency improvements, required for OPVs to become a truly disruptive technology, may lie in the detailed kinetics of charge generation and recombination, which, at this time, are poorly understood for multi-component thin film systems.
5.1 Thermodynamic description of open-circuit voltage
The most general description for the open-circuit voltage limit in any photovoltaic device has been addressed by Gregg.26 According to the free energy of the system, the obtainable photovoltage will depend on both the electrical and chemical potential energy gradients in the device. However, the equilibrium charge carrier concentrations and carrier mobilities in most heavily doped inorganic PV devices are extremely high compared with organic molecules. This means that the effect of the chemical potential in classic silicon-based cells is negligible. Indeed, the Voc limit for inorganic photodiodes is understood to be Voc ≤ Vbi,105–107 where Vbi is the ‘built-in’ electrical potential energy difference across the pn junction as illustrated in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Equilibrium energy diagram for a pn junction in an inorganic semiconductor material with intrinsic Fermi energy EFi, conduction band energy Ec, valence band energy Ev and with potentials φFp and φFn given by the respective impurity concentrations in the p and n regions. The quantity Vbi represents the total built-in electrical potential due to band bending. 
This canonical description for the limits of silicon solar cells led to early efforts to develop a similar narrative for the maximum phenomenological photovoltage of OPV devices. As a result, estimates for Vbi have been made by measuring the open-circuit voltage produced from composites of various conjugated polymers94 and derivatized fullerenes.93 These results demonstrate a clear correlation between the observed Voc and electrochemical reduction potentials of the fulleroid electron accepting materials. Thus, the magnitude of the open-circuit voltage appeared to be determined by the offset (ΔEDA) between the ionization energy (Ei) associated with the donor HOMO level and the electron affinity (Ea) associated with the acceptor LUMO level as depicted in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Energy level diagram for a typical D/A heterojunction depicting donor material with ionization energy of Ei and excited state ionization energy of Ei*, acceptor with electron affinity of Ea and excited state electron affinity of Ea*, and the interfacial energy level offset between Ei and Ea illustrated as ΔEDA, as described in the text. The driving force for charge transfer from the excited donor to the acceptor is given by Ei* − Ea. 
5.2 Orbital energy level offsets
Research conducted in our laboratory has utilized the concept of modifying ΔEDA to increase the cell voltage. It is important here to reiterate that employing new materials with high oscillator strength transitions overlapping the solar spectrum, while yielding high voltage devices, is paramount for improving power conversion efficiency. This was demonstrated in the case of boron subphthalocyanine chloride (SubPc),108 when compared as a donor material against a archetypal standard CuPc control in optimized cells having the planar lamellar structure ITO/Donor/C60/BCP/Al.
Possessing a delocalized 32 π electron system, the general class of subphthalocyanines are lower macrocyclic homologues of the parent 40 π electron phthalocyanines and are composed of three nitrogen bridged isoindole units around a central boron core.109 As a consequence of its smaller π-system, SubPc exhibits a more negative Ei value compared with CuPc and a hypsochromic shift of its Q-band absorption. Representative J(V) curves are plotted for both the CuPc and SubPc based devices in Fig. 9. For the standard CuPc control device, a Voc of 0.42 V was obtained under 1 sun illumination, while the SubPc device produced a Voc of 0.97 V. Although the CuPc device exhibits a broad spectral absorption, from the J(V) dependence in Fig. 9, it is clear that the photocurrent produced by both the SubPc (JSC = 3.36 mA cm−2) and CuPc (JSC = 3.07 mA cm−2) devices are comparable. This stems from the narrow, but intense SubPc Q-band absorption at λ = 590 nm that compensates for the low-energy broadband absorption exhibited by CuPc. Since the FF values for both the SubPc test device and CuPc control device are virtually identical, the resulting power conversion efficiency (ηp) more than doubles.
 Fig. 9  Comparison of J(V) characteristics for devices comprising ITO/Donor/C60/BCP/Al, where Donor = CuPc (red) or SubPc (blue). Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
The demonstration that device performance enhancement in excess of 100% can be achieved by maintaining substantial optical absorption, while increasing the Voc, represents a significant proof-of-concept and emphasizes the importance of understanding the origin of photovoltage losses in OPV devices. Further comparisons supporting the validity of tailoring the ΔEDA value to control Voc have been made by incorporating boron subnaphthalocyanine chloride (SubNc)110,111 as a donor material. The SubNc devices exhibit lower photovoltages than the corresponding SubPc cells when tested under equivalent light intensities. This has been rationalized on the basis of HOMO destabilization upon benzannulation. Thus, the reduced photovoltage is attributed to lower offset energy at the SubNc/C60 interface.
5.3 Temperature dependence of photovoltage losses
The notable demonstrations of efficiency enhancement for materials combinations with large ΔEDA values produced further impetus to quantitatively explore the relationship between temperature and photovoltage. We may expect from Voc ∝ ln(Jsc/Js) that the photovoltage will depend logarithmically on light intensity, until reaching some saturation voltage. Since thermally activated contributions to Js are expected to be proportional to Jso exp(−ΔEDA/γkT), where the frequency factor Jso and γ are phenomenological terms that must be assessed experimentally, we may also expect an inverse linear relationship between Voc and temperature within a given temperature regime.5,82,112 Beyond this the Voc again tends to saturate at a particular maximum voltage. One such study examined the Voc dependence on temperature for CuPc, pentacene, and N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(1-naphthyl)-1,1′-biphenyl-4,4′-diamine (NPD) donor materials paired with various acceptor materials.5 Significantly, select materials appear to exhibit temperature independent photovoltage response, as evidenced by the NPD/C60 trace in Fig. 10. While CuPc and pentacene possess planar geometrical structures, NPD exhibits a slightly distorted geometry due to steric effects. A similar result was also observed for devices fabricated with SubPc,5 which exhibits a cone-like distortion due to intramolecular ring strain. This suggests that for these two materials combinations, room temperature loss mechanisms are inherently minimized.
 Fig. 10  Temperature dependence of Voc for CuPc and pentacene donor-based devices compared with the relative temperature independence of Voc ≈ 0.9 V for the NPD based device. Reprinted figure with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2007 by the American Physical Society. 
5.4 General photovoltage description
While substantial photovoltage enhancement has been demonstrated by increasing ΔEDA, such an approach represents a significant challenge for the prospect of harvesting low energy solar photons to produce high efficiency devices. This is important because both high voltage and high current are required, assuming facile charge separation, to realize gains in power conversion efficiency. In Fig. 11 the thermodynamic balance required for enhancing the open-circuit voltage, while achieving broad absorption overlap with the solar spectrum, is depicted. Correspondingly, there is an efficiency limiting trade-off between robust photon capture and minimal photovoltage losses.
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of two hypothetical donor materials embodying the efficiency limiting trade-off between suppressed voltage losses on the left and robust spectral coverage on the right. Donor 1 exhibits a large ΔEDA and is expected to produce a large open-circuit voltage, whereas Donor 2 exhibits a small ΔEDA, but offers enhanced coverage of the solar spectral irradiance. Note that Ei* is identical for both donors, making the enthalpic driving force for charge transfer equivalent in both cases. 
Recent results have revealed the prospect that voltage losses may also be minimized according to the kinetic facility of excited state charge transfer quenching relative to charge recombination. For this reason it is compelling to return to the general photovoltage treatment presented by Gregg, based on the electrical and chemical potential energy gradients in the device. From the Voc description that emerges, one may expect molecular and architectural features that kinetically or thermodynamically suppress Js selectively will enhance the operational Voc.
As mentioned previously, a significant research effort has gone into addressing the relationship between the built-in electrical potential (Vbi), and the Voc produced by OPV devices. However, direct electroabsorption measurements of Vbi across simple devices consisting of a single organic layer, inserted between two energetically asymmetric contacts, have demonstrated that the relationship at room temperature between Vbi and the observed Voc is not straightforward,113 due to various loss mechanisms. Moreover, the photovoltaic effect has even been observed for organic molecular systems with no intrinsic asymmetry,114–116 hence no built-in electrical potential. From these observations it is clear that the Voc in OPV devices is not necessarily limited to any inherent built-in electrical potential. Importantly, the proposed explanation for the observed photovoltage in such systems relies on the interfacial kinetics114 of charge generation and recombination.
While simple single layer symmetric device architectures have not presently produced high power conversion efficiencies, demonstration that kinetic factors likely play a major role in determining the open-circuit voltage losses in all OPV devices cannot be overemphasized. For the synthetic chemist, the potential implication is an additional molecular handle in the design of new materials combinations that preferentially favor augmented Jsc, while suppressing Js. In the following sections we outline specific molecular examples relating to the characterization and development of such materials.
5.5 Molecular electron transfer kinetics
The conventional wisdom gleaned from Voc saturation studies and photoelectron spectroscopy suggests that when recombination losses are suppressed, qVoc is limited thermodynamically by ΔEDA. However, at room temperature or moderate photon flux, the magnitude of the operational photovoltage of many devices can be markedly reduced through recombination losses. As such, discerning the origin of these losses has become an important area of study. It has proven fruitful to electrically represent the charge carrier flux as discussed according to eqn (1) for the equivalent circuit model in Fig. 6. Details on this type of analysis may be found in the literature and the interested reader is directed to several outstanding recent reviews and articles.78,79,82,83,117–119
We have already mentioned that when n ≈ 2, as it is for many OPV devices, the saturation current density under forward bias arises from charge recombination.77 Thus, in this regime we expect Js = qkrec[(D+A−)](2)where q is the elementary charge, krec is the total rate constant (radiative plus non-radiative) for the recombination reaction (D+A−) → D0 + A0, and [(D+A−)] is the CT state concentration at the D/A interface as depicted in Fig. 5. Here, bulk recombination is implicitly neglected. Solving eqn (1) for V(J = 0) = Voc and substituting for Js, we may express the photovoltage as (3) (4) (5)where the approximations become valid as Rsh → ∞, Rs → 0, and Jph ≫ Js. According to Marcus theory99 for outer sphere electron transfer, the Arrhenius behavior for the non-radiative contribution to charge recombination may be expressed as100 (6)where h is Planck's constant, Hij is the electronic coupling matrix element between the initial CT state and the final neutral state, λ is the free energy for geometric reorganization, and ΔG° is the total free energy change for the recombination reaction as depicted schematically in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Free energy curves illustrating the free energy of activation ΔG*, the free energy of reaction ΔG°, and the coupling element Hij that determine the electron transfer rates in an OPV device. 
Here we arrive at a unified description for the voltage losses in OPV devices, accounting for the bimolecular interaction at the D/A interface, as well as the facility of charge injection and transport throughout the rest of the devices. The magnitude of the [(D+A−)] term in eqn (5) will depend on the charge injection rate kinj at the electrodes (Fig. 5), and on the mobility of holes (μp) in the donor and electrons (μn) in the acceptor. Materials and architectures that minimize [(D+A−)] will maximize Voc.
From eqn (6) we see that the non-radiative contribution to krec goes as the square of the electronic coupling of the CT state to the ground state and decreases exponentially with increasing reorganization energy. This relationship helps to frame the observed variations in Voc with device architecture, process conditions, molecular orientation, film morphology, and materials properties in terms of a more conceptually transparent description for actual electrochemical processes that occur during device operation. The implication of eqn (5) and (6) for molecular design are materials and architectures that minimize Hij and maximize λ will maximize Voc. Thus, the kinetics of molecular electron transfer forms the basis for assessing and minimizing voltage losses in organic photovoltaic devices. Note that, as depicted in Fig. 12, non-radiative charge recombination, following photoinduced charge transfer, occurs in the Marcus inverted region, with free energy of activation ΔG*.98,120 This is the origin of the long lived photoinduced CT states that make OPV device operation possible.
5.6 CT state coupling, molecular orientation, and Voc
From eqn (6), we expect the non-radiative recombination rate during outer sphere electron transfer to be related to the π–π interaction of the donor and acceptor species through Hij. The application of modern computational chemistry to this interfacial kinetic process will very likely be invaluable for developing the next generation of low-loss Voc materials. Comparing excited-to-CT state coupling with ground-to-CT state coupling is particularly interesting. Recently, such calculations were carried out for an archetypal D/A pair, pentacene/C60.121 Importantly, the results demonstrate that, based on geometric orientation, suppression of charge recombination by decoupling the ground-to-CT and triplet-to-CT state interactions is not mutually exclusive with respect to efficient photoinduced charge transfer. This is exemplified by the parallel orientation 2B, depicted in Fig. 13, that exhibits the most rapid rate for photoinduced charge transfer, both from pentacene to C60, (1B1uP⊗1AgC60 → 2B2gP+⊗2T1uC60−) and from C60 to pentacene (1AgP⊗1T1gC60 → 2B2gP+⊗2T1uC60−). However, the back recombination reaction for orientation 2B is suppressed, such that the rate for recombination from the CT0 state to the ground state (2B2gP+⊗2T1uC60− → 1AgP⊗1AgC60) is lower than orientation 2A. Similar comparisons can be drawn between other molecular orientations, suggesting that interfacial coupling can, in principle, act to suppress ground-to-CT state recombination, while preserving excited-to-CT forward electron transfer. The conceptual implication being, it is possible to suppress charge recombination rates and preserve Voc, without reducing Jsc, simply by deploying a D/A pair with the appropriate geometrical interaction. This represents a promising result for rationally designing materials combinations with minimal recombination losses. Presently, however, decoupling the ground and CT states while achieving strong excited-to-CT state coupling, based solely on molecular orientation, is a formidable challenge.
 Fig. 13  Molecular orientation and its influence on calculated charge transfer rates between pentacene and C60, indicating that suppressed recombination and efficient photoinduced charge transfer are not mutually exclusive. For example, the CT0 state to the ground state reaction 2B2gP+⊗2T1uC60− → 1AgP⊗1AgC60 rate for parallel orientation 2B (dotted red trace in parallel plot) is slightly suppressed, while the forward charge transfer rates for the same orientation (solid and dashed red traces) are an order of magnitude or more greater than orientation 2A (blue trace). Adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Experimentally, it has been shown for CuPc that molecular orientation can have an impact on the energy of molecular electronic states.65 Moreover, interfacial molecular orientation has also been shown to have an experimentally quantifiable influence on the interfacial charge recombination kinetics for TiOPc, CuPc, and PbPc.64 Molecular orientation has also been observed to influence the efficiency of charge transfer processes at CuPc/F16CuPc interfaces.122,123 Of course, the implication for device applications as it relates to open-circuit voltage is that the recombination and injection rates, hence the magnitude of Js, are related to interfacial molecular orientations as predicted from eqn (3). This is to say that controlling the coupling of the ground state to the CT state may be achieved by controlling the orientation of molecules at the D/A interface, thus minimizing Jsvia geometrically tailored molecular orbital interactions may be truly feasible.
It should be noted that care must be taken in addressing the interfacial electronic structure, since it may considerably impact the observed macroscopic materials behavior55,56,75 with respect to the isolated material. As such, precise characterization of interfacial frontier orbital energies has demonstrated relationships between molecular properties and electronic interactions for several common OPV heterojunctions.57,58,124 In particular, combining ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopies (UPS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopies (XPS) has helped to characterize the CuPc/C60 heterojunction contrasted with that of titanyl phthalocyanine (TiOPc)/C60. Commonly used in photoconductivity and electrophotographic studies, TiOPc may exist in several crystallographic polymorphs with disparate electronic properties,62,125 depending on process conditions126 and the nature of the surrounding medium. Similar studies have been carried out61,127 using aluminium phthalocyanine chloride (ClAlPc), a common photosensitizer28,128 and recently observed to yield photovoltage enhancements in OPV devices.129 Thus, detailed UPS and XPS studies have been invaluable in characterizing the performance enhancement62 observed in OPV devices fabricated using TiOPc.
5.7 Demonstrated kinetic impact on Voc
Recently, research in our laboratory has suggested a practical route for decreasing coupling between ground and CT state D/A pairs, demonstrated by the poignant result of substantially increased photovoltage for D/A pairs that would not have otherwise been expected from the simple ΔEDA model. In the first case presented here, we sought to understand the origin of the surprisingly high Voc for planar heterojunction devices using rubrene/C60 (Voc = 0.92 V) compared with tetracene/C60 (Voc = 0.55 V).112 Both donor materials consist of four fused six-member aromatic hydrocarbon rings and, although rubrene has phenyl substituents appended in the 5,6,11, and 12 positions, both molecules exhibit nearly identical ionization energies.63,130 Steric hindrance forces the rubrene phenyl rings to twist out of the backbone plane, electronically isolating them from the fused π-system.
Based on the ionization energies for tetracene and rubrene, respective values of ΔEDA ≈ 1.6 eV and 1.8 eV are estimated for the D/A heterojunctions formed between C60 and either donor material. From the thermodynamic model, the Voc of both devices should be comparable. However, it is clear from the J(V) characteristics in Fig. 14 that the rubrene based device produces a markedly higher photovoltage. Since the pendent phenyl rings of rubrene lie virtually orthogonal to the tetracene core, intimate intermolecular π-electronic interaction between adjacent molecules is inhibited. The effect of this reduced coupling can be observed in the broadened and red shifted absorption bands for tetracene in the neat film compared to solution. Rubrene, on the other hand, exhibits minimal change in its thin film spectral features compared with solution. The exposure of the π-system in tetracene is expected to lead to increased D/A coupling compared with the sterically hindered π-system of rubrene.
 Fig. 14  Semi-log scale J(V) characteristics in the dark (filled circles) and under illumination (open circles) for tetracene (black) and rubrene (red) based OPV devices illustrating the substantially higher Voc in the case of rubrene compared with tetracene, despite their similar ionization potentials. Adapted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Observations made in tetracene-based versusrubrene-based OPVs and related devices prompted us to experimentally explore the relationship of eqn (4) in more detail. For devices with ideality factor, n, close to 2, which is common for OPVs, the saturation current has been expressed as Js = Jso exp(−ΔEDA/2nkT).5 Substituting this definition of Js into eqn (4) and simplifying we obtain eqn (7). This clearly illustrates the relationship of the Voc to both ΔEDA and the intermolecular coupling at the D/A interface, represented by Jso. (7)While rubrene and tetracene have very similar values of ΔEDA, their Jso values differ by three orders of magnitude (cf.Table 1). The relatively isolated π-system in rubrene reduces the coupling at the D/A interface compared with tetracene. By implication, depopulation of the CT state becomes less kinetically feasible when going from tetracene to rubrene. This suggests that the enhanced photovoltage produced by rubrene arises in part from kinetically suppressed dark recombination processes resulting from a smaller Hij term in eqn (6). The smaller Hij value for rubrene results from poor D/A coupling at the rubrene/C60 interface, relative to tetracene, due to steric interactions between the phenyl groups of rubrene and C60 (cf.Fig. 14). It is an oversimplification to say that Jso is given by Hij, since Jso is also dependent on the reorganization energy (λ in eqn (6)). However, for similar systems, such as tetracene and rubrene, the relative magnitudes of Jso are largely due to differences in the spatial arrangements of donor and acceptor, which strongly influences the D/A coupling, i.e. Hij. It is also likely that a similar effect acts to minimize the dark D+ polaron concentration by suppressing dark injection of holes from the anode contact. Both the latter and the former would act to curb the photovoltage losses in rubrene.
Table 1 Dark current and photovoltage for various donor materialsa




Donor

V
oc


                    ΔEDA

J
so






a 
                      C60 acceptor heterojunction with Voc in V, ΔEDA in eV and Jso in mA cm−2.112






NPD

0.85
1.9
11



                    SubPc
                  
0.97
2.0
5.5



Tetracene

0.55
1.6
150



Rubrene

0.92
1.8
0.43



                    CuPc
                  
0.48
1.7
1.5 × 104



                    PtTPBP
                  
0.69
1.4
12




A significant effect on the Voc was also observed in the case of platinum tetraphenylbenzoporphyrin (PtTPBP) when compared against CuPc in C60-based heterojunction devices. Both CuPc and PtTPBP possess a 38 electron π-system and intense UV-vis absorption profiles. However, the ΔEDA for the PtTPBP/C60 junction is 1.4 eV, while that of CuPc/C60 is 1.7 eV. Based solely on these ΔEDA values, one might expect the photovoltage produced by the PtTPBP/C60 device to be significantly lower than that of the CuPc/C60 heterojunction. In reality, however, the PtTPBP-based device exhibits a Voc = 0.69 V, 20% higher than the CuPc based device, Voc = 0.48 V, as shown in Fig. 15. Again, the origin of this disparity appears to lie in the relative kinetic accessibility of the π electrons for the two donor materials. The PtTPBP possesses four sterically-hindered phenyl substituents that confer a perturbed non-planar saddle-shape or ‘butterfly’ contour on the molecule and reduce the accessibility of the core π-system compared with CuPc. In both the PtTPBP and the rubrene cases the aforementioned phenomenological frequency factor, Jso, are three orders of magnitude lower than their control device counterparts. Thus, considerable kinetic suppression of the recombination reaction, (D+A−) → D+A, results in the unexpectedly large photovoltage produced by these devices.
 Fig. 15  Semi-log scale J(V) characteristics in the dark (filled circles) and under illumination (open circles) for CuPc (black), PtTPBP (red), and PtTPNP (blue) based OPV devices suggesting that both ΔEDA and kinetic accessibility of the π-system play a role in determining Voc. Adapted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
In principle, materials with sterically inaccessible π-systems and non-planar geometries seem attractive for their apparent potential to control electronic coupling in OPV devices. However, in practice, this same quality is likely to deleteriously impact charge transport and exciton diffusion. Thus, further study is needed to understand the kinetics of recombination at the D/A interface and the dependence of dark free polaron concentrations on the nature of the electrical contacts and charge mobility of the incorporated materials.
Conclusions and outlook
Maturation of organic solar cells from laboratory concept into disruptive technology requires substantial advances in power conversion efficiency, photovoltage losses being a major limitation. Realization of these gains is a motivating factor to better understand non-equilibrium electronic processes in nanocrystalline and amorphous solids composed of π-conjugated molecules. Weak electronic interactions and low equilibrium charge carrier densities result in the decidedly dissimilar behavior observed for organic electronics compared with canonical semiconductor materials and devices. Consequently, despite significant effort based on traditional semiconductor models, a comprehensive description of OPV electronic processes has been slow to emerge. Therefore, it is compelling to consider the structure–function relationship of new material systems in a molecular context.
At low temperature or under intense illumination, when photovoltage losses may be neglected, qVoc is thermodynamically related to ΔEDA through the energy of the charge transfer state. However, under normal operating conditions, recombination losses appear to diminish the photovoltage obtained from certain D/A pairs, while virtually no temperature dependence is observed for others. Moreover, for certain material systems the nature of the electrical contacts has been implicated in determining Voc, while for others it has little effect. This seemingly disparate behavior can be rationalized on the basis of Marcus theory to describe the non-radiative component of charge recombination at the D/A interface. Within this framework, molecules with structural features acting to decouple the ground state from the charge transfer state, without impeding photoinduced electron transfer, will function in an OPV device with minimal photovoltage losses. Chemical properties that tend to increase the reorganization energy required for recombination will also limit photovoltage losses. Moreover, materials and architectures that act to inhibit injection of holes into the device from the anode or electrons into the device from the cathode are expected to act in accordance with le Châtelier's principle to leverage the photoinduced electron transfer reaction and subsequent charge separation toward the products side. Thus, photovoltage losses are expected to be suppressed in this case as well.
The outlook for organic photovoltaic devices as an economically viable solar energy conversion technology is extremely promising. However, despite continued improvements in single junction OPV power conversion efficiencies, certified record efficiencies have still not exceeded the tacit 10% minimum requirement considered practical for consumer applications. Photovoltage losses are a major contributing factor. The content of this article is intended to help the reader appreciate the photoelectrochemical origin of photovoltage losses in OPV devices and encourage the chemical community to undertake a coordinated effort in developing new materials, device architectures, characterization techniques, and theoretical models that address these potential losses.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge generous financial support from Global Photonic Energy Corporation, from the Center for Advanced Molecular Photovoltaics (CAMP) (KUS-C1-015-21), made by King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) and from the Center for Energy Nanoscience, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under award number DE-SC0001013. We also acknowledge insightful discussions with Dr M. Dolores Perez (CNEA).
Notes and references
A. Goetzberger, C. Hebling and H. W. Schock, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2003, 40, 1 CrossRef .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Hoffert, K. Caldeira, A. K. Jain, E. F. Haites, L. D. D. Harvey, S. D. Potter, M. E. Schlesinger, S. H. Schneider, R. G. Watts and T. M. L. Wigley, 
            et al.
          , Nature, 1998, 395, 881 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Hoffert, K. Caldeira, G. Benford, D. R. Criswell, C. Green, H. Herzog, A. K. Jain, H. S. Kheshgi, K. S. Lackner and J. S. Lewis, 
            et al.
          , Science, 2002, 298, 981 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Rand, D. P. Burk and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 115327 CrossRef .
P. Heremans, D. Cheyns and B. P. Rand, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1740 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58 CrossRef .
H. Spanggaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 125 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan, B. Gholamkhass, S. Holdcroft, C. Schlenker, M. E. Thompson, B. C. Thompson, D. Olson, D. S. Ginley and S. E. Shaheen, 
            et al.
          , Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1968 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, A. Dodabalapur and A. J. Lovinger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 4108 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, A. J. Lovinger and A. Dodabalapur, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 3066 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and P. R. L. Malenfant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 99 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Roberts, A. N. Sokolov and Z. N. Bao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3351 RSC .
B. Kippelen and J. L. Bredas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251 RSC .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924 CAS .
R. Steim, F. R. Kogler and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2499 RSC .
J. L. Bredas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, M. Liu, N. G. Pschirer, M. Baumgarten and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6817 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Hains, Z. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6689 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mathieu, P. Lefebvre and P. Christol, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1992, 46, 4092 CrossRef .
D. F. Blossey, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 2, 3976 CrossRef .
D. F. Blossey, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1971, 3, 1382 CrossRef .
I. G. Hill, A. Kahn, Z. G. Soos and R. A. Pascal, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 327, 181 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4688 CrossRef CAS .
G. de la Torre, P. Vazquez, F. Agullo-Lopez and T. Torres, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 1671 RSC .
B. W. Henderson and T. J. Dougherty, Photochem. Photobiol., 1992, 55, 145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bonnett, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1995, 24, 19 RSC .
S. Stachura, V. J. Desiderio and J. Allison, J. Forensic Sci., 2007, 52, 595 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Casey, D. D. Sell and K. W. Wecht, J. Appl. Phys., 1975, 46, 250 CrossRef .

          S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York,  1981 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Wang, E. I. Mayo, M. D. Perez, L. Griffe, G. D. Wei, P. I. Djurovich, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 233304 CrossRef .
R. Giridharagopal and D. S. Ginger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1160 Search PubMed .
C. Groves, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 612 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saini and B. Bagchi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7427 RSC .
E. Hennebicq, G. Pourtois, G. D. Scholes, L. M. Herz, D. M. Russell, C. Silva, S. Setayesh, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Mullen and J. L. Bredas, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4744 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jackson and R. Silbey, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 78, 4193 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, X. J. Jordanides and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1640 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fidder, J. Knoester and D. A. Wiersma, J. Chem. Phys., 1991, 95, 7880 CrossRef CAS .
T. Q. Nguyen, I. B. Martini, J. Liu and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 237 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stubinger and W. Brutting, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 3632 CrossRef .
D. E. Markov, E. Amsterdam, P. W. M. Blom, A. B. Sieval and J. C. Hummelen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 5266 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 034907 CrossRef .
R. R. Lunt, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1233 CrossRef .
R. R. Lunt, N. C. Giebink, A. A. Belak, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 053711 CrossRef .
B. A. Gregg, J. Sprague and M. W. Peterson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5362 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Rand, S. Schols, D. Cheyns, H. Gommans, C. Girotto, J. Genoe, P. Heremans and J. Poortmans, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1015 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Luhman and R. J. Holmes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 153304 CrossRef .
S. T. Roberts, C. W. Schlenker, V. S. Barlier, R. E. McAnally, Y. Zhang, J. N. Mastron, M. E. Thompson and S. E. Bradforth, The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 2011 DOI:10.1021/jz101554m .
K. Tsutsumi, H. Yoshida and N. Sato, Chem.
Phys. Lett., 2002, 361, 367 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanai, K. Akaike, K. Koyasu, K. Sakai, T. Nishi, Y. Kamizuru, Y. Ouchi and K. Seki, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2009, 95, 309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, A. Wan and A. Kahn, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 1 CrossRef .

          E. A. Silinsh and V. Čápek, Organic Molecular Crystals, American Institute of Physics, New York,  1994 Search PubMed .
H. Ishii, K. Sugiyama, E. Ito and K. Seki, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 605 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kahn, N. Koch and W. Y. Gao, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2003, 41, 2529 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Alloway and N. R. Armstrong, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2009, 95, 209 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brumbach, D. Placencia and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3142 CrossRef CAS .
S. Duhm, G. Heimel, I. Salzmann, H. Glowatzki, R. L. Johnson, A. Vollmer, J. P. Rabe and N. Koch, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 326 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kera, H. Yamane, H. Fukagawa, T. Hanatani, K. K. Okudaira, K. Seki and N. Ueno, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2007, 156, 135 CrossRef .
S. Kera, H. Yamane, H. Honda, H. Fukagawa, K. K. Okudaira and N. Ueno, Surf. Sci., 2004, 566, 571 CrossRef .
D. Placencia, W. N. Wang, R. C. Shallcross, K. W. Nebesny, M. Brumbach and N. R. Armstrong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1913 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sato, K. Seki and H. Inokuchi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1981, 77, 1621 RSC .
H. Yamane, H. Honda, H. Fukagawa, M. Ohyama, Y. Hinuma, S. Kera, K. K. Okudaira and N. Ueno, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2004, 137, 223 CrossRef .
H. Yamane, Y. Yabuuchi, H. Fukagawa, S. Kera, K. K. Okudaira and N. Ueno, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 5 .
J. Bredenbeck, A. Ghosh, H. K. Nienhuys and M. Bonn, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1332 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bredenbeck, A. Ghosh, M. Smits and M. Bonn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2152 CrossRef .
M. Khalil, N. Demirdoven and A. Tokmakoff, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 5258 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brixner, J. Stenger, H. M. Vaswani, M. Cho, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2005, 434, 625 CrossRef CAS .
V. Coropceanu, J. Cornil, D. A. da Silva, Y. Olivier, R. Silbey and J. L. Bredas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 926 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson, J. J. Kwiatkowski, J. Kirkpatrick and J. M. Frost, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1768 CrossRef CAS .
B. Servet, G. Horowitz, S. Ries, O. Lagorsse, P. Alnot, A. Yassar, F. Deloffre, P. Srivastava, R. Hajlaoui and P. Lang, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 1809 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Ma, C. Y. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Wu, G. Q. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hirose, A. Kahn, V. Aristov, P. Soukiassian, V. Bulovic and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 13748 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Scott and G. G. Malliaras, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 299, 115 CrossRef CAS .

          D. A. Neamen, Semiconductor Physics and Devices, McGraw-Hill, New York, 3rd edn,  2003 Search PubMed .
N. C. Giebink, B. E. Lassiter, G. P. Wiederrecht, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 155306 CrossRef .
N. C. Giebink, G. P. Wiederrecht, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 155305 CrossRef .
J. G. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3013 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoo, B. Domercq, S. R. Marder, N. R. Armstrong and B. Kippelen, Proc. SPIE–Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2004, 5520, 110 CAS .
W. J. Potscavage, A. Sharma and B. Kippelen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1758 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moliton and J. M. Nunzi, Polym. Int., 2006, 55, 583 CrossRef .
S. Yoo, B. Domercq and B. Kippelen, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 103706 CrossRef .
B. Mazhari, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1021 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cuiffi, T. Benanti, W. J. Nam and S. Fonash, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 143307 CrossRef .

          K. Emery, in Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, ed. A. Luque and S. Hegedus, Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK,  2003 Search PubMed .
K. A. Emery and C. R. Osterwald, Sol. Cells, 1986, 17, 253 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Matson, K. A. Emery and R. E. Bird, Sol. Cells, 1984, 11, 105 CrossRef CAS .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2016 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kearns and M. Calvin, J. Chem. Phys., 1958, 29, 950 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, D. Wuhlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. L. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez, J. C. Hummelen and T. Fromherz, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403, 368 CrossRef .
F. B. Kooistra, J. Knol, F. Kastenberg, L. M. Popescu, W. J. H. Verhees, J. M. Kroon and J. C. Hummelen, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 551 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lenes, G. Wetzelaer, F. B. Kooistra, S. C. Veenstra, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2116 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 435 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 599 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Barbara, T. J. Meyer and M. A. Ratner, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13148 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Gray and J. R. Winkler, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 1996, 65, 537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fedurco, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2000, 209, 263 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pichot and B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gregg, F. Pichot, S. Ferrere and C. L. Fields, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1422 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CAS .
S. Guha, J. Yang, P. Nath and M. Hack, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 49, 218 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hack and M. Shur, J. Appl. Phys., 1985, 58, 997 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Mutolo, E. I. Mayo, B. P. Rand, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8108 CrossRef CAS .
G. de la Torre, C. G. Claessens and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2000 RSC .
B. W. Ma, C. H. Woo, Y. Miyamoto and J. M. J. Frechet, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1413 CrossRef CAS .
B. Verreet, S. Schols, D. Cheyns, B. P. Rand, H. Gommans, T. Aernouts, P. Heremans and J. Genoe, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5295 RSC .
M. D. Perez, C. Borek, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9281 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Malliaras, J. R. Salem, P. J. Brock and J. C. Scott, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 1583 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gregg, M. A. Fox and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 1586 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kallmann and M. Pope, J. Chem. Phys., 1959, 30, 585 CrossRef .
N. Geacinto, M. Pope and H. Kallmann, J. Chem. Phys., 1966, 45, 2639 CrossRef .
A. Ortiz-Conde, F. J. G. Sanchez and J. Muci, Solid-State Electron., 2000, 44, 1861 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain and A. Kapoor, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 81, 269 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Banwell and A. Jayakumar, Electron. Lett., 2000, 36, 291 CrossRef .
G. Grampp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32, 691 CrossRef .
Y. P. Yi, V. Coropceanu and J. L. Bredas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15777 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, H. Huang, S. Chen, Y. L. Huang, X. Y. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7017 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, S. Chen, Y. L. Huang, H. Huang, D. C. Qi, X. Y. Gao, J. Ma and A. T. S. Wee, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 064910 CrossRef .
N. R. Armstrong, W. N. Wang, D. M. Alloway, D. Placencia, E. Ratcliff and M. Brumbach, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 717 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Klofta, J. Danziger, P. Lee, J. Pankow, K. W. Nebesny and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 5646 CrossRef CAS .
T. Enokida, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 1992, 31, L1135 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chauhan, R. Hatton, P. Sullivan, T. Jones, S. W. Cho, L. Piper, A. deMasi and K. Smith, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1173 RSC .
Y. Luo and D. Kessel, Photochem. Photobiol., 1997, 66, 479 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Bailey-Salzman, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 013508 CrossRef .
N. Sato, H. Inokuchi and E. A. Silinsh, Chem. Phys., 1987, 115, 269 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Cody W. Schlenker
	Cody W. Schlenker received his BS degree in Chemistry in 2004 from Linfield College in McMinnville, Oregon. He recently completed his doctoral work in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Southern California working with Professor Mark E. Thompson. Dr Schlenker's research has focused primarily on materials and devices relevant to solar energy conversion. Of specific interest are molecular aspects of interlayer excitation- and charge-transfer reactions that lead to photocurrent generation in organic photovoltaic devices, as well as the development of nanostructured composites, and alternative transparent electrode materials for solar energy collection.

Mark E. Thompson
	Mark E. Thompson is Professor of Chemistry at the University of Southern California. Dr Thompson received his BS degree in Chemistry in 1980 (U.C. Berkeley) and his PhD in chemistry in 1985 (California Institute of Technology). He spent 2 years as a postdoctoral fellow in the Inorganic Chemistry laboratory at Oxford University. Prof. Thompson took a position in the chemistry department at Princeton University in 1987, as an assistant professor, and moved to the University of Southern California in 1995. His research interests involve the study of new materials and devices for electroluminescence, solar energy conversion, chemical/biological sensing and catalysis.

 	Scheme 1  Donor materials 1–10 and acceptor materials A and B described in this article.	 

 	Fig. 1  Contemporary organic solar cell devices are based on donor–acceptor heterojunction architectures. (a) Energy level diagram. (b) Planar heterojunction configuration. (c) Bulk heterojunction configuration.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photoinduced charge transfer in organic solar cells involving (1) exciton generation, (2) exciton diffusion, (3) charge transfer state generation. Note that processes analogous to 1–3 may also occur in the acceptor material. (b) The motion of photogenerated charges involving (4) charge separation, (5) charge transport, (6) charge collection. (c) The forward progress for the dynamic equilibria involved in steps 1–4 must also compete with several alternative relaxation pathways that do not lead to photocurrent generation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Solar photon flux Φ (derived from ASTM G173-03 AM1.5G spectral irradiance) is plotted as a function of wavelength in the top panel. The absorption coefficient α for the active region of an archetypal organic donor/acceptor pair, CuPc/C60 (solid red trace, Organic D/A), is compared in the intermediate panel with that of gallium arsenide (dashed black trace, GaAs), a direct band gap semiconductor and both are contrasted with crystalline silicon (dotted blue trace, c-Si), an indirect band gap semiconductor. The bottom panel illustrates the percentage of solar photons captured by 1000 Å active layers with α identical to those in the middle panel, assuming a two-pass optical path.	 

 	Fig. 4  Simulated solar cell electrical behavior in the dark (dotted traces) and under illumination (solid black and red traces). The black traces represent a device with a markedly lower dark current than that of the device represented by the red traces. The sharp inflection points in the semi-log plots (upper panel) are the points where the current switches from positive to negative. Also illustrated in the linear representation (lower panel) is the power output of the devices as a function of voltage (blue line), given by the product of J and V. The fill factor (FF) is the maximum output power, Pmax, divided by the product of Jsc and Voc (FF = Pmax/JscVoc). The FF is often represented as the ratio of area of the filled gray rectangle (Pmax) to unfilled gray rectangle (Jsc × Voc).	 

 	Fig. 5  Recombination losses under forward bias in an OPV device. Holes injected from the anode Fermi level (EF,A) into the HOMO level (Ei) of the donor and electrons injected from the cathode (EF,C) into the LUMO level (Ea) of the acceptor are transported to the D/A interface. Coulombic attraction between holes and electrons yields the (D+A−) CT state with energy ECT. The recombination reaction (D+A−) → D + A occurs with rate constant krec, consisting of both radiative and non-radiative components.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Single diode equivalent circuit model commonly employed in estimating solar cell losses.	 

 	Fig. 7  Equilibrium energy diagram for a pn junction in an inorganic semiconductor material with intrinsic Fermi energy EFi, conduction band energy Ec, valence band energy Ev and with potentials φFp and φFn given by the respective impurity concentrations in the p and n regions. The quantity Vbi represents the total built-in electrical potential due to band bending.	 

 	Fig. 8  Energy level diagram for a typical D/A heterojunction depicting donor material with ionization energy of Ei and excited state ionization energy of Ei*, acceptor with electron affinity of Ea and excited state electron affinity of Ea*, and the interfacial energy level offset between Ei and Ea illustrated as ΔEDA, as described in the text. The driving force for charge transfer from the excited donor to the acceptor is given by Ei* − Ea.	 

 	Fig. 9  Comparison of J(V) characteristics for devices comprising ITO/Donor/C60/BCP/Al, where Donor = CuPc (red) or SubPc (blue). Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Temperature dependence of Voc for CuPc and pentacene donor-based devices compared with the relative temperature independence of Voc ≈ 0.9 V for the NPD based device. Reprinted figure with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2007 by the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of two hypothetical donor materials embodying the efficiency limiting trade-off between suppressed voltage losses on the left and robust spectral coverage on the right. Donor 1 exhibits a large ΔEDA and is expected to produce a large open-circuit voltage, whereas Donor 2 exhibits a small ΔEDA, but offers enhanced coverage of the solar spectral irradiance. Note that Ei* is identical for both donors, making the enthalpic driving force for charge transfer equivalent in both cases.	 
Js = qkrec[(D+A−)]	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 12  Free energy curves illustrating the free energy of activation ΔG*, the free energy of reaction ΔG°, and the coupling element Hij that determine the electron transfer rates in an OPV device.	 

 	Fig. 13  Molecular orientation and its influence on calculated charge transfer rates between pentacene and C60, indicating that suppressed recombination and efficient photoinduced charge transfer are not mutually exclusive. For example, the CT0 state to the ground state reaction 2B2gP+⊗2T1uC60− → 1AgP⊗1AgC60 rate for parallel orientation 2B (dotted red trace in parallel plot) is slightly suppressed, while the forward charge transfer rates for the same orientation (solid and dashed red traces) are an order of magnitude or more greater than orientation 2A (blue trace). Adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Semi-log scale J(V) characteristics in the dark (filled circles) and under illumination (open circles) for tetracene (black) and rubrene (red) based OPV devices illustrating the substantially higher Voc in the case of rubrene compared with tetracene, despite their similar ionization potentials. Adapted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 
	(7)



NPD
	0.85	1.9	11

                    SubPc
                  	0.97	2.0	5.5

Tetracene
	0.55	1.6	150

Rubrene
	0.92	1.8	0.43

                    CuPc
                  	0.48	1.7	1.5 × 104

                    PtTPBP
                  	0.69	1.4	12

 	Fig. 15  Semi-log scale J(V) characteristics in the dark (filled circles) and under illumination (open circles) for CuPc (black), PtTPBP (red), and PtTPNP (blue) based OPV devices suggesting that both ΔEDA and kinetic accessibility of the π-system play a role in determining Voc. Adapted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
