High efficiency solution-processed thin-film Cu(In,Ga)(Se,S) 2 solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE02352E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE02352E
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3674-3681High efficiency solution-processed thin-film Cu(In,Ga)(Se,S)2 solar cells†

        
          
            Ting 
            Zhang‡
, 
      
        
          
            Yixing 
            Yang‡
, 
      
        
          
            Deang 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shing Chi 
            Tse
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Weiran 
            Cao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zongbao 
            Feng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Song 
            Chen
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Lei 
            Qian
          
        
      *
      Suzhou Raysoll Nanotech, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215125, People's Republic of China. E-mail: qianl@raysoll.com; qian_lei@126.com
Received 
      12th August 2016
    , Accepted 18th October 2016First published on 18th October 2016AbstractThe polycrystalline chalcopyrite Cu(In,Ga)(Se,S)2 (CIGS) solar cell has been considered one of the most promising alternatives to conventional silicon solar cells, due to its achieving the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) among all the thin-film photovoltaic technologies, potentially lowered production cost and compatibility with large area flexible substrates. Unfortunately, almost all the high efficiency CIGS devices are presently fabricated via vacuum-based techniques, which still require expensive facilities and high power consumption, thus leaving the fabrication cost issue unresolved. Herein, a hydrazine-based, solution processed CIGS device with high performance has been demonstrated through the construction of a composition grading profile of the CIGS absorber layer, which enhances the charge collection efficiency and maximizes the solar spectrum absorption. ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO NP), as the window layer, are proven to be an ideal alternative to sputtered ZnO, benefiting from high optical transparency, smooth and defectless interface, adjacent to the CIGS absorber layer. The CIGS solar cell with a certified PCE of 17.3% is achieved, which is the world record efficiency for solution-based CIGS solar cells, and also shortens the efficiency gap towards vacuum-based devices.

Broader context
The polycrystalline chalcopyrite Cu(In,Ga)(Se,S)2 (CIGS) solar cell has been considered as one of the most promising alternatives to conventional silicon solar cells, due to its achieving the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) among all the thin-film photovoltaic technologies, potentially lowered production cost and compatibility with large area flexible substrates. Unfortunately, almost all the high efficiency CIGS devices are presently fabricated via vacuum-based techniques, which still require expensive facilities and high power consumption, thus leaving the fabrication cost issue unresolved. The cost-competitive solution-based technique for CIGS solar cell fabrication has therefore been developed to further reduce the cost. However, the efficiency of these solution processed devices is still inferior to that of CIGS devices made through vacuum-based techniques, despite the steady progress already achieved in recent years. Our work reported here is shortening the efficiency gap between vacuum and solution-based CIGS solar cells, and is believed to be an important step towards the realization of truly cost-competitive production of CIGS modules.

Introduction
Crystalline silicon solar cells are considered an indispensible source of renewable energy and currently dominate the photovoltaic market.1 In spite of the high industrial development already attained, the silicon-based solar technology is still struggling against the high production cost originating from the rigorous requirements for materials and processing. Several new technologies have recently emerged, especially the thin-film photovoltaic devices, which possess obvious advantages over conventional silicon wafer based devices, such as having only 1/100th the thickness of the absorber layer required, due to strong absorption of solar radiance, and are compatible with large area flexible substrates and roll-to-roll processing, aiming to significantly reduce the fabrication cost and raise the throughput. Amongst these thin-film technologies, the polycrystalline chalcopyrite Cu(In,Ga)(Se,S)2 (CIGS) solar cell has yielded the highest reported power conversion efficiency of 21.7%,2 along with reliable device stability and lack of the toxic heavy metal cadmium, making the CIGS solar cell one of the most attractive thin-film technologies. Unfortunately, almost all the high efficiency CIGS devices are presently fabricated via vacuum-based techniques (e.g. co-evaporation or sputtering), which require expensive facilities and high power consumption. Therefore, the fabrication cost issue still exists and the practical application is actually greatly impeded.
In order to further reduce the cost, several solution-processed approaches have emerged, including nanoparticle-precursor deposition,3,4 electro-chemical deposition5,6 and spray pyrolysis,7 all of which still have their own limitations: (1) the precursor solutions will be inevitably incorporated with impurities such as carbon, oxygen, and chlorine, which are difficult to remove and detrimental to cell performance; (2) it is usually difficult to uniformly dope Ga for most of the reported solution approaches; (3) high-temperature selenization under toxic gas (e.g. H2Se) atmosphere is still required in some cases; (4) other issues, such as complicated precursor solution preparation, low throughput, and low material utilization remain unresolved. As a result, these solution-processed approaches for CIGS solar cells actually failed to solve the high fabrication cost issue, making them still less competitive, compared to the prevailing vacuum-based techniques.
The search for a truly cost-competitive and reproducible solution-based technique for CIGS solar cell fabrication was falling into an impasse until a simple and controllable solution deposition approach for CIGS layers, featuring a chalcogenide–hydrazine complex as precursor was developed by IBM.8–10 In this approach, all the required elements are simply dissolved into the hydrazine-based precursor solution at room temperature, which is then deposited onto substrates to yield the desired CIGS film, with necessary heat treatment under inert gas atmosphere. The metal elements are introduced in the form of metal chalcogenides (Cu2S, Cu2Se, In2Se3, and Ga2Se3) with target compositions, and are mixed with chalcogen elements (S, Se) in hydrazine. The metal chalcogenide anions are separated by hydrazinium cations (N2H5+), generating a stabilized and homogeneous transparent precursor solution. The difficulties faced by previous solution-processed approaches are well addressed here, including fewer processing steps, no high-temperature selenization needed, and more facile Ga doping. Moreover, possible incorporation of undesired impurities (C, O, Cl) will be avoided, while on the other hand, the weakly coordinated hydrazine will decompose upon heat treatment and leave no detrimental impurities in the CIGS films.
Although this novel solution-processed technique can potentially offer many advantages towards reducing the fabrication cost and improving the reproducibility, the device efficiency is still inferior to that of CIGS devices made through vacuum-based techniques, despite steady progress already achieved in recent years. So far, the highest efficiency reported for the hydrazine-based solution processed CIGS solar cell is 15.2%,9 which is still 30% lower than that of vacuum-based devices (21.7%). Such an efficiency gap prevents the solution-based techniques of CIGS solar cells from having commercial application.
High efficiencies achieved by vacuum-based techniques, especially elemental co-evaporation, originate from the delicate design of the composition profiles for each element within the CIGS absorber layers. The resulting fine nanostructure of the CIGS layer is formed through a multi-stage process by varying the deposition parameters, such as deposition sequence and rates for each element at different stages, and a characteristic V-shaped Ga composition grading profile with a higher Ga content towards both the back and front of the CIGS layer is usually desirable to obtain high efficiencies.11–13 The higher Ga content towards Mo back contact will effectively drive the electrons away from the Mo back contact and suppress the recombination,14 while the front Ga gradient will facilitate the separation and collection of photo-generated charge carriers, as well as improve the open circuit voltage, Voc.15 The relatively low Ga content between the front and back grading profiles is favorable to build an optimal band gap to maximize the absorption of the solar spectrum. This fine tuning of the composition grading profile is, however, rarely studied and achieved in solution-processed CIGS devices.
An intrinsic ZnO (i-ZnO) window layer is also widely adopted by high efficiency CIGS devices, and is typically sputter-deposited between the CdS buffer layer and the conductive indium tin oxide (ITO) layer of the CIGS solar cell. It is found that this insulating i-ZnO layer significantly affects the formation of the ZnO/CdS/CIGS heterojunction, and thus, the overall performance of the completed cell. First, the existence of i-ZnO can help to control the defect distribution at the CIGS absorber layer interface, thereby obstructing the generation of additional point defects. Also, the combination of the ZnO and CdS buffer layer enables the self-limitation of open circuit voltage loss through the electronic isolation of local shunts and leakage pathways. However, the underlying CIGS/CdS p–n junction will be inevitably damaged or degraded by the highly kinetic particles during i-ZnO sputtering.
Given the discussion above, here in this work, we replaced the conventional sputtered i-ZnO window layer with solution processed ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO NPs), thereby, not only preventing the vulnerable n-type CdS layer from being damaged by high energy particles during sputtering,16 but also acting as a buffer layer to relieve the bombardment of ITO sputtering. We further found that the improved transparency and smooth interface generated by the ZnO NPs layer can also considerably contribute to the improved performance of CIGS devices. Moreover, we also introduced the V-shaped Ga composition grading feature into hydrazine-based solution-processed CIGS devices, by varying the element compositions of precursor solutions when successively coating the multilayer CIGS absorber film. With these two optimizations of the device fine nanostructure, our CIGS device shows a certified efficiency of 17.3%, which is so far, the world record high value for solution-based CIGS solar cells.
Results and discussion
The CIGS devices here have a typical device architecture consisting of molybdenum (Mo) sputtered on soda lime glass substrate, CIGS absorber layer, chemical-bath-deposited CdS buffer layer, ZnO window layer, sputtered ITO, silver collection grid and MgF2 anti-reflection layer. For comparison, the window layer here is either solution deposited with ZnO NPs or vacuum sputtered with i-ZnO (ZnO SP), both with layer thickness of 20 nm. In order to provide good electrical and chemical isolation between the p–n junction and ITO, and enhance device performance, the window layer is usually required to be (1) dense and smooth, and (2) highly optically transparent. Fig. 1 compares the atomic force microscopy (AFM) topographic images of ZnO SP and ZnO NPs deposited on top of either glass substrate or CIGS/CdS film. The film roughness, which is characterized by root-mean-square roughness (Rrms), of ZnO NPs (Rrms = 1.9 nm) is notably higher than that of ZnO SP (Rrms = 1.2 nm) when depositing onto a very smooth substrate, like glass. However, the relatively uneven surface of the CIGS/CdS film (Rrms = 6.6 nm, see Fig. S1, ESI†) can be smoothed by ZnO NPs with roughness reduced to Rrms = 1.8 nm, due to the good filling nature of solution deposition, while the roughness is mostly inherent with i-ZnO sputtered onto the CIGS/CdS layer (Rrms = 7.0 nm). The smoother interface created by ZnO NPs is expected to greatly avoid shunting between the p–n junction and ITO electrode and thus improve the shunt resistance of the device.
 Fig. 1  Surface roughness of ZnO NP and ZnO SP films. Tapping mode AFM topographic images of ZnO NPs and ZnO SP films on top of glass substrates (top row) and glass/CIGS/CdS films (bottom row). The scanning area is 5 × 5 μm and the scale bar is 1 μm for all four figures. The Rrms value for each image is also indicated. 
The transmittance of ZnO SP or ZnO NPs coupled with ITO is also compared, as shown in Fig. 2. The bilayer of ZnO NPs/ITO shows obviously higher transmission of incident light than ZnO SP/ITO in a wide wavelength range, especially in the wavelengths of λ < 700 nm. This optical spectral difference can be attributed to the different refractive indexes, n, of ZnO NPs and ZnO SP, as indicated in Fig. 3a, which originate from the reduced dielectric constant for ZnO NPs, due to the nano-scale nature of the material, as previously reported.17,18 As shown in Fig. 3a, the refractive index of ZnO NPs is measured to be only n = 1.59 at λ = 700 nm, while that for bulk ZnO SP is significantly higher and increased to n = 1.72 at λ = 700 nm, both of which were determined by spectroscopic ellipsometry.19
 Fig. 2  Optical transparency of ZnO NP and ZnO SP. Transmittance spectra of ZnO NP (red) and ZnO SP (blue) films bilayered with ITO. The film thicknesses are the same for ZnO NP and ZnO SP, and all the films have the same thickness as in the optimized devices. 
 Fig. 3  Size-dependent characteristics of ZnO NP and ZnO SP. (a) Refractive index spectra for ZnO NPs (red) and ZnO SP (blue), as determined by spectroscopic ellipsometry. (b) XRD spectra of ZnO NPs (red) and ZnO SP (blue) films. The stick pattern of the standard spectrum for bulk wurtzite ZnO is also shown for comparison. 
The ZnO NP and ZnO SP also show distinct X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra, as shown in Fig. 3b. The ZnO NPs adopt a wurtzite structure with very broad characteristic diffraction peaks, due to the small particle size, which is estimated to be 3 nm, derived from the full width half maximum (FWHM) of diffraction peaks based on Scherrer's equation. This value is close to the transmission electron microscope (TEM) result, which indicates an average diameter of 3–5 nm for ZnO NPs (Fig. S2, ESI†). In comparison, the ZnO SP shows a strong and preferential (002) diffraction peak, with peak width dramatically shrunken, clearly suggesting the increased grain size of ZnO.

Fig. 4a shows the comparison of the performance of CIGS devices employing either solution-processed ZnO NPs or vacuum sputtered ZnO SP as the window layer; the photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 1. The ZnO NPs based device exhibits improvement for all parameters, among which Voc is increased from 0.61 to 0.64 V (improved by ∼5%), Jsc from 30.38 to 32.89 mA cm−2 (∼8%), and fill factor, FF, from 70.7% to 74.2% (∼5%). The efficiency is thereby improved by almost 20%, from 13.1% to 15.6% for the ZnO NPs based CIGS device, which exceeds the former record efficiency (15.2%) reported by IBM, via a similar solution-based device fabrication process. The increase of Voc is primarily attributed to the smooth interface, as well as the reduced interface defects introduced by low temperature and gentle solution deposition of ZnO NPs. The Jsc has the most significant improvement of 2.51 mA cm−2, which is mainly due to the increased transmitted photon flux through the more transparent ZnO NPs and reduced recombination loss induced by decreased interface defects. The shunt resistance, Rsh, is enhanced from 541 to 1584 Ω cm2 as expected, due to the smoother interface formed by ZnO NPs, while the series resistance, Rs, is decreased from 2.7 to 2.3 Ω cm2. Both changes in series and shunt resistance thereby lead to an increase in FF for the ZnO NPs based CIGS device.
 Fig. 4  Photovoltaic performance comparison of CIGS solar cells with ZnO NPs and ZnO SP. (a) J–V characteristics under 1 Sun AM 1.5G solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) for CIGS solar cells with ZnO NPs (red circles) or ZnO SP (blue triangles) as the window layer; (b) IPCE spectra for these two devices. 
Table 1 Summary of photovoltaic parameters for CIGS solar cells with ZnO NPs or ZnO SP as the window layer




Window layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)




ZnO NPs
0.64
32.89
74.2
15.6
2.3
1584


ZnO SP
0.61
30.38
70.7
13.1
2.7
541




The improved Jsc achieved by the ZnO NPs based device can be further confirmed by the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra shown in Fig. 4b. The integrated Jsc for ZnO NPs and ZnO SP based devices derived from their IPCE spectra are calculated to be 31.68 and 29.58 mA cm−2, which are within 4% error of the measured values from J–V characteristics in Fig. 4a. The IPCE spectrum of the ZnO NPs based device exhibits increased efficiency, compared to the ZnO SP device, throughout almost the entire spectral response wavelength range, owing to the improved charge carrier collection (improved FF and Jsc) and increased transmitted incident light (improved Jsc). The relatively large increase in the IPCE spectrum in the short wavelength range (<700 nm) is in good agreement with the difference in transmission spectra between ZnO NPs and ZnO SP bilayered with ITO (Fig. 1b), which exhibits the maximum enhancement in the same wavelength range.
The formation of a V-shaped Ga composition grading profile with a higher Ga content towards both the back and front of the CIGS layer has already been widely proven to be an effective way to obtain high efficiencies of vacuum-based CIGS solar cells.20–22 In an effort to construct a similar composition grading feature via the solution processed technique, we carefully tailored the compositions of solutions for each layer, and successively deposited these film layers to comprise the CIGS absorber layer. Fig. 5a shows the optimized Ga grading profile (Ga/[Ga + In]) along the depth of the CIGS layer, characterized by secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). Only slight front grading (front grading height, Δxf = 0.005) at the CIGS/CdS interface is generated to assist the separation and collection of photo-generated charge carriers in the space charge region (SCR), and also reduce the recombination loss.15 The Voc will be slightly increased, since it is determined by the increased band gap in the SCR and the surface of CIGS resulting from higher Ga content. A similar strategy of employing low front grading was also previously reported to minimize the recombination.14 The low Ga content notch, located at the near-surface region, is designed to maximize the solar spectrum utilization and will be the main determinant of Jsc. Larger back grading (back grading height, Δxb = 0.046) than the front part is built with increased band gaps by primarily increasing the energy of the conduction band, which will effectively drive the photo-generated charge carriers away from the Mo back contact and suppress the back contact recombination. The Cu composition profile (Cu/[Ga + In]) is also designed with lower Cu content within the front 15–20 nm region of the CIGS layer, as shown in Fig. 5a. The Cu-deficiency induced Cu vacancy will create a n-type new phase with ordered defect chalcopyrite (ODC) structure, which then forms the favorable p–n junction with the p-type bulk CIGS layer.23,24
 Fig. 5  Composition grading profile characterization of CIGS absorber layer. (a) Composition profiles of Ga content (Ga/[In + Ga], right axis) and Cu content (Cu/[In + Ga], left axis) along the CIGS layer depth as characterized by SIMS. (b) Corresponding XRD spectra of the (204)/(220) diffraction peaks for CIGS devices with homogeneous (red) and composition grading (blue) CIGS layers. (c) SEM cross-sectional images of CIGS devices with homogeneous (left) and composition grading (right) CIGS layers. The scale bar is 1 μm. 
This Ga composition grading profile was further confirmed by XRD spectra of (204)/(220) diffraction peaks, shown in Fig. 5b. Generally, the incorporation of Ga content will lead to a reduced lattice constant and thus an increased diffraction angle. As shown in Fig. 5b, the diffraction peak of the grading CIGS sample obviously shifts to small angles, as well as wider peak width, compared to the homogeneous CIGS sample, both clearly indicating the formation of the Ga grading profile in the CIGS layer.25Fig. 5c compares the cross-section scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of CIGS devices with the homogeneous or composition grading CIGS absorber layer. The CIGS layers in both devices have the same thickness of approximately 1.4 μm, and are both highly crystalline with similar grain sizes, up to several hundred nanometers.
The device performance of CIGS solar cells are further improved by the construction of a composition grading profile, as demonstrated by J–V characteristics shown in Fig. 6a, and corresponding photovoltaic parameters are compared in Table 2. A slight increase in Voc from 0.64 to 0.66 (improved by ∼3%) is mainly due to the higher Ga content in the front grading, as well as the suppressed recombination. Both the front and back grading contribute to the enhanced FF from 74.2% to 77.2% (∼4%), owing to the reduced recombination loss. The favorable low Ga content notch, as well as the improved charge collection efficiency of the device, lead to Jsc increasing from 32.89 to 35.54 mA cm−2 (∼8%), which is the most significant improvement among all the parameters. The efficiency of 18.1% for composition grading of the CIGS device incorporating the ZnO NPs window layer demonstrated above, is therefore achieved, corresponding to an efficiency increase of 16%, compared to the device with the homogeneous CIGS absorber layer (PCE = 15.6%). The reproducibility of this high performance is verified by testing over 90 devices from multiple batches with exactly the same fabrication process, which yields an average efficiency of 17.1% (Fig. S3, ESI†). One of these devices was independently certified, confirming an efficiency of 17.3% under standard 1 Sun AM 1.5G solar illumination (Fig. S4, ESI†). This is the highest efficiency achieved so far by solution-based CIGS solar cells.
 Fig. 6  Photovoltaic performance comparison of CIGS solar cells with homogeneous and composition grading CIGS layers. (a) J–V characteristics under 1 Sun AM 1.5G solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) for CIGS solar cells with homogeneous (red circles) or composition grading (blue triangles) CIGS layers; (b) IPCE spectra for these two devices. 
Table 2 Summary of photovoltaic parameters for CIGS solar cells with homogeneous or composition grading CIGS layer




CIGS layer

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)




Homogeneous
0.64
32.89
74.2
15.6
2.3
1584


Gtrading
0.66
35.54
77.2
18.1
0.8
735




The IPCE spectra of these two CIGS devices are shown in Fig. 6b. The Jsc values derived from their IPCE spectra are integrated to be 31.68 and 34.76 mA cm−2 for homogeneous and grading CIGS devices, respectively, which agree well with those measured from J–V curves in Fig. 6a. The device with composition grading shows a broad plateau (IPCE > 80%) between the wavelengths of 350 nm and 900 nm, with maximum IPCE up to 92%. In contrast, the IPCE of the homogeneous CIGS device is considerably lower, consistent with the lower Jsc and efficiency of corresponding devices. In particular, the relatively large improvement in spectral efficiency in the long wavelength region is well matched to the characteristic low-Ga content notch built for enhanced utilization of the long wavelength portion of the solar spectrum, as well as the reduced recombination loss resulting from the back grading of Ga.
The IPCE spectrum for grading CIGS devices exhibits the onset of photoresponse at ∼1150 nm, suggesting an average optical band gap of Eg ≈ 1.10 eV for our grading CIGS absorber layer. Given that the open circuit voltage Voc = 0.66 V for grading the CIGS device (see Table 2), the voltage loss, Vloss, is thereby calculated to be 0.44 V, which is significantly lower than the previously reported 15.2% solution-processed CIGS device (Vloss = 0.54 V), and approaches those of high efficiency vacuum-based devices (Vloss < 0.4 V). This improvement is believed to benefit from the delicate CIGS interface optimization of our CIGS devices.
Conclusion
In summary, a high performance hydrazine-based solution processed CIGS device has been demonstrated through the construction of a composition grading profile of the CIGS absorber layer, which effectively reduces the recombination loss, enhances the charge collection efficiency and maximizes the solar spectrum absorption. The ZnO NPs, as the window layer, are also proven to be an ideal alternative to sputtered ZnO, benefiting from the favorable characteristics of ZnO NPs, including higher optical transparency, smoother interface generated adjacent to the CIGS absorber layer, and less interface defects created through the solution processed method. Both strategies effectively enhance the photovoltaic performance, and thereby lead to a certified efficiency of 17.3%, which is the world record efficiency for solution-based CIGS solar cells. Our approach involves shortening the efficiency gap between vacuum and solution-based CIGS solar cells, and is believed to be an important step towards the realization of a truly cost-competitive production of CIGS modules. Further optimization, including systematic tuning of CIGS grading profiles and corresponding adjustment of other functional layers is still required, in order to achieve efficiencies beyond 20%.
Methods
Materials synthesis
ZnO nanoparticles were synthesized by a solution–precipitation process reported previously in the literature.26,27 For a typical synthesis, a solution of zinc acetate in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (0.5 M) and 30 mL of a solution of tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) in ethanol (0.55 M) were mixed and stirred for 1 h in ambient air, then washed and dispersed in ethanol for device fabrication.
Preparation of CIGS precursor solutions
The precursor solutions were prepared in a nitrogen-filled glove box with water and oxygen levels maintained below 1 ppm. Caution: Hydrazine is highly toxic and should be handled using appropriate protective equipment to prevent physical contact with either vapor or liquid. In general, the CIGS precursor solution with a target elemental composition was formed by simply mixing the appropriate quantities of each element component in a single solution, while an excess of Se was usually introduced to form a high Se:S ratio material, in order to facilitate the grain growth. For a typical precursor solution preparation, 1.4 mmol Cu2S, 1.1 mmol In2Se3, 0.9 mmol Ga, 4.4 mmol Se and 2.8 mmol S were mixed with 10 mL hydrazine, forming a target Cu0.92In0.7Ga0.3Se2.5S1.4 precursor solution. By varying the In:Ga ratios mixed into the hydrazine, precursor solutions of CIGa0.5SeS, CIGa0.35SeS and CIGa0.1SeS can be prepared in a similar way.
CIGS device fabrication
CIGS devices were fabricated on 1 × 1 inch soda lime glass substrates (0.1 cm thickness), which were cleaned in ultrasonic baths of deionized water, acetone, and 2-propanol consecutively for 15 min each, and baked at 120 °C in an oven with ambient heating for 1 hour. The substrates were sputtered with approximately 700 nm Mo, forming the back contact of the devices. The coated substrates were then transferred into a N2-filled glove box to deposit the CIGS layers via spin coating. A single CIGS layer was spin coated at 800 rpm for 90 s and baked at 280–340 °C for 5 min on a preheated hot plate. This process was repeated for 14 deposition cycles and followed by a final heat treatment at 500–600 °C, generating a CIGS film of approximately 1.4 μm thickness. The homogeneous and composition grading CIGS absorber layer can thereby be formed by using the same and different composition precursor solutions, respectively, for each deposition cycle. For example, a typical composition grading profile of CIGS absorber layer can be produced by repeating 3 cycles of CIGa0.5SeS solution deposition (∼300 nm), 5 cycles of CIGa0.3SeS (∼500 nm), 5 cycles of CIGa0.1SeS (∼500 nm) and finally 1 cycle of CIGa0.35SeS (∼100 nm). The CdS layer was deposited, with approximately 30 nm thickness, using a chemical bath approach similar to that described previously.28 The window layer (25 nm thick) was either deposited with ZnO NPs via spin coating, or sputtered with ZnO (ZnO SP), followed by a 50 nm thick ITO top contact sputtered onto the glass/Mo/CIGS/CdS. Finally, the multilayer samples were patterned by printing the silver paste grid on top of the device to facilitate the photo-generated carrier collection. Each device was separated from neighboring devices by mechanical scribing and formed a total device area of 0.45 cm2.
Characterization and instrumentation
Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the CIGS solar cells in the dark, and under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination were measured in ambient laboratory conditions, using a Keithley 2420 sourcemeter. The light intensity from the Xe-arc lamp solar simulator was calibrated using a single crystalline silicon reference cell. The actual active device area was measured using a precision optical imaging instrument (DCGD Vision, DCV-2010ECM). To measure the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the devices, the while light emission from the Xe-arc lamp passed through an Oriel monochromator, and the monochromatic light was chopped at 400 Hz by a mechanical chopper, prior to incidence on the device. The photocurrent response was measured using a Stanford Research Systems 830DSP lock-in amplifier and a Keithley 438 current amplifier. The monochromatic light intensity was measured using a calibrated Newport 818-UV Si detector, which has the spectral response range of 200–1100 nm. The cross-sections of CIGS solar cells were characterized with a field emission scanning electron microscope (Hitachi S4800 SEM), with 5 keV electron beam energy. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was carried out using a Kratos AXIS ULTRADLD spectrometer with a He I (21.2 eV) discharge lamp. X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra (2θ scan) were collected using a Bruker AXS diffractometer (D8 Advance) with a Cu Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) X-ray source and step size of 0.02°. The film morphology and roughness were characterized in air using a Dimension 3100 atomic force microscope (AFM) operated in the tapping mode. The transmittance spectra of thin films were measured using a MAPADA UV/V-16/18 UV-Vis spectrometer. The refractive index of ZnO films prepared by different processing conditions was obtained by spectroscopic ellipsometry. The depth profile of elemental composition was characterized with a FEI PHI6600 SIMS system. Cs+ ions with ion energy of 5 keV were used as primary ions, and positive ions were detected.
Acknowledgements
Suzhou Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics (SINANO), Chinese Academy of Sciences is gratefully acknowledged for characterization assistance. We also acknowledge B. Sun, J. Tang and T. Song (Soochow University, P. R. China) for the assistance with IPCE measurement, L. (Lei). Li, L. (Ling) Li, Z. Chen, and R. Guo for the assistance with device fabrication, and J. Xia, Q. Sun for the assistance with device measurement.
References
2013 Results, International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic (ITRPV), 2014.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) efficiency chart, 2015, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, accessed 31 August 2015.
C. Kind, C. Feldmann, A. Quintilla and E. Ahlswede, Citrate-Capped Cu11In9 nanoparticles and its use for thin-film manufacturing of CIS solar cells, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5269–5274 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. McLeod, C. J. Hages, N. J. Carter and R. Agrawal, Synthesis and characterization of 15% efficient CIGSSe solar cells from nanoparticle inks, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1550–1556 CAS .
R. N. Bhattacharya, W. Batchelor, J. F. Hiltner and J. R. Sites, Thin-film CuIn1−xGaxSe2 photovoltaic cells from solution-based precursor layers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 1431–1433 CrossRef CAS .

          N. V. Bermudez, presented at the 5th Photovoltaics Thin-Film Week, Berlin, April 2013, unpublished.
D.-Y. Lee, S. Park and J. Kim, Structural analysis of CIGS film prepared by chemical spray deposition, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, S88–S92 CrossRef .
D. B. Mitzi, 
            et al., A high-efficiency solution-deposited thin-film photovoltaic device, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3657–3662 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Todorov, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen and D. B. Mitzi, Solution-processed Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 absorber yielding a 15.2% efficient solar cell, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 82–87 CAS .
C.-H. Chung, B. Bo, T.-B. Song and Y. Yang, Current–voltage characteristics of fully solution processed high performance CuIn(S,Se)2 solar cells: crossover and red kink, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 120, 642–646 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Gabor, 
            et al., High-efficiency CuInxGa1−xSe2 solar cells made from (Inx,Ga1−x)2Se3 precursor films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 198–200 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seyrling, 
            et al., Modification of the three-stage evaporation process for CuIn1−xGaxSe2 absorber deposition, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 7232–7236 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ranjan, T. Begou, S. Little, R. W. Collins and S. Marsillac, Non-destructive optical analysis of band gap profile, crystalline phase, and grain size for Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cells deposited by 1-stage, 2-stage, and 3-stage co-evaporation, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 22, 77–82 CAS .
T. Dullweber, 
            et al., Back surface band gap gradings in Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cells, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 387, 11–13 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chirila, 
            et al., Highly efficient Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cells grown on flexible polymer films, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 857–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, 
            et al., Solution-processed TiO2 nanoparticles as the window layer for CuIn(S,Se)2 devices, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1368–1374 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Chen, 
            et al., Dielectric functions of Si nanocrystals embedded in a SiO2 matrix, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 153301 CrossRef .
D. D. W. Grinolds, P. R. Brown, D. K. Harris, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, Quantum-dot size and thin-film dielectric constant: precision measurement and disparity with simple models, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 21–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Winkler, 
            et al., Optical designs that improve the efficiency of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1029–1036 Search PubMed .
I. Repins, 19.9%-efficient ZnO/CdS/CuInGaSe2 solar cell with 81.2% fill factor, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 235–239 CAS .
P. Jackson, 
            et al., New world record efficiency for Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin-film solar cells beyond 20%, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 894–897 CAS .
A. Chirila, 
            et al., Potassium-induced surface modification of Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin films for high-efficiency solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1107–1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Zhang, S. H. Wei, A. Zunger and H. Katayama-Yoshida, Defect physics of the CuInSe2 chalcopyrite semiconductor, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 9642–9656 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Wei, S. B. Zhang and A. Zunger, Effects of Ga addition to CuInSe2 on its electronic, structural, and defect properties, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 3199–3201 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rau and H. W. Schock, Electronic properties of Cu(In,Ga)Se2 heterojunction solar cells – recent achievements, current understanding, and future challenges, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1999, 69, 131–147 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, Y. Zheng, J. Xue and P. H. Holloway, Stable and efficient quantum-dot light-emitting diodes based on solution-processed multilayer structures, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 543–548 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, 
            et al., High-efficiency light-emitting devices based on quantum dots with tailored nanostructures, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 259–266 CAS .
M. A. Contreras, 
            et al., Optimization of CBD CdS process in high-efficiency Cu(In,Ga)Se2-based solar cells, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403, 204–211 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee02352e‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
The polycrystalline chalcopyrite Cu(In,Ga)(Se,S)2 (CIGS) solar cell has been considered as one of the most promising alternatives to conventional silicon solar cells, due to its achieving the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) among all the thin-film photovoltaic technologies, potentially lowered production cost and compatibility with large area flexible substrates. Unfortunately, almost all the high efficiency CIGS devices are presently fabricated via vacuum-based techniques, which still require expensive facilities and high power consumption, thus leaving the fabrication cost issue unresolved. The cost-competitive solution-based technique for CIGS solar cell fabrication has therefore been developed to further reduce the cost. However, the efficiency of these solution processed devices is still inferior to that of CIGS devices made through vacuum-based techniques, despite the steady progress already achieved in recent years. Our work reported here is shortening the efficiency gap between vacuum and solution-based CIGS solar cells, and is believed to be an important step towards the realization of truly cost-competitive production of CIGS modules.


 	Fig. 1  Surface roughness of ZnO NP and ZnO SP films. Tapping mode AFM topographic images of ZnO NPs and ZnO SP films on top of glass substrates (top row) and glass/CIGS/CdS films (bottom row). The scanning area is 5 × 5 μm and the scale bar is 1 μm for all four figures. The Rrms value for each image is also indicated.	 

 	Fig. 2  Optical transparency of ZnO NP and ZnO SP. Transmittance spectra of ZnO NP (red) and ZnO SP (blue) films bilayered with ITO. The film thicknesses are the same for ZnO NP and ZnO SP, and all the films have the same thickness as in the optimized devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  Size-dependent characteristics of ZnO NP and ZnO SP. (a) Refractive index spectra for ZnO NPs (red) and ZnO SP (blue), as determined by spectroscopic ellipsometry. (b) XRD spectra of ZnO NPs (red) and ZnO SP (blue) films. The stick pattern of the standard spectrum for bulk wurtzite ZnO is also shown for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photovoltaic performance comparison of CIGS solar cells with ZnO NPs and ZnO SP. (a) J–V characteristics under 1 Sun AM 1.5G solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) for CIGS solar cells with ZnO NPs (red circles) or ZnO SP (blue triangles) as the window layer; (b) IPCE spectra for these two devices.	 

ZnO NPs	0.64	32.89	74.2	15.6	2.3	1584
ZnO SP	0.61	30.38	70.7	13.1	2.7	541

 	Fig. 5  Composition grading profile characterization of CIGS absorber layer. (a) Composition profiles of Ga content (Ga/[In + Ga], right axis) and Cu content (Cu/[In + Ga], left axis) along the CIGS layer depth as characterized by SIMS. (b) Corresponding XRD spectra of the (204)/(220) diffraction peaks for CIGS devices with homogeneous (red) and composition grading (blue) CIGS layers. (c) SEM cross-sectional images of CIGS devices with homogeneous (left) and composition grading (right) CIGS layers. The scale bar is 1 μm.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photovoltaic performance comparison of CIGS solar cells with homogeneous and composition grading CIGS layers. (a) J–V characteristics under 1 Sun AM 1.5G solar illumination (100 mW cm−2) for CIGS solar cells with homogeneous (red circles) or composition grading (blue triangles) CIGS layers; (b) IPCE spectra for these two devices.	 

Homogeneous	0.64	32.89	74.2	15.6	2.3	1584
Gtrading	0.66	35.54	77.2	18.1	0.8	735
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee02352e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
