Graphene-based nanocomposites: preparation, functionalization, and energy and environmental applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE42518E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE42518E
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3483-3507Graphene-based nanocomposites: preparation, functionalization, and energy and environmental applications

        
          
            Haixin 
            Chang
          
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Hongkai 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *ab
aWPI-Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8577, Japan. E-mail: hxchang@wpi-aimr.tohoku.ac.jp
bDepartment of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong. E-mail: chhkwu@ust.hk
cState Key Laboratory of Material Processing and Die & Mould Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan 430074, PRC
Received 
      25th July 2013
    , Accepted 16th September 2013First published on 17th September 2013AbstractGraphene, a two-dimensional carbon sheet with one atom thickness and one of the thinnest materials in universe, has inspired huge interest in physics, materials science, chemistry and biology. However, pure graphene sheets are limited for many applications despite their excellent characteristics and scientists face challenges to induce more and controlled functionality. Therefore graphene nanocomposites or hybrids are attracting increasing efforts for real applications in energy and environmental areas by introducing controlled functional building blocks to graphene. In this Review, we first give a brief introduction of graphene's unique physical and chemical properties followed by various preparation and functionalization methods for graphene nanocomposites in the second section. We focus on recent energy-related progress of graphene nanocomposites in solar energy conversion (e.g., photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices, artificial photosynthesis) and electrochemical energy devices (e.g., lithium ion battery, supercapacitor, fuel cell) in the third section. We then review the advances in environmental applications of functionalized graphene nanocomposites for the detection and removal of heavy metal ions, organic pollutants, gas and bacteria in the fourth section. Finally a conclusion and perspective is given to discuss the remaining challenges for graphene nanocomposites in energy and environmental science.Haixin ChangHaixin Chang is an Assistant Professor in WPI-Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Japan. He got his Ph.D. in Materials Science in 2007 from Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Then he worked in Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University and Nanotechnology Centre, ITC, Hong Kong Polytechnic University before moving to Tohoku University in the beginning of 2011. He joined the faculty of Tohoku University as an Assistant Professor in 2012.Hongkai WuHongkai Wu is an Associate Professor in Department of Chemistry, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, and a junior Principle Investigator in WPI-Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Japan. He got Ph.D. from Harvard University in 2002 followed by 3 years in Stanford University as postdoctoral fellow. He moved to Hong Kong in 2007 as an Assistant Professor.

Broader context
Carbon-based nanomaterials have been in the frontier of nanotechnology from earlier C60 and carbon nanotubes to graphene. Graphene, a two-dimensional carbon sheet with one atom thickness, is one of the thinnest materials in universe, and has inspired huge interest in physics, materials science, chemistry and biology. Graphene has unique electronic, mechanical, optical, thermal, and chemical properties which are inherited from the two-dimensional atomic structures. The fast development of the graphene field has suggested the great potential of graphene in electronics, photonics, optoelectronics, and energy, environmental and biomedical applications. However, pure graphene sheets are limited for many applications despite their excellent characteristics and scientists face challenges to induce more and controlled functionality. Therefore graphene nanocomposites or hybrids are attracting increasing efforts for real applications in energy and environmental aspects by introducing controlled functional building blocks to graphene. In this Review, we summarize various preparation and functionalization methods for graphene nanocomposites followed by recent energy-related progress in solar energy conversion and electrochemical energy devices, and the advances in environmental applications for the detection and removal of heavy metal ions, organic pollutants, gas and bacteria. Finally a conclusion and perspective is given to discuss the remaining challenges for graphene nanocomposites in energy and environmental science.

1. Introduction
Graphene, a two-dimensional carbon sheet with one atom thickness, is one of the thinnest materials in universe, and has inspired huge interest in physics, materials science, chemistry and biology.1–5 Graphene has a theoretical surface area of 2630 m2 g−1, a mobility of 200000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at a carrier density of ∼1012 cm−2, and the highest electrical conductivity at room temperature (106 s cm−1).6–8 The strong mechanical properties of graphene with a Young's modulus of ∼1 TPa and breaking strength of 42 N m−1 and excellent thermal conductivity (∼5000 W m−1 K−1) are also favorable for various graphene applicatons.9,10 Graphene absorbs 2.3% light over a broad wavelength range for each layer which makes graphene transparent and suitable for specific optoelectronic applications.11 The fast development in the graphene field has suggested the great potential of graphene in electronics, optoelectronics, and electrochemical and biomedical applications due to its unique structure and properties.12–22 However, pure graphene sheets are limited for many applications despite their excellent characteristics. For example, graphene itself has weak absorption for light, making pure graphene sheets not suitable for collecting solar light efficiently. The capacitance of graphene is limited by the electronic double-layer regime and is very low. Therefore large-scale practical applications of graphene face the challenge to induce more and controlled functionality to pure graphene sheets.
Although graphene sheets were mostly explored in fundamental physics at the beginning, graphene nanocomposites or hybrids are attracting increasing efforts for real applications.23–30 The recent focus on graphene as a general platform for nanocomposites has inspired many possibilities in energy and environmental aspects by introducing controlled functional building blocks to graphene.31–40 Many methods have been developed to prepare functionalized graphene nanocomposites. Covalent and noncovalent methods, chemical electroless deposition, hydrothermal and solvothermal growth, electrochemical and electrophoresis deposition, photochemical reaction, and physical deposition and mixing are intensively pursued to prepare well-defined functional graphene nanocomposites. To introduce controlled functionality to graphene, molecules, nanoscale objects and polymers are applied to functionalize graphene toward specific applications.36,37 Various functional graphene nanocomposites have demonstrated strong potential in energy devices and have been applied for solar energy conversion (such as photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical cells and artificial photosynthesis), and electrochemical energy devices (lithium ions battery, supercapacitor, fuel cell). In addition to energy applications, functionalized graphene nanocomposites are also excellent platforms for environmental applications in the detection and removal of heavy metal ions, organic pollutants, gas and bacteria.
The progress made in graphene-based nanocomposites has been scattered in several reviews either with a focus on specific materials such as inorganic materials or polymers, or on specific applications in energy.27,29–36,39,40 However, a whole view of graphene nanocomposites from general preparation methods and functionalizations with all kinds of materials (molecules, nanoscale objects and polymers) to both energy and environmental applications is still missing. Here we review the recent progress made in graphene nanocomposites’ preparation methods, functionalization methods, and in their applications in energy and environmental areas. The preparation and functionalization methods of graphene nanocomposites are firstly introduced followed by recent progress in energy and environmental studies. Finally a conclusion and perspective is given to conclude this review.
2. Preparation and functionalization methods for graphene nanocomposites
2.1 Preparation methods
Many methods have been developed to prepare graphene nanocomposites, including non-covalent interaction, covalent reaction, chemical electroless deposition, hydrothermal and solvothermal growth, electrochemical and electrophoresis deposition, photochemical reactions, and physical deposition and mixing. Each method has its advantages and shortcomings and the fabrication of specific nanocomposites can be improved by adoption of most suitable preparation methods.

2.1.1 Non-covalent interaction. 
Non-covalent interaction is one of most frequently applied methods to prepare graphene nanocomposites. Non-covalent interactions between organic species and graphene promote the attachment of organic species on graphene surfaces. Small molecules like surfactants and polymers can interact with graphene surfaces by π–π stacking, or electrostatic or hydrophobic interactions, providing useful way to modify graphene surfaces for fabricating graphene nanocomposites.
Small molecules such as 1-pyrenebutyrate (PB−), PDI, sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS), 1-pyrenecarboxylic acid, and dendronized perylene bisimides can be conveniently applied to modify graphene.41–44 Xu et al. applied PB− to obtain highly water-soluble graphene because pyrene moiety in the molecule has strong π-stacking interactions with graphene surfaces.41 The processing was achieved by in situ chemical reduction of graphene oxide (GO) by hydrazine in the presence PB−. The obtained water-soluble graphene can be filtrated to fabricate large scale conductive graphene films with 7 orders of magnitude higher conductivity than graphene oxide (Fig. 1a). In another case, graphene can also be noncovalently functionalized by large aromatic donor and acceptor molecules such as pyrene-1-sulfonic acid sodium salt (PyS) and 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide bisbenzenesulfonic acid (PDI).42 The functionalized graphene has a strong doping effect to graphene and improves both the conductivity of the graphene electrodes and overall power efficiency in the bulk heterojunction solar cells. Another example is to use 1-pyrenecarboxylic acid to functionalize graphene direct from graphite without oxidation.43 1-Pyrenecarboxylic acid intercalated and exfoliated the graphite to single and multilayer graphene sheets, and at the same time, functionalized graphene by π stacking of pyrene ends in the molecules, with a –COOH group at another end of the molecule to stabilize graphene sheets in solution.
 Fig. 1  (a) Highly soluble PB− modified graphene. (b) The process to prepare graphene nanocomposites with a triblock polymer. (c) BSA proteins as adhesive agents to prepare graphene–nanoparticle composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, 45 and 56. Copyright 2008, ACS (a); copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons (b); copyright 2010, ACS (c). 
Polymers including polystyrene, polyaniline, and conjugated triblock copolymers are also widely applied to prepare graphene nanocomposites by non-covalent interactions.23,45–47 Stankovich et al. prepared graphene–polystyrene with molecular level dispersion of graphene in the polystyrene host by solution mixing of isocyanate-treated graphene oxide with polystyrene followed by chemical reduction.23 The graphene–polymer nanocomposites had a percolation threshold of 0.1%, the lowest one for carbon-based composites except carbon nanotube. An only 1% inclusion of graphene in the nanocomposites will make a conductivity of 0.1 S m−1.23 Qi et al. applied an amphiphilic coil-rod-coil conjugated triblock copolymer (PEG–OPE) to prepare amphiphilic graphene composites with excellent solubility in various solvents (Fig. 1b).45 The composites were synthesized by a two-step method. The graphene oxide was synthesized using a modified Hummers’ method followed by reduction by hydrazine in the presence of PEG–OPE. The excellent solubility was demonstrated in toluene, tetrahydrofuran (THF), chloroform, acetone, dimethyl formamide (DMF), ethanol, methanol, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and water. It was found that amine-terminated polymers such as amine-polystyrene can be noncovalently attached to the carboxylate groups on graphene surfaces, and the nanocomposites showed high dispersibility in various organic media.46 In another case, graphene was noncovalently functionalized by sulfonated polyaniline (SPANI) to produce electron-active composites with enhanced electrocatalytic activity.47
Metal ions can induce the noncovalent assembly of graphene to form three-dimensional composites or hydrogels.48,49 For example, metal salt precursors and graphene oxide are hydrothermally decomposed and can form three dimensional graphene nanocomposites with metal nanocrystals. Noble metal nanocrystals (Au, Ag, Pd, Ir, Rh, or Pt) on graphene sheets work as active sites to promote the assembly of porous graphene assemblies and composites. The three dimensional composite has shown strong potential in catalytic reactions for the Heck reaction with excellent activity and selectivity.48 Graphene oxide sheets also undergo a metal ions (e.g., ferrous ions)-induced self assembly process, together with the reduction of graphene oxide and the formation of FeOOH nanorods–magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles. As a result, macroscopic graphene nanocomposites with magnetic nanorods and nanoparticles can be prepared.49
Biomolecules such as nucleotides (DNA and RNA, both single- and double-stranded),26,28,50–53 peptides,54,55 and proteins56 can interact with graphene to form nanohybrids via π–π and electrostatic interactions. DNA is one of most widely applied biomolecules to noncovalently prepare graphene nanohybrids. Graphene–DNA hybrids were prepared via π stacking between a DNA base pair and graphene plane.28,50,51 The resulting nanohybrids can work as sensing platforms for DNA, proteins and inorganic ions. DNA on graphene surfaces with thiol ends can attach to noble metal nanoparticles to form graphene–NP composites.52 Peptides are another type of biomolecule which can also noncovalently form various nanohybrids with graphene. Aromatic peptide diphenylalanine can self assemble with graphene to form core–shell nanowires with higher electrical performances in supercapacitor electrodes than flat graphene sheets.55 Proteins such as BSA are amphiphilic biopolymers and are absorbed on graphene surfaces via hydrophobic interactions (Fig. 1c).56 These kinds of graphene nanohybrids can further work as a general glue to attach previously prepared metal and polymer nanoparticles. Most importantly, co-deposition of different types of nanoparticles such as gold NPs and polystyrene spheres on a single sheet can be achieved by this noncovalent assembly.56


2.1.2 Covalent reaction. 
Covalent reaction is another method conveniently applied to fabricate graphene nanocomposites. Graphene and graphene oxide can be covalently bonded to the surfaces by amide bonding, diazonium salt, atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) or click chemistry.57–67 Ionic liquids, p-phenyl-SO3H, porphyrin, polymer, perfluorophenylazide (PFPA), azidotrimethylsilane, organic nitrite, and even nanoparticles can be covalently bonded to graphene.
Amide bonding is widely applied to covalently functionalize graphene-based sheets. Stankovich et al. reported graphene oxide attached to organic isocyanate via forming amides and carbamate esters with carboxyl and hydroxyl groups on the surfaces of graphene oxide.57 Amine-functionalized porphyrin ((aminophenyl)-10,15,20-triphenyl porphyrin (TPP)) was also covalently bonded to graphene oxide in DMF via amide bonding (Fig. 2a).58 Similarly, amine-terminated ionic liquids were attached to graphene to form polydispersed nanocomposites which could be well dispersed in water, DMF, and DMSO for over 3 months because of the electrostatic interactions between the ionic liquid units on the graphene surfaces.59 In another work, alkylated graphene paper was fabricated by the alkylation of graphene oxide via amide bonding followed by chemical reduction. The alkylation of the graphene oxide in the first step created a stabilized structure which was maintained in the following chemical reduction.60 This produced uniformly conductive, alkylated graphene paper with ordered structures which has great potential in biocompatible materials, catalysis, supercapacitors and lithium ion batteries.
 Fig. 2  (a) Graphene–porphyrin hybrids produced via amine covalent bonding. (b) Covalent bonding of perfluorophenylazide (PFTA) to graphene by diazonium salt. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58 and 63. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons (a); copyright 2010, ACS (b). 
Another kind of covalent reaction for preparing graphene nanocomposites is to use diazonium salt. In one study, partially-reduced graphene oxide by sodium borohydride was sulfonated with aryl diazonium salt which can induce the sulfonated group SO3H on graphene sheets with a S/C ratio of 1:35.61 The sulfonated partially-reduced graphene oxide was further reduced by hydrazine to remove most residual oxygen functional groups. Sulfonated graphene has excellent solubility of 2 mg mL−1 in pH 3–10.61 Similarly, a wet chemical method was developed to produce covalently bulk functionalized graphene hybrids without oxidized defects. The graphite was intercalated with K in the 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) solution of K/Na alloys followed by exfoliation to single layer graphene. The graphene without oxidization defects was covalently functionalized by the addition of the diazonium salts, which will not cause any irreversible lattice damage to the graphene.62
Diazonium bonding also made it possible to attach graphene to perfluorophenylazide (PFPA) by photochemical or thermal activation. The graphene sheets functionalized by PFPA were highly soluble compared to unmodified graphene (Fig. 2b).63 This method was also applied to immobilize graphene sheets on silicon substrates with PFPA-Silane Coupling Agent, where silane ends are attached to the silicon substrate and PFPA diazonium ends are attached to the graphene by thermal treatments.64
Atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) can also be applied for the covalent functionalization of graphene starting from initiator molecules followed by growing polystyrene chains on graphene surfaces with over 80% grafting efficiency.65 The resulting polystyrene–graphene nanocomposites had improved tensile strength (by 70%) and Young's modulus (by 57%) with only 0.9 wt% graphene sheets compared to polystyrene. The resulted polystyrene–graphene nanocomposites also had improved thermal conductivity by a factor of 2.6 with 2 wt% graphene in comparison with polystyrene.66
Click chemistry is another way to covalently prepare graphene nanocomposites. Various photoactive molecules such as zinc–porphyrin and ruthenium–phenanthroline chromophores can be attached to graphene surfaces via click chemistry. In the first step, graphene was modified by phenylacetylene moieties with exposed alkyne groups followed by clicking with azide-terminated zinc–porphyrin and ruthenium–phenanthroline derivatives. The resulting nanocomposites showed significantly enhanced photocurrent responses.67


2.1.3 
            In situ chemical electroless deposition. 
There have been many efforts made to apply chemical electroless deposition to directly deposit nano-objects on graphene surfaces to form nanocomposites. Specific nanoparticles (NPs), nanorods and nanosheets can be deposited on graphene surfaces to form nanocomposites by in situ chemical deposition of the chosen precursors. These methods are very convenient to fabricate various graphene nanocomposites with metal, metal oxides and dichalcogenide nano-objects, such as Pt, Au, Ag, Cu, TiO2, Fe2O3, Mn3O4, SnO2, and CdS.68–78
Li et al. reported growing Pt nanoparticles on graphene by chemical reduction of Pt-containing precursors with a reducing agent in the presence of graphene and the reduction of both H2PtCl6 and graphene oxide by NaHB4 in one pot to form graphene–Pt nanocomposites.68 This method can also be used to grow bimetallic NPs on graphene sheets. Guo et al. fabricated graphene–bimetallic NPs nanocomposites with high electrochemical surface area using an in situ electroless chemical deposition.69 High-quality three-dimensional (3D) Pt-on-Pd bimetallic nanodendrites were deposited on graphene surfaces by a two step method (Fig. 3a). Pt precursors (K2PtCl4) were reduced on previously deposited Pd NPs on graphene sheets and formed branch Pt nanodendrites with the numbers of branches tunable with synthetic parameters. The obtained graphene–Pt and graphene–Pt-on-Pd bimetallic nanodendrite nanocomposites had much higher electrocatalytic activity for methanol oxidation than platinum black or commercial Pt/C catalysts.69 Similarly, Ag NPs–graphene nanocomposites can be fabricated by simply heating a silver nitrate–GO aqueous solution at 75 °C or by in situ reduction of silver salt in the presence of GO by glucose or NaBH4.70–72 Copper nanoparticle–graphene composites were also prepared by reducing the copper ions in presence of graphene oxide by potassium borohydride.73 The resulting copper NPs are about 20.8 nm in diameter and form a well interconnected network with graphene.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic demonstration of the preparation of Pt-on-Pd nanodendrites on graphene by in situ electroless chemical deposition. (b) Hydrothermal preparation of graphene–CdS NP nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69 and 92. Copyright 2010, ACS (a); copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons (b). 
Oxides can grow on graphene sheets by in situ chemical electroless deposition. In one work, graphene macroscopic hydrogel composites with FeOOH nanorods and Fe3O4 nanoparticles of robust interconnected 3D networks can be fabricated via the synergistic effect between the in situ reduction of graphene oxide by ferrous ions and simultaneous deposition of nanorods and nanoparticles.49 The composition and properties of the composite hydrogel highly depend on the pH value and the amount of reducing agent Fe(II) in the processing. In another study, graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites have been fabricated by in situ hydrolysis of absorbed titanium(IV) butoxide (Ti[O(CH2)3CH3]4) on reduced graphene surfaces with residual oxygenous functional groups.74 To achieve both a high conductivity and good attachment of TiO2 NPs, the oxidization time in the chemical exfoliation process were need to be optimized.
Metal chalcogenides like cadmium sulfide nanocrystals can be grown on graphene surfaces by in situ chemical deposition. Chang et al. prepared CdS NPs by absorbing Cd2+ ions on PB− functionalized graphene surfaces followed by reacting with S2− ions in solution at room temperature.75 CdS–graphene composites were also fabricated by microwave assisted reduction in the presence of Cd(NO3)2 and CH4N2S at 150 °C.76 This strategy can also be applied to the reactions between Zn2+ with H2S gas to form ZnS–graphene nanocomposites.77


2.1.4 Hydrothermal and solvothermal growth. 
Hydrothermal and solvothermal growth are also widely applied to prepare graphene nanocomposites. Due to high pressure hydrothermal and solvothermal processing, the obtained composites have close contacts and even covalent connections between graphene and the deposited materials, which are beneficial for various applications. To prepare graphene nanocomposites by hydrothermal or solvothermal processing, the precursor is mixed with graphene or graphene oxide in solution followed by hydrothermal and solvothermal deposition of the precursor on graphene in an autoclave. Hydrothermal and solvothermal methods are very versatile and can be applied to different kinds of materials.79–98 The metal/alloy nano-objects such as silver and PtRu, metal oxide (TiO2, SnO2, VO2, Mn3O4), metal chalcogenides (SnS, ZnS, MoS2), and complex compound (LiFePO4) nano-objects have been successfully grown on graphene surfaces with good control using hydrothermal or solvothermal methods.
Metal or alloy nanoparticles were grown on graphene surfaces by one pot hydrothermal reactions. In one work, reduced graphene oxide–Ag NP nanocomposites could be fabricated by hydrothermal conditions, with silver nitrate and graphene oxide as the precursors and ascorbic acids as the reducing agents.79 Similarly, platinum–ruthenium (PtRu) nanoparticles on graphene surfaces were fabricated using a hydrothermal method and showed two times higher mass electrocatalytic activity and better tolerance to poisoning issues in the electro-oxidation of methanol.80
Metal oxides can also be grown on graphene surfaces by hydrothermal or solvothermal methods to form graphene–metal oxide nanocomposites. Zou et al. reported one nanocrystal seed-directed hydrothermal strategy to grow various metal oxide nanorods on graphene surfaces such as TiO2, ZnO, MnO2, CuO, and ZrO2 to form metal oxide–graphene–metal oxide heterostructures. The heterostructures show 4 times higher photocatalytic performances than pure metal oxide nanorods.81 TiO2–graphene nanocomposites were fabricated using graphene oxide with glucose as a reducing agent using the hydrothermal method.82 P25–graphene nanocomposites prepared by a one step hydrothermal method showed strong adsorption to dyes, an extended light absorption range and efficient charge separation, resulting in significantly enhanced efficiency compared with P25 and P25–CNTs.83 The crystal facets of TiO2 NPs in graphene nanocomposites can be also controlled in the hydrothermal process.84 TiO2 nanosheets with exposed (001) facets and TiO2 nanotubes can form graphene composites by hydrothermal treatment in ethanol–water solvents or alkaline solution.85,86 In addition to the widely investigated TiO2, Fe3O4 nanoparticles with spherical geometry and a hollow interior, NiO nanosheets, VO2 nanotubes, MoO3 nanobelts, and Mn3O4 nanoparticles can form graphene nanocomposites through hydrothermal reactions.87–91
Metal chalcogenides–graphene nanocomposites can also be prepared by these hydrothermal or solvothermal reactions. Cao et al. reported CdS quantum dots grown on graphene by the solvothermal reaction of Cd2+ ions and graphene oxide in DMSO solvent at 180 °C (Fig. 3b).92 The graphene oxide was simultaneously reduced by the solvothermal processing. The CdS decoration was found not only to prevent the stacking of the graphene sheets but also the aggregation of the CdS QDs. The obtained nanocomposites have shown picosecond ultrafast electron transfer from QDs to graphene and have great potential in optoelectronic materials. Similar methods were adopted in a CdS clusters–graphene nanocomposite photocatalysts for hydrogen generation from water.93 Other metal sulfides such as SnS2 can also be fabricated using similar solvothermal methods for applications in lithium-ion batteries.94 ZnSe–graphene nanocomposites can be prepared by a one pot hydrothermal method by using graphene oxide and [ZnSe](DETA)0.5 nanobelts as precursors.95 The nanobelts were mixed with graphene oxide followed by hydrothermal processing at 180 °C for 12 h. Interestingly, nitrogen doping in graphene was also achieved at the same time during the hydrothermal reactions. The obtained nanocomposites have obviously improved electrochemical and photocatalytic properties for ORR and methyl orange degradation. In addition to the above mentioned metal oxides and chalcogenides, complex compounds such as Li4Ti5O12, LiFePO4 and Bi2WO6 can also be prepared by hydrothermal and solvothermal methods.96–98


2.1.5 Electrochemical and electrophoresis deposition. 
Electrochemical and electrophoresis deposition are other popular ways to prepare graphene nanocomposites. Metal, metal alloy and oxides are found to be easily deposited on graphene by electrochemical methods.99–113 Upon applying a potential or current, electrochemical reduction-induced formation of metal nanoparticles from solution can be achieved. Even some semiconductors such as CdSe can be electrochemically deposited on graphene to form nanocomposites.
ZnO nanorods were deposited on conductive reduced graphene oxide with the electrochemical deposition method.99 In brief, a constant current was first applied to seed ZnO on RGO followed by the growth of nanorods under constant potential mode. The conductivity of RGO has a strong influence on the ZnO morphology. Particle-shaped structures were found to grow on RGO with low conductivity while high quality hexagonal nanorods grow when RGO has a high conductivity. MnO2–graphene nanocomposites on textiles were also fabricated by electrochemical methods (Fig. 4a).100 In a typical process, graphene-coated textile surfaces are subjected to electrochemical deposition in a solution containing Mn(NO3)2 and NaNO3. The constant current of 0.1 mA cm−2 was applied on the coated textile which resulted in a deposition rate of ∼5 μg min−1. Graphene composites with Cu2O and ZrO2 can be prepared electrochemically in a similar way.101,102
 Fig. 4  (a) Electrochemical deposition of MnO2–graphene nanocomposites. (b) Photochemical routes to metal NP–graphene nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100 and 116. Copyright 2011, ACS (a); copyright 2012, Elsevier (b). 
Metals such as Cu, Pt NPs, nickel NPs, and even bimetallic NPs can be deposited on graphene sheets by electrochemical methods.103–106 In one study, AuPd bimetallic NPs were deposited on graphene by a constant-potential electrochemical reduction at −0.2 V in a solution containing HAuCl4, and PdCl2, and 0.1 M KCl. Glucose enzymes were further immobilized on the AuPd bimetallic NP–graphene nanocomposites for glucose sensors.106
Polymers such as polyaniline and polypyrrole can electrodeposited on graphene to form nanocomposites.107,108 Feng et al. developed a large scale, one step strategy to fabricate graphene–polyaniline nanocomposites. Typically, graphene oxide was mixed with an aniline monomer in the presence of H2SO4, followed by washing to remove non-adsorbed aniline monomer. The graphene oxide–aniline was further electropolymerized by electrochemical scanning between −1.3 and +1.0 V versus SCE in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte.107 Similarly, graphene–polypyrrole nanocomposites have been fabricated for flexible supercapcitors.108
Electrophoresis is another convenient way to prepare graphene nanocomposites.74,109,110 Graphene and other materials can be directly deposited on substrates by electrophoresis of the mixture solution. Zhu et al. prepared graphene–carbon nanotube nanocomposites with tunable CNT contents by electrophoresis of a mixture solution containing reduced graphene and CNTs with an applied voltage of 30 V for 30 min.111 Graphene–activated carbon (AC) nanoparticles were also prepared by electorphoresis.112 In another study, graphene–NiOH nanocomposites were prepared by electrophoresis of the colloidal solution of graphene oxide and Ni2+ ions. The GO was positively charged by Ni2+ ions and deposited on substrates under a negative potential accompanied by a simultaneous electrochemical reduction of GO to RGO.113


2.1.6 Photochemical reaction. 
Photochemical reaction is another way to prepare graphene nanocomposites.114–122 Under light irradiation, some photochemical reactions can happen in the presence of graphene, resulting in the formation of graphene nanocomposites. For example, graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites can be prepared by mixing graphene oxide and TiO2 nanoparticles in ethanol under irradiation by UV induced photochemical reactions. Because TiO2 is UV active, upon UV irradiation, the graphene oxide was reduced by accepting excited electrons from TiO2 followed by the formation of reduced graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites.114 This strategy was also applied to WO3– and BiVO4–graphene nanocomposites by photocatalytic reactions between their precursors and graphene oxide.115
In addition to metal oxide, metal nanoparticles such as Ag, Pt, Au and Pd nanoparticles can be deposited on graphene easily with the assistance of radiation.116–122 One strategy was developed to fabricate Au, Ag, Pt NPs on graphene with the photolysis of phosphotungstic acid (PTA) to reduce graphene oxide to graphene (Fig. 4b).116 At the same time, the photolysed PTA on graphene surfaces can be further applied to reduce metal precursors in situ. Therefore the metal NPs can attach to graphene without any molecular linkers. Well dispersed noble metal (Ag, Au, and Pd) NPs on graphene can also be prepared in dimethylformamide (DMF) by a two-step photochemical method. The first step was to photochemically reduce graphene oxide to reduced graphene by phosphotungstate under UV radiation. Then the noble metal ions or compound precursors were injected into the above system immediately to form graphene–noble metal NP composites.117 In another work, Ag–reduced graphene nanocomposites were prepared by the radiation of a mixture containing an ammonia–silver Ag(NH3)2OH complex and graphene oxide under a 450 W Hg lamp to initiate photochemical reactions to form Ag–reduced graphene nanocomposites.118 Similarly, silver NPs were also loaded on graphene oxide under visible light radiation via photochemical reactions.119 Photochemical depositions of Ag NPs on graphene oxide in an alkaline environment were also developed to prepare GO–Ag nanocomposites.120 Pt–graphene nanocomposites were prepared in a similar way without any reducing agent.121,122


2.1.7 Physical deposition and mixing. 
Another simple method to prepare graphene nanocomposites is to directly deposit materials on graphene by physical deposition methods such as physical vapor deposition or atomic layer depositon.123–127 High-k dielectric metal oxides such as Al2O3 were physically deposited on graphene surfaces by an atomic layer deposition (ALD) method.123 Metal oxide was formed only on the edge or defect sites of graphene while no direct deposition was observed in pristine graphene without defects. After coating a layer of carboxylate-terminated perylene molecules, the uniform ALD growth of Al2O3 on graphene in large area more than 5 μm was achieved. Metal nanoparticles were also physically deposited on chemically modified graphene (CMG) surfaces with controlled size and density by the physical vapor deposition method.124 The NPs growth on graphene was found to be very different for different metals (Ag, Au, Fe, Pd, Pt, Ti). The preferred strutctures on CMG were uniform films for Ti, connected, elongated and branched islands for Pt, and isolated NPs for Au and Ag with the Ag NPs larger than the Au NPs. The changes of morphology were related with the metal adatom adsorption and diffusion on the CMG. The size and coverage can also be well controlled down to about 1.5 nm diameter and coverage of 5 × 104 μm−2 for Au NPs.
Physical mixing is one of simplest method to prepare graphene nanocomposites. In a typical procedure, LiFePO4 NPs were mixed with graphene by spray-drying and an annealing process and finally wrapping by a graphene 3D network homogeneously.125 Alternatively, commercially available LiFePO4 particles were coated by graphene through a dropwise dropping of DMF graphene solution into LiFePO4 particles under gentle stirring under 180 °C.126 The coating processing was accelerated by the noncovalent interaction between graphene and the amorphous carbon shell on the LiFePO4 particles. These graphene modifications significantly increase the capacity and stability of LiFePO4 lithium batteries. Conducting polymers such as PEDOT:PSS were also directly mixed with graphene for high quality, solution-processable, transparent and flexible graphene nanocomposite electrodes after moderate thermal treatment which was comparable with ITO.127


2.1.8 Chemical vapor deposition. 
Chemical vapor deposition is another method to prepare graphene nanocomposites. Typically, graphene is applied as a substrate in the normal chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process, resulting in graphene heterostructures with other materials. Both CNTs and metal oxide can be successfully grown on the graphene surfaces using CVD methods.128–134 Kim et al. grew ZnO nanoneedles on graphene using vapor-phase epitaxy.128 The ZnO nanoneedles on graphene were found to have higher vertical alignments than that on SiO2/Si, and this was attributed to the enhanced nucleation at step edges and kinks on graphene surfaces. ZnO nanorod–graphene heterogeneous nanostructures were also achieved by tuning the CVD growth temperature, with denser nanorods arrays at the ripple boundary of graphene.129 In addition to ZnO, CNTs are also grown on graphene to form nanocomposites by the CVD method. Fan et al. reported the CVD growth of a three dimensional CNT–graphene sandwich which started from graphene oxide with uniform catalysts for the CNTs growth.130 The CNT–graphene sandwich had a surface area of 612 m2 g−1, much higher than graphene films without CNTs (202 m2 g−1). Transferable, pillared graphene–CNT 3D nanoarchitectures were also prepared using Fe-nanoparticle decorated copper thin films on SiO2/Si as a substrate.131 In another work, Zhu et al. reported a CVD-grown, seamless 3D carbon nanotube–graphene hybrid material with a surface area of over 2000 m2 g−1.132 A similar CVD procedure was applied to prepare a metal–graphene–CNTs hybrid and 3D graphene–CNT carpet microsupercapacitor electrodes.133,134

2.2 Functionalization methods
Various kinds of materials can be functionalized on graphene to induce more functionality. In general, there are three kinds of functionalization methods, either by molecules, nano-objects or polymers. By integrating the functionality of molecules, nano-objects and polymers with the excellent electronic, photonic, mechanical and thermal characteristics of graphene, graphene nanocomposites may create multifunctionalities which the pure graphene or the molecules, nano-objects and polymers cannot provide, or achieve significantly improved performance compared to that of the pure molecules, nano-objects and polymers (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Schematic demonstration of graphene functionalized with molecules, nano-objects and polymers. 

2.2.1 Functionalization with molecules. 
Small molecules have been one of most popular ways to functionalize graphene. Molecules such as surfactants, pyridine, proteins, DNA, RNA, peptides and complex compounds such as anticancer drugs can be functionalized on graphene surfaces, to enhance solution processing capabilities, or optical, electronic, and bio-related properties.
One of most important purposes of the molecular functionalization of graphene is to improve its solubility in various solvents. Chemically derived graphene has poor solubility and it is very difficult to use large scale solution processing techniques. For example, PB and SDBS were applied to modify graphene and to achieve highly soluble graphene over 1 mg mL−1 in water, which makes the solution-based fabrications of conductive films or biological analysis possible.28,41,43 DNA and proteins were also applied to functionalize graphene to achieve high solubility because the charges of these biomolecules in water stabilize the graphene sheets.52,56
Another purpose of molecular functionalization is to improve its optical performance. Porphyrin-functionalized graphene exhibited superior optical limiting effects, which was better than that from the benchmark optical limiting material of C60.58 The excellent optical limiting effect was related to the electron/energy transfer between porphyrin and graphene. In another work, noncovalent binding and electronic interactions between dendronized perylene bisimides and graphene was achieved in homogeneous solution and the fluorescence of the dendronized perylene bisimides was quenched due to the interactions.44
Molecular functionalizations also change the electronic properties of graphene. TCNQ on a graphene surface introduced a strong p-doing to graphene and changed the intrinsic electronic properties of graphene.135 Similarly, NO2 molecules absorbed on graphene also introduced a p-type doping to graphene which influences the charge transport.136 The doping types can also be tuned by different doping molecules to be p- or n-type doping by tetrasodium 1,3,6,8-pyrenetetrasulfonic or 1,5-naphthalenediamine acid, respectively.137 The carrier density in graphene can be tuned even to as high as 1.4 × 1013 cm−2, which is dependent on melamine coverage and annealing temperature.138
The functionalization of graphene by biological molecules changes the bio-related properties of graphene. In particular, biomolecular functionalization can change the bio-reactivity of graphene when forming nanohybrids and nanocomposites. For example, single stranded DNA can form a hybrid with graphene which has strong selectivity with complementary DNA down to a single base mismatch.139 DNA–graphene hybrids have shown ultrahigh sensitivity and selectivity for thrombin proteins, DNA, and heavy metal ions.28,50,51


2.2.2 Functionalization with nanoscale objects. 
Nano-objects such as nanoparticles, nanowires/nanorods, and nanosheets are another kind of functionalization frequently applied in the various graphene heterostructures and nanocomposites. Depending on the intrinsic characteristics of the materials, nano-objects provide different functionalities which cannot be found in pristine graphene. Nano-objects–graphene nanocomposites can have peculiar optical and electronic properties which combine the advantages of graphene and the nano-objects, and promote the potential of graphene in many electronic and optoelectronic applications.
Semiconductor nano-objects have excellent optical properties and can improve the low-absorption disadvantage of pristine graphene. For example, semiconductor CdS quantum dots/nanoparticles improved the photoabsorption significantly and photoelectrical responses when forming nanocomposites with graphene.75,92 ZnO nanowires/nanorods enhanced the UV responses of graphene when forming graphene–ZnO heterostructures because ZnO nanorods are UV-active, wide-bandgap semiconductors.25 TiO2 nanoparticles demonstrated enhanced photocatalytic and photoelectrical performances by forming nanocomposites with graphene with close contact between the nanoparticles and graphene.83
Graphene–nano-objects also show excellent performances in electrical and electrochemical aspects. In one work, MoS2 nanosheet–graphene nanocomposites had excellent electrocatalytic properties toward hydrogen evolution compared with pure MoS2.140 Ni(OH)2 nanosheet–graphene nanocomposites demonstrate a strong enhancement in electrochemical capacitance.141 Co3O4 NP–graphene nanocomposites showed strong oxygen reduction activity comparable with C/Pt catalysts while pure Co3O4 NPs had little oxygen reduction activity.142 Metal nanoparticle-functionalized graphene, such as Pt NP–graphene nanocomposites, provided an excellent electrocatalytic performance for methanol oxidization.68


2.2.3 Functionalization with polymers. 
Polymers are another kind of functional species widely applied to functionalize graphene in graphene nanocomposites. Polymers, like small molecules, are also applied to improve the solubility of graphene. For example, an amphiphilic conjugated triblock copolymer was applied to improve the solubility of graphene in various organic and inorganic solvents.45 Amine-terminated polymers, such as sulfonated polyaniline and amine-terminated polystyrene, were found to be very effective in enhancing the solubility of graphene in both organic solvents and water.46,47
Graphene–polymer composites have been applied in the enhancement of the electrical and electrochemical performances of pristine graphene. Graphene–polymer nanocomposites showed enhanced electrical conductivity comparable with commercial ITO both in transparency and conductivity.127 The capacitance of graphene was significantly enhanced by forming nanocomposites with conducting polyaniline for supercapacitors.143–145 Graphene–polymer nanocomposites also demonstrated high performances in photonic properties and ultrafast photonic devices.146,147 Poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc)–graphene nanocomposites had increased optical absorption by 10 times with only 0.07 wt% inclusion of graphene.146 Similar photonic effects were observed in polyvinyl alcohol–graphene nanocomposites in mode-locked ultrafast lasers.147 PEDOT–graphene nanocomposites also have enhanced photoelectrical performance with proper contents of graphene in the nanocomposites as anodes for light-emitting diodes.127 Graphene–polymer nanocomposites demonstrated the capability to enhance the mechanical properties of polymers with only slight inclusions of graphene in the composites.23,148 A 76% increase in tensile strength and a 62% improvement of Young's modulus was observed in poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) by including 0.7 wt% graphene oxide in the nanocomposites.148 Similar functionalization was also efficiently applied to graphene nanoribbons.149

3. Functionalized graphene nanocomposites for energy applications
Functionalized nanocomposites have been intensively investigated for energy-related applications such as solar energy conversion, and electrochemical energy devices. Here we describe briefly the progress in these fields including photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices, artificial photosynthesis, lithium ion and lithium batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells. Due to the fast progress and large numbers of publications, we only cover a limited number of works and try to give a balanced view of these fields.
3.1 Solar energy conversion

3.1.1 Photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices. 
Graphene and graphene nanocomposites have a great potential in photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices due to their excellent electronic and optical properties. Although pure graphene was firstly explored as a transparent electrode material for solar cells,19,150 graphene nanocomposites have been also proved to be competitive transparent electrodes in photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices.40,151–161 Moreover, graphene can be either a conductive platform or active element such as an electron acceptor in photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices.
Graphene nanocomposites provide alternative conductive electrodes to ITO and pure graphene sheets in photovoltaic cells and photoelectrochemical devices. Su et al. applied pyrene-1-sulfonic acid sodium salt (PyS)–graphene nanocomposites as transparent anodes in bulk P3HT–PCBM heterojunction solar cells.42 Photovoltaic devices from graphene composite electrodes showed a larger short-circuit current (8.2 mA cm−2), fill factor (0.31) and power conversion efficiency (1.12%) than those from pure graphene electrodes (5.4 mA cm−2, 0.26, 0.78%, respectively) due to the improved conductivity in graphene composite electrodes (Fig. 6a). In another work, graphene–polystyreneslufonate doped poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) composites were applied as counter electrodes for dye sensitized solar cells to replace conventional Pt electrodes.151 The nanocomposites counter electrodes show a high transmittance of over 80% at visible wavelengths and show comparable energy conversion efficiencies to Pt counter electrodes in DSSCs. Similarly, a CdSe QD-sensitized solar cell using a reduced graphene oxide (RGO)–Cu2S nanocomposite as a counter electrode and polysulfide electrolyte demonstrated power conversion efficiency of 4.4%.152
 Fig. 6  (a) Graphene–aromatic molecule hybrids as transparent electrodes for organic solar cells. (b) Highly doped single layer graphene for semi-transparent organic solar cells. (c) Semiconductor QD-sensitized graphene for photoelectrochemical cells. (d) Layered graphene–QDs for photovoltaic devices. (e) Graphene implanted in TiO2 films for dye sensitized solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42, 74, 75, 153, and 157. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons (a); copyright 2011, ACS (b); copyright 2010, Elsevier (c); copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons (d); copyright 2010, ACS (e). 
Graphene–gold nanoparticle–PEDOT composites were applied as top electrodes for organic solar cells (Fig. 6b).153 Semitransparent organic solar cells based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) were fabricated with ITO and graphene nanocomposites as bottom and top electrodes with a maximum efficiency of 2.7%. The devices showed a higher efficiency from the graphene than the ITO side due to the better transmittance of the graphene electrodes. The power conversion efficiencies decreased when the active area increases because the series resistances increased and the edge effect of the devices decreased.
Graphene can also be an active element in photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices. For example, isocyanate-modified graphene can be an efficient electron acceptor material in bulk heterojunction solar cells with P3OT or P3HT. The unique two dimensional structure of graphene improves the donor/acceptor interfaces between graphene and P3OT/P3HT, which facilitates the charge separation and transfer, resulting in a highest efficiency of 1.4% for the bulk heterojunction solar cells.154 In similar bulk heterojunction solar cells using graphene QDs as the acceptor a power conversion efficiency of 1.28% was obtained after annealing.155 In another study, graphene combined with silicon was shown to work as an active Schottky junction to fabricate Schottky solar cells.156 Under radiation, photogenerated electrons and holes were separated due to the existence of a build-in field at the interfaces of the graphene/n-silicon. Graphene enabled a uniform carrier separation and collection by reducing and eliminating the lateral potential drop along the graphene due to its two-dimensional and highly conductive nature. The best power conversion efficiency was achieved at 1.5% under air mass 1.5 (AM 1.5) illumination.
Graphene nanocomposites have many applications in photoelectrochemical (PEC) photovoltaic devices. CdS quantum dots (QDs) sensitized graphene nanocomposites were applied as photoelectrodes in photoelectrochemical solar cells and demonstrated a 3 times enhancement in photocurrent generation compared to pure QDs PEC cells (Fig. 6c).75 Similarly, layered CdS QDs–graphene nanocomposites show better performances compared with PEC devices based on graphene, QDs, and QDs–CNTs (Fig. 6d).157 With the nanoscale thin layered structure, the highest IPCE value reached 16% in the graphene–QDs nanocomposites and was much higher than other carbon–QDs solar cells reported (about 5%). Graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) are found to enhance the PEC performances in the CdSe QDs-based nanocomposites.158 Both GO and RGO showed enhancement of the charge separation and electron conduction, resulting in an enhancement in photocurrent generation by ∼150% compared with that without GO. The IPCE of P3OT PEC cells also increased about 10 times in the presence of 5 wt% small-molecule functionalized graphene.159
Graphene was an excellent electron acceptor and transporter in dye sensitized solar cells. For example, TiO2-based DSSCs can be fabricated by the deposition of Ti containing compound precursors and electrophoresis deposition of composites (Fig. 6e).74 The obtained graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites have two orders of magnitude higher conductivity and 5 times higher power conversion efficiency than pure TiO2. A similar enhancement of photoelectrochemical cells by graphene was also shown by the direct mixing of graphene and TiO2 nanoparticles.160 The photovoltaic performance in the graphene–TiO2 nanocomposite photoelectrodes was improved by 45% for short-circuit current density and by 39% for total conversion efficiency when compared with pure TiO2 nanocrystal photoelectrodes. The enhancement was also found in the CdS–CdSe quantum dot (QD) co-sensitized graphene sheets prepared by polymer brush templates, which showed significantly enhanced visible light response compared with graphene.161


3.1.2 Artificial photosynthesis. 
Graphene nanocomposites have shown potential in artificial photosynthesis such as photochemical and photoelectrochemical water splitting because of the unique characteristics of graphene as an electron acceptor and charge transporter.93,162–171 Graphene can be an efficient cocatalyst to replace noble metal cocatalysts like Pt which is widely applied in inorganic semiconductor-based photochemical water splitting. Graphene works as both a cocatalyst and as the conductive channels for graphene nanocomposite photoelectrodes in photoelectrochemical water splitting.
TiO2–graphene nanocomposites were applied in photochemical solar water splitting systems where graphene works as a cocatalyst to enhance the charge separation under radiation. Zhang et al. prepared TiO2–graphene nanocomposites from sol–gel processing and applied the nanocomposites as photocatalysts for H2 generation. The nanocomposite photocatalysts had 1.9 times higher hydrogen evolution than pure TiO2.162 In another study, TiO2 nanocrystal–graphene nanocomposites have been fabricated by a hydrothermal process and demonstrated higher hydrogen evolution efficiency in comparison with a TiO2–Pt NPs system (Fig. 7a).163 TiO2–graphene nanocomposites with Cu clusters and graphene as synergetic cocatalysts demonstrated 5 times higher photocatalytic performance than pure graphene as a cocatalyst in H2 generation from water using methanol as a sacrificial reagent, which opened a way to non-noble and inexpensive photocatalysts to achieve solar water splitting.164 TiO2–MoS2–graphene nanocomposites were applied in photocatalytic water splitting for H2 production (Fig. 7b).165 The positive synergistic effects of graphene and MoS2 hybrid cocatalysts improve the photocatalytic activity of TiO2–MoS2–graphene nanocomposites with a high H2 production rate of 165.3 μmol h−1, where graphene and MoS2 served as electron collectors and a source of active adsorption sites.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic demonstration of graphene as a cocatalyst for CdS and TiO2 nanocrystal-based solar water splitting. (b) MoS2–TiO2–graphene nanocomposites for solar water splitting. (c) ZnXCd1−XS NP–graphene nanocomposites for solar water splitting. (d) BiVO4–graphene nanocomposites for photoelectrochemical water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163, 165, 166, and 168. Copyright 2012, RSC (a); copyright 2012, ACS (b); copyright 2012, ACS (c); copyright 2010, ACS (d). 
Metal sulfide nanocrystal-functionalized graphene nanocomposites were applied as solar water splitting photocatalysts which showed a much higher H2-production rate than pure metal sulfide nanocrystals.93,163,166,167 CdS–graphene nanocomposites with a graphene content of 1.0 wt% and Pt 0.5 wt% has a 4.87 times higher H2-production rate than pure CdS NPs without graphene.93 A similar effect was observed when using ZnXCd1−XS NP–graphene nanocomposites (Fig. 7c).166 An apparent quantum efficiency of 23.4% at 420 nm and energy conversion efficiency of ca. 0.36% at simulated one-sun (AM 1.5G) illumination were achieved in the nanocomposites with the photocatalytic hydrogen production improved by 450% compared to pure ZnXCd1−XS NPs, and these were better than an optimized Pt–ZnXCd1−XS system. In another work, graphene oxide–CdS–Pt nanocomposites were fabricated with 2.5 times higher hydrogen evolution than GO–CdS and 10.3 times higher than CdS, which was attributed to the increased charge separation and the low overpotential of Pt in water splitting.167
As well as photochemical water splitting, inorganic semiconductor/graphene composites can also be applied in PEC water splitting.168–171 BiVO4, Fe2O3, Cu2O and WO3 were applied in graphene nanocomposite photoelectrodes for PEC solar water splitting.168–171 Ng et al. fabricated bismuth vanadate (BiVO4)–reduced graphene oxide nanocomposites for improving the visible light photoresponse in water splitting (Fig. 7d).168 The nanocomposites have a 10-fold higher PEC water splitting activity than pure BiVO4, which was contributed to the enhancement of the photocarrier separation at the BiVO4–graphene interfaces and the reduction of recombination. Successful water splitting can be achieved at 0.8 V, which was lower than the theoretical value of 1.23 V. Hou et al. prepared heterojunction arrays of α-Fe2O3–graphene–BiV1−xMoxO4 core–shell nanorods for PEC water splitting.169 The core–shell structures had increased absorption by the α-Fe2O3 cores and BiV1−xMoxO4 shells and enhanced separation of photocarriers at the interfaces, which make the heterojunction arrays achieve a high photoconversion efficiency of ∼0.53%.

3.2 Electrochemical energy devices

3.2.1 Lithium ion batteries and lithium batteries. 
High conductivity, a large surface area, and the light weight of graphene provide an excellent platform for lithium ion battery (LIB) electrode materials. Graphene nanocomposites have great potential in applications to improve the capacitance, cycling stability and rate performance in LIBs.91,125,126,172–192 Metal oxides, silicon, sulfur, complex compounds and metal can form nanocomposites with graphene for LIB electrodes. The presence of graphene also improves the performance of lithium batteries such as lithium–sulfur batteries.193–196
Mn3O4 NPs were deposited on reduced graphene oxide by two-step solution-phase reactions and applied in a LIB (Fig. 8a). The resulting nanocomposites had a high specific capacity up to 900 mA h g−1, good cycling stability and high-rate capability. The high performance was attributed to the close connections by wiring Mn3O4 NPs with RGO.91 Layer-by-layer assembly of a MnO2 nanotube (NT)–graphene hybrid thin film from filtration was applied for LIBs.172 The graphene layer in the hybrid provided a conductive pathway and electrical contact with MnO2 NTs, and formed a porous structure favoring the Li ion diffusion. The hybrid film showed excellent cycle and rate capabilities with a reversible specific capacity of 495 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 40 cycles.
 Fig. 8  (a) Mn3O4 NP–graphene nanocomposites for LIBs. (b) Co3O4 NP–graphene nanocomposites for LIBs. (c) Sulfur particles wrapped by graphene for lithium–sulfur batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, 181 and 193. Copyright 2010, ACS (a); copyright 2010, ACS (b); copyright 2011, ACS (c). 
Flexible graphene nanosheet–Fe3O4 composites showed a reversible specific capacity of 1026 mA h g−1 with 91% retention of its initial capacity after 100 cycles at 700 mA g−1.173 A RGO–Fe2O3 nanocomposite was prepared by homogeneous precipitation of iron precursors with GO and subsequent reduction by hydrazine assisted by microwave irradiation. The obtained composite anode for LIBs showed a discharge capacity of 1693 mA h g−1 and charge capacity of 1227 mA h g−1 which were normalized by the mass of Fe2O3 in the composite.174 Fe2O3 nanorice–graphene nanocomposites had a reversible capacity of 1184 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, 825 and 633 mA h g−1 at large currents of 1000 and 5000 mA g−1. Increased electrical conductivity and mechanical stability in the composites resulted in the high electrochemical performance.175 Fe2O3 nanowire–graphene core–shell structures prepared by a facile method were applied to LIB anodes, which showed an initial discharge capacity of 1338 mA h g−1 and 78% retention after 100 cycles.176
SnO2–graphene nanocomposites were also widely applied as the anode materials in LIBs. Wang et al. reported echinoid-like SnO2 NPs uniformly decorated on graphene for LIB anode materials. The anode showed a reversible capacitance of 634 mA h g−1 and retained a coulombic efficiency of 98% after 50 cycles. The high reversibility of the nanocomposites was induced by the buffering against the volume changes during the delithiation/lithiation.177 SnO2 nanocrystal–graphene composites were prepared by a facile method of chemical reduction of GO in the presence of Sn2+, and the resulting anode for LIBs had a reversible capacity of 541.3 mA h g−1 and a retention of 69.7% after 35 cycles.178 SnO2–graphene nanocomposites obtained by thermal reduction showed a charge capacity of 840 mA h g−1, and a retention of 86% after 30 cycles.179 Nitrogen doped graphene–SnO2 sandwich papers were applied as LIB anodes with a initial reversible capacity of 1300 mA h g−1 and a 45% retention after 20 cycles (583 mA h g−1).180
Co3O4 NP–graphene nanocomposites were applied as anode materials for LIBs (Fig. 8b).181 The Co3O4 NPs with a diameter of 30–40 nm worked as separators to prevent the stacking of neighbouring layers. A reversible capacitance of 800 mA h g−1 of the nanocomposites was achieved, which was much higher than the pure Co3O4 NPs, with a capacitance of 609 mA h g−1. In another work, oxygen-bridged NiO–graphene nanocomposites were applied as anode materials in LIBs.182 The NiO–graphene nanocomposites demonstrated a discharge capacity of 1478 mA h g−1 and an initial reversible capacity (1000 mA h g−1), higher than the values for the NiO nanosheet–graphene mixture (1066 and 696 mA h g−1, respectively) and NiO nanosheets (1193 and 602 mA h g−1, respectively). Vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) nanowire–graphene hybrids were fabricated via a green approach using single crystal, ultralong V2O5 nanowires.183 The initial discharge capacity of the hybrids reached 412 mA h g−1 at 50 mA h g−1 when applied as LIB cathode materials. TiO2 hollow particle–graphene nanocomposites showed 90 mA h g−1 of capacity and this was much higher than pure TiO2 (60 mA h g−1).184
Complex oxides can form graphene nanocomposites for efficient LIB cathode materials. Wang et al. prepared LiMn1−xFexPO4 nanorods on RGO surfaces by a two-step approach. The nanocomposites were applied as cathode materials with an unprecedented power rate performance and showed stable capacities of 132 mA h g−1 and 107 mA h g−1 for discharge rate of 20 C and 50 C, 85% and 70% retention for 155 mA h g−1 at C/2.185 Another example is LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2–graphene nanocomposites which showed a high discharge capacity (188 mA h g−1).186 Graphene-modified LiFePO4 composites were also applied as LIB cathode materials which showed a capacity of 70 mA h g−1 at a 60 C discharge rate, and less than a 15% decrease after cycling at 10 C charging and 60 C discharging 1000 times.125 A similar enhancement was observed in commercial LiFePO4 modified with 2 wt% electrochemically exfoliated graphene layers, which showed a capacitance of 208 mA h g−1 beyond the theoretical capacitance of LiFePO4 (170 mA h g−1).126
In addition to oxides, silicon was also applied as an anode material when forming nanocomposites with graphene.187,188 Silicon NPs were embedded in the 3-dimensional (3D) graphene matrix, and the obtained anode exhibited a reversible capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1 and 3200 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1.187 In another study, graphene from thermally expanded graphite oxide was applied to graphene composites with nanosized silicon, which achieved a capacity of 2753 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1.188 In addition, Sn and Sn-based sulfide were also applied in graphene nanocomposites for LIBs.189–191 Sn nanopillar arrays embedded between graphene sheets were prepared for LIB anodes with an initial discharge capacity of 734 mA h g−1 and 92.5% retention after 30 cycles.189 Sn NP–graphene 3D nanocomposites were also applied in LIB anodes achieving a reversible charging capacity of 810 mA h g−1 in the first cycle and 508 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles.190 Few-layer SnS2–graphene nanohybrids were shown to have a capacity of 920 mA h g−1 with high stability and high rate performance in LIB anode materials.191 The comparison of various graphene nanocomposites in LIB electrodes is listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Electrochemical performance for various graphene nanocomposite LIB electrodes




Materials
Electrode type
Performance
Reference




Mn3O4 NP–RGO
Anode
900 mA h g−1

91



MnO2 nanotube–graphene
Anode
495 mA h g−1

172



Graphene wrapped Fe3O4 particles
Anode
1026 mA h g−1

173



RGO–Fe2O3 nanocrystals
Anode
1693 mA h g−1

174



Fe2O3 nanorice–graphene
Anode
1184 mA h g−1

175



Fe2O3 nanowire–graphene core–shell structures
Anode
1338 mA h g−1

176



SnO2 NPs–graphene
Anode
634 mA h g−1

177



SnO2 nanocrystal–graphene
Anode
541.3 mA h g−1

178



Nitrogen doped graphene–SnO2 nanocrystal sandwich
Anode
1300 mA h g−1

180



Co3O4 NP–graphene
Anode
800 mA h g−1

181



NiO nanosheet–graphene
Anode
1000 mA h g−1

182



V2O5 nanowire–graphene
Anode
412 mA h g−1

183



TiO2 hollow particle–graphene
Anode
90 mA h g−1

184



Silicon NPs–3D graphene
Anode
3200 mA h g−1

187



Nanosized silicon–graphene
Anode
2753 mA h g−1

188



Sn nanopillar arrays–graphene
Anode
734 mA h g−1

189



Sn NP–graphene
Anode
810 mA h g−1

190



Few-layer SnS2–graphene
Anode
920 mA h g−1

191



LiMn1−xFexPO4 nanorods–RGO
Cathode
132 mA h g−1

185



LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 NP–graphene
Cathode
188 mA h g−1

186



Graphene-modified LiFePO4 NPs
Cathode
70 mA h g−1

125



Commercial LiFePO4–graphene
Cathode
208 mA h g−1

126





In addition to their use in LIBs, graphene nanocomposites have also been applied in lithium batteries (LBs) such as lithium–sulfur batteries.193–196 For example, submicrometer sulfur particles can be wrapped with mildly oxidized GO, and these showed a stable capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, which could be an efficient cathode material for rechargeable lithium–sulfur batteries (Fig. 8c).193 The capacity for a cathode in lithium–sulfur batteries can be 505 mA h g−1 for functionalized graphene–sulfur nanocomposites.194 In another work, a chemical approach was developed to coat tens of nanometer thick sulfur on GO followed by a low temperature treatment.195 The nanocomposites showed a reversible capacity of 950–1400 mA h g−1 and excellent stability for over 50 cycles at 0.1 C (167.5 mA g−1).


3.2.2 Supercapacitors. 
Graphene sheets have been pursued intensively for supercapacitor applications.197–203 Pure graphene sheet-based supercapacitors have extremely long cycling stability but low capacitance because of the electronic double-layer regime. Therefore many efforts have been made to integrate pseudocapacitance materials with graphene to improve the capacitance. At the same time, the excellent electronic properties of graphene will enhance the electrochemical stability in the supercapacitor electrodes.
Metal oxide–graphene nanocomposites have been most widely applied materials in graphene hybrid supercapacitors. Single-crystalline Ni(OH)2 hexagonal nanoplates were grown on slightly oxidized graphene to form Ni(OH)2–graphene nanocomposites for electrochemical pseudocapacitors with a specific capacitance of 1335 F g−1 at 2.8 A g−1 and 935 F g−1 at 45.7 A g−1.141 The supercapacitor also showed excellent cycling performance over 2000 cycles. The high performance was attributed to the direct growth of NiOH which had a strong connection with the conductive graphene sheets. In another study, NiO–graphene hybrid supercapacitor electrodes were prepared by electrochemical deposition of NiO on a CVD-grown 3D graphene network with a resulting 816 F g−1 capacitance at 5 mV s−1 scan rate and no decrease in capacitance after 2000 cycles.204
MnO2 is another oxide widely applied in graphene nanocomposites for supercapacitors. Solution-processed MnO2–graphene nanocomposite textiles were applied as supercapacitor electrodes. A specific capacitance of 315 F g−1 was observed with a maximum power density of 110 kW kg−1 and an energy density of 12.5 W h kg−1. The supercapacitor showed ∼95% capacitance retention after a 5000 cycles test.100 GO–needle-like MnO2 nanocrystal nanocomposites were fabricated through a soft chemical route in a water-isopropyl alcohol system and the obtained composites were tested as a supercapacitor electrode with a capacitance of 197.2 F g−1.205 Asymmetric supercapacitors using graphene as a negative electrode and a MnO2 nanowire–graphene composite as a positive electrode had an energy density of 30.4 W h kg−1 and a high power density (5000 W kg−1 at 7.0 W h kg−1) (Fig. 9a).206 The performance of the supercapacitor showed a 79% retention over 1000 cycling tests. Electrochemically deposited MnO2–CVD graphene layered composites were applied as supercapacitor electrodes with a capacitance of 399.82 F g−1.207 MnO2 nanorods were electrochemically decorated on graphene surfaces and the resulting material was applied as a supercapacitor electrode, with a capacitance of 328 F g−1, energy density of 11.4 W h kg−1 and a power density of 25.8 kW kg−1 after electroactivation.208
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic view of asymmetric supercapacitors using graphene as the negative electrode and a MnO2 nanowire–graphene composite as the positive electrode. (b) Vertical PANI nanowire–graphene hierarchical structures for supercapacitors. (c) Fabrication of graphene–CNT–MnO2 nanocomposite supercapacitor electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144, 206 and 220. Copyright 2010, ACS (a); copyright 2010, ACS (b); copyright 2012, ACS (c). 
Hydrous ruthenium oxide (RuO2) NP–graphene sheet composites (ROGSCs) were also prepared.209 The synergistic effect between graphene and RuO2 NPs enhanced the electrochemical performance of the composite supercapacitor electrodes, showing a capacitance of 570 F g−1, energy density of 20.1 W h kg−1 at 100 mA g−1, power density of 10000 W kg−1, and 97.9% retention after 1000 cycles. RuO2–graphene composite electrodes can also be paired with a Ni(OH)2/graphene electrode to form asymmetric supercapacitors, which had a ∼48 W h kg−1 energy density at ∼0.23 kW kg−1 power density and a ∼21 kW kg−1 power density at ∼14 W h kg−1 energy density.210 Cobalt oxide (Co3O4) nanowire–3D CVD graphene foam composites have been prepared by a hydrothermal process and applied in supercapacitor electrodes with a capacitance of ∼1100 F g−1 at a current density of 10 A g−1.211 The supercapacitor also demonstrated excellent stability in a 1000 cycles test. Fe3O4–graphene sandwich nanocomposites were fabricated via electrochemical transformation of the grown FeOOH nanorods on the surface of graphene with an energy density of 85 W h kg−1.212
In addition to oxides, conducting polymers are another kind of material which are broadly applied in graphene nanocomposites for supercapacitors. For example, the specific capacitance of graphene–polyaniline (PANI) nanocomposites was 531 F g−1 at 200 mA g−1, which was 2 times higher than the 216 F g−1 for PANI-based supercapacitors.143 A novel method for synthesizing PANI–graphene nanocomposites was developed starting from in situ polymerization of PANI on the graphene surfaces followed by hot sodium hydroxide reduction and acid redoping. The resulting supercapacitor had a specific capacitance of 1126 F g−1 and 84% retention in 1000 cycles.213 Electrochemically synthesized graphene–PANI nanocomposite film was fabricated on ITO starting from GO and aniline, with a specific capacitance of 640 F g−1 and a retention of 90% in 1000 charge/discharge cycles.107 Chemically-converted graphene (CCG) and PANI nanofibers were filtrated from a mixed dispersion to form the nanocomposites. The CCG–PANI nanofiber composites were flexible, mechanically stable, and conductive, which made them good candidates for supercapacitor electrodes, with a specific capacitance of 210 F g−1 at a discharge rate of 0.3 A g−1 and improved electrochemical stability and rate performance.214In situ growth of vertical PANI nanowires on graphene oxide sheets was also developed, with a tunable morphology and hierarchical structure for supercapacitor electrodes (Fig. 9b), showing specific capacitance of 555 F g−1 at a discharge current of 0.2 A g−1 and 227 F g−1 at 2 A g−1.144 The significantly enhanced stability in the nanocomposites was confirmed by the 92% retention in the 2000 cycles test, much higher than the 74% retention for pure PANI nanowires. A novel PANI–RGO nanocomposite supercapacitor electrodes were fabricated by an in situ grafting of an aniline monomer to the edge of the graphene oxide followed by the polymerization and reduction of GO, resulting in a capacitance of 250 F g−1 and conductivity of 8.66 S cm−1.215
Another kind of conducting polymer, poly(pyrrole) (PPy), was also applied in graphene nanocomposites for supercapacitors. Zhang et al. prepared polymerized poly(pyrrole) on graphene in situ resulting in 482 F g−1 capacitance with less than a 5% decrease in 1000 cycles.216 Layered conducting PPy–graphene oxide sandwiches exhibited a specific capacitance of over 500 F g−1 with a good rate performance and cycle stability.217 Multilayered PPy nanowire–graphene nanocomposites can also prepared by a capillary-driven self assembly for binder-free supercapacitor electrodes with a capacitance of 165 F g−1.218
CNTs are frequently applied in graphene nanocomposites for supercapacitor applications. Fan et al. fabricated 3D CNT–graphene sandwich (CGS) structures via growing CNT pillars between the graphene layers.130 The supercapacitor electrodes based on such 3D CGS nanocomposites showed a capacitance of 385 F g−1 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. A capacitance increase of about 20% was observed in a 2000 cycles test, indicating the good cycling stability of the supercapacitor electrodes.130 PEI-modified graphene sheets formed a hybrid assembly with acid-oxidized CNTs via electrostatic self assembly and were applied as a supercapacitor with a capacitance of 120 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 V s−1.219 Conductive, flexible and robust graphene–CNT–MnO2 nanocomposite supercapacitor electrodes were prepared with a high active materials loading of 71% MnO2, showing a capacitance of 372 F g−1 and high rate capability without the need of a current collector and binders (Fig. 9c).220 In another example, vertically aligned CNT–graphene nanoarchitectures were prepared by intercalation of CNTs into thermally expanded highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG).221 The nanoarchitectures were further coated with a thin layer of Ni(OH)2 with a specific capacitance of 1384 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The supercapacitor also showed a high rate performance with a capacitance of 970 F g−1 at 30 mV s−1 and an excellent cycling stability over 20000 cycles.


3.2.3 Fuel cell. 
Graphene nanocomposites also have many applications as the electrocatalysts in fuel cells. Although atomically-doped graphene sheets have been applied as electrocatalysts,222–225 graphene nanocomposites are considered as promising alternatives to noble metal electrocatalysts. Graphene nanocomposites have been widely applied as electrocatalysts in fuel cells for methanol oxidization, oxygen reduction reaction, oxygen evolution reaction, and hydrogen evolution reaction.
Graphene nanocomposites have strong activity over the electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol. Yoo et al. prepared Pt cluster–graphene nanosheet nanocomposites with a Pt cluster size of less than 0.5 nm.226 The nanocomposites showed unusually high activity for methanol oxidation in comparison with Pt/carbon black catalysts. In another work, graphene sheets decorated with Pt nanoparticles were prepared with the chemical reduction of graphene oxide in the presence of Pt precursors.68 The obtained electrocatalysts were found to have a 2 times higher peak current and better electrochemical stability than commercial Pt/vulcan catalysts.68 Similarly, Pt–nitrogen doped graphene nanocomposites showed a three times higher oxidization current for methanol than that from the Pt–graphene composites and the commercial Pt/carbon black.227 A Pt–chemically converted graphene (Pt–CCG) hybrid showed better CO tolerance for electro-oxidization of methanol compared with Pt/CNT catalysts.228 Porous graphene nanoflake–Pt nanoclusters also showed high activity for methanol electro-oxidation.229
FePt NP–graphene nanocomposites were fabricated via a solution phase self assembly method for the ORR (Fig. 10a).230 The FePt NP–graphene nanocomposites had a ORR activity of 1.6 mA cm2 at 0.512 V and 0.616 mA cm2 at 0.557 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), which were 3.7–4.5 times higher ORR activity than the FePt NP–C composites, and a 5.9–8.8 times higher ORR activity than the commercial C–Pt NP composites. The graphene nanocomposites also showed excellent stability under ORR conditions with no decrease of ORR activity in 10000 potential sweeps. In another work, both graphene–Pt NP and nitrogen doped graphene–Pt NP composites were applied as ORR catalysts in the fuel cells.231 Nitrogen doped graphene–Pt NPs had a higher maximum power density of 440 mW cm−2 than that of the graphene–Pt NPs (390 mW cm−2). The better performance in nitrogen doped graphene composites was attributed to the improved conductivity and carbon-catalyst binding catalysts in the nitrogen doped graphene. Pt NP–poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) functionalized graphene composites showed good electrocatalytic activity for both oxygen reduction and methanol oxidation.232 Pt3Co–graphene and Pt3Cr–graphene composites showed 3–4 times higher ORR activity and 45–70 mV lower overpotential than that of Pt/graphene. The maximum power density was 985 mW cm−2 in the Pt3Cr cathodes.233
 Fig. 10  (a) FePt nanocubes (A) and FePt nanocube–graphene nanocomposites (B); ORR activities of FePt nanocube–graphene nanocomposites in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (C) and 0.5 M H2SO4 solution (D). (b) MnCo2O4–N-doped reduced graphene oxide hybrids for ORR reaction. (c) MoSx–3D graphene protected Ni foam for HER reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230, 234 and 240. Copyright 2012, ACS (a); copyright 2012, ACS (b); copyright 2013, John Wiley & Sons (c). 
Co3O4 nanocrystal–nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide hybrids were fabricated from hydrothermal reactions and applied for ORR and OER reaction.142 The hybrids exhibit similar ORR catalytic activity and superior stability to Pt in alkaline conditions. The hybrids were also highly active to OER, showing promise for non-noble metal-based bifunctional catalysts. The synergistic effects between graphene and Co3O4 nanocrystals were believed to be the origin of the unusually high catalytic activity. MnCo2O4–graphene hybrids also had higher ORR current density and better stability than Pt/C (Fig. 10b).234 The Mn2+ substitutions and the covalent bonding between MnCo2O4 and graphene improved the electroactivity in the hybrids. Similar effects in the ORR were also observed in Co1−xS nanoparticle–graphene hybrids.235
In addition to oxide/graphene composites, other graphene-based nanocomposites with CNTs or polymers also have strong ORR activity. CNT–graphene complexes were prepared by exfoliating the outer layer of multiwall CNTs to graphene sheets and keeping the inner walls intact. The outer graphene sheets with nitrogen species and iron residues provided high ORR activity in the complex.236 PDDA-functionalized graphene was found to have a remarkable electrocatalytic ORR activity with better fuel selectivity, CO tolerance, and long-term stability than commercial Pt/C.237
Graphene nanocomposites also demonstrated great potential in electrocatalytic HER reactions. MoS2 nanoparticle–reduced graphene oxide (RGO) composites were prepared by solvothermal methods and showed a higher HER activity than pure MoS2. The Tafel slope was ∼41 mV per decade, much higher than previous MoS2 catalysts, suggesting the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism of hydrogen evolution and that the rate limiting step is electrochemical hydrogen desorption. The electroactivity resulted from the higher active sites in MoS2 NPs and the good connection of the MoS2 NPs with the conductive graphene matrix.238 MoS2 NPs were also grown in situ on mesoporous graphene foams (MGF). The high specific surface area and conductivity of MGF provided high loading of highly dispersed MoS2 NPs and a fast charge transfer between MGF and MoS2 NPs. The MoS2 NPs–MGF nanocomposites exhibit high HER activity with a Tafel slope of about 42 mV per decade.239 In another study, CVD graphene protected 3D nickel foams were coated with a layer of MoSx (x ≥ 2) and the resulting composites were applied as HER catalysts in acids (Fig. 10c).240 The high loading of MoSx in the 3D matrix and relatively low resistance in the electrodes induced the higher performance compared to MoS2 composites grown on carbon paper, carbon cloth, and graphene mats.
In addition to normal fuel cells, graphene nanocomposites can also be applied as electrocatalysts in microbial fuel cells, which can be found in a recent review on bio-inspired applications of graphene-based materials.22

4. Functionalized graphene nanocomposites for environmental applications
Functionalized graphene nanocomposites have shown promise for environmental applications from environmental sensing and monitoring to remediation. Graphene and graphene nanocomposites can be used as general platforms for sensing inorganic ions, biomolecules and organisms,22 and also as platforms for the removal of hazardous species in the environment. In the following section, we will review the recent progress of graphene-based nanocomposites in environmental applications with a focus on topics such as heavy metal ions detection and removal, organic species degradation, environmental gas sensors, and bacterial detection and removal.
4.1 Heavy metal ions detection and removal
Graphene nanocomposites have many applications in the detection of heavy metal ions. He et al. prepared graphene oxide–aptamer hybrids by self assembly between the DNA and graphene base plane.51 The hybrids exhibit ultralow fluorescence background because the extraordinarily high quenching efficiency of GO to the fluorescence of dyes, resulting in the high sensitivity of the graphene oxide–aptamer hybrids. The hybrid sensors using heavy metal ion-specific aptamers for Hg2+ ions achieved a sensitivity of 30 nM with excellent selectivity to other metal ions.51 In another work, graphene nanohybrids using silver-specific cytosine-rich oligonucleotide (SSO) were very sensitive to silver ions (Ag+) with a quantification limit of 20 nM and a detection limit of 5 nM (Fig. 11a).241 The sensors were still effective in the real environmental samples such as river water, where 2 times higher fluorescence responses was observed in 100 nM Ag+ in the river than in the blank river water without Ag+.
 Fig. 11  (a) Graphene–DNA hybrids for Ag+ ions detection. (b) Microarray fluorescent assay for Hg2+ and Ag+ ions based on graphene–aptamer hybrids. (c) Graphene hybrid-based field effect transistors for Hg2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241, 242 and 246. Copyright 2010, RSC (a); copyright 2013, John Wiley & Sons (b); copyright 2012, ACS (c). 
A microarray technique was further developed to detect Hg2+ and Ag+ using the photoluminescence (PL) of graphene oxide and the following PL quenching in the presence of heavy metal ions due to electron transfer (Fig. 11b).242 The detection limit for Ag+ is 10 μM while the detection limit for Hg2+ was 1 nM. The much higher sensitivity for Hg2+ may be the result of the Hg2+ aptamer being more energetically favorable than the Ag+ aptamer. The PL sensor was also selective to Hg2+ and Ag+, with no response to Cd2+ and Mg2+. In another example, molecular beacon (MB)–graphene oxide hybrids were applied to detect heavy metal ions using the fluorescence quenching properties of graphene oxide with a sensitivity of 20 nM, 5.7 nM for Ag+, Hg2+, respectively.243 Compared with the traditional MB technique, this MB–GO hybrid was easy to manipulate and had little background interference.
A graphene field-effect transistor (FET) is a convenient platform for the detection of heavy metal ions because of the bipolar transport of graphene and the sensitivity of charge neutral point (Dirac point) to surface charges on graphene. Graphene FETs based on graphene hybrids have been developed to detect heavy metal ions. 1-Octadecanethiol modified graphene was applied to detect Hg2+ based on a graphene field-effect transistor (FET). The detection limit in this graphene FET sensor for Hg2+ was 10 ppm.244 FET sensors using RGO modified with metallothionein type II protein (MT-II) were also developed for heavy metal ion detection because MT-II had high affinity to physiological and xenobiotic heavy metal ions. This MT-II modified RGO FET sensor can detect 1 nM Hg2+ with a signal-to-noise ratio of 25–30 and Cd2+ with a signal-to-noise ratio of 15–20, and had no response to K+, Na+, Ca2+, and Mg2+. Control experiments showed that there was no response to Hg2+ and Cd2+ for unmodified RGO FET.245 Alternatively, FETs based on thermally reduced graphene oxide modified with thioglycolic acid (TGA) functionalized gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) were developed with a detection limit of 2.5 × 10−8 M for mercury ions Hg2+ (Fig. 11c).246 The sensor response was less than 10 s and could be promising for low-cost, portable, and real-time heavy metal ion detection.
Graphene nanocomposites and hybrids are not only useful in heavy metal ions detection but also in their remediation and removal from the environment, such as from water. For example, magnetite–graphene hybrids were fabricated for the removal of As(III) and As(V).247 The magnetite–RGO composites had higher binding capacity for arsenic ions because of the decreased aggregation of pure magnetite on RGO sheets. 99.9% arsenic removal within 1 ppb was achieved for the nanocomposites with a higher removal capability for As(III) than As(V). The nanocomposites also showed a best removal effect at 30 C. A magnetic b-cyclodextrin–graphene oxide nanocomposite (MCGN) was fabricated and exhibited extremely fast Cr-removal from wastewater with a Cr-removal capability of more than 120 mg g−1.248 The adsorption on the nanocomposites was a combination of surface envelope behaviour (between cyclodextrin and Cr(VI)) and the single layer adsorption on the bare part of graphene. The nanocomposites were recycled with desorption of Cr ions in alkaline solution and the removal was repeated for 5 cycles with a slight decrease in the removal efficiency from 91% in the first cycle to 82% in the fifth cycle. Reduced graphene–polypyrrole nanocomposites showed a highly selective and efficient removal for Hg2+ ions in water and had a adsorption capacity of 980 mg g−1, which was around 2 times that for pure polypyrrole, and a desorption capacity of 92.3%.249
In another study, CNT–graphene hybrid aerogels were applied in water purification such as deionization of light metal salts, removing organic dyes and enrichment of heavy metal ions.250 The hybrid aerogel showed an extremely high desalination capacity (633.3 mg g−1), 15.8 times higher than the reported maximum capacity (40.1 mg g−1) for various electrode materials. Hybrid aerogels also show potential in the removal of heavy metal ions including Pb2+, Ag+, and dyes. EDTA–GO hybrids proved to be an excellent adsorber for Pb2+ in water with an adsorption capacity of 479 ± 46 mg g−1 at pH 6.8, which was 1–2 times higher than pure GO and 4–5 times higher than that of oxidized CNTs.251 The adsorption process was fast and completed within 20 min, and the hybrid was recycled by treatment with HCl solution. A similar high performance in removing heavy metal ions was observed in a graphene oxide–chitosan (GO–CS) composite hydrogel.252 The composite hydrogel exhibited fast adsorption for both Cu2+ and Pb2+ in the first hour and reached saturation in the following 4–10 hours. The adsorption capacity of GO–CS for Pb2+ increased gradually with GO content, indicating GO a better Pb2+ absorber than CS.
4.2 Degradation and removal of organic species
Organic species have been one of most serious pollutants of the environment. Graphene nanocomposites have been applied to address this issue by photodegradation or direct removal of organic species. Zhang et al. applied a TiO2–graphene nanocomposite photocatalyst to the photodegradation of organic dyes such as methyl blue (MB). The strong adsorption for dyes, extended light absorption range, and efficient charge separation made the TiO2–graphene nanocomposite an excellent photocatalyst for the dye degradation in both UV and visible light (Fig. 12a).83 TiO2–graphene nanocomposites showed much better photocatalytic activity than pure TiO2 and TiO2–CNTs photocatalysts. The RGO–CNT composites with CNTs pillared between RGO sheets showed high photocatalytic activity which was 4 times faster than that of P25 while GO–CNT composites had negligible photocatalytic activity. The high performance was attributed to the porous structure and unique electron transfer properties of RGO (Fig. 12b).253In situ grown TiO2 nanocrystal–graphene composites showed 3 times higher photocatalytic activity than P25 photocatalysts.254 In another study, TiO2–graphene nanocomposites prepared by hydrothermal reactions have also been investigated in both gas-phase photodegradation of benzene and solution photodegradation of MB, which showed a much higher activity than pure TiO2, but a similar activity to TiO2–CNTs nanocomposites of the same carbon component as graphene nanocomposites.255 The photocatalytic activity of TiO2–graphene composites can be further improved by adding an up-conversion (UC) material (YF3:Yb3+, Tm3+) or Ag NPs.256,257 The photodegradation effects of TiO2–graphene nanocomposites were also not limited to MB. The photodegradation of methyl orange (MO) and acetone were also achieved using graphene nanocomposites.258,259
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic view of TiO2–graphene composite photocatalysts for the photodegradation of organic pollutants. (b) Reduced graphene oxide–CNT composites as photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83 and 253. Copyright 2010, ACS (a and b). 
In addition to TiO2, ZnO, Ag/AgX (X = Br, Cl), C3N4 and Cu2O were also explored as part of graphene-based nanocomposites for photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants.260–264 ZnO NPs–graphene with 2 wt% graphene showed a highest photocatalytic activity toward MB degradation, which was 4 times that of pristine ZnO.260 Ag/AgX (X = Br, Cl)–GO was confirmed to be a stable plasmonic photocatalyst for MO photodegradation under visible-light irradiations.261 The Ag/AgBr–GO and Ag/AgCl–GO nanocomposites had a higher photodegradation efficiency than corresponding bare Ag/AgX nanospecies by a factor of ca. 3.5 and 2.8, respectively. In another work, graphene oxide modified g-C3N4 (GO–g-C3N4) nanocomposites showed 3.80 and 2.08 times higher photocatalytic degradation efficiency for rhodamine B and 2,4-dichlorophenol, respectively, compared to C3N4 under visible light irradiation.262 Reduced graphene oxide (RGO)–copper ion species had a much faster photocatalytic efficiency when applied to the photodegradation of rhodamine B (RhB) than RGO under visible radiation.263
Graphene nanocomposites can be applied to directly remove organic pollutants without using photoradiation. For example, GO–iron oxide NPs and RGO–iron oxide NP nanocomposites were both investigated to remove organic and inorganic pollutants such as Pb(II), 1-naphthol, and 1-naphthylamine. Interestingly, RGO–iron oxide NPs had a better removal efficiency than GO–iron oxide NPs for the removal of organic species like 1-naphthol, and 1-naphthylamine, while GO–iron oxide NPs had better performance in the removal of Pb(II). The nanocomposites can be separated by magnetic processing.265 In another study, Fe3O4 NP–RGO nanocomposites demonstrated a high removal efficiency with over 91% for rhodamine B and over 94% for malachite green.266 The separation of nanocomposites was very fast with the aid of an external magnetic field. The nanocomposites were also tested in industrial waste water and lake water and still maintained a high efficiency in the removal of organic pollutants. Graphene oxide–chitosan (GO–CS) hydrogel was also applied to remove organic pollutants directly.252 Graphene-based materials were further applied to the direct removal of oil and hydrocarbons from water.267–269
4.3 Environmental gas sensors for inorganic and organic vapor
Vapor pollution is another severe issue in modern society both in daily life and industrial environments. Graphene has shown excellent performance in vapor detection especially for NO2, NO, CO, CO2, NH3, SO2, H2, Cl2, and organic vapors including acetone, benzene and toluene.136,270–283 In the early stages of the development of graphene environmental gas sensors, pure graphene was used in the gas detection with a impressive detection sensitivity even down to single molecule level for NO2.136 In other studies, RGO was further applied to the detection of chemical-warfare agents (hydrogen cyanide – HCN, chloroethylethyl sulfide – CEES, dimethylmethylphosphonate – DMMP, and dinitrotoluene – DNT), and NO2, NH3, Cl2 with a sensitivity at the ppb or ppm level.270–272 Recently there have been efforts to improve graphene gas sensors by forming various nanocomposites.277–283
Ji et al. reported the layer-by-layer assembly of graphene and ionic liquid for the detection of toxic organic hydrocarbon vapors such as hexane, cyclohexane, ethanol, acetone, benzene, pyridine, and toluene (Fig. 13a).277 The graphene–ion liquid hybrid had higher affinity to aromatic compounds compared to aliphatic compounds. In one case, the hybrid gas sensor for benzene vapor had over 10 times higher selectivity than cyclohexane vapor. Li et al. fabricated palladium NP-decorated reduced graphene oxide (Pd–RGO) composite channels with CVD graphene as electrodes and applied the composites to detect NO gas (Fig. 13b).278 A Pd–RGO composite sensor had a sensitivity of 2 to 420 ppb and a response time of several hundreds of seconds. Pd decoration was important to achieve the high sensitivity in a NO sensor which was 5 folds higher than that without Pd NPs. A similar situation was also seen in the platinum–graphene nanosheet–SiC and polyaniline–graphene composites for H2 sensors.279–282 Singh and co-workers reported metal oxide nanocrystal–graphene composites as photoluminescent gas sensors for CO, NH3 and NO with a sensitivity of 1 ppm at room temperature.283
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic view of a graphene–ionic liquid assembly for organic vapor detection using a quartz crystal microbalance. (b) Pd NP–reduced graphene oxide composite channel for NO gas monitoring. Reproduced with permission from ref. 277 and 278. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons (a); copyright 2011, ACS (b). 
4.4 Bacterial detection and removal
Interactions between bacteria and graphene have been interesting for real applications, and both graphene and graphene-based composite materials have been investigated for bacteria detection and removal.284,285 Graphene is an impermeable cage for bacteria which can facilitate the direct, real-time observation of bacteria and reserve their dimensional and topological characteristics under high vacuum (10−5 Torr) and beam currents (150 A cm−2).285
Graphene nanocomposites were applied for bacterial detection. Antibody-functionalized GO sheet conjugates were prepared as biocatalytic probes for sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB), and GO-mediated silver enhancements were applied to sensitively detect SRB using a potentiometric stripping analysis (PSA) method. The sensor had a detection range from at least 1.8 × 102 to 1.8 × 108 cfu mL−1 with a detection limit of 50 cfu mL−1 (Fig. 14a).286 In a control experiment without GO, no enhancement of Ag was observed. A conventional immunoassay dot blot analysis using functionalized GO sheets for Ag enhancement was developed and had a detection limit of 1.8 × 102 cfu mL−1. In another study, antimicrobial peptide–graphene hybrids were applied to bioselectively detect bacteria at single-cell level (Fig. 14b).287 Highly sensitive graphene hybrid nanosensors were directly integrated with biomaterials such as tooth enamel. These graphene nanohybrid-based biointerfaces enabled battery-free sensors for remote monitoring of pathogenic bacteria, and may find applications in point-of-care diagnostics, hospital sanitation monitoring and food safety analysis.
 Fig. 14  (a) Graphene oxide-based hybrids with silver enhancement for detecting sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB). (b) Graphene hybrid nanosensors directly integrated with biomaterials such as tooth enamel for remote monitoring of pathogenic bacteria. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286 and 287. Copyright 2010, ACS (a); copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group (b). 
Graphene FET can be adapted to detect bacteria in the same way that it can be for heavy metal ions. Huang et al. functionalized CVD graphene FET with anti-E. coli antibodies to form a sensitive graphene hybrids for E. coli detection.288 The resulting graphene hybrid-based FET devices were applied to detect E. coli bacteria by monitoring conductance changes induced by E. coli binding. The graphene hybrid-based FET biosensor had a detection limit of 10 cfu mL−1 which was several orders of magnitude lower than that achieved by SWCNT-network FETs, polymerase chain reactions, and surface plasmon resonance. Moreover, this biosensor also demonstrated the capability to monitor the metabolic activities of E. coli bacteria induced by glucose.
Other than bacterial detection, both graphene and graphene-based nanocomposites showed antibacterial effects. Graphene and graphene oxide nanosheets and nanowalls showed good antibacterial effects.289,290 The reduced graphene oxide nanowalls had a better antibacterial effect than graphene oxide nanowalls due to the sharper edge and enhanced charge transfer between bacteria.289,290 In addition to pure graphene or graphene oxide, graphene nanocomposites are also excellent antibacterial materials. Kumar et al. found functional graphene–silver nanocomposites demonstrating bacterial-inhibition like pure graphene and graphene oxide.291 In another study, the nanocomposites of poly-N-vinyl carbazole (PVK) polymers and GO were applied as antibacterial coatings. The coated ITO surface showed 90% effectiveness to inactivate the colonization of bacteria while GO had 84% effectiveness, compared to unmodified surfaces. The inclusion of PVK in GO–PVK nanocomposites had no obvious negative influence on the antibacterial effect, but allowed well-defined and homogenous coating on various surfaces.292
5. Conclusions and perspective
Much progress has been made in the preparation, functionalization and applications of graphene nanocomposites. The global upsurge in energy research are paving the way to practical and industrial applications of graphene nanocomposites, leading to the next-generation of energy conversion and storage devices. The great potential of graphene nanocomposites in energy has been shown many times by the large amounts of exciting research being performed in photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices, artificial synthesis, LIBs, supercapacitors, and fuel cells. In particular, graphene nanocomposite-based LIBs and supercapacitors are highly promising for energy storage devices. However, there are still many challenges to address before real industrial applications become possible. First of all, large scale production of graphene nanocomposites with high and uniform quality is still challenging. Energy devices from graphene nanocomposites work well in lab-scale tests. To achieve high performance devices on an industrial level needs large amounts of high quality graphene nanocomposites which should be environmentally stable in electronic and chemical characteristics during operation. Secondly, the efficiencies of photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices based on graphene nanocomposites are still low in most prototype devices. There is still a lot work to do to optimize materials and device fabrication to improve the photoconversion efficiencies.17 Thirdly, regarding environmental applications, graphene nanocomposites show great potential in the detection of heavy metal ions and bacteria, and organic species degradation. The photodegradation of organic pollutants by graphene nanocomposites is most attractive considering the increas in water pollution by organic species in developing countries. However, it is still premature to envision large-scale applications of these nanocomposites in environmental monitoring and remediation because the fundamental questions over the influence, both in the short and long term, of graphene to the ecosystem and human living environments remain largely unaddressed.293 Although it faces these challenges, graphene nanocomposites, however, are still one of most exciting platforms for energy and environmental studies. The large-scale application of graphene-based devices in electrochemical energy storage and transparent electrodes in photovoltaics and optoelectronics may be achieved in near future. More revolutionary applications based on graphene and graphene nanocomposites, with the advance in both fundamental physics and chemistry and practical techniques, will expand the horizons of graphene nanocomposites and open up new windows in human life.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by World Premier International Research Center Initiative (WPI), MEXT, Japan. H.X.C. acknowledges the WPI-AIMR fusion research funding from MEXT and a Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists B from JSPS (no. 25870057), Japan.
References
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 132–145 CrossRef PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Chang and H. K. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1984–1997 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, L. Feng, X. Shi and Z. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 530–547 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, I. Skachko, A. Barker and E. Y. Andrei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 491–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Yin, S. X. Wu, X. Y. Qi, Q. Y. He, Q. C. Zhang, Q. Y. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. D. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nair, P. Blake, A. Grigorenko, K. Novoselov, T. Booth, T. Stauber, N. Peres and A. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-M. Lin, C. Dimitrakopoulos, K. A. Jenkins, D. B. Farmer, H.-Y. Chiu, A. Grill and P. Avouris, Science, 2010, 327, 662–662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liao, Y.-C. Lin, M. Bao, R. Cheng, J. Bai, Y. Liu, Y. Qu, K. L. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nature, 2010, 467, 305–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 487–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Chang, Z. Sun, Q. Yuan, F. Ding, X. Tao, F. Yan and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4872–4876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Chang, Z. Sun, M. Saito, Q. Yuan, H. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Wang, T. Fujita, F. Ding, Z. Zheng, F. Yan, H. Wu, M. W. Chen and Y. Ikuhara, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6310–6320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Chang, J. Cheng, X. Liu, J. Gao, M. Li, J. Li, X. Tao, F. Ding and Z. Zheng, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 8896–8903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, L. Tang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .
X. Shi, H. X. Chang, S. Chen, C. Lai, A. Khademhosseini and H. K. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 751–759 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. X. Chang, H. K. Wu and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 3521–3534 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 814–818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Chang, Z. Sun, K. Y.-F. Ho, X. Tao, F. Yan, W.-M. Kwok and Z. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 258–264 RSC .
L. Tang, H. X. Chang, Y. Liu and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3083–3088 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
H. X. Chang, L. Tang, Y. Wang, J. Jiang and J. Li, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 2341–2346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, B. Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388–1414 CAS .
T. Kuilla, S. Bhadra, D. Yao, N. H. Kim, S. Bose and J. H. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 1350–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
L. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 31–42 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
C. Liu, F. Li, L. P. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, C. Li and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8848–8868 CAS .
M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 668–674 CAS .
V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6156–6214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 242–251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC. Adv., 2012, 2, 64–98 RSC .
S. Cui, S. Mao, G. Lu and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2441–2454 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Xu, H. Bai, G. W. Lu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Su, S. P. Pang, V. Alijani, C. Li, X. L. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3191–3195 CrossRef CAS .
X. An, T. Simmons, R. Shah, C. Wolfe, K. M. Lewis, M. Washington, S. K. Nayak, S. Talapatra and S. Kar, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4295–4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Kozhemyakina, J. M. Englert, G. A. Yang, E. Spiecker, C. D. Schmidt, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5483–5487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Qi, K. Y. Pu, H. Li, X. Z. Zhou, S. X. Wu, Q. L. Fan, B. Liu, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9426–9429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Y. Choi, T. H. Han, J. H. Hong, J. E. Kim, S. H. Lee, H. W. Kim and S. O. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1907–1912 RSC .
H. Bai, Y. X. Xu, L. Zhao, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1667–1669 RSC .
Z. H. Tang, S. L. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4603–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Cong, X. C. Ren, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2693–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lu, H. H. Yang, C. L. Zhu, X. Chen and G. N. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4785–4787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, B. Song, D. Li, C. Zhu, W. Qi, Y. Wen, L. Wang, S. Song, H. Fang and C. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 453–459 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Liu, Y. L. Li, Y. M. Li, J. H. Li and Z. X. Deng, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 900–906 RSC .
L. Zhang, Z. Lu, Q. Zhao, J. Huang, H. Shen and Z. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 460–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. Chu, T. T. Chen, J. Ge and R. Q. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7065–7069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Han, W. J. Lee, D. H. Lee, J. E. Kim, E. Y. Choi and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2060–2064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Liu, S. H. Fu, B. Yuan, Y. L. Li and Z. X. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7279–7281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3342–3347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Xu, Z. B. Liu, X. L. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. G. Tian, Y. Huang, Y. F. Ma, X. Y. Zhang and Y. S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1275–1279 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Yang, C. S. Shan, F. H. Li, D. X. Han, Q. X. Zhang and L. Niu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3880–3882 RSC .
O. C. Compton, D. A. Dikin, K. W. Putz, L. C. Brinson and S. T. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 892–896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1679–1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Englert, C. Dotzer, G. Yang, M. Schmid, C. Papp, J. M. Gottfried, H.-P. Steinrück, E. Spiecker, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 279–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Liu, M. M. Lerner and M. D. Yan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3754–3756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Liu and M. D. Yan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3375–3378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fang, K. G. Wang, H. B. Lu, Y. L. Yang and S. Nutt, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7098–7105 RSC .
M. Fang, K. Wang, H. Lu, Y. Yang and S. Nutt, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1982–1992 RSC .
H. X. Wang, K. G. Zhou, Y. L. Xie, J. Zeng, N. N. Chai, J. Li and H. L. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5747–5749 RSC .
Y. M. Li, L. H. Tang and J. H. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 846–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Guo, S. J. Dong and E. K. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 547–555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Zhou, X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, S. X. Wu, C. Xue, F. Y. C. Boey, Q. Y. Yan, P. Chen and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10842–10846 CAS .
C. Xu and X. Wang, Small, 2009, 5, 2212–2217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Shen, M. Shi, N. Li, B. Yan, H. W. Ma, Y. Z. Hu and M. X. Ye, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 339–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. W. Chen, L. Y. Zhang and G. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 171–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Tang, C. S. Lee, J. Xu, Z. T. Liu, Z. H. Chen, Z. B. He, Y. L. Cao, G. D. Yuan, H. S. Song, L. M. Chen, L. B. Luo, H. M. Cheng, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3482–3488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Chang, X. J. Lv, H. Zhang and J. H. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 483–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Liu, L. K. Pan, T. Lv, G. Zhu, Z. Sun and C. Q. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11984–11986 RSC .
C. Nethravathi, T. Nisha, N. Ravishankar, C. Shivakumara and M. Rajamathi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2054–2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mao, Z. Wen, H. Kim, G. Lu, P. Hurley and J. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7505–7513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Shen, M. Shi, B. Yan, H. W. Ma, N. Li and M. X. Ye, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7795–7801 RSC .
S. H. Lee, N. Kakati, S. H. Jee, J. Maiti and Y. S. Yoon, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 3281–3284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Zou, Z. Y. Zhang, L. Yu, Q. W. Tian, Z. G. Chen and J. Q. Hu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13912–13917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Shen, B. Yan, M. Shi, H. W. Ma, N. Li and M. X. Ye, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3415–3421 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. J. Lv, Y. M. Li, Y. Wang and J. H. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Wang, B. B. Huang, Y. Dai, Y. Y. Liu, X. Y. Zhang, X. Y. Qin, J. P. Wang, Z. K. Zheng and H. F. Cheng, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1687–1692 RSC .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3670–3678 RSC .
S. D. Perera, R. G. Mariano, K. Vu, N. Nour, O. Seitz, Y. Chabal and K. J. Balkus, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 949–956 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Chen, G. Ji, Y. Ma, J. Y. Lee and J. M. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3078–3083 CAS .
Y. Q. Zou and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2615–2620 RSC .
C. Nethravathi, B. Viswanath, J. Michael and M. Rajamath, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4839–4846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Yang, H. Y. Ding, D. Zhang, X. H. Yan, C. Y. Lu, J. L. Qin, R. X. Zhang, H. Tang and H. J. Song, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2011, 46, 1195–1201 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, L. F. Cui, Y. A. Yang, H. S. Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Cao, Z. Liu, S. S. Chu, M. H. Wu, Z. M. Ye, Z. W. Cai, Y. L. Chang, S. F. Wang, Q. H. Gong and Y. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 103–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, B. D. Guo, J. G. Yu, J. R. Ran, B. H. Zhang, H. J. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. W. Ji, H. L. L. Xin, T. R. Kuykendall, S. L. Wu, H. M. Zheng, M. M. Rao, E. J. Cairns, V. Battaglia and Y. G. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 6981–6986 RSC .
P. Chen, T. Y. Xiao, H. H. Li, J. J. Yang, Z. Wang, H. B. Yao and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 712–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Shen, C. Z. Yuan, H. J. Luo, X. G. Zhang, S. D. Yang and X. J. Lu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 572–574 RSC .
Y. Shi, S. L. Chou, J. Z. Wang, D. Wexler, H. J. Li, H. K. Liu and Y. P. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16465–16470 RSC .
E. P. Gao, W. Z. Wang, M. Shang and J. H. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2887–2893 RSC .
Z. Y. Yin, S. X. Wu, X. Z. Zhou, X. Huang, Q. C. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 307–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Yu, L. B. Hu, M. Vosgueritchian, H. L. Wang, X. Xie, J. R. McDonough, X. Cui, Y. Cui and Z. N. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2905–2911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Wu, Z. Y. Yin, Q. Y. He, G. Lu, X. Z. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3467–3470 RSC .
D. Du, J. Liu, X. Y. Zhang, X. L. Cui and Y. H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8032–8037 RSC .
S. X. Wu, Z. Y. Yin, Q. Y. He, G. Lu, Q. Y. Yan and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15973–15979 CAS .
S. Liu, J. Q. Wang, J. Zeng, J. F. Ou, Z. P. Li, X. H. Liu and S. R. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4628–4633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. P. Xiao, Y. J. Sun, Y. Shi, H. C. Dai, P. J. Ni, J. T. Hu, Z. Li, Y. H. Song and L. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2013, 25, 959–966 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, S. Y. Deng, J. P. Lei, H. X. Ju and S. Gunasekaran, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 29, 159–166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Feng, R. M. Li, Y. W. Ma, R. F. Chen, N. E. Shi, Q. L. Fan and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2989–2996 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Liu, C. Li, H. Bai and G. Q. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22783–22789 CAS .
G. Zhu, L. Pan, H. Sun, X. Liu, T. Lv, T. Lu, J. Yang and Z. Sun, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 769–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chartarrayawadee, S. E. Moulton, D. Li, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 60, 213–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, L. K. Pan, T. Lu, T. Xu and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14869–14875 RSC .
M. S. Wu and Y. J. Zheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1782–1787 RSC .
H. T. Zhang, X. Zhang, D. C. Zhang, X. Z. Sun, H. Lin, C. H. Wang and Y. W. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 1616–1627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, N. J. Bell, A. Kudo and R. Amal, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 353–357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Pasricha, S. Gupta, A. G. Joshi, N. Bahadur, D. Haranath, K. N. Sood, S. Singh and S. Singh, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Moon, Y. Park, W. Kim and W. Choi, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3454–3462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Zhang, X. Yuan, Y. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7245–7251 RSC .
G. H. Moon, H. I. Kim, Y. Shin and W. Choi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2205–2207 RSC .
J. L. Chen, X. L. Zheng, H. Wang and W. T. Zheng, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520, 179–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tjoa, J. Chua, S. S. Pramana, J. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3447–3452 CAS .
F. G. Xu, Y. J. Sun, Y. Zhang, Y. Shi, Z. W. Wen and Z. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1131–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. R. Wang, S. M. Tabakman and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8152–8153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Pandey, G. R. Bell, J. P. Rourke, A. M. Sanchez, M. D. Elkin, B. J. Hickey and N. R. Wilson, Small, 2011, 7, 3202–3210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Zhou, F. Wang, Y. M. Zhu and Z. P. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3353–3358 RSC .
L. H. Hu, F. Y. Wu, C. T. Lin, A. N. Khlobystov and L. J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1687 CrossRef PubMed .
H. X. Chang, G. F. Wang, A. Yang, X. M. Tao, X. Q. Liu, Y. D. Shen and Z. J. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2893–2902 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Kim, J.-H. Lee and G.-C. Yi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 213101 CrossRef .
J. Lin, M. Penchev, G. Wang, R. K. Paul, J. Zhong, X. Jing, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Small, 2010, 6, 2448–2452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, L. Zhi, Q. Zhang, T. Wei, J. Feng, M. Zhang, W. Qian and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Paul, M. Ghazinejad, M. Penchev, J. Lin, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Small, 2010, 6, 2309–2313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Li, C. Zhang, G. Casillas, Z. Sun, Z. Yan, G. Ruan, Z. Peng, A.-R. O. Raji and C. Kittrell, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1225 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yan, L. Ma, Y. Zhu, I. Lahiri, M. G. Hahm, Z. Liu, S. Yang, C. Xiang, W. Lu, Z. Peng, Z. Sun, C. Kittrell, J. Lou, W. Choi, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 58–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, C. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Zhu, Z. Peng, R. H. Hauge, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, Nano Lett., 2012, 13, 72–78 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, S. Chen, D. C. Qi, X. Y. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10418–10422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Dong, D. L. Fu, W. J. Fang, Y. M. Shi, P. Chen and L. J. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 1422–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Medina, Y. C. Lin, D. Obergfell and P. W. Chiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2687–2692 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Dong, Y. M. Shi, W. Huang, P. Chen and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1649–1653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, G. S. Hong and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Y. Liang and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wang, Q. L. Hao, X. J. Yang, L. D. Lu and X. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1158–1161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Xu, K. Wang, S. Z. Zu, B. H. Han and Z. X. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Wang, F. Li, J. P. Zhao, W. C. Ren, Z. G. Chen, J. Tan, Z. S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Bao, H. Zhang, J. X. Yang, S. Wang, D. Y. Tong, R. Jose, S. Ramakrishna, C. T. Lim and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 782–791 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Sun, T. Hasan, F. Torrisi, D. Popa, G. Privitera, F. Q. Wang, F. Bonaccorso, D. M. Basko and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 803–810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Liang, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. F. Ma, T. Y. Guo and Y. S. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2297–2302 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, G. Ruan, B. Genorio, Y. Zhu, B. Novosel, Z. Peng and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2669–2675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263302 CrossRef .
W. Hong, Y. Xu, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Radich, R. Dwyer and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2453–2460 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Li, Z.-H. Sun, G. Tai, S.-P. Lau and F. Yan, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 810–818 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, S. Yin, X. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Deng, Y. Hou and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Zhu, K. Wang, A. Cao, J. Wei, C. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, X. Li and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2743–2748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Guo, H. B. Yang, Z. M. Sheng, Z. S. Lu, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3014–3017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Lightcap and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7109–7116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chang, Y. Liu, H. Zhang and J. Li, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 656, 269–273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Q. Ye, X. Wang, B. Yu and F. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2109–2116 RSC .
X.-Y. Zhang, H.-P. Li, X.-L. Cui and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2801–2806 RSC .
X.-J. Lv, W.-F. Fu, H.-X. Chang, H. Zhang, J.-S. Cheng, G.-J. Zhang, Y. Song, C.-Y. Hu and J.-H. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1539–1546 RSC .
X.-J. Lv, S.-X. Zhou, C. Zhang, H.-X. Chang, Y. Chen and W.-F. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18542–18549 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4584–4589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, J. Liu, S. Lee, T. Zhang and D. D. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2292–2298 RSC .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Feng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6464–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Tran, S. K. Batabyal, S. S. Pramana, J. Barber, L. H. Wong and S. C. J. Loo, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3875–3878 RSC .
J. Lin, P. Hu, Y. Zhang, M. Fan, Z. He, C. K. Ngaw, J. S. C. Loo, D. Liao and T. T. Y. Tan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9330–9336 RSC .
A. Yu, H. W. Park, A. Davies, D. C. Higgins, Z. Chen and X. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1855–1860 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, L. Zhang, N. Li, Z.-S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306–5313 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3333–3338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, J. Kan and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20747–20753 CAS .
W. Zhou, J. Zhu, C. Cheng, J. Liu, H. Yang, C. Cong, C. Guan, X. Jia, H. J. Fan and Q. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4954–4961 CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Zhang, N. Li, Z. Shi, Z. Gu and G. Cao, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 748–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Lv, J. Lu and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21770–21774 CAS .
X. Wang, X. Zhou, K. Yao, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 133–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Cao, L. Bourgeois, H. Guan, S. Chen, Y. Zhong, D. M. Tang, H. Li, T. Zhai and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2682–2690 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, D.-W. Wang, L.-C. Yin, N. Li, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3214–3223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu and W. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4000–4008 CAS .
J. S. Chen, Z. Wang, X. C. Dong, P. Chen and X. W. D. Lou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2158–2161 RSC .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, L. F. Cui, H. Sanchez Casalongue, Y. Li, G. Hong, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7364–7368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Rao, A. L. M. Reddy, Y. Ishikawa and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2966–2972 CAS .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1079–1084 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xiang, K. Zhang, G. Ji, J. Y. Lee, C. Zou, X. Chen and J. Wu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1787–1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, Z. Tan, T. Kuykendall, E. J. An, Y. Fu, V. Battaglia and Y. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3611–3616 CAS .
G. Wang, B. Wang, X. Wang, J. Park, S. Dou, H. Ahn and K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8378–8384 RSC .
K. Chang, Z. Wang, G. Huang, H. Li, W. Chen and J. Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 259–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, Z. Peng, C. Xiang, G. Ruan, Z. Yan, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6001–6006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, X. Li, I. A. Aksay, J. Lemmon, Z. Nie, Z. Yang and J. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 7660–7665 RSC .
L. Ji, M. Rao, H. Zheng, L. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Duan, J. Guo, E. J. Cairns and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18522–18525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Z. Wang, L. Lu, M. Choucair, J. A. Stride, X. Xu and H.-K. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7030–7034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vivekchand, C. S. Rout, K. Subrahmanyam, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Chem. Sci., 2008, 120, 9–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103–13107 CAS .
J. R. Miller, R. Outlaw and B. Holloway, Science, 2010, 329, 1637–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz and M. Thommes, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Wu, Q. Han and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2822–2830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5835–5842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. SukáCho, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18215–18219 RSC .
Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya and L.-C. Qin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2917–2925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, D. W. Wang, W. Ren, J. Zhao, G. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3595–3602 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, T. Mirfakhrai, Z. Chen, H. S. Casalongue and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 729–736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, S. Yang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574–5580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Hao, X. Yang, L. Lu and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2164–2170 RSC .
Q. Wu, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, A. Liu and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Kumar, H.-J. Choi, Y. R. Shin, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1715–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, P. Yu, C. Wang and Y. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5990–5996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang, S. Zhao, X. N. Tian and X. Zhao, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 17624–17628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao and J. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1392–1401 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 1, 467–470 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng, S. Lu, H. Zhang, C. V. Varanasi and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4206–4211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Du, D. Yu, L. Dai, S. Ganguli, V. Varshney and A. Roy, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4810–4816 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. a. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Sheng, H.-L. Gao, W.-J. Bao, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 390–395 RSC .
E. Yoo, T. Okata, T. Akita, M. Kohyama, J. Nakamura and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2255–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-S. Zhang, X.-Q. Liang, W.-G. Song and Z.-Y. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 12055–12059 RSC .
Y. Li, W. Gao, L. Ci, C. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1124–1130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Shang, P. Papakonstantinou, P. Wang and S. R. P. Silva, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15837–15841 CAS .
S. Guo and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. I. Jafri, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7114–7117 RSC .
J.-D. Qiu, G.-C. Wang, R.-P. Liang, X.-H. Xia and H.-W. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15639–15645 CAS .
C. V. Rao, A. L. M. Reddy, Y. Ishikawa and P. M. Ajayan, Carbon, 2011, 49, 931–936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, Y. Li and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10969–10972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Zhou, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, F. Wei, J.-C. Idrobo, S. J. Pennycook and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 394–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, D. Yu, L. Dai, D. W. Chang and J.-B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6202–6209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liao, J. Zhu, X. Bian, L. Zhu, M. D. Scanlon, H. H. Girault and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201300318 .
Y. H. Chang, C. T. Lin, T. Y. Chen, C. L. Hsu, Y. H. Lee, W. Zhang, K. H. Wei and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 756–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wen, F. Xing, S. He, S. Song, L. Wang, Y. Long, D. Li and C. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2596–2598 RSC .
F. Liu, H. D. Ha, D. J. Han and T. S. Seo, Small, 2013 DOI:10.1002/smll.201300499 .
M. Zhang, B.-C. Yin, W. Tan and B.-C. Ye, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3260–3265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, Z. Cheng, Y. Wang, Z. Li, C. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Fang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4738–4741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Sudibya, Q. He, H. Zhang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1990–1994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, G. Lu, J. Chang, S. Mao, K. Yu, S. Cui and J. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 4057–4062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Chandra, J. Park, Y. Chun, J. W. Lee, I.-C. Hwang and K. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3979–3986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, C. Luo, M. Sun and H. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24577–24583 RSC .
V. Chandra and K. S. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3942–3944 RSC .
Z. Sui, Q. Meng, X. Zhang, R. Ma and B. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8767–8771 RSC .
C. J. Madadrang, H. Y. Kim, G. Gao, N. Wang, J. Zhu, H. Feng, M. Gorring, M. L. Kasner and S. Hou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1186–1193 CAS .
Y. Chen, L. Chen, H. Bai and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1992–2001 CAS .
L. L. Zhang, Z. Xiong and X. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7030–7036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Z. Chen and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 701–705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ren, X. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Wei, J. Li, L. Yang and J. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11765–11771 RSC .
Y. Wen, H. Ding and Y. Shan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4411–4417 RSC .
G. Jiang, Z. Lin, C. Chen, L. Zhu, Q. Chang, N. Wang, W. Wei and H. Tang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2693–2701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, J. Yu, Q. Xiang and B. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 119, 109–116 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Cheng and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 382–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, P. Chen and M. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4529–4536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liao, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Yu and H. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2721–2726 RSC .
Z. Xiong, L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2428–2434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, H. Cao, G. Yin, Y. Lu and J. Yin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10645–10648 RSC .
X. Yang, C. Chen, J. Li, G. Zhao, X. Ren and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 8821–8826 RSC .
H. Sun, L. Cao and L. Lu, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 550–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bi, X. Xie, K. Yin, Y. Zhou, S. Wan, L. He, F. Xu, F. Banhart, L. Sun and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4421–4425 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-B. Luo, J.-S. Cheng, Q. Ma, Y.-Q. Feng and J.-H. Li, Anal. Methods, 2011, 3, 92–98 RSC .
J. T. Robinson, F. K. Perkins, E. S. Snow, Z. Wei and P. E. Sheehan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3137–3140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Fowler, M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung, Y. Yang, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Dua, S. P. Surwade, S. Ammu, S. R. Agnihotra, S. Jain, K. E. Roberts, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff and S. K. Manohar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2154–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Han, Y.-K. Huang, A. T. Tan, V. P. Dravid and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15264–15267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Joshi, H. Gomez, F. Alvi and A. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6610–6613 CAS .
Y. Ren, C. Zhu, W. Cai, H. Li, H. Ji, I. Kholmanov, Y. Wu, R. D. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 163114 CrossRef .
H. J. Yoon, D. H. Jun, J. H. Yang, Z. Zhou, S. S. Yang and M. M.-C. Cheng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 157, 310–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ji, I. Honma, S. M. Paek, M. Akada, J. P. Hill, A. Vinu and K. Ariga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9737–9739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, X. Geng, Y. Guo, J. Rong, Y. Gong, L. Wu, X. Zhang, P. Li, J. Xu, G. Cheng, M. Sun and L. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6955–6961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shafiei, P. G. Spizzirri, R. Arsat, J. Yu, J. du Plessis, S. Dubin, R. B. Kaner, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and W. Wlodarski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13796–13801 CAS .
B. H. Chu, C. Lo, J. Nicolosi, C. Chang, V. Chen, W. Strupinski, S. Pearton and F. Ren, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 157, 500–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Al-Mashat, K. Shin, K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. D. Plessis, S. H. Han, R. W. Kojima, R. B. Kaner, D. Li, X. Gou and S. J. Ippolito, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16168–16173 CAS .
A. Kaniyoor, R. I. Jafri, T. Arockiadoss and S. Ramaprabhu, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 382–386 RSC .
G. Singh, A. Choudhary, D. Haranath, A. G. Joshi, N. Singh, S. Singh and R. Pasricha, Carbon, 2012, 50, 385–394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mohanty and V. Berry, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4469–4476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mohanty, M. Fahrenholtz, A. Nagaraja, D. Boyle and V. Berry, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1270–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wan, Y. Wang, J. Wu and D. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2010, 83, 648–653 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Mannoor, H. Tao, J. D. Clayton, A. Sengupta, D. L. Kaplan, R. R. Naik, N. Verma, F. G. Omenetto and M. C. McAlpine, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 763 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, X. Dong, Y. Liu, L.-J. Li and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12358–12362 RSC .
W. Hu, C. Peng, W. Luo, M. Lv, X. Li, D. Li, Q. Huang and C. Fan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4317–4323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5731–5736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Kumar, N. Huang, H. Lim, M. Zainy, I. Harrison and C. Chia, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 181, 885–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Celeste RáTria and R. A. May VáVergara, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8892–8894 RSC .
X. Hu and Q. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3815–3835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Haixin Chang	Haixin Chang is an Assistant Professor in WPI-Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Japan. He got his Ph.D. in Materials Science in 2007 from Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Then he worked in Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University and Nanotechnology Centre, ITC, Hong Kong Polytechnic University before moving to Tohoku University in the beginning of 2011. He joined the faculty of Tohoku University as an Assistant Professor in 2012.
Hongkai Wu	Hongkai Wu is an Associate Professor in Department of Chemistry, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, and a junior Principle Investigator in WPI-Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Japan. He got Ph.D. from Harvard University in 2002 followed by 3 years in Stanford University as postdoctoral fellow. He moved to Hong Kong in 2007 as an Assistant Professor.

Broader context
Carbon-based nanomaterials have been in the frontier of nanotechnology from earlier C60 and carbon nanotubes to graphene. Graphene, a two-dimensional carbon sheet with one atom thickness, is one of the thinnest materials in universe, and has inspired huge interest in physics, materials science, chemistry and biology. Graphene has unique electronic, mechanical, optical, thermal, and chemical properties which are inherited from the two-dimensional atomic structures. The fast development of the graphene field has suggested the great potential of graphene in electronics, photonics, optoelectronics, and energy, environmental and biomedical applications. However, pure graphene sheets are limited for many applications despite their excellent characteristics and scientists face challenges to induce more and controlled functionality. Therefore graphene nanocomposites or hybrids are attracting increasing efforts for real applications in energy and environmental aspects by introducing controlled functional building blocks to graphene. In this Review, we summarize various preparation and functionalization methods for graphene nanocomposites followed by recent energy-related progress in solar energy conversion and electrochemical energy devices, and the advances in environmental applications for the detection and removal of heavy metal ions, organic pollutants, gas and bacteria. Finally a conclusion and perspective is given to discuss the remaining challenges for graphene nanocomposites in energy and environmental science.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Highly soluble PB− modified graphene. (b) The process to prepare graphene nanocomposites with a triblock polymer. (c) BSA proteins as adhesive agents to prepare graphene–nanoparticle composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, 45 and 56. Copyright 2008, ACS (a); copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons (b); copyright 2010, ACS (c).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Graphene–porphyrin hybrids produced via amine covalent bonding. (b) Covalent bonding of perfluorophenylazide (PFTA) to graphene by diazonium salt. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58 and 63. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons (a); copyright 2010, ACS (b).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic demonstration of the preparation of Pt-on-Pd nanodendrites on graphene by in situ electroless chemical deposition. (b) Hydrothermal preparation of graphene–CdS NP nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69 and 92. Copyright 2010, ACS (a); copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Electrochemical deposition of MnO2–graphene nanocomposites. (b) Photochemical routes to metal NP–graphene nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100 and 116. Copyright 2011, ACS (a); copyright 2012, Elsevier (b).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic demonstration of graphene functionalized with molecules, nano-objects and polymers.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Graphene–aromatic molecule hybrids as transparent electrodes for organic solar cells. (b) Highly doped single layer graphene for semi-transparent organic solar cells. (c) Semiconductor QD-sensitized graphene for photoelectrochemical cells. (d) Layered graphene–QDs for photovoltaic devices. (e) Graphene implanted in TiO2 films for dye sensitized solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42, 74, 75, 153, and 157. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons (a); copyright 2011, ACS (b); copyright 2010, Elsevier (c); copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons (d); copyright 2010, ACS (e).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic demonstration of graphene as a cocatalyst for CdS and TiO2 nanocrystal-based solar water splitting. (b) MoS2–TiO2–graphene nanocomposites for solar water splitting. (c) ZnXCd1−XS NP–graphene nanocomposites for solar water splitting. (d) BiVO4–graphene nanocomposites for photoelectrochemical water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163, 165, 166, and 168. Copyright 2012, RSC (a); copyright 2012, ACS (b); copyright 2012, ACS (c); copyright 2010, ACS (d).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Mn3O4 NP–graphene nanocomposites for LIBs. (b) Co3O4 NP–graphene nanocomposites for LIBs. (c) Sulfur particles wrapped by graphene for lithium–sulfur batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, 181 and 193. Copyright 2010, ACS (a); copyright 2010, ACS (b); copyright 2011, ACS (c).	 

Mn3O4 NP–RGO	Anode	900 mA h g−1	
91

MnO2 nanotube–graphene	Anode	495 mA h g−1	
172

Graphene wrapped Fe3O4 particles	Anode	1026 mA h g−1	
173

RGO–Fe2O3 nanocrystals	Anode	1693 mA h g−1	
174

Fe2O3 nanorice–graphene	Anode	1184 mA h g−1	
175

Fe2O3 nanowire–graphene core–shell structures	Anode	1338 mA h g−1	
176

SnO2 NPs–graphene	Anode	634 mA h g−1	
177

SnO2 nanocrystal–graphene	Anode	541.3 mA h g−1	
178

Nitrogen doped graphene–SnO2 nanocrystal sandwich	Anode	1300 mA h g−1	
180

Co3O4 NP–graphene	Anode	800 mA h g−1	
181

NiO nanosheet–graphene	Anode	1000 mA h g−1	
182

V2O5 nanowire–graphene	Anode	412 mA h g−1	
183

TiO2 hollow particle–graphene	Anode	90 mA h g−1	
184

Silicon NPs–3D graphene	Anode	3200 mA h g−1	
187

Nanosized silicon–graphene	Anode	2753 mA h g−1	
188

Sn nanopillar arrays–graphene	Anode	734 mA h g−1	
189

Sn NP–graphene	Anode	810 mA h g−1	
190

Few-layer SnS2–graphene	Anode	920 mA h g−1	
191

LiMn1−xFexPO4 nanorods–RGO	Cathode	132 mA h g−1	
185

LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 NP–graphene	Cathode	188 mA h g−1	
186

Graphene-modified LiFePO4 NPs	Cathode	70 mA h g−1	
125

Commercial LiFePO4–graphene	Cathode	208 mA h g−1	
126


 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic view of asymmetric supercapacitors using graphene as the negative electrode and a MnO2 nanowire–graphene composite as the positive electrode. (b) Vertical PANI nanowire–graphene hierarchical structures for supercapacitors. (c) Fabrication of graphene–CNT–MnO2 nanocomposite supercapacitor electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144, 206 and 220. Copyright 2010, ACS (a); copyright 2010, ACS (b); copyright 2012, ACS (c).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) FePt nanocubes (A) and FePt nanocube–graphene nanocomposites (B); ORR activities of FePt nanocube–graphene nanocomposites in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 (C) and 0.5 M H2SO4 solution (D). (b) MnCo2O4–N-doped reduced graphene oxide hybrids for ORR reaction. (c) MoSx–3D graphene protected Ni foam for HER reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230, 234 and 240. Copyright 2012, ACS (a); copyright 2012, ACS (b); copyright 2013, John Wiley & Sons (c).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Graphene–DNA hybrids for Ag+ ions detection. (b) Microarray fluorescent assay for Hg2+ and Ag+ ions based on graphene–aptamer hybrids. (c) Graphene hybrid-based field effect transistors for Hg2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241, 242 and 246. Copyright 2010, RSC (a); copyright 2013, John Wiley & Sons (b); copyright 2012, ACS (c).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic view of TiO2–graphene composite photocatalysts for the photodegradation of organic pollutants. (b) Reduced graphene oxide–CNT composites as photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83 and 253. Copyright 2010, ACS (a and b).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic view of a graphene–ionic liquid assembly for organic vapor detection using a quartz crystal microbalance. (b) Pd NP–reduced graphene oxide composite channel for NO gas monitoring. Reproduced with permission from ref. 277 and 278. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons (a); copyright 2011, ACS (b).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Graphene oxide-based hybrids with silver enhancement for detecting sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB). (b) Graphene hybrid nanosensors directly integrated with biomaterials such as tooth enamel for remote monitoring of pathogenic bacteria. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286 and 287. Copyright 2010, ACS (a); copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group (b).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
