Hierarchically porous graphene for batteries and supercapacitors  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NJ00652K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NJ00652K
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 5634-5655Hierarchically porous graphene for batteries and supercapacitors

        
          
            Shimeles T. 
            Bulbula
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Lu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Dong
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Xiao-Yu 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, 122 Luoshi Road, Wuhan 430070, China. E-mail: dongying@whut.edu.cn; xyyang@whut.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics, Woldia University, Woldia, Ethiopia
Received 
      6th February 2018
    , Accepted 28th February 2018First published on 1st March 2018AbstractAs energy consumption rapidly increases, energy storage devices that are low-cost, environmentally friendly and have a long life span are imperative. Recently, hierarchically porous graphene (HPG) based electrode materials have received widespread attention due to their unique porous structure and outstanding intrinsic properties such as high specific capacity, good rate capability, being pollution-free, and excellent conductivity. The hierarchically porous structure is beneficial for the charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface and ion diffusion, and it can also accommodate volume changes during cycling. Moreover, the existence of a large number of defects in the basal plane of graphene increases the number of electrochemically active reversible storage sites. These advantages make HPG a promising material for electrochemical energy storage devices with flexible, stable, inexpensive, high gravimetric and volumetric current density. This perspective paper focuses on the recent works on HPG based materials and their applications in batteries (such as lithium-ion batteries and post lithium-ion batteries) and supercapacitors.
Shimeles T. Bulbula
Shimeles T. Bulbula is currently a PhD candidate in the material science and engineering department under Prof. Xiao-Yu Yang's supervision at Wuhan University of Technology. His research area focuses on advanced application of graphene based materials for energy storage devices and the environment.
Yi Lu
Yi Lu is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Baolian Su and Prof. Xiao-Yu Yang at the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing at Wuhan University of Technology, China. His research interest is the design and synthesis of graphene-based composites, as well as their applications in energy and environmental fields.
Ying Dong
Dr Ying Dong is a post-doctoral researcher in the group of Prof. Xiao-Yu Yang at the State Key Laboratory Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology. She received her PhD in 2015 from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research interests mainly focus on design, fabrication and characterization of graphene-based materials and their applications in the fields of environmental remediation and energy conversion and storage.
Xiao-Yu Yang
Prof. Dr Xiao-Yu Yang earned his PhD from Jilin University (co-educated at the University of Namur, Belgium). After post doctoral research at the University of Namur with Prof. Bao-Lian Su, he has worked as a ‘‘Chargéde Recherches’’ at the F.N.R.S. (National Foundation of Scientific Research) since 2008. He is currently working as Chutian Professor at Wuhan University of Technology. His research is aimed at novel porous systems, green chemistry, self assembly techniques and their applications in energy, the environment and catalysis.
1. Introduction
The supply and management of energy has a significant impact on global socioeconomics development, which facilitate the development of technologies that provide us with a higher living standard. However, harvesting green energy from solar energy, hydropower, geothermal energy and so on, requires efficient energy storage devices. In the last few decades, electrochemical energy storage devices have attracted lots of interest for their high energy storage density. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), post-LIBs (e.g., lithium–sulfur (Li–S) and lithium–air (Li–O2/air) batteries), and supercapacitors are considered as effective energy storage devices which can be applied to communication and portable electronic devices, as well as electric vehicles.1
In the battery industry, lithium metal is preferable due to its advantages such as lightest density (0.534 g cm−3), highest voltage (∼3.6 V), greatest energy density (∼240 W h kg−1), long cycle life, and environmental friendliness.2,3 In the past few decades, LIBs have developed rapidly as transportation and stationary power systems used in portable electronic devices, electric or hybrid vehicles, renewable energy, and even in smart grids due to their high energy density with a cell voltage of more than 3.2 V, tiny memory effect and low self-discharge. With the development of LIBs, next-generation batteries, or so-called post-LIBs (e.g., Li–S and Li–air batteries) with theoretical energy densities much higher than that of conventional LIBs, have also attracted tremendous attention in recent years.
In the technology of electrochemical energy storage devices, the electrode materials are the central components, and the characteristics of the electrodes decide the performance of the energy storage devices. Basically, the structure and nature of the elements, morphology and size of the electrodes can greatly influence the performance of storage capacity,4–6 because the lithium storage is strongly dependent on the microscopic structures of the host materials. For instance, during Li-ions intercalation–de-intercalation, the conductivity decreases due to the formation of the solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) layer,3 and structure degradation occurs because of volume expansion,5,7,8 and self-aggregation can result in the capacity fading.9–11 These negative factors make active materials change into inactive phases, indicating higher impedance and poor operating voltage.11,12 Therefore, materials with outstanding electrical conductivity, high-rate ion transportation, large ion accessible surface area, and excellent electrochemical stability are required for high-performance storage devices.
Recent research shows that nanostructured materials2,3,5,13 (such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, gold nanoparticles, silicon nanowires, germanene, and so on) play a significant role in improving the electrical performance of advanced LIBs,13,14 Na-ion batteries,15 Li–air,16 Li–S batteries,17 and supercapacitors.18,19 Recently, a single layer carbon material, so-called graphene, has been developed as a new electrode material due to its striking intrinsic electrical conductivity (106 S cm−1),20,21 outstanding mechanical flexibility,9 high intrinsic mobility (200000 cm2 V−1 s−1),22 large theoretical surface area (2630 m2 g−1),20,23 high Young's modulus (∼1 TPa),21,22 excellent optical transmittance (∼97.7%),22 good thermal conductivity (3000–5000 W m−1 K−1),20,21 splendid theoretical lithium storage capacity (744 mA h g−1),1 and high theoretical gravimetric capacitance (550 F g−1).13 However, due to the strong π–π interaction between graphene sheets, the sheets are readily restacked and form graphite-like powders or films.23–25 This self-aggregation will lead to a decrease of the active accessible surface area and the rate of the ion diffusion, resulting in relatively low discharging/charging rates, as well as poor reversible capacity at high-current density (e.g., 540 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1).11,23
Exploring materials with high specific surface area and surface activity, good selective adsorption, strong structural stability, and excellent reusability are very hot issues at present, yet they still remain challenging tasks.24 Basically, most nano-sized particles have high specific surface area and rich active sites but weak structural stability, thus they are very easy to aggregate resulting in unwanted reductions of specific surface area and surface activity.26,27 On the other hand, the micro-sized particle powders have good structural stability and anti-aggregation properties, but they do not satisfy the requirements in terms of surface area and activity.26 Hence, materials with both the micro-scaled building blocks and nanostructure will be good choice to resist performance loss stemming from restacking or structural instability of the materials. Gao et al.28 reported that the hierarchical graphene/metal grid structure showed an excellent direct current to optical conductivity ratio of 8900, taking advantage of the high conductivity and optical transmission properties of graphene (Fig. 1a). This work also pointed out that the hierarchical structure was desirable for uniform and local current conductivity. In addition, Wood and co-workers29 studied the mechanical behavior of hierarchical structural graphene which possessed high stiffness and strength, and an excellent Young's modulus (initially around 30 GPa, Fig. 1b), as well as ductile behavior similar to Dikin's study.30 Compared with different materials, including the common standard materials such as nacre (Fig. 1c), the hierarchical graphene oxide (GO) papers constructed of lamellae/superlamellae structures exhibited a desirable combination of high strength, stiffness, and strain to failure, indicating that the complex network preserved the integrity of the structure.29 The above works demonstrate that hierarchical structure can enhance the structure stability of graphene nanosheets.
 Fig. 1  (a) Transmission versus sheet of hierarchical graphene/metal grid, the minimum industry standard, typical industry standard, and theoretical calculation of highly doped graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Stress–strain behavior (left) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) image (right) of GO papers. (c) Young's modulus, tensile strength, and strain to failure/elongation of different materials under uniaxial tension. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2013, American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
To date, hierarchically porous materials have been applied for photocatalysts,31 LIBs,16,32,33 supercapacitors,34–36 drug delivery,37 microwave absorption,38 and environmental remediation.39,40 In general, hierarchical porous materials can be defined as materials containing interconnected porous structures with different pore sizes including micropore (<2 nm), mesopore (2–50 nm) and macropore (>50 nm).24,41 The special porous structures contribute to improve the rate of mass transfer. In conjunction with the advantages of graphene, hierarchically porous graphene (HPG) based materials possess large specific surface areas,41 well-defined pore size (2–300 nm),32,33 high conductivity and specific capacity,35 and interconnected porous structures with good stability.35,42,43 Furthermore, a large number of additional defects in the basal plane of graphene increase the electrochemical active reversible storage sites.24,32 Therefore, HPG-based materials can be considered as a promising candidate for engineering energy storage devices concerning long-term cell stability,1,9 heat control,27 safety issues, and economical efficiency. Notably, the number of layers and the lateral size of graphene have a significant impact on Li ion intercalation.44 In addition, Ghosh et al.45 reported that the thermal conductivity of suspended or freestanding graphene decreased with the increase of the layer number due to phonon dispersion change. Kim et al.46 investigated the effect of the layer number and size of graphene nanosheets on the thermal conductivity of their epoxy composites. It was found that the epoxy composites made from multilayer graphene sheets with large size (>30 μm) showed a thermal conductivity of ∼1.5 W m−1 K−1 at only 2.8 vol% graphene loading, higher than those made from monolayer or few-layer graphene with the same graphene loading. Lee et al.47 investigated multilayer graphene (30 to 300 graphene layers) and found that it exhibited very high strain rate tensile deformation behavior (∼107 s−1) at a specific area. Therefore, optimizing the dimensions of graphene is of great importance to improve thermal management and safety in real-world usage (such as preventing overheating) and to enhance long-cycle stability. In this perspective paper, we focus on the recent research on the preparation of HPG-based materials and their applications in electrochemical energy storage devices such as LIBs, post-LIBs, and supercapacitors.
2. Synthesis of HPG
The fabrication of porous graphene can generally be divided into template-dependent and template-free protocols, in which metal and metal oxide nanopaticles (like KMnO4, MnO, NaAlO2, Na2SnO3, K2TiO3, and so on) can be used as catalysts to interact with carbon atoms of graphene to form porous structures at high temperature.11,32,48–50 Zhou and co-workers49 prepared scalable porous graphene using metal oxide nanoparticles as a template via a carbothermal reaction (Fig. 2). Liu et al.51 also fabricated porous graphene by etching graphene sheets using silver nanoparticles via a one-pot synthesis method. Xie et al.52 reported that the porous structure of microstructures of graphene sponges can be controlled by changing the parameters during freeze casting, especially the freezing temperature. However, it is still challenging to develop hierarchically porous material with very high active surface area and mechanical strength, low cost, scalable pore volume, and porosities with micro, meso, and macro length scales simutaneously.12,24,41 Self-assembly of graphene sheets can be expected as an effective technique for the preparation of HPG, which is capable of organizing individual building blocks into complex architectures via hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking interactions, electrostatic forces and so on.55
 Fig. 2  Description of the synthesis process of porous GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2014, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Graphene sheets can be prepared by several approaches, such as micromechanical exfoliation of graphite, epitaxial growth of graphene films, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and solution-based chemical reduction of GO.22,42 Among them, the chemical reduction method is the most frequently used to obtain graphene because it is suitable for large-scale production with low costs.22 Therefore, the strategies for preparing HPG mainly include template-free chemical reduction, hydrothermal, and electrochemical reduction methods, as well as the template-directed CVD technique.24,53–59
2.1 Chemical reduction method
Self-assembly of individual graphene sheets can be conducted through the gelation process of GO suspension. The gelation of GO is started by disturbing the balanced electrostatic repulsions force of the functional groups on GO via chemical reactions.56,60 Commonly, the chemicals used as reducing agents are sodium ascorbate, vitamin C, hydroquinone, NaHSO2, Na2S, and hydrogen iodide.53 In a typical procedure, GO sheets are firstly dispersed in a solution with reducing agents (to change the pH of the GO dispersion solution), then through a series of procedures, gelation and reduction occur, followed by special drying techniques to obtain assembled GO sheets. Sheng et al.61 prepared mechanically strong 3D graphene hydrogels (3D-SGHs) with good electrical conductivity (1 S m−1) through chemical reduction of GO using sodium ascorbate (C6H7NaO6). Self-assembly takes place due to the hydrophobic and π–π interactions between the graphene sheets. Xu et al.62 synthesized functionalized graphene hydrogels (FGHs), in which the pore sizes ranged from sub-micrometers to several micrometers with mechanical robustness and high specific capacitance (441 F g−1) by using hydroquinones as the reducing agent and functionalizing molecules simultaneously (Fig. 3). Wang et al.63 also reported superhydrophobic and highly porous monolithic graphene, with the aid of natural phenolic acids as a reducing agent, and in situ self-assembly of graphene sheets via π–π interactions. Generally, the chemical reduction method can give large scale production of 3D porous graphene without high energy and time consuming long production times.
 Fig. 3  (a) Photographs of aqueous dispersion of GO precursors and the as-prepared FGHs and aerogel after freeze-drying. (b) SEM images of interior microstructures of freeze-dried FGHs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
2.2 Hydrothermal method
In the so-called hydrothermal method, different chemical compounds and materials are produced in a closed-system under a temperature of above 100 °C and pressure of above 1 atm. HPG can be prepared via self-assembly by the hydrothermal process23,32 with the help of block copolymers, surfactants or ionic liquids.42,64 During the hydrothermal treatment at high temperature, functional oxygen groups are reduced and hydrophilic GO sheets are transformed into hydrophobic sheets and the conductivity increases accordingly.32,65 Some noble-metal nanocrystals (such as Au, Ag, Pd, Ir, Rh, Pt, etc.) play an important role (such as enhancing the conductivity and controlling the pore sizes) in the assembly of GO sheets into a 3D porous structure. As shown in Fig. 4a, Tang et al.66 successfully achieved 3D macroscopical porous GO with the assistance of some noble-metal nanocrystals via hydrothermal treatment at 120 °C for 20 h. The macroscopic size of samples was easily controlled by adjusting the reagent volume in the vessel and the pore size was controlled by varying the effective concentration of GO.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the assembly of (1) the graphene oxide sheets and (2) the graphene oxide sheets with a noble metal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66, copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. (b) Fabrication of hierarchical macro- and mesoporous GA–SiO2 frameworks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Wu et al.67 synthesized 3D interconnected graphene-based frameworks with hierarchical macro and mesoporous structures. The macropores were derived from the hydrothermal assembly of GO with the help of surfactant cations (CTA+), while the mesopores were created by silica–graphene aerogel (SiO2–GAs) networks. As shown in Fig. 4b, first the electrostatic adsorption and assembly of CTAB occurred at the surface of 3D GAs, and then nucleation and growth of mesoporous silica took place due to the TEOS hydrolysis, finally the CTAB was removed through thermal annealing and an interconnected porous GA–SiO2 network was developed. Jiang et al.68 fabricated 3D gel-like reduced GO (rGO) using divalent ions (like Ca2+, Ni2+, or Co2+) and water molecules by hydrothermal treatment at 120 °C for 10 h. As shown in Fig. 5a, the rGO sheets were tailored into a gel-like 3D architecture due to the divalent ions and water molecules jointly forming chemical and hydrogen bonds. The gel-like structure was easily controlled by immersing in polyvinylalcohol (PVA). Ren et al.32 also reported a 3D hierarchical GA with uniform and tuneable pore sizes prepared using Co3O4 nano-particles as a template via hydrothermal self-assembly at 180 °C for 12 h (Fig. 5b). The pore size on GA was controlled by simply changing the size of the Co3O4 nano-particles. Therefore, the metal oxide templates have a great impact upon the size and volume of pores during the preparation of porous graphene. Due to the gases created between the graphene sheets, methanol or benzene can also be used as an intercalator, resulting in a particular hierarchically porous structure.48
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of gel-like rGO, M2+ represents the divalent ion (Ca2+, Ni2+, or Co2+). Reprinted with permission from ref. 68, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic preparation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, copyright 2017, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
2.3 Electrochemical reduction
Graphene sheets can be self-assembled into 3D structure by depositing graphene on electrodes. Typically, as shown in Fig. 6a, 3D graphene is deposited on working electrodes by electrolyzing GO aqueous solution in a three-electrode system. This strategy can be carried out at room temperature or even at low temperature. Electrons act as the reducing agent, being favorable for homogeneous reduction. GO nanosheets can be used directly as the feedstock.69,70
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical reduction of a bulk GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation method for ERGO-based composite materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25, copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Chen et al.25 prepared conductive 3D porous graphene architectures (ERGO) (∼716 F g−1) using Pt foil as the counter electrode and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode by the cyclic voltammetry technique in the potential range of 0 to 0.65 V. In a typical procedure, firstly conductive 3D porous GO is prepared by electrochemically reducing a concentrated GO aqueous solution and then the second component was electrochemically deposited onto the 3D ERGO matrix, yielding a graphene-based 3D porous material (Fig. 6b). Sheng et al.69 also fabricated a 3D GO electrode via electrochemical reduction of GO using lithium perchlorate (LiClO4) as an electrolyte under an applied potential of ∼1.2 V for the purpose of supercapacitor application. The pore sizes were in the range of several micrometers to larger than ten micrometers, and the pore walls were nearly vertical to the surface of the current collector. The obtained electrode showed a good rate-performance at 120 Hz, exhibiting a phase angle of −84° and a high Cs value of 283 μF cm−2.
2.4 Template-directed CVD method
3D graphene can be prepared by the CVD method using pre-fabricated 3D metal substrates (such as Ni foam, Cu foam, ZnO, and so on) as the catalysts and templates.53,56 The synthesis of HPG via the template-directed CVD method involves epitaxial growth on the SiC or metal substrate, and the decomposition of CH4 at 1000 °C under ambient pressure.56,71 Compared with the self-assembly method, the CVD method can produce 3D graphene with a large amount of pores in the graphene network, more controlled and uniform morphologies and structures, and better mechanical strength. However, hazardous byproduct gases (like CO and HF) are generated and many substrates are unstable at high temperature. Furthermore, the instrument is quite costly.71–73
Chen et al.74 fabricated 3D-graphene foams (3D-GFs) using CH4 as the carbon source and porous nickel foam as the template (Fig. 7a). The squeezing of the graphene network was prevented by depositing poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) on the surface of graphene before GFs etching from the nickel skeleton. Acetone facilitated the formation of an interconnected 3D network, which was in favour of improving the transport channel of charge carriers. In this study the pore structures and the networks of GFs were tuned simply by using different nickel foams, and the average numbers of graphene layers, specific surface area, as well as the density, were able to be controlled by changing the concentration of CH4. Such a control system was advantageous for developing elastic conductive materials, flexible electrodes for energy storage devices, and biomedical materials.
 Fig. 7  (a) Synthesis procedure of a 3D-GF and integration with PDMS (GF/poly(dimethyl siloxane)) via CVD growth graphene films (Ni–G) using a nickel foam. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74, copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for a 3D-GN. (I) Self-assembly of colloidal silica on SiO2. (II) Graphene growth by CVD on 3D PVA-FeCl3 Si substrate. (III) Infiltration of PVA-FeCl3 into 3D CS assembly. (IV) Iron/CS etching, leaving the 3D-GN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Yoon et al.72 fabricated 3D graphene nano-networks (3D-GNs, pore size approximately 210–230 nm) by using SiO2/Si substrate in a PVA/iron precursor solution. In the preparing procedure as shown in Fig. 7b, the annealing of PVA/FeCl3 helped the reduction of Fe3+, which served as a catalyst for the dissolution of carbon during the subsequent graphene growth process. In addition, HF or HCl played an important role in creating a porous structure by removing the SiO2 substrate and iron simultaneously. Zhu et al.75 made 3D graphene and carbon nanotube (CNT) carpets hybrid material connected by covalent bonds using a copper foil substrate. As shown in Fig. 8a, graphene was grown on the copper foil substrate via the CVD method, then the iron catalyst and alumina buffer layer were deposited on the graphene in series by electron beam evaporation. The obtained hybrid material exhibited a high surface area (>2000 m2 g−1), good energy density (>60 W h kg−1), and excellent electrical conductivity.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representing the synthesis of CNT carpets directly from graphene. (I) Copper foil substrate. (II) Graphene growth on the copper foil by CVD (III) iron and alumina are deposited on the graphene-covered copper foil by using e-beam evaporation. (IV) A CNT carpet is directly grown on the graphene surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75, copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of 3D NGSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Furthermore, 3D porous graphene can be fabricated by integrating the aforementioned methods. Sun et al.76 reported 3D hierarchically porous nitrogen-doped graphene microspheres (3D NGSs) using CVD and the hydrothermal method (Fig. 8b). In the CVD process, PMMA was used as a carbon source and the mixture of Ni microspheres and PMMA were treated at high temperature under Ar/H2 gas flow. After Ni etching and hydrothermal treatment with urea, 3D NGSs were yielded. Wang et al.77 also fabricated hierarchical 3D graphene via microwave plasma enhanced CVD and hydrothermal treatment for a high-performance supercapacitor and the performance was retained at ∼85% after 5000 cycles.
2.5 Other methods
Many other approaches are also reported for preparing HPG-based materials, such as surfactant templating, emulsion templating, sol–gel, ion exchange, post treatment, freeze casting, and so on.57,78 Zhang et al.79 prepared two kinds of 3D graphene spongy structures by the combination of surfactant and freeze-drying techniques. As shown in Fig. 9 (the upper part), hierarchical porous 3D graphene sponges were produced using detergent soap bubbles as templates. First the detergent bubbles were formed using a laundry detergent in aqueous solutions and then mixed with GO dispersion. After vacuum freeze-drying and thermal annealing, 3D porous graphene sponge was obtained. During the synthesis process, the stirring rate, freezing rate and additives added all had significant effects on the pore size and the final structure. Xu et al.80 reported that using waste office paper as a carbon source, metal oxide/metal decorated 3D porous graphene could be produced via in situ activation of cobalt(II) in the following consecutive steps; hydrolysis, carbonization, and carbothermal reactions (Fig. 10a). Huang et al.81 synthesized tunable 3D porous graphene foams (3D-PGFs) using a general emulsion soft-template (1,3,5-trimethylbenzene). As shown in schematic Fig. 10b, first the GO and templates were mixed in aqueous solutions, and self-assembly occurred between graphene oxide and the emulsion soft template. After vacuum filtration and calcination, 3D-PGFs were produced. The diameters and the types of the emulsion templates were vital in controlling the pore size of 3D-PGFs.
 Fig. 9  Fabrication of two kinds of 3D-rGO sponge using the upper bubbles and lower part of the detergent solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79, copyright 2014, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration for the preparation of functional porous graphene (Co3O4/Co@PG) from waste paper (MCM stands for microporous carbonaceous material and PG for porous graphene). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the emulsion soft-template synthesis procedures for preparing 3D-PGFs; (I) self-assembly occurs between graphene oxide and emulsion soft templates, (II) separation of graphene oxide/template composites, (III) calcination to produce 3D-PGFs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recent research demonstrates that GO can be directly reduced by active metals (like Al, Fe, Cu) and the assembly of graphene sheets can be controlled on conductive substrates, including active and inert metals, semiconducting Si, nonmetallic carbon, and indium-tin oxide glass. Hu et al.82 fabricated 3D networked rGO via a substrate-assisted method to achieve reduction and assembly of GO simultaneously. As shown in Fig. 11a the active metal substrates (Sub0) are oxidized to Subn+ ions by electron (e−1) loss, while GO is reduced by electron reception. Hence, the electron transport through GO allows the assembly of 3D rGO. Worsley et al.83 prepared 3D macro-assemblies of graphene aerogel and monolithic graphene architectures with low densities (∼10 mg cm−3) and good electrical conductivities according to the cross-link of individual sheets. Lv et al.84 produced a 3D graphene macro-assembly with a porous core and layered shell via a one-pot self-assembly approach in a low temperature environment (below 100 °C). As shown in Fig. 11b, the pore size of the porous core and the thickness of the layered shell could be precisely controlled by adjusting the concentration of KMnO4 and GO. Liu et al.85 fabricated an ordered hierarchically mesoporous carbon/graphene aerogel composite by an interface-induced co-assembly and subsequent carbonization process. In this process, GA acted as a macroporous substrate, and the triblock copolymer F127 and resols were used as a soft template and carbon sources, respectively. The uniform pore size was about 9.6 nm. The mesopores’ orientation, which had a strong influence on the electrochemical performance, could be easily modified via tuning the ratio of the components during the co-assembly process. Li et al.86 reported a novel 3D HPG material prepared at low temperatures by a one-step ion-exchange/activation. As shown in Fig. 11c, during the synthetic process, the ion-exchanged resin with Ni2+ ions played the role of carbon precursor, and it underwent decomposition, carbonization, and finally graphitization with the formation of gases (like CO and CO2), yielding porous structured graphene-like networks. The 3D HPG showed interconnected micro-, meso-, and macropores, which provided a high surface area and abundant ion channels, resulting in large capacitance and high rate capability.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the substrate-assisted reduction and assembly of the GO process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82, copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Schematic diagram of one-pot self-assembly preparation of 3D-porous graphene macroassemblies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84, copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the synthetic steps of 3D HPG via one-step ion-exchange/activation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
3. Application of HPG in electrochemical energy storage devices
3.1 HPG for LIBs
LIB is composed of two electrodes, the anode and the cathode, separated by the electrolyte (polymer or liquid).4,5 The selection of electrode basically depends upon the electrochemical potential anode (μA) and cathode (μC) as well as their relative position from the lowest unoccupied and highest occupied molecular orbitals (LUMO and HOMO) of the electrolyte.2,5,87 For a stable cell, μA must be lower than the LUMO and μC should be higher than the HOMO of the electrolyte in energy (Fig. 12a),5,87 otherwise the reaction between the electrode and electrolyte will be blocked because of the formation of a passivation SEI layer. The SEI near the anode surface must be anodically and cathodically stable,5 otherwise passivation film forms a permeable interface near the cathode's surface during the discharging/charging process,2 resulting in capacity fading of LIBs due to the block of the Li-ion transport. When we come to the general electrochemistry mechanism of LIBs (Fig. 12b) during discharging, the Li ions move from the anode to the cathode. During charging, the lithium ions migrate from the cathode to the anode through the separator with the electrolyte as the transport media.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the relative position of μA and μC from the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of electrolyte. (b) The general mechanism in the LIB during charging and discharging. 
Recently, LIBs with lithium metal oxides (e.g., LiCoO2, LiNiO2, and LiMn2O4) as the cathode2,20 and graphite as the anode have achieved great commercial success in small cell applications (such as cellular phones and laptops) due to their good life cycle performance, relatively high safety, low cost, and high coulombic efficiency.32,88,89 However, there are still some challenges, such as: (i) limited theoretical energy capacity of graphite (∼372 mA h g−1);11,90 (ii) capacity fading due to electrolyte impurities (such as O2, H2O, and CO2); (iii) structural surface damage upon cycling; and (iv) PC based electrolytes may exfoliate the graphite structure layers and generate gases between the graphite planes, leading to cracking and splitting of the graphite layers.2,5,20 In recent years, metal alloys, semimetals, and transition metal oxides have been widely explored as anodes to substitute graphite in LIBs.2,20 However, materials with a high surface area, good specific capacity, excellent cyclic stability, and high-energy density are still underexploited.
To date, several successful promising materials have been prepared to enhance the performance of anode materials. Graphene based materials are one of the most promising materials. Zhang and coworkers91 doped SnO2 nanoparticles on both sides of single layer graphene sheets to improve the performance of the anode in LIBs. Their results showed that the reversible specific capacity was 558 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles, indicating that it had 71% retention of its initial capacity. This capacity was 3/2 multiple of the theoretical energy capacity of graphite. The performance variation between doped and bare graphene is displayed in Fig. 13a. Yin and coworkers12 prepared hierarchical GO by self-assembly of bioinspired honeycomb structures of GO sheets. The reversible capacity was 1150 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles (Fig. 13b), which was more than three times greater than the theoretical energy capacity of graphite. Xu et al.92 reported a hierarchical SnO2@SnS2@GO nanostructure with a reversible capacity of 664 mA h g−1 (Fig. 13c) at a high specific current density (2000 mA g−1) and relatively low impedance (displayed in Fig. 13d). Similarly, Sun et al.8 also reported a hierarchical Mn2Mo3O8–graphene nanostructure with reversible capacity of 671 ± 5 mA h g−1 at a high specific current density (1500 mA g−1) (Fig. 13e) and the impedance was also reduced compared to bare Mn2Mo3O8 (Fig. 13f). Basically, the decrease of impedance facilitates the electron transfer between the electrodes and electrolyte. Therefore, the excellent energy capacity, which was almost double that of graphite, implys that the hierarchical graphene-based nanostructure is promising for further improving the performance of anode electrodes with high-current density.
 Fig. 13  (a) Cycle performance of SnO2–G, commercial SnO2 and G at a rate of C/5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91, copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves and SEM image (inset) of the honeycomb film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c and d) CV curves and electrochemical impedance performances of hierarchical SnO2@SnS2@rGO hollow spheres, SnO2 hollow spheres, and SnS2 nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e and f) CV and electrochemical impedance performances of hierarchical Mn2Mo3O8–graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8, copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Hierarchical porous nanomaterials with well-defined pore dimensions and structures, as well as interconnected active sites, exhibit minimized diffusive resistance to mass transport, and more effective and faster Li intercalation–de-intercalation due to the short Li+ diffusion path length, striking electrical conductivity, high specific surface area, and rich active surface area sites.17,42 Thus, a porous graphene based network with an interconnected nanostructure is a very attractive research area because it is helpful in the redirection of the ion traffic in order to maintain the rapid charging capacity of LIBs.24,74
Ren et al.32 prepared a 3D hierarchical porous graphene aerogel (HPGA) with tunable mesopores using Co3O4 nano-particles as template via a hydrothermal self-assembly and in situ carbothermal reaction to improve the performance of the anode electrode in LIBs. The reversible specific capacity at high-current density (20 A g−1) was 300 mA h g−1, which was the highest value ever reported. HPGA-50 (Co3O4 size of 50 nm) showed the lowest impedance (Fig. 14a). Recent studies showed that when metal nanoparticles react with carbon atoms of graphene at high temperature, porous graphene was formed and at the same time the conductivity increased.11,32 For instance, Cao et al.11 reported the conductivities of graphene aerogel and porous graphene/cobalt aerogel were 756 S m−1 and 1896 S m−1, respectively. Sun et al.93 prepared hierarchically porous and nitrogen-doped graphene-like microspheres (3D NPGSs) (Fig. 14b) via a precursor assisted CVD method for stable LIBs. Porous nickel microspheres were used as a template, and polyethylene glycol (PEG) and urea were used as the liquid carbon and nitrogen source, respectively. 3D NPGSs decorated by FeOx nanoparticles showed a better cycle performance and rate capability than that of pure 3D NPGSs. The reversible capacity was 1102 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 (50 cycles without capacity loss as displayed in Fig. 14c).
 Fig. 14  (a) Electrochemical impedance spectra of HPGA-50 (Co3O4 size 50 nm), HPGA-20 (Co3O4 size 20 nm) and graphene aerogels after a discharge/charging cycle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, copyright 2017, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) SEM image of 3D NPGS and (c) rate capability of the 3D PGS and 3D NPGS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d and e) SEM images of porous graphene/cobalt (PG/Co) aerogels with different resolution. (f) Discharge capacities of the PG/Co, G/Co and G electrodes with variable current densities. Reprinted with the permission from ref. 11, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gravimetric capacitance is generally used as the figure-of-merit to evaluate an electrochemical electrode. However, volumetric performance4,11,12,22 is also a key figure-of-merit to be considered for practical applications, because portable electronic products can only give limited space for batteries. For instance, highly porous electrode materials show large specific surface area and fast ion diffusion for high gravimetric capacitance, but they usually have low volumetric capacitance due to low packing density. On the other hand, a more compact electrode may have improved volumetric capacitance, but decreased ion-accessible surface area and rate of ion diffusion because of the relatively small specific surface area and insufficient empty space, resulting in a lower gravimetric capacitance and poor rate capability. Cao and co-workers11 reported a 3D hierarchical interconnected porous graphene/Co (PG/Co) aerogel with both high gravimetric capacity (900 mA h g−1) and volumetric capacity (358 mA h cm−3) at a current density of 0.05 A g−1 (Fig. 14d–f). Furthermore, after mechanical compression of the three aerogels (graphene (G), graphene/Co (G/Co), and PG/Co), the gravimetric capacity reductions of G (from 592.5 to 362 mA h g−1) and G/Co aerogel (from 756.4 to 453.2 mA h g−1) were obvious and blocked the flow of electrolytes due to the building up of a dense layered structure. Interestingly, the compressed PG/Co aerogel showed no capacity loss compared with the sample before compression (∼900 mA h g−1 at 0.05 A g−1). It was suggested that the nanopores created on the graphene sheets in the PG/Co aerogel facilitated the access of ions to the entire electrode.
However, some critical challenges associated with LIBs still exist, such as: (i) rapid increase of the electrode impedance; (ii) low power density; and (iii) unsatisfied cyclic stability. It is suggested that highly conductive and well controlled porous morphological materials play an important role in determining the cycling performance and the capacity.12 Hence, hierarchical interconnected 3D porous graphene would be a promising anodic electrode material for designing LIBs with high volumetric and gravimetric current density. Table 1 lists the recent research work on the performance enhancement of LIBs using HPG based materials.
Table 1 Summary of hierarchical graphene-based electrodes for LIBs




Electrode material
Capacity (mA h g−1)
Current rate
Cyclic life
Ref.




GN@C(Fe3O4)
872
0.1 A g−1
100

94



Hierarchical MoSe2/rGO
917
0.1 A g−1
100

95



U-Fe3O4@RGO
2292
0.5 A g−1
500

96



3D NS-GSs
1117
0.1 A g−1
80

97



Porous rGO/SnO2
595
600 mA g−1
300

98



TiO2@C/rGO
401
100 mA g−1
200

99



3D HP Co3O4/G
600
0.07C
80

100



LMNCO NTs
250
1C
100

101



HP-SnO2@C
400
1000 mA g−1
100

102



Fe3O4 microsphere/graphene
551
1 A g−1
1000

103



Mesoporous NiCo2O4/3DGN
359
2 A g−1
2000

104





3.2 HPG for Li–S batteries
Li–S batteries have received much attention in recent years for their high theoretical gravimetric (2500 W h kg−1) and volumetric energy density (2800 W h L−1), as well as high specific capacity (1673 mA h g−1), which is nearly five times that of the existing materials based on transition metal oxides and phosphates.105–108 Moreover, the element sulfur has various advantages such as low cost, abundance in nature, environmental friendliness, and can directly react with two Li ions.109–111
The first ideas for using sulfur element as a cathode source was proposed by Herbert and Ulam in 1962, and the Argonne National Laboratory in 1967.112 In a Li–S battery, sulfur (S or S8) and lithium are used as the cathode and anode electrodes, respectively, with both a liquid electrolyte and separator as the charge transfer medium.107,113 At the open circuit state (Fig. 15), the Li–S battery holds a maximum voltage (the open-circuit voltage (ΦOC)) which is indirectly proportion to the difference between the electrochemical potentials of the Li anode (μa) and S cathode (μc).87,114 During discharging, S reacts with Li by a two-electron reduction process to form polysulfide intermediates (Li2Sx, x = 2–8), generating lithium sulfide (Li2S) at the end of discharge process. This process is monitored until the battery reaches the terminal voltage (ΦOC ≤ 1.5 V). During charging, Li2S is decomposed back to Li and S. The cathode electrochemical potential gradually decreases until the battery voltage returns to ΦOC. The overall electrochemical reaction mechanism can be displayed as follows:115Anode: 16Li ↔ 16Li+ + 16e−Cathode: S8 + 16Li+ + 16e− ↔ 8Li2S
 Fig. 15  Electrochemistry of the Li–S battery during open circuit. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
However, several serious problems remain in the development of a Li–S battery, for example: (i) during cycling, large sulfur volume expansion (∼80%) occurs due to the conversion of sulfur to lithium sulfide, giving rise to the structural change of active material and low reversible capacity;116 (ii) dissolution of sulfur into the electrolyte forms soluble polysulfide components, leading to the formation of an insulating layer on the electrode, which is a so-called shuttling phenomenon. This phenomenon brings out many problems, especially reduction of coulombic efficiency, self-discharging, and lithium anode deterioration due to surface passivation and capacity decay during cycling. In addition, the electronic and ionic insulating compounds (Li2Sx, x = 1, 8) may deposit on the cathode, which results in sluggish electrochemical kinetics.3,107,108,117
To overcome such critical challenges, two approaches have been proposed, e.g., surface coating of the cathode (sulfur) and sulfur loading.118 A mixed conductive layer (like graphene, MnO2 and so on) coated on the surface of the sulfur electrodes can suppress the migration of lithium polysulfides from the sulfur electrode and improve the cycling capacity.119,120 Sulfur loading is another approach to improve the electrical conductivity and cycling capacity by loading the optimal sulfur contents. For instance, mesoporous channels of the carbon matrix can be effectively loaded with the active sulfur of nearly 84 wt% for a large pore volume and suitable pore size.118
Coating of graphene-based materials can improve the electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries by increasing the charge transfer kinetics.115,121–123 Huang et al.124 developed sulfur entrapped HPG to improve the electrochemical performance of a Li–S battery. They reported high discharging capacitance of 1068 mA h g−1 (which was more than two times that of the conventional theoretical capacity e.g., 418 mA h g−1)109 at a current density of 0.5C. In addition, when the temperature was reduced to −20 and −40 °C, the discharging capacitances at 0.1C were 755 and 386 mA h g−1, respectively. The abundant epoxy and hydroxyl groups in porous graphene were helpful for enhancing the binding of S to the C–C bonds. Zhang and co-workers also reported that the oxygen-containing groups on the graphene sheets could immobilize the sulfur element in the cathode material, which could be responsible for the excellent electrochemical performance of the Li–S batteries.125
The uniform distribution of sulfur on the porous graphene has a great impact on reducing the capacity decay of the cells.115,126 Generally, graphene and sulfur compounds like Na2SO3 and Na2S, as well as sulfuric acid, are used for preparing uniform composition of graphene/sulfur (Fig. 16a).115 Liu et al.127 prepared a 3D carbon-network of interlinked connections of graphene sheets and hollow carbon spheres (3D rGO-HCS) with a hierarchical porous structure (Fig. 16b), and used it as the host for the sulfur cathode. The obtained Li–S battery showed a high-rate capacity (∼770 mA h g−1 at 4C rate), long cycling stability (recorded low capacity decay rate of ∼0.052% per 400 cycles), and excellent coulombic efficiency (∼98% up to 400 cycles). Recently, carbon based micro/mesoporous structures109,128,129 have attracted intense interest in improving the capacity retention of Li–S batteries by balancing the sulfur confinement and loading.130 You et al.131 developed hierarchically micro/mesoporous activated graphene (Fig. 16c) with a high specific surface area (SSA) (∼3000 m2 g−1), which was larger than pristine graphene (2600 m2 g−1),132 and had a large-volume pore (∼2.14 cm−3 g−1). The large SSA and porosity were beneficial for uniform sulfur distribution, and the micro/mesoporous structures could act as good reservoirs for preventing the diffusion of polysulfide into the electrolyte, which resulted in a suppressed shuttle effect and improved the coulombic efficiency and cycling stability. The initial discharging capacity was 670 mA h g−1, but after 200 cycles, the discharging capacity went down to 502 mA h g−1. However, the coulombic efficiency after 200 cycles was nearly 100% (Fig. 16d). Li et al.17 also designed sulfur–carbon nanocomposites by infiltrating sulfur into a 3D graphene-like material with hierarchical pores, which showed a high specific surface area (2700 m2 g−1), good conductivity (∼1224 S m−1), and large pore volume (2.5 cm3 g−1). After 300 cycles, the discharging capacity was 1067 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, better than that of previous reports.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of sulfur-coated graphene composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM image of a 3D rGO–HCS nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of the a-MEGO/S composite. (d) Charge/discharge performance of the a-MEGO/S at 1 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The recent reported discharge capacities of various HPG based materials are summarized in Table 2. However, the performance of Li–S batteries is still far from the theoretically expected value due to the shuttle phenomenon effect and the slowness of the electron transportation. The porous structures and stability of HPG should be further optimized to improve the performance of Li–S batteries.
Table 2 Summary of hierarchical graphene-based electrodes for Li–S ion batteries




Electrode material
Capacity (mA h g−1)
Current rate
Cyclic life
Ref.




CGA [w, 12]-S
629
0.5C
200

130



3D-HGPC-S
1017
0.2C
300

133



3DMG aerogels
870
1 A g−1
200

134



GO–MCWCS–S
905
1C
200

135



3D N-doped graphene
666.8
0.5C
300

136



GCS
704
0.3C
100

137



L-GPCS-68%
650
0.5
100

138



S@3D-graphene
500
2C
100

108



2D-GPF
962
2 A g−1
120

139



3D-NGS
792
600 mA g−1
145

140





3.3 HPG for Li–air batteries
The Li–air battery (also called the Li–O2 battery) has the highest specific capacity (∼11000 mA h g−1)141,142 and can deliver high-energy density (∼3500 W h kg−1) which is nearly ten times higher141,143 than that of the currently available LIBs and comparable to the currently used gasoline fuel.115,141 Thanks to these merits, the Li–O2 battery can be considered as one of the most promising power sources for delivering high-energy density when applied to electric vehicles, electrical machinery, and aircraft technology.
The major discharge product at the cathode is lithium peroxide (Li2O2) with a small portion of lithium oxide (Li2O).91,115,144,145 During the discharging process, the oxygen element is first reduced and then reacts with the Li ions, forming Li2O2/2Li2O layers, which is called the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). During the charging process, Li2O2/2Li2O is decomposed to O2 and Li ions, which is called the oxygen evaluation reaction (OER). The overall reversible electrochemical reaction of the Li–air battery can be expressed as follows (Fig. 17):157Anode: Li ↔ Li+ + e−Cathode: 2Li+ + O2 + 2e− ↔ Li2O2 (2.96 V) or 4Li+ + O2 + 4e− ↔ 2Li2O (2.92 V)
 Fig. 17  Electrochemistry of the Li–air battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157, copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. 
Mostly, lithium oxide is not desirable for a fully reversible reaction (back to O2 and Li) but lithium peroxide is considered as the ideal discharge product as a cathode. However, the cathode ORR in a Li–air battery is much slower than that of the anode Li oxidation reaction. As shown in Fig. 18a, the cathode reaction overpotential is much higher than that of the anode reaction. Therefore, to improve the performance of the Li–air battery, the cathode electrode (air electrode) should be paid more attention than the anode electrode. Abraham and Jiang146 were the first to report a nonaqueous electrolyte rechargeable Li–O2 battery with a specific energy between 250–350 W h kg−1. The design of a Li–air battery is essentially different from that of traditional polymer electrolyte-based Li batteries. As such non-aqueous rechargeable Li–O2 batteries have emerged, many researchers have been working on improving their discharging capacities. However, there are still some obstacles to developing Li–O2 batteries,147 including: (i) the decomposition and deterioration of electrolytes happens during the charging process; (ii) the morphology and structure of air-electrodes are not stable, and the structural control is still a problem in developing new electrode materials; (iii) unavoidable by-products (like LiOH, Li2O, Li2CO3, etc.) may cover the electrodes, which block the pathways of the electrolytes and oxygen, leading to low electrochemical performance; and (iv) suitable active catalysts are insufficient for improving the kinetics of the oxygen reaction due to large overpotentials,148,149 especially in the anodic OER direction.115,141,143,150–152
 Fig. 18  (a) Potential of Li anode and air cathode in a Li–air cell at 0.2 mA cm−2 discharging current density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158, copyright 2009, Elsevier. (b) CV graph of a Ru–rGO hybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of Ru@PG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM and (e) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of FGS. (f) The discharged electrochemical performance air electrode of FGS with C/O = 14. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Due to the special 2D ultrathin and open structures, graphene possesses a large effective surface area for exposing abundant accessible active sites. Hence, in graphene-based nanocomposites, graphene can act as both a functional component and a substrate for immobilizing other components for its excellent catalytic activity. Furthermore, this feature also facilitates the accessibility of oxygen and Li ions. According to single or dual doping of heteroatoms on graphene electrodes, the storage performance of Li–air batteries can be greatly improved.153 Jeon et al.148 proved that graphene supported with noble metals (such as Pt, Pd, and Ru) could lower the overpotential. Among them, Ru–rGO hybrids exhibited the most stable cycling performance and the lowest overpotentials (Fig. 18b). Sun et al.145 prepared graphene/Co3O4 nanocomposites via a hydrothermal route for efficient and stable ORR and OER catalytic activities. Compared with a commercial Pt/C catalyst, graphene/Co3O4 nanocomposites showed long-term durability in alkaline solutions.
Designing porous cathode electrodes with sufficient space is also advantageous for accommodation of the discharge products and discovery of effective cathode catalysts to promote both oxygen ORR and OER. Andrei et al.154 studied the pore size distribution effects on the discharge characteristics of Li–air batteries to solve the transport equations in the electrolyte by developing a solution model based theory, including: (i) electrolyte transport; (ii) oxygen diffusion; (iii) heat diffusion; and (iv) electron transport. The theory also coupled the local change in porosity, the variation of the specific surface area, and the resistance of the deposit layer. Furthermore, the accurate porosity change inside the cathode can be obtained by summing the specific areas of each pore. The result indicated that the specific capacity, and the voltage drop increased with the average value of the pore size increasing. Sun et al.155 prepared ruthenium nanocrystal-functionalized porous graphene (with uniform pores ∼250 nm) (Fig. 18c). This large and uniform porous structure improved the overall electrochemical performances of Li–O2 batteries and Ru nanocrystals could efficiently reduce the charge overpotential and increase the cycling stability.
Hierarchical porous structured materials are desirable for facilitating electrolyte permeation and oxygen diffusion, providing sites to accommodate Li2O2 deposition, enhancing the discharge capacity, shortening the Li–O2 diffusion length, stabilizing the electrode structure and so on.145,150,153,156 Wang et al.157 demonstrated that free-standing hierarchical mesopores/micropores carbon derived from GO can improve the discharged capacity of Li–air batteries. Xiao et al.16 developed HPG (∼18 nm pore size, 0.84 cm3 g−1 pore volume, and 186 m2 g−1 BET surface area) without any catalysts via a colloidal microemulsion approach for Li–air battery electrodes using functionalized graphene sheets (FGS) with lattice defects, hydroxyl, epoxy, and carboxyl groups. This HPG air electrode exhibited a high capacity of 15000 mA h g−1 (Fig. 18f), due to the effect of the morphology structure of the electrode, which consisted of lots of nanoscale pores and microporous channels (Fig. 18d and e). This was helpful for rapid oxygen diffusion while the highly connected nanoscale pores provided a high density of reactive sites for Li/O2 reactions. They also further studied the structure of the electrode using the density functional theory model, determining that hierarchical pore structure and defects played a critical role in enhancing the performance of the Li–air electrodes. In addition, the C/O ratio was related to the number of functional groups and lattice defects of the graphene surface, which played an important role in the formation of the isolated nanosized discharge product (Li2O2, deposited on the FGS surface and highlighted by the white arrows in Fig. 18e), because Li2O2 particles tended to nucleate and grow near FGS defects. As a result, the cathode structure can be tuned via controlling of the functional groups and defect sites of the graphene surface, which is beneficial for rechargeable Li–air cells.
To further improve the performance of Li–air batteries, some directions should be considered, including: (i) synthesizing a high catalytic activity electrode to lower the overpotential effect during charging and discharging; (ii) optimizing the porosity of the electrode materials to facilitate the accommodation of the discharge products; and (iii) constructing free-standing nanostructures to enhance the electron transport and promote the decomposition of Li2O2 on the electrode surface.
3.4 HPG for supercapacitors
With the development of technology, a variety of new-tech products such as hybrid electrical vehicles, aerospace satellites, portable electronic equipment and so on have emerged. Consequently, the demand for energy storage devices with higher power densities has rapidly increased. Nowadays, supercapacitors have received much attention due to their excellent power density (>10 kW kg−1), low maintenance cost, superior performance under extreme temperatures, excellent cycle stability, and fast charging/discharging rate compared to batteries or conventional capacitors.159,160 In the common definition, power density determines how fast the energy could be discharged or charged, which is one of the most important parameters for describing the quality of energy storage devices. Supercapacitors are also well known as electrochemical capacitors or ultracapacitors, which can be classified into two types, based on their energy storage mechanisms, including the electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudo-capacitors, as shown in Fig. 19a. For EDLCs, they generate capacitance from the separation of charges at the electrode/electrolyte interface, and carbonaceous materials are mainly used as electrode materials. For pseudo-capacitors, they generate capacitance by rapid Faradaic reactions between the electrolyte and the electro-active species, and conductive polymers and metal oxide nanoparticles are usually applied in constructing the electrode. The charge transfer process in EDLCs is purely electrostatic, however in pseudo-capacitors, it is Faradic in nature (Fig. 19b).160–162 Compared to EDLCs, pseudo-capacitors usually supply a higher specific capacitance and energy density, but suffer a narrow available voltage window, a poor cycling stability and low electrical conductivity, therefore leading to an unsatisfactory electrochemical performance and life cycles. On the other hand, in the EDLCs the charges do not transfer between the electrode and the electrolyte due to the nature of EDLCs, thus making charge storage highly reversible and giving excellent cycling stability.
 Fig. 19  (a) Chart showing types of supercapacitors. (b) Schematic diagram of cell electrode configurations with both EDLC and pseudocapacitance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160, copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A supercapacitor typically consists of dual electrodes separated by a porous separator in an electrolyte medium. In general, when the voltage is applied between the electrodes, the accumulation of opposite charges at the two electrodes would increase, and an electric field is generated, allowing the supercapacitor to store energy.160,163
Some indispensable criteria, such as the minimum ESR value, high cell voltage and large SC are required for a high performance supercapacitor. As a consequence, the selection of electrode material and electrolyte solution plays a critical role in optimizing the overall performance of a supercapacitor. For the electrode, the SSAs, pore structure and distribution, interconnected porous structure and electrical conductivity are critical parameters to be considered.163
Three major types of electrode materials are used in supercapacitor devices which are: carbon materials, transition metal oxides/hydroxides, and conducting polymers.156 Recently, carbon-based porous materials, such as CNTs, activated carbon (AC), and graphene nanosheets, which can store energy by ion adsorption on the surface of carbon, have become the most attractive research fields due to their high specific surface area, excellent chemical stability, rapid ion/electron transportation rate, and large accessible surface area.163,165–168 Among these carbonaceous porous materials, graphene shows great potential as an electrode material for high capacitive performance.161,162,169–174 Assembled HPG is promising for designing an advanced supercapacitor with excellent gravimetric and volumetric capacitance, as well as high rate capability.175–177 Yu et al.178 prepared HPG nanosheets (HPGN) via a hard-template method to improve the SSA (up to 1942 m2 g−1) and their electrochemical behaviors in supercapacitors. Their research indicated that the van der Waals interaction between graphene sheets was prevented by using microsphere polystyrene as spacers between the graphene sheets, effectively reducing the aggregation of the sheets. Furthermore, as the material treating temperature was increased, the morphological structure of the porous graphene sheet changed. For instance, at a temperature of about 500 °C, a spherical structure built up (Fig. 20a), however at temperatures above 600 °C, the spherical structure disappeared (Fig. 20b), and some micro or mesopores appeared, indicating that during electrode preparation, the treating temperature played a part in the performance improvement. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 20c, HPGN8 and HPGN7 (treated at 800 and 700 °C, respectively) exhibited much better rate performance (112 and 97 F g−1) than HPGN5 (73 F g−1) and HPGN6 (72 F g−1) (treated at 500 and 600 °C, respectively) at high-current density (8 A g−1).
 Fig. 20  SEM images of HPGN after low (a) and high (b) temperature treatment. (c) Cycling stability of HPGN electrodes upon charging/discharging at varied current density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) Low magnification SEM images of SP-AG. (e) CV curves of SP-AG, AG, P-AG and S-AG at scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (f) Cyclic stability of SP-AG and AG at current density of 1 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184, copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Single or dual doping of heteroatoms, or using active chemicals, such as sulfur, nitrogen, phosphorus and ZnCl2, have become an attractive way to improve the capacitive performance.164,179–183 Yu et al.184 synthesized sulfur (5.8%) and phosphorus (4.6%) co-doping of HPG aerogels by S and P modifying graphene lattices the via freeze-drying method for improving the specific capacitance of a supercapacitor (Fig. 20d). The SSA of the doped graphene aerogel (SP-AG, 409 m2 g−1) was 1.34 times greater than that of the pure graphene aerogel (AG, 305 m2 g−1). Furthermore, the specific capacitance of the heteroatoms doping sample (SP-AG, 438 F g−1) was 1.8 times higher than that of pure AG (240 F g−1), and also better than the single atom doping GA (e.g., S-AG = 347 F g−1 and P-AG = 313 F g−1) (Fig. 20e). In addition, the capacitance retention was stable after thousands of charging/discharging cycles (Fig. 20f). Chang et al.179 developed graphene-like hierarchical porous carbon sheets (HPCNS) by using nano-MgO spheres as templates and ZnCl2 as a chemical activation agent. The pore size and porosity property of the electrodes with different micro/mesopore proportionality were controlled by tuning the MgO/ZnCl2 ratio. Furthermore, ZnCl2 helped to separate the carbon layers by releasing gas. As shown in Fig. 21a and b, the thickness of HPCNS was much thinner compared with the product without using ZnCl2. Moreover, the BET surface area was increased from 578.7 to 1415.6 m2 g−1.
 Fig. 21  SEM images of HPCNS without (a) and with (b) ZnCl2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of 3D NG/Co–NCNT hybrid. (d) Ragone plot (energy density vs. power density vs. charge time) of the 3D NG/Co–NCNT/NG asymmetric supercapacitors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 185, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) SEM image of NiCo2O4–GO. (f) Electrical-resistance variation of NiCo2O4–GO electrode at different bending angles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 188, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Supercapacitors, which can charge very quickly have been around for decades, but their low-energy densities have held them back in many applications, such as vehicle technology. Basically, energy density reflects the ability to store energy and determines how long the supercapacitor can act as a power source. Nowadays, supercapacitors with high energy density are still under investigation. Balamurugan et al.185 synthesized 3D hierarchical N-doped graphene nanosheet/cobalt encapsulated carbon nanotubes via sol–gel methods for improving the energy density and the capacitance retention of the supercapacitor (Fig. 21c). The Co nanoparticles were tightly encapsulated in NGS/NCNT, which was favorable for electron transport, and grown on both sides of the NGS/NCNT nanosheets, which prevented the sheets aggregation and improved the BET surface area. As a result, high energy density (∼88.44 W h kg−1) and power density (∼892.83 W kg−1) were obtained, and the corresponding charge time was 356.8 s (Fig. 21d).
With the rapid development of intelligent electronic devices such as smart phones, flexible, portable, ultrathin and highly-efficient power source storage devices are in high demand.186,187,192 Mitchell et al.188 reported ultra-thin porous hierarchically textured NiCo2O4–GO flexible nanosheets via an electro-deposition method (Fig. 21e). As shown in Fig. 21f, there was no change in the electrical resistivity of the NiCo2O4–GO electrode as the electrode bent from 0 to 170°. This could be ascribed to the porous and nanosheet like structure of the electrode. For instance, the nanosheet structure greatly enhanced the Faradaic redox reaction of NiCo2O4 and the porous structure provided a large accessible surface area for the enhanced charge storage.

Table 3 summarizes the application of HPG based materials for supercapacitors. Today in the global market, supercapacitors are commonly used for burst-mode power delivery or short-term energy storage in trains, elevators, and hybrid electric vehicles. Furthermore, supercapacitors in smaller units are also utilized as memory backup for static random-access memory. Compared to lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors show superiority in terms of power, number of cycles, and capability at low temperatures. IDTechEx Ltd. estimated that supercapacitors would have a huge market potential and could capture about 800 million to 1 billion dollars by 2026.189 However, the current commercially available supercapacitors can only provide energy densities of less than 10 W h kg−1, which is a critical challenge when used for appliances for longer times without recharging.
Table 3 Summary of HPG based materials used for supercapacitors




Electrode material
Specific capacitance (F g−1)
Energy density (W h kg−1)
Power density (W kg−1)
Capacitance retention (%)
Ref.




H-NiCo2/porous graphene
1768
60.9
11.36
96.8

192



LDH-NF/GNS
165.6
31.5
400
80

193



HPCNS
332.8
45.8
495.3
93.8

179



NGCA
750
—
—
81

194



hnp-G
38.2 F cm−3
2.65 mW h cm−3
20.8 W cm−3
94

195



frGO-F/PANI
939
20.9
103.2
88.7

196



GS-CNTs-9-1
326.5
21.74
78.29k
65

197



H-GA
128.2
36.4
633.7
80

176



CoMn(CoMn)2O4/rGO
571
—
—
84

198



Graphene/CNTs/Mn2O3
370
—
—
—

199



3DGF-MCS
288.77
—
—
—

200



NF/G/Ni–Co–S
9.2 F cm−1
—
—
94.6

201



PANI-frGO
590
—
—
91

202



CSG
303.8
87.5
1500
95.3

203



H-PGC
300
67
60k
99

177



CNT@NiO//DGNs ASC
108
38.1
16k
93.5

204



HGPAs
418
—
—
80

205



PF16G-HA
231
98
—
—

206



3D GA-MC
226
—
—
—

67



3D-HPCFs
130
18.7
11k
94

165



GQD-3DG
268
—
—
90

207



GPC
313
90.4
12.8k
94.2

208





3.5 HPG for hybrid supercapacitors
LIBs can store a large amount of energy (150–200 W h kg−1), but are confined by their low power density (<1000 W kg−1) and poor cycle life (<1000 cycles).164,165 By combination of the high power density of supercapacitors and high energy density of LIBs, a novel supercapacitor–battery hybrid energy storage system (HSC) has emerged (Fig. 22a).190,191 The HSC commonly includes a capacitor-type electrode and a lithium ion battery-type electrode in a Li salt containing organic electrolytes. Various electrode materials such as carbon based materials, transition metal oxides, metal hydroxides, and so on have been investigated in the application of HSC. Among them, metal oxide/hydroxides (such as Co(OH)2, Fe3O4, PbO2, Ni(OH)2, MnO2, SnO2 and so on) as a positive electrode (cathode) and active carbon as a negative electrode (anode) in aqueous systems could improve the energy density from 10 to 50 W h kg−1.209,210 However, there are numerous parameters that can influence the performance of HSC electrodes, such as pore size and shape, number of layers, orientation, chemical compositions and so on. For example, Gao et al.211 reported that cobalt ions in the layered Co(OH)2 can reduce the energy associated with (CoO2)2− planes oriented perpendicular, rather than parallel to, the large surface area of platelet particles and thus minimize the diffusion path.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic plot of integrated rechargeable hybrid battery-supercapacitor electrical energy storage devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 190, copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Ragone plots of the Fe3O4/G//3D graphene hybrid supercapacitor and 3D graphene/3D graphene symmetric supercapacitor at various charge–discharging rates. (c) Ragone plots of electronic energy storage devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213, copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gao et al.212 fabricated mechanically stable flexible asymmetric (unequal electrodes) supercapacitors based on free-standing paper electrodes by intercalating carbon nanotubes and Mn3O4 nanoparticles between the graphene layers using polymer gel electrolytes. The CNTs and Mn3O4 nanoparticles intercalated between the graphene layers minimized the restacking of rGO nanosheets. As a result, more electrolyte-accessible surface areas were available, which greatly contributed to the diffusion of electrolyte ions into the interior of the electrodes. The energy density was 32.7 W h kg−1, better than previously reported values on active carbon based HSC electrodes. Furthermore, as the power density increased to 9 kW kg−1, the energy density was still as high as 22.9 W h kg−1, indicating that the asymmetric supercapacitors were cyclically stable. Zhang et al.213 fabricated a high energy density (147 W h kg−1, Fig. 22b) battery type HSC via a solvothermal reaction using a Fe3O4/graphene (Fe3O4/G) nanocomposite as the negative electrode material and 3D porous graphene (∼3355 m2 g−1) as the positive electrode material. As shown in Fig. 22b, the hybrid battery-supercapacitor (Fe3O4/G//3D graphene) showed superior performance compared to a symmetric supercapacitor (3D graphene//3D graphene) and LIBs. Furthermore, the energy density (86 W h kg−1, at high power density of ∼2587 W kg−1) was the highest value ever reported for HSC. During the charging process, PF6 ions (from the organic electrolytes) were absorbed in the porous structure of 3D graphene, while Li ions from electrolytes were easily intercalated into the Fe3O4/G, and the discharge process was the reverse.

Fig. 22c shows Ragone plots (energy density versus power density) of different electrochemical energy storage devices. Clearly, the current energy storage devices are not satisfying the need for very high energy and power density. Additionally, the power density increases while the energy density radically reduces. Therefore, there is a critical need to redesign the energy storage device in terms of materials, architectures, electrolytes, and other features to concurrently improve the power and energy density. HPG based materials can provide a good opportunity to simultaneously improve the performance, structural stability, portability, self-discharging, and power and energy densities for HSC. However, the development of HPG materials is still at the initial stage, many issues remain to be resolved, such as mechanical strength, electrical conductivity, volumetric capacity, intrinsic kinetics, surface chemistry, and cost effectiveness and so on.
4. Conclusion and perspectives
Electrochemical energy storage devices have many advantages, including low cost, good reversibility capacity, long life span, high energy and power density. LIBs with lithium metal oxides as the cathode and graphite as an anode have been widely commercially available for smart phones, tablets, laptops, digital cameras and so on. Importantly, the structures and the compositions of the electrodes are the key issues that limit the performance of storage devices.
Graphene based materials with reduced resistance and increased capacity retention to high discharge rates have already been used in the energy storage industry. However, the performance is still far from their theoretical value due to the strong π–π interaction between graphene sheets, which makes the sheets readily restack to form graphite-like powders. Consequently, the active accessible surface area is greatly decreased and the rate of ion diffusion is immensely slowed. Nowadays, HPG based materials have aroused vigorous interest as novel electrode materials for LIBs, post-LIBs and supercapacitors due to their large SSA, well-defined pores, good structure stability, high rate capability, and high gravimetric capacity. The porous structures not only facilitate the transport of electrolyte ions within the electrodes and improve the specific capacitance, but also contribute to prevent the formation of SEI by morphology controlling.
This comprehensive perspective paper presents recent research works on HPG based materials, including synthesis methods and their applications in electrochemical energy storage devices such as LIBs, post-LIBs and supercapacitors. However, beyond those existing works, HPG based materials are still facing some challenges. First, the high porosity of HPG based materials greatly increases the active accessible surface area and enhances the rate of ion diffusion, resulting in relatively high discharging/charging rates. However, the low packing density gives rise to a low volumetric capacitance. The optimal balance between the high porosity and volumetric capacitance should be considered. Second, HPG based materials with high porosity and low packing density still suffer from dissatisfactory mechanical strength. Thorough investigation of the self-assembling mechanism of HPG based materials would provide a unambiguous strategy to strengthen the 3D skeletons. Without the sacrifice of electrode performance, some reinforcing agents or cross-linkers could be further developed to boost the interactions among graphene nanosheets. Third, GO as a precursor is mostly used to prepare HPG based materials due to its active oxygen-containing functional groups. Based on the established mechanism, the preparation methodology puts forward higher requirements, for example, the distribution of pore structures and active nanoparticles should be elaborately controlled on the basis of the extended fundamental knowledge of the reactivity and transfer inside the confined environments, as well as the energy and kinetics of the key processes. Molecular dynamics would be helpful in the field. Fourth, the defects, especially nonmetal atoms, give rGO lower electrical conductivity than pristine graphene sheets, but enhance the interaction with active nanoparticles. More efforts should be made to optimize the interfaces between the nanostructures and graphene nanosheets and charge collecting electrodes. Fifth, thermal energy could be released during the charge–discharge processes. The gathering heat in the porous structures should also be paid more attention. The corrosive organic liquid electrolytes can be easily decomposed and form barriers near electrodes, which prevent the flow of ions. It is expected that HPG based materials will lead to the next generation of energy storage devices with high energy and power densities.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially funded by the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFC1103800), the National Science Foundation of China (51602236, U1662134, 51472190, 51611530672 and 21711530705), Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (IRT_15R52), Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (2016CFA033), and International Science & Technology Cooperation Program of China (2015DFE52870). This study was also supported by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2016M592400), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WUT: 2017IVB012), the Open Project Program of State Key Laboratory of Petroleum Pollution Control (PPC2016007), Chinese Government Scholarship (CSC), and the Ethiopian Ministry of Education (MoE).
Notes and references
L. Liu, M. An, P. Yang and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Haregewoin, A. S. Wotango and B. J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1955–1988 CAS .
L. Mai, X. Tian, X. Xu, L. Chang and L. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11828–11862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Wu, J. S. Chen, H. H. Hng and X. W. D. Lou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2526–2542 RSC .
P. Roy and K. S. Suneel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2454–2484 CAS .
C. Tang, J. Sheng, C. Xu, S. M. Khajehbashi, X. Wang, P. Hu, X. Wei, Q. Wei, L. Zhou and L. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19427–19432 CAS .
X. Li, C. Zhang and T. Meng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 4321–4328 RSC .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17229–17235 RSC .
W. Zhou, J. Zhu, C. Cheng, J. Liu, H. Yang, C. Cong, C. Guan, X. Jia, H. J. Fan, Q. Yan and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4954–4961 CAS .
E. C. Evarts, Nature, 2015, 526, S93–S95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cao, X. Zhou, W. Deng and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6021–6028 CAS .
S. Yin, Y. Zhang, J. Kong, C. Zou, C. M. Li, X. Lu and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3831–3838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. M. Tarascon and P. Simon, Electrochemical energy storage, John Wiley and Sons, Great Britain and the United States,  2015 Search PubMed .
Y. G. Guo, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878–2887 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Han, E. Gonzalo, G. Singh and T. A. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 81–102 CAS .
J. Xiao, D. Mei, X. Li, W. Xu, D. Wang, G. L. Graff and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071–5078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Li, Q. Zhang and P. K. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4528–4533 CAS .
Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2011, 334, 917–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dong, Z. Chen, D. Yang and H. Lu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21183–21191 RSC .
Y. Jing, Z. Zhou, C. R. Cabrera and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12104–12122 CAS .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Zhong, X. Huang, N. O. Weiss, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4554–5554 CAS .
L. Jiang and Z. Fan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1922–1945 RSC .
K. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Chen, H. Bai and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20968–20976 RSC .

          W. Cai, G. Duan and Y. Li, Hierarchical micro/nanostructured materials: fabrication, properties, and applications, CRC Press, London,  2014 Search PubMed .
K. Zhang, Y. Zhang and S. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3448 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Gao, Z. Li, P. Huang, G. J. Shenoy, D. Parobek, S. Tan and P. Leu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5440–5446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Wood, M. J. Palmeri, K. W. Putz, Z. An, S. T. Nguyen and L. C. Brinson, J. Appl. Mech., 2013, 80, 040913 CrossRef .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. Dommett, G. Evmenenko and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. A. Parlett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3876–3893 RSC .
L. Ren, K. N. Hui, K. S. Hui, Y. Liu, X. Qi, J. Zhong, Y. Du and J. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. M. Chen, Chemistry and macroscopic assembly of graphene for application in energy storage, Springer, Berlin,  2015 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, X. Zhuang, Y. Huang, J. Jiang, H. Tian, D. Wu and X. Feng, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 1088–1095 RSC .
D. Li, Y. Li, Y. Feng, W. Hu and W. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2135–2143 CAS .
P. Hao, Z. Zhao, J. Tian, H. Li, Y. Sang, G. Yu, H. Cai, H. Liu, C. P. Wong and A. Umar, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12120–12129 RSC .
J. Wu, A. Chen, M. Qin, R. Huang, G. Zhang, B. Xue, J. Wei, Y. Li, Y. Cao and W. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1655–1660 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Li, J. Chen and X. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5878–5886 RSC .
S. P. Kumar, J. Sundaramurthy, S. Sundarrajan, V. J. Babu, G. Singh, S. I. Allakhverdiev and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3192–3222 Search PubMed .
E. Ziaei, A. Mehdinia and A. Jabbari, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2014, 850, 49–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. L. Su, C. Sanchez and X. Y. Yang, Hierarchically structured porous materials: from nanoscience to catalysis, separation, optics, energy, and life science, John Wiley and Sons, Singapore,  2012 Search PubMed .
S. Dutta, A. Bhaumik and K. C. W. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3574–3592 CAS .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
J. Hui, M. Burgess, J. Zhang and J. R. Lopez, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4248–4257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, W. Bao, D. L. Nika, S. Subrina, E. P. Pokatilov, C. N. Lau and A. A. Balandin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 555–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, Z. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Liu, Y. B. He and J. K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3585–3593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, P. E. Loya, J. Lou and E. L. Thomas, Science, 2014, 346, 1092–1096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cao, Y. Tian, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, C. Bai, Y. Luo, X. Zhao, L. Ma and S. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13518–13526 RSC .
D. Zhou, Y. Cui, P. W. Xiao, M. Y. Jiang and B. H. Han, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yuan, J. Chen and G. Shi, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Liu, M. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Guo, Z. Xue and X. Lu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 100268–100271 RSC .
X. Xie, Y. Zhou, H. Bi, K. Yin, S. Wan and L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2117 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2015, 2, 40–53 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang and S. Gu, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 221, 41–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, G. Shi and X. Duan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1666–1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mao, G. Lu and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6924–6943 RSC .
X. Y. Yang, L. H. Chen, L. Y. Li, J. C. Rooke, J. C. Sanchez and B. L. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 481–558 RSC .
K. Cao, Y. Tian, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, C. Bai, Y. Luo, X. Zhao, L. Ma and S. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13518–13526 RSC .
H. Gao and H. Duan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 65, 404–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, Y. Sun, H. Bai and G. Shi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11193–11198 RSC .
K. X. Sheng, Y. X. Xu, L. I. Chun and G. Q. Shi, New Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5779–5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Shi., J. Fan, Y. Ge, J. Yin and G. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22459–22466 RSC .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806–4814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1679–1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, S. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4603–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Z. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532–19535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, Y. Ma, J. Li, Q. Fan and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22462–22465 CAS .
K. Sheng, Y. Sun, C. Li, W. Yuan and G. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Feng, W. Chen and L. Yan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 80106–80113 RSC .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and C. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Yoon, J. S. Lee, S. I. Kim, K. H. Kim and J. H. Jang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1788 CrossRef .
X. Chen, L. Zhang and S. Chen, Synth. Met., 2015, 210, 95–108 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Li, C. Zhang, G. Casillas, Z. Sun, Z. Yan and R. H. Hauge, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1225 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Sun, J. Yang and X. Yan, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 348–353 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, J. Xu, M. F. Yuen, J. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Chen and W. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6372–6380 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, W. Yao, L. Hu, D. Liu, C. Wang and C. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5563–5577 RSC .
R. Zhang, Y. Cao, P. Li, X. Zang, P. Sun, K. Wang, M. Zhong, J. Wei, D. Wei, D. Wu, F. Kang and H. Zhu, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1477–1487 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, Y. Xie, Y. J. Song and W. Q. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16072–16078 CAS .
X. Huang, B. Sun, D. Su, D. Zhao and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7973–7979 CAS .
C. Hu, X. Zhai, L. Liu, Y. Zhao, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2065 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lv, Y. Tao, W. Ni, Z. Zhou, F. Y. Su, X. C. Chen, F. M. Jin and Q. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12352–12357 RSC .
R. Liu, L. Wan, S. Liu, L. Pan, D. Wu and D. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 526–533 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Li and P. K. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2474–2480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, B. Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388–1414 CAS .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Lu, S. Wen, L. Lu and J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17857–17866 CAS .
L. S. Zhang, L. Y. Jiang, H. J. Yan, W. D. Wang, W. Wang, W. G. Song, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5462–5467 RSC .
W. Xu, Z. Xie, X. Cui, K. Zhao, L. Zhang, G. Dietrich and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22533–22541 CAS .
D. Sun, X. Yan, J. Yang, P. Zhang and Q. Xue, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1830–1838 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, S. Zhao, Y. Lian, M. Zhou, L. Wang, B. Ding and S. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 229, 306–315 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Fu, X. Yang, Y. Qu and Z. Zhang, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, J. Huang, X. Liu, F. Bu, L. Wang, Q. Xie and D. L. Peng, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 327, 678–685 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, J. Yang and X. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2134–2137 RSC .
D. Zhou, W. L. Song, X. Li and L. Z. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 207, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiang, R. Wang, M. Pang, H. Wang, S. Zeng, X. Yue, L. Ni, S. Qiu and Z. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 280, 614–622 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sun, K. Huang, X. Qi, T. Gao, Y. Liu, X. Zou and J. Zhong, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 2523–2528 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, Y. Li, M. Wu, L. Deng, X. Ren and P. Zhang, Acta Mater., 2016, 112, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. Zhu, Q. Liu, J. Gu, Z. Guo, Z. Chen, C. Feng, D. Zhang and W. J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2766–2773 RSC .
K. Zhu, Y. Zhang, H. Qiu, Y. Meng, Y. Gao, X. Meng, Z. Gao, G. Chen and Y. Wei, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 675, 399–406 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, J. Wu, J. Zhou, G. Fang and S. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kang, N. Deng, J. Ju, Q. Li, D. Wu, X. Ma, L. Li, M. Naebe and B. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16541–16588 RSC .
M. Behzadirad, O. Lavrova and T. Busani, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7830–7840 CAS .
Z. W. Seh, W. Li, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, P. C. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1331 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xu, Y. Wu, X. Zhao, X. Wang, G. Du, J. Zhang and J. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 22–25 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Wang, Q. Zeng, G. Zhou, L. Yin, F. Li, H. M. Cheng, I. R. Gentle and G. Q. M. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9382–9394 CAS .
R. V. Noorden, Nature, 2013, 498, 416–417 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhou, L. C. Yin, D. W. Wang, L. Li, S. Pei, I. R. Gentle, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5367–5375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Zheng and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3018–3032 RSC .
Z. Lin and C. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 936–958 CAS .
X. Y. Yin, S. Xin, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13186–13200 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sun, G.-L. Xu, Y.-F. Xu, S.-G. Sun, X. Zhang, Y. Qiu and S. Yang, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 726–738 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Du, Y. X. Yin, X. X. Zeng, J. L. Shi, S. F. Zhang, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3584–3590 CAS .
B. Ding, C. Yuan, L. Shen, G. Xu, P. Nie, Q. Lai and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1096–1101 CAS .
D. Li, F. Han, S. Wang, F. Cheng, Q. Sun and W. C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2208–2213 CAS .
E. S. Shin, K. Kim, S. H. Oh and W. I. Cho, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2004–2006 RSC .
Y. Li, D. Ye, W. Liu, B. Shi, R. Guo, H. Zhao, H. Pei, J. Xu and J. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28566–28573 CAS .
L. Ji, M. Rao, H. Zheng, L. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Duan, J. Guo, E. T. Cairs and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18522–18525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, J. Xie, J. Yang, Y. Zou, J. Tang, S. Wang, L. Ma and Q. Liao, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 993–1000 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, A. Wang, F. Tian, H. Song, Y. Wang, C. Li, J. D. Hong and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5292–5298 RSC .
J. Q. Huang, X. F. Liu, Q. Zhang, C. M. Chen, M. Q. Zhao, S. M. Zhang, W. Zhu, W. Z. Qian and F. Wei, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 314–321 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Ji, P. A. Glans, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu and J. Guo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13670–13675 RSC .
X. Y. Zhao, J. P. Tu, Y. Lu, J. B. Cai, Y. J. Zhang, X. L. Wang and C. D. Gu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 113, 256–262 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, K. Xie, Z. Chen, Y. Li, X. Hong, J. Xu, L. Zhou, J. Yuan and C. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11395–11402 CAS .
A. Walcarius, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4098–4140 RSC .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutiérrez and F. D. Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794–830 RSC .
K. Zhang, F. Qin, Y. Lai, J. Li, X. Lei, M. Wang, H. Lu and J. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6072–6081 CAS .
Y. You, W. Zeng, Y. X. Yin, J. Zhang, C. P. Yang, Y. Zhu and Y. G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4799–4802 CAS .
L. Rodriguez-Perez, M. A. Herranz and N. Martín, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3721–3735 RSC .
C. Wu, L. Fu, J. Maier and Y. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9438–9445 CAS .
J. He, P. Li, W. Lv, K. Wen, Y. Chen, W. Zhang, Y. Lu, W. Qin and W. He, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 215, 12–18 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, X. Zhang, J. Guo, S. Zhao and F. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 714, 311–317 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Y. Huang, S. Xu, W. Zhang, K. Wang and M. Zong, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 321, 855–867 CrossRef .
S. Niu, W. Lv, C. Zhang, Y. Shi, J. Zhao, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 295, 182–189 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, L. Zhang, F. Zhang, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5208–5215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shan, Y. Liu, Y. Su, P. Liu, X. Zhuang, D. Wu, F. Zhang and X. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 314–320 CAS .
C. Wang, K. Su, W. Wan, H. Guo, H. Zhou, J. Chen, X. Zhang and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5018–5023 CAS .
M. H. Sun, S. Z. Huang, L. H. Chen, Y. Li, X. Y. Yang, Z. Y. Yuan and B. L. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3479–3563 RSC .
J. G. Zhang, D. Wang, W. Xu, J. Xiao and R. E. Williford, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4332–4337 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Jung, Y. S. Jeong, J. B. Park, Y. K. Sun, B. Scrosati and Y. J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3532–3539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, X. Yuan, L. Li, Z. F. Ma, D. P. Wilkinson, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2144–2198 CAS .
C. Sun, F. Li, C. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Ren, W. Yang, Z. Ma, J. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Kim and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7188–7196 CAS .
K. M. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, T. Zhang and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1125–1141 CAS .
Y. S. Jeong, J. B. Park, H. G. Jung, J. Kim, X. Luo, J. Lu, L. Curtiss, K. Amine, Y.-K. Sun, B. Scrosati and Y. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4261–4268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Zhao, Y. Lu, M. Xu, D. Zhang, R. S. Ruoff, K. J. Stevenson and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1379–A1382 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, J. Zheng, X. Li, Y. Shao and J. G. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 424004 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Williford and J. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1164–1170 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tan, W. Kong, Z. Shao, M. Liu and M. Ni, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 62, 155–189 CrossRef .
H. Cui, Z. Zhou and D. Jia, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 7–19 RSC .
P. Andrei and V. V. Bevara, ECS Trans., 2014, 61, 193–212 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, X. Huang, S. Chen, P. Munroe and G. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3145–3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Zhou, H. Nie and H. A. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, D. Xu, J. J. Xu, L. L. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699–3705 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, D. Foster and J. Read, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1235–1240 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, M. Ni, X. Ren, Y. Tian, N. Li, Y. Su and X. Zhang, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 20, 416–428 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Tan and J. M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14814–14843 CAS .
Z. Lei, J. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, N. A. Kumar and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1891–1930 CAS .
S. Bose, T. Kuila, A. K. Mishra, R. Rajasekar, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 767–784 RSC .
Q. Wang, J. Yan and Z. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 729–762 CAS .
P. Hao, Z. Zhao, Y. Leng, J. Tian, Y. Sang, R. I. Boughton, C. P. Wang, H. Liu and B. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 9–23 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, J. Jiang and S. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15302–15308 CAS .
X. Tong, H. Zhuo, S. Wang, L. Zhong, Y. Hu, X. Peng, W. Zhou and R. Sun, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 34261–34270 RSC .
W. Tian, Q. Gao, Y. Tan, K. Yang, L. Zhu, C. Yang and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5656–5664 CAS .
Y. P. Gao, Z. B. Zhai, K. J. Huang and Y. Y. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 11456–11470 RSC .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702–730 CAS .
S. He and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6957–6990 RSC .
Q. Shi, Y. Cha, Y. Song, J. I. Lee, C. Zhu, X. Li, M. K. Song, D. Du and Y. Lin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15414–15447 RSC .
K. C. Pham, Y. H. Chang, D. S. McPhail, C. Mattevi, A. T. Wee and D. H. Chua, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 6856–6864 RSC .
U. Patil, S. C. Lee, S. Kulkarni, J. S. Sohn, M. S. Nam, S. Han and S. C. Jun, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6999–7021 RSC .
X. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. Li, K. Wang, X. Sun and Y. Ma, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 45862–45884 RSC .
L. Dong, Z. Chen, D. Yang and H. Lu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21183–21191 RSC .
X. Wang, C. Lu, H. Peng, X. Zhang, Z. Wang and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 188–198 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, J. Wang, C. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Lu and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2107–2113 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Y. D. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Lin, J. Shen, L. Zhang, X. M. Li and T. He, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 177, 171–178 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chang, S. Zhang, L. Sun, H. Yin and B. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 71360–71369 RSC .
W. Gu, M. Sevilla, A. Magasinski, A. B. Fuertes and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2465–2476 CAS .
Y. P. Wu, S. Fang, Y. Jiang and R. Holze, J. Power Sources, 2002, 108, 245–249 CrossRef CAS .
J. Romero, D. Rodriguez-San-Miguel, A. Ribera, R. Mas-Ballesté, T. F. Otero, I. Manet, F. Licio, G. Abellan, F. Zamora and E. Coronado, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4343–4351 CAS .
W. Yu, H. Wang, S. Liu, N. Mao, X. Liu, J. Shi, W. Liu, S. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5973–5983 CAS .
X. Yu, Y. Kang and H. S. Park, Carbon, 2016, 101, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
J. Balamurugan, T. D. Thanh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9555–9565 CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Lai, M. Ge, Y. Zheng, K. Q. Zhang and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13577 CAS .
W. Fan, Y. E. Miao, L. Zhang, Y. Huang and T. Liu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 31064–31073 RSC .
E. Mitchell, A. Jimenez, R. K. Gupta, B. K. Gupta, K. Ramasamy, M. Shahabuddin and S. R. Mishra, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 2181–2187 RSC .

          F. Gonzales, Supercapacitor Technologies and Markets 2016–2026, IDTechEx, London, 2016.
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gao, F. Xiao, C. B. Ching and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2801–2810 CAS .
Z. Gao, W. Yang, J. Wang, N. Song and X. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 306–317 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, K. N. Hui, K. S. Hui, X. Chen, R. Chen and H. Lee, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 9443–9453 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Liu, Y. Tao, X. Z. Song, M. Bao and Z. Tan, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 6664–6670 RSC .
K. Qin, J. Kang, J. Li, E. Liu, C. Shi, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang and N. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yu, X. Zhao, Y. Li and Q. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 393, 37–45 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang, K. H. Chang, H. W. Tien, Y. F. Lee, S. M. Li, Y. S. Wang, J. Y. Wang, C. C. M. Ma and C. C. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2374–2380 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Cui, X. Wang, M. Zhi, M. Lavorgna, A. P. Baker and J. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 704–709 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. Ma, J. Yang, W. Huang and X. Dong, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 8466–8471 RSC .
X. Xu, Y. Liu, M. Wang, C. Zhu, T. Lu, R. Zhao and L. Pan, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 193, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Nguyen, C. Lamiel and J. J. Shim, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 161, 351–357 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Ye, X. Lu, Z. Wen, Z. Li, H. Hou and Y. Song, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3568 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhang, N. Gao, C. Fu, D. Liu, S. Li, L. Jiang, H. Zhou and Y. Kuang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 340–347 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiu, D. He, Y. Wang, X. Zhao, W. Zhao and H. Wu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 7843–7856 RSC .
Y. He, Y. Bai, X. Yang, J. Zhang, L. Kang, H. Xu, F. Shi, Z. Lei and Z. H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 317, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, G. Long, Y. Wu, T. Zhang, K. Leng, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, A. Yu and Y. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1408 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Chen, Y. Hu, C. Hu, H. Cheng, Z. Zhang, H. Shao and L. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19307–19313 RSC .
X. F. Hao, Y. Yan, L. G. Gao, W. S. Mu and C. Hao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 241, 124–131 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, X. Yan, J. Lang, Z. Zheng and P. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12724–12732 CAS .
W. Shi, J. Zhu, D. H. Sim, Y. Y. Tay, Z. Lu, X. Zhang, Y. Sharma, M. Srinivasan, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3422–3427 RSC .
H. Gao, S. Xin and J. B. Goodenough, Chem, 2017, 3, 26–28 CAS .
H. Gao, F. Xiao, C. B. Ching and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 7020–7026 CAS .
F. Zhang, T. Zhang, X. Yang, L. Zhang, K. Leng, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1623–1632 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2018
Table Content:

Shimeles T. Bulbula
	Shimeles T. Bulbula is currently a PhD candidate in the material science and engineering department under Prof. Xiao-Yu Yang's supervision at Wuhan University of Technology. His research area focuses on advanced application of graphene based materials for energy storage devices and the environment.

Yi Lu
	Yi Lu is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Baolian Su and Prof. Xiao-Yu Yang at the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing at Wuhan University of Technology, China. His research interest is the design and synthesis of graphene-based composites, as well as their applications in energy and environmental fields.

Ying Dong
	Dr Ying Dong is a post-doctoral researcher in the group of Prof. Xiao-Yu Yang at the State Key Laboratory Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology. She received her PhD in 2015 from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research interests mainly focus on design, fabrication and characterization of graphene-based materials and their applications in the fields of environmental remediation and energy conversion and storage.

Xiao-Yu Yang
	Prof. Dr Xiao-Yu Yang earned his PhD from Jilin University (co-educated at the University of Namur, Belgium). After post doctoral research at the University of Namur with Prof. Bao-Lian Su, he has worked as a ‘‘Chargéde Recherches’’ at the F.N.R.S. (National Foundation of Scientific Research) since 2008. He is currently working as Chutian Professor at Wuhan University of Technology. His research is aimed at novel porous systems, green chemistry, self assembly techniques and their applications in energy, the environment and catalysis.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Transmission versus sheet of hierarchical graphene/metal grid, the minimum industry standard, typical industry standard, and theoretical calculation of highly doped graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Stress–strain behavior (left) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) image (right) of GO papers. (c) Young's modulus, tensile strength, and strain to failure/elongation of different materials under uniaxial tension. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2013, American Society of Mechanical Engineers.	 

 	Fig. 2  Description of the synthesis process of porous GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2014, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photographs of aqueous dispersion of GO precursors and the as-prepared FGHs and aerogel after freeze-drying. (b) SEM images of interior microstructures of freeze-dried FGHs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the assembly of (1) the graphene oxide sheets and (2) the graphene oxide sheets with a noble metal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66, copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. (b) Fabrication of hierarchical macro- and mesoporous GA–SiO2 frameworks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of gel-like rGO, M2+ represents the divalent ion (Ca2+, Ni2+, or Co2+). Reprinted with permission from ref. 68, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic preparation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, copyright 2017, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical reduction of a bulk GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation method for ERGO-based composite materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25, copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Synthesis procedure of a 3D-GF and integration with PDMS (GF/poly(dimethyl siloxane)) via CVD growth graphene films (Ni–G) using a nickel foam. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74, copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for a 3D-GN. (I) Self-assembly of colloidal silica on SiO2. (II) Graphene growth by CVD on 3D PVA-FeCl3 Si substrate. (III) Infiltration of PVA-FeCl3 into 3D CS assembly. (IV) Iron/CS etching, leaving the 3D-GN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representing the synthesis of CNT carpets directly from graphene. (I) Copper foil substrate. (II) Graphene growth on the copper foil by CVD (III) iron and alumina are deposited on the graphene-covered copper foil by using e-beam evaporation. (IV) A CNT carpet is directly grown on the graphene surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75, copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of 3D NGSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Fabrication of two kinds of 3D-rGO sponge using the upper bubbles and lower part of the detergent solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79, copyright 2014, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration for the preparation of functional porous graphene (Co3O4/Co@PG) from waste paper (MCM stands for microporous carbonaceous material and PG for porous graphene). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the emulsion soft-template synthesis procedures for preparing 3D-PGFs; (I) self-assembly occurs between graphene oxide and emulsion soft templates, (II) separation of graphene oxide/template composites, (III) calcination to produce 3D-PGFs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the substrate-assisted reduction and assembly of the GO process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82, copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Schematic diagram of one-pot self-assembly preparation of 3D-porous graphene macroassemblies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84, copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the synthetic steps of 3D HPG via one-step ion-exchange/activation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the relative position of μA and μC from the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of electrolyte. (b) The general mechanism in the LIB during charging and discharging.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Cycle performance of SnO2–G, commercial SnO2 and G at a rate of C/5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91, copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves and SEM image (inset) of the honeycomb film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c and d) CV curves and electrochemical impedance performances of hierarchical SnO2@SnS2@rGO hollow spheres, SnO2 hollow spheres, and SnS2 nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e and f) CV and electrochemical impedance performances of hierarchical Mn2Mo3O8–graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8, copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Electrochemical impedance spectra of HPGA-50 (Co3O4 size 50 nm), HPGA-20 (Co3O4 size 20 nm) and graphene aerogels after a discharge/charging cycle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, copyright 2017, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) SEM image of 3D NPGS and (c) rate capability of the 3D PGS and 3D NPGS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d and e) SEM images of porous graphene/cobalt (PG/Co) aerogels with different resolution. (f) Discharge capacities of the PG/Co, G/Co and G electrodes with variable current densities. Reprinted with the permission from ref. 11, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

GN@C(Fe3O4)	872	0.1 A g−1	100	
94

Hierarchical MoSe2/rGO	917	0.1 A g−1	100	
95

U-Fe3O4@RGO	2292	0.5 A g−1	500	
96

3D NS-GSs	1117	0.1 A g−1	80	
97

Porous rGO/SnO2	595	600 mA g−1	300	
98

TiO2@C/rGO	401	100 mA g−1	200	
99

3D HP Co3O4/G	600	0.07C	80	
100

LMNCO NTs	250	1C	100	
101

HP-SnO2@C	400	1000 mA g−1	100	
102

Fe3O4 microsphere/graphene	551	1 A g−1	1000	
103

Mesoporous NiCo2O4/3DGN	359	2 A g−1	2000	
104

Anode: 16Li ↔ 16Li+ + 16e−
Cathode: S8 + 16Li+ + 16e− ↔ 8Li2S

 	Fig. 15  Electrochemistry of the Li–S battery during open circuit. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of sulfur-coated graphene composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM image of a 3D rGO–HCS nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of the a-MEGO/S composite. (d) Charge/discharge performance of the a-MEGO/S at 1 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

CGA [w, 12]-S	629	0.5C	200	
130

3D-HGPC-S	1017	0.2C	300	
133

3DMG aerogels	870	1 A g−1	200	
134

GO–MCWCS–S	905	1C	200	
135

3D N-doped graphene	666.8	0.5C	300	
136

GCS	704	0.3C	100	
137

L-GPCS-68%	650	0.5	100	
138

S@3D-graphene	500	2C	100	
108

2D-GPF	962	2 A g−1	120	
139

3D-NGS	792	600 mA g−1	145	
140

Anode: Li ↔ Li+ + e−
Cathode: 2Li+ + O2 + 2e− ↔ Li2O2 (2.96 V) or 4Li+ + O2 + 4e− ↔ 2Li2O (2.92 V)

 	Fig. 17  Electrochemistry of the Li–air battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157, copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Potential of Li anode and air cathode in a Li–air cell at 0.2 mA cm−2 discharging current density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158, copyright 2009, Elsevier. (b) CV graph of a Ru–rGO hybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of Ru@PG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM and (e) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of FGS. (f) The discharged electrochemical performance air electrode of FGS with C/O = 14. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Chart showing types of supercapacitors. (b) Schematic diagram of cell electrode configurations with both EDLC and pseudocapacitance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160, copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  SEM images of HPGN after low (a) and high (b) temperature treatment. (c) Cycling stability of HPGN electrodes upon charging/discharging at varied current density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) Low magnification SEM images of SP-AG. (e) CV curves of SP-AG, AG, P-AG and S-AG at scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (f) Cyclic stability of SP-AG and AG at current density of 1 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184, copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  SEM images of HPCNS without (a) and with (b) ZnCl2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of 3D NG/Co–NCNT hybrid. (d) Ragone plot (energy density vs. power density vs. charge time) of the 3D NG/Co–NCNT/NG asymmetric supercapacitors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 185, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) SEM image of NiCo2O4–GO. (f) Electrical-resistance variation of NiCo2O4–GO electrode at different bending angles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 188, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

H-NiCo2/porous graphene	1768	60.9	11.36	96.8	
192

LDH-NF/GNS	165.6	31.5	400	80	
193

HPCNS	332.8	45.8	495.3	93.8	
179

NGCA	750	—	—	81	
194

hnp-G	38.2 F cm−3	2.65 mW h cm−3	20.8 W cm−3	94	
195

frGO-F/PANI	939	20.9	103.2	88.7	
196

GS-CNTs-9-1	326.5	21.74	78.29k	65	
197

H-GA	128.2	36.4	633.7	80	
176

CoMn(CoMn)2O4/rGO	571	—	—	84	
198

Graphene/CNTs/Mn2O3	370	—	—	—	
199

3DGF-MCS	288.77	—	—	—	
200

NF/G/Ni–Co–S	9.2 F cm−1	—	—	94.6	
201

PANI-frGO	590	—	—	91	
202

CSG	303.8	87.5	1500	95.3	
203

H-PGC	300	67	60k	99	
177

CNT@NiO//DGNs ASC	108	38.1	16k	93.5	
204

HGPAs	418	—	—	80	
205

PF16G-HA	231	98	—	—	
206

3D GA-MC	226	—	—	—	
67

3D-HPCFs	130	18.7	11k	94	
165

GQD-3DG	268	—	—	90	
207

GPC	313	90.4	12.8k	94.2	
208


 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic plot of integrated rechargeable hybrid battery-supercapacitor electrical energy storage devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 190, copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Ragone plots of the Fe3O4/G//3D graphene hybrid supercapacitor and 3D graphene/3D graphene symmetric supercapacitor at various charge–discharging rates. (c) Ragone plots of electronic energy storage devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213, copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2018
