Renewable fuels from concentrated solar power: towards practical artificial photosynthesis   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE02214B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE02214B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2791-2796Renewable fuels from concentrated solar power: towards practical artificial photosynthesis†

        
          
            Shannon A. 
            Bonke‡
, 
      
        
          
            Mathias 
            Wiechen‡
*, 
      
        
          
            Douglas R. 
            MacFarlane
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Leone 
            Spiccia
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry and ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science (ACES), Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia. E-mail: mathias.wiechen@monash.edu; leone.spiccia@monash.edu
Received 
      17th July 2015
    , Accepted 11th August 2015First published on 11th August 2015AbstractThere is intense interest in the solar driven conversion of water to hydrogen as a means of achieving the sustainable generation of a practical fuel. It is widely considered that such “Artificial Photosynthesis” processes need to achieve an energy conversion efficiency exceeding 10% to have practical impact. Although some solar-driven fuel generating systems have reached efficiencies as high as 18%, they are often based on precious metal catalysts, or offer only limited stability. We describe here a system that utilises concentrated solar power, which is inexpensive to produce, and an electrolyser module based on Earth-abundant materials capable of operating under benign conditions. This system delivers the highest efficiency reported to date, in excess of 22%. The electrolyser functions in electrolytes with pH values ranging from neutral to alkaline, including river water, allowing implementation in a variety of geographic locations. Testing over multiple diurnal cycles confirmed the long-term stability of performance. We also describe an analysis of the efficiency in terms of the critical cell-matching parameters and thereby understand the key directions for further optimisation. This simple and adaptable system addresses key criteria for the large-scale deployment of an artificial photosynthesis device.

Broader context
Today's lifestyle is strongly reliant on mobility and technology. Developed countries are used to a high standard of comfort and this is fuelling a continuing growth in energy consumption. In addition, the growth in the earth's population approaching 10 billion is accelerating energy consumption, as is the rapid development taking place in many emerging or developing economies. This is straining our traditional energy resources and is having a major impact on our environment. Solar energy has tremendous potential as a clean and sustainable energy source but only a small fraction is currently used. To take full advantage of the enormous potential of the sun, solutions to the capture of solar energy and its conversion into readily utilisable and storable forms are urgently required. The development of sunlight driven water-splitting systems for the production of hydrogen as a fuel is one widely investigated approach towards meeting this challenge. While promising results have already been achieved, these systems often suffer from the use of precious elements and a lack of stability. In order to achieve large scale application, affordable systems that overcome these limitations are required.

Introduction
The identification of alternatives in energy production is absolutely crucial to meet human energy demand in a sustainable way. One of the great challenges is to take full advantage of the enormous potential of solar energy as a sustainable resource and to convert it into useful and storable forms, such as fuels.1–9 Towards this goal, water splitting – the generation of hydrogen and oxygen from water – is currently an intensely investigated approach.1–10 In addition to being directly usable for energy production in fuel cells, the formed hydrogen could also be used to reduce CO2 to fuels such as methane, methanol or dimethyl-ether.
In order to become attractive for an application in alternative energy production, it is widely considered that an overall solar-energy to fuel-energy conversion efficiency (SFE) threshold of 10% has to be reached in an economically practical and long-lived device.8,9,11 Approaches to this form of “Artificial Photosynthesis” have ranged from the utilisation of bacteria and proteins, to the engineering of inorganic solid-state materials.5,7,12,13
For the latter, three approaches have been proposed for coupling the light capture (energy harvesting) and water splitting (energy conversion) components. In integrated photo-electrochemical (PEC) devices, also referred to as wireless PECs, the materials for light capture and the water splitting catalysts are in physical contact (Fig. 1A). In partially integrated devices, or wired PECs, one of the redox catalysts is in physical contact with the light harvester, while the other redox catalyst is connected via external wiring (Fig. 1B). Non-integrated setups on the other hand (Fig. 1C) are modular systems in which the light harvesting photovoltaic (PV) cell(s) and electrolyser are separate units, joined by external wiring.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of light-driven water electrolysis approaches. (A) Fully integrated, wireless, PEC; (B) partially integrated, wired, PEC; (C) non-integrated, modular, PEC. 
A number of researchers have demonstrated SFEs exceeding 10%,14–17 including as high as 16.5% by Turner and co-workers18 and 18% by the groups of Licht19 and Peharz.20 However, a key limitation of these PECs is the use of precious, platinum group elements as water splitting catalysts.21 In 2011, light-driven water splitting was demonstrated using more abundant materials. Coined The Artificial Leaf, this wired PEC represented an important step forward, however, the SFE was 4.7%.22 Subsequent work with this system improved the SFE to 10%.11 Most recently, a modular system has been described in which solution-processable solar cells and catalysts derived from abundant elements were used to achieve an SFE of 12.3%.23 Two CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite based PV cells connected in series generated sufficient potential to enable water splitting with NiFe layered double hydroxide electrodes.23 This system however, was noted to suffer from the lack of stability of the perovskite PVs.23
It is clear that the redox potential provided by the PV component has to be optimised versus the thermodynamic potential required for water splitting of 1.23 V. The difference between this potential and that provided by the PV at its maximum power point (MPP) provides the additional driving force, or overpotential, required to drive the water splitting reaction at practical rates; however, a mismatch beyond these requirements represents an energy loss. Thus, the anode and cathode must be optimised to enable the water splitting half reactions to proceed at rates and potentials close to the MPP of the solar cell. In other words, the key to high efficiencies in sunlight driven water splitting is not only related to efficient catalysis, but also to the effective pairing of the solar cell characteristics with the redox catalysts.
The strategy described herein involves the application of a GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction PV device with a MPP at ∼2.2 V. This PV device is capable of high solar-to-electrical power conversion efficiency under concentrated solar conditions; it is important to note that the use of simple solar concentrators will significantly improve the economics of the solar harvesting aspect of this approach. To most effectively pair the water splitting module with these PV devices, well-known, highly stable and inexpensive nickel foam electrodes were applied in the water electrolysis cell. We describe here that this system achieves an SFE higher than 22%.
Results and discussion
We have applied a commercially available GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction device with a quoted solar-to-electrical power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 37% under concentrated solar conditions. Given that low to medium solar concentrator systems are readily available that provide intensities in the range of 2–300 suns,24,25 a light intensity of 100 suns was adopted as a practically achievable operating intensity to investigate. The potentiodynamic characterisation of this solar cell shows that the MPP under illumination with one sun simulated sunlight corresponds to a potential (VMP) of 2.05 V and a current (IMP) of 1.13 mA (12.6 mA cm−2). Increasing the light intensity to 100 suns resulted in a VMP = 2.18 V, IMP = 159 mA (1.77 A cm−2) and PCE of about 38% (characterisation data provided in ESI,† Fig. S1–S3 and Tables S1–S3). This PCE corresponds well to the manufacturer's specifications.
Considering the performance of the multi-junction solar cell, an anode and cathode were required that could facilitate water splitting at a rate fast enough to utilise a current of about 160 mA at an applied voltage of ∼2.2 V. This exceeds the thermodynamic potential for water splitting by ∼1 V. A comparison of these values with the characteristics of literature-known catalysts for water splitting shows that this high driving force allows the selection of electrodes from a broad range of materials. However, it is challenging to match the high current output of the solar cell, which is an order of magnitude higher than currents typically provided by solar cells used in water splitting systems (4–25 mA cm−2 at 1 sun18,19,22,23 and 100–120 mA cm−2 at about 10 suns14,17vs. 1.77 A cm−2 at 100 suns herein). To overcome this limitation, nickel foam was selected as the electrode/electro-catalytic material for both the anode and cathode. Nickel foam is inexpensive and exhibits a high stability under the reaction conditions used. It also provides a large surface area, has a high electrical conductivity and is capable of driving the water splitting reaction at the potential provided by the solar cell used.
Initially, a simple electrolyte consisting of 1.0 M NaOH, pH 13.6 was used. The water-splitting activity of the Ni electrodes was then examined by linear scan voltammetry and steady state (1 hour) measurements, systematically varying the geometric area from 2 to 20 cm2, in a two-electrode system (Fig. 2 and Fig. S4, ESI†). The optimal area was identified as 10 cm2 since this allows a current of ∼160 mA at ∼2 V, which matches very well with the IMP (at VMP) of the solar cell. The overlay of the voltammograms obtained from independent experiments carried out on the solar cell and the Ni foam water splitting electrodes in Fig. 2 clearly shows that the maximum current of the solar cell can be reached at a potential below the MPP. Since the maximum current available was reached by the optimised Ni foam electrodes no further modification of the electrodes, such as through the introduction of additional catalytically active materials, was required.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of the activity of the Ni foam electrodes and the performance of the solar cell. This analysis allowed an estimation of the Ni foam electrode size required to match the maximum output of the GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cell (red). 
To perform light driven water splitting, the solar cell was connected to the 10 cm2 Ni foam electrodes in a modular setup (cf.Fig. 1c), and both the anode and cathode were immersed in 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6). Testing at room temperature, over a 24 hour period of illumination, with a light intensity of 100 suns, reveals that the current is absolutely stable and matches the short-circuit current of the solar cell (163 mA, Fig. 3). Taking into account the water splitting current (Iws) measured, as well as the power input of the 100 suns light intensity, a solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency of 22.4% was achieved (calculation details provided below). To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest SFE reported to date.
 Fig. 3  Current generated by the modular system combining the solar cell and a water splitting cell. Utilising a GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cell and Ni electrodes in 1 M NaOH at room temperature. Stable current over 24 h testing of light driven water electrolysis corresponds to an SFE = 22.4%. Dashed black line indicates the solar cell short-circuit current while the red curve shows the water splitting current. 
To explore the effect of pH and electrolyte, further experiments were conducted under the conditions described above, using various electrolytes. Testing in phosphate buffer (1.0 M, pH 7.0; Fig. S5, ESI†) also revealed an absolutely stable current, matching the ISC of the solar cell. However, testing in 1.0 M borate buffer (pH 9.2, Fig. 4) resulted in an unstable and relatively low current, decreasing to 36 mA after 24 h. On addition of 0.23 M Na2SO4 and lowering the borate concentration to 0.60 M to improve solubility, a stable water splitting current of about 150 mA (corresponding to a SFE of 20.5%) was achieved. This result demonstrates that, prior to the addition of Na2SO4, the ionic strength of the borate buffer was limiting the water splitting rate. However, in order to reach ISC as the maximum available current, optimisation of the electrode size was also required. After varying both the ionic strength and electrode size, a SFE of 22.4% was also achieved for this electrolyte system. The ability to optimise parameters such as the electrode size is a benefit of the modular system adopted herein. This same high SFE was also reached in both sodium sulphate (1.0 M, pH 6.5, Fig. S6, ESI†) and sulfuric acid (1.0 M, pH 0.0, Fig. S6, ESI†), although the stability of the Ni electrodes was compromised as expected from the nickel Pourbaix diagram (Fig. S8, ESI†).26
 Fig. 4  Current generated by the modular system combining the solar cell and Ni electrodes in borate buffer as electrolyte. Utilising a GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cell, over 24 h testing of light driven water electrolysis in 1.0 M borate buffer (pH = 9.2, blue curve), the water splitting current is limited by the ionic strength of the buffer. On addition of 0.23 M Na2SO4 (and lowering the borate concentration to 0.6 to improve solubility), the water splitting current was increased significantly (red curve). An optimisation of the electrode size (15 cm2 instead of 10 cm2) leads to the same high SFE as in NaOH (22.4%, green curve). The dashed black line indicates the short-circuit current of the solar cell. 
As readily available sources of water are a necessity for the application of this process, especially in remote areas, the system was also trialled using phosphate buffer made up with filtered local river water (Yarra River, Melbourne), following literature precedents.27 As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†), the same high SFE can also be reached, however, the optimum electrode area in this case was found to be 20 cm2.
To explore the performance of the system during typical diurnal (on-off) cycling, multiple 12 hour cycles were performed in 1.0 M NaOH, as it represents the harshest conditions under which the electrodes are stable. The absolutely stable currents achieved during each cycle (Fig. 5), clearly demonstrate the stability of the electrolysis cell.
 Fig. 5  Current generated by the modular system combining the solar cell and a water splitting cell in a simulated diurnal cycling. Utilising a GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cell and Ni electrodes in 1.0 M NaOH at room temperature. Stable current over 72 h during 12 h on–off cycling leads to the same high SFE of 22.4% that was achieved in the 24 h testing period. Dashed black line indicates the solar cell short-circuit current while the red curve shows the water splitting current. 
Revisiting the requirements for the construction of efficient systems for light driven water splitting that were discussed above, allows an understanding of the factors determining these efficiency results. In turn, this can allow the development of strategies for further increasing the performance. The multi-junction solar cell used here is extremely efficient and its operating potential is high enough that inexpensive components can be employed for the water electrolysis module. However, the substantial difference between the solar cell PCE of 38% and our observed SFE of 22%, suggests that even higher SFEs could be achieved with further development of this concept.
This can be demonstrated through an analysis of the governing equations for SFE (eqn (1)) and PCE (eqn (S1)). For light driven, electro-catalytic H2 production from water splitting the SFE is given by the thermodynamic potential (1.23 V), the water splitting current (IWS) and the Faradaic efficiency (ηFE), divided by the power input (Pin). (1)
As the potential applied to the electrolyser is provided by a solar cell, Pin is equal to the power input (light source) of the solar cell. Considering the equations for PCE and the fill factor (FF, see ESI† eqn (S1) and (S2)), Pin can also be formulated as a function of IMP, VMP and PCE as the parameters of the used solar cell (eqn (2)). (2)
From eqn (1) and (2), the SFE can be directly calculated from IWS, ηFE and the respective parameters of the solar cell (eqn (3)). (3)
Here, IWS was shown to reach values as high as IMP. If a ηFE of 100% is also reached, such as in previous studies,23,28–30 including work on water oxidation catalysts based on Ni foam,27eqn (3) can be simplified to eqn (4). In the simplified equation, the SFE can be estimated directly from the VMP and PCE of the light harvesting unit of the water splitting system. (4)
From this equation, it is clear that the major loss in efficiency is related to the mismatch between the solar cell voltage and the thermodynamic potential for water splitting (representing the stored energy). The amount of energy that can be stored is fixed for water splitting, but the former could be lowered through engineering of the solar cell. Implicit in this strategy is that IWS is tuned such that IWS = IMP. Towards this end, the variables that can allow this tuning are the electrode area and the use of alternative electro-catalysts on the anode and cathode. In this way, further substantial improvements in SFE towards the PCE of 38% are possible if the output voltage of the solar cell can be lowered into, for example, the range 1.6–1.8 V without a loss of efficiency.
Conclusions
In summary, the modular system for light driven water splitting described herein shows a SFE of 22.4% under various electrolyte conditions. This is the highest efficiency reported to date. By coupling concentrated solar power to electrodes based on abundant Ni, we identified simple but nevertheless very effective ways of optimising the overall performance of such a system. Firstly, the electrode material and size can be optimised, regardless of the size of the solar cell. Secondly, the electrolyser conditions (e.g. electrolyte, operating temperature) can be optimised independently from the operation conditions of the solar cell.
In our opinion, the herein investigated matching of the solar cell and water electrolyser performance that is possible with a modular arrangement will stimulate the development of tailored PV devices for this purpose. This will enable the achievement of truly practical solar-driven fuel production.
Experimental
Materials
Reagent or analytical grade chemicals were used as received from commercial suppliers. Reverse osmosis purified water with a quoted resistivity of 1 MΩ cm−1 at 25 °C was used in the preparation of all electrolyte solutions. The Ni foam used was purchased from Marketech International, USA, and had the following specifications: purity >99.99%, thickness 1.6 mm, surface density 346 g m−2, porosity ≥ 95% (80–110 pores per inch).
Preparation of Ni foam electrodes
Rectangular sections were cut out of the Ni foam sheets and wires were soldered to the cut pieces to achieve electrical contact. The active size of the Ni foam electrodes (2, 5, 10, 15 and 20 cm2) was defined by covering the top of the sections with a silicone sealant (see Fig. S9, ESI†). The sealant was a neutral (non-corrosive) cure silicone sealant (Wet Area Silicone Sealant manufactured by Selleys, a division of DuluxGroup Australia Pty. Ltd.). To allow good penetration into the pores of the Ni foam, the silicone sealant was diluted with n-hexane in a 1.5:1 (v/v) mixture. The diluted sealant was then applied to the electrodes using a syringe.
Preparation of electrolytes
The 1.0 M NaOH (pH 13.6) and 1.0 M Na2SO4 solutions were prepared by dissolving either NaOH (20.0 g, 0.50 mol) or Na2SO4 (71.0 g, 0.50 mol) in 500 mL H2O. Using a glass pH electrode, a pH of 6.5 was measured. The 1.0 M H2SO4 solution was prepared by mixing conc. H2SO4 (27.8 mL, 0.50 mol) with H2O (472.2 mL). The 1.0 M phosphate (Pi) and borate (Bi) buffer solutions were prepared by first dissolving either NaH2PO4·H2O (69.0 g, 0.50 mol) or H3BO3 (30.9 g, 0.50 mol) in water, and then adjusting the solution pH to 7.0 and 9.2, respectively, using freshly prepared NaOH solution and the final volume to 500 mL. The pH of the solutions was monitored with a glass pH electrode. The same procedure was used to prepare a 1.0M Pi buffer from filtered water collected from the Yarra River, Melbourne, Australia. The 0.6 M Bi + Na2SO4 buffer solution was prepared by the same method but using 18.5 g (0.30 mol) H3BO3 and 17.0 g (0.12 mol) Na2SO4 in 500 mL H2O.
Solar simulator calibration and characterisation of GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cells
A solar simulator (Newport, Model 67005) equipped with a 150 W Xenon lamp was used as a light source. The proprietary reference solar cell (serial number: 010-2010, calibration mark: 1010-2010014ISE0311) was purchased from CalLab, Frauenhofer ISE, Freiburg i.B., Germany. The GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cells (CPV Receiver 10 mm) were purchased from Suncore Photovoltaic Tech Co., Ltd., China. The devices have a quoted solar-to-electrical power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 37% under concentrated solar conditions. For all experiments, the active area of the devices was reduced to 0.09 cm2 using a square (3 × 3 mm) mask.
The calibration of the solar simulator for 1 sun conditions (100 mW cm−2) was carried out at a spectral distribution of AM1.5G. The reference solar cell was placed in the light beam, neutral density (ND) filters were changed and the device was aligned to reach ISC stated by the calibration laboratory (see Table S3, ESI†). ISC was reached using two ND filters with a quoted absorbance of 0.2 and 0.04. Subsequently, potentiodynamic characterisation of the reference solar cell was carried out.
After calibration of the solar simulator, the three different GaInP/GaAs/Ge solar cells were placed in turn, in the same position as the reference solar cell during its calibration. Using the same filter settings (AM1.5G, ND0.2, ND0.04), potentiodynamic characterisation of the devices was carried out at 1 sun (100 mW cm−2).
To analyse the performance of the solar cells at high light intensities (100 suns), the light beam was concentrated by placing a convex lens in front of the beam (Thorlabs Inc. LA1740 – N-BK7 Plano-Convex Lens, ∅75.0 mm, f = 85.0 mm, uncoated). Two ND filters (ND1.5, ND0.5) with a total quoted absorbance of 2.0 were placed in front of the solar cell. The device was then aligned to match recorded data for 1 sun conditions. After the alignment, the ND filters were removed to allow illumination with full (100 fold higher) light intensity. The procedure was repeated with the other two solar cells.
When carrying out chronoamperometric measurements of the water splitting performance, the GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi junction solar cells were aligned in the concentrated beam to match the previously recorded ISC value of 163 mA.
Electrochemical methods
All electrochemical experiments were performed with a Bio-Logic VSP potentiostat using a two electrode setup under ambient conditions unless otherwise specified. Additionally, all electrolyte solutions were stirred during electrochemical measurements.
Potentiodynamic characterisation of the reference solar cell and the GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cell under 1 sun as well as 100 sun conditions was performed by linear sweep voltammetry, applying 0–0.7 V, 0–2.5 V and 0–2.7 V, respectively, at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 directly against the solar cells connected to the potentiostat.
For voltammetric testing of the Ni foam electrodes, the electrodes were dipped into 1 M NaOH and a potential of 2.18 V (VMP of the GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cell) was applied for 1 h before linear sweep voltammetry was performed with decreasing oxidative potential. For chrono-potentiometric measurements, a variable potential was applied to the electrodes in 1 M NaOH as electrolyte in order to allow a current flow of 163 mA (=ISC, maximum current output of the GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cells). The applied potential was recorded over 1 h.
For the fully light driven water splitting experiments, the Ni foam electrodes were dipped into the respective electrolytes. The soldered wires were directly connected to each of the poles of the GaInP/GaAs/Ge solar cell. The potentiostat was connected in series between one of the electrodes and one pole of the solar cell, the current flow was recorded vs. open circuit (EOC). After a period of about 5 min in the dark, the solar cell was illuminated for 24 h. To increase the solubility of the Bi electrolytes, these experiments were carried out at 35 °C. To test the performance of the system under a diurnal cycle, the solar cell, Ni foam electrodes and the potentiostat were connected as described above. The illumination was started directly with recording the current flow for a period of 12 h, followed by a dark period of 12 h. The 12 h light on/off cycle was repeated over 72 h.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Chun Kiu Ng, Dijon Hoogeveen and Prof. Udo Bach (all of Monash University) for assistance and productive discussions. The authors are grateful to the Australian Research Council (ARC) for financial support provided through the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science and an Australian Laureate Fellowship award (D.R.M.), for providing an Australian Postgraduate Award (S.A.B.), the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for a Feodor Lynen Fellowship (M.W.) and a Senior Research Award (L.S.). The authors declare no conflicting financial interests.
Notes and references
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Faunce, W. Lubitz, A. W. Rutherford, D. MacFarlane, G. F. Moore, P. D. Yang, D. G. Nocera, T. A. Moore, D. H. Gregory, S. Fukuzumi, K. B. Yoon, F. A. Armstrong, M. R. Wasielewski and S. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 695 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Styring, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 357 RSC .
H. Dau, C. Limberg, T. Reier, M. Risch, S. Roggan and P. Strasser, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Faunce, S. Styring, M. R. Wasielewski, G. W. Brudvig, A. W. Rutherford, J. Messinger, A. F. Lee, C. L. Hill, H. deGroot, M. Fontecave, D. R. MacFarlane, B. Hankamer, D. G. Nocera, D. M. Tiede, H. Dau, W. Hillier, L. Z. Wang and R. Amal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1074 Search PubMed .
W. Lubitz, E. J. Reijerse and J. Messinger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 15 CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185 RSC .
C. R. Cox, J. Z. Lee, D. G. Nocera and T. Buonassisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 14057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fujii, S. Nakamura, M. Sugiyama, K. Watanabe, B. Bagheri and Y. Nakano, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Huang, C.-H. Liao, C.-H. Wu and J. C. S. Wu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjallstrom, M. Sahlberg, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3676 CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev, A. Bansal and J. A. Turner, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8920 CrossRef CAS .
G. Peharz, F. Dimroth and U. Wittstadt, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries, 2014, 120 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          IPCC, Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation, Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, USA,  2011 Search PubMed .

REN21, Renewables 2013 Global Status Report REN21 Secretariat, Paris,  2013 Search PubMed .

          N. Takeno, Atlas of Eh-pH diagrams, Geological Survey of Japan Open File Report No.419, http://www.gsj.jp/data/openfile/no0419/openfile419e.pdf, 2005.
A. J. Esswein, Y. Surendranath, S. Y. Reece and D. G. Nocera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 499 CAS .
M. Fekete, R. K. Hocking, S. L. Y. Chang, C. Italiano, A. F. Patti, F. Arena and L. Spicci, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2222 CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhou, A. Izgorodin, R. K. Hocking, V. Armel, L. Spiccia and D. R. MacFarlane, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee02214b‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Broader context
Today's lifestyle is strongly reliant on mobility and technology. Developed countries are used to a high standard of comfort and this is fuelling a continuing growth in energy consumption. In addition, the growth in the earth's population approaching 10 billion is accelerating energy consumption, as is the rapid development taking place in many emerging or developing economies. This is straining our traditional energy resources and is having a major impact on our environment. Solar energy has tremendous potential as a clean and sustainable energy source but only a small fraction is currently used. To take full advantage of the enormous potential of the sun, solutions to the capture of solar energy and its conversion into readily utilisable and storable forms are urgently required. The development of sunlight driven water-splitting systems for the production of hydrogen as a fuel is one widely investigated approach towards meeting this challenge. While promising results have already been achieved, these systems often suffer from the use of precious elements and a lack of stability. In order to achieve large scale application, affordable systems that overcome these limitations are required.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of light-driven water electrolysis approaches. (A) Fully integrated, wireless, PEC; (B) partially integrated, wired, PEC; (C) non-integrated, modular, PEC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of the activity of the Ni foam electrodes and the performance of the solar cell. This analysis allowed an estimation of the Ni foam electrode size required to match the maximum output of the GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cell (red).	 

 	Fig. 3  Current generated by the modular system combining the solar cell and a water splitting cell. Utilising a GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cell and Ni electrodes in 1 M NaOH at room temperature. Stable current over 24 h testing of light driven water electrolysis corresponds to an SFE = 22.4%. Dashed black line indicates the solar cell short-circuit current while the red curve shows the water splitting current.	 

 	Fig. 4  Current generated by the modular system combining the solar cell and Ni electrodes in borate buffer as electrolyte. Utilising a GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cell, over 24 h testing of light driven water electrolysis in 1.0 M borate buffer (pH = 9.2, blue curve), the water splitting current is limited by the ionic strength of the buffer. On addition of 0.23 M Na2SO4 (and lowering the borate concentration to 0.6 to improve solubility), the water splitting current was increased significantly (red curve). An optimisation of the electrode size (15 cm2 instead of 10 cm2) leads to the same high SFE as in NaOH (22.4%, green curve). The dashed black line indicates the short-circuit current of the solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 5  Current generated by the modular system combining the solar cell and a water splitting cell in a simulated diurnal cycling. Utilising a GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cell and Ni electrodes in 1.0 M NaOH at room temperature. Stable current over 72 h during 12 h on–off cycling leads to the same high SFE of 22.4% that was achieved in the 24 h testing period. Dashed black line indicates the solar cell short-circuit current while the red curve shows the water splitting current.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee02214b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
