Sensing of ultraviolet light: a transition from conventional to self-powered photodetector  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR04561J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR04561J
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 15526-15551Sensing of ultraviolet light: a transition from conventional to self-powered photodetector

        
          
            Md Fahim 
            Al Fattah
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Asif Abdullah 
            Khan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hossein 
            Anabestani
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Md Masud 
            Rana
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shazzad 
            Rassel
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Joel 
            Therrien
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Dayan 
            Ban
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave, Waterloo, ON, Canada. E-mail: dban@uwaterloo.ca
bDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Massachusetts, Lowel, Massachusetts, USA
cSchool of Physics and Electronics, Henan University, No. 1 Jinming street, Kaifeng, Henan, P. R. China
Received 
      13th July 2021
    , Accepted 17th August 2021First published on 19th August 2021AbstractClouds in the sky pass almost 80% of ultraviolet (UV) radiation to the earth's surface, which has a significant impact on humankind. Conventional UV photodetectors (PDs) require an external battery, which not only increases the device size but also has a limited life span and maintenance costs can be prohibitively expensive. An alternative and more technically-sound solution would be the use of self-powered UV PDs that can operate independently, eliminating the need for an external source. Although many exciting studies have been done and state-of-the-art research is underway to successfully fabricate self-powered UV PDs, periodic reviews on this topic are deemed essential so that the technology's readiness can be properly evaluated and critical challenges can be addressed in a timely manner. In this article, the key issues and most exciting developments made in recent years on built-in electric field assisted self-powered UV PDs based on p–n homojunctions, p–n heterojunctions, and Schottky junctions followed by energy harvester integrated UV PDs are extensively reviewed. Finally, a summary and comparison of different types of self-powered UV PDs as well as future challenges that need to be addressed are discussed. This review sets a foundation providing essential insights into the present status of self-powered UV PDs with which researchers can engage and deal with the major challenges.
1. Introduction
With the rapid progress of the Internet of Things (IoTs), the need to develop intelligent, highly sensitive, sustainable, eco-friendly, energy-efficient, and exceptionally small multifunctional optoelectronic devices and sensors is becoming more significant.1–4 As an essential class among the various sensors, photodetectors (PDs), used to convert an incident optical signal into an electrical signal, have gained tremendous attention owing to their variety of applications. Currently, distinct types of photodetectors are being employed for sensing the optical signal at a wavelength in the ultraviolet (UV), visible, and infrared (IR) regions.
From the wide spectral band, UV radiation in particular is an important part of the electromagnetic radiation that has a profound influence on organic life and inorganic existence.5–8 The source of UV radiation is not only limited to sunlight, but it can also be artificially generated from phototherapy, plasma torches, UV light emitting diodes, welding arcs, and xenon-mercury arc lamps. The UV band is defined as the spectral range of 10 nm to 400 nm according to the ISO standard. This can be subdivided into a few main categories, namely, UVC: 100 nm–280 nm, UVB: 280 nm–320 nm, and UVA: 315 nm–400 nm, as depicted in Fig. 1(a).9–13
 Fig. 1  (a) Spectral distribution with the classification of UV region. (b) Typical structures of different types of self-powered UV photodetectors with their applications.26–28 
Based on the level of exposure, UV radiation can be advantageous or have catastrophic effects on the existence and growth of humankind. For instance, moderate exposure of UV light, either from a natural or artificial source, to human skin is necessary for the synthesis of vitamin D, which facilitates the growth of bone and prevents rickets. Excessive doses of UV radiation, on the other hand, can accelerate the aging process and even cause life threatening skin cancer.8 The ozone layer in the stratospheric region works as a filter for hazardous UV radiation coming from the sun, thus protecting lives on earth from its potentially detrimental exposure. Unfortunately, over the past forty years, changes in the stratospheric ozone layer have altered the solar UV radiation conditions on the earth's surface which are interacting adversely with human health as well as food and water security and ecosystem services.14 The adverse effects of modified UV exposure due to continuous climate change will become more noticeable in the near future.
Therefore, UV radiation needs to be monitored, which can be done using a high-performance UV PD to transform the UV signal to a measurable electrical quantity. UV PDs can also be used for a wide variety of other applications such as air/water purification, wildfire detection, environmental monitoring, biological and chemical analysis, leak detection, missile detection, security surveillance, and advanced optical communication.15–21
Generally, conventional UV PDs require an external bias to be applied for the separation of photogenerated charge carriers (electron–hole pairs) which consume energy and increase the device size, thus restricting miniaturization as well as affecting long term stand-alone deployment in large-scale arrays.21–23 For the countless number of batteries that are distributed on the earth to operate the sensors, each having a limited life span, monitoring, swapping, and recycling batteries would be arduous and even an impossible task in some cases.24 Furthermore, the materials used in the external source (battery) are likely to have potential hazards to the environment and human health.8 Therefore, it is highly preferred for PDs to be self-powered by eliminating the need for an external battery, which not only enhances the adaptability, even in extreme conditions, but also significantly reduces the size and weight. Self-powered UV PDs can be divided into three categories based on the photovoltaic effect that arises from the charge separation features at the interface, and they are: the p–n junction (homojunction or heterojunction), Schottky junction, and photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell. A pictorial view of the basic structures along with the applications of self-powered UV PDs are shown in Fig. 1(b).
In the p–n junction and the Schottky junction UV PDs, the built-in electric field separates the electron–hole pairs generated under illumination. The resulting charge imbalance causes the carriers to flow in a connected external circuit thus producing a photocurrent. However, the self-powered phenomenon in built-in electric field type UV PDs arises from the internal material properties. A rising problem that society is facing today is the diminishing of available fossil fuels and the shortfall of existing technology to efficiently utilize renewable energy sources.25
Recently, another very promising strategy being considered to resolve the power supply problem as well as satisfy the growing concerns of the global energy crisis is harnessing renewable and green energy to trigger UV photodetectors.29 Various renewable sources of energy including solar, wind, hydro, geothermal, biomass, and tidal energy are available, but most of these sources can be inconsistent and likely to depend on environmental conditions.25,30 Regardless of environmental factors, a significant amount of reliable energy from mechanical vibration and heat can be used to counter the rising energy crisis. As an emerging technology for mechanical and heat energy harvesters, three types of nanogenerators, triboelectric, piezoelectric, and thermoelectric nanogenerators, provide a feasible proposal for self-powered sensing technology. For example, the mechanical energy from body motion can power an implantable UV PD which can detect the level of UV exposure to skin and warn when the intensity exceeds a dangerous limit. Moreover, nanogenerator-based UV PDs powered by the slightest swinging of tree branches have potential in wildfire monitoring.
To date, many studies have been carried out developing self-powered UV PDs with a choice of different materials and device fabrication strategies, providing an excellent opportunity to utilize their novel properties into potential applications. Owing to the progressive number of investigations, a complete review on self-powered UV PDs is of immense importance to summarize the recent advances which would pave the way to optimize and implement devices with the best performance. In this article, a selection of frontier works in the field of self-powered UV PDs is reviewed. Firstly, the performance determining parameters of a UV PD such as sensitivity, response time, quantum efficiency, responsivity, and detectivity are briefly introduced. The latest research progress of self-powered UV PDs based on homo and hetero p–n junctions and semiconductor–metal and semiconductor–graphene Schottky junctions are discussed in detail followed by an introduction of energy harvester integrated UV PDs. Finally, the possible challenges and prospects of these techniques are suggested.
2. Performance determining parameters of a UV PD
The important factors that largely determine the performance of a UV PD are summarized in Table 1. Firstly, the responsivity, R, of a photodetector is one of the key parameters, defined as the photocurrent generated per unit optical power of an incident photon at a particular wavelength. This photoelectric conversion ability can be best represented by the following equation, where it depends on the quantum efficiency and the gain of the photodetector. (1)where Itot is the total current under illumination, Iph is the photocurrent, Idark is the dark current, Plight is the optical power of an incident photon of wavelength λ, h is Plank's constant, c is the velocity of light, q is the electron charge, η is the quantum efficiency, and g is the gain, which is assumed to be 1.
Table 1 Mathematical relationship of the characteristic parameters of UV PDs with their units8,15,31–35




Name of the parameters
Symbol
Mathematical expression
Unit




Responsivity

R




A W−1


Photo current

I
ph

Ampere (A)


Dark current

I
dark

Ampere (A)


Sensitivity

S




No unit


Response time

t
r


t
90%–t10%, rise time is the time in which photocurrent increases from 10% to 90%
Second (s)


Recovery time

t
d


t
10%–t90%, delay time is the drop of photocurrent from 90% to 10%
Second (s)


Quantum efficiency

η




%


Detectivity

D*

, A0 is the UV signal sensitive area of the photodetector and Δf is the bandwidth
cm W−1 Hz1/2 (Jones)


Noise equivalent power
NEP



W Hz−1/2




The dark current in a UV PD is a tiny current generated due to the random creation of electrons and holes in the depletion region under the absence of UV illumination. This dark current in a self-powered UV PD is even smaller than any conventional PDs owing to the elimination of the external bias. On the other hand, the photocurrent is the flow of electron–hole pairs resulting from the excitation of ground state electrons to the excited states upon the absorption of UV light. A photodetector does not act instantaneously upon the impinging of a photon because the migration of generated carriers takes time. This delay to act in operation is referred to as the response time, which can be subdivided into two categories: rise time and delay time. The need for a rapid response time is extremely significant for a UV PD especially in the application of a missile defense system where a decision needs to be made immediately.
Furthermore, the noise of a UV PD includes the shot noise, Johnson noise and flicker noise, all of which have a significant role on device performance. The shot noise is the reason for the fluctuation of the dark current while the Johnson and flicker noises stem from the thermal generation and trapping of carriers.36 Single photon detection is not possible unless the noise level becomes ultralow.37 The signal to noise ratio (SNR) of a UV PD is measured in dB and is the ratio of electrical signal power to noise power used to characterize the required signal relative to the background noise.38 Moreover, the noise equivalent power (NEP) is referred to as the optical incident power for which the generated photocurrent is equal to the noise current. Another important figure of merit of a UV PD is the detectivity, which is defined as the capability to sense a weak signal from a noise environment and should be enhanced as high as possible.8
3. Built-in electric field assisted self-powered UV PDs
As an essential feature for most of the conventional optoelectronic devices, p–n junctions are considered to be a great prospect for the application of self-powered optoelectronic devices. The principle lies behind the formation of a built-in potential when p-type and n-type semiconducting materials are joined together. Owing to the difference in Fermi energy levels as well as the carrier concentration gradient, spontaneous diffusion of free carriers creates a depletion or space charge layer near the homo, hetero or semiconductor–metal interface.39 Following the diffusion of free carriers, a strong local electric field is generated in the space charge layer which points from the positively charged n region towards the negatively charged p region. If the p–n junction is now exposed to UV radiation, the photo induced e–h pairs will be separated under the influence of this built-in electric field thereby producing the photocurrent. The separation process of e–h pairs is much faster in a fully depleted photovoltaic type photodetector than the diffusion process and thus has a great advantage in terms of high-speed response.39
3.1. Homojunction based self-powered UV PDs
The absorbance of an incident optical signal in the depletion region of a p–n junction depends on the band gap energy of that material. Although the commercially available photovoltaic devices are mostly based on silicon homojunctions, these have a band gap that makes them weakly sensitive to UV light.40 Consequently, the search for wide band gap compounds has been triggered to be used in p–n homojunctions to capture UV light effectively. Recently, oxide and nitride based wide band gap semiconductors have drawn much attention for homojunction based self-powered UV PDs due to their high carrier mobility, outstanding stability, and established synthesis process.8,41,42 Self-powered UV PDs with homojunctions offer a perfect lattice match thus preventing structural defects near the p–n interface which ensures a consistent built-in electric field.
In addition, they are resistant to chemical or thermal deterioration in extreme working conditions.
Compared to other wide band gap semiconductors, p–n homojunctions fabricated with ZnO have been exposed as a widely studied material in recent years in order to realize their application in self powered UV PDs. The 3.37 eV band gap of ZnO shows excellent photosensitive properties in the UV spectral region while most of the visible spectrum is passed through.45–48 ZnO is comprised of environmentally benign earth abundant elements which can be synthesized at low temperature and low cost. Tae Won Kang et al. have successfully demonstrated the first self-powered ultraviolet photodetector based on a p–n homojunction nanowire using ZnO.49 This photodetector showed very promising UV absorption characteristics and can generate a short circuit current of around 1.1 μA in absence of any external bias. Unlike other ZnO based photoconductive photodetectors, this ZnO homojunction nanowire photodetector can respond much faster with rise and decay times of 30 ms and 50 ms, respectively. The authors have suggested this device is not only promising for self-powered UV PDs but also can be an environmentally clean ultralow power source for other sensors. This self-powering property of ZnO inspired other researchers to investigate more with different ideas and approaches.
Inherently, undoped or pure ZnO exhibits n-type conductivity, and Shan Chong-Xin et al. have successfully synthesized the p-type ZnO by a lithium (L)–nitrogen (N) co-doping method setting a solid ground for the realization of p–n homojunction based self-powered UV PDs.43,50,51Fig. 2(a) shows the schematic structure of the device where p-ZnO(Li,N)/n-ZnO was grown by molecular beam epitaxy on a sapphire substrate and In, Ni/Au were used as the metallic contact in the undoped and doped layers, respectively. The inset of Fig. 2(b) shows that the neutral p-ZnO (Li,N) layer works as a filter with which only wavelengths longer than 370 nm can pass through while wavelengths shorter than 390 nm are absorbed by the n-ZnO layer. This filtering effect of neutral p-ZnO (Li,N) results in a very selective spectral response of UV radiation in the range of 370 nm to 390 nm under no external bias applied to the device. The I–V curve clearly indicates the rectifying behavior of this device with a turn-on voltage of 3.3 V shown in Fig. 2(c). Yihua Gao et al. demonstrated a similar kind of self-powered UV PD where the ZnO was doped with Sb.52 They measured the sensitivity of a p-ZnO (Sb)/n-ZnO homojunction photodetector as 26.5 while the rise and decay times were 30 ms. Xiaosheng Fang et al. fabricated p–n homojunction arrays employing aligned n-type undoped ZnO nanofibers and Ag doped p-type ZnO nanofibers perpendicular to each other.44Fig. 2(d) shows the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of an Ag doped p-type ZnO which not only helps to produce self-powered phenomena but also the formation of Ag nanoparticles helps reduce the response time. The theory behind this argument is explained with the formation of an Ag–ZnO Schottky barrier which increases the depletion region inside the Ag doped ZnO nanofibers owing to the difference in Fermi level thus blocking the carrier transportation. Upon UV light illumination, the width of the depletion region and carrier recombination decrease as the photogenerated electrons get captured by Ag nanoparticles; thus more holes are collected at the electrode, reducing the rise time. On the other hand, while turning off the illumination, an expanded depletion region prevents the flow of free carriers causing a rapid decline of current as well as decay time. Furthermore, an increase of Ag doping concentration increases the Ag nanoparticles which in turn forms more internal Schottky barriers resulting in improved device responses. Benefiting from the above mentioned effect, the p–n homojunction UV PD combined with Ag–ZnO and ZnO exhibits a rise/decay time of 3.90 s/4.71 s at no applied bias, as shown in Fig. 2(e). Fig. 2(f) shows the device responsivity spectrum, which has a peak at around 360 nm and has a sharp edge at 380 nm.
 Fig. 2  (a) Device structure of a homojunction self-powered UV PD based on p-ZnO:(Li,N)/n-ZnO, (b) responsivity of p-ZnO:(Li,N)/n-ZnO without applying any external bias and, (c) I–V characteristics under UV illumination. This figure has been adapted from ref. 43 with permission from AIP publishing, copyright 2013. (d) TEM image of p type Ag doped ZnO, (e) switching behavior of three different devices at zero bias with turning on and off 360 nm UV light, and (f) spectral response of Ag–ZnO:ZnO UV PD collected at 0 V. This figure has been adapted from ref. 44 with permission from WILEY VCH, copyright 2018. 
Besides ZnO, W. H. Tang et al. have proposed a self-powered photodetector by forming α and β phase junctions using another oxide material, Ga2O3, which is highly efficient in sensing the UV light without applying any external bias, avoiding the need for p type doping.53 Owing to the simplicity of the phase transformation of Ga2O3,55–58 the electric field induced in type II band alignment between the α and β phases provides effective and prompt separation of photogenerated e–h pairs thus travelling to the external circuit through the corresponding electrodes without applying any bias. Fig. 3(a) shows the device structure of vertically aligned core shell nanorod arrays (NRAs) of α/β Ga2O3, fabricated onto fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) by a simple and low-cost hydrothermal method. The effective separation of photogenerated carriers was tested through photoluminescent (PL) measurement at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 3(b). While the α/β junctions of Ga2O3 NRAs were illuminated with a wavelength of 266 nm deep ultraviolet light, electrons were promoted to higher unoccupied states leaving holes in the valence band. Fig. 3(b) shows that the PL intensities of α, β and α/β Ga2O3 extend in the visible emission band ranging from 350 nm to 550 nm, which is due to the recombination of photogenerated carriers with defect states originating from oxygen vacancies. The PL intensity of α/β Ga2O3 is significantly lower than α-Ga2O3 and β-Ga2O3, which is attributed to the type II band alignment indicating a signature for effective separation of photogenerated electrons and holes into α-Ga2O3 and β-Ga2O3 respectively. The I–V curves in Fig. 3(c) show an obvious rectifying property when Au/Ti was used as top electrode. The photocurrent was observed to be increasing while illuminating from the top electrode with a 254 nm light source with varying the intensity of light. The photocurrent could be further improved by using a graphene monolayer or Ag–NW instead of Au/Ti as the top electrode since they have better transmittance for deep UV light. Even with a graphene or Ag–NW electrode, there will be unevenness in the α/β Ga2O3 NRAs, and a photoelectrochemical type device assembling α/β Ga2O3 NRAs would be a potential solution to this.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic structure of an α/β Ga2O3 homojunction based self-powered UV PD, (b) photoluminescence (PL) intensity measured by exciting with a 266 nm laser for α-Ga2O3, β-Ga2O3, α/β Ga2O3 at room temperature, and (c) I–V characteristics collected for different intensities of incident light. This figure has been adapted from ref. 53 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright 2020. (d) Device structure of a p–n homojunction NW based GaN photodetector, (e) measured current–voltage characteristics of the device, and (f) responsivity collected at 0 V and −0.5 V. This figure has been adapted from ref. 54 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Unlike these oxide based self-powered UV PDs, for the first time, Maria Tchernycheva et al. demonstrated a novel nitride based flexible self-powered photodetector which has great potential for application as a wearable and portable UV sensor.54,59 As shown in Fig. 3(d), the flexible UV PD was fabricated employing core shell GaN p–n homojunction NWs which were grown by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) on sapphire substrates.54 A Ni/Au contact at the bottom served as the negative electrode while a flexible and transparent top electrode based on a silver NW network was used to allow the UV light to pass through and the detector to bend without any damage to the device. The active region was modified by inserting InGaN/GaN quantum wells (QWs) to increase the detection range beyond the cut-off edge of GaN. The dark current shown in Fig. 3(e) clearly indicates the rectifying behavior of this flexible UV PD with a turn on voltage of 2.3 V; after that, the current increases rapidly at forward bias. The stability of this device was tested by repeating I–V measurements after 50 cycles of bending the device by 5 mm, and there was no change observed in the I–V curve, which justifies that the device is very stable. The peak responsivity of this device shown in Fig. 3(f) was measured to be 0.096 A W−1 at 370 nm without any bias applied to it. The rise and decay time of this flexible photodetector were determined to be less than 0.1 s. This flexible device could be a reference for the future development of next generation wearable and portable self-powered UV sensors.
3.2. Heterojunction based self-powered UV PDs
Although substantial progress has been achieved in self-powered UV PDs using the p–n homojunction configuration, they still suffer from some shortcomings preventing their large-scale application. Doping is a must in forming a p–n homojunction to achieve counterparts which is still a major challenge for some wide band gap semiconductors due to low dopant solubility, self-compensation by native defects, and deep impurity levels.8,60–62 Especially, p-type doping of the widely studied ZnO material for the self-powered homojunction based UV PDs discussed in the previous section is very difficult to achieve. Furthermore, the high cost associated with doping for maintaining a rigorous fabrication process of p–n homojunctions makes it unsuitable, which eventually turns the attention of device engineers to the p–n heterojunction based self-powered UV PDs. In contrast to the p–n homojunctions, heterojunctions offer more flexibility to choose various semiconductor materials.
This enables adjusting the spectral response for improved performance of a self-powered UV PD. To date, the following device configurations based on p–n heterojunctions such as p-GaN/n-ZnO,63,64 p-NiO/n-ZnO,65 p-CuSCN/n-ZnO,66 p-PANI/n-MgZnO,67 p-PANI/n-TiO2,68 and p-Ga2O3/n-ZnO69 have been successfully demonstrated by several groups as self-powered UV PDs. ZnO is basically a polycrystalline material that works as the building block for most of the devices mentioned above and has grain boundaries which greatly affect the performance of the device. Moreover, the cut-off wavelength and signal to noise ratio of self-powered UV PDs are influenced by the various defects on tunable semiconductor alloys such as AlGaN.70 Among the other wide band gap semiconductors, TiO2 is useful for constructing super sensitive self-powered UV PDs due to its high absorption coefficient for UV light. However, previously reported TiO2 based UV PDs exhibit a large dark current and low photo response speed due to self-recombination in surface and defect states which require a modified device structure design with improved crystal quality of TiO2.71
Lan Li et al. demonstrated a self-powered UV PD based on NiO/TiO2, depicted in Fig. 4(a), where intrinsically n-type TiO2 nanorod arrays (NRAs) were hydrothermally grown upon FTO and TiOx thin film improving the carrier transport properties with decreased surface defect states.71 The type II energy band alignments between the n-type TiO2 and p-type NiO nanoflakes shown in Fig. 4(b) made this device a promising candidate for sensing UV light without any external power supply. The device was illuminated from the FTO side with 365 nm (3.41 eV) UV light which excites the core electrons to the conduction band of TiO2 (3 eV) leaving holes in the valence band, but the light is not absorbed by NiO due to its 3.55 eV band gap. The electromotive force at the interface instantly sweeps the holes towards the NiO collected at the Au electrode while the electrons are collected at the FTO electrode. The fast response speed of this device is characterized by small rise and decay times of less than 0.1 s. Fig. 4(c) shows the high selectivity of the spectral response of a narrow FWHM with a peak at 380 nm and a shoulder at 350 nm corresponding to the band gap of TiO2 and NiO. This device can respond quickly to a relatively weak UV signal but both the responsivity and detectivity start to decrease with increasing signal intensity. Though the authors claimed decreased surface and defect states of their fabricated device, this effect becomes more pronounced at higher intensity light causing an increased recombination rate and decreased carrier lifetime which is the reason for the relatively lower responsivity and detectivity.
 Fig. 4  (a) Device structure of a NiO/TiO2 heterojunction based self-powered UV PD. (b) Energy band diagram, and (c) responsivity under zero bias. This figure has been adapted from ref. 71 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (d) Device structure of (i) planar and (ii) fiber shaped p-CuZnS/TiO2 NTA based UV PDs, (e) responsivity measured at zero bias for fiber shaped configuration, and (f) switching characteristics under both in original and in bending condition. This figure has been adapted from ref. 72 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. (g) Device prototype of a GaN/Sn:Ga2O3 based p–n heterojunction UV PD, (h) time dependent photo response, and (i) responsivity of GaN/Sn:Ga2O3 without applying any bias. This figure has been adapted from ref. 78 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (j) Device structure, and (k) energy band diagram of the Ga2O3/CuSCN core–shell heterojunction based microwire photodetector, (l) I–V characteristics of the Ga2O3/CuSCN device collected at dark and UV illumination. This figure has been adapted from ref. 79 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
Xiaosheng Fang et al. fabricated a novel self-powered planar UV PD based on TiO2 combining with CuZnS and then successfully turned this device into a fiber-shaped real-time flexible and wearable UV sensor which is capable of sensing UV power density and transmitting the data to a smartphone via wifi.72 To enhance the photocurrent and response time of TiO2 nanotube arrays (NTAs) UV PDs, a novel transparent CuS–ZnS nanocomposite hole transporting layer was used for constructing a p–n heterojunction.73,74 In Fig. 4(d-i), part of the TiO2 NTAs were coated with CuZnS and the other part were left behind. Silver pads were used on each part as electrodes to collect the photocurrent. The rise and fall times of this planar device were measured at zero bias to be 0.45 s and 0.41 s, respectively, by intermittently turning on and off a 350 nm UV source. The self-driven phenomenon and the improved performance were attributed mainly to the p-CuZnS/n-TiO2 heterojunction enabling efficient incident light collection and the induced built-in electric field helping the separation of photogenerated e–h pairs. Having illustrated with the planar device, the authors’ main idea was to transform this rigid device to a flexible wearable real time sensor, as shown in Fig. 4(d-ii). To do so, Ti foil in the planar device was replaced by a Ti microwire which serves as a substrate for TiO2 NTAs. A 360-degree coating was performed on the fiber-shaped substrate by using a chemical bath of CuZnS to form the p–n heterojunction with TiO2 NTAs. Unlike the Ag electrode in the planar device, here carbon nanotube fibers were wrapped around the p-CuZnS/n-TiO2 junction to serve as an outer electrode to facilitate better charge collection. This novel design significantly enhanced the photocurrent compared to the planar device due to the vertical structure, which allows the charge carriers to travel along the longitudinal direction of the NTAs, and the 360-degree light collection ability due to the unique shape of the fiber. A peak responsivity of 2.54 mA W−1 was recorded at 0 V on illuminating with a 300 nm UV light source having a power density of 0.48 mW cm−2, shown in Fig. 4(e). The rise and decay time were improved from the planar device, and they were measured as less than 0.2 s, as shown in Fig. 4(f). A slight increase of the photocurrent was observed in the bent condition which is due to the increased area for more light absorption. This high-performance flexible fiber-shaped self-powered UV PD could have great potential as a wearable real-time UV sensor.
Another wide band gap material, Ga2O3, is considered to be exciting for UV sensing due to its suitable direct band gap of 4.9 eV and intrinsically n-type behavior for oxygen deficiency. In addition, a high electron mobility, high chemical stability, and very low defect concentration made this material promising for fabricating high performance self-powered UV PDs.70 Several works have been done in the past to realize the self-powered phenomenon of Ga2O3 constructing a p–n heterojunction in conjunction with p-type ZnO,69 GaN,75 NSTO,76 MoS277etc. In spite of having a very good lattice match between Ga2O3/ZnO, the grain boundaries at the interface prohibit their usefulness in PDs.
While p-GaN/n-Ga2O3 self-powered UV PDs exhibit a responsivity of 54.43 mA W−1,75 Weihua Tang et al. fabricated a p-GaN/Sn:Ga2O3 device with increased performance in terms of faster response.78 Their idea was to increase the built-in electric field between the GaN and Ga2O3 to facilitate faster separation of photogenerated e–h pairs. To do so, they fabricated the device shown in Fig. 4(g) where thin films of n-type Sn:Ga2O3 were deposited onto p-type GaN films. The introduction of tetravalent Sn doping with Ga2O3 brings the fermi level closer to the conduction band than it was with intrinsic Ga2O3, thus increasing the built-in electric field and helping effective and faster separation of e–h pairs. Fig. 4(h) shows the time dependent switching characteristics which were recorded under zero bias with intermittently turning on and off a 365 nm and 254 nm UV source with an intensity of 500 μW cm−2. The ratio of photo and dark current was measured to be 104 citing the self-powered characteristics of p-GaN/Sn:Ga2O3. A record high responsivity of 3.05 A W−1, shown in Fig. 4(i), and a detectivity of 1.69 × 1013 Jones were recorded at zero bias shining with a 254 nm UV light of 50 μW cm−2 intensity, which make this device very promising for space and communication detection.
Copper thiocyanate, CuSCN, is one of the best aspirants of p-type wide band gap (3.9 eV) material for self-powered UV sensing applications due to its compatibility with integrating multiple other materials and its suitability for large-area manufacturing techniques.79 As such, Weihua Tang et al. integrated p-type CuSCN with n-type Ga2O3 to construct a core–shell p–n heterojunction photodetector attaining a superhigh figure of merit in the solar-blind spectral region.79 In addition to the material properties, a core shell nano/microwire geometric structure provides specific benefits such as an excellent light capturing ability, and the photogenerated e–h pairs have to travel a reduced path thus reducing the recombination. The prototype of this Ga2O3/CuSCN self-powered UV device is depicted in Fig. 4(j) where a simple immersion method was used to form the core–shell p–n heterojunction. Type II band alignments between the heterojunction of CuSCN and Ga2O3 shown in Fig. 4(k) offer effective carrier separation leading to an enhanced photoelectric effect.80Fig. 4(l) depicts the logarithmic I–V characteristics of Ga2O3/CuSCN which were measured in the dark (black curve) and at UV illumination of 245 nm (blue curve) and 365 nm (red curve) with a fixed light intensity of 1000 μW cm−2. It is clear from the figure that the device responds significantly higher at a 254 nm wavelength which corresponds to the band gap of Ga2O3, but 365 nm can not produce as many e–h pairs as 254 nm thus contributing less current. On the other hand, the dark current was measured to be 0.91 pA at a reverse bias of 5 V which is very much lower compared to the photocurrent thus offering a high signal to noise ratio, a desirable characteristic for a high performance self-powered device. The high signal to noise ratio of this device is attributed to the high crystal quality of Ga2O3 and core–shell device architecture resulting in reduced recombination of minority carriers due to a shorter travel path to reach the electrodes. Compared to the response speed of individual devices constructed with CuSCN and Ga2O3, the rise and decay times of the combined Ga2O3/CuSCN photodetector were recorded to be 0.19 s and 0.16 s, respectively, at 1 V. The spectral response was measured directly with a monochromator to be 13.3 mA W−1 at 5 V applied bias with a light intensity of 1500 μW cm−2. However, the responsivity of this device starts to decrease with any further increase of intensity after 2000 μW cm−2 owing to the scattering of the carriers induced by self-heating.
Besides Ga2O3, recently, all-inorganic metal lead halide perovskites have drawn significant attention owing to their simple synthesis process, direct band gap, large absorption coefficient of light, increased carrier lifetime and diffusion length, and well-balanced charge transport ability.81–83 Cesium lead bromide, CsPbBr3, represents an important class of perovskite materials that exhibit high electron mobility, high stability, and small exciton binding energy, and its film can be integrated into optoelectronic devices with various other materials.84–86 For instance, Xiaosheng Fang et al. demonstrated a multiband detection self-powered photodetector using single millimeter wires (MMWs) and micro wires (MWs) of SnO2 decorated with CsPbBr3 particles.85 Dual response is a very promising feature for this device composition in contrast to photodetectors having a specific spectral response. In the past, MMW, MW, and nanowire arrays of SnO2 have been utilized with other semiconductors such as TiO2, PEDOT:PSS to investigate self-powered properties but none of them showed a dual response. However, investigating with both SnO2 MMW/CsPbBr3 and SnO2 MWs/CsPbBr3 composites, they not only possess self-powered features but also SnO2 MWs/CsPbBr3 exhibits dual response behavior. MMW and MWs of SnO2 were prepared by chemical vapor deposition and then CsPbBr3 solution was transferred on to them to form SnO2/CsPbBr3. The device structure of SnO2 MMW/CsPbBr3,shown in Fig. 5(a), produces a photocurrent of 0.3 μA under 300 nm illumination which is 5000 times greater than the dark current resulting in a high signal to noise ratio. The ultrafast response speed of this configuration was characterized by the short rise and decay times of 0.03 ms and 1.94 ms, respectively, shown in Fig. 5(b) at 300 nm without application of any external bias.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic structure of the device based on a SnO2 MW/CsPbBr3 heterojunction, (b) time dependent photo response with periodically turning on/off UV sources of 300 nm and 500 nm, and (c) responsivity of SnO2 MWs/CsPbBr3 and SnO2 MMW/CsPbBr3 at zero bias. This figure has been adapted from ref. 85 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (d) Device structure of Cs3Bi2I9−xBrx based photodetector, (e) responsivity with varying the x composition, and (f) time varying photo response measured at zero bias with intermittently turning on/off a 375 nm light source. This figure has been adapted from ref. 90 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 

Fig. 5(c) shows that the responsivity which was measured at zero bias has a peak of 10 mA W−1 at 300 nm, and the detectivity follows a similar trend as responsivity with a maximum value of 2.6 × 1011 Jones. On the other hand, while photodetectors with pure SnO2 MW do not show self-powered properties, the heterojunction form with SnO2 MWs/CsPbBr3 not only operates at zero bias but can respond to two different wavelengths of 320 nm and 520 nm.
The responsivity of this device was recorded as 20 μA W−1 and 25 μA W−1 at 320 nm and 520 nm, respectively, as shown in Fig. 5(c) in a blue color. The reason behind the dual color responsivity of this device stems from the asymmetric barriers at the conduction bands of SnO2 and CsPbBr3 for which the 520 nm edge originated from the bandgap of CsPbBr3 (2.35 eV) while the 320 nm absorption edge resulted from the bandgap of SnO2 (3.6 eV). However, the toxicity of lead-based perovskites has raised serious concerns regarding large scale applications.87 Therefore, the search for environment friendly and nontoxic lead-free metal halide perovskites has been a significant issue in recent years. To address the above-mentioned concern, bismuth halide perovskites were introduced to be used in optoelectronic devices due to their wide band gap, nontoxicity, and high stability.88,89 Zhubing He et al. utilized Cs3Bi2I9−xBrx perovskite to modulate the photo response from the UV to the visible region by tuning the band gap.90 They studied the photoelectric properties of the device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Cs3Bi2I9−xBrx/C60/BCP/Ag shown in Fig. 5(d) by varying the x composition from 0 to 9. Measuring the responsivity of the device with varying x composition, it was found that Cs3Bi2I6Br3 (x = 3) exhibits outstanding performance. Fig. 5(e) depicts the maximum responsivity for Cs3Bi2I6Br3 (x = 3) as 15 mA W−1 at zero bias. The reason for the high performance for this particular configuration was determined from the high crystallinity and compactness of the synthesized film. The response speed shown in Fig. 5(f) was measured as 40.7 ms (rise time) and 27.1 ms (decay time) with intermittently turning on and off the 375 nm source.
The p–n homojunction or heterojunction photodetector devices discussed so far are based on all-inorganic materials. Though they possess a high electron/hole mobility and large absorption coefficient, they suffer from a lower flexibility and complicated integration process. Therefore, in recent years, organic conductive polymers have proved to be exciting for utilization in self-powered UV PDs. Among many other polymers, PEDOT:PSS is an intrinsically p-type material that possesses a high hole mobility and is very suitable in photodetectors as a hole transporting layer. Utilizing its p-type conductivity, Xiaosheng Fang et al. fabricated an organic–inorganic hybrid ultrahigh sensitive self-powered UV PD in conjunction with highly crystalline n-type Ga2O3.70 The device structure is shown in Fig. 6(a) where individual microwires of PEDOT:PSS and Ga2O3 were taken to fabricate the photodetector. Indium (In) was used with both materials as the electrode for collecting the electrical signal. Fig. 6(b) shows the I–V characteristics of the PEDOT:PSS/Ga2O3 device for dark and UV illumination of 250 nm, 260 nm, 270 nm, and 280 nm wavelengths. A very low dark current of 0.5 pA was observed for this device at −2 V and would be even lower at no applied bias which is highly desired for a self-powered UV PD. An increasing trend of photocurrent was observed for the decreasing of incident wavelength. This is because the incident photon energy becomes higher than the band gap energy of PEDOT:PSS and Ga2O3 at lower wavelength generating more e–h pairs and thus contributing increased photocurrent. A significant amount of photocurrent was observed at zero applied bias compared to the dark current which is a signature of increased sensitivity and detectivity of PEDOT:PSS/Ga2O3 self-powered UV PD. The responsivity of this device was measured to be 2.6 A W−1 at 245 nm. The high wavelength selectivity can be seen from Fig. 6(c) having a sharp cutoff at 255 nm with a narrow FWHM of only 17 nm. Very recently, Aidong Shen et al. fabricated another type of hybrid inorganic–organic high sensitivity self-powered UV PD using polyaniline (PANI) in conjunction with Ga2O3.91 PANI is a good choice for application in photodetectors due to its excellent optical and electrical properties with a simple synthesis process.92 In addition, its p-type conductivity can easily be tailored to an order of magnitude by introducing different doping concentrations. The SEM image of the Ga2O3/PANI device shown in Fig. 6(d) clearly shows the p–n heterojunction formation between the interfaces. A chemical vapor deposition method was used for synthesizing highly crystalline microwire Ga2O3 and highly doped PANI was deposited directly onto Ga2O3 by in situ polymerization.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic device structure of a PEDOT:PSS/Ga2O3 PD, (b) I–V characteristics of PEDOT:PSS/Ga2O3 at dark and UV illumination and, (c) responsivity measured at 0 V. This figure has been adapted from ref. 70 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (d) SEM image of the heterojunction formation between the PANI and Ga2O3 interface, (e) energy band diagram showing the transport mechanism, and (f) spectral response of Ga2O3/PANI at 0 V. This figure has been adapted from ref. 91 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. 
The linear relationship of individual I–V measurements of In/Ga2O3/In and In/PANI/In suggested that both the electrodes work as an Ohmic contact which does not help in producing any built in electric field. So, only the electric field generated at the interface of the p–n junction of this device is responsible for separating the photogenerated e–h pairs and helping produce the rectifying behavior. The basic mechanism of rapid response to UV light of this device can be explained with the help of the energy band diagram shown in Fig. 6(e). Owing to the high doping concentration of p-PANI, the depletion layer mainly extends to the n side of Ga2O3. So, it is obvious that the response of this p–n heterojunction device would largely originate from the Ga2O3 microwires while the heavily doped PANI layer would work as a transporting layer. The high hole mobility of the PANI layer is the reason for the quick separation of the holes by the influence of the built-in electric field when electrons are elevated from higher occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO) to lower unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMO) due to UV illumination thus providing very little chance to make the recombination. This phenomenon caused a higher photocurrent as well as a high responsivity, as shown in Fig. 6(f).
3.3. Schottky junction based self-powered UV PD

3.3.1. Semiconductor–metal Schottky junction. 
So far, we have studied the construction of self-powered UV PDs utilizing the photovoltaic effects arising from the built-in electric field in assembling p–n homojunctions and heterojunctions. These UV PDs generally suffer from a slow photo response due to defects and traps at the interface. Compared to p–n homo or heterojunctions, the UV PDs based on Schottky junctions comprised of a metal–semiconductor interface have seen growing scientific interest.93 Schottky junction-based self-powered UV photodetectors have various merits, for instance, an easy and cheap fabrication process, uncomplicated device structure, wide band photodetection, straightforward integration with CMOS technologies, and self-powered operation.94 Schottky barriers are constructed by the deposition of select metals as contacts on semiconductor wafers. Differences in work function lead to a charge transfer between the metal and semiconductor, thus forming a strong built-in electric field at the interface facilitating the separation of e–h pairs and transport to the external circuit upon UV irradiation. To date, studies have been performed on material combinations such as ZnO:Sb/Au95 and TiO2/Au/TiO296 successfully demonstrating self-powered behavior originating from the built-in electric field at the metal–semiconductor interface. Yue Zhang et al. in 2010 reported a Schottky barrier assisted self-powered UV PD by bridging Sb doped ZnO with two metal electrodes, one of them forming a Schottky contact (ZnO:Sb/Au) while the other was an Ohmic contact (Ag/ZnO:Sb).95 A barrier height of 0.6 eV was determined since the work function of Au is 5.1 eV and the electron affinity of ZnO is 4.5 eV. They characterized the photo response time of the fabricated device to be less than 100 ms under zero bias. This response was attributed to the electric field at the Schottky junction which was further confirmed by illuminating with UV light in other parts of the device and no response was observed at zero bias. However, the trap states at the surface of the ZnO nano belts were one of the major impediments for higher device performance. Gaohong He et al. introduced another type of UV PD which was architecturally different than most of the Schottky based devices where Au nanoparticles were sandwiched in between the top and bottom layers of n-type TiO2 nanorods.96 Opposite Schottky junctions formed due to the device design are mainly responsible for the high responsivity and fast response time at zero bias. A responsivity of 1 A W−1 was recorded for 365 nm UV illumination with a low intensity of 242 nW cm−2. Even very low intensity light of 135 nW cm−2 can produce a photocurrent of 3 nA, suggesting this photodetector is an excellent candidate for sensing ultra-low intensity UV light without the help of any external bias. Xiaosheng Fang et al. implemented an idea of alloying ZnO with BeO to modulate the band gap from the near to deep UV region thus allowing the BeZnO based PD to respond at different cut-off wavelengths.97 They fabricated the novel self-powered UV PD shown in Fig. 7(a) by taking BeZnO as an active layer to realize a dual-color response at 355 nm and 270 nm due to its dual band gaps of 3.5 eV and 4.6 eV, respectively. Asymmetric Schottky contacts of wide Ti/Au and narrow Ti/Au were deposited onto alloyed BeZnO film. An extremely low dark current of 1 × 10−2 pA and a photocurrent about 1000 times greater were measured for this device due to the suppression of defects (oxygen vacancies) by introducing BeO with ZnO. This low dark current helps contribute to a high detectivity of 1 × 109 Jones at 330 nm and 1.6 × 109 Jones for 240 nm, respectively, at 2 V reverse bias. Fig. 7(b) shows two different response peaks at 330 nm and 240 nm having a magnitude of 1.6 μA W−1 and 2.5 μA W−1, respectively. Ultrafast response speeds of 35 μs rise time and 880 μs decay time were recorded at zero bias, as depicted in Fig. 7(c), by intermittently turning on and off a 355 nm UV light. However, the photogenerated current measured for this device was still very low due to the poor crystal quality of the BeZnO alloy and long channel length which need to be overcome. In addition, beryllium (Be) is a rare element in the earth, which would increase the cost of the device, and this metal is known to be toxic, which can damage the lungs if breathed in. An alternative but similar semiconductor alloy, MgxZn1−xO, exhibits a tunable band gap suitable for UV detection by changing the x composition. Unlike BeZnO, this alloy has other advantages in fabricating self-powered UV PDs including being environment friendly, biocompatible, and able to grow at low temperature. Furthermore, owing to the similar radius of Mg2+ and Zn2+, defects are rarely formed during the crystallization process making MgZnO an excellent candidate for self-powered UV PDs. Shichen Su et al. demonstrated a self-powered UV PD based on this ternary alloy, MgZnO, which has a faster response time than BeZnO driven by the built-in electric field formed in the back-to-back asymmetric Schottky junction.98 The device structure is shown in Fig. 7(d), where approximately 200 nm films of MgZnO were grown onto a sapphire substrate and two asymmetric Au electrodes having widths of 50 μm and 5 μm were deposited using vacuum evaporation. The design of these asymmetric electrodes helps to enhance the electric field along the vertical, as well as horizontal, direction of MgZnO films due to the increased contact area of Au/MgZnO. The formation of an asymmetric Schottky contact was verified by the dark and photo current behavior as shown in Fig. 7(e). The responsivity peak was found to be at 330 nm with a maximum value of 2.22 mA W−1 at no applied bias, as shown in Fig. 7(f). In addition, a faster decay time of 92 μs was recorded which is much lower compared to the BeZnO device. However, the incorporation of Mg with ZnO deteriorates the crystal quality after a certain concentration of Mg content by introducing phase segregation, thus affecting the device performances. Dezhen Shen et al. reported a Au/Ga2O3 Schottky junction-based UV PD that outperformed those devices with BeZnO and MgZnO explained above.99 Moreover, most of the previously reported Ga2O3 UV detectors based on p–n homo or heterojunctions possess a relatively slow response time hindering their practical application where a fast response speed is required. Interestingly, this Au/Ga2O3 nanowire based Schottky junction can respond very quickly even without supplying any external power to this device.
 Fig. 7  (a) Device structure of a BeZnO based Schottky junction UV PD, (b) spectral response at no applied bias, and (c) time dependent response. This figure has been adapted from ref. 97 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017. (d) MgZnO based back-to-back asymmetric Schottky junction UV PD, (e) dark and photo current, and (f) responsivity at zero bias. This figure has been adapted from ref. 98 with permission from IOP publishing, Ltd, copyright 2019. (g) Fabrication process of a vertical Schottky UV PD based on a β-Ga2O3 nanowires array film, (h) logarithmic I–V characteristics under dark and illumination conditions, and (i) responsivity collected at 0 V and −10 V with 254 nm illumination of UV light. This figure has been adapted from ref. 99 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Most of the Schottky junction photodetectors consist of two different contacts on a semiconductor layer; an Ohmic contact at the bottom and a Schottky contact at the top add more complexity to the device fabrication process. In contrast, the authors of this paper used a simple fabrication process eliminating the need for deposition of an extra Ohmic electrode. The initial to final stage fabrication process flow of the device is shown in Fig. 7(g). The process starts with the spin coating of liquid Ga metal which formed a thin layer upon which Ga2O3 nanowire array films were deposited in an oxygen environment after thermal expansion at 1050 °C to protect the Ga layer from further oxidation. The device was designed such that the interface between Ga and Ga2O3 works as the Ohmic contact for this detector. Then, Au metal was deposited using a mask to form the Schottky contact between the Au and Ga2O3 layer. The I–V characteristics in Fig. 7(h) show the obvious rectifying properties having a current rectification ratio on the order of 5 at about ±15 V. The leakage current was extremely low (pA) compared to the photocurrent illuminating with a 254 nm light source having an intensity of 2 mW cm−2. The spectral response of the Au/Ga2O3 nanowires film Schottky photodiode was measured at two different voltages shown in Fig. 7(i) to characterize its self-powered properties and see how it changes with varying applied bias. The detector showed a peak spectral response at 258 nm of 0.01 mA W−1 and 0.6 mA W−1 at 0 V and 10 V reverse bias respectively indicating that the photogenerated e–h pairs were mainly generated due to the higher excitation energy compared to the band gap of Ga2O3. In addition to the self-powered response of this detector, another significant property is the response speed which determines the ability to track a rapidly changing optical signal. Measuring the current as a time varying quantity at no applied bias revealed that it rises to a peak value of 0.15 nA within 1 μs while decays within 64 μs from 90 to 10% of its peak value. Although the response speed was quickest among the other Ga2O3 based detector, its decay time is higher than rise time which was attributed to the RC time constant where C (0.54 pF) is the capacitance of the depletion layer and R (∼108 Ω) is the series resistance. The decay time can be further improved by optimizing the device architecture to reduce the parasitic resistance and the capacitance.


3.3.2. Semiconductor–graphene Schottky junction. 
A common problem for metal–semiconductor Schottky junction devices is the semitransparent metals that absorb and reflect the incident light thus causing a decrease of photocurrent which in turn reduces the responsivity. Graphene provides a pathway to solve this problem which possesses excellent optical transmittance and carrier mobility and has the potential to substitute metals as transparent electrodes. In light of this, Wenxue Zhang et al. proposed a self-powered UV PD based on a graphene/ZnO:Al nanorod-array-film (AZNF) where they improved the stability of a Schottky junction barrier, a problem for previously reported graphene/ZnO detectors.28
The device structure is depicted in Fig. 8(a), where AZNF was synthesized on an Al substrate followed by a two-step surface treatment. After that, pristine graphene was transferred onto the previously treated AZNF, and a gold electrode was deposited on the edge of the graphene to collect the electrical signal. The stable Schottky barrier which does not disappear under UV illumination was due to this two-step surface treatment, and the interface defect states between graphene/AZNF were greatly reduced. In this way, a responsivity of 39 mA W−1 and short rise and decay times of 37 μs and 330 μs, respectively, were measured at no applied bias, as shown in Fig. 8(b) and (c). Yang Xu et al. reported a graphene enhanced Si Schottky junction UV PD in which they claimed their results approached the upper limit of traditional Si UV detectors.100Fig. 8(d) shows the schematic structure of the Gr/Si device with an Al2O3 anti reflection coating. Metal contacts on the top and edge of the graphene layer were used to reduce the resistance at contact which is essential for improving the response speed of the device. The working principle of generating e–h pairs and their contribution to the photocurrent can be explained with the energy band diagram in Fig. 8(e).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic structure of a graphene/ZnO:Al AZNF device, (b) responsivity, and (c) switching characteristics at zero bias. This figure has been adapted from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (d) Device structure of a graphene (Gr)/Si UV PD with Al2O3 anti reflection coating, (e) energy band diagram, (f) variation of photocurrent with respect to voltage at varying light intensity, (g) time dependent photo response of the Gr/Si UV PD at two different active areas, (h) reflectance, and (i) spectral response with and without Al2O3 anti reflection coating.100 
When the device is illuminated with a UV light, a small part of it is absorbed in the graphene thus producing hot carriers which then undergo carrier soft multiplication and cross the Schottky barrier to reach the Si side. Since most of the UV light passes through the graphene and can not penetrate deep into the Si due to the high absorption coefficient of UV light less than 370 nm, most of the photogenerated e–h pairs therefore remain in the surface of Si. The maximum built-in electric field was measured to be 7.8 × 106 V m−1 pointing from Si to graphene, effectively separating the carriers and thus contributing to the photocurrent at zero bias. Furthermore, carrier multiplication happens both in the graphene and Si thus helping boost the responsivity and the internal quantum efficiency. The current density measured on illuminating with a 365 nm laser was observed to increase with the increase in light intensity, as shown in Fig. 8(f), which suggests that the Gr/Si interface was void of any trapped charges. In addition, at zero bias, the photocurrent density reached the saturation value indicating the built-in electric field is sufficiently strong to separate most of the photogenerated e–h pairs. The response speed was examined in Fig. 8(g) to determine how fast this device can respond with the change (on and off) in incident illumination. For the active area of 0.25 mm2 and illuminated with a 375 nm picosecond pulsed laser, the rise and decay times were recorded to be 4 ns and 12 ns respectively. A further decrease in rise and decay times to 2 ns and 5 ns, respectively, were noticed for a smaller effective active area of 0.0225 mm2. The ultra-fast response time of this device was attributed to three components of response time: (i) the very low diffusion time (less than 1 pA) in the atomic layer thickness graphene due to its high carrier mobility, (ii) the around 2 ps carrier drift time in the depletion region, and (iii) the RC time constant.
It was revealed that the response time was greatly affected by the parasitic resistance and capacitance, without which the response time would be in the picosecond (ps) range. There is still some room to improve the response time by eliminating the edge metal contact by graphene. To reduce the reflection of incident photons at the Si surface and maximize the photons participating in the production of e–h pairs, an anti-reflection coating of Al2O3 was used which has a dramatic impact on reducing the reflection in the UV region, as shown in Fig. 8(h). In addition to boosting the photon conversion efficiency, and thus the photocurrent, with this anti reflection coating, the Gr/Si device remains stable even after 2 years, making it suitable for practical applications. Moreover, after the deposition of Al2O3, the responsivity increases from 0.12 A W−1 to 0.2 A W−1 at 365 nm and 0.07 A W−1 to 0.14 A W−1 at 254 nm. Fig. 8(i) shows that the relative change in responsivity is larger in the UV region than in the visible region, suggesting Al2O3 is an excellent absorber for the UV region.

4. Energy harvester integrated UV PD
Other than built-in electric field induced self-powered UV PDs, a feasible alternative solution could be the use of integrated renewable energy harvesting devices as the power source in the sensor network. Over past decades, various efforts have been devoted to harvest energy to produce electricity from different environmental energy sources such as mechanical vibration, water and wind using electromagnetic,101 electrostatic,102,103 and piezoelectric methods.104–106
Recently, triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) based on the coupling effect of contact electrification and electrostatic induction have emerged as a persuasive technology to convert ambient mechanical energy into electric energy with numerous advantages, including large power density, high energy conversion efficiency, and versatile options for material selection etc.
Triboelectrification or contact electrification creates static polarized charges (tribocharges) on two different material (tribomaterial) surfaces, which is still ambiguously reasoned by electron transfer/ion-transfer processes. The tribocharge mediated electrostatic induction on the attached metal electrodes of the tribomaterials converts the applied mechanical energy to electrical energy by changing their separating distance and hence creating electrical potential differences. Until now, four modes of TENGs have been significantly investigated: lateral sliding mode, vertical contact-separation mode, freestanding mode, and single-electrode mode. These can scavenge almost all types of mechanical energy from the environment. They have successfully been used either as a self-powered sensor or a power source for sensors in wind speed sensing, micro liquid biological and chemical sensing, vibration monitoring, transportation and traffic management, motion tracking, powering biomedical microsystems, among others.107–110 Due to their light weight, flexible design, and superior performance at lower frequency ranges (<5 Hz), the TENGs could be a promising candidate to be incorporated into wearable UV detectors for protecting people from UV light damage.
In the goal towards achieving a self-powered UV photodetector, Yong Qin et al. firstly fabricated an electrospun nanowire based TENG (ENTENG) for driving a ZnO nanowire based UV photodetector.111 The ENTENG shown in Fig. 9(a) was composed with (from top) Ag/kapton/PVDF nanofibers/air-gap/nylon fibers/Ag/kapton, and the PVDF nanofibers in Fig. 9(b) were tribonegative and nylon fibers in Fig. 9(c) were tribopositive material, due to their different electron affinities.112 The kapton was used as a substrate to achieve the arch shape structure, and silver was used as the electrodes. In Fig. 9(d), when the linear motor exerts a force on the device at 5 Hz, the PVDF and nylon fibers come into close contact, and electrons are transferred from the nylon to the PVDF fiber to achieve electrostatic equilibrium (contact-electrification). When the force is removed, tribolayers are physically separated via self-releasing; however, the static polarized charges in the PVDF and nylon are unchanged, thus developing electric potential, which will trigger electron-transfer to occur from the top to the bottom Ag electrode by electrostatic induction. This electron flow will continue until the opposite tribolayers reach their electrostatic equilibrium, possibly at their maximum separation distance. When the force is applied again, two tribolayers will approach to contact again with each other; the separation distance will decrease, hence the electric potential will be decreasing, and now electrons will flow back from the bottom to the top Ag electrode. In this way, alternating currents (AC) are generated by the ENTENG from any type of ambient mechanical excitation on it. The output voltage and short-circuit current measured from this ENTENG were 1163 V (peak-to-peak) and 211 μA, respectively, as depicted in Fig. 9(e–f). Such a high output electrical energy is capable of sustainably powering up a UV photodetector, thus making it self-powered. From Fig. 9(f), it can be seen that the output current of the ENTENG decreases with the increase of load resistance, and such impedance matching effects are very common for capacitive devices.113 When the regulated TENG output was connected with a ZnO nanofiber-based UV detector like in Fig. 9(g and h), the TENG output changed with the resistance of ZnO, which is dependent on the UV light intensity.
 Fig. 9  Electrospun nanowire based TENG (ENTENG) for directly driving a UV detector for self-powered UV sensing, (a) schematic of the TENG, (b and c) SEM images of PVDF and nylon nanofibers, (d and e) working principle, output voltage of the ENTENG, (f) load resistance dependency of output current and power, (g–i) a self-powered UV radiation detection system driven by the ENTENG, (g and h) schematic and optical image of the UV radiation level detection system powered by an ENTENG, (i) current flowing across the UV sensor and the optical images of the LEDs at UV intensities of 0, 5, 12.5, 17.5 and 25 W m−2. This figure has been adapted from ref. 111 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
The applied UV light on ZnO will generate free carriers (electron–hole pairs) which will decrease the resistance of the photodetector. As shown in Fig. 9(i), increasing UV light intensity (0, 5, 12.5, 17.5, and 25 W m−2) on the photodetector increases TENG output currents (decreases ZnO resistance) as indicated by the number of glowing LEDs, thus conveying information on the UV exposure level.
Although it is convenient to establish a proof-of-concept by separately connecting a photodetector and TENG, to achieve mobility and compatibility with real-life self-powered photodetection, the design needs to be more compact, miniaturized, and flexible. In regard to that, an approach stems from the similar impedance-matching concept; however, the TENG, UV-photodetector, and alarm circuits are integrated as a wearable and compact form on a single flexible PET substrate with an area of 6 × 12 cm2 for real time UV exposure level detection, as shown in Fig. 10(a).114 Interdigitated indium tin oxide (ITO) was deposited on a flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate, and then it was covered by a one-sided viscous fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) thin film, shown in Fig. 10(b) for the transparent and flexible film-based TENG (TFF-TENG). The ZnO NP based photodetector and the alarm circuit were integrated on the same PET substrate, and the transmittance of the TFE-TENG under the UV spectrum was well-above 80%. Human skin and FEP act as the tribopositive and tribonegative layers, respectively, and thus generate electricity along with the contact-separation cycle of the hand and the FEP (60 V, 10 μA). The output voltage of the TFE-TENG increases with the load resistance (1 kΩ to 10 GΩ) and exhibits a linear response (region II in Fig. 10(d)) within the 200 kΩ to 1000 MΩ range, suitable for sensing. The measured resistance of the ZnO photodetector varies within the range of 1000 to 2 MΩ, with different UV light (375 nm) intensity, and was kept fixed in zone-II for optimum sensing.
 Fig. 10  (a) Demonstration of a real-time monitoring of the UV light by the TFE-TENG during human motion, (b) device structure, (c) working principle of the TFE-TENG excited by hand tapping, (d) output voltage under varying load resistances (1 kΩ to 10 GΩ) and frequencies (0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 Hz). Three working regions are marked as zones I, II, and III. (e) Output voltage under different light intensities of 375 nm UV light, and (f) a real-time dynamic voltage response and recovery curves under 31.92 mW cm−2 of 375 nm UV light illumination. This figure has been adapted from ref. 114 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
The decreasing trend of the TFE-TENG output with different UV light intensity (0 to 31.92 mW cm−2) is due to the operation of the photodetector in zone-II (Fig. 10(e)). Another interesting feature of this device is due to the interdigitated electrode design, it is capable of operating in both the vertical contact-separation mode and lateral sliding modes simultaneously, enhancing the energy conversion efficiency. The longer recovery time (1.84 s) than the response time (1.25 s) of this device, depicted in Fig. 10(f), is due to the resistive load characteristics of the TENG.113
Rather than areal integration, Zhong Lin Wang et al. reported a more compact and vertically integrated TENG-powered photodetector for a wide linear detection range starting from 20 μW cm−2 to 7 mW cm−2.115 Different from the aforementioned devices, a layer of 3D dendritic TiO2 nanostructures was used for both an active photodetector material and a tribopositive layer. Due to the excellent photo response characteristics of 3D dendritic TiO2, a fast 18 ms rise and a 31 ms decay time and a high responsivity were achieved. The device structure in Fig. 11(a) was composed of (from top) glass/ITO/PDMS/air-gap/TiO2/Ni/glass/ITO and the top and bottom parts were supported by springs. In this unique TENG-powered UV detector structure, the tribopositive and active photo detecting element of 3D dendritic TiO2 and tribonegative PDMS were forming the TENG. The applied UV light reduces the resistance of the photoactive material and also changes the surface charge density of the TENG. In this device, a linear trend between incident UV light and TENG output voltage was observed; however, the output current exhibited a change of up to two orders of magnitude with the UV light (Fig. 11(b)) irradiation, hence more convenient for photodetection. A high responsivity of this self-powered photodetector was achieved, as shown in Fig. 11(c).
 Fig. 11  (a) Fabrication process of the self-powered UV photodetector, (b) the dependence of output current, and (c) responsivity of the self-powered photodetector on UV light illumination with various power intensities. This figure has been adapted from ref. 115 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. (d) Device structure of a self-powered and organometallic halide perovskite photodetector, (e) the output voltage under a solar stimulator at 100 mW cm−2. This figure has been adapted from ref. 116 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
The contact induced static surface charge density is the key factor determining the output of TENG, hence it can be also used for designing a TENG-powered active photodetector. Both the light induced photoconductivity and surface triboelectric charge density can be altered significantly with the light illumination, which in turn results in a considerable output voltage change of the TENG. Based on this, Guang Zhu et al. proposed a multilayer structure,116 as shown in Fig. 11(d), where the copper layer on top was the tribopositive layer and the bottom part was composed of (from bottom) fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO), a TiO2 hole blocking layer, a transport layer of mesoporous TiO2 scaffold, and then the light absorbing organometallic perovskite of MAPbI3 (tribonegative). Due to the presence of the TiO2 and MAPbI3 layers, this device can absorb both UV and visible light. Under a light illumination of 100 mW cm−2, the output voltage of the device decreases sharply from 8 V to 5 V directly (Fig. 11(e)). The reason for this sharp change could be explained as from the light induced electron–hole pairs on the MAPbI3 surface, the electrons are transported to the bottom of the device while holes remain on the surface due to the hole blocking layer underneath the MAPbI3 layer. These holes on the MAPbI3 are recombined with the contact induced negative surface charges on the MAPbI3 surface and suppress the tribonegative charges, hence reducing the output voltage. In addition, it is also anticipated that the variation of photoconductivity of the MAPbI3–TiO2 composite under light illumination synergistically contributes to the reduction of the output voltage.
Besides TENG, another promising energy harvesting system called piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs) has been used to deliver the power required to operate sensors. In recent years, mechanical energy harvesting utilizing PENGs has gained tremendous attention due to their sophisticated design, light weight, and flexibility for the direct conversion of mechanical energy into electrical power for many integrated applications. PENGs produce electrical energy by ionic polarization induced in certain materials while subject to tiny mechanical deformations or vibrations. Many materials have been implemented to successfully fabricate piezoelectric NGs since the first report on piezoelectric material, including ZnO,108 BaTiO3,117 PZT (lead zirconate titanate),118 PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride),119–121 InN,122 CdS,123 CdTe,124 NaNbO3,125etc. Among them, ZnO is a well-known piezoelectric material employed to fabricate high performance PENGs, and the working principle of a PENG can be best explained by taking the wurtzite structure of ZnO as an example, as shown in Fig. 12(a).126
 Fig. 12  (a) Basic working principle of a PENG. (i) Crystal structure of ZnO. (ii) Piezo potential formation in compression and tension mode.126 
At the original state of ZnO, the cations (Zn2+) and anions (O2−) are accumulated layer by layer along the c-axis as shown in Fig. 12(a-i). When the structure is subjected to an external force, an electric dipole moment will be formed due to the repositioning of positively charged Zn2+ ions and negatively charged O2− ions, leading to a piezoelectric potential similar to Fig. 12(a-ii). When sensors or loads are connected to the deformed material, free electrons will be driven through the external circuit by the piezoelectric potential to achieve a new equilibrium state.127 Sequential compressing and stretching alter the piezoelectric potential which makes a series of current pulses that flow through the external circuit. This basic mechanism of piezoelectric potential generation is not only limited to ZnO but applicable to various other piezoelectric materials.
Based on the principle described above, Zhong Lin Wang et al. first demonstrated a PENG using ZnO NW arrays which was driven by an ultrasonic wave to produce direct current.128 It was fabricated by placing vertically aligned ZnO NW arrays underneath a zigzag shaped metal electrode keeping a small gap in-between. The ultrasonic wave drives the electrode up and down causing the NWs to bend and thus the mechanical energy converts into electrical energy collected by the zigzag metal electrode. Though this device offers cost effective and adaptable energy harvesting technology, Zhong Lin Wang et al. used the concept of vertical as well as lateral integration of ZnO NW arrays which is capable of producing a maximum voltage of 1.26 V under a low strain of 0.19%.129 The authors successfully integrated this PENG to drive a NW pH sensor and UV sensor demonstrating its self-powered characteristics.
One major problem arises from the free electrons in ZnO NRs which is the reason for the piezoelectric potential screening effect, which needs to be suppressed to stabilize the output for a sustainable device.119,130 Moreover, stable operation of ZnO based PENGs is most desirable under UV conditions because the higher energy of the UV light than the band gap causes the generation of free carriers. Keeping this in mind, Sang-Woo Kim et al. investigated the possible reasons for the potential drop in ZnO NR-based PENGs and proposed a surface passivated NG which showed 25 times higher output voltage than the non-passivated NG under UV illumination.131 They fabricated the PENG device shown in Fig. 13(a) firstly growing ZnO NRs on ZnO thin film which was sputtered on a sapphire substrate. Gold was used as the top electrode deposited onto a polyethylenenaphthalene (PEN) substrate and then pressed onto ZnO NRs to form the PENG. The piezoelectric potential distribution was measured under the absence of UV light having a maximum output voltage of 48 mV applying a compressive force of 0.9 kgf from the upper side of the NG in the direction perpendicular to the electrode as shown in Fig. 13(a). A significant reduction of the output voltage under UV illumination with the same compressive force was observed, as shown in Fig. 13(b), due to the screening effect of ZnO. When intrinsic n-type ZnO is exposed to air, a depletion layer of low conductivity will be formed near the surface of the ZnO due to the capture of free electrons from the conduction band by adsorbed oxygen molecules thus converting into oxygen ions. Upon UV illumination, e–h pairs will be generated, and holes will migrate to the surface to get neutralized by the oxygen ions. This will give rise to the number of unpaired free electrons shown in Fig. 13(c-i), causing the screening effect and thus reducing the output voltage. Surface passivation is considered to be an effective way to reduce the screening effect, and the authors passivated the ZnO NRs by thermal annealing at 350 degrees Celsius for 30 minutes. In this way, as shown in Fig. 13(c-ii), the direct recombination of photo-excited e–h pairs was made dominant rather than the holes being neutralized by oxygen ions. Fig. 13(d) shows the output voltage of a surface passivated ZnO NRs based PENG without exposing it to UV light which is seven times higher than that of non-passivated PENG due to the reduction of oxygen vacancies. The output voltage measured under UV illumination of a passivated ZnO NRs PENG shown in Fig. 13(e) not only increased but also stabilized. Therefore, this technique of surface passivation is suggested to be used for enhancing as well as stabilizing the device performance which is promising for the application of PENG based self-powered UV PDs.
 Fig. 13  Device structure and the output voltage under direct compression (a) without UV radiation (b) with UV radiation. (c) Energy band diagram (i) without surface passivation, (ii) with surface passivation of ZnO NRs. Output voltage of a surface passivated ZnO NRs based PENG (d) without UV illumination and (e) with UV illumination.131 (f) Integrated UV sensor with PZT based PENG, (g) photo response of an ZnO NW UV sensor powered by PENG, and (h) voltage vs. UV light intensity. This figure has been adapted from ref. 133 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. 
Owing to the increasing interest for flexible PENGs, Zhong Lin Wang et al. proposed a ZnO NW based flexible power generator for the first time.108 Unlike the other approach, they avoided sliding contacts and instead used a piezoelectric fine wire attached to metal electrodes at both ends and placed in a flexible substrate. A maximum output voltage of 50 mV was generated by periodically stretching and releasing a single wire at 0.05 to 0.1% strain, which resulted in a conversion efficiency of 6.8%. Zhong Lin Wang et al. demonstrated another similar kind of transparent and flexible PENG by growing the ZnO NWs on a PDMS substrate.132 This PENG can produce an output voltage of 8 V and a short circuit current of 0.6 μA at 0.12% applied strain which is sufficient to power up a UV PD. Compared to piezoelectric semiconducting materials like ZnO, lead zirconate titanate (PZT) has a larger piezoelectric constant suitable for electromechanical coupling and has been broadly employed as an active material for self-powered PENG. Zhong Lin Wang et al. in another work developed a suspending sintering method of electrospinning NWs to fabricate a flexible, dense, and tough PZT textile composed of aligned parallel NWs.133 Then they transferred the textile onto a thick film of PET (polyethylene terephthalate) and chemical fabric to make flexible and wearable PENG. A ZnO NW UV sensor connected to this PENG shown in Fig. 13(f) was successfully driven by its maximum output voltage and current of 6 V and 45 nA, respectively. When the sensor was illuminated with different intensities of UV light, a change in voltage across the sensor was observed due to the change in resistance, as shown in Fig. 13(g).
The voltage decreased as the increased intensity produced more carriers resulting in a reduced resistance. Monitoring the voltage vs. intensity curve in Fig. 13(h), the UV signal can be detected quantitatively. Jong-Hyun Ahn et al. integrated a graphene film with PZT to fabricate a high performance flexible and transparent PENG.134 An ∼2 V output voltage, 2 μA cm−2 current density, and ∼88 mW cm−3 power density were recorded which are sufficient to drive a UV sensor.134 Yaojin Wang et al. reported that a cost effective flexible PZT based PENG fabricated on a two-dimensional mica substrate showed outstanding performance with an open circuit voltage of 120 V, short circuit current of 150 μA cm−2 and power density of 42.7 mW cm−3, unique for the application of a battery free sensor network.135 However, environmental concerns from the high lead (Pb) concentration in the PZT material drive the development of new lead-free piezoelectric materials.136 Organic and biocompatible piezoelectric polymers such as polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and its co-polymers polyvinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene (P(VDF–HFP)) and polyvinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene (P(VDF–TrFE)) are promising for their flexibility, low cost, light weight and stretchability.137
Dipankar Mandal et al. fabricated a flexible PENG comprising of a composite flexible film of P(VDF–HFP) and Zn2+ avoiding the traditional electrical poling.137 The flexible film was prepared by adding 0.1 g of ZnCl2 with previously prepared P(VDF–HFP)–DMF solution and then stirred for 12 hours. The resulting solution was drop casted onto a glass substrate and the flexible film of Zn2+–HFP was peeled off after drying at 60 degrees Celsius for 5 hours.

Fig. 14a(i–iv) shows the flexibility of the film that can be rolled, bended, folded, and twisted. Conducting carbon tape was attached on both sides of the film to collect the electrical signal and a PDMS layer encapsulated the device to protect it from physical damage, as shown in Fig. 14(b). The fabricated PENG device can generate an open circuit voltage of around 6 V upon 14 kPa of pressure applied by human touch, shown in Fig. 14(c). The device can be used as a dc source due to its ability to charge capacitors using a full wave rectifier within a very short time, as depicted in Fig. 14(d). Changes in output voltage and power with respect to the external load in Fig. 14(e) show gradual increases of voltage and power to a maximum of 6 V and 2.4 mW at 10 MΩ. This device has the potential to light more than 20 blue LEDs, as shown in Fig. 14(f), by repeatedly pressing and releasing with a finger without any storage device. Fig. 14(g) depicts the schematic of the UV sensor powered by PENG where the top electrode was designed in such a way as to provide some bare area for direct UV light exposure to the film. The I–V characteristics in Fig. 14(h) were recorded both during UV light exposure and in dark conditions. The on–off ratio of this self-powered sensor was measured to be 4.2 at zero bias. The piezoelectric current decreased from 6 nA to 3.5 nA, shown in Fig. 14(i), owing to the increase in conductivity when the UV light was turned on providing the 14 kPa pressure by finger touch. These results indicate that this device is highly sensitive to UV light and can be used as a portable self-powered device in practical applications.
 Fig. 14  (a) Flexibility of Zn2+–HFP film, (b) device structure, (c) finger touch response of the device, (d) charging of capacitors by PENG, (e) dependence of output voltage and power on the external variable load, (f) blue LEDs glowing with finger touch, (g) PENG as a UV sensor, (h) I–V characteristics of the UV detector, and (i) change of current measured with turning on and off the UV source.137 
While TENG and PENG are designed to convert mechanical energy into electrical energy, there is one important NG called a thermoelectric nanogenerator (TMENG) which uses heat energy to convert to electrical energy. TMENG operation is important when energy from the other sources such as light or mechanical vibrations are not available. On the other hand, heat or thermal energy is very common to our everyday living environment including the CPU of computers, running automobile engines, the human body etc.138 The main idea for a TMENG to operate is to maintain a temperature gradient between two points to drive the charge carrier flow in the external circuit, thus converting heat into electrical energy. Based on this, Zhong Lin Wang et al. demonstrated a TMENG using a ZnO micro/nanobelt doped with Sb that is able to generate a 10 mV output voltage, 194 nA output current, and about 1.94 nW output power at a temperature difference of 30 K between the two electrodes.138 The results suggest the suitability of this TMENG as a self-powered system. Zhong Lin Wang et al., in another article, fabricated a PZT micro/nanowire based TMENG which they used as a self-powered temperature sensor.139
The output voltage was observed to increase linearly with an increase in the temperature difference. This TMENG has response and reset times of 0.9 s and 3 s, respectively. It could be a very good source for a self-powered sensor for application in the environmental sciences, safety monitoring, and medical diagnostics.11
Xiaosheng Fang et al. used a novel approach to dedicatedly fabricate a helical shaped flexible and wearable self-powered UV PD, integrating with a TMENG on the same substrate, as depicted in Fig. 15(a).140 The three-dimensional helical substrate was prepared by coating a screw with polyurethane (PU). The author investigated the characteristic performance of the two fabricated UV PDs and determined the optimum one to be that driven by the integrated TMENG. Pristine n-type and p-type thermoelectric materials, Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3, respectively, were separately blended with PVDF and DMF to form a paste. Opposite sides of the PU substrate were then coated with these two pastes and silver paste was placed in between the gap of the two thermoelectric materials to form a whole conductive device, as shown in Fig. 15(b). A temperature difference between the two sides of this TMENG generates a voltage which drives the photodetector unit without any external battery connected to it.
 Fig. 15  (a) Structural design of a TMENG integrated UV PD, (b) TMENG design, (c) measured output voltage of TMENG with respect to temperature difference, (d) I–V characteristics of a Au/ZnO/Au PD at different intensities of UV light, (e) current measured as a function of temperature difference at different UV intensities, (f) device on a human wrist, (g) I–V, and (h) I–T characteristics of Ag/ZnO:PVDF/Ag PD at different intensities of UV light, (i) stability test of the integrated device.140 
The output voltage generated as a function of temperature differences is shown in Fig. 15(c) which indicates that a maximum voltage of 4.6 mV was achieved at a 23.7 K temperature difference. The author first attempted to drive a Au/ZnO/Au UV photodetector and examined the I–V characteristics under different UV intensities. Fig. 15(d) shows that the current increases with increasing the intensity of incident UV light at a certain bias. The current measured at the different temperature differences shown in Fig. 15(e) signifies that the device can adjust the output current based on the temperature difference and UV intensity. A digital photograph in Fig. 15(f) shows the flexibility and wearability of the device, which can be worn on a human wrist. However, the photocurrent measured for this pristine ZnO based UV PD was on the order of 10−11 A which is not up to the standard required for a high-performance UV PD. To resolve this problem, a composite photoactive material ZnO:PVDF was developed which showed improved performance compared to the pristine ZnO while driven by the TMENG. A significant boost in the output current with a slight increase in UV intensity was observed for this Au/ZnO:PVDF/Au device shown in Fig. 15(g) which is a signature of high sensitivity. The changes in output current with the change in temperature difference and UV intensity in Fig. 15(h) suggest that this integrated device can work throughout the year and modulate itself. At the end, mechanical testing was performed to confirm the stretchability and stability of the device. It is noticeable in Fig. 15(i) that the output current remains almost constant even after 1000 stretching cycles performed at a strain of 75%, suggesting the long-term stability of this integrated TMENG and the UV PD.
5. Summary and perspectives
In this article, the most significant studies performed in the efforts towards the transition from conventional to self-powered ultraviolet photodetectors were reviewed. Device structure, fabrication steps, working principle, and characterization of the figures of merit were systematically discussed for different types of UV PD including p–n homojunctions, p–n heterojunctions, and Schottky junctions driven by a built-in electric field. In addition to these, an emerging alternative solution towards making self-powered UV PDs was reviewed where the energy harvesting unit was integrated with the sensor network. In order to present a detailed comparison, the performance determining parameter values for different self-powered UV PDs are listed in Table 2. This review may help researchers in providing a novel solution for self-powered UV photodetection with enhanced device performances suitable for real time applications.
Table 2 Key parameters for different types of self-powered UV PD




Device type
Architecture
UV light
Responsivity
Response time
Detectivity
Ref.




p–n homojunction
p–n ZnO nanowire
325 nm
—
30 ms/50 ms
—

49



p-ZnO(Li,N):n-ZnO
—
18 μA W−1
—
—

43



p-ZnO(Ag):n-ZnO
360 nm
1 × 103 μA W−1
3.9 s/4.6 s
—

44



NR–NR ZnO
—
2.45 mA W−1
4.78 s/0.33 s
4.17 × 109 Jones

147



p–n heterojunction
p-GaN:n-ZnO
325 nm
—
20 μs/219 μs
—

63



p-GaN:n-ZnO
358 nm
0.68 mA W−1
—
—

64



n-ZnO/p-NiO
350 nm
0.415 mA W−1
7.5 s/4.8 s
—

148



Cl–ZnO NRs/DMSO–PEDOT:PSS
365 nm
0.8 mA W−1
0.03 s/0.032 s
1.12 × 1010 Jones

149



p-Te/n-TiO2
350 nm
84 mA W−1
0.772 s/1.492 s
3.7 × 109 Jones (at 300 nm)

150



p-Te/n-ZnO2
300 nm
387 mA W−1
2.46 s/1.75 s (350 nm)
4 × 1010 Jones

150



n-TiO2/p-NiO
350 nm
42 μA W−1
1.2 s/7.1 s
1.1 × 109 Jones

151



Ag/Cl:ZnO/PEDOT:PSS/ITO
365 nm
2.33 mA W−1
28 ms/23 ms
1.54 × 1010 Jones

152



n-SnO2/p-CuZnS
300 nm
1.6 mA W−1 (315 nm)
0.045 ms/1.17 ms
5.41 × 1011 (0.05 V)

153



n-ZnO:p-NiO
325 nm
0.493 mA W−1
1.38 μs/10 μs
—

65



p-CuSCN:n-ZnO
370 nm
0.02 A W−1
—
—

66



p-PANI:n-MgZnO
250 nm
160 μA W−1
—
1.5 × 1011 Jones

67



p-PANI:n-TiO2
320 nm
3.6 mA W−1
3.8 ms/30.7 ms
—

68



p-Ga2O3:n-ZnO
254 nm
0.76 mA W−1
0.179 s/0.272 s
—

69



p-NiO:n-TiO2
365 nm
5.66 mA W−1
0.1 s/0.1 s
5.4 × 1011 Jones

71



p-GaN:n-Ga2O3
365 nm
54.43 mA W−1
0.14 s/0.08 s
1.23 × 1011 Jones

75



p-GaN:n-Ga2O3(Sn doped)
254 nm
3.05 A W−1
0.018 s/0.018 s
1.69 × 1013 Jones

78



SnO2:CsPbBr3
300 nm
10 mA W−1
0.03 ms/1.94 ms
2.6 × 1011 Jones

85



PEDOT:PSS/Cs3Bi2I9−xBrx
375 nm
15 mA W−1
40.7 ms/27.1 ms
—

90



PEDOT:PSS/Ga2O3
245 nm
2.6 A W−1
0.34 ms/3 ms
2.2 × 1013 Jones

70



p-PANI:n-Ga2O3
—
21 mA W−1
—
1.5 × 1011 Jones

91



Schottky junction
ZnO(Sb):Au
325 nm
—
100 ms
—

95



TiO2/Au/TiO2
365 nm
1 A W−1
0.37 s/6.6 s
—

96



BeZnO:(Ti/Au)
355 nm
2.5 μA W−1
35 μs/880 μs
—

97



Ag NW/TiO2
350 nm
1.1 mA W−1
2 ms/47 ms
—

154



MgxZn1−xO:Au
330 nm
2.22 mA W−1
0.23 μs/92 μs
4.4 × 1011 Jones

98



Au/Ga2O3
254 nm
0.01 mA W−1
1 μs/64 μs
—

99



Graphene/ZnO:Al
365 nm
0.039 A W−1
37 μs/330 μs
—

28



Graphene/Si
375 nm
0.2 A W−1
4 ns/12 ns
1.6 × 1013 Jones

100



Nanogenerator
TENG:ZnO NW
UV
—
—
—

111



TFE-TENG:ZnO NP
375 nm
—
1.25 s/1.84 s
—

114



Glass/ITO/PDMS/airgap/TiO2/Ni/glass/ITO
UV
280 A W−1
18 ms/31 ms
—

115



TENG:MAPbI3–TiO2
UV
7.5 V W−1
<80 ms
—

116



PEN/Au/ZnO NR/Al2O3
325 nm
—
—
—

131



PENG (PZT):PD (ZnO NW)
UV
—
—
—

133



P(VDF–HFP)/Zn2+
330 nm
—
—
—

137



TMENG (n-Bi2Se3, p-Bi2Te3):PD (Ag/ZnO:PVDF/Ag)
350 nm
2.18 × 10−4 A W−1
14.64 s/4.97 s
6.33 × 107 Jones

140





Each type of self-powered UV PD discussed in this review has its own merits and demerits. For instance, owing to the similar lattice constant between the joining materials, p–n homojunction based self-powered UV PDs offer a perfect lattice match, thus improving the photocurrent. But p-type doping is mandatory for p–n homojunction devices which is very difficult to achieve for some materials. Compared to this, a p–n heterojunction offers the diversity of material selection allowing the device engineers to investigate the detector characteristics with different materials. However, the complex fabrication process, lattice mismatch, and relatively slow response are serious concerns for heterojunction based self-powered UV PDs. On the other hand, a Schottky junction based self-powered UV PD requires a simple fabrication process and can respond very fast. But semi-transparent metals absorb and reflect some of the incident UV light causing a reduction in the photocurrent and thus degrading the device performance. For the nanogenerator based energy harvester, in terms of output power density, the TENG is superior to the PENG. While the TENG is better suited for low frequency vibration, the PENG requires higher frequency vibration. However, reliability is an issue for TENG based devices due to the periodic contact separation between the two triboelectric layers while the PENG is more reliable due to its compact size. Compared to the TENG and PENG, the TMENG is still in its developing stage and far from realizing its commercial application. A temperature difference is required to operate a TMENG which is a problem for this type of device.
Although intensive research in this field has already yielded a complete system, some challenges are still there which need to be investigated, thus creating room to improve performance considering different aspects. The noise attributed to the dark current should be as low as possible since the signal to noise ratio for a self-powered UV PD should be high enough. Several aspects need to be taken into consideration in suppressing the dark current and thus increasing the detectivity and responsivity, including electrode alignment,141,142 structuring the charge transport layer,143 layer thickness optimization to prevent current flowing in the shunt paths,144 and smoothing the interlayers at the bottom electrode.145,146 In addition to these, dark current stemming from intrinsic and extrinsic sources needs to be suppressed by employing improved synthesis techniques of materials and optimized device architectures. Native defects, for instance trapping centres that extend the generation–recombination time of charge carriers when illuminating with UV light, need to be reduced for efficient photoconversion. Furthermore, the defects arising from lattice mismatch, specially for p–n heterojunction UV PDs, are required to be explored considering the lattice constant of the joining materials. Sensitivity, one important figure of merit of a UV PD, can be increased by using an antireflection coating to reduce the unwanted reflection from the surface of the absorbing material so that most of the incident photons can participate in producing the e–h pairs, thus reducing the loss. In addition, attention needs to be paid in selecting electrodes that have a higher optical transparency, very good electrical conductivity, and flexibility to increase the photocurrent and thus the responsivity.
For nanogenerator coupled self-powered UV photodetectors, although some groundwork has been laid, still there are challenges that need to be addressed to commercialize such technology. Firstly, the output power density from the TENGs, PENGs and TMENGs needs to be enhanced substantially for the reliable operation of the UV photodetectors or next-generation multifunctional sensory systems. As energy harvesting is a rapidly emerging field, state-of-the-art research is underway to boost-up the energy conversion efficiency and more co-ordinated approaches are required from scientists and engineers to unveil more fundamental nanoscale phenomena. Hybridization with other types of energy harvesters such as solar-cells or electrochemical cells could improve the overall power density, and at the same time robust-integration and system-level designs are necessary in this regard. Secondly, the output from the TENGs, PENGs, and TMENGs is highly dependent on environmental conditions such as moisture, temperatures, etc. Thirdly, the output power density of the TENGs and PENGs varies significantly with the change of mechanical excitation, and this variability will make it harder to distinguish the real-time changes in the output produced by the UV PD. Although regulatory circuitry could be a solution, it will further increase the overall complexity of the system.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Ontario Centers of Excellence and University of Waterloo.
References
M. Bariya, H. Y. Y. Nyein and A. Javey, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 160–171 CrossRef .
Z. Wen, J. Fu, L. Han, Y. Liu, M. Peng, L. Zheng, Y. Zhu, X. Sun and Y. Zi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11893–11902 RSC .

          D. Bandyopadhyay and J. Sen, in Wireless Personal Communications,  2011, vol. 58, pp. 49–69 Search PubMed .
Z. Wen, Y. Yang, N. Sun, G. Li, Y. Liu, C. Chen, J. Shi, L. Xie, H. Jiang, D. Bao, Q. Zhuo and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803684 CrossRef .
B. L. Diffey, Phys. Med. Biol., 1991, 36, 299–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, L. Hu, K. Huo, B. Gao, L. Zhao, M. Liao, P. K. Chu, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3907–3915 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Mancebo and S. Q. Wang, Rev. Environ. Health, 2014, 29, 265–273 CAS .
L. Su, W. Yang, J. Cai, H. Chen and X. Fang, Small, 2017, 13, 1701687 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, L. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. He, X. Pan and E. Xie, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 50–73 RSC .
L. Peng, L. Hu and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5321–5328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, L. Hu and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2591–2610 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Wang, S. Li, X. Liu, Z. Shi, X. Fang and J. H. He, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2003309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, W. Ouyang, W. Yang, J. H. He and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909909 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Barnes, C. E. Williamson, R. M. Lucas, S. A. Robinson, S. Madronich, N. D. Paul, J. F. Bornman, A. F. Bais, B. Sulzberger, S. R. Wilson, A. L. Andrady, R. L. McKenzie, P. J. Neale, A. T. Austin, G. H. Bernhard, K. R. Solomon, R. E. Neale, P. J. Young, M. Norval, L. E. Rhodes, S. Hylander, K. C. Rose, J. Longstreth, P. J. Aucamp, C. L. Ballaré, R. M. Cory, S. D. Flint, F. R. de Gruijl, D. P. Häder, A. M. Heikkilä, M. A. K. Jansen, K. K. Pandey, T. M. Robson, C. A. Sinclair, S. Å. Wängberg, R. C. Worrest, S. Yazar, A. R. Young and R. G. Zepp, Nat. Sustainability, 2019, 2, 569–579 CrossRef .
E. Monroy, F. Omnès and F. Calle, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2003, 18, R33 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, X. Yan, Z. Bai, X. Zheng, Y. Sun, Y. Liu, P. Lin, X. Chen and Y. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 5976–5981 RSC .
F. H. L. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, M. Peng, W. Wu, J. Guo, G. Gao, Y. Liu, J. Kou, R. Wen, Y. Lei, A. Yu, Y. Zhang, J. Zhai and Z. L. Wang, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 274–280 RSC .
H. Chen, H. Liu, Z. Zhang, K. Hu and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 403–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Esopi, M. Calcagno and Q. Yu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700025 CrossRef .
B. Ouyang, K. Zhang and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700208 CrossRef .
B. Zhao, F. Wang, H. Chen, L. Zheng, L. Su, D. Zhao and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700264 CrossRef .
Y. Xie, L. Wei, G. Wei, Q. Li, D. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Yan, G. Liu, L. Mei and J. Jiao, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 188 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. Chen and L. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2250–2282 RSC .
B. Saravanakumar, K. Thiyagarajan, N. R. Alluri, S. SoYoon, K. Taehyun, Z. H. Lin and S. J. Kim, Carbon, 2015, 84, 56–65 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Leung, K. T. Ho, P. K. Kung, V. K. S. Hsiao, H. N. Alshareef, Z. L. Wang and J. H. He, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704611 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, C. Gao, H. Duan, B. Lu, X. Pan and E. Xie, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 640–645 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, F. He, Y. Tian, B. Sun, J. Fan, X. Yu, L. Ni, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen and W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8161–8168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Khan, A. Mahmud and D. Ban, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2019, 18, 21–36 CAS .

          S. Priya and D. J. Inman, Energy harvesting technologies, Springer, New York, NY,  2009 Search PubMed .
B. Zhao, F. Wang, H. Chen, Y. Wang, M. Jiang, X. Fang and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3988–3993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, M. Tong, Y. Xia, W. Cai, J. S. Moon, Y. Cao, G. Yu, C. L. Shieh, B. Nilsson and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2009, 325, 1665–1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Omnès, E. Monroy, E. Muñoz and J. L. Reverchon, Gallium Nitride Materials and Devices II,  2007, vol. 6473, p. 64730E Search PubMed .
A. Erturk and D. J. Inman, J. Vib. Acoust. Trans. ASME, 2008, 130, 041002 CrossRef .
B. Deka Boruah, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 2059–2085 RSC .

          C. Schönenberger, S. Oberholzer, E. V. Sukhorukov and H. Grabert, arXiv preprint cond-mat/0112504, 2001, 1–5.
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, W. Zheng and F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8753–8770 RSC .
W. Yang, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. He and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808182 CrossRef .
H. P. Wang and J. H. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602385 CrossRef .
K. Liu, M. Sakurai and M. Aono, Sensors, 2010, 10, 8604–8634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Morkoç, A. Di Carlo and R. Cingolani, Solid-State Electron., 2002, 46, 157–202 CrossRef .
H. Shen, C. X. Shan, B. H. Li, B. Xuan and D. Z. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 232112 CrossRef .
Y. Ning, Z. Zhang, F. Teng and X. Fang, Small, 2018, 14, 1703754 CrossRef PubMed .
D. C. Look, D. C. Reynolds, J. W. Hemsky, R. L. Jones and J. R. Sizelove, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 811–813 CrossRef CAS .
A. Uedono, T. Koida, A. Tsukazaki, M. Kawasaki, Z. Q. Chen, S. F. Chichibu and H. Koinuma, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 2481–2485 CrossRef CAS .
Z. K. Tang, G. K. L. Wong, P. Yu, M. Kawasaki, A. Ohtomo, H. Koinuma and Y. Segawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 3270–3272 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gong, Y. Li and Y. Deng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 14864–14867 RSC .
H. D. Cho, A. S. Zakirov, S. U. Yuldashev, C. W. Ahn, Y. K. Yeo and T. W. Kang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 115401 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Sun, C. X. Shan, B. H. Li, Z. Z. Zhang, D. Z. Shen, Z. Y. Zhang and D. Fan, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, S. Chong-Xin, L. Ji-Shan, L. Bing-Hui, Z. Zhen-Zhong and S. De-Zhen, Phys. Status Solidi, 2013, 250, 2102–2105 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Chen, W. Zhao, L. Ding, L. Wen, H. Li, F. Jiang, J. Su, L. Li, N. Liu and Y. Gao, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Guo, K. Chen, S. L. Wang, F. M. Wu, A. P. Liu, C. R. Li, P. G. Li, C. K. Tan and W. H. Tang, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2020, 13, 024051 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Dai, N. Guan, A. Messanvi, V. Neplokh, V. Piazza, M. Vallo, C. Bougerol, F. H. Julien, A. Babichev, N. Cavassilas, M. Bescond, F. Michelini, M. Foldyna, E. Gautier, C. Durand, J. Eymery and M. Tchernycheva, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26198–26206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Guo, P. G. Li, Z. W. Chen, Z. P. Wu and W. H. Tang, Acta Phys. Sin., 2019, 68, 078501 Search PubMed .
D. Guo, Q. Guo, Z. Chen, Z. Wu, P. Li and W. Tang, Mater. Today Phys., 2019, 11, 100157 CrossRef .
D. Guo, X. Qin, M. Lv, H. Shi, Y. Su, G. Yao, S. Wang, C. Li, P. Li and W. Tang, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2017, 13, 483–488 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Q. Xu, M. Li, S. Shen, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Shi, H. Han and C. Li, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 13266–13269 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Z. Li, F. Ni, W. Ouyang and X. Fang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1828–1833 RSC .
J. J. Hassan, M. A. Mahdi, S. J. Kasim, N. M. Ahmed, H. Abu Hassan and Z. Hassan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 261108 CrossRef .
C. H. Park, S. B. Zhang and S. H. Wei, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 073202 CrossRef .
W. Tian, Y. Wang, L. Chen and L. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1701848 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Bie, Z. M. Liao, H. Z. Zhang, G. R. Li, Y. Ye, Y. B. Zhou, J. Xu, Z. X. Qin, L. Dai and D. P. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 649–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Su, Q. Zhang, T. Wu, M. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Zhu, R. Xiang, X. Gui and Z. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 072106 CrossRef .
P. N. Ni, C. X. Shan, S. P. Wang, X. Y. Liu and D. Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4445–4449 RSC .
J. Garnier, R. Parize, E. Appert, O. Chaix-Pluchery, A. Kaminski-Cachopo and V. Consonni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5820–5829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, P. Yu, Z. Zhang, F. Teng, L. Zheng, K. Hu and X. Fang, Small, 2016, 12, 5809–5816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng, P. Yu, K. Hu, F. Teng, H. Chen and X. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33924–33932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, L. Jiao, X. Wang, D. Guo, W. Li, L. Li, F. Huang and W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8688–8693 RSC .
H. Wang, H. Chen, L. Li, Y. Wang, L. Su, W. Bian, B. Li and X. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6850–6856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, J. Xu, S. Shi, H. Dong, Y. Cheng, C. Wei, X. Zhang, S. Yin and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11269–11279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, J. Chen, S. Cai, Z. Long, Y. Zhang, L. Su, S. He, C. Tang, P. Liu, H. Peng and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803165 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Maurya, Y. Liu, X. Xu, R. Woods-Robinson, C. Das, J. W. Ager and K. R. Balasubramaniam, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 505107 CrossRef .
X. Xu, J. Bullock, L. T. Schelhas, E. Z. Stutz, J. J. Fonseca, M. Hettick, V. L. Pool, K. F. Tai, M. F. Toney, X. Fang, A. Javey, L. H. Wong and J. W. Ager, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1925–1932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, H. Shi, K. Chen, D. Guo, W. Cui, Y. Zhi, S. Wang, Z. Wu, Z. Chen and W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10562–10570 RSC .
D. Guo, H. Liu, P. Li, Z. Wu, S. Wang, C. Cui, C. Li and W. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1619–1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhuo, D. Wu, Y. Wang, E. Wu, C. Jia, Z. Shi, T. Xu, Y. Tian and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10982–10986 RSC .
D. Guo, Y. Su, H. Shi, P. Li, N. Zhao, J. Ye, S. Wang, A. Liu, Z. Chen, C. Li and W. Tang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12827–12835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, D. Guo, P. Li, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Yan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhi, Y. Huang, Z. Wu and W. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35105–35114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Teng, K. Hu, W. Ouyang and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706262 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xue, H. Zhou, G. Ma, L. Yang, Z. Song, J. Zhang and H. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 187, 69–75 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Shi, L. Lei, F. Zhang, Z. Ma, D. Wu, T. Xu, Y. Tian, Y. Zhang, G. Du, C. Shan and X. Li, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6744–6755 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Kang, I. Dursun, G. Liu, L. Sinatra, X. Sun, M. Kong, J. Pan, P. Maity, E. N. Ooi, T. K. Ng, O. F. Mohammed, O. M. Bakr and B. S. Ooi, Light: Sci. Appl., 2019, 8, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yantara, S. Bhaumik, F. Yan, D. Sabba, H. A. Dewi, N. Mathews, P. P. Boix, H. V. Demir and S. Mhaisalkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4360–4364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Xu, X. Xu, J. Cai, W. Yang and X. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 836–841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, C. Han, Y. Zhang, Z. Zang, M. Wang, X. Tang and J. Du, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 172, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, B. Dong and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11436–11449 RSC .
X. W. Tong, W. Y. Kong, Y. Y. Wang, J. M. Zhu, L. B. Luo and Z. H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18977–18985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Hussain, A. K. Rana and M. Ranjan, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1217–1227 RSC .
D. Liu, B. Bin Yu, M. Liao, Z. Jin, L. Zhou, X. Zhang, F. Wang, H. He, T. Gatti and Z. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 30530–30537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Li, H. Wang, L. Su, H. Chen, W. Bian, J. Ma, B. Li, Z. Liu and A. Shen, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1406–1413 RSC .
P. Yu, K. Hu, H. Chen, L. Zheng and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703166 CrossRef .
Y. Chang, L. Chen, J. Wang, W. Tian, W. Zhai and B. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 21244–21251 CrossRef CAS .
D. Periyanagounder, P. Gnanasekar, P. Varadhan, J. H. He and J. Kulandaivel, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 9545–9551 RSC .
Y. Yang, W. Guo, J. Qi, J. Zhao and Y. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 223113 CrossRef .
W. Zheng, T. Bian, X. Li, M. Chen, X. Yan, Y. Dai and G. He, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 712, 425–430 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, H. Chen, X. Xu and X. Fang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2017, 11, 1700222 CrossRef .
H. Chen, X. Sun, D. Yao, X. Xie, F. C. C. Ling and S. Su, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2019, 50, 505112 CrossRef .
X. Chen, K. Liu, Z. Zhang, C. Wang, B. Li, H. Zhao, D. Zhao and D. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4185–4191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, Y. Xu, H. Guo, K. Shehzad, A. Ali, Y. Liu, J. Yang, D. Dai, C. Te Lin, L. Liu, H. C. Cheng, F. Wang, X. Wang, H. Lu, W. Hu, X. Pi, Y. Dan, J. Luo, T. Hasan, X. Duan, X. Li, J. Xu, D. Yang, T. Ren and B. Yu, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 1–8 CrossRef .
S. J. Park, S. H. Lee, M. L. Seol, S. B. Jeon, H. Bae, D. Kim, G. H. Cho and Y. K. Choi, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, S. Ma, H. M. Zhao, C. Wu, J. Ge, D. Xie, Y. Yang and T. L. Ren, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8951–8957 RSC .
P. D. Mitcheson, P. Miao, B. H. Stark, E. M. Yeatman, A. S. Holmes and T. C. Green, Sens. Actuators, A, 2004, 115, 523–529 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Lu, J. Song, M. Y. Lu, M. T. Chen, Y. Gao, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1223–1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Seol, H. Im, D. Il Moon, J. H. Woo, D. Kim, S. J. Choi and Y. K. Choi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10773–10779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Khan, M. M. Rana, G. Huang, N. Mei, R. Saritas, B. Wen, S. Zhang, P. Voss, E. A. Rahman, Z. Leonenko, S. Islam and D. Ban, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13619–13629 RSC .
Y. Qi and M. C. McAlpine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1275–1285 RSC .
R. Yang, Y. Qin, L. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 34–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Choi, D. Choi, M. J. Jin, I. Kim, S. H. Kim, J. Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim and S. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2185–2189 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Khan, A. Mahmud, S. Zhang, S. Islam, P. Voss and D. Ban, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 691–699 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, L. Cheng, M. Yuan, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Qin and T. Jing, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7842–7846 RSC .
H. Zou, Y. Zhang, L. Guo, P. Wang, X. He, G. Dai, H. Zheng, C. Chen, A. C. Wang, C. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Niu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 14, 161–192 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, M. Peng, Y. Liu, T. Zhang, Q. Zhu, H. Lei, S. Liu, Y. Tao, L. Li, Z. Wen and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 19384–19392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Lin, G. Cheng, Y. Yang, Y. S. Zhou, S. Lee and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2810–2816 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, Z. X. Zhao, H. Y. Li, J. Yuan, Z. L. Wang, G. Z. Cao and G. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11310–11316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Il Park, S. Xu, Y. Liu, G. T. Hwang, S. J. L. Kang, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4939–4943 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Xu, B. J. Hansen and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 1–5 Search PubMed .
C. Sun, J. Shi, D. J. Bayerl and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4508–4512 RSC .
J. Fang, X. Wang and T. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11088–11091 RSC .
C. Chang, V. H. Tran, J. Wang, Y. K. Fuh and L. Lin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 726–731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Te Huang, J. Song, C. M. Tsai, W. F. Lee, D. H. Lien, Z. Gao, Y. Hao, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4008–4013 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Lin, J. Song, Y. Ding, S. Y. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 22105 CrossRef .
T. C. Hou, Y. Yang, Z. H. Lin, Y. Ding, C. Park, K. C. Pradel, L. J. Chen and Z. Lin Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 387–393 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jung, M. Lee, J. Il Hong, Y. Ding, C. Y. Chen, L. J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10041–10046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zheng, B. Shi, Z. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700029 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Gao, J. Zhou, Y. Gu, P. Fei, Y. Hao, G. Bao and Z. L. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 39901 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. Song, J. Liu and L. W. Zhong, Science, 2007, 316, 102–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Qin, C. Xu, Y. Wei, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 366–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, P. Fei, J. Song, X. Wang, C. Lao, R. Tummala and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 328–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Pham, K. Y. Lee, J. H. Lee, K. H. Kim, K. S. Shin, M. K. Gupta, B. Kumar and S. W. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 841–846 RSC .
L. Lin, Y. Hu, C. Xu, Y. Zhang, R. Zhang, X. Wen and Z. Lin Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 75–81 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, S. Bai, M. Yuan, Y. Qin, Z. L. Wang and T. Jing, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6231–6235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwon, W. Seung, B. K. Sharma, S. W. Kim and J. H. Ahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8970–8975 RSC .
D. Wang, G. Yuan, G. Hao and Y. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Wang, L. Zhao, X. Yu and Y. Zi, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 318–340 CrossRef CAS .
P. Adhikary and D. Mandal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 17789–17798 RSC .
Y. Yang, K. C. Pradel, Q. Jing, J. M. Wu, F. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6984–6989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Zhou, J. M. Wu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8456–8461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sa, X. Xu, X. Wu, J. Chen, C. Zuo and X. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 13097–13103 RSC .
M. Kielar, O. Dhez, G. Pecastaings, A. Curutchet and L. Hirsch, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Kim, Y. J. Choi, H. J. Woo, J. Yang, Y. J. Song, M. S. Kang and J. H. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704475 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, A. Fischer, N. Sergeeva, S. Reineke and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, Org. Electron., 2019, 65, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, Z. Ma, A. Sánchez-Díaz, S. Ullbrich, Y. Liu, B. Siegmund, A. Mischok, K. Leo, M. Campoy-Quiles, W. Li and K. Vandewal, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702184 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Friedel, P. E. Keivanidis, T. J. K. Brenner, A. Abrusci, C. R. McNeill, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6741–6747 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kublitski, A. Hofacker, B. K. Boroujeni, J. Benduhn, V. C. Nikolis, C. Kaiser, D. Spoltore, H. Kleemann, A. Fischer, F. Ellinger, K. Vandewal and K. Leo, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, B. Hu, Z. Wang, X. Lv, C. Zhang, B. Chen, H. San and W. Hofmann, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104042 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Ning and X. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 223–229 RSC .
D. Boruah, S. N. Majji and A. Misra, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4536–4543 RSC .
Y. Zhang, W. Xu, X. Xu, W. Yang, S. Li, J. Chen and X. Fang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 452–456 RSC .
L. Zheng, F. Teng, Z. Zhang, B. Zhao and X. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10032–10039 RSC .
B. Deka Boruah, S. Naidu Majji, S. Nandi and A. Misra, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3451–3459 RSC .
J. Cai, X. Xu, L. Su, W. Yang, H. Chen, Y. Zhang and X. Fang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800213 CrossRef .
J. Xu, W. Yang, H. Chen, L. Zheng, M. Hu, Y. Li and X. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3334–3340 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Spectral distribution with the classification of UV region. (b) Typical structures of different types of self-powered UV photodetectors with their applications.26–28	 
	(1)

Responsivity	
R
	

	A W−1
Photo current	
I
ph
	Ampere (A)
Dark current	
I
dark
	Ampere (A)
Sensitivity	
S
	

	No unit
Response time	
t
r
	
t
90%–t10%, rise time is the time in which photocurrent increases from 10% to 90%	Second (s)
Recovery time	
t
d
	
t
10%–t90%, delay time is the drop of photocurrent from 90% to 10%	Second (s)
Quantum efficiency	
η
	

	%
Detectivity	
D*	
, A0 is the UV signal sensitive area of the photodetector and Δf is the bandwidth	cm W−1 Hz1/2 (Jones)
Noise equivalent power	NEP	

	W Hz−1/2

 	Fig. 2  (a) Device structure of a homojunction self-powered UV PD based on p-ZnO:(Li,N)/n-ZnO, (b) responsivity of p-ZnO:(Li,N)/n-ZnO without applying any external bias and, (c) I–V characteristics under UV illumination. This figure has been adapted from ref. 43 with permission from AIP publishing, copyright 2013. (d) TEM image of p type Ag doped ZnO, (e) switching behavior of three different devices at zero bias with turning on and off 360 nm UV light, and (f) spectral response of Ag–ZnO:ZnO UV PD collected at 0 V. This figure has been adapted from ref. 44 with permission from WILEY VCH, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic structure of an α/β Ga2O3 homojunction based self-powered UV PD, (b) photoluminescence (PL) intensity measured by exciting with a 266 nm laser for α-Ga2O3, β-Ga2O3, α/β Ga2O3 at room temperature, and (c) I–V characteristics collected for different intensities of incident light. This figure has been adapted from ref. 53 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright 2020. (d) Device structure of a p–n homojunction NW based GaN photodetector, (e) measured current–voltage characteristics of the device, and (f) responsivity collected at 0 V and −0.5 V. This figure has been adapted from ref. 54 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Device structure of a NiO/TiO2 heterojunction based self-powered UV PD. (b) Energy band diagram, and (c) responsivity under zero bias. This figure has been adapted from ref. 71 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (d) Device structure of (i) planar and (ii) fiber shaped p-CuZnS/TiO2 NTA based UV PDs, (e) responsivity measured at zero bias for fiber shaped configuration, and (f) switching characteristics under both in original and in bending condition. This figure has been adapted from ref. 72 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. (g) Device prototype of a GaN/Sn:Ga2O3 based p–n heterojunction UV PD, (h) time dependent photo response, and (i) responsivity of GaN/Sn:Ga2O3 without applying any bias. This figure has been adapted from ref. 78 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (j) Device structure, and (k) energy band diagram of the Ga2O3/CuSCN core–shell heterojunction based microwire photodetector, (l) I–V characteristics of the Ga2O3/CuSCN device collected at dark and UV illumination. This figure has been adapted from ref. 79 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic structure of the device based on a SnO2 MW/CsPbBr3 heterojunction, (b) time dependent photo response with periodically turning on/off UV sources of 300 nm and 500 nm, and (c) responsivity of SnO2 MWs/CsPbBr3 and SnO2 MMW/CsPbBr3 at zero bias. This figure has been adapted from ref. 85 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (d) Device structure of Cs3Bi2I9−xBrx based photodetector, (e) responsivity with varying the x composition, and (f) time varying photo response measured at zero bias with intermittently turning on/off a 375 nm light source. This figure has been adapted from ref. 90 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic device structure of a PEDOT:PSS/Ga2O3 PD, (b) I–V characteristics of PEDOT:PSS/Ga2O3 at dark and UV illumination and, (c) responsivity measured at 0 V. This figure has been adapted from ref. 70 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (d) SEM image of the heterojunction formation between the PANI and Ga2O3 interface, (e) energy band diagram showing the transport mechanism, and (f) spectral response of Ga2O3/PANI at 0 V. This figure has been adapted from ref. 91 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Device structure of a BeZnO based Schottky junction UV PD, (b) spectral response at no applied bias, and (c) time dependent response. This figure has been adapted from ref. 97 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017. (d) MgZnO based back-to-back asymmetric Schottky junction UV PD, (e) dark and photo current, and (f) responsivity at zero bias. This figure has been adapted from ref. 98 with permission from IOP publishing, Ltd, copyright 2019. (g) Fabrication process of a vertical Schottky UV PD based on a β-Ga2O3 nanowires array film, (h) logarithmic I–V characteristics under dark and illumination conditions, and (i) responsivity collected at 0 V and −10 V with 254 nm illumination of UV light. This figure has been adapted from ref. 99 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic structure of a graphene/ZnO:Al AZNF device, (b) responsivity, and (c) switching characteristics at zero bias. This figure has been adapted from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (d) Device structure of a graphene (Gr)/Si UV PD with Al2O3 anti reflection coating, (e) energy band diagram, (f) variation of photocurrent with respect to voltage at varying light intensity, (g) time dependent photo response of the Gr/Si UV PD at two different active areas, (h) reflectance, and (i) spectral response with and without Al2O3 anti reflection coating.100	 

 	Fig. 9  Electrospun nanowire based TENG (ENTENG) for directly driving a UV detector for self-powered UV sensing, (a) schematic of the TENG, (b and c) SEM images of PVDF and nylon nanofibers, (d and e) working principle, output voltage of the ENTENG, (f) load resistance dependency of output current and power, (g–i) a self-powered UV radiation detection system driven by the ENTENG, (g and h) schematic and optical image of the UV radiation level detection system powered by an ENTENG, (i) current flowing across the UV sensor and the optical images of the LEDs at UV intensities of 0, 5, 12.5, 17.5 and 25 W m−2. This figure has been adapted from ref. 111 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Demonstration of a real-time monitoring of the UV light by the TFE-TENG during human motion, (b) device structure, (c) working principle of the TFE-TENG excited by hand tapping, (d) output voltage under varying load resistances (1 kΩ to 10 GΩ) and frequencies (0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 Hz). Three working regions are marked as zones I, II, and III. (e) Output voltage under different light intensities of 375 nm UV light, and (f) a real-time dynamic voltage response and recovery curves under 31.92 mW cm−2 of 375 nm UV light illumination. This figure has been adapted from ref. 114 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Fabrication process of the self-powered UV photodetector, (b) the dependence of output current, and (c) responsivity of the self-powered photodetector on UV light illumination with various power intensities. This figure has been adapted from ref. 115 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. (d) Device structure of a self-powered and organometallic halide perovskite photodetector, (e) the output voltage under a solar stimulator at 100 mW cm−2. This figure has been adapted from ref. 116 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Basic working principle of a PENG. (i) Crystal structure of ZnO. (ii) Piezo potential formation in compression and tension mode.126	 

 	Fig. 13  Device structure and the output voltage under direct compression (a) without UV radiation (b) with UV radiation. (c) Energy band diagram (i) without surface passivation, (ii) with surface passivation of ZnO NRs. Output voltage of a surface passivated ZnO NRs based PENG (d) without UV illumination and (e) with UV illumination.131 (f) Integrated UV sensor with PZT based PENG, (g) photo response of an ZnO NW UV sensor powered by PENG, and (h) voltage vs. UV light intensity. This figure has been adapted from ref. 133 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Flexibility of Zn2+–HFP film, (b) device structure, (c) finger touch response of the device, (d) charging of capacitors by PENG, (e) dependence of output voltage and power on the external variable load, (f) blue LEDs glowing with finger touch, (g) PENG as a UV sensor, (h) I–V characteristics of the UV detector, and (i) change of current measured with turning on and off the UV source.137	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Structural design of a TMENG integrated UV PD, (b) TMENG design, (c) measured output voltage of TMENG with respect to temperature difference, (d) I–V characteristics of a Au/ZnO/Au PD at different intensities of UV light, (e) current measured as a function of temperature difference at different UV intensities, (f) device on a human wrist, (g) I–V, and (h) I–T characteristics of Ag/ZnO:PVDF/Ag PD at different intensities of UV light, (i) stability test of the integrated device.140	 

p–n homojunction	p–n ZnO nanowire	325 nm	—	30 ms/50 ms	—	
49

p-ZnO(Li,N):n-ZnO	—	18 μA W−1	—	—	
43

p-ZnO(Ag):n-ZnO	360 nm	1 × 103 μA W−1	3.9 s/4.6 s	—	
44

NR–NR ZnO	—	2.45 mA W−1	4.78 s/0.33 s	4.17 × 109 Jones	
147

p–n heterojunction	p-GaN:n-ZnO	325 nm	—	20 μs/219 μs	—	
63

p-GaN:n-ZnO	358 nm	0.68 mA W−1	—	—	
64

n-ZnO/p-NiO	350 nm	0.415 mA W−1	7.5 s/4.8 s	—	
148

Cl–ZnO NRs/DMSO–PEDOT:PSS	365 nm	0.8 mA W−1	0.03 s/0.032 s	1.12 × 1010 Jones	
149

p-Te/n-TiO2	350 nm	84 mA W−1	0.772 s/1.492 s	3.7 × 109 Jones (at 300 nm)	
150

p-Te/n-ZnO2	300 nm	387 mA W−1	2.46 s/1.75 s (350 nm)	4 × 1010 Jones	
150

n-TiO2/p-NiO	350 nm	42 μA W−1	1.2 s/7.1 s	1.1 × 109 Jones	
151

Ag/Cl:ZnO/PEDOT:PSS/ITO	365 nm	2.33 mA W−1	28 ms/23 ms	1.54 × 1010 Jones	
152

n-SnO2/p-CuZnS	300 nm	1.6 mA W−1 (315 nm)	0.045 ms/1.17 ms	5.41 × 1011 (0.05 V)	
153

n-ZnO:p-NiO	325 nm	0.493 mA W−1	1.38 μs/10 μs	—	
65

p-CuSCN:n-ZnO	370 nm	0.02 A W−1	—	—	
66

p-PANI:n-MgZnO	250 nm	160 μA W−1	—	1.5 × 1011 Jones	
67

p-PANI:n-TiO2	320 nm	3.6 mA W−1	3.8 ms/30.7 ms	—	
68

p-Ga2O3:n-ZnO	254 nm	0.76 mA W−1	0.179 s/0.272 s	—	
69

p-NiO:n-TiO2	365 nm	5.66 mA W−1	0.1 s/0.1 s	5.4 × 1011 Jones	
71

p-GaN:n-Ga2O3	365 nm	54.43 mA W−1	0.14 s/0.08 s	1.23 × 1011 Jones	
75

p-GaN:n-Ga2O3(Sn doped)	254 nm	3.05 A W−1	0.018 s/0.018 s	1.69 × 1013 Jones	
78

SnO2:CsPbBr3	300 nm	10 mA W−1	0.03 ms/1.94 ms	2.6 × 1011 Jones	
85

PEDOT:PSS/Cs3Bi2I9−xBrx	375 nm	15 mA W−1	40.7 ms/27.1 ms	—	
90

PEDOT:PSS/Ga2O3	245 nm	2.6 A W−1	0.34 ms/3 ms	2.2 × 1013 Jones	
70

p-PANI:n-Ga2O3	—	21 mA W−1	—	1.5 × 1011 Jones	
91

Schottky junction	ZnO(Sb):Au	325 nm	—	100 ms	—	
95

TiO2/Au/TiO2	365 nm	1 A W−1	0.37 s/6.6 s	—	
96

BeZnO:(Ti/Au)	355 nm	2.5 μA W−1	35 μs/880 μs	—	
97

Ag NW/TiO2	350 nm	1.1 mA W−1	2 ms/47 ms	—	
154

MgxZn1−xO:Au	330 nm	2.22 mA W−1	0.23 μs/92 μs	4.4 × 1011 Jones	
98

Au/Ga2O3	254 nm	0.01 mA W−1	1 μs/64 μs	—	
99

Graphene/ZnO:Al	365 nm	0.039 A W−1	37 μs/330 μs	—	
28

Graphene/Si	375 nm	0.2 A W−1	4 ns/12 ns	1.6 × 1013 Jones	
100

Nanogenerator	TENG:ZnO NW	UV	—	—	—	
111

TFE-TENG:ZnO NP	375 nm	—	1.25 s/1.84 s	—	
114

Glass/ITO/PDMS/airgap/TiO2/Ni/glass/ITO	UV	280 A W−1	18 ms/31 ms	—	
115

TENG:MAPbI3–TiO2	UV	7.5 V W−1	<80 ms	—	
116

PEN/Au/ZnO NR/Al2O3	325 nm	—	—	—	
131

PENG (PZT):PD (ZnO NW)	UV	—	—	—	
133

P(VDF–HFP)/Zn2+	330 nm	—	—	—	
137

TMENG (n-Bi2Se3, p-Bi2Te3):PD (Ag/ZnO:PVDF/Ag)	350 nm	2.18 × 10−4 A W−1	14.64 s/4.97 s	6.33 × 107 Jones	
140


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
