Ionogels, ionic liquid based hybrid materials   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CS00059K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CS00059K
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 907-925Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsIonogels, ionic liquid based hybrid materials†

        
          
            Jean 
            Le Bideau
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lydie 
            Viau
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            André 
            Vioux
          
          
        
      *b
aInstitut des Matériaux Jean Rouxel (IMN), Université de Nantes - CNRS, 2 rue de la Houssinière, BP 32229, F44322 Nantes, France. E-mail: Jean.LeBideau@cnrs-imn.fr;   Tel: +33 240 373 919
bInstitut Charles Gerhardt de Montpellier, UMR 5253 CNRS-UM2-ENSCM-UM1, Université Montpellier 2, Place Eugène Bataillon Montpellier, cc1701, F34095, France. E-mail: André.Vioux@univ-montp2.fr;   Tel: 33 4 67 14 39 70
Received 
      30th July 2010
    First published on 22nd December 2010AbstractThe current interest in ionic liquids (ILs) is motivated by some unique properties, such as negligible vapour pressure, thermal stability and non-flammability, combined with high ionic conductivity and wide electrochemical stability window. However, for material applications, there is a challenging need for immobilizing ILs in solid devices, while keeping their specific properties. In this critical review, ionogels are presented as a new class of hybrid materials, in which the properties of the IL are hybridized with those of another component, which may be organic (low molecular weight gelator, (bio)polymer), inorganic (e.g.carbon nanotubes, silicaetc.) or hybrid organic–inorganic (e.g.polymer and inorganic fillers). Actually, ILs act as structuring media during the formation of inorganic ionogels, their intrinsic organization and physicochemical properties influencing the building of the solid host network. Conversely, some effects of confinement can modify some properties of the guest IL, even though liquid-like dynamics and ion mobility are preserved. Ionogels, which keep the main properties of ILs except outflow, while allowing easy shaping, considerably enlarge the array of applications of ILs. Thus, they form a promising family of solid electrolyte membranes, which gives access to all-solid devices, a topical industrial challenge in domains such as lithium batteries, fuel cells and dye-sensitized solar cells. Replacing conventional media, organic solvents in lithium batteries or water in proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells (PEMFC), by low-vapour-pressure and non flammable ILs presents major advantages such as improved safety and a higher operating temperature range. Implementation of ILs in separation techniques, where they benefit from huge advantages as well, relies again on the development of supported IL membranes such as ionogels. Moreover, functionalization of ionogels can be achieved both by incorporation of organic functions in the solid matrix, and by encapsulation of molecular species (from metal complexes to enzymes) in the immobilized IL phase, which opens new routes for designing advanced materials, especially (bio)catalytic membranes, sensors and drug release systems (194 references).
Jean Le Bideau
Jean Le Bideau (born 1965) obtained his Materials Science Degree from the Université de Nantes (France), and then joined the Institut des Matériaux de Nantes under the supervision of Professor Jean Rouxel, where he received his PhD in 1994. After two years stay at Michigan State University (USA) under the supervision of Professor Daniel G. Nocera, he moved to the Université de Montpellier (France) as Associate Professor, and returned in 2008 to the Université de Nantes as full Professor. His research is aimed at building low dimensional organic–inorganic materials with specific confinement effects. Since 2003, he focuses his research on sol–gel chemistry in ionic liquids, more specifically on the properties of the resulting confined ionic liquids.
Lydie Viau
Lydie Viau earned a degree in chemical engineering in 2000 from the Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Procédés et d'Ingénierie Chimiques d'Aix-Marseille (France) and a PhD degree in organometallic chemistry in 2003 under the supervision of Dr Hubert Le Bozec at the University of Rennes. She spent one year at the University of Canberra (Australia) and one year at the University of Nantes (France) before joining the group of Professor André Vioux at the Institut Charles Gerhardt in Montpellier (France). Her current research interest mainly focus on the development of ionogels based on silica and polymers suitable for catalysis, drug delivery, electrolyte membranes.
André Vioux
André Vioux studied chemistry at the University of Montpellier and completed his PhD in coordination chemistry in 1981 under the supervision of Prof. Robert Corriu. In 1983–84 he worked at the University of Paris 6 on sol–gel chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Jacques Livage. In the late 80's, he developed some new approaches to out-of-equilibrium ceramics by thermal conversion of silicon-containing polymer resins at the University of Montpellier, where he has been full Professor since 1992. Over the last decades he has focused his research on new ways to inorganic–organic hybrid materials and on sol–gel processing in unusual media.
1. Introduction
Ionic liquids (ILs) are organic salts which exhibit low melting temperature, by convention below 100 °C. They consist of only ions; their properties are strikingly different from those of molecular liquids. One of the most important properties is negligible vapour pressure (and generally thermal stability and non-flammability). Actually, the physicochemical properties of ILs can be tuned by the choice of the anion-cation pair, which opens millions of possibilities.1,2 ILs have been widely used by electrochemists for a long time, as a result of their high ionic conductivity (within 10−4 to 8.10−2 S cm−1 around room temperature) and their wide electrochemical potential window (which can be as high as 5.7 V between Pt electrodes).3,4 A renewed interest for such electrolytes, which prove to be high-performance over a wide range of temperatures (typically up to 200–300 °C), has been triggered by the topical demand in advanced electrochemical devices, such as actuators, lithium batteries, electric double-layer capacitors, dye-sensitized solar cells and fuel cells.5
Moreover, the unique combination of non-volatility and favourable solubilising characteristics of ILs has motivated a growing interest as a replacement for organic solvents, and more generally of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), in many industrial applications like catalysis6,7 and extraction.8 Actually, negligible vapour pressure allows easy retrieval of the final products by distillation or by using biphasic chemical processes, without degradation or loss of solvent by evaporation and, consequently, an easy recycling. Thus, the use of ILs appears sustainable and they have been claimed (maybe too loosely) as “green” solvents. To what extent ILs are actually environment friendly is in debate nowadays. Nevertheless benign ILs have been recently synthesized from biomolecules.9,10 Anyway, considerable developments have been carried out in organic chemistry, especially in the field of homogeneous catalysis by organometallic complexes and biocatalysis, as in many cases ILs bring about some improvement of catalyst efficiency and selectivity.11–13
On the other hand, although ILs easily dissolve inorganic species as well, their use as solvents in inorganic chemistry is much more recent. Actually, they have proved to be an innovative reaction media, especially in metal electrodeposition,14 “ionothermal” syntheses (ILs enable reaction temperatures above 300 °C without autoclaving)15,16 and sol–gel.17 There have been numerous studies on the controlled growth of nanoparticles in ILs, especially metal nanoparticles in relation to their catalytic activity in organic reactions.18 The use of ILs in the preparation of a wide range of inorganic (and hybrid) materials (including silicas, organosilicas, metal oxides, metal chalcogenides, metal salts, open-framework structures, nanostructured metals and alloys etc.) has been recently reviewed.19–21
The growing use of ILs in the materials field originates from their unique structural and physicochemical features. The local organisation of ILs (or ILs containing solutes) involves fluxional ion aggregates that are stabilized by ionic interactions as well as hydrogen bonds and van der Waals forces.22 A short overview on physicochemical properties of ILs, which sets the background of all applications based on ILs, is given in the first part of the article in the form of a tentative outline of the current understanding of structure-properties relationships.
There is currently a challenging need for immobilizing ILs in solid devices, while keeping their unique properties. To this purpose, one possibility is to impregnate a support, the IL being used as an adsorbed film. This approach, which is beyond the scope of this article, is well illustrated by the current development of supported IL catalysis (SILC), in which metal catalysts are immobilized within IL films supported on silica beads, resulting in free flowing powders that are particularly suitable for continuous fixed-bed reactors. SILC has been widely reviewed.23,24 Another way of immobilization involves the formation of a three-dimensional network which percolates throughout the IL and is responsible for the solid-like behaviour of the resulting material, called ionogel (or ion gel). Actually, if any gel may be regarded as solid and liquid phases percolating throughout each other, here the specificity is the negligible vapour pressure and the thermal stability of the liquid phase, which makes ionogels stable materials over time and allows for using them up to temperatures much higher than ambient.
The various types of ionogels may be separated into physical and chemical gels. In physical gels, the internal 3-D network is cross-linked through weak (reversible) interactions (e.g.hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, crystallite junctions etc.), whereas in chemical gels the cross-linkage results from covalent bonding. Physical gels can be obtained by using an organic gelator (molecular species of low molecular mass or polymers as well) or a divided solid (e.g. fumed silica particles, carbon nanotubes) which coagulate the whole assembly. As a matter of fact, free-standing membranes can be prepared by incorporating an IL into a polymer.25 However, physical gels are often in the form of jellies, slurries or pastes, or at the least, present a limited mechanical solidity. Another possibility is to create chemical gels, by confining the IL in a covalently interconnected network. Typically, the chemical cross-linking of the above mentioned polymers results in mechanically resistant organic matrices. Alternatively, chemical gels based on inorganic oxide matrices may be prepared by sol–gel synthesis from an alkoxide precursor. Interestingly, the structural and textural properties of the inorganic matrix may be strongly influenced by the presence of the IL.17 A third way, which has just emerged, involves nanocomposite matrices in which the polymer or biopolymer network is cross-linked via covalently bonded oxide nanofillers generated in situ by sol–gel.26,27 The different ways of obtaining organic, inorganic or nanocomposite ionogels are reviewed in the second part of the article.
It is worth underlining that the intrinsic hybrid character of ionogels relies on the intimate combination of an IL and a solid-like network. The properties of ionogels are expected to derive both from those of the IL and those of the component forming the solid-like network. As mentioned above, this component may be organic (polyethylene oxide, cellulose etc.), inorganic (carbon nanotubes, silicaetc.) or organic–inorganic (silsesquioxaneetc.). However, properties may be affected by the nanometre scale assembly. This is the case in some ionogels based on organic polymers, in which only one glass transition is observed at a temperature (Tg) lower than that of the pure polymer and higher than that of the pure IL.28 This behaviour is typical of plasticizing effects.29 The effects of confinement that are observed in inorganic ionogels are much more specific. Actually, physicochemical properties of the IL, as phase transitions and molecular dynamics, may be significantly modified by the confinement in the nanopores of the host matrix. These specific confinement effects are presented in the third part of the article.
Ionogels, which keep the main properties of ILs except outflow, considerably enlarge their array of applications. Some of these applications, which range from solid electrolytes to drug release to catalysis (Fig. 1), are reviewed in the fourth part of the article. They are generally based on the intrinsic properties of ILs, such as ionic conductivity, drug activity and solvent ability. These properties can be adjusted to specific tasks by the choice of the anion-cation combination. Blending adds a further possibility of tuning. Moreover, the encapsulation of designed molecules (catalysts, sensing molecules, fluorescent metal complexes etc.) in the immobilized IL phase opens infinite possibilities of functionalization. The host matrix and its interactions with IL ions bring their own contribution to the whole functionality. Finally, polymer tractability as well as versatility of sol–gel in shaping allows easy adaptations to a wide range of devices.
 Fig. 1  Ionogels, multi-purpose hybrid materials. 
2. Relationships between structure and physical–chemical properties of ILs
ILs can be defined as aprotic or protic, depending on the nature of cation. The former class arises from quaternization reactions. Typically aprotic ILs involve organic cations as imidazoliums, pyridiniums and phosphoniums (Fig. 2). Protic ILs arise from a proton transfer to the same site occupied by an alkyl group in aprotic ILs. Note that this transfer between a Brønsted acid (AH) and a Brønsted base (usually an amine) is equilibrated, which implies the presence of some residual neutral species.30 However, the displacement of equilibrium towards ion formation may be maximised using 2:1 or 3:1 acid–base ratios. Indeed the oligomeric anionic species (A2H− or A3H2−) that formed are weaker bases than the monomeric anion (A−), because of solvation by the additional acid molecules.31,32 The fluidities, and attendant conductivities, of protic ILs tend to be much higher than those of aprotic ILs.33 Within a given family of ILs, the physicochemical properties can be tuned by the choice of the anion (e.g. hydrophilicity, Fig. 2). Typically halide anions can be exchanged by metathesis reaction or converted into complex anions by Lewis acid addition (Fig. 3).34
 Fig. 2  Some examples of cations and anions used in the formation of aprotic ILs and changes of water miscibility with anion type. 
 Fig. 3  Typical preparations of imidazolium ILs by metathesis reaction and Lewis acid addition. 
However, even if the preparation of ILs involves quite simple organic chemistry, their purification is far from being straightforward, since both distillation and crystallization can not be easily used. Then, small amounts of impurities have been shown to dramatically influence their properties. Accordingly, since the development of purification methods of water-stable and air-stable ILs is relatively recent, reliable data on their physicochemical properties are still incomplete, despite a huge number of reports. A comprehensive overview of physicochemical properties of ILs is far beyond the scope of this article. The only purpose here is to give the non-specialist reader a glance at the current approaches to rationalize the fundamental physicochemical properties of ILs.
Among the interactions taking place in ILs, Coulombic interactions are predominant, insuring their high cohesive energy and, therefore, their extremely low vapour pressure. There are evidences of ionic association in ILs and, consequently, all ions could not be available to contribute to conductivity. Typically, ion pairs, if sufficiently long lived, appear neutral in the electric field. A fundamental point relies in the balance between anion-cation interaction and their respective volume.35,36
The empirical Walden's rule connects conductivity per mole of charge carrier Λ = σVe (where σ is the specific conductivity in S cm−1 and Ve is the volume per equivalent) to the fluidity (i.e. the reciprocal viscosity η−1) of the electrolyte medium, stating that Λη = C, where C is a temperature dependent constant. A way of evaluating the concept of “ionicity” in ILs (i.e. the effective fraction of ions available to contribute to ionic conduction) would be to compare the Walden plot of ILs (i.e. the logarithmic plot of Λ vs. η−1) to that of a so-called ideal electrolyte solution (where the ions are assumed to be fully dissociated), typically a 0.01 M aqueous KCl solution. However, one has to keep in mind that the Walden's rule applies to infinitely diluted electrolyte solutions. Nevertheless, quite unexpectedly, the Walden plot of ILs, which are the very opposite extreme from diluted electrolyte solutions, discloses excellent correlation between viscosity and conductivity.35 Deviations from the Walden rule (Fig. 4),37 have been discussed in term of “ionicity” (from “good” to “poor” ILs and non-ILs),35 as a decrease in “ionicity” of ILs should bring about an increasing deviation from the so-called ideal KCl line (slope 1 through the origin).
 Fig. 4  (a) Walden plot of log(molar conductivity, Λ) against log(reciprocal viscosity, η1), which includes the classication for ILs proposed by Angell et al.35 and (b) a close-up view of the region occupied by typical aprotic ILs. The solid line indicates the ideal line for a completely dissociated strong electrolyte aqueous solution (KClaq.). Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. 
Actually, the Walden plot represents a qualitative approach. Other authors proposed a more quantitative approach by defining the self-dissociativity of ILs as the molar conductivity ratio (Λimp/ΛNMR), calculated from the molar conductivity measured by the electrochemical impedance method (Λimp, Λ in the Walden plot approach) and that estimated by use of pulse-field-gradient spin echo (PGSE) NMR, ionic self-diffusion coefficients ΛNMR.38 The molar conductivity (ΛNMR) can also be calculated from the ionic self-diffusion coefficients (D+ and D−), using the Nernst–Einstein equation, which for a 1:1 salt can be written as: (1)where NA is the Avogadro number, e is the electron charge on each ion carrier, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. This statement is based on the assumption that every diffusing species detected by PGSE-NMR contributes to the molar conductivity. On the other hand, Λimp is related to the migration of charged species in an electric field. Thus, the Λimp/ΛNMR ratio would reflect the “ionicity”. Note that the diffusion coefficients of each ion are given by the Stokes–Einstein equation: (2)where r is the “effective” ionic radius. Interestingly, if one substitutes these diffusion coefficients into the above Nernst–Einstein equation, one obtains a relationship in the form: (3)Actually, this relationship provides a refinement of the Walden plot which takes into account the radius (i.e. the volume) of the conductive species. “Ionicity” was estimated from the vertical distance of the data points to the reference KCl line for a range of aprotic ILs. A relative good agreement with Λimp/ΛNMR was obtained.39
Finally, a measurement of the “ionicity” of ILs would be provided by the effective ionic concentration (Ceff), which is the product of Λimp/ΛNMR and the molar concentration. For 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium ILs [CnMIm][TFSI], Ceff was found to decrease from 3.1 to 1.5 × 10−3 mol cm−3 as the number of carbon atoms n in the alkyl chain increases from 1 to 8. This decrease in “ionicity” cannot be explained in terms of Coulombic interactions, but it can be understood considering the interactions between the alkyl chains. Actually, small to wide angle X-ray scattering (SWAXS) evidenced the occurrence of nanoscale structural heterogeneities whose sizes depend on the length of the alkyl chain and are related to chain segregation into nano-domains.40 Interestingly, computer simulations predicted structuring in a manner that is analogous to microphase separation between polar and nonpolar domains.41 Thus, the short-range structuring of ILs arises from a balance of long-range (Coulombic) and short-range (hydrogen bonding, van der Waals, dipole–dipole, π–π) interactions. As a consequence, ILs may be regarded as solvents, but also as supramolecular networks in which the introduction of other species takes place with the formation of inclusion-type compounds between the guest molecules and the host pre-organised medium (ILs).22 Note that the presence of H-bonded nanostructured networks, with polar and non-polar regions, may be responsible for the stabilisation of enzymes supported in ILs, which can maintain their functionality under very extreme denaturative conditions.13
Discussing the concept of “ionicity” is beyond the scope of this review. However, it is worth underlining here that Abbott proposed a model in which charge transport is governed by the mobility of holes at infinite dilution, which explains why the Walden rule has been found to be applicable to ILs, and why the application of the Stokes–Einstein equation allows accurate prediction of their conductivity.42 Actually, the ions are not closely packed, allowing some cavity volumes to exist, although at a very low (about 10−6) molar fraction. At a given temperature, these holes are of random size and location and undergo constant flux. An ion will be able to move only if there is a hole of suitable dimensions adjacent to it. The assumption is that this occurrence is rate-limiting for the ionic conduction.
3. Preparation of ionogels
Synthetic routes to ionogels fall into three categories depending on the nature of the solid-like network, which may be organic (using low molecular weight gelators or polymers), inorganic (typically using oxide nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes or oxide networks arising from sol–gel), or hybrid organic–inorganic (typically polymers reinforced with inorganic fillers) (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Different types of ionogels. 
3.1 Organic ionogels

3.1.1 Use of low molecular weight gelators. 
Low molecular weight gelators (LMWGs) are organic molecules, which are added in small quantities to liquids at elevated temperature and then induce physical gelation upon cooling. Actually LMWGs are able to self-assemble in solution through supramolecular bonding such as hydrogen bonding, π–π interactions or electrostatic interactions.
Thus, Kimizuka et al. studied the gelation of ether-containing ILs by the addition of L-glutamic acids or carbohydrates such as β-D-glucose, α-cyclodextrin.43 Formation of fibrous nanostructures was observed due to strong interactions between carbohydrates and ether groups. Shinkai used a cholesterol based compound known to aggregate by one-dimensional stacking of the cholesterol moieties.44 However, this molecule turned out to be poorly soluble in ILs; accordingly acetone co-solvent was needed. Yanagida and co-workers reported ionogels arising from an imidazolium IL and N-benzyloxycarbonyl-l-isoleucyl aminooctadecane as a gelator. They applied these electrolyte gels to the fabrication of a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) which showed light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 5% and high temperature durability.45 Hanabusa et al. synthesized clyclo(dipeptides) gelators from aspartame which allowed gel formation of a wide variety of ILs, including imidazolium, pyridinium, pyrazolidinium, piperidinium, morpholinium and ammonium salts, by using less than 1 wt% of gelator.46 Recently the first organometallic gelator, a pyridine-bridged bis(benzimidazolylidene)-palladium complex, proved efficient in the gelation of a variety of ILs.47Gelation was shown to involve π-stacking, van der Waals interactions and metal-metal bonding. Dong et al. used bis(4-acylaminophenyl)methane and bis(4-acylaminophenyl)ether with varied acyl chains to gelify imidazolium ILs.48 The phase transition temperatures of the gels increased with an increase of the acyl chain length of the gelators, whereas the conductivities of ionic-liquid gels decreased. However, the differences in conductivities between the gels and corresponding bulk ILs were within one order of magnitude.


3.1.2 
            Polymer gels. 
The use of polymers to immobilize ILs in the form of free-standing membranes which combine the mechanical flexibility of a polymer and the characteristic conductivity of ILs has been widely developed, particularly as materials for electrochemical devices. Many gelled systems are obtained simply by swelling a polymer in an IL49 or mixing the polymer and the IL together with a co-solvent which is subsequently removed. Another route is the polymerization of monomers in an IL used as a solvent, but the loss of miscibility above a certain degree of polymerization may be a limitation.50
Of course, the key point is the miscibility between the IL and the polymer.29 However, numerous ILs have been reported to act as plasticizers, by lowering the glass transition temperature (Tg) which thus provides flexibility. Thus, the outstanding compatibility of imidazolium salts with poly(methyl methacrylate)s (PMMA) has been reported.28,50,51Fig. 6 illustrates the improvement in thermal stability of PMMA ionogels compared with that of PMMA itself, despite of a decrease in the Tg with the incorporation of IL ([C4MIm][TFSI]). However, poly(ethylene oxide)s (PEO) and fluoropolymers and copolymers, as sulfonated tetrafluoroethylenes (Nafion®) and poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene)s (PVdF-HFP), have attracted the most interest as host polymers in electrolyte membranes for lithium batteries, fuel cells and dye-sensitized solar cells.52,53 Even in the case of complete miscibility,29 there is a limitation associated with the plasticizing effect which entails the loss of mechanical resistance on increasing the IL loading. Cross-linking permits the improvement of mechanical stability without losing significant conductivity.54–56
 Fig. 6  (a) TG curves for MMA network polymers with different mole fractions of dissolved [C2MIm][TFSI] and [C2MIm][TFSI] bulk at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. From ref. 50. (b) DSC thermograms for MMA network polymers with different mole fractions of dissolved [C2MIm][TFSI] and [C2MIm][TFSI] bulk at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. 
The limitation related to non miscibility is well illustrated by the confinement of ILs in epoxy-based networked polymers performed by curing epoxy resins with an amine in the presence of an IL.57 The materials obtained exhibited threshold behaviour at 40 wt% loading of IL, moving from insulating with a high Young's modulus to ion conducting with a low Young's modulus, which reflected the transition from discrete microdroplets to a percolating phase of IL in the polymer network. Accordingly, the IL was easily extracted with acetone by means of Soxhlet extractor at high IL loading (> 40 wt%), whereas it was retained at lower IL loading.
The obstacle of non miscibility is hard to bypass (e.g. by using the polymerization of IL-based microemulsions),58 as the long-term operation of the membranes remain subjected to the risk of some leakage of IL. On the other hand, in some cases cross-linked resins with permanent macroporosity could be prepared by using the IL as a porogen solvent.59 Another interesting way to take advantage from non miscibility is the use of some polymer-IL binary systems that exhibit phase separations depending on external stimuli (as temperature) to access to “smart” ionogels. Thus, poly(benzylmethacrylate) (PBzMA) and its copolymers exhibit lower critical solution temperature (LCST)-type phase separation in common hydrophobic ILs.60 Moreover, cross-linked PBzMA gels show reversible and discontinuous volume phase transition in [C2MIm][TFSI] with the change in temperature. Lodge et al. reported the self assembly of tri-block copolymers that alternated soluble and insoluble polymer blocks and yielded transparent thermoreversible ionogels (Fig. 7).61,62 The recent application of ionogels derived from tri-block copolymers as gate dielectric in polymer thin-film transistors evidences high potential in flexible electronics.63 The key point is that ionogels are both printable and have tremendous specific capacitances, in excess of 10 μF cm−2, which is 500 times as high as many typical dielectrics and 10 times as high as some other recently reported dielectric layers.
 Fig. 7  An ABA triblock copolymer with soluble B block (blue) and insoluble A blocks (red) (left) self-assembles in the presence of an IL (+ and – symbols) to form an ion gel (center). Suitable choice of A block enables thermoreversible gelation when the A blocks become soluble at a higher temperature (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. 
Special mention has to be made of the use of biopolymers, as gelatin and polysaccharides, which provides sustainable materials, furnished with biomolecular functions.43,64,65 It is worth stressing here that the dissolution of high molecular weight polysaccharides, especially cellulose, is a challenge of great importance in sustainable chemistry context.66 ILs do offer a route to such an aim, thanks to the ability of some anions, as chloride at high concentration, to break the original intra- and inter-chain hydrogen bonding of polysaccharides.67 Typically, cellulose completely dissolves in water-soluble 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride on microwave pulse heating (120–170 °C).68 Solvation involves hydrogen bonding between the carbohydratehydroxyl protons and the chloride ions in a 1:1 stoichiometry, as demonstrated by 13C and 35/37Cl NMR relaxation measurements.69 Cellulose can be regenerated in water.68 Otherwise, gelation simply occurs by keeping the IL solution at room temperature for a few days under ambient humidity.70 Gels are similarly obtained from chitosan,71agarose,72 and starch73,74 or by mixing a solution of cellulose with starch or carrageenans.75,76

3.2 Inorganic ionogels

3.2.1 “Bucky” gels. 

Carbon nanotubes (“bucky” tubes) consist of a rolled-up graphene sheet with heganonally arranged sp2-hybridized carbon atoms and provide good electronic and optical properties. CNTs possess extraordinary mechanical, electrical and thermal properties, however one major drawback is that they are hard to process. One approach to increase the solubility and processability is to absorb organic molecules onto their surfaces.
In 2003, Aida and Fukushima found that single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) could be easily dispersed in imidazolium ILs, where heavily entangled bundles of carbon nanotubes were exfoliated to give highly dispersed, much finer bundles.77 Gelatinous materials were obtained by grounding the IL and SWNTs, followed by centrifugation to remove the excess of IL. Phase transition and rheological properties suggested that the gels are formed by physical cross-linking of the nanotube bundles, mediated by local ordering of the ILs rather than by entanglement of the nanotubes. The “bucky gels” thus obtained are easy to process into any shape. Another method included the heating and ultrasonication of CNTs in the presence of the IL at 90 °C.78 The dispersion mechanism for SWNTs in ILs is still unclear. A possible cation–π interaction between the surface of SWNTs and the imidazolium IL was postulated. However, recent experiments and simulation studies inferred that the IL interact with SWNTs through weak van der Waals interactions, cation–π or electrostatic interactions.79 Anyway, “bucky gels” opened a wide range of applications, as they combine electroconductive CNTs and ion conductive ILs.80


3.2.2 
            Silica-based ionogels. 

Silica-based ionogels can be obtained either by dispersion of silica nanoparticles into ILs or by sol–gel processing.
Dispersion of silica nanoparticles. 
Numerous studies reported a striking stabilization of metal nanoparticles in ILs, even in the absence of any stabilizers, such as surfactants or polymers.20 Nevertheless, bare silica colloids were shown to be unstable in ILs, leading to the formation of a close packed particulate network. This gelation of ILs in the presence of silica nanoparticles was first used by Graetzel to prepare thermally stable quasi-solid electrolytes.81 Later on, Honma studied the ionic conductivities of gels obtained using 10 wt% of [C4MIm][TFSI] and evidenced the importance of particles size on gelation.82 Studies on the mechanism responsible for the colloidal aggregation demonstrated a reaction-limited cluster aggregation, suggesting a moderate repulsive-interaction between the particles, which was not enough to stabilize the particles due to extremely high ionic strength and the resulting surface-charge screening.83
Sol–gel processing. 
The first sol–gel synthesis in an IL solvent was reported in 2000 by S. Dai et al., which prepared mesoporous silicas with high surface areas from a mixture of tetramethoxysilane (TMOS) and formic acid in [C4MIm][TFSI].84 Actually, the IL, which was removed at the end of the synthesis, was used as a template. Since this pioneering work, numerous sol–gel syntheses involving IL templates were reported.17,85,86 ILs proved to have significant influence on the structure of the resulting silica-based materials. The effect of ILs as drying control chemical additives was ascribed to the formation of a non volatile liquid film on the walls of pores which could protect them from the interface strains associated with the formation of a meniscus on evaporation.87 This would permit the pore walls to strengthen on ageing, before removing the IL by means of Soxhlet extraction or calcination thus giving access to highly porous structure.
Anyway, this approach is out of the scope of this review. Sol–gel processes involving silicon alkoxide precursors, in which the interstitial IL phase first present between colloidal particles is then entrapped as condensation cross-linking extends, should result in more intimate biphasic systems than the simple impregnation of oxide particles. In this view, Deng and co-workers reported the immobilization of a catalyst IL in silica gels prepared in the presence of HCl aqueous solutions,88,89 while some of us developed high ionic conducting solid membranes by adapting the non-aqueous sol–gel method of Dai.90–92 The latter way provided monolith ionogels, cast as pellets or rods, which turned out to be endowed both with the transparency and mechanical properties of silica, and the conductivity performances of ILs (about 3 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 200 °C).91 Recently, monolithic silica ionogels endowed with both ionic conductivity and electronic conductivity: were obtained by incorporating multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWNT).93 It is worth noting that the MWNT percolation was reached with a rather low loading (i.e. 3.6 wt%), and exhibited an electronic conductivity of 1.31 × 10−2 S cm−1 at room temperature.
Alternatively, the IL could be extracted from ionogels by polar solvents such as acetonitrile, then exchanged for a new IL phase.94 Care was taken to keep the solvent of extraction inside the material to avoid cracking and finally the solvent was replaced by the new IL. This method makes it possible to incorporate any (even sensitive to formic acid) metal complex within the ionogel, opening the route to many applications as sensors and display devices. Thus, an ionogel showing a very intense and highly monochromatic red photoluminescence under UV irradiation, was obtained by doping an europium(III) tetrakis β-diketonate complex into an imidazolium IL and by immobilizing the IL in a silica-like network.95,96
Derived from the above working up, ionogels could also be obtained by synthesizing the silica gel in a classical molecular solvent, then exchanging this solvent for an IL. Recently, this method was successfully applied by Taubert using a basic catalyzed sol–gel reaction.97,98 Dynamics and physical properties of the IL nanophase confined in silica-like matrices will be developed in next section.
Inorganic matrices other than silica. 
Quasi-solid systems arising from the mechanical mixing of inorganic particles as titania or caesium hydrogen sulfate and ILs have been used as electrolyte materials.99,100 Parallel to silicon alkoxides, sol–gel reactions of metal alkoxides in ILs were also investigated. They turned out to be an interesting route to oxide particles, with control of morphology and crystalline form.101 Thus, Dionysiou systematically studied the synthesis of highly porous titanium oxide particles with anatase crystalline structure from a titanium isoproxide precursor by hydrolytic sol–gel reaction at room temperature in the presence of water immiscible 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluorophosphate [C4MIm][PF6].102 However, anatase monoliths with a worm-like pore structure and large surface areas were prepared using [C4MIm][BF4] as a templating agent by a classical sol–gel method associated with a peptization process in the presence of an aqueous solution of HCl.103 Actually, the only report relevant to ionogels was the recent preparation of TiO2 gels from a mixed emulsion of 1-butyl-3-methyl-imidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide [C4MIm][TFSI], TiCl4, methanol and formic acid, which was ultra-sonicated at 25 °C, then aged and dried at 80 °C.104 These electrolyte materials showed stable ion conductivities over a wide range of temperatures, including the intermediate region of 100–200 °C, and thermal stability at 275 °C (conductivity of 10−2 S cm−1 at 275 °C). Tin dioxide translucent monolith ionogels were obtained by using a β-diketonato stabilized tin precursor.105 A major advantage of this precursor over commercially available SnCl4 was the possibility to use a wide range of ILs ([C4MIm][BF4], [C4MIm][PF6], [C4MIm][Br]), thanks to the chelating ligand on the tin precursor which permitted to control the polycondensation rate.

3.3 Composite (hybrid organic–inorganic) ionogels
To our knowledge, the association of molecular organogelators and inorganic nanoparticles has been hardly explored. However it is worth mentioning the latent chemically-cross-linked gel electrolyte precursors for quasi-solid dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC) reported by Kato et al.106 The gel electrolyte precursors consisted of silica or titania nanoparticles and a dicarboxylic acid (typically with a C16 chain) as the latent gelators. The viscosity of the precursor was low at first, but when the precursor was baked at 80 °C, it solidified immediately.
By contrast, the incorporation of inorganic nanoparticles in polymer ionogels is widely used, as it is well known to improve the mechanical properties. Accordingly, it is a way of counterbalancing the plasticizing effect of high IL loadings, while preserving flexibility and tractability of the resulting nanocomposite materials. It is worth mentioning here the use of imidazolium ILs as compatibilizers between apolar polymer chains and polar inorganic filler, as clays107 and silica108 (see also the specific case of carbon nanotubes109). Although this use does not enter the scope of the review, it sheds light on the role that may be played by ILs in some ternary polymer/inorganic filler/IL systems. Moreover, nanocomposite polymer electrolytes (NCPEs) have demonstrated enhanced ion conducting properties.110–114 Actually, inorganic oxide nanofillers have large specific surface areas covered with various Lewis acidic or basic groups. The interactions between these surface groups and the ionic species are most likely involved in the observed conductivity enhancement. Typically the creation of a large IL/oxide interface is thought to promote ion-pair dissociations (for instance by giving rise to specific interactions with the anion or the cation) and to provide some free volume for ions to diffuse. Moreover, mesoporous silica fillers lead to higher lithium transference numbers in electrolyte membranes for Li-ion batteries.114 Recently, an in situ sol–gel synthesis of silica nanofillers has been successfully used to prepare transparent and flexible electrolyte membranes.27 Indeed, the use of modified poly(methyl methacrylate)s (PMMA) bearing pendant trimethoxysilane groups and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) allowed immobilizing high loadings of IL, while silica nanofillers covalently bonded to the polymer chains provided mechanical strength. Note that the inorganic functionalisation of cellulose with siloxane groups, which can subsequently undergo polycondensation, was shown to similarly yield ionogels with hybrid organic–inorganic host matrices.26
4. Confinement effects
The confinement of ILs, where ion-wall interactions become important relatively to ion–ion interactions, can infer some changes in their physicochemical behaviour. The first insight into the effect of confinement is given by the thermal behaviour. Typical phase transitions disclosed on bulk ILs by DSC analysis (on heating after a fast cooling) comprise glass-transition temperature (Tg) (the compound passed from the glass state to a “subcooled liquid” phase), cold crystallization (Tcc; exothermic), and melting (Tm; endothermic). In silica ionogels, while glass transition is observed whatever the degree of confinement, no hint of any cold crystallization nor melting is observed for the highest degrees of confinement (i.e. the smallest space for the IL).91,92 Moreover, first-order transitions are clearly shifted. In ionogels, melting (Tm@pore) is shifted to lower temperatures, although the signal simultaneously broadens.115 Such a displacement of phase transition has been reported for many confined solvents, but the lowest shift observed with ILs is greater than the highest observed with molecular liquids (conversely with the viscosity behaviour—see below).116 This shift is commonly related to the melting temperature of the confined species (Tm), the pore diameter (d), the molar volume (Vm), the enthalpy of fusion ΔHf, the surface tensions at solid-substrate γss and liquid-substrate γls interfaces on the basis of the Gibbs–Thomson equation Tm – Tm@pore = α(TmVm/ΔHf)(γss − γls)/d.91,115 The dependence on the chemical nature of the host matrix is thus expected. Actually, it appears that there is a strong dependence of thermal behaviour on the chemical nature of both pore walls and IL ions.98 Note that CNTs offered an opportunity to observe unique crystalline organisation due to specifically strong C–H⋯F contact with the fluorinated anion in the crystal phase induced by the strong confinement degree.78,117 It is also noteworthy that related simulation studies of confinement of [C1MIm][Cl] confined between hydrophobic graphene sheets showed a transition at much higher temperatures than expected for the bulk IL, moreover at a distance of the “wall” of no less than 1.1 nm.118 This evidences the particularly important effect of the liquid-substrate affinity on transition temperature in the case of ILs (attractive forces increase the melting point of confined species; conversely, repulsive forces decrease it), concurrently with the degree of confinement (volume of confined species vs. volume of confinement) which decreases the melting point.119 Moreover, it is noteworthy that recent rheology studies on confined ILs between mica walls (SFA apparatus) showed strong IL-surface interaction below around 10 nm, i.e. below around 13 IL organized layers (depending on the nature of the IL, figures are given here for [C4MIm][TFSI]).120 As referred to the above mentioned DSC studies, this appears to be a limit below which confinement shows strong effects. Other recent rheological studies conclude at a lower viscosity enhancement for confinement of ILs as compared to that of confinement of non-polar molecular liquids,116 or more precisely to a strong lowering of the viscosity for [BMIm] based ILs confined between methylated mica walls compared to non-methylated parent walls.121

Solid state NMR spectroscopy gives further information on the molecular dynamics of confined ILs. From a general point of view, when increasing the temperature, the IL system transforms from the rigid lattice to more dynamic phenomena associated with the diffusive state: this change is accompanied by a line narrowing of the NMR signals, which normally takes place at the melting point in case of crystalline salts and at the glass transition temperature in case of amorphous materials. So, as a first approach, following the line width gives insights into the dynamics of IL. Whatever in polymer gels or silica confined ILs, confinement usually results in decreasing the temperature at which the line narrowing occurs (1H and 19F nuclei).91,122 This shows that the confinement studied did not inhibit ion dynamics.

1H NMR spectra of confined IL showed a relatively narrow signal without spinning on monolithic silica ionogels (Fig. 8a).123 Unusual for solids, this evidenced that liquid-like mobility was still enough to average the dipole–dipole and chemical shift anisotropy (csa) which were responsible for line broadening. A spinning rate as low as 400 Hz was enough to recover liquid-like resolution, although the signal was not as narrow as for bulk IL due to susceptibility gradient at the wall neighbourhood. Other studies on similar systems (weak interactions between confined IL and pore wall) pointed out an even better resolution, concluding to the absence of a noticeable wall effect.97 From the spectra observed without spinning and at a spinning rate of 400 Hz, it was concluded that the dynamics of the confined ionic liquid experienced only a slight slowing down. It is noteworthy that the above mentioned MAS NMR experiments probe short-range correlations, which is consistent with the distribution of chemical shifts at the wall neighbourhood. Relaxation-time measurements were used to probe longer spatial range correlations (Fig. 8b). 1H T1 relaxation times measured above the melting temperature showed similar T1 for confined and bulk IL, thus illustrating similar dynamics. Nevertheless, below the temperature of crystallisation of bulk IL, T1 parameter of confined IL exhibited values in the same range as above the crystallisation temperature, thus revealing that liquid-like behaviour was gained toward lower temperatures on confinement. Further proton and fluorine nuclear magnetic relaxation dispersion (NMRD) studies, widening space and time scales probed to 20 nm and 5 μs, respectively, suggested a translational diffusion of this confined cation and anion at the proximity of the flat pore surface. From a model, translational time (time during which an ion is correlated with the surface) and escape time (time during which the ion is not correlated to the surface) were measured and showed a decrease of the translational correlated time along with an increase of the ratio escape time/translational time when increasing the temperature.124PFG NMR studies showed also that confining an IL or confining an IL-based electrolyte (i.e. with addition of lithium salt) does not entail the ionic mobility.125
 Fig. 8  (a) 1H NMR room-temperature spectra of the pristine IL ([C4MIm][TFSI]) and a monolithic silica ionogel (IL/SiO2 = 0.5) at zero, 400 Hz and 3kHz spinning rates (asterisks indicate spinning sidebands). (b) 1H relaxation times vs. temperature of pristine IL (open symbols) and of a monolithic silica ionogel (IL/SiO2 = 0.5; black squares). Reprinted with permission from ref. 123. 
The ionic conductivity of silica ionogels with rigid porosity is of course of interest. While complex impedance spectroscopy (CIS) allows ionic conductivity measurements, ions transportations throughout the ionogel has been demonstrated with lithium battery prototypes as well as with solar cells.126 By means of CIS, the ionogels showed conductivity of the same order of magnitude as that of bulk IL. Typically, the conductivity of a monolithic ionogel was found to be roughly half that of the confined IL, for the same shape factor, which means very similar conductivities. The Arrhenius plots recorded between ca. −30 °C and +220 °C showed break slopes as reported by several studies.90–92,125 The origin of this break slope is not completely elucidated and could be related either to ion pairs dissociation or to the disappearance of wall-to-ions interactions, as seen by NMRD.124
Infra-red spectroscopy on silica based ionogels indicated no striking difference between the bulk and confined ILs.97 Nevertheless, in the case of imidazolium ILs with long alkyl chains, the shifts of the bands assigned to (CH2) disclosed some changes in the conformational order of the alkyl chain, which were ascribed to a more disordered conformation adopted on confinement compared with the bulk crystalline solid IL at room temperature.94 Similarly, Raman spectra disclosed that, after being confined in mesoporous silica, [C4MIm][Cl] was in the liquid form as early as 25 °C, whereas it was expected to melt at 70 °C.94 These results, which are consistent with DSC and NMR data, confirm that steric constraints at the wall neighbourhood prevent solid state organization of the IL at low temperature.83 Nevertheless, it has to be emphasized that the conclusions from the spectroscopic studies presented just above refer to confinement at no less than ∼6 nm but that a fluorescence red shift was observed recently in one study for smaller pore diameters, i.e. higher confinement.127

Luminescence spectroscopy was informative too. An unexpected confinement effect was observed specifically with a dicyanamide-based IL. Fluorescence emissions were recorded with different IL loadings; the emission intensity of a 25 wt% [C4MIm][N(CN)2] ionogel was found to be about 200 times stronger than that of bulk [C4MIm][N(CN)2]. This was tentatively attributed to the presence of strong π–π conjugations.94 It could be inferred that a specific arrangement of the ions at the wall neighbourhood led to a specific anion–anion arrangement, which in turn led to this unexpected fluorescence enhancement. Another indirect way to probe the physical feature of a confined species was to compare the luminescence spectrum of an europium(III) complex dissolved in an IL confined in a silica matrix with that of the same europium(III) complex dissolved in the bulk IL. No difference in crystal-field fine structure or in relative intensities could be observed in the spectra of the ionogel and the IL solution. This indicated that confinement of the europium(III)-doped IL had negligible influence on the structure of the europium(III) complex. The decay time turned out to be similar in the bulk (0.55 ms) and confined IL (0.52 ms).95 The luminescence decay times of others lanthanide(III) cations (samarium, neodymium, ytterbium, erbium, terbium) encapsulated in ionogels were similarly recorded. No significant difference between the decay times (confined IL or bulk) was observed, evidencing again the liquid-like behaviour of the confined IL.128
5. Applications
5.1 Electrolytic membranes
ILs are of considerable interest to implement advanced electrochemical devices, specifically energy devices, whose development is expected to address the topical challenges of renewable energy and global warming, as lithium batteries, fuel cells and solar cells. Actually, replacing conventional media, organic solvents in batteries or water in proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells (PEMFC), by low-vapour-pressure and non flammable ILs presents major advantages such as, among others, improved safety and operating temperatures higher than 100 °C. Immobilizing ILs within solid membranes gives access to all-solid devices, which are an industrial challenge for practical applications.


            Lithium-ion batteries. 

            Lithium batteries are expected to find a prominent role as electrochemical storage systems in renewable energy plants, as well as power systems for sustainable vehicles, such as hybrid and electric vehicles. However, scaling up the lithium battery technology for these applications is still problematic since issues such as costs, wide operational temperature and safety are still to be resolved. The latter point attracts a special attention since a too rapid discharge of a lithium battery or a short-circuit can result in overheating, rupture, and even explosion. The current development of all-solid IL-based lithium batteries may be regarded as a real breakthrough in the field (Fig. 9).129
 Fig. 9  Toward all-solid IL based lithium battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. 
Actually, IL-polymer systems, commonly referred to as gels in the literature, showed performances in term of number of cycling, rate of cycling and solid electrochemical interface formation which were similar to those obtained with non confined IL-based electrolytes.130 The confinement of a mixed salt (IL with lithium salt) within a poly(vinylidene fluoride)–hexafluoro propylene (PVdF–HFP) copolymer matrix has been intensively studied.131 It is here of importance to obtain flexible, thin (lowering the ohmic drop), mechanically resistant (avoiding short-cuts upon pressure between the positive and the negative electrode) membranes. It was shown that the conductivity in these polymeric matrices, e.g. PVdF–HFP membranes loaded with an electrolyte solution of LiTFSI in N-butyl-N-ethylpiperidinium N,N-bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide [PP24][TFSI], was on the order of 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature, which resembled that of the parent bulk electrolyte under the same conditions. However, an unexpected but potentially significant enhancement in Li transference number was observed in passing from the liquid to the membrane electrolyte system. Another polymer which was intensively studied for hosting lithium salt or ILs containing lithium salt is polyethylene oxide (PEO), in relation to its ability to solvate Li cation. The addition of IL to P(EO)20-LiTFSI systems resulted in an increase of more than one order of magnitude in ionic conductivity at room temperature (moving from salt-in-polymer to polymer-in-salt systems).132 In this case, with a N-butyl-N-methyl-pyrrolidinium [PY14] to lithium cations ratio of 3.2, the ionic conductivity of the polymer electrolyte reaches 2 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 40 °C. Moreover, a low temperature conductivity enhancement of the ILs containing-PEO electrolytes was pointed out, which was attributed to the formation of amorphous phases instead of PEO-lithium crystalline phases.
Another approach is the sol–gel hydrolysis-polycondensation of silicon alkoxide directly onto a porous electrode. This allows a full wetting of the porosity of the composite electrode as well as the simultaneous formation of a solid electrolytic separator.126 The concept allows single-step preparation of the assembly of the electrode and solid electrolyte separator and can be applied without specific adaptation to current thick electrode technology prepared by the widespread tape casting technique. Here the polarization, i.e. the voltage difference between charge and discharge, was less important with the ionogel electrolyte than with genuine IL-based electrolyte, which was attributed to the good wetting of the composite electrode by the ionogel. Moreover for LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 based electrodes, the discharge capacities obtained were ∼110 mAh g−1 and ∼105 mAh g−1 with the ionogel and IL based electrolytes resp., whereas with classical carbonated based electrolytes the capacities were found around 125 mAh g−1. Nevertheless, up to now the main drawback remains the low cycling rate (C/20 at RT). It is also interesting to note that the capacity of a battery with LiV3O8 as positive electrode and with PEO-PVdF confined IL-based electrolytes exhibited a (slight) increase, as referred to those observed for this cathode material in standard electrolytes.133 This result was attributed to a lower solubility of the electrode material in the IL-polymer electrolyte.



Fuel
            cells
          . 
Protic ILs can serve as proton carriers in fuel cell electrolytes (Fig. 10), thus giving access to conductivities exceeding 10 mS cm−1 under fully anhydrous conditions.134,135 For instance, ammonium salts can be used as protic electrolytes for fuel cells running above 80 °C.136 Actually, conventional PEMFCs require medium temperature operation in order to provide more efficient power generation and longer lifetime.137 Moreover, PEMFCs also require membranes efficiently separating both fuels. In this prospect, providing membranes with proton conducting ionic liquids (PCILs), non volatile and non degradable in the needed range of temperature, is the focus of intense research.138
 Fig. 10  IL based polymer electrolytes fuel cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. 
Most recent research has been devoted to PVdF-HFP, Nafion® and sulfonated polyimide ionogel-membranes. The latter ones have been recently studied with diethylmethylammonium trifluoromethanesulfonate for FC operating under nonhumidified conditions at intermediate temperatures. Using an IL weight loading as high as 80%, these membranes showed thermal stability (>300 °C), ionic conductivity (>10−2 S cm−1at 120 °C), mechanical strength and gas permeation comparable to those of hydrated Nafion®.139Nafion® membranes were probably the most studied for FC applications. In these membranes the choice of the IL and the version of Nafion® are important. The sensitivity of the choice of the PCIL is exemplified by the comparison of two ILs with the same diethylmethylammonium cation associated with either trifluoromethanesulfonate or TFSI anion: the first one showed good activity for FC electrodes reaction as well as relatively low ohmic drop, leading to open circuit voltage (OCV) of 1.03 V at 150 °C, whereas the second showed lower electrode activities, leading to an open circuit voltage of ca. 0.7 V.140 Modified Nafion® were also shown to be of interest. Thus confinement of trifluoromethanesulfonate triethylammonium in Nafion® neutralized with triethylammonium resulted in lower water uptake and improved thermal and mechanical stability as compared to the reference Nafion® membrane.141 The key role of ionomer-IL interactions on the proton transference number has been recently emphasized.135,142Polymer membranes based on PVdF-HFP were also developed. A marked decrease in conductivity, larger than what could be expected from the dilution of the conducting IL by the insulating polymer matrix, was ascribed to the morphology of the membrane and the interactions between the polymer matrix and the IL.143 Superacids like trifluoromethanesulfonic acid or N,N-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide were used to enhance proton conductivity. Unfortunately, strong interaction between HTFSI and parent IL (with the same anion) increased the viscosity and accordingly decreased the ionic conductivity.144 Also based on a fluorinated polymer, fluorohydrogenate ionic liquid based membranes showed OCV around 1.0 V at 130 °C with interesting conductivity at 34.7 mS cm−1 at 130 °C.145
Hybrid inorganic–organic nanocomposites were also investigated. Biopolymer composites were fabricated, aiming at increasing proton transport by blending a basic chitosan exchange membrane and basic oxide fillers such as CaO.146 Filling Nafion® with SiO2 particles led to an unexpected segregation into Nafion® domains with helical chains and hydrophilic domains where SiO2 particles were shown to be covered by a shell of PCIL.147
Finally, a recent work was reported on electrolyte membranes fully based on silica-derived ionogels.148Tetraethoxysilane/ethyl-triethoxysilane/trimethylphosphate and 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium-bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide were used as precursors. The sol was then cast onto one side of the Pt-loaded carbon serving as electrode. The resulting membrane showed good hydrogen permeability (2.7 10−12 mol cm−1 s−1Pa−1 for the 40 wt% [C4MIm][TFSI] at 150 °C). Nevertheless, the main drawback of such a membrane still resides in the occurrence of cracks which would “short-cut” the gas path.


Solar cells. 
Still in the sustainable development context, harvesting solar energy with a high yield is a major challenge because of the clean, inexhaustible and ready availability of the resource.149 In the ionogel prospect, physical gels obtained by mixingsilica nanoparticles as “gelator” to solidify IL-based electrolytes (with addition of KI and I2) resulted in enhanced performances of dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  All-solid dye sensitized solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. 
As a matter of fact, such ionogels were applied to DSCCs based on a ruthenium polypyridyl photosensitizer leading to 7% efficiency at AM 1.5 sunlight.81 Ionogels provide considerable benefits over bulk ILs since they enable the fabrication of flexible, all solid-state devices, free of leakage and available in varied geometries. At the borderline of ionogel, it is worth mentioning DSSCs in which the IL-based electrolyte wetted an array of TiO2 nanotubes perpendicular to a Ti foil, thus enhancing electron transfer. The photovoltaic conversion efficiency was of 3.6% under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight.150 Such an approach was similar to that carried out with IL filling the straight nanopores of alumina sandwiched between a counter electrode and a TiO2 electrode.151 Even though the electrochemically inactive Al2O3 wall occupies 50% of the electrolyte layer, the solar cell performances were the same as those with IL gelled with Al2O3 nanoparticles, where random ion paths were expected. Actually, the increase in performances was explained by straight ion diffusion and Grötthuss-type diffusions fabricated on Al2O3 walls.152 Similar devices based on ZnO nanoparticles and CNT layers at the electrolyte interface (thus creating a good continuous electrolytic junction) were tested.153 Fully organic ionogel electrolytes were also used, based on poly(vinylpyrrolidone), and showed an overall light-to-electricity energy conversion efficiency of 5.41% under irradiation of AM 1.5.154 Some studies were reported with the same objective with organic gelators, synthetic or natural, but the efficiency was lower than those already reported.155,156 It is worth noting that previous DSSCs based on volatile solvents showed the highest efficiency at 11%, but suffered from intrinsic volatility. Replacement of volatile solvents by ILs decreased efficiency down to 7% and showed long-time instability. However, the assemblies of eutectic ternary mixtures of iodide ILs with nanocrystalline TiO2 particles at one of the DSSC interfaces led to efficiency of 8.2% under AM 1.5 illumination.157 It is remarkable for our subject that association with oxide particles permitted to reach high efficiency as well as excellent stability, thus opening way to low cost DSSCs.


Electrochemical sensors and biosensors. 
Coll et al. described for the first time the preparation of PVC membranes containing [C4MIm][PF6] and polyazacycloalkane as ionophore for use as anion-selective electrodes and found a remarkable selective response to the highly hydrophilic anion sulfate.158 Pletnev, using the same concept, described the use of PMMA and PVC membranes containing bis(trifluoromethanesulfonimidate) salts of 1-butyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium and dodecylethyldiphenylphosphonium, [BDMIm][TFSI] and [DEDPP][TFSI], respectively. These ion-selective membranes demonstrated good and extremely stable responses to both cations and anions (including surfactants).159
Modified electrodes with bulky gels are characterized by a large surface area, excellent chemical and physical stabilities which make them ideal candidates for constructing sensors with high performance. Zhu was able to selectively detect dopamine even in the presence of ascorbic acid and uric acid using a glassy carbon electrode modified with a MWCNTs/[OMIm][PF6] gel.160 An electrode modified with a gel containing ferrocene filled with SWCNTs has been reported which efficiently catalyzed oxidation of H2O2 to O2 and reduction to H2O.161
ILs are known for their good biocompatibility with biomolecules and enzymes and they improve their reusability and stability. Thus, catalytically active proteins and enzymes were also confined for biosensors applications in order to achieve direct electron transfer.162 Some examples are based on the immobilization of enzyme-IL systems in chitosan163 or Nafion®.164 These membranes yielded suitable matrix for direct electrochemistry of HRP and hemoglobin (Hb). New hybrid organic–inorganic siloxane-based hydrogels entrapping IL have been recently developed for similar uses.26 Interestingly, an amperometric biosensor was obtained by coating the surface of a glassy carbon electrode with a silica ionogel film doped with HRP and ferrocene (IL:[C4MIm][BF4]).165 The resulting electrode had faster response in sensing hydrogen peroxide than with classic sol–gel film, with a detection limit for H2O2 of 1.1 μM. A more sophisticated system based on silica/RTIL/Nafion/carbon electrode was described where Hb could be adsorb onto the surface. This biosensor shows a stable, sensitive and fast response to oxygen.166
Bulky gels based electrodes can also be modified by catalytically active proteins like Hb,167 HRP168 or glucose oxidase.169 Closely related works using carbon nanotubes composites with gold170 or AuPt nanoparticles171 were also reported.


Actuators. 
CNT nanofillers are known to improve the mechanical properties of polymers and to endow them with electronic conductivity provided percolation threshold was reached. In 2005 Aida et al. reported the synthesis of the first generation of bucky-gel actuators, which worked in air, without any support or external electrolytes, and without deposition of a metallic electrode layer. The film was prepared through layer-by-layer casting of the electrode from a mixture of a fluorinated copolymer (PVdF-HFP), 4-methyl-2-pentanone, an IL and SWCNTs arising from high pressure CO conversion.172 However, the performances were limited by the robustness of the polymer, which also lowered the electrical conductivity and capacitance of the electrode layers. A second generation of actuators was reported by the same authors in 2009.173 These actuators comprised polymer-free CNT electrodes obtained using super-growth SWNTs arising from a water assisted chemical vapour deposition. Performances were increased, so that a displacement as large as 5 cm was observed at a frequency of 1 Hz, that is a ten fold increase to the performance of the first generation. Recently, elastic conductors were achieved from millimetre-long SWNTs, a fluorinated copolymer and a compatible IL, which could be made printable. Conductivity of more than 100 S cm−1 and stretchability of more than 100% were obtained. A rubber-like stretchable active-matrix display that showed good luminance characteristics was constructed from integrated printed elastic conductors, organic transistors and organic light-emitting diodes.174

5.2 Separation membranes
Besides their use as electrolytes, ILs are also well known for their ability to dissolve a wide range of species, from organic compounds to metal salts. The solubility of gases in ILs is of prior importance for using them as solvents for reactions (hydrogenation, hydroformylationetc.) or for the storage of gases.175 Emphasis was put on the outstanding ability to dissolve carbon dioxide.176 The use of ILs to separate gases benefits from huge advantages, as the absence of contamination of the gas stream (in relation to the low vapour pressure of ILs) and the possibility to work at higher temperatures than is in conventional absorption solvents.
Actually, the specific properties of ILs considerably broaden the range of separation applications, from metal ions separations to chromatography. The design of task-specific ions and the choice of the cation–anion combination permit one to tune the high or selective solvation ability and non miscibility in water or other solvents. However, the challenge to implement ILs in separation techniques is also to develop supported IL membranes, either by immobilizing ILs within polymer membranes or in porous inorganic supports.24
The operational stability of supported IL membranes based on hydrophilic polymers has been demonstrated.177 The nature of the supporting polymer membrane strongly affected the transport (i.e. permeation) rates and selectivity in the separation of organics.178,179 Ion selective polymer membranes involving ILs (typically phosphonium salts) as ion exchangers were successfully used in potentiometric sensors.159,180 In those cases, the hydrophobicity of the polymer (typically PMMA or poly(vinyl chloride)) could prevent spontaneous, non-specific ion extraction from the aqueous sample, while the IL acted as a plasticizer, improving the solubility and migration of analytes. The ability of ILs (typically phosphonium based ILs like Cyphos −104) to extract metal ions may find application in ionogels as well. Some recent examples include silica based ionogels for the extraction of Y(III),181 and alginate based ionogels for the extraction of Pd(II).182
In gas separation, ionogel polymer membranes were shown to increase selectivity compared with conventional polymer membranes (including those arising from polymerisable ILs). However, the IL was likely to be displaced at low differential pressure. This problem was overcome by using a combination of polymerisable IL with 20 mol% free RTILs to increase the compatibility between the liquid and solid phase while keeping good gas permeativity. These tailored membranes allowed gas separation with a CO2 permeability increased of ∼400%, and an improvement of CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 selectivity with respect to analogous membranes arising from only polymerisable ILs.183 It is worth stressing the efficient separation of CO2 from H2 at temperatures around 100 °C and the topical interest for applications as hydrogen production from syngas (an industrial mixture of CO and H2 which can be reacted with water to produce CO2 and more H2).184 Another recent result is the use of LMWG as 12-hydroxystearic acid to form gels which exhibit liquid-like CO2 gas transport ability as they are composed of 98.5% of IL.185
Hybrid organic–inorganic membranes which involve the dispersion of inorganic particles (typically zeolite) in the polymer matrix combine superior selectivity with excellent fabrication properties of polymer membranes.186 However, limited compatibility between inorganic and organic components may result in a lack of adhesion. The addition of IL both increased the permeability and proved to be an excellent compatibilizer, yielding defect-free membranes.
5.3 
          Catalytic
          membranes
        

          SILC, where the IL (which contains the catalyst) is immobilized as a thin film on high surface area supports, has been widely developed to circumvent viscosity and recyclability problems.23,24 In this case, reactants and products diffuse through the residual voids in pores which are coated with the liquid catalyst film.

Silica based ionogels were shown to provide alternative nanoreactors systems.24 The presence of two interpenetrated networks (silica and IL) allows free transport of reactants and products through the liquid phase, while pore diameters are small enough to prevent IL leaching. Actually, Deng et al. reported the enhanced catalytic performance of the carbonylation of aniline into ureas and carbamates in the presence of ionogels loaded with Rh(PPh3)3Cl and Pd(PPh3)2Cl2.89 The reactions were carried out without additional organic solvent in an autoclave at 135–180 °C under 5 MPa CO pressure. Pd salts were also encapsulated in silica based ionogels and apply as an effective catalytic system without leaching for Heck coupling reaction in the presence of toluene.187
ILs have recently demonstrated attractive performances as a reaction media in biocatalysis.13 The activity of biomolecules in ILs has been found to be comparable or higher than in conventional solvents, and enhanced enzyme stability has been reported. The first reports of applications of ionogels to biocatalysis seem promising. Thus, the activity of horseradish peroxidase (HRP) immobilized in ionogels was shown to be about 30-fold greater than that in silica gel without IL, with an excellent thermal stability.188 HRP was immobilized in ionogels prepared by acidic hydrolysis of TEOS in [C4MIm][BF4]. The enzyme was thought to be protected by the IL from the detrimental effect of ethanol during the synthesis, while the interconnected pore structure of ionogels would facilitate the internal diffusion of the substrate.
5.4 
          Drug release

Drug release has just emerged as a new application of ionogels. It is dealt separately as, contrary to the previous fields of applications, it is based on ionogels that are able to lose gradually the IL. In other words, whereas all the other applications require the complete stability of ionogels under the operating conditions, drug release involves the in situ delivery of the IL loading.
A common problem that exists with many active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) is their low solubility. As a result, much research is conducted on finding ways to improve drug solubility and availability. It has been demonstrated that ILs can dissolve compounds which are insoluble or sparingly soluble in water and organic solvent including cellulose and compounds having pharmaceutical activity. These studied were however limited by the toxicological issue of ILs. Some efforts have been conducted recently to obtain nontoxic and biodegradable ILs.189,190 Some ion constituents of ILs have biologically activity, such as ammonium cations which are well-known as antibacterial agents. Recently, new ILs have been created from APIs, some of them combining anionic and cationic APIs with biological activities that complement each other. These new IL drugs present promising advantages over usual solid APIs, which can suffer from polymorphic conversion, low solubility and low bioavailability associated with the solid form.
Actually, the availability of APIs is a key issue. A tremendous effort is currently being undertaken by the pharmaceutical industry to develop drug delivery systems in which the release of the active substance is controlled “on demand”. Drug carriers being considered as promising candidates include soluble polymers, microparticles made of insoluble or biodegradable natural and synthetic polymers, microcapsules, cells, lipoproteins, liposomes, and micelles. Silica matrices show high biocompatibility–biodegrability and resistance to microbial attack and they exhibit higher mechanical strength, enhanced thermal stability and negligible swelling in organic solvents, compared to most organic polymers. All these features make silica supports promising carriers for the drug delivery systems formulation. Several research groups have investigated both drug storage and delivery properties of ordered mesoporous silica such as MCM-41 and SBA-15 and of sol–gel silica materials.191 The use of ionogels for biological applications is very limited to-date. Lin was the first to report on the synthesis of mesoporous materials containing long alkyl chains antibacterial ILs and their use as controlled release delivery device.192 Recently some of us reported the synthesis of a new IL containing drug composed of an imidazolium cation and ibuprofenate anion.193 We succeeded in synthesizing new ionogels containing a high amount of ibuprofenate by a simple one-step sol–gel procedure. These ionogels were easily shaped and do not need any further process to achieve a final pharmaceutical form. The ibuprofen release was found to be governed by the inner and the outer surfaces of the ionogel, as well as the chemical nature of the surface. More recently Goto et al. reported the use of an IL-assisted microemulsion for transdermal delivery of acyclovir using isopropyl myristate, Tween-80 as a surfactant and span-20 as a co-surfactant.194
Conclusions and prospects
Ionogels form a new class of hybrid materials which are just emerging, but considerably increase the potential of ILs in such key areas as energy, environment and analysis. Basically, ILs are modularly tunable materials, on which, at least potentially, the properties of both cation and anion components can be independently modified. In ionogels, a further dimension in this “flexibility space” is offered by the unique combinations of chemical and physical properties addressable by their two-component nature. As shown in Fig. 12, designing both the guest IL phase and the host support allows the targeted synthesis of an ionogel which fits a specific task. It is worth stressing that functionalization of ionogels can be achieved by incorporation of organic functions in the host matrix, by modifying the IL ions and by encapsulation of functional molecules in the immobilized IL phase. In addition, inherent tractability of polymer and particulate sols makes it easy to shape ionogels in different geometries and laminated structures adapted to a specific device.
 Fig. 12  Ionogels, tailored hybrid materials. 
However, the properties of the final ionogel as a host–guest material are different from the simple combination (or “hybridation”) of those of each pure component. Actually, the concept of ionogel involves a fascinating chain of nanostructuring interactions (Fig. 13), from the supramolecular structuring ability of ILs in the synthesis of solids, to the confinement effects occurring in these solids used as host matrices, which in turn influences the nanostructure of the guest IL.
 Fig. 13  The synthesis of ionogels, a chain of nanostructuring effects. 
Typically many ionogels can be seen as two continuous interpenetrated networks of solid and liquid (i.e. two continuous percolation pathways). Classical structuring process involves a phase separation induced by the (organic or inorganic) polymerization. This (spinodal type) phase separation results in the formation of two interpenetrated nanophases, which accordingly causes an increase of interface. This phenomenon takes place before the thermodynamic phase separation which conversely tends to minimize the interface energy. To be effective, such structuring process then implies that the gelation “freezes” the transient bi-continuous structure before the system spontaneously evolves to macroscopic phase separation. Thus, ionogels can be structured at the nanometre scale by playing on the compatibility of the IL with the polymer or the inorganic phases that grow up during the in situ synthesis. This compatibility can be tuned by combining the choice of the cation–anion pair and the tools of macromolecular chemistry (modification of polymer chains, synthesis of block co-polymers) and sol–gel chemistry (use of silicon precursors bearing organic groups).
However, once the IL is immobilized in the host matrix (e.g.polymer or silica), its nanostructure and physicochemical properties may be in turn affected. Typically this has been illustrated by some reports of confinement effects in some inorganic ionogels. These effects are strongly related to the pore size and depend on the nature of both the IL and the matrix. They appear to be limited to a modification of the short-range organization and molecular dynamics at the close neighbourhood of the pore wall. Most physicochemical properties are not markedly changed by the confinement in mesopores. This is roughly the case of ionic conductivity. A salient feature of ionogels is that the IL keeps a liquid behaviour on confinement. Anyway, some drastic modifications have been reported as the disappearance of phase transitions or the appearance of new ones, or the striking enhancement in luminescence emission of dicyanamide anion.
Finally, if one keeps in mind that over the last decades the use of ILs have evolved from electrochemical and general solvents to catalysts, lubricants, thermal fluids, magnetic fluids, optical fluids, propellants, active pharmaceutical ingredients etc., one feels that the concept of ionogel opens unlimited possibilities of applications and should inspire innovative, and likely unexpected, developments in future technologies.
References
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071 CrossRef CAS .

Ionic Liquids in Synthesis, ed. P. Wasserscheid and T. Welton, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. Galinski, A. Lewandowski and I. Stepniak, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5567 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hapiot and C. Lagrost, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2238 CrossRef CAS .

Electrochemical Aspects of Ionic Liquids, ed. H. Ohno, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ,  2005 Search PubMed .
T. Welton, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 2459 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Parvulescu and C. Hardacre, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2615 CrossRef CAS .
G.-T. Wei, Z. Yang and C.-J. Chen, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 488, 183 CrossRef CAS .
G.-h. Tao, L. He, N. Sun and Y. Kou, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3562 RSC .
J. Pernak, A. Syguda, I. Mirska, A. Pernak, J. Nawrot, A. Pradzynska, S. T. Griffin and R. D. Rogers, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 6817 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wasserscheid and W. Keim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3772 CrossRef .
J. Dupont, R. F. de Souza and P. A. Z. Suarez, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3667 CrossRef CAS .
F. Van Rantwijk and R. A. Sheldon, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2757 CrossRef .
S. Zein El Abedin and F. Endres, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 58 CrossRef .
P. S. Wheatley, P. K. Allan, S. J. Teat, S. E. Ashbrook and R. E. Morris, Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 483 RSC .
N. Recham, J. N. Chotard, L. Dupont, C. Delacourt, W. Walker, M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 68 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vioux, L. Viau, S. Volland and J. Le Bideau, C. R. Chim., 2010, 13, 242 CrossRef CAS .
G. Machado, J. D. Scholten, T. da Vargas, S. R. Teixeira, L. H. Ronchi and J. Dupont, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2007, 4, 541 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Curr. Nanosci., 2005, 1, 35 Search PubMed .
T. Torimoto, T. Tsuda, K.-i. Okazaki and S. Kuwabata, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1196 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, J. Yu and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 261 CrossRef CAS .
L. Leclercq and A. R. Schmitzer, Supramol. Chem., 2009, 21, 245 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Mehnert, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 50 CrossRef .
A. Riisager, R. Fehrmanna, M. Haumannb and P. Wasserscheid, Top. Catal., 2006, 40, 91 CrossRef .
T. Ueki and M. Watanabe, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3739 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Weiss, J. Le Bideau, J. Recho, A. Fatimi and J. Guicheux, Patent FR 08/05473,  2008, WO 10/037986 A1,  2010, Université de Nantes - INSERM - CNRS.
F. Gayet, L. Viau, F. Leroux, F. Mabille, S. Monge, J.-J. Robin and A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5575 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, D. Gao, Z. Li and G. Su, React. Funct. Polym., 2006, 66, 1141 CrossRef CAS .
N. Winterton, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 4281 RSC .
D. R. MacFarlane and K. R. Seddon, Aust. J. Chem., 2007, 60, 3 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsuda and R. Hagiwara, J. Fluorine Chem., 2008, 129, 4 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Johansson, E. I. Izgorodina, M. Forsyth, D. R. MacFarlane and K. R. Seddon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 2972 RSC .
W. Xu and C. A. Angell, Science, 2003, 302, 422 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Angell and J. W. Shuppert, J. Phys. Chem., 1980, 84, 538 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, E. I. Cooper and C. A. Angell, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6170 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshizawa, W. Xu and C. A. Angell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15411 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno, H. Tokuda and M. Watanabe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1649 RSC .
S. Tsuzuki, W. Shinoda, H. Saito, M. Mikami, H. Tokuda and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 10641 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth, E. I. Izgorodina, A. P. Abbott, G. Annat and K. Fraser, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 4962 RSC .
O. Russina, A. Triolo, L. Gontrani, R. Caminiti, D. Xiao, L. G. Hines, Jr., R. A. Bartsch, E. L. Quitevis, N. Pleckhova and K. R. Seddon, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 424121 CrossRef .
J. N. A. Canongia Lopes and A. A. H. Padua, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 3330 CrossRef .
A. P. Abbott, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 2502 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kimizuka and T. Nakashima, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 6759 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ikeda, K. Sonoda, M. Ayabe, S. Tamaru, T. Nakashima, N. Kimizuka and S. Shinkai, Chem. Lett., 2001, 1154 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kubo, S. Kambe, S. Nakade, T. Kitamura, K. Hanabusa, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4374 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hanabusa, H. Fukui, M. Suzuki and H. Shirai, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10383 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tu, X. Bao, W. Assenmacher, H. Peterlik, J. Daniels and K. H. Dotz, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1853 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Dong, H. Wang, F. Fang, X. Li and Y. J. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2275 CrossRef CAS .
P. Izak, S. Hovorka, T. Bartovsky, L. Bartovska and J. G. Crespo, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 296, 131 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. B. H. Susan, T. Kaneko, A. Noda and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4976 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Scott, M. Rahman and C. S. Brazel, Eur. Polym. J., 2003, 39, 1947 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, F. Yan and J. Texter, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 431 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Klingshirn, S. K. Spear, R. Subramanian, J. D. Holbrey, J. G. Huddleston and R. D. Rogers, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3091 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rupp, M. Schmuck, A. Balducci, M. Winter and W. Kern, Eur. Polym. J., 2008, 44, 2986 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Sterner, Z. P. Rosol, E. M. Gross and S. M. Gross, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 2963 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matsumoto and T. Endo, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6981 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yan, S. Yu, X. Zhang, L. Qiu, F. Chu, J. You and J. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1480 CrossRef CAS .
P. Snedden, A. I. Cooper, K. Scott and N. Winterton, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 4549 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ueki and M. Watanabe, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 988 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He and T. P. Lodge, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 167 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Lodge, Science, 2008, 321, 50 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Cho, J. Le, Y. He, B. Kim, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 686 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vidinha, M. T. Lourenco Nuno, C. Pinheiro, R. Bras Ana, T. Carvalho, T. Santos-Silva, A. Mukhopadhyay, J. Romao Maria, J. Parola, M. Dionisio, M. S. Cabral Joaquim, A. M. Afonso Carlos and S. Barreiros, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5842 RSC .
M. B. Turner, S. K. Spear, J. D. Holbrey, D. T. Daly and R. D. Rogers, Biomacromolecules, 2005, 6, 2497 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Fort, R. C. Remsing, R. P. Swatloski, P. Moyna, G. Moyna and R. D. Rogers, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 63 RSC .
A. Pinkert, K. N. Marsh, S. Pang and M. P. Staiger, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 6712 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Swatloski, S. K. Spear, J. D. Holbrey and R. D. Rogers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4974 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Remsing, R. P. Swatloski, R. D. Rogers and G. Moyna, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1271 RSC .
J.-i. Kadokawa, M.-a. Murakami and Y. Kaneko, Carbohydr. Res., 2008, 343, 769 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Singh, B. Bhattacharya, R. K. Nagarale, K.-W. Kim and H.-W. Rhee, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 139 CrossRef CAS .
T. Singh, T. J. Trivedi and A. Kumar, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1029 RSC .
N. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Liu and B. He, Carbohydr. Polym., 2009, 76, 482 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Liu and N. Han, Polym. Polym. Compos., 2010, 18, 53 Search PubMed .
J.-i. Kadokawa, M.-a. Murakami, A. Takegawa and Y. Kaneko, Carbohydr. Polym., 2009, 75, 180 CrossRef CAS .
K. Prasad, Y. Kaneko and J.-i. Kadokawa, Macromol. Biosci., 2009, 9, 376 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukushima, A. Kosaka, Y. Ishimura, T. Yamamoto, T. Takigawa, N. Ishii and T. Aida, Science, 2003, 300, 2072 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, G. Wu, M. Sha and S. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2416 CrossRef .
J. Wang, H. Chu and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2540 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukushima and T. Aida, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5048 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Comte, I. Exnar and M. Graetzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1166 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shimano, H. Zhou and I. Honma, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5216 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno, K. Hata, T. Katakabe, M. Kondoh and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 9013 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dai, Y. H. Ju, H. J. Gao, J. S. Lin, S. J. Pennycook and C. E. Barnes, Chem. Commun., 2000, 243 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Ma, F. Shi, L. Liu and Y. Deng, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 119, 97 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Pujari, J. J. Chadbourne, A. J. Ward, L. Costanzo, A. F. Masters and T. Maschmeyer, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 1997 RSC .
M. A. Klingshirn, S. K. Spear, J. D. Holbrey and R. D. Rogers, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 5174 RSC .
D. Li, F. Shi, S. Guo and Y. Deng, Tetrahedron Lett., 2004, 45, 265 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shi, Q. Zhang, D. Li and Y. Deng, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 5279 CrossRef CAS .
M.-A. Neouze, J. Le Bideau, F. Leroux and A. Vioux, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1082 RSC .
M.-A. Neouze, J. Le Bideau, P. Gaveau, S. Bellayer and A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3931 CrossRef CAS .
M.-A. Neouze, J. Le Bideau and A. Vioux, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2005, 33, 217 CrossRef CAS .
J.-B. Ducros, N. Buchtová, A. Magrez, O. Chauvet and J. Le Bideau, J. Mater. Chem., 2011 10.1039/c0jm02016h .
J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Li, S. Liu, Y. Ma, F. Shi and Y. Deng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1971 RSC .
K. Lunstroot, K. Driesen, P. Nockemann, C. Goerller-Walrand, K. Binnemans, S. Bellayer, J. Le Bideau and A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5711 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lunstroot, K. Driesen, P. Nockemann, K. Van Hecke, L. Van Meervelt, C. Goerller-Walrand, K. Binnemans, S. Bellayer, L. Viau, J. Le Bideau and A. Vioux, Dalton Trans., 2009, 298 RSC .
R. Goebel, P. Hesemann, J. Weber, E. Moeller, A. Friedrich, S. Beuermann and A. Taubert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3653 RSC .
R. Goebel, A. Friedrich and A. Taubert, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 603 RSC .
H. Usui, H. Matsui, N. Tanabe and S. Yanagida, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 97 CrossRef .
J.-D. Kim, T. Mori, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 1178 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Farag, M. Al Zoubi and F. Endres, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 122 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, Y. J. Kim, R. S. Varma and D. D. Dionysiou, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5377 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Li, M. Wang, Z. Li, H. Liu, P. He, X. Yang and J. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2005, 5, 1643 CrossRef CAS .
U. H. Lee, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3068 RSC .
S. Bellayer, L. Viau, Z. Tebby, T. Toupance, J. Le Bideau and A. Vioux, Dalton Trans., 2009, 1307 RSC .
T. Kato, A. Okazaki and S. Hayase, Chem. Commun., 2005, 363 RSC .
J. W. Gilman, W. H. Awad, R. D. Davis, J. Shields, R. H. Harris, Jr., C. Davis, A. B. Morgan, T. E. Sutto, J. Callahan, P. C. Trulove and H. C. DeLong, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3776 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Donato, M. A. Benvegnu, L. G. Furlan, R. S. Mauler and H. S. Schrekker, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 116, 304 CAS .
S. Bellayer, J. W. Gilman, N. Eidelman, S. Bourbigot, X. Flambard, D. M. Fox, H. C. De Long and P. C. Trulove, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 910 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, H. Liu, Y. Liu, P. He, J. Li, L. Zheng and J. Li, Polymer, 2005, 46, 7578 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tominaga, S. Asai, M. Sumita, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 402 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fernicola, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 591 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, S. Cheng, L. Qiu, F. Yan, S. Shang and J. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1807 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ferrari, E. Quartarone, P. Mustarelli, A. Magistris, M. Fagnoni, S. Protti, C. Gerbaldi and A. Spinella, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 559 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kanakubo, Y. Hiejima, K. Minami, T. Aizawa and H. Nanjo, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1828 RSC .
S. Perkin, T. Albrecht and J. Klein, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1243 RSC .
F. Chen, Q. Qing, J. Xia, J. Li and N. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9908 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sha, G. Wu, Y. Liu, Z. Tang and H. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4618 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Christenson, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2001, 13, R95 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno, M. Kasuya, M. Watanabe, M. Mizukami and K. Kurihara, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 4066 RSC .
I. Bou-Malham and L. Bureau, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 4062 RSC .
D. P. Kaur, K. Yamada, J.-S. Park and S. S. Sekhon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 5381 CrossRef CAS .
J. Le Bideau, P. Gaveau, S. Bellayer, M. A. Neouze and A. Vioux, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 5419 RSC .
D. Petit, J.-P. Korb, P. Levitz, J. Le Bideau and D. Brevet, C. R. Chim., 2010, 13, 409 CrossRef CAS .
T. Echelmeyer, H. W. Meyer and L. van Wuellen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2280 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Le Bideau, D. Guyomard, J.-B. Ducros and P. Soudan, Patent FR 09/50936,  2009, WO 10/092 258,  2010, CNRS-Université de Nantes. .
M. P. Singh, R. K. Singh and S. Chandra, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2036 CAS .
K. Lunstroot, K. Driesen, P. Nockemann, K. Van Hecke, L. Van Meervelt, C. Gorller-Walrand, K. Binnemans, S. Bellayer, L. Viau, J. Le Bideau and A. Vioux, Dalton Trans., 2009, 298 RSC .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guerfi, M. Dontigny, Y. Kobayashi, A. Vijh and K. Zaghib, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 1003 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fernicola, F. C. Weise, S. G. Greenbaum, J. Kagimoto, B. Scrosati and A. Soleto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A514 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Shin, W. A. Henderson, G. B. Appetecchi, F. Alessandrini and S. Passerini, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3859 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chew, J. Sun, J. Wang, H. Liu, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 6460 CrossRef CAS .
A. Noda, M. A. B. H. Susan, K. Kudo, S. Mitsushima, K. Hayamizu and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4024 CrossRef CAS .
M. Martinez, Y. Molmeret, L. Cointeaux, C. Iojoiu, J.-C. Lepretre, N. El Kissi, P. Judeinstein and J.-Y. Sanchez, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5829 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Angell, N. Byrne and J.-P. Belieres, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 1228 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nakamoto and M. Watanabe, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2539 RSC .
C. Iojoiu, M. Martinez, M. Hanna, Y. Molmeret, L. Cointeaux, J.-C. Lepretre, N. El Kissi, J. Guindet, P. Judeinstein and J.-Y. Sanchez, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2008, 19, 1406 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Lee, T. Yasuda and M. Watanabe, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5909 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Lee, A. Ogawa, M. Kanno, H. Nakamoto, T. Yasuda and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9764 CrossRef CAS .
V. Di Noto, E. Negro, J.-Y. Sanchez and C. Iojoiu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2183 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cho, J.-S. Park, S. S. Sekhon, G.-G. Park, T.-H. Yang, W.-Y. Lee, C.-S. Kim and S.-B. Park, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B197 CrossRef CAS .
A. Martinelli, A. Matic, P. Jacobsson, L. Borjesson, A. Fernicola, S. Panero, B. Scrosati and H. Ohno, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 12462 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fernicola, M. A. Navarra and S. Panero, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2008, 38, 993 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, T. Nohira and R. Hagiwara, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 535 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ramirez-Salgado, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 3766 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thayumanasundaram, M. Piga, S. Lavina, E. Negro, M. Jeyapandian, L. Ghassemzadeh, K. Müller and V. Di Noto, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1355 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lakshminarayana, M. Nogami and I. V. Kityk, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B892 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Comte, P. Liska, D. Kuang and M. Graetzel, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 693 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kuang, J. Brillet, P. Chen, M. Takata, S. Uchida, H. Miura, K. Sumioka, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1113 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kato, T. Kado, S. Tanaka, A. Okazaki and S. Hayase, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A626 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kato and S. Hayase, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B117 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei, H. E. Unalan, D. Han, Q. Zhang, L. Niu, G. Amaratunga and T. Ryhanen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424006 CrossRef .
L. Fan, S. Kang, J. Wu, S. Hao, Z. Lan and J. Lin, Energy Sources, Part A: Recovery, Util. Environ. Eff., 2010, 32, 1559 Search PubMed .
K. Suzuki, M. Yamaguchi, M. Kumagai, N. Tanabe and S. Yanagida, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 611 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kubo, T. Kitamura, K. Hanabusa, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, Chem. Commun., 2002, 374 RSC .
Y. Bai, Y. Cao, J. Zhang, M. Wang, R. Li, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 626 CrossRef CAS .
C. Coll, R. H. Labrador, R. M. Manez, J. Soto, F. Sancenon and M. J. Segui, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3033 RSC .
N. V. Shvedene, D. V. Chernyshov, M. G. Khrenova, A. A. Formanovsky, V. E. Baulin and I. V. Pletnev, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 1416 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhao, Y. Q. Gao, D. P. Zhan, H. Liu, Q. Zhao, Y. Kou, Y. H. Shao, M. X. Li, Q. K. Zhuang and Z. W. Zhu, Talanta, 2005, 66, 51 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Sun, L. H. Guan, Z. J. Shi, N. Q. Li, Z. N. Gu, Z. W. Zhu, M. X. Li and Y. H. Shao, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 6050 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei and A. Ivaska, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 607, 126 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Xiong, T. Chen, X. H. Zhang and S. F. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2671 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Chen, Y. L. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Z. Wang, L. Qi and S. J. Dong, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 469 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Shi, M. Wang, Z. Li, H. Liu and J. Li, Green Chem., 2005, 7, 655 RSC .
G. C. Zhao, M. Q. Xu, J. Ma and X. W. Wei, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 920 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Tao, D. W. Pan, Q. Liu, S. Z. Yao, Z. Nie and B. X. Han, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 1681 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, X. Wu, M. K. Wang, Y. Liu, L. X. Gao and S. J. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 4960 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Liu and S. J. Dong, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 55 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiang, Y. Zou, L.-X. Sun and F. Xu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 38 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhang, G. P. Guo, F. Q. Zhao, Z. R. Mo, F. Xiao and B. Z. Zeng, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 223 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukushima, K. Asaka, A. Kosaka and T. Aida, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2410 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mukai, K. Asaka, T. Sugino, K. Kiyohara, I. Takeuchi, N. Terasawa, D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Fukushima and T. Aida, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1582 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekitani, H. Nakajima, H. Maeda, T. Fukushima, T. Aida, K. Hata and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 494 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Anderson, J. K. Dixon and J. F. Brennecke, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 1208 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hasib-ur-Rahman, M. Siaj and F. Larachi, Chem. Eng. Process., 2010, 49, 313 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fortunato, C. A. M. Afonso, M. A. M. Reis and J. G. Crespo, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 242, 197 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Branco, J. G. Crespo and C. A. M. Afonso, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 3865 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Branco, J. G. Crespo and C. A. M. Afonso, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2771 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peng, J. Zhu, X. Liu and Y. Qin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 133, 308 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Sun, J. Chen and F. Luo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 7308 CrossRef CAS .
E. Guibal, T. Vincent and C. Jouannin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8515 RSC .
J. E. Bara, E. S. Hatakeyama, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2008, 19, 1415 CrossRef CAS .
C. Myers, H. Pennline, D. Luebke, J. Ilconich, J. K. Dixon, E. J. Maginn and J. F. Brennecke, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 322, 28 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Voss, J. E. Bara, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3027 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Hudiono, T. K. Carlisle, J. E. Bara, Y. Zhang, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 350, 117 CrossRef CAS .
S. Volland, M. Gruit, T. Regnier, L. Viau, O. Lavastre and A. Vioux, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 2015 RSC .
Y. Liu, M. Wang, J. Li, Z. Li, P. He, H. Liu and J. Li, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1778 RSC .
K. Fukumoto, M. Yoshizawa and H. Ohno, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2398 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Hough, M. Smiglak, H. Rodriguez, R. P. Swatloski, S. K. Spear, D. T. Daly, J. Pernak, J. E. Grisel, R. D. Carliss, M. D. Soutullo, J. J. H. Davis and R. D. Rogers, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 1429 RSC .
M. Vallet-Regi, F. Balas and D. Arcos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7548 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Trewyn, C. M. Whitman and V. S. Y. Lin, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2139 CrossRef CAS .
L. Viau, C. Tourne-Peteilh, J.-M. Devoisselle and A. Vioux, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 228 RSC .
M. Moniruzzaman, Y. Tahara, M. Tamura, N. Kamiya and M. Goto, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1452 RSC .

Footnote† Part of the themed issue on hybrid materials.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Jean Le Bideau
	Jean Le Bideau (born 1965) obtained his Materials Science Degree from the Université de Nantes (France), and then joined the Institut des Matériaux de Nantes under the supervision of Professor Jean Rouxel, where he received his PhD in 1994. After two years stay at Michigan State University (USA) under the supervision of Professor Daniel G. Nocera, he moved to the Université de Montpellier (France) as Associate Professor, and returned in 2008 to the Université de Nantes as full Professor. His research is aimed at building low dimensional organic–inorganic materials with specific confinement effects. Since 2003, he focuses his research on sol–gel chemistry in ionic liquids, more specifically on the properties of the resulting confined ionic liquids.

Lydie Viau
	Lydie Viau earned a degree in chemical engineering in 2000 from the Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Procédés et d'Ingénierie Chimiques d'Aix-Marseille (France) and a PhD degree in organometallic chemistry in 2003 under the supervision of Dr Hubert Le Bozec at the University of Rennes. She spent one year at the University of Canberra (Australia) and one year at the University of Nantes (France) before joining the group of Professor André Vioux at the Institut Charles Gerhardt in Montpellier (France). Her current research interest mainly focus on the development of ionogels based on silica and polymers suitable for catalysis, drug delivery, electrolyte membranes.

André Vioux
	André Vioux studied chemistry at the University of Montpellier and completed his PhD in coordination chemistry in 1981 under the supervision of Prof. Robert Corriu. In 1983–84 he worked at the University of Paris 6 on sol–gel chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Jacques Livage. In the late 80's, he developed some new approaches to out-of-equilibrium ceramics by thermal conversion of silicon-containing polymer resins at the University of Montpellier, where he has been full Professor since 1992. Over the last decades he has focused his research on new ways to inorganic–organic hybrid materials and on sol–gel processing in unusual media.

 	Fig. 1  Ionogels, multi-purpose hybrid materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  Some examples of cations and anions used in the formation of aprotic ILs and changes of water miscibility with anion type.	 

 	Fig. 3  Typical preparations of imidazolium ILs by metathesis reaction and Lewis acid addition.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Walden plot of log(molar conductivity, Λ) against log(reciprocal viscosity, η1), which includes the classication for ILs proposed by Angell et al.35 and (b) a close-up view of the region occupied by typical aprotic ILs. The solid line indicates the ideal line for a completely dissociated strong electrolyte aqueous solution (KClaq.). Reprinted with permission from ref. 37.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  Different types of ionogels.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TG curves for MMA network polymers with different mole fractions of dissolved [C2MIm][TFSI] and [C2MIm][TFSI] bulk at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. From ref. 50. (b) DSC thermograms for MMA network polymers with different mole fractions of dissolved [C2MIm][TFSI] and [C2MIm][TFSI] bulk at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 7  An ABA triblock copolymer with soluble B block (blue) and insoluble A blocks (red) (left) self-assembles in the presence of an IL (+ and – symbols) to form an ion gel (center). Suitable choice of A block enables thermoreversible gelation when the A blocks become soluble at a higher temperature (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 62.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) 1H NMR room-temperature spectra of the pristine IL ([C4MIm][TFSI]) and a monolithic silica ionogel (IL/SiO2 = 0.5) at zero, 400 Hz and 3kHz spinning rates (asterisks indicate spinning sidebands). (b) 1H relaxation times vs. temperature of pristine IL (open symbols) and of a monolithic silica ionogel (IL/SiO2 = 0.5; black squares). Reprinted with permission from ref. 123.	 

 	Fig. 9  Toward all-solid IL based lithium battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129.	 

 	Fig. 10  IL based polymer electrolytes fuel cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140.	 

 	Fig. 11  All-solid dye sensitized solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157.	 

 	Fig. 12  Ionogels, tailored hybrid materials.	 

 	Fig. 13  The synthesis of ionogels, a chain of nanostructuring effects.	 
Footnote
† Part of the themed issue on hybrid materials.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
