From lab to fab: how must the polymer solar cell materials design change? – an industrial perspective   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE43460E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE43460E
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 925-943From lab to fab: how must the polymer solar cell materials design change? – an industrial perspective†

        
          
            Riccardo 
            Po
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Andrea 
            Bernardi
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anna 
            Calabrese
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chiara 
            Carbonera
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gianni 
            Corso
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Andrea 
            Pellegrino
          
          
        
      
Research Center for non-Conventional Energies – Istituto Eni Donegani, Eni S.p.A., Via Fauser 4, 28100 Novara, Italy. E-mail: riccardo.po@eni.com;  Fax: +39 0321 447241;   Tel: +39 0321 447541
Received 
      17th October 2013
    , Accepted 2nd December 2013First published on 9th December 2013AbstractOrganic photovoltaic (OPV) devices, in particular polymer solar cells, made by solution processed organic materials have shown great promise as a disruptive technology for affordable electricity. Even though recent advances look impressive on paper, until now the commercialization of OPV has been hampered by the difficulty of converting lab produced “champion” cell figures into reliable industrial-scale product performances. A key factor to achieve this condition is to develop OPV materials (polymer donors, acceptors, buffer materials, electrodes materials and encapsulants) exhibiting the required technical and economic characteristics to be conveniently used in an industrial environment. The well established strategies for the design of materials for efficient lab-scale OPV devices are not sufficient when large-area printed panels are concerned. A number of additional requirements, normally not addressed in the laboratory context, must be met: the materials must be easily accessible as pure compounds in few synthetic steps from cheap starting compounds, need to be stable and soluble enough to afford ink formulations processable with roll-to-roll compatible equipment; solvent and solvent additives should be easily removable after printing, and possibly should be environmentally friendly compounds; the layers should achieve a stable morphology under mild conditions (low temperatures and short times); the above mentioned materials can be screened on glass substrates, but should be finally tested on plastic films, protected through a scalable encapsulation technique. The more researchers adhere to these guidelines, the greater the possibility for OPV to demonstrate at last its enormous potential on the industrial scale.Riccardo PoRiccardo Po studied Industrial Chemistry at the University of Pisa, where he received the MSc (Laurea) in 1988. Subsequently he moved to the Enichem Research Center in Novara, where he joined the Materials Department, working on polymer synthesis and modification. In 1999 he became Manager of the Polymer Chemistry and Physics Department. In 2007 the Research Center was incorporated by Eni SpA and he was appointed Manager of the Solar Energy Department and put in charge of the research activities on polymer solar cells.Andrea BernardiAndrea Bernardi graduated in Physics in 2005 at the University of Turin and earned a PhD in Metrology at the Politecnico of Turin in 2008. After that he moved to eni to the “Research Center for Non Conventional Energies – Eni Donegani Institute” where he worked as a researcher in the production and characterization of polymer solar cells. Currently he is involved in the project devoted to scale-up of the OPV technology.Anna CalabreseAnna Calabrese received her MSc in Electronic Engineering (Curriculum: Micro-Optoelectronics) from the University of Messina (Italy) in 2007 and a PhD degree in Energy from the Scuola Superiore of Catania, University of Catania (Italy) in 2011. Since February 2009 she has been collaborating with Eni SpA, “Research Center for Non Conventional Energies – Eni Donegani Institute” (Novara, Italy) and in 2011 she joined the research center as a researcher. Her activity concerns the characterization of organic and polymeric materials suitable for technological applications in OPV.Chiara CarboneraChiara Carbonera received her MSc in Industrial Chemistry with focus on chemical physics at the University of Milan. She then earned her PhD in chemistry at the University of Florence in 2003. From 2003 to 2008, she was a postdoctoral fellow first at the Institute for Solid State Chemistry (Bordeaux, France) and then at the Institute of Materials Science of Aragón (Saragossa, Spain), before she joined Po's research group at the “Research Center for Non Conventional Energies – Eni Donegani Institute”, where her research is directed mainly toward the improvement of polymer solar cell device features through their fabrication and characterization.Gianni CorsoGianni Corso graduated in Chemistry at the University of Trieste in 1998. He gained experience in the analytical field in search and identification of traces of aromas and then as a supervisor in an analytical laboratory. In 2000 he worked as a researcher at the experimental institute for plant nutrition (ISNP) in Gorizia and in 2001 he moved to Enichem Research Center (Novara), working on synthesis and reactivity evaluation of catalysts for hydrogenation and polymerization. In 2007 the Research Center was incorporated by ENI SpA and he was involved in the scale-up activities in OPV technology.Andrea PellegrinoAndrea Pellegrino received his MSc in Organic Chemistry at the University of Milan in 2007. He joined Eni spa at the “Research Center for Non Conventional Energies – Eni Donegani Institute” in 2008. He is involved in the design and synthesis of novel photoactive materials and macromolecular characterization.

Broader context
The global electric energy demand in 2010 was about 21400 TW h (source: IEA). Renewable energies accounted for almost one-fifth of the total energy production. While solar energy was only around 1% of this portion, over the past five years it has averaged an annual growth rate of over 50%. Growth has been mostly concentrated in a few countries, where PV generates today a few percent of total yearly electricity production. High cost, along with the intermittency of the solar radiation, is one of the main limiting factors, therefore much effort must be spent to overcome these problems. Polymer-based organic solar cells have the potential to be cost-effective and lightweight solar energy converters, with a promising energy balance. Their function is based on the photoinduced electron transfer from a polymeric donor to an acceptor, generally a fullerene derivative. In principle, they can be fabricated by low temperature printing or coating processes from solvent-based inks, which are compatible with flexible plastic substrates. Fair power conversion efficiencies (∼10%), comparable with amorphous silicon, have been recently achieved in the laboratory, by the combination of improved materials engineering, fine control of the photoactive layer morphology and use of more sophisticated device architectures. However, the technology will become convenient and will have large diffusion only when laboratory research results are transferable to large area modules, to be produced in high throughput plants.

1. Introduction
A decade ago, polymer-fullerene solar cells – and, in general, new generation organic photovoltaics (OPVs) and hybrid photovoltaics – were foretold1 to be a disruptive technology able to provide in the short-mid term sustainable, affordable and decentralized energy.
In particular, OPVs have unique advantages over other photovoltaic technologies in terms of scalability, fast manufacturing rates, short energy payback time, and favorable performance-to-weight ratios.2–9 However, to date, although the potentiality of the OPV technology remains enormous, this promise has not been yet achieved. The reasons for this are multiple. First of all, in spite of the step increase of certified power conversion efficiencies on small area cells reported in the last couple of years,10 the transfer of the results to large area modules is not trivial.11 In fact, most of the highly efficient materials reported in the literature are complex in nature: thousands of papers describing a large variety of photoactive materials have been published,9 but the applicability of most of them in an industrial environment is – at least – questionable. The module durability is another factor obstructing the commercial diffusion of OPV modules. A couple of recent papers report lifetimes as high as seven12 or fifteen years,13 values extrapolated from glass encapsulated lab-scale small-area cells. Only very recently the achievement of the standard IEC-61646 stress test has been reported for the first time for flexible large area modules.14 Finally, virtually in any paper the costs of OPV modules and watt-peak are claimed to be by far lower than those of conventional silicon modules, relying for instance on the simplicity of roll-to-roll (R2R) processes and on the supposed lower cost of raw materials with respect to silicon. However, in the best cases these claims are based on long-term projection of material prices (that are sometimes difficult to predict) or are simple statements, not corroborated by any data, in most papers. As a matter of fact, in the past years only a few companies have ventured into polymer solar module production, and are struggling to survive, with ups and downs.15
Undoubtedly, the materials are key elements in OPV technology, because they affect the efficiency, the stability and large part of the costs of the final devices. The materials constituting a typical organic solar cell or module perform four distinct functions:16 (i) the active material (which, in turn, includes the electron donor component and the electron acceptor); (ii) the buffer materials; (iii) the electrode materials and (iv) the encapsulant. The ranking in this list reflects also the emphasis devoted by the OPV community to the different aspects of OPV research. For each class, several design criteria have been established to enhance the performances of the final device. This optimization is usually performed on the lab scale, i.e. on materials (not necessarily cheap) obtained in some cases with multistep synthesis and with fabrication techniques suitable for small area-devices (e.g., spin coating), often with the sole scope of breaking the current record efficiency. However, in the pursuing of commercial applicability of OPV, laboratory cells should not be considered per se the final goal. They are rather means to test and assess new materials, new architectures, new concepts, neither more nor less than other common characterization techniques such as UV-vis spectroscopy, gel permeation chromatography, time of flight mobility, etc. In truth, there are several additional materials design criteria that must be considered when large-area deposition techniques are involved,9,17 with the final goal to go beyond the scientific curiosity of polymer solar cells and to develop a robust, commercially successful technology. The scope of this perspective is to highlight these criteria and provide a useful tool for the researchers in this field.
2. Discussion
The following discussion will be restricted to flexible solar modules, typically based on polymeric donors and fullerene acceptors, fabricated through R2R compatible printing/coating techniques from materials dissolved in suitable solvents and formulated in the form of inks.17–20 Thus, wet processes will be mostly considered,21 although vacuum deposition processes can be also applied to some type of materials (namely, the buffer and the electrodes) without affecting too much the simplicity and the economy of the overall R2R fabrication process. Nevertheless, to some extent some of the arguments and conclusions that will be drawn are relevant also for other types of new generation photovoltaics, i.e. hybrid solar cells and small-molecule organic solar cells.
The discussion will be divided into four sections, corresponding to the function of the items listed in the Introduction.
2.1 Active layer
The active layer of polymer solar cells includes both a polymer donor and a fullerene acceptor. The discussion will start from the donor, while the acceptor will be discussed later on.
The literature reports several well established strategies for the design of donor polymers for efficient lab-scale22–27 devices, which keep their validity also for industrial scale modules. In summary, the electronic and structural properties of the donor must be tailored, to satisfy the following conditions:
(i) a broad absorption spectrum and a red-shifted absorption maximum, meaning a relatively low energy gap (Eg), for the improvement of solar light harvesting and short circuit current density (Jsc). A λmax of 800 nm, corresponding to an energy gap of around 1.5 eV, is considered optimal (this value is substantially dictated from the Shockley–Queisser limit). For materials to be used in tandem devices or indoor-OPV, the polymer(s) must have matched absorption spectra or match the emission wavelength of the indoor light source, respectively;
(ii) suitable energy level offsets to the acceptor (about 0.3 eV) to provide the driving force for an efficient exciton dissociation into charge-separated pairs at the donor/acceptor27 interface;
(iii) a deep HOMO level to enhance the open circuit voltage (Voc)27 (the exact optimal value depends on the energy levels of the acceptor and should be below −5.3 eV with conventional fullerene acceptors) and to provide a good stability toward oxidation. The empirical relationship for efficient charge generation Eg − qVoc > 0.6 is also used;28
(iv) an extended π-electrons delocalization to favour charge carrier separation and transport.29,30 The hole mobility should be in the range 10−4 to 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, balanced with the electron mobility in the fullerene acceptor phase to assure a high fill factor (FF).
(v) good mixing properties with the acceptor to form a suited phase segregated bicontinuous nanomorphology.31–34
There is a number of theoretical35–37 and semi-empirical38 methods to predict the properties of a conjugated polymer and design materials that fulfil the criteria (i)–(iii), much less for criterion (iv)39,40 and almost none for criterion (v).41 Some authors even proposed high-throughput computational methods for the fast screening of large number of OPV donor materials.42–44
When turning to the industrial scenario, there are many additional factors that come into play.
The active layer morphology, on the macro-, the micro-, and the nanoscale, greatly affects the device behaviour45,46 and is strongly dependent on the deposition conditions.47 In particular, the morphology is determined by several factors, like (i) the film processing conditions, (ii) the molar ratio (composition) of the polymer and the fullerene, (iii) the nature of the solvent additive (if any), and (iv) the thermal post-treatments (most of these points will be further discussed later). On the laboratory scale, spin coating is the most convenient technique for the active layer deposition and the large majority of the published works rely on this technique.9 However, while extremely simple, spin coating is characterized by very high wastes of ink and is not scalable to a R2R process. Scalable printing/coating techniques like – for instance – slot-die coating,48 flexographic printing,49 or gravure printing,50 are used instead. When moving from spin coating to any other printing technique, the whole ink formulation must be revisited to achieve the ideal morphology and a new optimum composition must be found. In other words, the optimized formulation parameters found for lab-scale devices may largely differ from those required in a scaled process and it is also possible that some conditions could not be replicable at all.
The implications on the material structural characteristic can be profound. For a good quality layer, the ink viscosity must be relatively low in spin coating (below 10 cP (ref. 21)). As a matter of fact, also very thin donor/acceptor solutions can be used, with some skill and patience, to prepare small-area (10 mm2 or less), efficient devices. In contrast, R2R compatible printing techniques require ink formulation with relatively higher viscosities (e.g., >10 cP for slot-die coating21 or >50 cP for flexographic printing51). This means that high molecular weight polymers and/or high concentrations must be exploited. An additional required property for the ink is thixotropic behaviour. It is noteworthy that the component that mostly affects the solution viscosity is the polymer rather than the fullerene.
To increase the solubility of a given polymer in a given solvent, the simplest way is to increase the number, length and branching degree of the alkyl side chain.52,53 Of course, a trade-off must be found, to limit the amount of electrically insulating moieties and to keep a good morphology, and ultimately to avoid interfering with the charge-transport properties.
The solution viscosity is also proportional to the molecular weight of the polymer. The molecular weight must be high enough (the value depends on chain flexibility, pendant groups, intermolecular forces and on the solvent), but beyond a critical threshold, at sufficiently high concentrations the chains begin to entangle and the rheology of the solution becomes difficult to control. Under these premises, the best compromise between the polymer structure, polymer concentration and molecular weight must be carefully identified.
To illustrate the importance of ink viscosity, Fig. 1 shows the qualities of different P3HT:PCBM films obtained from o-dichlorobenzene solutions with gravure printing at different concentrations (Fig. 1a–c: 50 g L−1; Fig. 1d: 100 g L−1; Fig. 1e: 150 g L−1), engraving parameters and printing speeds.50
 Fig. 1  Optical images of P3HT:PCBM thin films obtained under different printing conditions: (a) concentration 50 g L−1 in o-DCB, line density 80 line cm−1, speed 7 m min−1, (b) concentration 50 g L−1, line density 80 line cm−1, speed 18 m min−1, (c) concentration 50 g L−1, line density 45 line cm−1, speed 18 m min−1, (d) concentration 100 g L−1, line density 80 line cm−1, speed 18 m min−1, and (e) concentration 150 g L−1, line density 120 line cm−1, speed 18 m min−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. 
It is clearly seen that below the total blend concentration of 100 g L−1, corresponding to 50 g L−1 of P3HT, the printed films are not homogeneous and exhibit a very poor quality. This concentration is about 3–4 times higher than the usual concentrations used for spin coating. For a polymer with good solubility, such as P3HT, it is not difficult to reach relatively high concentrations and appropriate viscosities, but with inherently scarcely soluble polymers,54 such as for example PCDTBT,55–57 this can be very tricky, or impossible, unless an intrinsically more viscous solvent is used to prepare the ink (limitations to this approach are addressed below). On the other hand, if the solubility of the polymer in the ink is too low, notwithstanding the printability has been corrected using viscous solvents, and the wettability matches the requirements, it may be difficult or impossible to reach the required thickness for the final dry layer, since too little polymer is transferred during the printing step (transferred volume of ink is a fixed parameter using printing techniques). In this context, the choice of the most effective combination of the printing technique, rheological characteristics of the ink, wettability and concentration to obtain a smooth surface layer with the desired thickness and sharp edges of the printed pattern is a critical issue, and great efforts to identify the best combination may be required.
Last but not the least, the polymer concentration in solution is also determined by the fullerene:polymer ratio. Because for many polymers this ratio must be kept as high as 4:1 to achieve a high power conversion efficiency,58 the solubility of fullerenes could compel us to use solutions that are not concentrated enough for printing, making the material not suitable for scale-up.
Summarizing, once a promising donor polymer having a given conjugated backbone is identified through testing at the laboratory scale, the transfer of the chosen material to a R2R process implies a re-design of the lateral substituents, increasing and optimizing its solubility and rheological properties.
The change of the lateral alkyl chains has relevant consequences on the synthesis. In fact, when linear chains are substituted with branched chains, the monomers and intermediates gradually become less and less prone to crystallization. For instance, while 4,8-dioctyloxybenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene is a solid compound,59 4,8-bis(2-ethylhexyloxy)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene is an oil.60 This occurrence makes the purification steps laborious. Unless fractional distillation is possible, column chromatography must be used instead of crystallization and although this is perfectly manageable at the laboratory scale, it is very expensive, or even impossible, at the industrial scale.
The easy accessibility of the polymer,61 and thereby of the constituting monomers, is a further key element that must be considered in the design of a new donor material. According to a recent analysis,62 based on published lab-scale synthetic procedures, the cost per gram increases linearly with the number of synthetic steps required for the preparation. The authors conclude that only simple preparations, requiring less than six steps, do not affect significantly the final cost of an OPV module. In particular, a material requiring three synthetic steps contributes costs of less than 0.01 $ per-peak-watt and a complex polymer requiring fourteen steps contributes costs in the range 0.075–0.48 $ per-peak-watt.
The synthesis of a typical alternating donor–acceptor (D–A) polymer requires a number of synthetic steps equal, at least, to the sum of the steps required by the donor and the acceptor monomers, plus one. This number increases further if the precursors of the alkyl side chains (R) on the D unit and/or the A unit are not readily available (2–3 more steps for each comonomer). Scheme 1 summarizes the minimum number of steps required for the preparation of some monomers constituting the most popular highly-efficient polymers.53,63,64 One can see that the “six-steps” rule-of-thumb is never fulfilled for those combinations; nevertheless, for scaling-up purposes the simplicity and the cheapness are inevitably the paramount evaluation criteria. In particular, in the case of P3HT the estimated polymer consumption for a 50 MW OPV plant is some hundreds of kilograms per year. During the last couple of years several high-efficiency polymers have been made commercially available, but only on the scale 0.1–1 g. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) is the only largely available (>10 kg) donor polymer.
 Scheme 1  Minimum number of synthetic steps for the preparation of selected monomers used in low-band gap polymers.53,63,64 
To achieve low material cost, the minimization of workup procedures in the scaled production, as well as solvent and reagent consumption is essential, ruling out the recourse to column-chromatographic purifications, as already mentioned. The high purity of the monomers and of the polymer is nevertheless a characteristic that must be guaranteed. The purity of the comonomers is a condition for the achievement of adequate molecular weights: indeed, if unknown inert impurities or monofunctional compounds are present, the stoichiometric balance of the two comonomers is altered. On the other hand, if polyfunctional impurities are present, a branched or a crosslinked, insoluble, polymer is obtained.
A large number of alternating D–A polymers are presently obtained through Stille53,58,65,66 polycondensation. Stille reaction is a flexible polymerization technique, very convenient in the laboratory routine because it exhibits several advantages on other palladium catalyzed cross-coupling reactions, i.e., Suzuki, Sonogashira, Negishi. On the other hand, the high toxicity of tin compounds (used in stoichiometric amount) and the safety issues related to lithiation reaction represent big drawbacks that prevent its industrial application.65 Burke et al. have discussed in detail the merits and the defects of Stille polymerization, as well as of other reaction polymerization applied to OPV materials.67
Concerning this point, recently, a clever synthetic strategy that solves many of the above mentioned problems, is gaining increasing attention. Direct (hetero)arylation polymerization67–70 avoids the pre-functionalization of the monomers and greatly simplifies the preparation of the polymers (Scheme 2). The major flaw of direct arylation is the lack of C–H bond regioselectivity, possibly leading to crosslinked materials during polymerization. However, the fine tuning of the reaction conditions (reaction temperature, palladium ligands, carboxylate additives, solvents) may prevent undesired side-reactions. As a matter of fact, providing that the reaction conditions are optimized, direct arylation promises to become a powerful methodology for the preparation of conjugated polymers on the industrial plant scale.
 Scheme 2  Palladium catalyzed condensation reactions used for the synthesis of D–A conjugated copolymers. 
Although the relevance of materials purity has been demonstrated in a few published papers,71,72 this is seldom a subject of specific studies in the literature when the optimization of device performances is carried out. Generally speaking, impurities in the active layer may derive either from the donor,73–78 the acceptor71,72 or the solvent. The purity issue has to be carefully considered when a material is developed at the industrial scale, to avoid batch-to-batch variations in modules performance on one side, and to hold down costs on the other side. Hence, the final polymer must be purified from residual unreacted monomers, catalysts73,77 and low molecular weight fractions, by solid–liquid extraction (leaching). The removal of insoluble matters (possibly crosslinked macromolecules, microgels, inorganic particles, unreacted diboronic acids if Suzuki polymerization is carried out) is more problematic, because it implies the complete dissolution of the polymer, the filtration of the solution, the reprecipitation and the final drying. The operation is not particularly complicated in the laboratory, but can be very costly when large quantities of materials are involved, therefore it is preferable, for instance, to prevent the crosslinking side reaction by carefully controlling the polymerization conditions.
The number of papers where the topic of polymer stability and module durability is tackled is much lower compared to the papers where high efficiencies are pursued.14,79,80 Yet, a material, however efficient it may be, is useless if is not able to afford stable modules during operation. Part of the problem also arises from the lack of standard methods for the determination of organic solar cells durability, although important progresses on this point have been done in recent times.81,82
Thermal, morphological and photochemical stability contribute altogether to the overall durability of the device,83 although the positive effect of a suitable encapsulant is probably dominant. The stability to photodegradation can be improved by changing the chemical structure of the polymer. Several criteria are established to develop a photostable donor polymer for polymer solar cells.84 Some specific aromatic units are more resistant to photooxidation than others, thus they should preferably be incorporated in the polymer backbone, even at the cost of losing somewhat in efficiency. For instance, fluorene units are very prone to degradation, so they must be avoided as much as possible.84 Benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) is a very popular monomer unit and is the precursor of many highly-efficient polymers,58 but also undergoes dramatic structural modifications when exposed to the light in the presence of oxygen, which reacts with the polymer excited state, leading to the irreversible disruption of the conjugation.85 As discussed above, the alkyl chains are important to modulate the polymer solubility and its rheological behaviour. However, they can also be sites where degradation is triggered, especially the benzylic methylene groups. Accordingly, dialkyl-BDT units are much more photooxidisable than dialkoxy-BDT units,85 a useful general rule to be taken in mind when designing new polymers.
A clever alternative strategy consists in putting thermocleavable side chains on the polymer donor. The flexible alkyl chains allow the dissolution and the processing of the material, but once the active layer is formed their presence is detrimental. A mild thermal treatment can be applied to remove the chains and, with them, the weak sites.63
The choice of the active material must also take into account the thermal treatments that the device must withstand (either performed on purpose or indirect ones) during all the stages of its fabrication. For most materials, the annealing treatments improve the device performances. However, there are a number of cases where the annealing is not influential86,87 or is even detrimental88–94 due to unfavorable morphological rearrangements. Unless the morphology can be stabilized with appropriate compatibilizing additives, the devices based on these active blends should be kept close to room temperature during all the fabrication steps and during operation to avoid drops in efficiency. In the lab the solution to this is rather simple: the annealing treatment is not performed. However, in a R2R process after the deposition of the active layer, the buffer (usually PEDOT:PSS) and the electrode (usually obtained from a silver inks95) undergo thermal treatments at 80–120 °C to achieve their final structure. Therefore, because the active layer endures indirect annealing treatments in a R2R process, donor–acceptor systems that develop an adverse nanomorphology on heating must be avoided. A possible way to overcome this problem is to apply an hybrid coating/printing–evaporation process,96 where the layers following the active layer are deposited through thermal evaporation. However, productivity and cost issues come into play when vacuum operations are involved (see paragraph on electrodes).
It is now important to emphasize the physical and environmental constraints that are subject to annealing temperatures and durations in a R2R coating/printing process, that do not apply to laboratory operations. When solar devices are fabricated in the laboratory, a wide range of different annealing temperatures and durations can be applied. For instance, for the well known P3HT:PCBM system97 the annealing times are as high as 120 minutes and the annealing temperatures can reach 200 °C. Such temperatures are not an issue when the substrate is glass. On the other hand, for flexible modules the annealing temperature is limited by the service temperature of the plastic support. In particular, the upper operating temperature for heat-stabilized poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) films is around 140 °C. Small loads or tensions applied to PET films above these temperatures produce a strain in the material, which may result in subsequent deformations98 and shrinkage after a cooling/reheating cycle. Fig. 2 shows the shrinkage of a PET film as a function of temperature.99 Furthermore, a prolonged heating (10 min) of PET films above 100 °C causes the migration of cyclic oligomers to the film surface,99 interfering with manufacturing processes and deteriorating the device quality. These factors make questionable the use of active materials requiring high annealing temperatures (>130–140 °C). A more effective (Fig. 2), but also more expensive, alternative to PET could be poly(ethylene 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate) (PEN), which is also a better oxygen and moisture barrier material. Treatment temperatures up to 170–180 °C could be applied in this case.
 Fig. 2  Thermal shrinkage of heat-stabilized PET and PEN films vs. temperature.99 
Apart from the substrate/material constraints, the duration of the annealing treatment in a R2R process is determined by two factors: the roll speed and the maximum allowed length of the ovens where the film is heated. In order to assure a good productivity, the roll speed must be kept as high as possible, depending on the specific printing/coating technique: in slot-die coating, gravure printing and flexographic printing (used for the deposition of the active layer and of some buffer layers) the allowed roll speed is relatively high, around 10 m min−1, while in rotary screen printing (used for some buffers and back-electrode deposition) it is usually lower than 2 m min−1. The total length of the ovens is limited by the available space for the printing line and by the costs. Generally 10 meters is an upper limit, beyond which the printing line become unmanageable. The combination of the two factors brings to the trade-off value of about 1 minute for the annealing of the active layer and less than 5 minutes for the silver back-electrode. Longer times are still possible, but this means lower productivity and lower profit margins. Therefore, whatever is the transformation taking place in the material (morphological arrangements, solvent evaporations, chemical reactions, crystallizations, etc.), it must be fast and the material/ink formulation must be designed to allow these transformations to happen quickly. Laser annealing may represent a scalable technique to increase the speed of treatments.100,101 It is worth noting that in this context the often applied (at the lab scale) solvent annealing for active layer morphology and efficiency improvement33,102 would not be viable. In fact, solvent annealing is normally an inherently slow process that must be carried out in a controlled environment.103 Therefore, for what has been explained above, the application in an industrial R2R process is not straightforward: for a roll speed of 10 m min−1, five minutes of solvent annealing time would require a 50 meters sealed linear chamber.
As far as it concerns the acceptor, the variety of compounds reported in the literature104–107 is significantly smaller than that of the donors.9 As a matter of fact, PCBM, PC71BM and indenyl C60-bisadduct (ICBA) are the three mainly used compounds in the literature. The choice is even more limited moving to the industrial scale. The current prices of fullerene derivatives108,109 make PCBM the only reasonable choice for cost-effective printed module production. In addition, purification costs impose the recourse to PCBM-rich PCBM/PC71BM mixtures instead of pure PCBM. Unless cheap synthetic routes for other fullerenes are found in the near future, this fact has important consequences. Many low band gap polymers reach their best performance with PC71BM,58 thus their application in large area modules is not straightforward.
The fullerene:polymer ratio in many low-band gap polymer-based solar cells is often significantly above 1:1. Other than affecting the ink viscosity (see above50), this has an adverse effect on the interadhesion of the active layer.110Fig. 3 shows the fracture energy of P3HT:PCBM films as a function of the PCBM concentration in the blend. Above ∼30% by weight of PCBM, the fracture energy rapidly drops, suggesting a strong tendency to delaminate and a decreased integrity of the module during its life cycle.
 Fig. 3  Fracture energy vs. PCBM content in P3HT:PCBM thin films (full or empty squares account for different experimental conditions). Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 

Fig. 4 shows the variation of the fracture energy with the annealing time and annealing temperature. Higher temperatures and longer annealing times increase the fracture energy; although this is a desired situation, as discussed above it is also not easily implementable in a R2R process. All-polymer solar cells, i.e. solar cells where both the donor and the acceptor are polymers, may represent a solution to this problem.111,112
 Fig. 4  Fracture energy vs. annealing time in (a) P3HT:PCBM solar cells with various weight percent ratios of PCBM (annealing temperature: 130 °C); (b) P3HT:PCBM solar cells with a 50 wt% PCBM annealed at 110 °C (triangles) and 130 °C (squares). Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
Besides the donor and the acceptor, there is a “third component” of the active layer, sometimes underrated probably because it is not found in the final device: the solvent. However, the solvent is not barely a way used to convey the active components, but is an element that must be itself accurately selected and designed when large modules are involved. Due to the solubility issues of most polymers and of the commonly used fullerenes, chlorinated compounds (o-dichlorobenzene, chlorobenzene, trichlorobenzene, chloroform and others) are the solvents of choice for the lab-scale fabrication of polymer solar cells (Table 1). In particular, trichlorobenzene exhibits the advantages of better solvent power and relatively high viscosity.
Table 1 Properties of selected chlorinated solvents used in polymer:fullerene blend deposition processes56




Solvent

T
eb (°C)
Viscositya (cP)
Solubility parameter (J cm3)1/2
R-safety phrases





a @20 °C, except 1,2,4-thriclorobenzene @55.4 °C.





Chloroform
61
0.57
19.02
R22, R38, R40, R48/20/22


Chlorobenzene
132
0.80
19.26
R10, R20, R51/53



o-Dichlorobenzene
180
1.33
20.31
R22, R36/37/38, R50/53


1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene
213
1.57
20.62
R22, R38, R50/53




Because the PET substrate is chemically inert toward chlorinated compounds, in principle the same solvents can be used in R2R processes.18,48,95,113–118 In this case, however, the discussed constraints related to thermal treatment temperatures and times restrict the list of usable solvents. Fig. 5 shows the appearance of P3HT:PCBM films cast from different solvents after different drying times at room temperature. With chloroform (Fig. 5a) or chlorobenzene (Fig. 5b) the films are dried immediately after spin casting. With o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) it takes 30 minutes to allow the film to dry perfectly, but before that moment there are large wet zones on the substrate (light orange area in Fig. 5c). With 1,2,4-thrichlorobenzene (TCB) it takes about 150 minutes to have a dry film. At 90 °C the film from TCB becomes dry in a much shorter time (Fig. 6c) (see also the movies in ESI†), but nevertheless still too long for a R2R process. Furthermore, with o-DCB and TCB, the solvent evaporation process is not uniform, as well as being slow, thus the final films are very inhomogeneous and exhibit zones with different thicknesses.
 Fig. 5  Optical images of P3HT:PCBM films deposited from (a) chloroform; (b) chlorobenzene; (c) o-dichlorobenzene and (d) 1,2,4-thrichlorobenzene after different times (in minutes, indicated on each image) at 20 °C. 
 Fig. 6  Optical images of P3HT:PCBM films deposited from (a) chlorobenzene; (b) o-dichlorobenzene and (c) 1,2,4-thrichlorobenzene after different times (in seconds, indicated on each image) at 90 °C. 
Based on these results, it is not recommended to use TCB in R2R printing processes, even with donor–acceptor systems that give the best performances with this solvent;119,120 also o-DCB may lead to a critical situation under the point of view of performance and reproducibility.
A widespread practice in the optimization of polymer solar cells consists of the addition of high-boiling processing additives121 to the ink formulation to control the bulk heterojunction morphology by selective solubility of the fullerene component. Typical examples are compounds such as 1,6-dimercaptohexane, 1,8-diiodooctane or 1-chloronaphtalene.32,122,123 On the other hand, exactly due to their characteristics, it is possible that these additives will remain in the solar cell following solvent evaporation acting as contaminants124,125 and causing poor device reproducibility93 due to unfavourable interfacial contact or even a decreased stability.126 Hence in a roll-to-roll process a donor–acceptor system must be designed such that preferably it does not need solvent additives;94,126 alternatively, a specific process step must be added to remove residual deleterious compounds (but at the expense of the overall costs), for instance a washing treatment with inert solvents.93 Some other additives, not normally used in the laboratory routine for spin coating, might be necessary with different aims: tuning the ink properties in printing processes, namely antifoaming agents, viscosity index improvers, surface tension modifiers, etc. In particular, the latter are important when a hydrophilic material is printed over a hydrophobic layer, or vice versa, to avoid uneven surface coverage and bad adhesion. Care must be taken in using the correct type and amount of these functional additives and preventing interference with the photovoltaic performances.
A long term goal is to eliminate chlorinated compounds127 and resort to non- toxic and environmentally friendly solvents, such as hydrocarbons, ethers, esters, ketones, alcohols or even water–alcohols mixtures.128 Because of the solubility characteristics of polymers and fullerenes, at present the reported examples in the literature are scarce. For instance, a fluorene-dithienylquinoxaline-triphenylamine terpolymer:PCBM solar cell, which demonstrated a 3.5% power conversion efficiency when ink-jet printed from chlorobenzene–TCB solutions,129 led to efficiencies below 3% from anisole–tetralin, xylene–tetralin or xylene–mesitylene–tetralin mixtures, with pinholes observed in some cases. However, a bare solvent substitution could be not enough; a redesign of the active components and of the device layer characteristics may be required to advantageously use a different solvent. To achieve a satisfactory solubility in non-chlorinated solvents, the structure of the side chains of both the polymer and the fullerene must be modified. For example, alkyl chain substituents on the active components still work for aliphatic hydrocarbon solvents, but higher degrees of branching may be needed; polar substituents, such as di- or trioxyethylene groups, dimethylaminoalkyl groups, polyhydroxyalkyl groups, or ionic moieties (carboxylated, sulfonated or phosphonated alkyl chains), should be used for alcoholic solvents or alcohol–water mixtures.130 For instance, efficiencies of 0.7% have been achieved in isopropanol–water mixture processable solar cells, with an active blend made of polythiophene with hydroxyl-substituted lateral chains and a triethyleneoxy-substituted fullerene.128
Because the described structural changes would have a strong impact on morphologies, long and hard work of reoptimization of the new photoactive blends is due.
2.2 Buffer layers
Undoubtedly, the active layer is the core of a polymer solar cell, but the buffer layers play also a very important role, because they affect the electrical, optical and mechanical properties of the device and its durability.131–133 By carefully choosing and optimizing the buffer layer materials, it is possible to enhance selectively, or even simultaneously, the photovoltaic parameters of a solar cell (open circuit voltage, short circuit current, fill factor).134
For the buffer layer materials most considerations made for the active layer are valid: the materials should not be expensive and the post-deposition treatments (if any) must be done under mild conditions. A variety of deposition methods are applied in the laboratory for the creation of buffer layers, depending on their chemical nature. Evaporation, sputtering, e-beam deposition and atomic layer deposition are used for inorganic compounds, in particular metal oxides, while spin coating is normally used for polymeric compounds.132 Although very effective in improving the performance of polymer solar cells, some buffer materials, including ionic polymers134,135 are used as very thin layers (from a few to maximum ten nanometers). Such low thickness values are extremely hard to obtain with gravure printing or slot-die coating and even more difficult when seeking reproducibility.
In principle, vacuum deposition can be used96 with several materials (metal oxide, metal salts, organometallic compounds, low molecular weight organic compounds) for the large-area fabrication of the buffer layers with R2R equipment, but the impact of the direct process energy and the plant maintenance may be critical, thus making printing techniques preferable. In several cases, materials that are normally evaporated, for instance MoO3136,137 can be also formulated in the form of inks138–140 without significantly losing performances, although variations in the final material properties (work function, electron affinity, ionization potential) do exist.141 There are two main routes for the wet deposition of metal oxide-based inks:141 (i) deposition of precursor solutions, which includes sol–gel methods and (ii) deposition from nanoparticle suspensions.
Sol–gel derived ZnO films have been fabricated at a temperature as low as 130 °C,142 thus demonstrating the compatibility of these materials and this process with plastic substrates. Table 2 reports the power conversion efficiencies of inverted P3HT:PCBM solar cells with the ZnO cathodic layer treated at different temperatures for different times. As it can be observed from the figures reported in Table 2, reducing the thermal treatment time from one hour to a few minutes does not dramatically affect the efficiency, provided that the temperature is kept above 120 °C.
Table 2 Average and maximum power conversion efficiency of ITO (80 nm)/ZnO (30 nm)/P3HT:PCBM (180 nm)/MoO3 (10 nm) or PEDOT:PSS (150 nm)/Ag (100 nm) solar cells (active area: 26 mm2) with different treatments of the sol–gel derived ZnO buffer layer (see ESI for experimental details)




Entry
Thermal treatment
PCEav (PCEmax) (%)


Temperature (°C)
Time (min)





a Anodic buffer PEDOT:PSS instead of MoO3.
b Active area: 132 mm2.





1
200
60
1.88 (2.49)


2
140
60
1.54 (1.75)


3a
140
60
3.33 (3.59)


4
140
5
1.55 (1.70)


5a
140
5
2.40 (2.67)


6a,b
140
5
2.02 (2.01)


7
140
1
1.35 (1.61)


8
120
5
1.09 (1.25)


9
120
1
<0.01


10
100
5
<0.01




While the sol–gel route generally provides a dependable method to obtain efficient buffer layers even on plastic substrates, the nanoparticles route is still challenging. For instance, ZnO nanoparticle dispersions have a limited shelf-life. The reported inverted cells generally exhibit a lower efficiency than the conventional cells, due to the high number of recombination centers (defects) represented by the dangling bonds in ZnO nanoparticles.143 A mild UV–ozone treatment has been proposed144 that can overcome this limitation. In addition, the effective sintering of nanoparticles may be complicated, leading to unsatisfactory adhesion properties.
Once again, while in the laboratory many tricks can be used to obtain at the end a good test cell, in the upscaling only reliable and reproducible methods should be applied.
2.3 Electrodes
The electrodes assure the photogenerated charge collection; the workfunctions of the constituting materials provide the built-in potential and the driving force for carriers migration. The most commonly used materials at the lab scale solar cells are tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) for the anode and aluminum or calcium/aluminum for the cathode in conventional devices (about 90% of the published papers9); in inverted devices, the anode is usually made of silver and the cathode of ITO.
For the fabrication of large area printed modules, the choice of electrode materials is restricted by the necessity to achieve long-term stability under operating conditions and by the undeniable advantages of cheaper air-atmosphere processes: for these reasons the inverted geometry is, by far, preferable. Moreover, while silver inks and pastes are already commercially available, aluminum inks145 are easily oxidable and their use is still very challenging.
For the electrodes, the same arguments made for the buffer layers apply: vacuum processes are very energy intensive,5,146,147 thus they increase the costs, increase the energy pay-back time and decrease the economic convenience of polymer solar cells. On the whole, evaporated or sputtered electrodes have been evaluated to be responsible for more than 50% of the materials energy content and almost 45% of the energetic cost associated with the process of fabrication.147,148 Concerning ITO, it is an intrinsically critical material, due to the scarce availability of indium149–151 and the unsatisfactory mechanical properties of thin films, especially to bending.152–156 The latter is not an influential characteristic for rigid glass supports, but has a serious drawback when flexible plastic films are used.
A substitution of ITO with different transparent conductive materials based on earth-abundant elements is therefore sought for.157–159 Potential ITO substitutes are: (i) conductive polymers; (ii) conductive polymers and metal grids; (iii) thin metal films; (iv) metal nanowires embedded in transparent conductive metal oxides and (v) graphene160 and carbon nanotubes. In spite of the enormous progresses achieved in last times, these materials still need a further improvement in conductivity and/or optical transmittance.
At present, the most promising viable way appears to consist of solution processable materials to be deposited either on-line or off-line. Thus, it would be desirable that the future development of new active materials and buffer layers would be done also by using these types of scalable electrodes.
2.4 Encapsulant
Encapsulation of organic solar cells/modules until now has been relatively poorly studied on the lab scale compared to other aspects of the fabrication process; in most cases, devices are prepared and tested inside a glove box for limited periods of time. Under these conditions encapsulation is not required, and lifetime and stability are simply not taken into account. In spite of this, improvements of the stability of the organic cells and modules are needed, and will probably decide the success or the failure of the OPV technology in market application. To increase the stability of organic solar cells several ways have been experimented, for instance introducing additives, minimizing metal residues, and moving towards a more intrinsic stable architecture, namely the inverted structure. However, encapsulation is the unique reliable way to improve their lifetimes up to years by protecting the devices against oxygen and moisture,161 that are considered the main cause of degradation.162–166 The permeation requirements of the barrier layer for OPV applications are estimated in the range 10−3 to 10−6 g per m2 per day for the water vapour transmission rate (WVTR) and 10−2 to 10−5 cm3 per m2 per day per bar for the oxygen transmission rate (OTR)167–170 to assure a lifetime of at least one year or more.
In order to demonstrate the potentiality of OPV, at the laboratory scale the most used materials to protect the devices is (i) glass, applied on the device and sealed at the edges of the substrate using glues, such as epoxy resin, or (ii) polymeric materials, used to embed devices, such as polyurethane or UV resins. However, even if glass shows excellent barrier properties, and lifetimes of hundreds to thousands of hours have been obtained,12,14,171,172 it is heavy and brittle. Moreover processing rigid substrates in general implies low throughput in comparison to R2R processable substrates; on the other hand in situ monomers polymerization for embedding the modules/cells requires long reaction times (>20 minutes),173,174 not compatible with the R2R production process where web speeds are in the order of 2 to 20 m min−1 and the line length is kept as short as possible.
Flexible and R2R compatible solutions can be divided in two classes: (i) deposited/produced in line or (ii) prepared off line and then applied. The first class comprises several types of coating materials, both organic and inorganic, and several deposition techniques such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD),175 atomic layer deposition (ALD),176,177 vapor phase deposition (PEVCD),170,178 that are used to directly protect the device, but can also be used to prepare barrier films to be applied by adhesives. The main advantage of these kinds of techniques is that barrier layers are conformal to the device, and no horizontal channels for oxygen and moisture are open, even next to nano/micrometric vertical structures; their main common Achille's heels are (i) a very slow deposition process and (ii) a high energy demand, since they all are vacuum processes.
Going into details, barriers made of organic layers show low performances, with T80 in the order of hundreds of hours or less, most likely due to the permeability of polymeric films.179–184 The claimed target's uses are short lifetime applications, however, the use of such an expensive process does not seem to be justified for these kinds of applications. More promising is the deposition of inorganic layers such as SiNx, SiOx, Al2O3etc. for which the quality of the produced layers is not an issue. In particular low pinhole density barrier layers have been obtained using ALD, allowing over 6000 h of lifetime with negligible deterioration in pentacene/C60 cells.185 For this technique scalability to the R2R plant is under development, and speeds up to 2 m min−1 are considered to be achievable.
In this context, accurate cost evaluation has to be performed when encapsulation processes with vacuum steps are foreseen in line, especially when multiple layers are required, to keep high and stable both OTR and WVTR of the produced barrier.
Barrier films from clay nanocomposites are promising from the energetic point of view since they do not require high intensive energy vacuum steps, but, at the moment, their performances do not meet commercial requirements186 and lifetime T80 of devices is of the order of tens of hours.
The second class refers to films prepared off-line and then applied to the modules. Lamination is a common and consolidated process in several industrial processes. This approach can be applied to OPV to obtain final products having different expected lifetimes depending on the chosen barrier, matching the requirements of the target applications in terms of cost and lifetime and, differently from the first class, is also easily viable on the lab scale. To couple modules and barrier films, adhesives are used that introduce a new element in the structure that may interact with module layers; moreover it represents an additional point for oxygen and moisture inlet (lateral permeation). In addition, the perfect sealing of a micrometric vertical structure, such as a bus bar for electrical connection is not always guaranteed, and these may be additional inlet points.
Looking deeper into the materials forming barrier films, several types can be recognized, with different properties. Polymeric barriers are inexpensive but show low performances,168 even using perfluorinated polymer,187 or increasing the thickness of the film. One example of low permeability barrier (0.01 g per m2 per day) using only an inexpensive polymeric film has been demonstrated adopting a multilayer structure with nitrogen spacers, but the compatibility with R2R processes still has to be proved.188 Non-conventional encapsulants are graphene189 and flexible glass; the first one is conductive and requires an electrically insulating layer at the top of the module, and at the moment this is far away from being compatible with large scale applications. Flexible glass162,190 may be a very good candidate, but the cost of this material is still high. At the moment, the most promising way to encapsulate devices is the use of commercial barrier films obtained from the combination of organic and inorganic layers coupled in several ways. Lifetimes higher than 9000 h (T80) in environmental chambers14 and under outdoor conditions have been demonstrated.161
As mentioned before, the quality of the sealing of the devices was demonstrated to be fundamental to preserve high performances (oxygen and moisture can diffuse not only through the barrier layer but also through the electric contacts and the adhesive). Comparisons between commercial types of adhesives show remarkable differences of lifetimes, due especially to delamination problems at the edges.191 This suggests that the best couple of barrier and adhesive has to be deeply investigated.
In conclusion, looking to scalable materials, encapsulants for OPV will need not only to fit barrier properties and R2R processability, but also a series of other characteristics, such as high transparency, preferably higher than 90% in the absorption range of the active material, high dielectric breakdown, high volume resistivity, refractive index comparable with other layers,181 UV resistance and incorporating a UV filter to protect active and other organic layers, very good adhesion to the module. Moreover, it is necessary to accurately design the architecture of the layers to avoid delamination problems due to different thermal expansion coefficients of the involved materials, especially for outdoor applications.
3. Outlook and concluding remarks
The researchers working on polymer solar cells development have established during the years a number of criteria to design more and more efficient materials. About ten-thousand scientific papers9 reporting a huge number of novel chemical structures or compositions for donors, acceptors, buffers and electrodes have been published, in a frantic run to the best efficiency number. However, because a solar cell is a holistic system, in the end the recorded efficiencies have a real meaning and utility only if referred to a combination of upscalable materials/conditions/methods. If just one of these three elements fails, a certain finding loses most of its significance.
As demonstrated in this paper, the well established strategies for the design of materials for efficient lab-scale OPV devices are not sufficient when large area panels are concerned. A number of additional requirements must be met, both economical and technical (Table 3). As for the first point, with no doubts, the cost of any material used for module fabrication must affect as little as possible the overall costs of the final product: materials with good performances and lower costs are, by far, preferable to materials with exceptionally high performances, but too much sophisticated and expensive.61 Regarding the photoactive materials, the synthetic steps needed for their preparation should be few.62,67 To achieve this objective it may be also necessary to develop different synthetic strategies from those currently applied. From this point of view, direct (hetero)arylation69,70 is a powerful preparation method whose use is expected to grow in the future, for the preparation of both monomers and polymers. In any case, the simplification of the synthesis of already existing high-efficiency polymers would be desirable. Green chemistry67 will be a further way to reduce the product energy, the wastes and ultimately the cost of manufacturing polymer solar modules. Regarding the electrodes, the costs can be greatly reduced, and ultimately the commercial scale diffusion of OPV would become more likely, by replacing ITO with solution processable materials based on earth-abundant elements or graphene deposited on plastic sheets.
Table 3 The (hexa)decalogue for the flexible polymer solar modules development






Common lab practice
R2R plant
Recommended lab practice




Device area
Few mm2
Hundreds cm2
>1 cm2


Environmental conditions
Mostly fabricated in N2, less commonly in air
Air
Air


Deposition techniques
Spin coating, evaporation
Gravure printing, slot-die coating, rotary screen printing, flexographic printing
Gravure printing, slot-die coating, flat bed screen printing


Polymer synthetic complexity
Not discriminating
Cheap polymers
Keep the polymer complexity low (below 5–6 synthetic steps)


No hazardous intermediates


Selective reactions


Polymer purity
Purification through common lab-scale techniques
Pure and constant quality polymers
Pure and constant quality polymers


Polymer photostability
Issue not always addressed
Not critical with proper encapsulation
To be carefully considered; effect of side groups also to be evaluated


Polymer solubility
Not too much binding
Enough to afford processable ink formulations
High; increase the solubility by changing the side groups


Acceptor
Any; PC71BM largely used
Cheap acceptors: technical grade PCBM (PCBM/PC71BM ∼80:20 wt/wt)
Use PCBM (preferably, technical grade)


Develop novel (cheap) acceptors


Acceptor:donor ratio
Up to 4:1
Low enough to maintain a good ink viscosity and a low active layer fracture energy
Low A:D ratios; about 1:1 is recommended


Solvent
Any; chloroaromatics widely used
Chlorobenzene
Fast evaporating solvents; aromatic hydrocarbons are acceptable


In the long term: environmentally friendly solvents
For the long term: aliphatic hydrocarbons, alcohols, water


Solvent additives
Widely used
Fine, as long as they are removed after deposition
Apply treatments for post-deposition additives removal


Thermal annealings
Any temperature, any duration
Temperature limited by the substrate
Maximum temperature: 140 °C


As fast as possible
Maximum duration: a few minutes


Solvent annealing
Used
Critical
Avoid


Buffer materials
A large variety
Cheap, printable materials
Printable, fast curable materials


Electrodes
ITO–Ca/Al in conventional cells and ITO–Ag in inverted cells
Inverted architecture is currently applied
Inverted architecture; avoid metals easily oxidized by air


In the long term, substitution of ITO


Encapsulation
Generally not used, otherwise glass + epoxy or UV curable glue
Barrier films + sealant (e.g., pressure sensitive adhesive, hotmelt adhesive, UV curing)
Use barrier films instead of glass


In the long term, possibly, ALD or CVD protection




As for technical criteria, the donor polymers should not only have the right values of HOMO–LUMO levels, energy gap, absorption coefficients and charge carriers mobility, but also a suitable solubility to afford a smoothly printable ink. To achieve this characteristic a full understanding of the rheological behavior of the ink formulation is essential and a redesign of the polymer structure may be required. Even more so, if the chlorinated solvents, generally used in the laboratory experiments, would be substituted with more environmentally friendly hydrocarbons or polar solvents like alcohols or water.
Although spin coating and evaporation are simple and convenient methods in the laboratory, tools that are more similar to equipment used in R2R lines21 should be increasingly used for the development of new materials.17,50,192,193 In fact, many technical limitations of a material may become evident only when they are processed with instruments comparable to those used in industrial equipment. Furthermore, devices with at least 1 cm2 area should be studied9 and careful procedures for J–V curves (using masks if necessary) to avoid under- or overestimations of power conversion efficiencies and misleading conclusions should be followed.194
The device stability should take on much greater importance when new materials are developed. Unless a study is specifically devoted to durability, the authors usually are just concerned about the fact that the device survives to the first measurement. This cannot be the case for commercial modules, where a lifetime of at least 5 years, possibly up to 20 years, is essential.1,20,195 For this reason, on the one hand conventional architecture should be abandoned in favor of inverted architectures, because the latter is the only one able to guarantee a sufficient durability of the scaled device, and on the other hand more extensive research on barrier films and gas-proof sealants is required. From this point of view, reciprocal benefits from research advances in OPV and other adjoining technology fields, like OLEDs, flexible displays and printed electronics in general, are expected.
Finally, a possible niche application of polymer solar modules is indoor applications,196,197 where OPV has some advantages over other photovoltaic technologies. First of all, the requirements of photostability are much less stringent than for outdoor OPV, because the modules are not exposed to direct sunlight. A polymer for indoor use operates under low illumination conditions (less than 10 mW cm−2), harvests diffused light and does not need to absorb broadly in the visible/NIR spectrum. In this case, the absorption must be tuned just on the emission wavelength of the indoor light source, thus the re-design criteria involve for instance the conjugated backbone.
Predictably, by complying with the guidelines provided in this perspective paper will result, at least initially, in lower efficiency figures; however, in the long run the benefits in term of chances to successfully scale the OPV technology will be greatly enhanced.
Abbreviations

ALDAtomic layer deposition
BDTBenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene
CVDChemical vapour deposition
FFFill factor
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
ICBAIndenyl-[C60]bisadduct
ITOTin-doped indium oxide

J
sc
Short circuit current density
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital

o-DCB
o-Dichlorobenzene
OPVOrganic photovoltaics
OTROxygen transmission rate
P3HTPoly(3-hexylthiophene)
PC71BMPhenyl-[C71]-butyric acid methyl ester
PCBMPhenyl-[C61]-butyric acid methyl ester
PCDTBTPoly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)]
PCEPower conversion efficiency
PECVDPlasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition
PEDOT:PSSPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrenesulfonate
PENPoly(ethylene 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate)
PETPoly(ethylene terephthalate)
R2RRoll-to-roll
T80Lapse of time after which 80% of initial PCE is measured
TCB1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene

V
oc
Open circuit voltage
WVTRWater vapor transmission rate

References
C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 273–292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Darling and F. You, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17633–17648 RSC .
D. Yue, P. Khatav, F. You and S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9163–9172 CAS .
N. Espinosa, M. Hösel, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5117–5132 CAS .
N. Espinosa, R. García-Valverde, A. Urbina, F. Lenzmann, M. Manceau, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 3–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. M. Emmott, A. Urbina and J. Nelson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 14–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lizin, S. Van Passel, E. De Schepper, W. Maes, L. Lutsen, J. Manca and D. Vanderzande, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3136–3149 CAS .
F. C. Krebs and M. Jørgensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 119, 73–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jørgensen, J. E. Carlé, R. R. Søndergaard, M. Lauritzen, N. A. Dagnæs-Hansen, S. L. Byskov, T. R. Andersen, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, A. P. L. Böttiger, B. Andreasen, L. Fu, L. Zuo, Y. Liu, E. Bundgaard, X. Zhan, H. Chen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 119, 84–93 CrossRef PubMed .

          http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, accessed November 2013.
S. Dongaonkar, S. Loser, E. J. Sheets, K. Zaunbrecher, R. Agrawal, T. J. Marks and M. A. Alam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 782–787 CAS .
C. H. Peters, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, J. P. Kastrop, S. Beaupré, M. Leclerc and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 491–494 CrossRef CAS .
R. Roesch, K.-R. Eberhardt, S. Engmann, G. Gobsch and H. Hoppe, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 59–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yan, J. Noble, J. Peltola, S. Wicks and S. Balasubramanian, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 114, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.smartplanet.com/blog/intelligent-energy/lux-research-konarkas-solar-tech-caused-its-failure/16585, accessed November 2013.

          C. Brabec, V. Dyakonov and U. Scherf, Organic photovoltaics: materials, device physics, and manufacturing technologies, John Wiley & Sons,  2008 Search PubMed .
R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen and F. C. Krebs, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 36–49 CrossRef .
P. Kopola, T. Aernouts, R. Sliz, S. Guillerez, M. Ylikunnari, D. Cheyns, M. Välimäki, M. Tuomikoski, J. Hast, G. Jabbour, R. Myllylä and A. Maaninen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1344–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, S. Gowrisanker, J. J. M. Halls, D. Laird, S. Jia and S. P. Williams, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3839–3856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bian, E. Zhu, J. Tang, W. Tang and F. Zhang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 1292–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bilby, B. G. Kim and J. Kim, Pure Appl. Chem., 2011, 83, 127–139 CrossRef CAS .
N. Blouin, A. Michaud, D. Gendron, S. Wakim, E. Blair, R. Neagu-Plesu, M. Belletête, G. Durocher, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 130, 732–742 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. Chochos and S. A. Choulis, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 1326–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 723–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di Nuzzo, G.-J. A. H. Wetzelaer, R. K. M. Bouwer, V. S. Gevaerts, S. C. J. Meskers, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 85–94 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marsh, C. Groves and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 083509 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3013–3015 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45–61 RSC .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619–3623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Yao, H. Yang, V. Shrotriya, G. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1636–1644 CrossRef CAS .
P. Westacott, J. R. Tumbleston, S. Shoaee, S. Fearn, J. H. Bannock, J. B. Gilchrist, S. Heutz, J. deMello, M. Heeney, H. Ade, J. Durrant, D. S. McPhail and N. Stingelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2756–2764 CAS .
L. Longo, C. Carbonera, A. Pellegrino, N. Perin, G. Schimperna, A. Tacca and R. Po, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 139–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Risko, M. D. McGehee and J.-L. Bredas, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1200–1218 RSC .
N. Bérubé, V. Gosselin, J. Gaudreau and M. Côté, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7964–7972 Search PubMed .
J. Roncali, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1761–1775 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, G. Nan, X. Yang, Q. Peng, Q. Li and Z. Shuai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 423–434 RSC .
S. S. Mottaghian, M. Biesecker, K. Bayat and M. F. Baroughi, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 024501 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kouijzer, J. J. Michels, M. van den Berg, V. S. Gevaerts, M. Turbiez, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12057–12067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Olivares-Amaya, C. Amador-Bedolla, J. Hachmann, S. Atahan-Evrenk, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, L. Vogt and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4849–4861 CAS .
I. Y. Kanal, S. G. Owens, J. S. Bechtel and G. R. Hutchison, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1613–1623 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. O'Boyle, C. M. Campbell and G. R. Hutchison, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16200–16210 CAS .
W. Chen, T. Xu, F. He, W. Wang, C. Wang, J. Strzalka, Y. Liu, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, J. Chen, K. Hong, L. Yu and S. B. Darling, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3707–3713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3135–3145 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Baek, H. Yang, T.-S. Yoon, C. J. Kang, H. H. Lee and Y.-S. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1263–1267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 465–475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hübler, B. Trnovec, T. Zillger, M. Ali, N. Wetzold, M. Mingebach, A. Wagenpfahl, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1018–1022 CrossRef .
P. Kopola, T. Aernouts, S. Guillerez, H. Jin, M. Tuomikoski, A. Maaninen and J. Hast, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1673–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Voigt, R. C. I. Mackenzie, S. P. King, C. P. Yau, P. Atienzar, J. Dane, P. E. Keivanidis, I. Zadrazil, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 105, 77–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Facchetti, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 733–758 CrossRef .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, C.-C. Chen, K. Yoshimura, K. Ohya, W.-H. Chang, J. Gao, Y. Liu, E. Richard and Y. Yang, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 3384–3390 CrossRef CAS .
N. Banerji, E. Gagnon, P.-Y. Morgantini, S. Valouch, A. R. Mohebbi, J.-H. Seo, M. Leclerc and A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11456–11469 CAS .
G. Fang, J. Liu, Y. Fu, B. Meng, B. Zhang, Z. Xie and L. Wang, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2733–2740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yi, S. Al-Faifi, A. Iraqi, D. C. Watters, J. Kingsley and D. G. Lidzey, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13649–13656 RSC .
P.-L. T. Boudreault, A. Najari and M. Leclerc, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 456–469 CrossRef .
L. Huo, J. Hou, H.-Y. Chen, S. Zhang, Y. Jiang, T. L. Chen and Y. Yang, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6564–6571 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, D. Feng, Y. Wu, S.-T. Tsai, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7792–7799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Khlyabich, B. Burkhart, A. E. Rudenko and B. C. Thompson, Polymer, 2013, 54, 5267–5298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Osedach, T. L. Andrew and V. Bulovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 711–718 CAS .
M. Helgesen, S. A. Gevorgyan, F. C. Krebs and R. A. J. Janssen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4669–4675 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Hu, P. Liu, W. Li, X. Gong, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9638–9641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Carsten, F. He, H. J. Son, T. Xu and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 1493–1528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huo and J. Hou, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2453–2461 RSC .
D. J. Burke and D. J. Lipomi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2053–2066 CAS .
P. Berrouard, A. Najari, A. Pron, D. Gendron, P.-O. Morin, J.-R. Pouliot, J. Veilleux and M. Leclerc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2068–2071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Facchetti, L. Vaccaro and A. Marrocchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3520–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Mercier and M. Leclerc, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1597–1605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Cowan, W. L. Leong, N. Banerji, G. Dennler and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3083–3092 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kaake, X.-D. Dang, W. L. Leong, Y. Zhang, A. Heeger and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1706–1712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Camaioni, F. Tinti, L. Franco, M. Fabris, A. Toffoletti, M. Ruzzi, L. Montanari, L. Bonoldi, A. Pellegrino, A. Calabrese and R. Po, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 550–559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kettle, M. Horie, L. A. Majewski, B. R. Saunders, S. Tuladhar, J. Nelson and M. L. Turner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2186–2193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Nikiforov, B. Lai, W. Chen, S. Chen, R. D. Schaller, J. Strzalka, J. Maser and S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1513–1520 CAS .
A. Saeki, M. Tsuji and S. Seki, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 661–669 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Troshin, D. K. Susarova, Y. L. Moskvin, I. E. Kuznetsov, S. A. Ponomarenko, E. N. Myshkovskaya, K. A. Zakharcheva, A. A. Balakai, S. D. Babenko and V. F. Razumov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4351–4357 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Mateker, J. D. Douglas, C. Cabanetos, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, J. A. Bartelt, E. T. Hoke, A. El Labban, P. M. Beaujuge, J. M. J. Frechet and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2529–2537 CAS .
F. C. Krebs and H. Spanggaard, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5235–5237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Tanenbaum, M. Hermenau, E. Voroshazi, M. T. Lloyd, Y. Galagan, B. Zimmermann, M. Hosel, H. F. Dam, M. Jorgensen, S. A. Gevorgyan, S. Kudret, W. Maes, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, U. Wurfel, R. Andriessen, R. Rosch, H. Hoppe, G. Teran-Escobar, M. Lira-Cantu, A. Rivaton, G. Y. Uzunoglu, D. Germack, B. Andreasen, M. V. Madsen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 882–893 RSC .
R. Rosch, D. M. Tanenbaum, M. Jorgensen, M. Seeland, M. Barenklau, M. Hermenau, E. Voroshazi, M. T. Lloyd, Y. Galagan, B. Zimmermann, U. Wurfel, M. Hosel, H. F. Dam, S. A. Gevorgyan, S. Kudret, W. Maes, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, R. Andriessen, G. Teran-Escobar, M. Lira-Cantu, A. Rivaton, G. Y. Uzunoglu, D. Germack, B. Andreasen, M. V. Madsen, K. Norrman, H. Hoppe and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6521–6540 Search PubMed .
J. U. Lee, J. W. Jung, J. W. Jo and W. H. Jo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24265–24283 RSC .
M. Manceau, E. Bundgaard, J. E. Carle, O. Hagemann, M. Helgesen, R. Sondergaard, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4132–4141 RSC .
S. Alem, S. Wakim, J. Lu, G. Robertson, J. Ding and Y. Tao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2993–2998 CAS .
S. Ko, E. Verploegen, S. Hong, R. Mondal, E. T. Hoke, M. F. Toney, M. D. McGehee and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16722–16725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Zoombelt, M. Fonrodona, M. G. R. Turbiez, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5336–5342 RSC .
S. Bertho, I. Haeldermans, A. Swinnen, W. Moons, T. Martens, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, J. Manca, A. Senes and A. Bonfiglio, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 385–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, Y. Liang, J. Szarko, B. Lee, H. J. Son, B. S. Rolczynski, L. Yu and L. X. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 114, 742–748 CrossRef PubMed .
P. P. Khlyabich, B. Burkhart, C. F. Ng and B. C. Thompson, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5079–5084 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Li, C. Li, W. Li, C. Zhou, H. Liu, Z. Bo and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21970–21975 CAS .
W. Nie, C. M. MacNeill, Y. Li, R. E. Noftle, D. L. Carroll and R. C. Coffin, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1163–1168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Osaka, M. Saito, H. Mori, T. Koganezawa and K. Takimiya, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 425–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jorgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873–886 RSC .

          V. Shrotriya, Industrial & Specialty Printing Magazine,  January/February 22–25, 2013 Search PubMed .
M. T. Dang, L. Hirsch and G. Wantz, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3597–3602 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zardetto, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 638–648 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. MacDonald, M. K. Looney, D. MacKerron, R. Eveson, R. Adam, K. Hashimoto and K. Rakos, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2007, 15, 1075–1083 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Okraku, M. C. Gupta and K. D. Wright, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2013–2017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Petsch, J. Haenel, M. Clair, B. Keiper and C. Scholz, Proc. SPIE, 2011, 7921, 79210U,  DOI:10.1117/12.876245 .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pivrikas, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1226–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 583–590 CrossRef .
Y. He and Y. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 1970–1983 RSC .
P. Hudhomme, EPJ Photovoltaics, 2013, 4, 40401 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sonar, J. P. Fong Lim and K. L. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1558–1574 CAS .

          http://www.solarischem.com, accessed November 2013.

          http://www.solennebv.com/price%20lists.htm, accessed November 2013.
S. R. Dupont, M. Oliver, F. C. Krebs and R. H. Dauskardt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 171–175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Facchetti, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 123–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, X. Zhao, B. Andreasen, R. R. Søndergaard, M. Helgesen, K. Norrman, M. Jørgensen, F. C. Krebs and X. Zhan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 112, 157–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Galagan, I. G. de Vries, A. P. Langen, R. Andriessen, W. J. H. Verhees, S. C. Veenstra and J. M. Kroon, Chem. Eng. Process., 2011, 50, 454–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, O. Hagemann, J. Alstrup, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, K. Larsen and J. Kristensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 422–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, D. Vak, N. Clark, J. Subbiah, W. W. H. Wong, D. J. Jones, S. E. Watkins and G. Wilson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 109, 47–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC .
L. Blankenburg, K. Schultheis, H. Schache, S. Sensfuss and M. Schrödner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 476–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Park, M.-G. Kang, S. H. Ahn and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E247–E253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Price, A. C. Stuart, L. Yang, H. Zhou and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4625–4631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Chang, L. Zuo, H.-L. Yip, Y. Li, C.-Z. Li, C.-S. Hsu, Y.-J. Cheng, H. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5084–5090 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Liao, C.-C. Ho, C. Y. Chang, M.-H. Jao, S. B. Darling and W.-F. Su, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 326–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge, T. W. Holcombe, O. P. Lee and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15547–15549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Jing, X. Guo, H. Sun, S. Zhang, M. Zhang, L. Huo and J. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14920–14928 CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Zou, H.-L. Yip, K.-S. Chen, J. A. Davies, Y. Sun and A. K. Y. Jen, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4752–4758 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, A. Pron, M. Leclerc and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1297–1304 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chueh, K. Yao, H.-L. Yip, C.-Y. Chang, Y.-X. Xu, K.-S. Chen, C.-Z. Li, P. Liu, F. Huang, Y. Chen, W.-C. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3241–3248 CAS .
R. Søndergaard, M. Helgesen, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 68–71 CrossRef .
A. Lange, W. Schindler, M. Wegener, K. Fostiropoulos and S. Janietz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 109, 104–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mei and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 604–615 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, H.-L. Yip, F. Huang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1371–1388 CrossRef CAS .
R. Po, C. Carbonera, A. Bernardi and N. Camaioni, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 285–310 CAS .
H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5995–6011 Search PubMed .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636–4643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 Search PubMed .
P. M. Beaujuge, J. Subbiah, K. R. Choudhury, S. Ellinger, T. D. McCarley, F. So and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2093–2106 CrossRef CAS .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C.-W. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Hammond, J. Meyer, N. E. Widjonarko, P. F. Ndione, A. K. Sigdel, A. Garcia, A. Miedaner, M. T. Lloyd, A. Kahn, D. S. Ginley, J. J. Berry and D. C. Olson, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3249–3254 RSC .
S. Murase and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2459–2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, M. Wang, Y. Cao, F. Huang, L. Huang, J. Peng, X. Gong, S. Z. D. Cheng and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 523–527 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zilberberg, J. Meyer and T. Riedl, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4796–4815 RSC .
Y. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Fonoberov, K. A. Alim, A. A. Balandin, F. Xiu and J. Liu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 165317 CrossRef .
S. Chen, C. E. Small, C. M. Amb, J. Subbiah, T.-H. Lai, S.-W. Tsang, J. R. Manders, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1333–1337 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Maaninen, A. Maaninen and M. Tuomikoski,  2010, US Pat. US2010/0092659 .
N. Espinosa, R. García-Valverde, A. Urbina and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1293–1302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Espinosa, R. Garcia-Valverde and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1547–1557 CAS .
R. García-Valverde, J. A. Cherni and A. Urbina, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 535–558 Search PubMed .
E. Fortunato, D. Ginley, H. Hosono and D. C. Paine, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Roes, E. A. Alsema, K. Blok and M. K. Patel, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17, 372–393 CAS .
K. Zweibel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 375–386 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, B. Cotterell, W. Wang, E. Guenther and S.-J. Chua, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 394, 201–205 CrossRef .
J. de Goede, P. Bouten, L. Médico, Y. Leterrier, J.-A. Månson and G. Nisato, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2004, 854, U2,  DOI:10.1557/proc-854-U9.2 .
J. Lewis, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Cairns, R. P. Witte, D. K. Sparacin, S. M. Sachsman, D. C. Paine, G. P. Crawford and R. R. Newton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 1425–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Park, J. I. Han, D. G. Moon and W. K. Kim, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 42, 623–629 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 11–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Po, C. Carbonera, A. Bernardi, F. Tinti and N. Camaioni, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 100, 97–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. Ri Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Gevorgyan, M. V. Madsen, H. F. Dam, M. Jørgensen, C. J. Fell, K. F. Anderson, B. C. Duck, A. Mescheloff, E. A. Katz, A. Elschner, R. Roesch, H. Hoppe, M. Hermenau, M. Riede and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 116, 187–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Grossiord, J. M. Kroon, R. Andriessen and P. W. M. Blom, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 432–456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kawano, R. Pacios, D. Poplavskyy, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3520–3530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Manceau, A. Rivaton, J.-L. Gardette, S. Guillerez and N. Lemaître, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2009, 94, 898–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rivaton, S. Chambon, M. Manceau, J.-L. Gardette, N. Lemaître and S. Guillerez, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2010, 95, 278–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cros, R. de Bettignies, S. Berson, S. Bailly, P. Maisse, N. Lemaitre and S. Guillerez, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, S65–S69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, M. Latrèche, G. Czeremuszkin and M. R. Wertheimer, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 349–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Hauch, P. Schilinsky, S. A. Choulis, R. Childers, M. Biele and C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 727–731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kim, W. J. Potscavage Jr, A. Sundaramoothi, C. Henderson, B. Kippelen and S. Graham, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 140–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tipnis, J. Bernkopf, S. Jia, J. Krieg, S. Li, M. Storch and D. Laird, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 442–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel and M. Niggemann, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 491–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Lee, H.-P. Kim, H.-M. Kim, J.-H. Youn, D.-H. Nam, Y.-G. Lee, J.-G. Lee, A. R. b. Mohd Yusoff and J. Jang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 111, 97–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Søndergaard, T. Makris, P. Lianos, A. Manor, E. A. Katz, W. Gong, S. M. Tuladhar, J. Nelson, R. Tuomi, P. Sommeling, S. C. Veenstra, A. Rivaton, A. Dupuis, G. Teran-Escobar, M. Lira-Cantu, S. B. Sapkota, B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel, A. Matzarakis and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 292–300 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Barr, J. A. Rowehl, R. R. Lunt, J. Xu, A. Wang, C. M. Boyce, S. G. Im, V. Bulović and K. K. Gleason, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3500–3505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Bernardi, J. A. Rowehl, R. Po, A. O'Mahony, P. Scudo and V. Bulovic, Proceedings of the International Conference on Science and Technology of Synthetic Metals, Atlanta,  2012 Search PubMed .
C.-Y. Chang, C.-T. Chou, Y.-J. Lee, M.-J. Chen and F.-Y. Tsai, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1300–1306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mandlik, J. Gartside, L. Han, I.-C. Cheng, S. Wagner, J. A. Silvernail, R.-Q. Ma, M. Hack and J. J. Brown, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 103309 CrossRef PubMed .

          L. K. Massey, Permeability and other film properties of plastic elastomers, Norwich, NY, 1st edn,  1995 Search PubMed .
E. Lueder, Electrochem. Soc., Proc., 1998, 22, 336–354 Search PubMed .
J. Ahmad, K. Bazaka, L. J. Anderson, R. D. White and M. V. Jacob, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 27, 104–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. H. Jamieson and A. H. Windle, J. Mater. Sci., 1983, 18, 64–80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Leterrier, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2003, 48, 1–55 CrossRef CAS .
R. Paetzold, A. Winnacker, D. Henseler, V. Cesari and K. Heuser, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2003, 74, 5147–5150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Potscavage, S. Yoo, B. Domercq and B. Kippelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 253511 CrossRef PubMed .
M. W. Möller, D. A. Kunz, T. Lunkenbein, S. Sommer, A. Nennemann and J. Breu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2142–2147 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Granstrom, J. S. Swensen, J. S. Moon, G. Rowell, J. Yuen and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 253511 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Granstrom, M. Villet, T. Chatterjee, J. A. Gerbec, E. Jerkunica and A. Roy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 093306 CrossRef PubMed .
R. R. Nair, H. A. Wu, P. N. Jayaram, I. V. Grigorieva and A. K. Geim, Science, 2012, 335, 442–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Knauer, E. Najafabadi, W. Haske, M. P. Gaj, K. C. Davis, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, U. Carrasco and B. Kippelen, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2418–2423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hösel, R. R. Søndergaard, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2013, 15, 995–1001 CrossRef .
H. F. Dam and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 191–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Alstrup, M. Jørgensen, A. J. Medford and F. C. Krebs, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2819–2827 CAS .
E. J. Luber and J. M. Buriak, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4708–4714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kalowekamo and E. Baker, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 1224–1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Minnaert and P. Veelaert, Adv. Sci. Technol., 2010, 74, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .
R. Steim, T. Ameri, P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf, G. Dennler, M. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3256–3261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Solvent evaporation tests, thermal treatments of ZnO buffer layers. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee43460eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Riccardo Po	Riccardo Po studied Industrial Chemistry at the University of Pisa, where he received the MSc (Laurea) in 1988. Subsequently he moved to the Enichem Research Center in Novara, where he joined the Materials Department, working on polymer synthesis and modification. In 1999 he became Manager of the Polymer Chemistry and Physics Department. In 2007 the Research Center was incorporated by Eni SpA and he was appointed Manager of the Solar Energy Department and put in charge of the research activities on polymer solar cells.
Andrea Bernardi	Andrea Bernardi graduated in Physics in 2005 at the University of Turin and earned a PhD in Metrology at the Politecnico of Turin in 2008. After that he moved to eni to the “Research Center for Non Conventional Energies – Eni Donegani Institute” where he worked as a researcher in the production and characterization of polymer solar cells. Currently he is involved in the project devoted to scale-up of the OPV technology.
Anna Calabrese	Anna Calabrese received her MSc in Electronic Engineering (Curriculum: Micro-Optoelectronics) from the University of Messina (Italy) in 2007 and a PhD degree in Energy from the Scuola Superiore of Catania, University of Catania (Italy) in 2011. Since February 2009 she has been collaborating with Eni SpA, “Research Center for Non Conventional Energies – Eni Donegani Institute” (Novara, Italy) and in 2011 she joined the research center as a researcher. Her activity concerns the characterization of organic and polymeric materials suitable for technological applications in OPV.
Chiara Carbonera	Chiara Carbonera received her MSc in Industrial Chemistry with focus on chemical physics at the University of Milan. She then earned her PhD in chemistry at the University of Florence in 2003. From 2003 to 2008, she was a postdoctoral fellow first at the Institute for Solid State Chemistry (Bordeaux, France) and then at the Institute of Materials Science of Aragón (Saragossa, Spain), before she joined Po's research group at the “Research Center for Non Conventional Energies – Eni Donegani Institute”, where her research is directed mainly toward the improvement of polymer solar cell device features through their fabrication and characterization.
Gianni Corso	Gianni Corso graduated in Chemistry at the University of Trieste in 1998. He gained experience in the analytical field in search and identification of traces of aromas and then as a supervisor in an analytical laboratory. In 2000 he worked as a researcher at the experimental institute for plant nutrition (ISNP) in Gorizia and in 2001 he moved to Enichem Research Center (Novara), working on synthesis and reactivity evaluation of catalysts for hydrogenation and polymerization. In 2007 the Research Center was incorporated by ENI SpA and he was involved in the scale-up activities in OPV technology.
Andrea Pellegrino	Andrea Pellegrino received his MSc in Organic Chemistry at the University of Milan in 2007. He joined Eni spa at the “Research Center for Non Conventional Energies – Eni Donegani Institute” in 2008. He is involved in the design and synthesis of novel photoactive materials and macromolecular characterization.

Broader context
The global electric energy demand in 2010 was about 21400 TW h (source: IEA). Renewable energies accounted for almost one-fifth of the total energy production. While solar energy was only around 1% of this portion, over the past five years it has averaged an annual growth rate of over 50%. Growth has been mostly concentrated in a few countries, where PV generates today a few percent of total yearly electricity production. High cost, along with the intermittency of the solar radiation, is one of the main limiting factors, therefore much effort must be spent to overcome these problems. Polymer-based organic solar cells have the potential to be cost-effective and lightweight solar energy converters, with a promising energy balance. Their function is based on the photoinduced electron transfer from a polymeric donor to an acceptor, generally a fullerene derivative. In principle, they can be fabricated by low temperature printing or coating processes from solvent-based inks, which are compatible with flexible plastic substrates. Fair power conversion efficiencies (∼10%), comparable with amorphous silicon, have been recently achieved in the laboratory, by the combination of improved materials engineering, fine control of the photoactive layer morphology and use of more sophisticated device architectures. However, the technology will become convenient and will have large diffusion only when laboratory research results are transferable to large area modules, to be produced in high throughput plants.


 	Fig. 1  Optical images of P3HT:PCBM thin films obtained under different printing conditions: (a) concentration 50 g L−1 in o-DCB, line density 80 line cm−1, speed 7 m min−1, (b) concentration 50 g L−1, line density 80 line cm−1, speed 18 m min−1, (c) concentration 50 g L−1, line density 45 line cm−1, speed 18 m min−1, (d) concentration 100 g L−1, line density 80 line cm−1, speed 18 m min−1, and (e) concentration 150 g L−1, line density 120 line cm−1, speed 18 m min−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2010, Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 1  Minimum number of synthetic steps for the preparation of selected monomers used in low-band gap polymers.53,63,64	 

 	Scheme 2  Palladium catalyzed condensation reactions used for the synthesis of D–A conjugated copolymers.	 

 	Fig. 2  Thermal shrinkage of heat-stabilized PET and PEN films vs. temperature.99	 

 	Fig. 3  Fracture energy vs. PCBM content in P3HT:PCBM thin films (full or empty squares account for different experimental conditions). Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Fracture energy vs. annealing time in (a) P3HT:PCBM solar cells with various weight percent ratios of PCBM (annealing temperature: 130 °C); (b) P3HT:PCBM solar cells with a 50 wt% PCBM annealed at 110 °C (triangles) and 130 °C (squares). Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 


Chloroform	61	0.57	19.02	R22, R38, R40, R48/20/22
Chlorobenzene	132	0.80	19.26	R10, R20, R51/53

o-Dichlorobenzene	180	1.33	20.31	R22, R36/37/38, R50/53
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene	213	1.57	20.62	R22, R38, R50/53

 	Fig. 5  Optical images of P3HT:PCBM films deposited from (a) chloroform; (b) chlorobenzene; (c) o-dichlorobenzene and (d) 1,2,4-thrichlorobenzene after different times (in minutes, indicated on each image) at 20 °C.	 

 	Fig. 6  Optical images of P3HT:PCBM films deposited from (a) chlorobenzene; (b) o-dichlorobenzene and (c) 1,2,4-thrichlorobenzene after different times (in seconds, indicated on each image) at 90 °C.	 



1	200	60	1.88 (2.49)
2	140	60	1.54 (1.75)
3a	140	60	3.33 (3.59)
4	140	5	1.55 (1.70)
5a	140	5	2.40 (2.67)
6a,b	140	5	2.02 (2.01)
7	140	1	1.35 (1.61)
8	120	5	1.09 (1.25)
9	120	1	<0.01
10	100	5	<0.01

Device area	Few mm2	Hundreds cm2	>1 cm2
Environmental conditions	Mostly fabricated in N2, less commonly in air	Air	Air
Deposition techniques	Spin coating, evaporation	Gravure printing, slot-die coating, rotary screen printing, flexographic printing	Gravure printing, slot-die coating, flat bed screen printing
Polymer synthetic complexity	Not discriminating	Cheap polymers	Keep the polymer complexity low (below 5–6 synthetic steps)
No hazardous intermediates
Selective reactions
Polymer purity	Purification through common lab-scale techniques	Pure and constant quality polymers	Pure and constant quality polymers
Polymer photostability	Issue not always addressed	Not critical with proper encapsulation	To be carefully considered; effect of side groups also to be evaluated
Polymer solubility	Not too much binding	Enough to afford processable ink formulations	High; increase the solubility by changing the side groups
Acceptor	Any; PC71BM largely used	Cheap acceptors: technical grade PCBM (PCBM/PC71BM ∼80:20 wt/wt)	Use PCBM (preferably, technical grade)
Develop novel (cheap) acceptors
Acceptor:donor ratio	Up to 4:1	Low enough to maintain a good ink viscosity and a low active layer fracture energy	Low A:D ratios; about 1:1 is recommended
Solvent	Any; chloroaromatics widely used	Chlorobenzene	Fast evaporating solvents; aromatic hydrocarbons are acceptable
In the long term: environmentally friendly solvents	For the long term: aliphatic hydrocarbons, alcohols, water
Solvent additives	Widely used	Fine, as long as they are removed after deposition	Apply treatments for post-deposition additives removal
Thermal annealings	Any temperature, any duration	Temperature limited by the substrate	Maximum temperature: 140 °C
As fast as possible	Maximum duration: a few minutes
Solvent annealing	Used	Critical	Avoid
Buffer materials	A large variety	Cheap, printable materials	Printable, fast curable materials
Electrodes	ITO–Ca/Al in conventional cells and ITO–Ag in inverted cells	Inverted architecture is currently applied	Inverted architecture; avoid metals easily oxidized by air
In the long term, substitution of ITO
Encapsulation	Generally not used, otherwise glass + epoxy or UV curable glue	Barrier films + sealant (e.g., pressure sensitive adhesive, hotmelt adhesive, UV curing)	Use barrier films instead of glass
In the long term, possibly, ALD or CVD protection
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
BDT	Benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene
CVD	Chemical vapour deposition
FF	Fill factor
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
ICBA	Indenyl-[C60]bisadduct
ITO	Tin-doped indium oxide

J
sc
	Short circuit current density
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital

o-DCB	
o-Dichlorobenzene
OPV	Organic photovoltaics
OTR	Oxygen transmission rate
P3HT	Poly(3-hexylthiophene)
PC71BM	Phenyl-[C71]-butyric acid methyl ester
PCBM	Phenyl-[C61]-butyric acid methyl ester
PCDTBT	Poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)]
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
PECVD	Plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition
PEDOT:PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrenesulfonate
PEN	Poly(ethylene 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate)
PET	Poly(ethylene terephthalate)
R2R	Roll-to-roll
T80	Lapse of time after which 80% of initial PCE is measured
TCB	1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene

V
oc
	Open circuit voltage
WVTR	Water vapor transmission rate
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Solvent evaporation tests, thermal treatments of ZnO buffer layers. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee43460e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
