Eco-friendly semiconducting polymers: from greener synthesis to greener processability  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC04085A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC04085A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 14645-14664Eco-friendly semiconducting polymers: from greener synthesis to greener processability

        
          
            Madison 
            Mooney†
, 
      
        
          
            Audithya 
            Nyayachavadi†
 and 

        
          
            Simon 
            Rondeau-Gagné
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Windsor, Advanced Materials Centre of Research (AMCORe), Ontario, N9B 3P4, Canada. E-mail: Simon.Rondeau-Gagne@uwindsor.ca
Received 
      27th August 2020
    , Accepted 6th October 2020First published on 6th October 2020AbstractOrganic π-conjugated polymers are an important class of semiconducting materials with favourable optoelectronic and thermomechanical properties, making them great candidates for the fabrication of next generation electronics. These materials can be manufactured at large-scale through solution deposition techniques and many parameters affecting their processability can be easily modulated through synthetic design. However, current synthesis and processing approaches often involve employing toxic precursors, additives and/or solvents, significantly impacting the environmental sustainability of these promising materials. This review presents emerging strategies for materials scientists to design, develop and process semiconducting polymers in a more sustainable and eco-friendly manner. Emphasis will be given throughout this review to materials that are sourced and prepared from sustainable eco-friendly precursors through novel polymerization approaches. Additionally, emerging chemical design strategies for enhancing the solubility of these materials in environmentally benign solvents will also be highlighted. These various methodologies for greener materials and processing will ultimately provide greater cogency towards the development of sustainable next generation electronics.
Madison Mooney
Madison Mooney received her BSc in Chemistry and Anthropology from Trent University in Peterborough, Canada in 2019. During her undergraduate degree, she worked with Prof. Shegufa Shetranjiwalla on the implementation of Green Chemistry to the undergraduate chemistry curriculum. After completing her bachelor's degree, Madison began her graduate degree in the laboratory of Prof. Simon Rondeau-Gagné at the University of Windsor, where she is currently working as a PhD student in Materials Chemistry. Her current research focuses on the development of new, green and eco-friendly semiconductors. She also investigates the use of these new materials for the design of greener, fully printed technologies as part of the NSERC Green Electronic Network.
Audithya Nyayachavadi
Audithya Nyayachavadi was born in Ottawa, Canada. He completed his BSc in Biochemistry at the University of Windsor. During his undergraduate degree, he worked with Professor Jichang Wang on developing new materials for electroanalytical application. Audithya is currently a PhD candidate in the Rondeau-Gagné group at the University of Windsor. His current research focuses on developing novel crosslinking methodologies for organic semiconductors using thermal and photoirradiation techniques.
Simon Rondeau-Gagné
Simon Rondeau-Gagné received his PhD in chemistry from Université Laval, Québec, Canada, in 2014 under the guidance of Prof. Jean-François Morin. The same year, he joined the Department of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University, California, USA, as a postdoctoral research fellow where he worked on the development of new materials for skin-inspired electronics under the supervision of Prof. Zhenan Bao. In 2016, he moved to the University of Windsor as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry. His current research activities include the synthesis and design of conjugated polymers for greener printed organic electronics with a special emphasis on generating materials with robust mechanical properties and self-healing capability.
1. Introduction
Current technologies and electronics have experienced incredible transformations and advancements throughout the last decade. Nowadays, the possibility of using the human body as a platform for electronics capable of sensing a multitude of parameters and enhancing biological functionalities is a dream rapidly becoming reality.1,2 The rise of wearable e-textiles and rapid growth of the connections between humans and their surroundings clearly highlights the limitations of traditional silicon-based electronics and the need for novel alternatives.3–5 Known as the Internet of Things (IoT), all sorts of household, consumer, and industrial objects are now constantly acquiring and transmitting an impressive amount of data wirelessly.6,7 Through this data collection, the IoT is inventing ever-emerging opportunities for more direct integration of the physical world into computer-based systems, resulting in efficiency improvements, economic benefits, and reduced human exertion. To take the next step in moving forward in the IoT, body-integrated electronics, and e-textiles, a change in the way we design and manufacture electronics needs to occur.8 Silicon, despite being the champion material of electronics leading to very high performance devices, possesses some key limitations.9 First, the production of mono- and polycrystalline silicon is an expensive process, and the fabrication of electronic devices requires state-of-the-art ultra-controlled facilities.10 Furthermore, silicon is a brittle material and electronic devices made from it show limited mechanical conformability and robustness.11 Moreover, from a more global and environmental perspective, the production of silicon and related electronics is unsustainable. Therefore, a lot of attention in modern materials science has been given to the development of innovative alternatives to silicon-based electronics.
Among numerous candidates, π-conjugated polymers have been proven to be both a promising complementary and alternative solution to traditionally used silicon. Interestingly, π-conjugated polymers are semiconducting materials that possess several key properties required to enable the fabrication of next generation electronics.12,13 First, the π-conjugated structure of the polymers gives these materials favourable electronic properties that can lead to performant electronics.14 Second, their synthesis is well-established, allowing for π-conjugated polymers to be designed and tailored to control their physical, thermomechanical, and electronic properties.15–17 Due to tunable elastic moduli and good optical properties, semiconducting polymers are an ideal platform for the development of bio-inspired transparent or translucent electronic devices.12,18,19 Finally, these materials can be solution-processed at a large scale through multiple solution deposition techniques, opening new avenues for rapid, cost-effective manufacturing of electronic devices at the industrial scale.20–23
Despite these advantages, π-conjugated materials still need to be optimized to increase their utility for the fabrication of consumer electronics and technology. Currently, their processing and preparation are important limitations. Typically synthesized through a palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction between a dibrominated monomer and an organostannane (Stille coupling), or organoboron derivative (Suzuki coupling), the preparation of conjugated polymers is not eco-friendly and requires the use of expensive non-sustainable catalysts, chlorinated high-boiling point organic solvents, and generate toxic wastes.24 These polymerization methods produce high molecular weight conjugated species, but can lack selectivity (chemo- and regio-) and are often not economical in atom count (maximal number of atoms from precursors and reactants in the final products).25 Moreover, once purified and isolated, π-conjugated polymers are typically insoluble in eco-friendly solvents. This relatively low solubility directly results from their chemical structure; the long rigid semi-crystalline polymer backbone strongly aggregates through π interactions, limiting the capability of solvents to solubilize the polymer chains.26 These limitations did not stop scientists from optimizing and constantly designing new π-conjugated polymers. However, important optimizations are still required to bring the use of π-conjugated semiconducting materials to the next level and enable their sustainable production and incorporation into next generation electronics.
This review surveys important progresses in the design and synthesis of conjugated polymers through greener, eco-friendly strategies. Among the strategies described, a special attention is put on synthetic pathways that generate non-toxic wastes and result in π-conjugated polymers with good electronic properties for multiple applications in organic electronics. In addition to the greener synthesis of π-conjugated polymers, design strategies to improve and enhance the solubility of semi-crystalline π-conjugated polymers in eco-friendly organic solvents (and water) are highlighted to cover the processing of these semiconducting materials in various printed and thin-film electronics. A solvent can be defined as eco-friendly based on its low safety, health and environmental impacts. Many eco-friendly solvent ranking guides have been published for common organic solvents.27,28 Although anisoles, an aromatic and eco-friendly class of solvents, have had some success in processing these materials, π-conjugated polymers very often necessitate the use of toxic aromatic and/or halogenated solvents (at high temperatures) to be processed into devices.29 Therefore, through the next pages, the fabrication and conception of greener, sometime transient, electronics will be discussed. Despite significant progress that has been achieve in these fields for the last years, the design of greener, sustainable, and environmentally friendly semiconducting materials remains an important challenge in the field of organic electronics.
2. Green materials in organic electronics
Conjugated polymers have literally transformed the field of electronics since the discovery of polyacetylene by Heeger, Shirakawa and Mcdiarmid.30 Entirely made out of sp2-hybridized carbon, these rigid, semi-crystalline materials possess outstanding properties, particularly favourable for different organic-based electronic devices such as photovoltaics (OPVs),31 thin film transistors (TFTs),32 organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and others.33 These properties include charge mobilities similar to that of amorphous silicon, strong absorbance in the visible and near-IR, low Young's moduli (typically in the MPa range) and good solubility in organic solvents. More importantly, conjugated polymers can be processed at low cost through large-scale solution deposition (roll-to-roll printing, inkjet printing, etc.). They also possess tunable mechanical properties previously inaccessible in traditional silicon-based electronic devices, including a relatively high crack onset strain and moderate glass transition temperatures.34,35 These novel characteristics allow for accessing a variety of previously unattainable potential applications. However, as the popularity of these organic-based electronics grows, so does the potential for waste. Discarded plastics of outdated devices will continue to grow as research constantly produces newer, better materials. In anticipation of this environmental threat, recent work has been done to make organic devices more eco-friendly before they become commercially available or reach some industrial utility. In recent years, various approaches have been reported on the design and preparation of greener materials, using bio-based or degradable components to minimize the environmental impact of the devices in which they are applied. Overall, the ultimate objective of these approaches is to produce organic-based electronics that can degrade to non-accumulating components without sacrificing device performance. These approaches to greener electronic devices have been summarized nicely over the past decade by Irimia-Vladu, Vaccaro and Loh, among many others.36–38 However, some more recent works have led to new perspectives on the scope of what constitutes as ‘green’ materials.
‘Green materials’ can be loosely defined as materials that cause minimal harm to the environment. They are often derived directly from nature or are synthesized to mimic natural materials. One common example of green material in organic electronics is the use of natural dyes and colour pigments.39 Because they are naturally conjugated molecules, they make for interesting charge-carrying building blocks in electroactive materials and polymers. Green materials can also be defined by their degradable properties, as nicely reviewed recently by Bao et al.40 Interestingly, the authors separated these materials into two categories; materials that can disintegrate without full chemical breakdown (type I), and materials that can be degraded back down to monomeric and oligomeric building blocks (type II). They noted that significant progress has been made in developing degradable device components, but the electrical and mechanical properties of these materials must be improved before the commercial production of fully degradable electronics can be realized.
Furan-based polymers are an important example of type II green materials in organic electronics. Furan can be directly obtained from biomass and is biodegradable.41 Oligofurans were first used as semiconducting materials by Perepichka et al. where they reported p-type field-effect mobilities of 0.05–0.07 cm2 V−1 s−1, similar to those of thiophene-based analogues.41 Furthermore, the furan-based oligomers demonstrated intrinsically higher fluorescence and improved solubility compared to the thiophene analogues. They concluded that the difference in heteroatomic structure had little effect on device performance and indicated that the substitution of furans for thiophene units could lead to the development of new green electronics. Gidron et al. further developed furan-based semiconductors in their work with bifuran imides.42 They noted that, while furans have many advantages over thiophene analogues, their low environmental stability greatly limits their applications in electronic devices. Bifuran imides, however, showed much greater environmental stability without a loss of other favourable furan characteristics. Bifuran imide-based oligomers and polymers showed similarly improved fluorescence and solubility compared to equivalent thiophenes (Fig. 1a). They also demonstrated good solid-state packing and greatly improved thermal and photochemical stability compared to furan-based materials, which makes them ideal for use in a wide variety of organic electronics (Fig. 1b and c). While this material loses the biodegradability inherent to furan-based systems, it is still an important example of greener electronics from bio-based materials.
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of furan-based oligomers; (b) fluorescence in solution (CHCl3) and in the solid state at 365 nm, and (c) photostability in 1,4-dioxane in ambient light at room temperature.42 Adapted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another important source of biomass for green electronics is wood and wood derivatives. Hu et al. recently reviewed many applications of wood-derived materials, including green electronics, biological devices and energy applications.43 Cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin are important green materials derived from wood that can be applied to electronic devices primarily as biodegradable substrates. These substrates can then be used as the first step toward fully degradable electronic devices. Recently, Zhang et al. found success in developing paper-based strain sensors for wearable green electronics.44 They used thermally-annealed graphite glue, a mix of graphite powder and methyl-cellulose, to create printable paper-based strain sensors with a gauge factor of 804.9, response time of 19.6 ms and strain resolution of 0.038%, performance indicators that surpass many recently reported strain sensors. The authors concluded that the employment of cost-effective, bio-sourced materials to fabricate strain sensors with high sensitivity and rapid response times represent an important step toward a sustainable electronics industry.
Bao et al. further developed the applicability of wood-derived materials as substrates in the fabrication of fully disintegrable thin film transistors.45 By exploiting reversible imine chemistry, the authors synthesized a fully decomposable conjugated polymer processed onto a thin biodegradable cellulose substrate to produce transient devices (Fig. 2a). Under acidic conditions, these devices were fully disintegrated within 40 days to environmentally benign degradation products as confirmed visually and by the disappearance of the donor–acceptor charge transfer band (associated to the π-conjugated backbone), probed by UV-vis spectroscopy (Fig. 2b and c). While no in-depth evaluations of the toxicity and environmental impact of the degradation products from their new semiconducting polymers have been performed, the authors performed in vitro cell culture experiments with their conjugated polymer and its degradation products to prove their biocompatibility. Through nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy studies, they also proposed a two-steps degradation mechanism for their polymer that includes an initial imine bond hydrolysis followed by lactam ring hydrolysis. The authors further developed these degradable semiconductors to optimize charge mobility to a maximum of 0.05 cm2 V−1 s−1 as well as improve intrinsic stretchability and solid-state aggregation without sacrificing degradability.46 They accomplished this by incorporating a biodegradable polycaprolactone elastomer to induce phase segregation and produce semiconducting nanofibers. Furthermore, these nanofibers demonstrated strain-independent electrical performance, a highly desirable trait for many electronic applications (Fig. 2d and e). Although degradation in environmental conditions has not yet been achieved here, this work represents an important step toward biodegradable electronics. Additionally, it is important to note that several articles have been published on the biodegradability of a selected range of natural and synthetic polymers and polymer blends. These resources also give insight on some standard methods for evaluating biodegradability.47,48
 Fig. 2  (a) Chemical structure and degradation products of semiconducting polymer p(DPP-PPD); (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of p(DPP-PPD) in chlorobenzene with 1% TFA (1 M) over 40 days; (c) photographs of a fully degradable p(DPP-PPD) thin-film transistor at varying stages of disintegration.45 The change in mobility of neat and nanoconfined p(DPP-PPD) during (d) parallel and (e) perpendicular stretching to 100% strain elongation.46 Adapted with permission from ref. 45 and 46. Copyright 2017 PNAS. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
These recent successes in the pursuit of green materials demonstrate that the future of organic electronics can be sustainable. However, it is not only materials that can be made greener. The synthesis and processing of organic semiconductors can be just as harmful to the environment as the materials they produce. It is therefore important to focus effort toward making these aspects more environmentally-friendly as well.
3. Greener synthesis of conjugated polymers
The synthesis of π-conjugated polymers involves the formation of extended chains of sp2-hybridized carbons through carbon–carbon cross-couplings. Therefore, high-yielding cross-coupling reactions are required to achieve high coupling efficiencies, resulting in high molecular weights and degree of polymerization. Since their discovery, palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions such as Stille, Negishi, Kumada, and Suzuki couplings (Fig. 3) have been utilized and optimized for the synthesis of high performance conjugated polymers.49–53 Despite many key advantages for the synthesis of high molecular weights semiconducting polymers, including, synthetic versatility, robustness and good reaction efficiency, many of these cross-coupling reactions involve the use of costly, toxic and non-sustainable organometallic moieties including organotin (Stille coupling) or boron-containing species (Suzuki coupling). They also require additional synthetic steps to obtain the desired starting materials necessary for an efficient polymerization to occur. Thus, one of the major obstacles faced in the development of environmentally sustainable, high performance semiconducting materials is the development and optimization of synthetic strategies that mitigate the use of toxic reagents and allow for reducing the number of synthetic steps. Establishing a greener synthetic strategy to access conjugated polymers is the first necessary steps toward more sustainable materials. Throughout the years, many new polymerization reactions and techniques have been developed to address these challenges. Since these new methodologies have been extensively covered in previous reviews and constitute an entire field by itself, the following sections briefly highlight some key green synthetic pathways to access high-performance conjugated polymers.37,53,54 For a more in-depth overview, the reader is encouraged to consult the key review articles that will be highlighted in the respective sections.
 Fig. 3  Some conventional cross-coupling reactions used to prepare conjugated polymers. 
3.1 Direct (hetero)arylation polymerization (DHAP)
Greatly inspired from the work performed in the field of C–H activation, one of the more contemporary approaches for the greener synthesis of conjugated polymers is the use of transition metal-catalyzed direct (hetero)arylation polycondensation (DHAP) between aryl halides and heteroarene C–H bonds.55 This new strategy based on C–H activation eliminates the need for toxic organometallic precursors and minimizes the number of additional synthetic steps required to install these functional group for polymerization, thus offering an economical and environmentally-friendly alternative to traditional polymerization approaches for semiconducting polymers.
One of the first reports on DHAP has been investigating the synthesis of poly(3-hexyl-thiophene) (P3HT), one of the most commonly used polymers for organic electronic application.56 Lemaire et al. were able to prepare a library of poly(3-alkylthiophenes) with molecular weights close to 3 kDa by using 2-iodo-thiophene with various alkyl chains at the C3 position in what was described as a Heck-like cross-coupling reaction. Further improvement on this type of polymerization was reported over a decade later by Ozawa et al. by using Herrmann's catalyst as a palladium source.57 By using a superheated THF medium and screening for different ligand additives, the authors were able achieve P3HT with molecular weights of 31 kDa in 99% yield. Additionally, they conducted 1H NMR spectroscopic experiments, carefully selecting peak ratios that correspond to head-to-head and head-to-tail coupling to determine the regioregularity, found to be around 98%. The study by Ozawa and coworkers demonstrated that through careful selection of catalysts, ligands, and reaction conditions, DHAP provides a greener alternative to obtain materials comparable to conventional polymer cross-coupling reactions.58 By optimization and analysis of P3HT, DHAP has been used as a greener alternative for the synthesis of an extensive range of novel conjugated polymer systems. With this new tool in hands, high-performance π-conjugated polymers with better regioregularity, higher molecular weight, comparable or better performance in devices compared to materials prepared by conventional coupling techniques can be achieved. Notably, DHAP has been found to be compatible with a wide variety of functional groups, including fluorinated and amide-containing building-blocks.59 Among these, Wang and coworkers investigated the polymerization of DPP with a tetra-fluorinated thiophene-vinyl-thiophene (TVT) donor monomer to obtain copolymers capable of ambipolar charge transport (Fig. 4a).60 The resulting OTFT devices were shown to have hole and electron mobilities of 2.6 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 8 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively in ambient air atmosphere (Fig. 4b). These values are currently among the highest values of DPP based polymers, thus confirming the potential of DHAP as a viable methodology for developing high performance devices.
 Fig. 4  (a) Synthetic scheme for diketopyrrolopyrrole and tetrafluorinated thienovinylthiophene co-polymer, and (b) OTFT output and transfer curves.60 Adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Important progress has been made regarding the DHAP methodology to improve its economic viability as well as its synthetic versatility. Recently, Thomson and coworkers have reported the synthesis of several conjugated polymers using a copper catalyzed DHAP reaction instead of the traditionally more expensive and less sustainable palladium catalyst.61–63 Breakthroughs have also been carried out with regards to optimizing DHAP in the presence of water-containing systems, ambient oxygen atmospheres, and greener solvents.64,65 Notably in 2017, Leclerc and coworkers reported a DHAP methodology for various types of conjugated polymer systems that could be performed in an oxygenated atmosphere and water/toluene solvent system using tetrabutylammonium bromide phase transfer agent, demonstrating that DHAP has the potential to have more accessible conditions traditional cross-coupling techniques while also being greener.66
Despite becoming one of the most promising tools to access π-conjugated polymers in a greener manner, there are still some important challenges for the expansion of this methodology, particularly on an industrial scale. One of these major obstacles is the formation of homocoupling defects within the polymer backbone, resulting in low regioregularity and distorted structures that compromise electronic performance (Fig. 5). In order to mitigate this, various studies have investigated reaction conditions and developing novel catalysts and additives to prevent homocoupling defects.67–70 Progress with stopping homocoupling has been made where DHAP is now capable of reaching achieving higher regioregularity in comparison to the traditional polymer cross coupling methods.71
 Fig. 5  β-Branching and homocoupling defects in conjugated polymer synthesis. 
Another prominent challenge with DHAP is a lack of specificity during the polymerization process that arises from multiple possible C–H sites on the monomers capable of reacting with the catalytic agent. This lack of specificity is commonly referred to as β-branching (Fig. 5). During conventional heteroarylation of small molecules, β-branching is a nonissue as the α-position C–H bond has greater reactivity than the β-position. However, as the number of repeat units increases during polymerization, this specificity decreases, resulting in extensive branching or crosslinked conjugated structures that have effects on properties such as solubility and morphology, thus compromising device performance. To avoid this, studies have been conducted in finding ways to prevent β-branching from occurring during the polymerization process. One strategy for stopping β-branching is to protect the β-position sites by substituting the H group with a nonreactive moiety such as a fluorine or alkylated groups, thus stopping the side reaction altogether and maintaining high regioselectivity.72 Additionally, the use of monomers that contain phenyl aryl-halides such as isoindigo and carbazoles tend to mitigate β-branching due to their greater aromatic stability.73,74 However, this approach has limitations as it can introduce additional synthetic steps into the equation or limit the scope of attainable target structures. It is expected that future investigations will continue to carry out the trend of generating more environmentally friendly and cost-effective strategies that further DHAP as a viable and sustainable route for high performance plastic electronics.
3.2 Dehydrogenative polycondensation
In addition to developing direct arylation type polymerization techniques that reduces the need for toxic monomeric precursors, other synthetic routes also eliminate the need for halide containing monomers.54 Dehydrogenative polycondensation or direct C–H/C–H coupling, seeks to further eliminate the synthetic steps associated with the installation and purification associated with halide synthesis in order to develop more environmentally friendly semiconductors (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Comparison between DHAP and dehydrogenative polycondensation. 
First reported by Tsuchiya and Ogino in 2012, direct C–H/C–H polymerization for conjugated polymers was used for the synthesis of P3HT and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS).75 By using a combination of catalytic palladium(II) acetate in the presence of copper(II) acetate with trifluoroacetic acid and an oxygen atmosphere, they were able to synthesize regiorandom P3HTs with molecular weights up to 7 kDa and polydispersity index (PDI) as low as 1.67. Tsuchiya and Ogino proposed an oxidative insertion of mechanism of the alkylthiophene monomer with the Pd in combination of a copper oxidation cycle to restore the original Pd(II) species at the end of the coupling cycle in order to repeat the catalytic process. They successfully applied this system to various PEDOT:PSS derivatives, achieving molecular weights as high as 1.9 kDa and PDIs of 2.06. Despite the lack of regioregularity, these studies helped codify the use of dehydrogenative polycondensation as a viable methodology for synthesizing contemporary organic semiconductors. Other groups then proceeded to report the synthesis of different types of conjugated homopolymers including polybenzodiimidazole, polythienopyrroledione, polypropylenedioxythiophene, and regioregular thiophene-based polymers for high performance device application.76–79 Some examples of conjugated polymers prepared via dehydrogenative polycondensation are shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Various conjugated polymers synthesized through dehydrogenative polycondensation: (a) poly(benzodiimidazole);76 (b) poly(thienopyrrolodione),78 and (c) poly(3-ester-thiophene).80 
Interestingly, Thompson and coworkers reported the synthesis of a regioregular poly(3-ester-thiophene) (P3ET) by using a combination of Pd catalyst, silver(II) carbonate as an oxidant, and evaluated a variety of different ligands and additives.80 In their investigation, they found that the addition of tricyclohexylphosphine tetrafluoroborate as a ligand for the Pd catalyst allows for the synthesis of polymers with molecular weights of 15.1 kDa and PDIs as low as 2.3. When tested against identical polymers that were synthesized using DHAP and conventional Stille coupling, their results showed that DHAP and Stille methodologies resulted in lower molecular weights and higher PDIs. Additionally, Thompson and coworkers looked at the regioregularity of the P3ETs they synthesized and found that their synthetic approach for dehydrogenative polycondensation afforded regioregularities up to 86%, showing that the methodology is a suitable in developing high performance organic semiconductors. Notably in 2018, Kanbara et al. reported the development of a direct C–H coupling strategy for creating DA type conjugated polymers.81 By taking advantage increased susceptibility to Pd insertion due to the acidic nature of the C–H bond on the octafluorobiphenylene acceptor monomers, Kanbara and coworkers were able to copolymerize with 3,3′-dihexyl-2,2′-bithiophene donor monomers (Fig. 8a) in the presence of palladium(II) acetate, pivalic acid, potassium carbonate base and silver carbonate oxidant, generating polymers in moderate yields (61%) and high molecular weights (53 kDa). Through NMR studies, they found that the homocoupling defects of the resulting polymers was 4%, indicative of a successful DA copolymerization (Fig. 8b). The resulting polymer was successfully integrated into a working aqua-emitting OLED device with external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 0.12% at 8.5 mA cm−2, displaying that it was possible to use this approach for device application (Fig. 8c).
 Fig. 8  (a) Synthetic pathway toward octafluorobiphenylene and bithiophene copolymer; (b) 1H NMR spectra of copolymer; (c) OLED device and CIE color spectra, and (d) photo and electroluminescence of octafluorobiphenylene and bithiophene copolymer.81 Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Due to conjugated dehydrogenative polycondensation being a new and relatively unexplored approach, there are many reaction conditions and reagents to investigate and optimize with regards to synthesizing high performance organic semiconductors. It is likely that future studies will look at understanding the fundamentals of dehydrogenative polycondensation while looking at ways for applying the methodology to access novel organic semiconductors that would traditionally be synthetically challenging. Additionally, understanding the role of various additives and species and applying them for different species will be central in pushing the methodology forward. Future investigations will likely have to look at comparing the device performance of materials made from dehydrogenative polycondensation with materials made from traditional cross coupling techniques.
3.3 Aldol polycondensation
Another prominent strategy that has arisen as a greener alternative for the synthesis of conjugated polymers is aldol polycondensation. Compared to other methods of polymer synthesis, aldol polycondensation is unique in that it eliminates the use of organometallic reagents and transition metal catalysts, with the only by-product being water. Additionally, aldol polycondensation avoids some of the obstacles associated with other greener strategies such as β-branching and homocoupling, making it a viable eco-friendly methodology for the development of plastic electronics. Some examples of conjugated polymers prepared via aldol polycondensation are depicted in Fig. 9. Initially reported in 2013, Biewer and Stefan investigated and developed a library of various pyrimidine based conjugated copolymers via base catalyzed aldol condensation reacting 4,6-dimethylpyrimidines with a series of aromatic dialdehydes in the presence of potassium-tert-butoxide and 18-crown-6.82 The polymers were then characterized for both their physical and electronic properties and were shown to have good molecular weights, with most reported polymers being above 7 kDa. They later expanded on this study by using their aldol polycondensation methodology to develop a pyrimidine-phenyl copolymer that exhibited graphitic-like morphology after pyrolysis.83 The resulting materials were used to develop P3HT/graphene hybrid field effect transistors, with their investigation showing that the hybrid transistor devices exhibited greater charge mobilities by a factor of 10.
 Fig. 9  Various conjugated polymers synthesized through aldol polycondensation: (a) poly(phenyl-pyrimidine);83 (b) poly(bis-isatin-oxindole),84 and (c) poly(bisisoindigo).85 
In 2017, Zhang and coworkers were able to expand the scope of aldol polycondensation by applying the methodology for the synthesis of isoindigo and bisisoindigo based DA copolymers with bithiophene donors for OTFT applications (Fig. 10a).86 Using a combination of direct arylation to synthesize the monomers, acid catalyzed aldol polycondensation was carried out to generate the isoindigo based polymers with good molecular weights being reported (54 kDa and 31.9 kDa). When spincoated onto thin films, the polymers were shown to have similar optical properties when compared to identical based polymers synthesized through Stille coupling, as depicted in Fig. 10b. Additionally, the resulting materials were incorporated into organic thin film transistors (OTFTs) and were found to have good hole mobility of 0.16 cm2 V−1 s−1 and good electron mobility 0.26 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 10c). Similarly, Ravva and coworkers reported the synthesis of a series of rigid fused-ring isoindigo-based polymers using bis-isatin and bisoxindole monomers under both acid and base catalyzed aldol polycondensation, reporting high molecular weights (from 8 to 214 kDa) and good electron mobility of 0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1.84 In a similar manner, Li and coworkers reported the synthesis of polyisoindigo using acid catalyzed aldol polycondensation for n-type transistors, reporting a mobility of 9.29 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1.85
 Fig. 10  (a) Synthetic scheme for the preparation isoindigo-bithiophene based copolymer via aldol condensation; (b) UV-vis spectra of isoindigo-bithiophene and bisisoindigo-bithiophene copolymers, and (c) OTFT output and transfer curves of isoindigo-bithiophene polymer.86 Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Aldol polycondensation has shown to be a viable, greener synthetic approach for the development of organic semiconductors. With benign byproducts and the elimination transition metal catalysts it is expected that future research will look at applying the approach for synthesizing different types of conjugated polymer for device application as well as looking into improvements of the economic efficiency of such reactions.
3.4 Cycloaddition polymerization
Due to the high yielding nature, absence of need for extensive purification, and the ability to be carried out in greener solvents and in the solid state, the application of click chemistry towards the synthesis of semiconducting polymers has seen growing prominence as a viable strategy for developing of organic semiconductor based devices.87 Particularly, the copper(I)-catalyzed cycloaddition of azides and alkynes that give arise to 1,2,3-triazoles has seen wide use in developing novel organic semiconductors for device application. It is to be noted that there are many examples of using the click reaction as a post-functionalization technique for conjugated polymers to generate novel morphologies and unique materials such as bottleneck polymers, block copolymers and crosslinked networks.
One example of Huisgen cycloaddition for the preparation of organic semiconductors has been reported by Reek and van Maarseveen.88 By polymerizing a 2,7-diazidofluorene with a variety of aromatic diynes, the group was able to generate a library of alternating fluorene-triazole based conjugated copolymers with high molecular weights and good PDIs. The presence of 1,2,3-triazoles directly within the backbone of polymers and its effect on the optoelectronic properties has been investigated by various. Particularly, Bäuerle's group has reported the synthesis of a library of DA oligomers using a thiophene-triazole motif, with studies showing that the 1,2,3-triazoles units help maintain conjugation throughout the system while acting as weak electron acceptors.89 Additionally, their studies on the optoelectronic properties of the materials demonstrated that the triazoles were able to lower the bandgap values of the thiophene oligomers, demonstrating the potential of conjugated triazole based polymers for organic devices. While being performed on oligomers, known to be significantly different than high molecular weights conjugated polymers, this work confirms that the azide–alkyne cycloaddition is a particularly promising design strategy for developing novel conjugated polymers in a green manner, and for fine-tuning their optoelectronic properties. Despite these encouraging results, the employment of azide–alkyne Huisgen cycloaddition as an approach for synthesizing 1,2,3-triazole-based conjugated polymers for device application remains a relatively unexplored approach.
Another click polymerization technique of interest is the thiol–yne reaction to yield conjugated poly(vinyl sulfides) (PVS), which have seen applications in chemo-sensing and nonlinear optics. Tang and coworkers reported the metal free synthesis of a branched phenyl based PVS capable of aggregate induced emission capable of fluorescently sensing 2,4,6-trinitrophenol.90 Cao and coworkers reported the synthesis of a click polymerized a phenyl based PVS with ethynl-phenyl side chains that could be post functionalized with tetracyanoethylene in order to develop a donor–acceptor conjugated copolymer with third-order nonlinear properties.91
4. Conjugated polymers – solubility in eco-friendly solvents
To create sustainable next generation electronic devices, semiconducting polymers not only need to be synthesized through greener methodologies and procedures, but also need to be processed in a more environmentally friendly manner. While solution deposition methods are generally scalable and affordable, especially large-scale roll-to-roll or inkjet printing techniques, they also pose a notable environmental concern due to the large quantities of solvent waste that can be generated.92 Additionally, semiconducting polymers present a unique challenge as their solubility is often intrinsically restricted due to their design (strong intermolecular π–π interactions). While these intermolecular non-covalent interactions are critical to allow the polymers to efficiently carry electric charges, they result in a crystalline and aggregated morphology that can only be disrupted by high-boiling point (and often toxic) solvents. Therefore, large-scale fabrication of electronic devices from current semiconducting polymers often results in the release of large amounts of toxic solvents into the environment.
As organic electronics gain popularity, the continued use of these solvents will become unsustainable and toxic waste will continue to build unless the production of organic electronics can be made greener. There has been much work in the pursuit of ‘greener’ organic electronics, namely focused on greener synthesis and the use of environmentally benign materials, as discussed above. However, improving the processability of these polymers has only recently become a focus of research. This approach to obtaining greener organic electronics involves the rational design and synthesis of the semiconductor to make processing and device fabrication more eco-friendly. The next sections highlight important and significant progresses in the design of semiconducting polymers with improved solubility in eco-friendly solvents. While the focus of this review article is on semiconducting conjugated polymers, it is important to mention that important progresses have been made toward the greener processing of ionic conductive conjugated polymers. This includes the processing of PEDOT:PSS in aqueous emulsions and the processing of polyelectrolytes from various alcohols. Several important reviews can be accessed to get more details on the green processing of these important materials for the fabrication of organic electronics.93–95
4.1 Solubility of conjugated polymers in green solvents: challenges
Altering semiconductor solubility is one of several approaches to minimize the environmental impact of organic electronics. This approach involves the substitution of processing solvents for bio-based or environmentally benign solutions. The use of greener solvents in conjugated polymer processing is both more environmentally sustainable and less harmful to humans than traditional processing in toxic and halogenated solvents. However, before substituting one solvent for another, one needs to know whether that new solvent is truly greener. The ‘greenness’ of a solvent can be defined in many ways, and most methods use specific categories covering various aspects of waste, environmental impact, health, and safety, to describe the greenness of a given solvent and compare it to other solvents.96 In this type of evaluation, a given solvent is assigned a relative numeric value in each category so that it can be compared to other solvents and assessed in terms of overall greenness.28 These broad categories were originally derived from the principles of Life Cycle Analysis, a method by which to assess the greenness of any chemical process based on specific, but comprehensive subcategories.97 This careful evaluation and comparison between different solvents led to the development of a solvent selection guide, which has now become a valuable resources to determine the greenness of a solvent with regards to the different categories mentioned above.90 Furthermore, several recent works concluded that, beyond decreasing production impact, certain green solvents enable favourable thin-film morphologies and lead to improved electronic device performance.98,99 Many of these solvents surpassed common chlorinated solvents in device performance testing, proving that the use of green solvents is not only environmentally sustainable, but is also important to the optimization of organic electronic devices.
There are several approaches to improving conjugated polymer solubility in greener solvents. Fine-tuning the solvent system used for processing the semiconductor is often the first approach utilized as less environmentally harmful solvents with equivalent polarity or solvability to commonly used halogenated solvents can be used directly or made from a mix of solvents. This method has the advantage of not having to alter a previously optimized conjugated system to improve green solvent solubility, however it is limited by the number of green solvents with comparable solvation parameters as halogenated solvents. Bio-based solvents such as ethanol or water are often not accessible by this method.
Another approach aimed to access more highly environmentally friendly solvents involves the modification of conjugated polymers to alter their solubility. This can be achieved through two methods: side-chain engineering and backbone modification. These methods are also not without challenges. Solubilizing modifications to a polymer backbone can cause interruptions in the conjugated system which can result in poor device performance. Furthermore, altering side-chains can disrupt π–π stacking and impact solid-state morphologies, which in turn could also interfere with device performance. Therefore, modifications to the polymer structure must be made carefully to improve solubility without disrupting the ability of the material to carry charge effectively.
Independent of the approach utilized to access semiconducting polymers processable in eco-friendly solvents, the solid-state and thin film morphology of the polymers is highly dependent on the solvent used in processing. Solvent properties such as polarity, boiling point, and volatility can significantly influence the resulting film morphology and electrical properties of the materials. In particular, Park et al. reported a very detailed investigation of the effect of alcohol polarity on the aggregation and film-formation behaviors of P3HT.100 In this work, the authors observed that, depending on the chemical and physical properties of the solvent, polymer segregation in the solution state and polymer crystallization in the solid state can change greatly. This effect can even be modulated by using binary and ternary solvent mixtures and by fine-tuning the miscibility of the solvents through their Hansen solubility parameter (HSP). Overall, this investigation highlights the importance of miscibility and boiling point on polymer crystallization and film formation. Moreover, depending on the polymer processing method, the physicochemical properties of the polymers are crucial to control to achieve favourable solid-state morphologies for improved charge transport and thermomechanical properties.
To fabricate organic electronic devices by solution processing, the formation of multi-layer stacks is also a very important parameter to consider as materials need to be compatible and stable to one another. Therefore, the development of green strategies towards crosslinked polymer films in highly desirable. Still in its infancy, new green functionalization crosslinking reactions have been used to control the solubility of materials during device fabrication. Crosslinking of conjugated materials has also shown promises for getting access to novel solid-state morphologies and for fine-tuning the optoelectronic properties of the materials.101 One strategy reported by Kim et al. has been exploiting the incorporation of azide-bearing side chains on P3HT.102 In their investigation, it was shown that the azide-containing polymers can self-assemble to form nanowires, which can be then crosslinked upon UV irradiation to stabilize the nanowire morphology. Additionally, the authors showed that any nonreactive azides could be further used to functionalize the materials with polyethylene glycol, conferring water solubility and processability to the resulting conjugated materials. With a similar goal in mind, Nyayachavadi et al. reported an additive-free, solid-state crosslinking methodology for organic semiconductors through the incorporation of 1,3-butadiyne side chains.103 These 1,3-butadiyne moieties were shown to undergo a solid-state crosslinking to generate polydiacetylene upon exposure to mild photoirradiation. This crosslinking reaction allowed for a modulation of the materials solubility, and increased resistance to chemical etching. Ultimately this work demonstrates the possibility of using greener crosslinking strategies to not only fine-tune the solubility of conjugated polymers, but also to develop complex architectures with strong potential in organic electronic devices.
4.2 Enhancing solubility in eco-friendly solvents by solvent substitution
The use of eco-friendly solvents in conjugated polymer processing can be accomplished in some cases by solvent substitution. o-Anisole has become a popular alternative to halogenated solvents for many reasons; it is slightly nucleophilic, unreactive to most functional groups, has similar solubilizing properties as common halogenated solvents such as chlorobenzene, but is significantly less toxic.104,105 In addition, the high boiling point of the solvent makes it ideal for device fabrication.
Recent work by Hou et al. proves that o-anisole is a feasible alternative to chlorobenzene that does not sacrifice device performance.104 They used both anisole and a binary solvent blend of chlorobenzene (CB) and 1-chloronaphthalene to process perylene diimide-based (PDI) all-polymer solar cells (Fig. 11a). Power conversion efficiencies were similar between the resulting devices, with 5.43% efficiency for the anisole-processed device and 5.63% efficiency for the traditionally-processed device. Furthermore, using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), they concluded that the device film processed by anisole (Fig. 11b) was smoother and more evenly blended than the CB-processed film (Fig. 11c).
 Fig. 11  (a) Chemical structure of the acceptor polymer PPDIODT and donor polymer PBDT-TS. AFM height and phase images of PBDT-TS1:PPDIODT films processed by (b) o-anisole, and (c) chlorobenzene-based binary solvent.104 Adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Another green solvent with similar solubilizing properties as anisole is o-xylene. While not as nucleophilic as anisole, o-xylene has a similarly high boiling point and low toxicity, making it a viable alternative to halogenated solvents in some cases. For example, Peng et al. recently reported over 13% power conversion efficiency in o-xylene processed non-fullerene organic solar cells.106 They used novel wide-bandgap copolymers and a common non-fullerene acceptor to produce green-solvent processed organic solar cells with a power conversion efficiency of 12.8% without any post-treatment. This work illustrates how novel synthetic improvements to device performance does not have to be sacrificed for sustainability.
Further work has also been done to expand the variety of green solvents that can be accessed for use without the necessity of synthetic modifications to the conjugated polymer structures. Noh et al. reported the use of a binary solvent blend of mesitylene and acetophenone in processing several commercially available semiconducting polymers.98 Using the Hansen solubility parameters, they determined that the combination of these two solvents closely mimicked dichlorobenzene in terms of solubilizing efficiency. OTFTs were produced using both the solvent blend and dichlorobenzene. The authors concluded that the green solvent blend produced OTFTs with mobility values equal to or greater than the dichlorobenzene-processed materials. This work demonstrates that the use of green solvents may be the key to performance optimization on even previously tested and commercially available conjugated polymers. Additionally, the Hansen solubility parameters can be an important tool to employ the use of green solvents in processing conjugated polymers whose chemical structures cannot be modified due to previously optimized mechanical or electronic properties.
Building on this foundation, Vaccaro et al. created a library of green solvents that can be used to efficiently process conjugated polymers using 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene as a model.99 These solvents were ranked by greenness, processing compatibility and the characteristics of the resulting devices. Among those ranked highest, based on these three categories, were isobutyl acetate, isopropyl acetate, dimethyl carbonate, anisole, and t-amyl methyl ether. These solvents obtained a “fully green” ranking due to their low environmental impacts, good thin-film forming capabilities and promising device performances. The authors also demonstrated that several green solvents produced OTFTs with mobility values greater than traditionally used chlorinated solvents. Though this list is limited to the solvents and model semiconductor chosen, it is a valuable starting point to employing green solvent processing to all organic electronic devices.
4.3 Enhancing solubility in eco-friendly solvents by rationale design
Although the use of greener solvents without modification to the conjugated polymers is very useful, it is limited by the innate characteristics of the material. These materials are often non-polar with alkyl side chains, indicating poor solubility in polar solvents such as alcohols or water. Additionally, printing (rather than spin-coating) of electronic devices often requires solvents with low boiling points for processing.107 In order to access solubility in polar or low boiling solvents, modifications to the polymer structure must be made. Recent work has been done to fine-tune polymer solubility through synthetic modifications in several ways: both ionic and non-ionic side chain engineering, and conjugation-breaking backbone modifications.

4.3.1 Side-chain engineering with non-ionic moieties. 
Side-chain engineering is used to alter the mechanical or chemical properties of a polymer by modifying monomer side-chains. To improve green solvent solubility, these modifications often include the addition of heteroatomic or ionic groups to allow the material to interact with and solubilize in previously inaccessible polar solvents. Non-ionic moieties are used to exploit hydrogen-bonding properties to promote interactions between the polymer and polar solvents.
An example of this strategy has been reported by You et al., who synthesized several conjugated polymers bearing oligoethylene glycol side chains to improve solubility.29 Importantly, they found that the replacement of branched alkyl side-chains with oligoethylene glycol (OEG) had little effect on the solubility of the resulting polymers. However, as the number of OEG side-chains increased, the solubility was improved enough to process the polymers in 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (2-MeTHF), a nonhalogenated solvent. These polymers were used to create organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices with efficiencies of 2%, which is lower than the 7% measured from a device prepared from a non-substituted polymer processed in toluene. The authors associated the decrease in efficiency to poorer film morphology observed by atomic force microscopy (AFM), which is caused by the altered side-chains. This work illustrates the challenges to tuning the solubility of conjugated polymers through synthetic modifications by highlighting the difficulty of estimating solubility changes resulting from side-chain modifications and the disruption of mechanical properties such as film smoothness that result from manipulation of the polymeric structure. Park et al. noted similar results in their characterization of hole-transport polymers using OEG side-chains.108 Although OEG side-chains did not allow them to access alcohol or water solubility, these materials were processed in 2-methyl anisole and 3-methylcyclohexanone, a greener, non-aromatic solvent. The materials were used in perovskite solar cells and obtained a power conversion efficiency of about 20% when processed with 2-methyl anisole, 3-methylcyclohexane and chlorobenzene. This indicates that these materials can be processed in green solvents without loss of efficiency.
Woo et al. also exploited the compatibility of OEG units with polar solvents by incorporating branched OEG side-chains into a conjugated polymer to afford solubility in ethanol.109 These materials were then processed in both ethanol and chlorobenzene to test device performances. Interestingly, the ethanol-processed devices outperformed the chlorobenzene ones by nearly a factor of 10; the ethanol-processed devices had a maximum mobility of 1.0 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 in OTFTs, while the chlorobenzene-processed ones had a maximum mobility of 2.2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. The authors concluded that, beyond being greener, ethanol-processing allowed for favourable aggregation and film formation over chlorobenzene. Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction indicated that the ethanol-processed film had a more ordered packing structure, which lead to improved film morphology and greater charge mobility (Fig. 12). Interestingly, this work is a good demonstration that solubility in green solvents can improve not only the sustainability, but the performance of the resulting devices.
 Fig. 12  Chemical structure of PPDT2FBT-A, and grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) patterns of PPDT2FBT-A films processed from ethanol and CB.109 Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Building upon this, Kim et al. recently developed similar OEG-containing polymer blends with ethanol/water solubility.110 These materials contained OEG moieties in both the donor and acceptor polymers, enhancing the solubility to become partially water-soluble (Fig. 13a). These materials were used to fabricate all-polymer solar cells. The authors used a double cantilever beam test to confirm that the incorporation of the OEG moieties improved the interfacial adhesion properties between the active layer and electron/hole transporting layers (Fig. 13b). This led to enhanced durability under ambient conditions. Although true water solubility has not yet been accomplished by non-ionic side-chain engineering, these works show that these modifications can be manipulated to improve more than just solubility and can also improve device performance and durability.
 Fig. 13  (a) Images of de-bonded surfaces of OEG and alkyl side-chain polymers after the double cantilever beam test, and (b) diagrams of the fracture paths of both devices.110 Adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 


4.3.2 Side-chain engineering with ionic moieties. 
Research has also been done on the incorporation of ionic moieties into the side-chains of conjugated polymers. One advantage of this strategy is the possibility to achieve water solubility due to the ability of the polymer to ionically interact with the solvent, but there is also a concern of decreased device performance. Ionic groups have been reported as potential charge trapping sites, which could make them poor candidates for use as electronic materials.16 However, some progress has been made to avoid this through novel synthetic strategies.
Among others, Li et al. developed water-soluble conjugated polymers with bromine stabilized quaternary ammonium cation side-chains.111 These side-chains were modified post-polymerization and went from soluble only in organic solvents such as chloroform, to water-soluble. The ionic polymer was also found to be soluble in methanol and DMSO. Since these polymers were used as fluorescent tags to monitor DNA elongation, the authors reported no values of charge transport capabilities or thin film morphologies. However, this work illustrates the potential to achieve water solubility by manipulation of solubilizing side-chains and copolymer ratios.
McCulloch et al. also used an elegant approach to functionalize π-conjugated polymers toward biological applications.112 More specifically, they introduced TFA-stabilized lysine side-chains to achieve water-soluble polymers that were further used in OTFT devices (Fig. 14a). Interestingly, when compared to a branched alkyl chain standard, the incorporation of lysine groups on the side chains improved the electrochemical behavior of the polymer backbone. However, the ionic-containing polymers exhibited poorer hole transport properties with mobility values approximately one order of magnitude lower than the alkyl standard. Despite this decrease in device performance, the resulting materials proved to be highly biocompatible, with a normalized relative cells (neurons) viability similar to a control poly-D-lysine (PDL) sample (Fig. 14b). This work is a good illustration of the trade-off of using ionic moieties; improved water-solubility with potential charge-trapping sites and therefore decreased device performance.
 Fig. 14  (a) Structure of diketopyrrolopyrrole-based polymers incorporating lysine-containing side-chains, and (b) normalized relative viability of neurons on lysine-containing polymers L1-TFA and L2-TFA compared to poly-D-lysine.112 Adapted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
This trade-off was recently addressed by Reynolds et al. through the use of novel side-chains that could be cleaved after film formation.113 They designed an ester-based side-chain with traditional organic solvent solubility for simple monomer and polymer synthesis that could be hydrolyzed with potassium hydroxide to become charged post-polymerization for processing and device formation. Then, once processed, the side chains were cleaved by UV radiation to result in a water-processed device with no charge-trapping ionic moieties (Fig. 15). Though the mobilities of the resulting OTFTs were fairly low, with an average of 6.8 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, this work functions as an important proof of concept that ionic moieties can be used transiently to allow processing in green solvents without altering traditional polymer syntheses or requiring ionic components in the final electronic devices.
 Fig. 15  Process for preparation of conjugated polymer thin films with multistage cleavable side chains.113 Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


4.3.3 Backbone modification. 
In addition to side-chain engineering, there has also been investigation into the effects of backbone modification on green solvent solubility. Although backbone modifications have the potential to greatly alter solubility due to the effects on polymer flexibility and crystallinity, these modifications could also disrupt the conjugation of the polymer backbone, resulting in potentially decreased device performance. As such, current backbone modification has not been as successful at achieving solubility in target green solvents such as ethanol and water. However, progress has still been made to diverge from the most toxic halogenated solvents.
Bao et al. recently used conjugation breaking units to improve polymer solubility in non-halogenated solvents for OTFT devices.114 They incorporated branched alkyl linkers into the backbone of a conjugated polymer to reduce polymer aggregation in solution and decrease crystallinity, thereby greatly increasing solubility (Fig. 16). This increase in solubility allowed the polymer to be processed in non-halogenated solvents, such as p-xylene and 2-methyltetrahydrofuran, for OTFTs with a maximum hole mobility of 2.8 cm2 V−1 s−1. Additionally, the increase in solubility afforded access to alternative methods of device processing; both inkjet printing and solution shearing in high concentrations. Although this method does not allow access to solubility in polar green solvents such as alcohols, it improves the solubility of a conjugated polymer enough to access greener solvents and alternative device processing methods without sacrificing device performance.
 Fig. 16  Diketopyrrolopyrrole-based semiconducting polymers incorporating flexible conjugation-breaking units for improvement of solubility in non-halogenated solvents.114 Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Oh et al. found that solubility in nonhalogenated solvents could also be improved by modifying the types of heteroatoms present in the conjugated polymer backbone.115 They altered the polymer backbone with asymmetric conjugated segments, thereby maintaining conjugation throughout the backbone. They found that, by using selenophene in the place of a thiophene in the donor monomer unit, they created an asymmetric polymer with enhanced solubility in non-halogenated solvents such as toluene and o-xylene without sacrificing polymer crystallinity (Fig. 17). The asymmetry of the polymer enhanced electrical performance due to increased intermolecular interactions and caused it to demonstrate ambipolar characteristics to produce moderated electron and hole mobility values. This work exploits asymmetry caused by a heteroatom exchange to produce conjugated polymers with improved solubility in eco-friendly solvents without sacrificing polymer crystallinity or conjugation.
 Fig. 17  Grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) patterns of selenophene-containing polymer films processed using (a) chlorobenzene, (b) toluene, (c) o-xylene, and (d) toluene with DMSO additive after thermal annealing at 250 °C.115 Adapted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

5. Summary and perspective
In an age of constantly evolving technology, organic-based electronics possess a remarkable potential not only because they can be produced more economically than current silicon-based electronics, but also because they possess tunable thermomechanical and chemical properties that allow access to new applications such as flexible and biocompatible devices. Because of these exciting possibilities, new materials for organic electronic devices are constantly being developed and optimized at a rate that, if left unchecked, may become unsustainable to the environment. Common synthetic and processing methods to produce these materials include the use of toxic chemicals and generate large amounts of bio-accumulating waste. As such, any approach to the sustainable use of organic-based electronics must consider and attempt to minimize the environmental impact of these materials. Ideally, this impact can be minimized by using greener synthesis to produce bio-based, bio-sourced or degradable materials that can be processed in environmentally-benign solvents. While this may not always be possible, many recent advancements summarized in this review article can be considered in the pursuit of greener synthesis and processing of organic semiconducting polymers greener.
The design of bio-sourced and degradable semiconductors has achieved much success and attention in several reviews over the past decade, although the use of greener materials is not the only way to minimize the environmental impact of organic electronics. More recently, progress has been made to minimize the environmental impact of polymer synthesis and processing for organic electronic devices. As demonstrated in this review, synthetic methods such as direct (hetero)arylation polymerization, dehydrogenative polycondensation and click polymerization have been developed and modified to yield high molecular weight polymers with good electronic properties. These novel advancements have allowed greener synthetic methods to become viable alternatives to conventional polymerization methods that often involve the use of toxic organometallic species. Furthermore, much recent work has been done to minimize the environmental impact of the processing of organic semiconductors both through solvent substitution and synthetic modifications. Through side-chain engineering and backbone modification, tunable solubility has been achieved in several novel ways to allow for processing of semiconducting polymers in environmentally benign solvents.
Despite these important recent advancements, there is still much work to be done to achieve truly green organic electronics. In order to be implemented at the industrial level, where the full impact of greener electronics can be realized, the products of greener synthetic and processing methods must be able to match those from conventional methods. Improvement of material and device performance resulting from both green synthesis and processing designs is critical to the widespread use of these eco-friendly strategies. Many conventional synthetic and processing methods are well-known and have been previously optimized in terms of efficiency and resulting material performance. These is still much room for optimization in terms of design and materials performance before these greener methods can become an attractive alternative to conventional synthesis and processing. Furthermore, the minimization of the environmental impact in both polymer synthesis and processing is still an ongoing challenge. Many of the polymerization methods discussed here are limited in their applicability. Greater investigation into the application of these syntheses to new materials is needed to expand the use of these polymerization methods. Synthetic modifications to improve solubility in eco-friendly solvents also requires further investigation into how these modifications impact device performance. Additionally, the impact of eco-friendly solvents on film formation and device performance requires further study to fully realize the electronic performance potential of semiconducting materials. While completely green commercial electronic devices may still be out of reach, the research presented here demonstrates important foundational steps toward a sustainable future for next-generation electronics.
Author contributions
All authors contributed to the manuscript. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through the NSERC Green Electronics Network (GreEN) (NETGP 508526-17) and a NSERC Discovery Grant (RGPIN 2017-06611). S. R.-G. also acknowledges the Faculty of Science at the University of Windsor for support. M. M. thanks the NSERC for financial support through a Canada Graduate Scholarship – Masters (CGS-M). A. N. thanks MITACS Canada for financial support through a Research Training Award.
References
J. A. Rogers, Electronics for the Human Body, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 2015, 313, 561–562 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mehrali, S. Bagherifard, M. Akbari, A. Thakur, B. Mirani, M. Mehrali, M. Hasany, G. Orive, P. Das, J. Emneus, T. L. Andresen and A. Dolatshahi-Pirouz, Blending Electronics with the Human Body: A Pathway toward a Cybernetic Future, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700931 CrossRef .
H. Jin, N. Matsuhisa, S. Lee, M. Abbas, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Enhancing the Performance of Stretchable Conductors for E-Textiles by Controlled Ink Permeation, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605848 CrossRef .
C. Liao, M. Zhang, M. Y. Yao, T. Hua, L. Li and F. Yan, Flexible Organic Electronics in Biology: Materials and Devices, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7493–7527 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. O’connor, K. M. Rajan, A. D. Printz and D. J. Lipomi, Toward organic electronics with properties inspired by biological tissue, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 4947–4952 RSC .
M. Swan, Sensor Mania! The Internet of Things, Wearable Computing, Objective Metrics, and the Quantified Self 2.0, J. Sens. Actuator Netw., 2012, 1, 217–253 CrossRef .
J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic and M. Palaniswami, Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions, Future Gener. Comput. Syst., 2013, 29, 1645–1660 CrossRef .
M. Amjadi, K. U. Kyung, I. Park and M. Sitti, Stretchable, Skin-Mountable, and Wearable Strain Sensors and Their Potential Applications: A Review, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1678–1698 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rivnay, R. M. Owens and G. G. Malliaras, The rise of organic bioelectronics, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 679–685 CrossRef CAS .
R. Parashkov, E. Becker, T. Riedl, H.-H. Johannes and W. Kowalsky, Large Area Electronics Using Printing Methods, Proc. IEEE, 2005, 93, 1321 CAS .
P. Heremans, A. K. Tripathi, A. de Jamblinne de Meux, E. C. P. Smits, B. Hou, G. Pourtois and G. H. Gelinck, Mechanical and Electronic Properties of Thin-Film Transistors on Plastic, and Their Integration in Flexible Electronic Applications, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4266–4282 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, P. Baek, A. Akbarinejad, D. Barker and J. Travas-Sejdic, Conjugated polymers and composites for stretchable organic electronics, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5534–5552 RSC .
X. Guo, M. Baumgarten and K. Müllen, Designing π-conjugated polymers for organic electronics, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1832–1908 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Kline and M. D. McGehee, Morphology and charge transport in conjugated polymers, Polym. Rev., 2006, 46, 27–45 CAS .
M. U. Ocheje, B. P. Charron, A. Nyayachavadi and S. Rondeau-Gagné, Stretchable Electronics: Recent Progress in the Preparation of Stretchable and Self-Healing Semiconducting Conjugated Polymers, Flexible Printed Electron., 2017, 2, 043002 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, M. U. Ocheje, L. Huang, L. Galuska, Z. Cao, S. Luo, Y.-H. Cheng, D. Ehlenberg, R. B. Goodman, D. Zhou, Y. Liu, Y.-C. Chiu, J. D. Azoulay, S. Rondeau-Gagné and X. Gu, The Critical Role of Electron-Donating Thiophene Groups on the Mechanical and Thermal Properties of Donor-Acceptor Semiconducting Polymers, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1800899 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, A. Alesadi, M. Selivanova, Z. Cao, Z. Qian, S. Luo, L. Galuska, C. Teh, M. U. Ocheje, G. T. Mason, P. B. J. St. Onge, D. Zhou, S. Rondeau-Gagné, W. Xia and X. Gu, Toward the Prediction and Control of Glass Transition Temperature for Donor–Acceptor Polymers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2002221 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, H. Chong, M. Vosgueritchian, J. Mei and Z. Bao, Toward mechanically robust and intrinsically stretchable organic solar cells: Evolution of photovoltaic properties with tensile strain, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 355–365 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. J. St. Onge, M. U. Ocheje, M. Selivanova and S. Rondeau-Gagné, Recent Advances in Mechanically Robust and Stretchable Bulk Heterojunction Polymer Solar Cells, Chem. Rec., 2019, 19, 1008 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gu, L. Shaw, K. Gu, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, The meniscus-guided deposition of semiconducting polymers, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 534 CrossRef .
Z. Nie and E. Kumacheva, Patterning surfaces with functional polymers, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 277–290 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rogers and Z. Bao, Printed plastic electronics and paperlike displays, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2002, 40, 3327–3334 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, The path to ubiquitous and low-cost organic electronic appliances on plastic, Nature, 2004, 428, 911–918 CrossRef CAS .

Design and Synthesis of Conjugated Polymers, ed. M. Leclerc and J.-F. Morin, John Wiley & Sons,  2010 Search PubMed .
B. M. Trost, The Atom Economy - A search for synthetic efficiency, Science, 1991, 254, 1471–1477 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Reid, N. E. Jackson, A. J. Bourque, C. R. Snyder, R. L. Jones and J. J. De Pablo, Aggregation and Solubility of a Model Conjugated Donor-Acceptor Polymer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4802–4807 CrossRef CAS .
D. Prat, A. Wells, J. Hayler, H. Sneddon, C. R. McElroy, S. Abou-Shehada and P. J. Dunn, CHEM21 selection guide of classical- and less classical-solvents, Green Chem., 2015, 18, 288–296 RSC .
R. K. Henderson, C. Jiménez-González, D. J. C. Constable, S. R. Alston, G. G. A. Inglis, G. Fisher, J. Sherwood, S. P. Binks and A. D. Curzons, Expanding GSK's solvent selection guide - Embedding sustainability into solvent selection starting at medicinal chemistry, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 854–862 RSC .
Z. Chen, L. Yan, J. J. Rech, J. Hu, Q. Zhang and W. You, Green-Solvent-Processed Conjugated Polymers for Organic Solar Cells: The Impact of Oligoethylene Glycol Side Chains, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 804–814 CAS .
H. Shirakawa, J. Louis and A. G. Macdiarmid, Synthesis of Electrically Conducting Organic Polymers: Halogene Derivatives of Polyacetylene, (CH)x, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580 RSC .
A. Facchetti, π-Conjugated polymers for organic electronics and photovoltaic cell applications, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 733–758 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Nelson, T. M. Young, J. Liu, S. P. Mishra, J. a. Belot, C. L. Balliet, A. E. Javier, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, Transistor paint: High mobilities in small bandgap polymer semiconductor based on the strong acceptor, diketopyrrolopyrrole and strong donor, dithienopyrrole, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4617–4621 CrossRef CAS .
B. Russ, A. Glaudell, J. J. Urban, M. L. Chabinyc and R. A. Segalman, Organic thermoelectric materials for energy harvesting and temperature control, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16050 CrossRef CAS .
Re-inventing print, Nat. Nanotechnol.,  2017, 12, 283 Search PubMed .
J. Onorato, V. Pakhnyuk and C. K. Luscombe, Structure and design of polymers for durable, stretchable organic electronics, Polym. J., 2017, 49, 41–60 CrossRef CAS .
M. Irimia-Vladu, ‘Green’ electronics: Biodegradable and biocompatible materials and devices for sustainable future, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 588–610 RSC .
A. Marrocchi, A. Facchetti, D. Lanari, C. Petrucci and L. Vaccaro, Current methodologies for a sustainable approach to π-conjugated organic semiconductors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 763–786 RSC .
M. J. Tan, C. Owh, P. L. Chee, A. K. K. Kyaw, D. Kai and X. J. Loh, Biodegradable electronics: Cornerstone for sustainable electronics and transient applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5531–5558 RSC .
M. Gsänger, D. Bialas, L. Huang, M. Stolte and F. Würthner, Organic Semiconductors based on Dyes and Color Pigments, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3615–3645 CrossRef .
V. R. Feig, H. Tran and Z. Bao, Biodegradable Polymeric Materials in Degradable Electronic Devices, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 337–348 CrossRef CAS .
O. Gidron, A. Dadvand, Y. Sheynin, M. Bendikov and D. F. Perepichka, Towards “green” electronic materials. α-Oligofurans as semiconductors, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1976–1978 RSC .
S. V. Mulay, B. Bogoslavky, I. Galanti, E. Galun and O. Gidron, Bifuran-imide: A stable furan building unit for organic electronics, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11951–11955 RSC .
H. Zhu, W. Luo, P. N. Ciesielski, Z. Fang, J. Y. Zhu, G. Henriksson, M. E. Himmel and L. Hu, Wood-Derived Materials for Green Electronics, Biological Devices, and Energy Applications, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9305–9374 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liao, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, Q. Liang, Y. Ou, M. Xu, M. Li, G. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Flexible and printable paper-based strain sensors for wearable and large-area green electronics, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13025–13032 RSC .
T. Lei, M. Guan, J. Liu, H.-C. Lin, R. Pfattner, L. Shaw, A. F. McGuire, T.-C. Huang, L. Shao, K.-T. Cheng, J. B.-H. Tok and Z. Bao, Biocompatible and totally disintegrable semiconducting polymer for ultrathin and ultralightweight transient electronics, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 5107–5112 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tran, V. R. Feig, K. Liu, H. C. Wu, R. Chen, J. Xu, K. Deisseroth and Z. Bao, Stretchable and Fully Degradable Semiconductors for Transient Electronics, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 1884–1891 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jayasekara, I. Harding, I. Bowater and G. Lonergan, Biodegradability of a selected range of polymers and polymer blends and standard methods for assessment of biodegradation, J. Polym. Environ., 2005, 13, 231–251 CrossRef CAS .
W. Amass, A. Amass and B. Tighe, A review of biodegradable polymers: Uses, current developments in the synthesis and characterization of biodegradable polyesters, blends of biodegradable polymers and recent advances in biodegradation studies, Polym. Int., 1998, 47, 89–144 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Wu, C.-W. Hong and W.-C. Chen, Biaxially extended thiophene–isoindigo donor–acceptor conjugated polymers for high-performance flexible field-effect transistors, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 4378–4392 RSC .
S. Xu, E. H. Kim, A. Wei and E. I. Negishi, Pd- and Ni-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions in the synthesis of organic electronic materials, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2014, 15, 044201 CrossRef .
B. S. Nehls, U. Asawapirom, S. Füldner, E. Preis, T. Farrell and U. Scherf, Semiconducting polymers via microwave-assisted Suzuki and Stille cross-coupling reactions, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 352–356 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Cheng and T. Y. Luh, Synthesizing optoelectronic heteroaromatic conjugated polymers by cross-coupling reactions, J. Organomet. Chem., 2004, 689, 4137–4148 CrossRef CAS .
P. O. Morin, T. Bura and M. Leclerc, Realizing the full potential of conjugated polymers: innovation in polymer synthesis, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 11–20 RSC .
J. Kuwabara, Direct arylation polycondensation for synthesis of optoelectronic materials, Polym. J., 2018, 50, 1099–1106 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. McGlacken and L. M. Bateman, Recent advances in aryl-aryl bond formation by direct arylation, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2447–2464 RSC .
M. Sévignon, J. Papillon, E. Schulz and M. Lemaire, New synthetic method for the polymerization of alkylthiophenes, Tetrahedron Lett., 1999, 40, 5873–5876 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, R. Takita, Y. Kikuzaki and F. Ozawa, Palladium-catalyzed dehydrohalogenative polycondensation of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene: an efficient approach to head-to-tail poly(3-hexylthiophene), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11420–11421 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Mercier and M. Leclerc, Direct (hetero)arylation: A new tool for polymer chemists, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1597–1605 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, R. M. Pankow, M. Horikawa, E. L. Melenbrink, K. Liu and B. C. Thompson, Green-Solvent-Processed Amide-Functionalized Conjugated Polymers Prepared via Direct Arylation Polymerization (DArP), Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 9383–9388 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, J. Bai, Y. Sui, Y. Han, Y. Deng, H. Tian, Y. Geng and F. Wang, High Mobility Ambipolar Diketopyrrolopyrrole-Based Conjugated Polymers Synthesized via Direct Arylation Polycondensation: Influence of Thiophene Moieties and Side Chains, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 8752–8760 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Pankow, L. Ye and B. C. Thompson, Sustainable Synthesis of a Fluorinated Arylene Conjugated Polymer via Cu-Catalyzed Direct Arylation Polymerization (DArP), ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7, 1232–1236 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Pankow, L. Ye and B. C. Thompson, Copper catalyzed synthesis of conjugated copolymers using direct arylation polymerization, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 4120–4124 RSC .
L. Ye, R. M. Pankow, A. Schmitt and B. C. Thompson, Synthesis of conjugated polymers using aryl-bromides via Cu-catalyzed direct arylation polymerization (Cu-DArP), Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 6545–6550 RSC .
Y. J. Lin, H. S. Sun, H. R. Yang, Y. Y. Lai, K. Y. Hou and Y. H. Liu, Aqueous Palladium-Catalyzed Direct Arylation Polymerization of 2-Bromothiophene Derivatives, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2020, 41, 2000021 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Pankow, L. Ye, N. S. Gobalasingham, N. Salami, S. Samal and B. C. Thompson, Investigation of green and sustainable solvents for direct arylation polymerization (DArP), Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 3885–3892 RSC .
F. Grenier, K. Goudreau and M. Leclerc, Robust Direct (Hetero)arylation Polymerization in Biphasic Conditions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2816–2824 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Cicha, S. N. Gockel, A. J. Helmin, W. D. Wilcox, D. E. Janzen and T. M. Pappenfus, Benzodithiophene homopolymers via direct (hetero)arylation polymerization, Polym. Bull., 2018, 75, 5667–5675 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lombeck, H. Komber, S. I. Gorelsky and M. Sommer, Supporting information for Identifying Homocouplings as Critical Side Reactions in Direct Arylation Polycondensation, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 819–823 CrossRef CAS .
E. Iizuka, M. Wakioka and F. Ozawa, Mixed-Ligand Approach to Palladium-Catalyzed Direct Arylation Polymerization: Effective Prevention of Structural Defects Using Diamines, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 3310–3317 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wakioka and F. Ozawa, Highly Efficient
Catalysts for Direct Arylation Polymerization (DArP), Asian J. Org. Chem., 2018, 7, 1206–1216 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Hendsbee and Y. Li, Performance comparisons of polymer semiconductors synthesized by direct (Hetero)Arylation Polymerization (DHAP) and conventional methods for organic thin film transistors and organic photovoltaics, Molecules, 2018, 23, 1255 CrossRef .
S.-L. Suraru, J. A. Lee and C. K. Luscombe, C–H Arylation in the Synthesis of π-Conjugated Polymers, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 724–729 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bura, P. O. Morin and M. Leclerc, En Route to Defect-Free Polythiophene Derivatives by Direct Heteroarylation Polymerization, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 5614–5620 CrossRef CAS .
P. O. Morin, T. Bura, B. Sun, S. I. Gorelsky, Y. Li and M. Leclerc, Conjugated polymers à la carte from time-controlled direct (hetero)arylation polymerization, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsuchiya and K. Ogino, Catalytic oxidative polymerization of thiophene derivatives, Polym. J., 2013, 45, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, X. Qin, B. Li, J. Lan, Q. Guo and J. You, Cu-catalysed oxidative C-H/C-H coupling polymerisation of benzodiimidazoles: An efficient approach to regioregular polybenzodiimidazoles for blue-emitting materials, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13739–13741 RSC .
Q. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Lu, H. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Chen and C. Li, Pd-catalysed oxidative C-H/C-H coupling polymerization for polythiazole-based derivatives, Polymer, 2015, 68, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, X. Wan, Y. Lu, Y. Li, Y. Li, C. Li, H. Wu and Y. Chen, The synthesis of 5-alkyl[3,4-c]thienopyrrole-4,6-dione-based polymers using a Pd-catalyzed oxidative C-H/C-H homopolymerization reaction, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12497–12499 RSC .
G. S. Collier and J. R. Reynolds, Exploring the Utility of Buchwald Ligands for C-H Oxidative Direct Arylation Polymerizations, ACS Macro Lett., 2019, 8, 931–936 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Gobalasingham, S. Noh and B. C. Thompson, Palladium-catalyzed oxidative direct arylation polymerization (Oxi-DArP) of an ester-functionalized thiophene, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 1623–1631 RSC .
H. Aoki, H. Saito, Y. Shimoyama, J. Kuwabara, T. Yasuda and T. Kanbara, Synthesis of Conjugated Polymers Containing Octafluorobiphenylene Unit via Pd-Catalyzed Cross-Dehydrogenative-Coupling Reaction, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Gunathilake, H. D. Magurudeniya, P. Huang, H. Nguyen, E. A. Rainbolt, M. C. Stefan and M. C. Biewer, Synthesis and characterization of novel semiconducting polymers containing pyrimidine, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 5216–5219 RSC .
S. S. Gunathilake, P. Huang, M. P. Bhatt, E. A. Rainbolt, M. C. Stefan and M. C. Biewer, Nitrogen containing graphene-like structures from pyrolysis of pyrimidine polymers for polymer/graphene hybrid field effect transistors, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 41997–42001 RSC .
A. Onwubiko, W. Yue, C. Jellett, M. Xiao, H. Y. Chen, M. K. Ravva, D. A. Hanifi, A. C. Knall, B. Purushothaman, M. Nikolka, J. C. Flores, A. Salleo, J. L. Bredas, H. Sirringhaus, P. Hayoz and I. McCulloch, Fused electron deficient semiconducting polymers for air stable electron transport, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ganguly, K. He, A. D. Hendsbee, M. Abdelsamie, R. N. Bennett, Y. Li, M. F. Toney and T. L. Kelly, Synthesis of Poly(bisisoindigo) Using a Metal-Free Aldol Polymerization for Thin-Film Transistor Applications, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces, 2020, 12, 14265–14271 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, Y. Dai, Y. Liu, J. Liu, H. Lu, L. Qiu and K. Cho, Facile green synthesis of isoindigo-based conjugated polymers using aldol polycondensation, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 3448–3456 RSC .
A. Marrocchi, A. Facchetti, D. Lanari, S. Santoro and L. Vaccaro, Click-chemistry approaches to π-conjugated polymers for organic electronics applications, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6298–6308 RSC .
D. J. V. C. Van Steenis, O. R. P. David, G. P. F. Van Strijdonck, J. H. Van Maarseveen and J. N. H. Reek, Click-chemistry as an efficient synthetic tool for the preparation of novel conjugated polymers, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4333–4335 RSC .
S. Potratz, A. Mishra and P. Bäuerle, Thiophene-based donor-acceptor co-oligomers by copper-catalyzed 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2012, 8, 683–692 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yao, T. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Li, J. Z. Sun, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, Multi-functional hyperbranched poly(vinylene sulfide)s constructed via spontaneous thiol-yne click polymerization, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 7782–7791 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Q. Guo, H. Gao, Z. Yang, H. Cao, W. He and H. Wang, Facile synthesis of functional poly(vinylene sulfide)s containing donor-acceptor chromophores by a double click reaction, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 59327–59332 RSC .
M. Berggren, D. Nilsson and N. D. Robinson, Organic materials for printed electronics, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 3–5 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen and J. Xu, Scientific Importance of Water-Processable PEDOT–PSS and Preparation, Challenge and New Application in Sensors of Its Film Electrode: A Review, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 1121–1150 CrossRef CAS .
A. Duarte, K. Y. Pu, B. Liu and G. C. Bazan, Recent advances in conjugated polyelectrolytes for emerging optoelectronic applications, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 501–515 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Water/alcohol soluble conjugated polymers as highly efficient electron transporting/injection layer in optoelectronic devices, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2500–2521 RSC .
F. P. Byrne, S. Jin, G. Paggiola, T. H. M. Petchey, J. H. Clark, T. J. Farmer, A. J. Hunt, C. Robert McElroy and J. Sherwood, Tools and techniques for solvent selection: green solvent selection guides, Sustainable Chem. Processes, 2016, 4, 7 CrossRef .

          J. B. Guinée, M. Gorrée, R. Heijungs, G. Huppes, R. Kleijn, A. de Koning, L. van Oers, A. W. S. De, S. Suh, H. A. Udo de Haes, H. de Bruijn, R. van Duin and M. A. J. Huijbregts, Handbook on Life Cycle Assessment – Operational Guide to the ISO Standards,  2002, p. 1393 Search PubMed .
H. Opoku, B. Nketia-Yawson, E. S. Shin and Y. Y. Noh, Organic field-effect transistors processed by an environmentally friendly non-halogenated solvent blend, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 661–667 RSC .
D. Ho, J. Lee, S. Park, Y. Park, K. Cho, F. Campana, D. Lanari, A. Facchetti, S. Seo, C. Kim, A. Marrocchi and L. Vaccaro, Green solvents for organic thin-film transistor processing, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3777 RSC .
E. H. Kwon, G. W. Kim, M. Kim and Y. D. Park, Effect of Alcohol Polarity on the Aggregation and Film-Forming Behaviors of Poly(3-hexylthiophene), ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 7, 2980–2986 CrossRef .
J. W. Rumer and I. McCulloch, Organic photovoltaics: Crosslinking for optimal morphology and stability, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 425–435 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, M. Skinner, H. Yu, J. H. Oh, A. L. Briseno, T. Emrick, B. J. Kim and R. C. Hayward, Water Processable Polythiophene Nanowires by Photo-Cross-Linking and Click-Functionalization, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5689–5695 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nyayachavadi, A. Langlois, M. N. Tahir, B. Billet and S. Rondeau-Gagné, Conjugated Polymer with Polydiacetylene Crosslinks Through Topochemical Polymerization of 1,3-Butadiyne Moieties Towards Photopatternable Thin Films, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 1918–1924 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, H. Zhang, W. Zhao, L. Ye, H. Yao, B. Yang, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Green-Solvent-Processed All-Polymer Solar Cells Containing a Perylene Diimide-Based Acceptor with an Efficiency over 6.5%, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–9 CAS .
J.-R. Desmurs and S. Ratton, Anisole: An Excellent Solvent, Ind. Chem. Libr., 1996, 8, 481–488 CAS .
X. Xu, T. Yu, Z. Bi, W. Ma, Y. Li and Q. Peng, Realizing Over 13% Efficiency in Green-Solvent-Processed Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells Enabled by 1,3,4-Thiadiazole-Based Wide-Bandgap Copolymers, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. M. Ling and Z. Bao, Thin film deposition, patterning, and printing in organic thin film transistors, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4824–4840 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, G. W. Kim, M. Kim, S. A. Park and T. Park, Nonaromatic Green-Solvent-Processable, Dopant-Free, and Lead-Capturable Hole Transport Polymers in Perovskite Solar Cells with High Efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1–7 Search PubMed .
T. L. Nguyen, C. Lee, H. Kim, Y. Kim, W. Lee, J. H. Oh, B. J. Kim and H. Y. Woo, Ethanol-Processable, Highly Crystalline Conjugated Polymers for Eco-Friendly Fabrication of Organic Transistors and Solar Cells, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 4415–4424 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, Y. Kim, Z. Wu, C. Lee, S. J. Oh, N. T. Luan, J. Lee, D. Jeong, K. Zhang, F. Huang, T. S. Kim, H. Y. Woo and B. J. Kim, Aqueous-Soluble Naphthalene Diimide-Based Polymer Acceptors for Efficient and Air-Stable All-Polymer Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45038–45047 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, L. Liu and L. Li, Water-soluble conjugated polymers for amplified fluorescence detection of template-independent DNA elongation catalyzed by polymerase, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3143–3149 CrossRef CAS .
W. Du, D. Ohayon, C. Combe, L. Mottier, I. P. Maria, R. S. Ashraf, H. Fiumelli, S. Inal and I. McCulloch, Improving the Compatibility of Diketopyrrolopyrrole Semiconducting Polymers for Biological Interfacing by Lysine Attachment, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6164–6172 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schmatz, Z. Yuan, A. W. Lang, J. L. Hernandez, E. Reichmanis and J. R. Reynolds, Aqueous Processing for Printed Organic Electronics: Conjugated Polymers with Multistage Cleavable Side Chains, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 961–967 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. N. Wang, F. Molina-Lopez, H. Zhang, J. Xu, H. C. Wu, J. Lopez, L. Shaw, J. Mun, Q. Zhang, S. Wang, A. Ehrlich and Z. Bao, Nonhalogenated Solvent Processable and Printable High-Performance Polymer Semiconductor Enabled by Isomeric Nonconjugated Flexible Linkers, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 4976–4985 CrossRef CAS .
I. Song, H. W. Kim, J. Ahn, M. Han, S. K. Kwon, Y. H. Kim and J. H. Oh, Non-halogenated solution-processed ambipolar plastic transistors based on conjugated polymers prepared by asymmetric donor engineering, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 14977–14985 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Madison Mooney
	Madison Mooney received her BSc in Chemistry and Anthropology from Trent University in Peterborough, Canada in 2019. During her undergraduate degree, she worked with Prof. Shegufa Shetranjiwalla on the implementation of Green Chemistry to the undergraduate chemistry curriculum. After completing her bachelor's degree, Madison began her graduate degree in the laboratory of Prof. Simon Rondeau-Gagné at the University of Windsor, where she is currently working as a PhD student in Materials Chemistry. Her current research focuses on the development of new, green and eco-friendly semiconductors. She also investigates the use of these new materials for the design of greener, fully printed technologies as part of the NSERC Green Electronic Network.

Audithya Nyayachavadi
	Audithya Nyayachavadi was born in Ottawa, Canada. He completed his BSc in Biochemistry at the University of Windsor. During his undergraduate degree, he worked with Professor Jichang Wang on developing new materials for electroanalytical application. Audithya is currently a PhD candidate in the Rondeau-Gagné group at the University of Windsor. His current research focuses on developing novel crosslinking methodologies for organic semiconductors using thermal and photoirradiation techniques.

Simon Rondeau-Gagné
	Simon Rondeau-Gagné received his PhD in chemistry from Université Laval, Québec, Canada, in 2014 under the guidance of Prof. Jean-François Morin. The same year, he joined the Department of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University, California, USA, as a postdoctoral research fellow where he worked on the development of new materials for skin-inspired electronics under the supervision of Prof. Zhenan Bao. In 2016, he moved to the University of Windsor as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry. His current research activities include the synthesis and design of conjugated polymers for greener printed organic electronics with a special emphasis on generating materials with robust mechanical properties and self-healing capability.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of furan-based oligomers; (b) fluorescence in solution (CHCl3) and in the solid state at 365 nm, and (c) photostability in 1,4-dioxane in ambient light at room temperature.42 Adapted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Chemical structure and degradation products of semiconducting polymer p(DPP-PPD); (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of p(DPP-PPD) in chlorobenzene with 1% TFA (1 M) over 40 days; (c) photographs of a fully degradable p(DPP-PPD) thin-film transistor at varying stages of disintegration.45 The change in mobility of neat and nanoconfined p(DPP-PPD) during (d) parallel and (e) perpendicular stretching to 100% strain elongation.46 Adapted with permission from ref. 45 and 46. Copyright 2017 PNAS. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Some conventional cross-coupling reactions used to prepare conjugated polymers.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Synthetic scheme for diketopyrrolopyrrole and tetrafluorinated thienovinylthiophene co-polymer, and (b) OTFT output and transfer curves.60 Adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  β-Branching and homocoupling defects in conjugated polymer synthesis.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison between DHAP and dehydrogenative polycondensation.	 

 	Fig. 7  Various conjugated polymers synthesized through dehydrogenative polycondensation: (a) poly(benzodiimidazole);76 (b) poly(thienopyrrolodione),78 and (c) poly(3-ester-thiophene).80	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Synthetic pathway toward octafluorobiphenylene and bithiophene copolymer; (b) 1H NMR spectra of copolymer; (c) OLED device and CIE color spectra, and (d) photo and electroluminescence of octafluorobiphenylene and bithiophene copolymer.81 Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Various conjugated polymers synthesized through aldol polycondensation: (a) poly(phenyl-pyrimidine);83 (b) poly(bis-isatin-oxindole),84 and (c) poly(bisisoindigo).85	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Synthetic scheme for the preparation isoindigo-bithiophene based copolymer via aldol condensation; (b) UV-vis spectra of isoindigo-bithiophene and bisisoindigo-bithiophene copolymers, and (c) OTFT output and transfer curves of isoindigo-bithiophene polymer.86 Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Chemical structure of the acceptor polymer PPDIODT and donor polymer PBDT-TS. AFM height and phase images of PBDT-TS1:PPDIODT films processed by (b) o-anisole, and (c) chlorobenzene-based binary solvent.104 Adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structure of PPDT2FBT-A, and grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) patterns of PPDT2FBT-A films processed from ethanol and CB.109 Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Images of de-bonded surfaces of OEG and alkyl side-chain polymers after the double cantilever beam test, and (b) diagrams of the fracture paths of both devices.110 Adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Structure of diketopyrrolopyrrole-based polymers incorporating lysine-containing side-chains, and (b) normalized relative viability of neurons on lysine-containing polymers L1-TFA and L2-TFA compared to poly-D-lysine.112 Adapted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Process for preparation of conjugated polymer thin films with multistage cleavable side chains.113 Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Diketopyrrolopyrrole-based semiconducting polymers incorporating flexible conjugation-breaking units for improvement of solubility in non-halogenated solvents.114 Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) patterns of selenophene-containing polymer films processed using (a) chlorobenzene, (b) toluene, (c) o-xylene, and (d) toluene with DMSO additive after thermal annealing at 250 °C.115 Adapted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
