Selecting speed-dependent pathways for a programmable nanoscale texture by wet interfaces  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35074B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35074B
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6859-6873Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSelecting speed-dependent pathways for a programmable nanoscale texture by wet interfaces

        
          
            Simone 
            Fabiano
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Bruno 
            Pignataro
          
          
        
      *
      Dipartimento di Chimica “S. Cannizzaro”, Università degli Studi di Palermo, V.le delle Scienze – Parco D'Orleans II – ed. 17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. E-mail: bruno.pignataro@unipa.it
Received 
      12th March 2012
    First published on 23rd July 2012AbstractThe realization of well-defined and ordered structures on the nanoscale is a main issue in nanoscience and nanotechnology, biotechnology and other related fields like plastic or organic electronics. Among the bottom-up approaches, to date, self-assembly (equilibrium aggregates) received a major attention. In spite of this, far from equilibrium conditions allow for the generation of a wider landscape of organized systems depending on the set of control parameters employed. Under an adaptation vision of the structures, here we report some case studies showing how it is possible to programme and control the nanoscale features of ordered super- or supra-aggregates at wet interfaces by modulating the dynamic parameters. In particular, speed is foreseen as a threshold factor for changing the aggregation mechanism along with the shape and degree of order of the structures as well as, within a specific aggregation path, their size and defectivity.
Simone Fabiano
Simone Fabiano (1985) received his Master's degree in Chemistry from the University of Catania (2008). Then he joined the group of Prof. Pignataro at the University of Palermo where he earned his PhD in Chemistry in 2012, based on controlling molecular packing for charge transport in organic electronics. From 2010, he also worked as a visiting PhD student in the group of Prof. Loi at the University of Groningen (The Netherlands). He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Organic Electronics group at Linköping University (Sweden). His research interests include supramolecular chemistry for electronic and optoelectronic applications.
Bruno Pignataro
Bruno Pignataro, born in Bologna in 1972, is a Professor of Physical Chemistry at the University of Palermo. He received a degree in chemistry in 1995 and a PhD in materials science in 2000 at the University of Catania. His research interests focus mainly on engineered molecular and supramolecular materials at solid surfaces including their organization and application in electronics (transistors, photovoltaic cells, biosensors, and screening devices).
1. Introduction
Chemistry is a very dynamic science, which continuously evolves by learning/copying from Nature but also by exploiting different/original pathways.1 In this way chemistry bridges important basic disciplines like physics and biology to generate new paradigms toward complexity and diversity.2 But also, the understanding of complex systems plays a crucial role in the new technologies including the definition of nano- and micro-scale structures and devices.3–5
By reducing more and more the gap between natural and synthetic products, today we are able to manipulate the chemical bonds even to develop molecular systems that nature does not. On the other side, non-covalent chemistry, namely supramolecular chemistry, is a powerful tool to increase complexity and diversity by means of weak interactions of the constitutional building blocks.6–8 Thus, by modulating the interaction between molecules or between molecules and surfaces an important challenge in nanotechnology is directed to build-up new molecular assemblies of reduced size, possibly including multiple functions.9–16 As an analogy to the natural evolution of biological systems, the evolution process from simple molecules to complex aggregates is characterized by the development of more and more heterogeneous and differentiated systems that are integrated or coordinated between them, coherent and well defined.
On this respect, throughout the bottom-up approach two main self-processes may be employed, namely self-assembly (thermodynamically stable systems) and dynamic self-assembly (kinetic systems). Importantly while diversity by self-assembly is limited by a selection at energy minima, dynamic self-assembly may allow for the development of a large variety of structures and whenever the experimentalist is able to make survive or to freeze one of these far from equilibrium, he experiences an artificial selection through, in principle, infinite energy levels along infinite different paths.17
By considering the recent literature, a new vocabulary is continuously developing just to name different classes of self-assembly or self-organization phenomena depending on the employed conditions. Thus for instance, the term constitutional dynamic chemistry considers chemical objects and systems capable of responding to external solicitations by modification of their constitution through component exchange or reorganisation opening the way towards an adaptive and evolutive chemistry, that is a new step towards the chemistry of complex matter.18 The term directed self-assembly (DSA) has been generically used to include the basic principles of self-assembly by carefully designing the building blocks and modulating the thermodynamic forces without going into advanced and sophisticated techniques but it has been also considered for ordered non-equilibrium structures, as well.19 Also the term controlled evaporative self-assembly (CESA) has been employed to consider ordered structures arising from the evaporative assembly of confined solutions.20 Under a dynamic adaptation vision of self-organization, in spite of the energetic restrictions of thermodynamic self-assembly for artificial selection we here intend the possibility from the experimentalist to pilot a system along one of the infinite possible far-from-equilibrium pathways and then make it specifically survive in a given condition, i.e. under the pressure of a peculiar set of parameters including freezing at surfaces.21 Thus the experimentalist by a trial and error process is able to find a given system under a large number of shapes and sizes by modulating the chemical and physical external/internal stimuli.22–24
We already know from the macroscopic-world that under dynamic conditions different ordered and disordered patterns can be found in nature across multiple length-scales, which depend on the involved matter and the acting forces.25 In particular, by considering length-scales ranging from centimetres to hundreds of kilometres ordered patterns with periodic features along with anisotropy or fractal shapes may be observed by looking at the black-and-white ripples across the hide of a zebra or at flowers, sands, by walking along a coastline or by gazing at sea waves or even at aurorae and other astronomic phenomena. By considering smaller features of the order of millimetres or less, oscillations at the propagation of a fluid front have been observed to develop order in gravity-driven falling films (viscous fingering), in rising films under a temperature gradient or in directional solidification.26–30
Although on different length-scales, the above regular patterns may originate, as a common feature, from the competition of driving forces acting in different directions. These may include heat flows, mass diffusion gradients, uniaxial stresses, lattice mismatches, gravitational, magnetic forces etc.31–36 On this respect, it is quite clear that for instance gravity may be an important driver for phenomena involving an aggregated system with a significant mass and that it becomes less and less important in the case of systems with a reduced dimension. On the other hand, the electromagnetic forces including intermolecular and surface forces along with the chemical gradients are expected to be the right tools for developing order on the nanoscale.
Thus, learning from Nature we expect that self-made patterns with diverse shape and size may be painted in a very versatile way by time-dependent processes in the lab and on the nanoscale starting from programmed molecular building blocks and employing electromagnetic interactions.37 On this respect, it is also important to note that whereas self-processes near thermodynamic equilibrium are easy-to-control handling to attenuate fluctuations and leading to relatively simple geometries, far from equilibrium self-organization or dynamic self-assembly may amplify fluctuations into coherent dissipative oscillations, leading to much more complex geometries including periodic superstructures made of repetitive building blocks or large supra-molecular entities, as well.38 To make this, the specific sequence of operations as well as the extent of kinetic factors (transfer speed, evaporation rate etc.) has to be experimentally finely tuned.39 This is because the far-from-equilibrium development of an aggregated system from its constitutional building blocks has not to be assimilated to a step-by-step ladder process, but just the set of experimental conditions and the protocol may determine the interplay of the different competing forces and the mechanism responsible for the formation of the structures along branched tree-like pathways, thus resulting in a wide spectrum of possible dissipative structures (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  A general picture showing different non-equilibrium structures as a function of the length-scale. Shown clockwise from the top are: a simple aggregate of three millimeter-sized, rotating, magnetized disks interacting with one another via vortex–vortex interactions;1 spoke-like radial pattern of dewetted gold nanoparticles on hydrophilic substrate;28 complex pattern produced by templated solid-state dewetting;29 folded CaCO3 coralline-like biomorph produced in alkaline SiO2 sols;30 hierarchical self-assembly of silver nanowires on diblock copolymer scaffolds;32 self-organized carbon nanotubes serpentine generated by competitive dissipative forces of adhesion and aerodynamic inducing oscillations in the nanotubes as they adsorb on the surface.36 
In this tutorial we want just to review on the realization of nanoscale patterns with a variety of shapes and dimensionalities by exploiting far from equilibrium pathways along with intermolecular and surface forces. Here we conceptually highlight those speed-dependent processes leading to ordered structures and involving liquid solutions, surfaces and interfaces since these are of increasing interest for emerging applications needing for low costs. To facilitate the reader we divide the review in paragraphs based on the dimensionality of the systems by reporting some simple case studies. In order to provide the big effects of dynamic parameters in these paragraphs we also provide possible deviation toward the other dimensionalities. Finally, we discuss on how powerful may be a dynamic adaptation approach along with the exploitation of speed-dependent far from equilibrium pathways for a programmable nanoscale supramolecular texture at wet interfaces.
2. Speed-dependent selection of zero dimensional nanostructures by wet processes at interfaces
Zero dimensionality (0D) on the nanoscale concerns systems showing a small size (conventionally <100 nm) in all the three Cartesian coordinates. This is for instance the case of inorganic spherical nanoparticles that during preparation are stabilized by an organic shell through entropic confinement effects avoiding further aggregation in larger systems.9 Indeed, in this case although particles aggregation would be favoured by the minimization of the surface/volume ratio, i.e. by the minimization of surface Gibbs energy, a particle confinement would increase the total Gibbs energy of the system because of the increased entropy by ordering of the interacting organic shells. In this case, we say that particles are thermodynamically stable.
Spherical nanoparticles may be frozen on a surface by avoiding further aggregation through kinetic factors as large activation energy, as well. In this case, nanoparticles at ambient temperature do not diffuse because of a large energetic barrier due to their adhesion with the surface and we say that the particles are kinetically stable.
As an interesting example of a far from equilibrium system with patterned 0D nanoparticles, let us first consider the case of self-organizing molecules from an evaporating solution at a solid surface. Such a process frequently yields structures with a population of shapes, dimensions and inter-spaces, thus exhibiting a high degree of disorder across multiple length scales. This is because molecules usually adopt random positions and orientations on the substrate, primarily caused by the non-uniform evaporation of the solvent. In fact, evaporation typically is accompanied by dewetting, leading to the formation of holes in the liquid layer that eventually enlarge and coalesce until the solvent is completely vanished. From theoretical considerations, two possible rupture mechanisms have been discussed.40 First, heterogeneous hole nucleation due to defects in the liquid film and, second, spontaneous rupture under the influence of long-range inter-molecular forces, namely spinodal dewetting. Typically, dewetting on a flat defect-free surface leads to randomly distributed droplets with a shape depending on the attractive/repulsive long- and short-range intermolecular interactions as well as the surface tension forces applied to the solution during the process. The dominant lateral wavelength of the dewetting process strictly depends on the surface tension of the liquid and the excess free energy ϕ(h) of a layer of solution with thickness h deposited on the surface. If the second derivative of ϕ with respect to the film thickness is negative, ϕ′′(h) < 0, all fluctuations in film thickness are amplified leading to spontaneous dewetting of the liquid (spinodal dewetting).40 Local film thickness is in turn strongly dependent on dynamic parameters like evaporation rate and spreading time, so that whenever one is able to modulate the dynamics (i.e. by changing surface chemistry, solute concentration in the drop, geometrical configuration of the system, etc.) this would affect the final morphology of the structures. For instance, a strong concentration dependence of the drop spreading has been recently demonstrated for polyoxometalates (POMs) solutions at a solid surface.41 The dynamic nature of this phenomenon at high-energy surfaces originates from the significant changes in the drop contact area and evaporation time upon increasing the solution concentration. The spreading behaviour of fluids containing nanometre-sized particles is extremely different from the well-established behaviour of pure liquids. This fact can be easily understood by considering that the presence of solute promotes the formation of solid-like structures in the three-phase contact region at the edge of the spreading fluid. Thus the enhanced disjoining pressure, arising from this ordered solid-like region with respect to the disordered liquid-like bulk phase, may produce the advancing of the contact line and a stepwise thinning of the film.42 In this paper, at least three different patterns have been frozen at the solid surface by simply changing the experimental conditions affecting the dynamic parameters and ultimately the mechanism:
(1) Low POM concentrations (0.1 mg ml−1) have been observed to yield smaller drop spreading and lower evaporation rate, resulting in dewetted 0D nanodots independently of the peculiar POM structure (Fig. 2). Note that following the above considerations, this is a process driven by external physical pressures.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the concentration effect on the drop spreading of POM solution: (a) pure acetonitrile solvent; (b) 0.1 mg ml−1 POM solution in acetonitrile giving dewetted nanodots of 5–15 nm tall and 100–300 nm wide and density of about 4 dots per μm2, as observed by the SFM image exemplarily shown; (c) 1 mg ml−1 POM solution in acetonitrile resulting in large spreading along with POM dependent self-structuring; (d, e) examples of other POM shapes obtained as reported in points 2 (physically driven dendritic structures) and 3 (structure dependent self-organization through hydrogen bonds) above in the text (Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). 
(2) By slowing down the evaporation rate through drop-casting experiments under a saturated solvent atmosphere, the self-organization dynamic has been observed to be diffusion limited, forming dendritic nanostructures. Also this process may be considered as driven by external physical pressures.
(3) Simply increasing the POM concentration to 1 mg ml−1 induces a high wetting and large spreading condition, where the self-organized architectures have been observed to be very sensitive to the POM structure. In contrast to what in (1) and (2), here the development of the structures is piloted by internal chemical pressures (hydrogen bonds, van der Waals interactions, etc.).
In this case one can easily observe that during the formation of the structures there is a compromise between the physical process and the chemical nature of the constitutional objects and this can be tuned by speed. Thus, in order to develop 0D structure a possible strategy regards to direct the deposition phenomenology toward dewetting, where different speed conditions can give structures with different shape and dimensionality. Literature shows a large statistics concerning dewetted features (ordered and disordered) at surfaces and for further readings one can refer to ref 19 and 20. Also, the striking array of complex non-equilibrium patterns can be quantitatively well-described by mesoscopic models.43–45 For instance, Rabani et al. presented a coarse-grained lattice gas approach applicable for modeling the drying-mediated self-assembly of nanoparticles.39 Simulations of the lattice gas model for binary mixtures reveal two distinct mechanisms of ordering, corresponding to homogeneous and heterogeneous evaporation dynamics (Fig. 3). Under homogeneous evaporation conditions the solvent evaporation triggers the self-assembly process and the final morphologies are mainly determined by the diffusion rate of nanoparticles and by their coverage. Dynamic adaptation in this case leads to the formation of disk-like domains at low coverage and bi-continuous phases at intermediate to large coverage (Fig. 3a–b). A more quantitative analysis depicting the time progress of nanoparticle aggregation shows the average domain size R(t) ≈ t0.25, indicating a growth by cluster diffusion. When evaporation is heterogeneous instead, the dynamics and final morphologies are quite different (Fig. 3c–d). In this case evaporation occurs by nucleation and growth of vapor bubbles. Here, the final morphology is determined by the relative timescales of solvent evaporation and nanoparticle diffusion.39,46 If nanoparticles are sufficiently mobile to track the fronts of growing vapor nuclei, their aggregate patterns will be shaped by the structural history of evaporation leading to sparse or dense network-like morphologies. A sparse network is obtained when the particles diffuse rapidly while when the nanoparticles are slow a dense network is observed. Slow evaporation also results in morphologies with a significant lower concentration of defects.46 The same authors also explored the hierarchical self-assembly of nanoparticles over patterned templates showing that the properties of the solvent, the timescales for self-diffusion and the evaporation rates can be used to tune the shape of the final superstructures along with novel morphologies yet to be explored.47
 Fig. 3  Dynamics of nanoparticle assembly resulting under homogeneous (a–b) and heterogeneous (c–d) evaporation conditions for different nanoparticle diffusion rates (Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 Copyright 2006, Wiley-VCH). 
However, a big challenge of nanoscience and nanotechnology is to assemble and position molecules at desired locations to construct complex, highly-ordered functional systems and devices. Owing to the statistical nature of drying-mediated self-organization, dewetting is not suitable for multiscale patterning over a large area as a result of the spatially inhomogeneous deposition of aggregates. Controlled positioning of the pattern can be easily achieved in pre-defined templates fabricated by top-down approaches.48 On the other hand, the combination of dewetting with unconventional lithographic procedures allows for fabricating ordered 0D patterns inside confined regions, with size and distance controlled at multiple length scales.49 In principle, such an approach can be pushed down to the limit length scale of a single molecule depending on the operation conditions. In particular, when a stamp is placed in contact with a layer of solution spread on the substrate, menisci are formed under the protrusions of the stamp, due to capillary forces (Fig. 4a). As the solvent evaporates, the solution remains pinned to the protrusions and the contact line between solution and substrate recedes due to faster solvent evaporation in the region between protrusions. As the critical concentration is reached, the solute precipitates onto the substrate with a large-area spatial modulation directed by the stamp. As a result, the process of droplet formation is confined under the stamp protrusions. Droplet size and inter-droplet distances depend on the initial concentration of the solution and the volume under the protrusions, which is controlled by the distance between the stamp and the substrate. The possibility to downsize the printed features with respect to the lateral size of the protrusions is achieved by controlling the distance between the stamp and the substrate and, indirectly, the lateral size of the menisci forming under the protrusions. For dilute solution, ultra-narrow split features can be obtained because of the pinning at the sharper edges of the protrusions. In this case, deposited structures as small as tens of nanometers wide can be obtained by using protrusions that are a few hundred nanometers wide but have sharper edges. Since the process is independent of the specific interactions between the molecules and the surface, it is of general application for patterning a large variety of soluble molecules. As an example, an atomic force microscopy image of the possible pattern is reported in Fig. 4b. The arrays of manganese single-molecule magnet (Mn12 SMM) droplets are obtained over large area (more than 100 × 100 μm2) with heights ranging from 10 to 50 nm and an inter-droplet spacing of 200–400 nm, depending on the solution concentration. This allows the realization of nanopatterns exhibiting magnetic properties similar to those observed in conventional bulk magnets.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the confined dewetting. (1) The stamp is placed in contact with a layer of solution spread on the substrate. (2) As the solvent evaporates, the onset of capillary forces pins the solution to the protrusions. Because the evaporation rate is faster in the thinner parts, the receding front between adjacent protrusions leaves dry areas in between. (3) As the critical concentration is reached in the solution confined under the protrusion, molecules precipitate. The material is deposited according to the positive replica of the stamp; as the deposition is followed by dewetting, arrays of droplets with a characteristic size and distance will form. (4) Dilute solutions yield split structures pinned to the edges of the protrusions. (5) Strings of nanodroplets are obtained by dewetting the material deposited upon the regime (4). (b) Aligned nanodots of Mn12 SMM on the Si(100) surface (Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society). 
Stamp pressures can also control the local dewetting dynamics. In particular, when the stamp is under high pressure, the solution is slowly drawn out of the bottom of the stamp leaving self-organized droplets between protrusions (Fig. 5a–b). Conversely, under low pressure the solution leaves the stamp faster, concentrating the solutes at the edges and also enhancing evaporation near the edges, which further concentrates the solutes and helps pin the contact point to the stamp edge (Fig. 4c–d). Such a speed control over the dewetting dynamics of stamped solutions makes it possible to pattern a variety of materials through regulating local drying-mediated deposition of solutes on a surface.50
 Fig. 5  Schematic of a confined self-assembly showing centre dewetting (a–b) and edge dewetting (c–d). Under high pressure the contact point between the droplet and stamp edge slips down the side of the stamp (a) and eventually breaks near the stamp edge, creating a droplet on the substrate in the center of the stamp (b). Under low pressure the contact point between the droplet and stamp remains pinned to the side of the stamp (c) and eventually breaks near the stamp middle, creating a droplet on the silicon substrate at the edge of the stamp (d) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group). 
3. Speed-dependent selection of nanoscale 1D systems by wet processes at interfaces
Monodimensional (1D) nanoscale objects are those systems showing a small size (conventionally <100 nm) along two of the three space axes. Many examples are reported in the literature showing thermodynamically stable wires, fibers, tubes etc. Patterned, or highly structured, 1D molecular assemblies can be formed far from equilibrium in closed or open systems under the action of fluxes of matter and/or energy. These assemblies can sustain themselves while the fluxes are maintained, leading to the emergence of spatiotemporal structures.51
As a first example, the formation of holey gold nanowires has been demonstrated via photoconversion of dissipative nanostructures at the water/chloroform interface, under non-equilibrium conditions.52 An aqueous solution containing Au(OH)4− ions was layered on a chloroform solution of tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) as shown in Fig. 6a. Firstly, the osmotic pressure induced by concentration gradients revealed by TBAPF6 dissolved in the chloroform phase produces a flux of TBA ions from the organic to the aqueous phase. This promotes the formation of TBA[Au(OH)4] pairs at the interface and their desorption into the aqueous phase, where they kinetically self-assemble into specifically preorganized linear aggregates under a continuous vectorial transport of tetra-alkyl ammonium ions across the interface (Fig. 6b). The photochemical reduction of Au(OH)4− is assisted by TBA ions, which act as sacrificial electron donors. This leads to the formation of highly elongated gold nanowires with lengths of more than several micrometres and widths of 8–14 nm, rapidly near the water/chloroform interface (Fig. 6c–d).
 Fig. 6  (a–c) Schematic illustration of gold nanowire formation at the water/chloroform interface under far-from-equilibrium conditions. (a) The ion pairs TBA[Au(OH)4] are formed at the water/chloroform interface. (b) The ion pairs continuously diffuse into the aqueous phase as dissipative linear aggregates. The spontaneous formation of linear assemblies at the interface is promoted by vectorial transport of TBA ions across the interface, which is driven by chemical potential (concentration) gradients. (c) Interfacial photoreduction of Au(OH)4− ions preorganized in the linear aggregates gives holey gold nanowires, which grow into the aqueous phase. At high concentration, the fast matter transport across the interface results in elongated gold nanowires, while a lower chemical potential gradient leads to slower flux of matter across the interface and formation of agglomerated nanoparticles. (d) TEM image of holey gold nanowire, indicating the distance between aligned nanocavities. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH). 
The flux of matter from the organic to the aqueous phase is sustained by the TBA ions concentration. Indeed, for concentration larger than 1 mM, a fast matter transport across the interface results in elongated gold nanowires, as observed by the UV/Vis-NIR absorption peak at 530 nm that is characteristic of nanowires. On the other hand, when the TBA concentration is lowered to 100 μM, a change in the formation mechanics is expected due to the lower flux of matter across the interface and only the formation of agglomerated nanoparticles with diameters of tens of nanometers is observed (the absorption intensity at 530 nm is weakened and it is replaced by a red-shifted peak at 660 nm), disclosing the possibility to select different shapes by adjusting speed through the chemical potential (concentration) gradients.
Elemans et al.53 demonstrated the formation of complex 1D surface patterns extending over a macroscopic distance, by exploiting spatiotemporal pathways on the nanoscale. In particular, the self-organization of a porphyrin trimer into small columnar stacks of millimeter length (Fig. 7) has been reported as a result of combined self-assembly and dewetting, which take place simultaneously when a drop-casted solution of the porphyrin molecules is evaporated on the surface. In this case an artificial selection of superstructures made of 1D well-aligned fibers has been obtained by the two following pathways:
 Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of the porphyrin trimer and schematic representation of the columnar stack. The proposed formation of periodic patterns on a surface is reported in (b); spinodal dewetting causes an undulating pattern in the solvent, which governs the positioning of the aggregates and thus the spatial distribution of the lines. (c) Topographical SFM image of the porphyrin trimer lines with a cross-section of tens of nanometers. The 1D pattern is aligned parallel to the receding drop direction. Slowing down the solvent evaporation rate by using larger droplets, the lines pattern is perpendicular to the drop edge (d) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2009, AAAS). 
(1) At faster evaporation speed (i.e. small droplet volume), very large domains containing a highly ordered pattern of equidistant, nearly parallel, wire-like architectures with a molecular height of 4.5 nm have been observed (Fig. 7c). The authors argued that this self-organization of molecules on a macroscopic length scale results from a hierarchical dewetting process. In fact, after retraction of the solvent front, thin films remain between the pinned contact lines, which are then subject to spinodal dewetting.53 Combined with the propensity of the porphyrin trimer to form one-dimensional aggregates, this dewetting gives rise to the formation of the highly defined periodic line patterns, with the contact pinning lines directing their orientation parallel to the local solvent front. The periodicity within each domain is determined by the local spinodal dewetting, which in all cases was between 500 nm and 1 mm.
(2) At slower evaporation speed, when larger droplets are deposited under similar conditions, a partial pinning of the solvent front hinders the retraction of the contact line and the consequent formation of the contact pinning lines. This leads to a molecular flow toward the contact line (that is, coffee stain phenomenon)54 and to the growth of a lines pattern, which is orthogonal with respect to the solvent front. The resulting lines consist of bundles of columnar stacks of the porphyrin trimer with larger dimensions (about 55 nm, Fig. 7d). In both cases, spinodal dewetting effects result in the observed periodic dissipative surface patterning.53
Another example dealing with the experimental and theoretical prediction of switching the directionality of anisotropic structures by changing the speed of the liquid front is shown in the next paragraph.
As an alternative to conventional dewetting models as far as one considers the organization of 1D supramolecular systems at interfaces, fiber-forming anisotropic molecules have been shown to give differently shaped supra-aggregates such as the compact (radial growth mechanism) and the holed (tangential growth) ones or cellular networks, as well.55
Molecules with anisotropic lateral interactions may aggregate in thermodynamically favored fibers. Once fibers are formed, the topology of the growing film made up of interacting fibers depends on the fibers' elastic properties in addition to the solvent-film and substrate-film interfacial free energies. Fig. 8 shows different possible shapes observed at solid surfaces. At high speed (4000 rpm) and relatively low concentration (8.4 × 10−5 M) a spin coating of rhodamine 123 (R123) on hydrophilic solid substrates gives linear aggregates (Fig. 8a). The cellular network concerns the structure that R123 assumes by transferring on mica through spin coating at 4000 rpm but at a concentration in solution of 8.4 × 10−4 M (Fig. 8c). SFM images of R123 transferred on mica by spin coating at lower speed (500 rpm) and at the same concentration show compact and holed aggregates arising from two different mechanisms that occur under a saturation condition (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  Fiber forming molecules giving different supra-aggregates by speed-dependent processes: (a) linear aggregates; (b) compact and holed supra-aggregates; (c) cellular networks. The compact and holed aggregates in (a) arise from two different mechanisms (see the schemes marked by the arrows) occurring under the saturation conditions. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society). (d) Nanowires of trigeminal amphiphile porphyrins formed on mica through the diffusive transport of molecules or aggregates of molecules to the suitable recognition sites (e) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
This above is an interesting example showing again that: (1) the dimensionality of the structures may be related to the speed of transfer, since we can obtain 1D fibers or 2D cellular networks instead of compact (0D) or holed aggregates by increasing almost one order of magnitude the transfer speed. (2) The growth speed has been shown as a critical problem in defining the mechanism of accretion of compact or holed aggregates which may consist of two different 2D organization of the fiber forming molecules. This last point has been explained by considering the following non-equilibrium effects:55 for a growing disk made up of molecules with strong lateral interactions, the growth takes place when the energy gain due to disk formation overcomes the energy of the free molecules. Flat aggregates are preferred for small disks but two characteristic lengths have to be considered: a critical volume Vcrit = const × (E/ΔΓ)2 (it increases with the fiber rigidity E and decreases with the film-solvent interfacial tension ΔΓ) for the flat to hole transition and the aggregate maximum volume VMAX which depends on the nucleation and growth rate processes. Thus, VMAX depends on the instantaneous supersaturation S of the solution, while Vcrit does not and two different scenarios have been envisaged:
(a) Vcrit < VMAX. In this case, the flat to hole transition occurs before the growing aggregate reaches its maximum size.
(b) Vcrit > VMAX. In this region, no holed aggregates are allowed.
At low supersaturation, the nucleation rate is ≈exp(–const/log S) and the limited amount of molecules in solution limits the further growth of the formed nuclei. In contrast, at high supersaturation, the nuclei concentration is high but the large amount of molecules in solution enables the formation of bigger aggregates. Thus, here the effect of speed concerns the fact that holed supra-aggregates are mainly observed at high concentration where the aggregate growth is faster.55
Epitaxial growth of high aspect ratio nanostructures has also been reported by dynamic self-assembly of trigeminal amphiphile molecules into well-defined fibers at a surface (Fig. 8d–e).56 In particular, the local surface hydration is found to play an important role in the fiber growth mechanism. Growth occurs indeed at the nanowires tip through diffusive transport of molecules or aggregates of molecules to suitable recognition sites. Fiber growth can be arrested by drying the sample/substrate system (or by lowering the relative humidity) indicating that hydration is important for the surface molecular mobility and resulting nanowire formation.56 These authors modulated the bifurcation/shape of the molecular nanowires by inducing a reassembly process through sequential mechanical-erasure/regrowth processes to obtain novel adaptive structures.
4. Speed-dependent selection of nanoscale 2D systems by wet processes at interfaces
Two-dimensional (2D) nanoscale objects are those systems showing a small size (conventionally < 100 nm) along one of the three Cartesian axes. Ordered two-dimensional systems may be obtained according to several procedures.57,58
For instance, the spontaneous formation of stripe patterns has been demonstrated through out-of-equilibrium mechanisms by transferring nanoparticles from a floating film onto a substrate in an evaporation-induced organization process.28 Well-aligned stripe patterns with tunable orientation, thickness and periodicity at a multiple length scale have been obtained by dewetting of a dilute film of polymer-coated nanoparticles floating on a water surface in a dip-coating experiment. When the substrate is pulled up, the nanoparticles at the contact line are carried off the surface film and dried onto the substrate. During this step, the continuous line of nanoparticles at the water–substrate contact line tends to segregate into more concentrated, periodically distributed domains of nanoparticles owing to the fingering instability of the drying front. The resulting stripe pattern has uniform long-range thickness and inter-stripe distance of the order of cm2.28
Regular 2D patterns can be obtained by “freezing” out-of-equilibrium systems on the nanoscale, i.e. by blocking a thermodynamically unstable pattern. In particular, a fast and simple method to generate extended patterned surfaces on the nanometre scale without any lithographic processes has been demonstrated by using the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique, which allows a precise control on the deposition parameters such as transfer speed, film pressure, subphase temperature etc.59 Approximately parallel channels of L-α-dipalmitoyl-phosphatidycholine (DPPC) on mica can be obtained over a long-range in a 2 nm-high monolayer (Fig. 9).60 These features with controlled wetting properties are clearly out-of-equilibrium since the transfer speed plays a major role. The method represents a general approach for patterning different systems with a speed-dependent anisotropy. The stripes within the LB films are formed when the surface pressure is kept below or close to the phase transition from the liquid-expanded to liquid-condensed phase. The possibility to switch the direction of these anisotropic patterns in a controllable way by changing speed and pressure conditions has been demonstrated.61 High speed and low lateral pressure (or small surfactant concentration) drive the pattern-shape toward periodic structures perpendicular to the transfer direction, whereas lower speed and/or higher pressure results in structures parallel to the transfer. A transition region where both parallel and perpendicular features coexist can be found in between. Those findings have been interpreted by a non-equilibrium model based on the stability of surfactant concentration and film thickness coupled fluctuations near the meniscus of a surfactant-covered receding thin film.27 This allows explaining how the directional features may be switched from parallel (high speed/low pressure) to perpendicular (low speed/high pressure) with respect to the substrate motion. The dramatic difference in the force profile allows one to understand the speed dependent patterning:
 Fig. 9  AFM images of DPPC patterns on the mica surface that can be formed under various conditions below the main phase transition. Scale bar for these AFM images is 5 μm. The transfer velocity and the transfer surface pressure are (a) 60 mm min−1 and 3 mN m−1, (b) 40 mm min−1 and 3 mN m−1, and (c) 10 mm min−1 and 3 mN m−1. The double arrow in the AFM images shows the axis of film transfer. (d–f) Schematic of the patterns formation during the LB vertical deposition. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society). 
(1) Upon high transfer speed (Fig. 9a), the normal pressure is localized at some distance from the meniscus and new instabilities arise yielding stripes of dense surface-bound surfactants perpendicular to the transfer direction.
(2) At low transfer speed (Fig. 9c), the pressure is localized in a long and narrow stripe along the meniscus. Here, because of the small averaged film height, the coupled thickness concentration fluctuations become unstable, forming small dots of greater surfactant concentration leading to stripes parallel to the transfer direction.
(3) At an intermediate transfer speed, the combination of such effects lead to crossing networks (Fig. 9b)
A diagram showing the far-from-equilibrium states of such systems is reported in Fig. 10a, where transfer speed is observed to be a threshold factor for shapes (from compact planes to periodic features parallel to the transfer direction, intermediate structures within a transition regions, periodic features perpendicular to the transfer direction, up to isotropic/random structures).
 Fig. 10  (a) Diagram of shapes for LB sub-monolayers transferred at different speeds. (b) Theoretical surfactant–substrate normal pressure (P) versus the distance from the meniscus (x) calculated at (i) low speed (tends to 0; parallel waves) and (ii) high speed (10−3 m s−1; perpendicular waves). Curve (ii) has been enlarged (×3) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (*) Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2000, Nature Publishing Group). 

Fig. 10b shows the model in ref. 27. Here, the fluctuations in the surfactant concentration (Φ) have been defined by the following continuity equation:  where Us the velocity field of the fluid at the air–film interface, ∇s the divergence operator and D0 the diffusion coefficient, defined as the product of the thermal energy (kT) and the surfactant mobility coefficient at zero concentration (Λ0). The latter term in brackets takes account of the surfactant–solid interaction (Ae−κH) and includes the nonlinear term (1−Φ)Φ allowing to investigate concentrated monolayers. At low transfer speed U, the surfactant concentration near the meniscus is large but it becomes small if the transfer speed increases because of diffusive/hydrodynamic effects. As regards the film thickness (H), the fluctuations have been indicated by the relation:  where U is the substrate transfer speed, γ = γΦ ≈ γ(1 − σΦ) is the air/film interfacial energy (with σ ≡ ∂γ/∂Φ∣|Φ=0), η is the fluid viscosity and Π(H,Φ) is the disjoining pressure resulting from solid–liquid–surfactant interactions. At slow transfer speed U, the normal pressure has a maximum localized near the meniscus. Because of the small film height, the thickness–concentration coupled fluctuations become unstable, forming small surfactant aggregates of higher concentration and leading to stripes parallel to the transfer. At a fast speed, the normal pressure is tiny near the meniscus, reaching a maximum and then decreasing far underneath. Thus in this last case, the fluctuations result into stripes of dense surface-bound surfactant perpendicular to the transfer direction.
The addition of a second component still results in a regular nanometre-scale pattern of highly parallel stripes although higher concentrations of the second component within the mix strongly affect the formation of the DPPC stripe patterns with a modulation of the stripe width.61,62 Furthermore, the employment of macroscopically curved substrates allows for preparing complex patterns on the solid surface. In particular, low surface pressure leads to a distorted horizontal stripe pattern with a zigzag edge at one side and a straight edge parallel to the three-phase contact line at the other side. On the other hand, high surface pressure results in discontinuous vertical stripes.63
In spite of the above phenomena, when a drop of colloidal solution dries on a surface, highly uniform 2D crystalline monolayers can be achieved by controlling evaporation kinetics and particle interactions at the liquid–air interface.64Fig. 11a shows that during evaporation, monolayer islands of gold nanocrystals appear on the top surface of the drop and grow as compact structures. For an attractive particle–interface interaction, rapid early-stage evaporation dynamically produces a two-dimensional solution of nanoparticles at the liquid–air interface, from which nanoparticle islands nucleate and grow. These islands eventually merge to form a continuous monolayer across the entire liquid–air interface. In other words, the solution remains below the critical nucleation boundary. Upon receding of the contact line towards the centre of the substrate, the nanocrystal sheet lays down onto the substrate leading to long-range-ordered 2D monolayers (Fig. 11b). The resulting 9 nm-thick monolayer extends completely across a 3 mm × 4 mm silicon nitride substrate. The rapid evaporation of the drop along with the attractive interaction between the particles and the liquid–air interface are required to segregate particles near the liquid–air interface and to localize them on the interface, featuring the highly non-equilibrium behaviour of the process. If the evaporation rate is significantly slowed down, nanoparticles concentrating and depositing at the substrate edge are instead observed. This is because the prime process governing the growth is the flow of molecules towards the drop edge as a result of solvent evaporation, which increases their concentration in the proximity of the edge. This is a well-known phenomenon explaining, for example, why coffee stains have edges that are darker than the center.65
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the dynamic self-assembly process of gold nanocrystals onto a substrate during the early stages of drying, showing how nanocrystals are captured by a quickly receding liquid–air interface. (b) Micrograph of the gold nanocrystal monolayer produced by drop-casting 10 μl of a solution of dodecanethiol-ligated 6 nm gold nanocrystals onto the silicon nitride substrate. The upper left inset schematically shows the arrangement of two neighbouring nanocrystals in the monolayer. The lower right inset is a fast Fourier transform of the image (Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group). 
5. Speed-dependent selection of thin film bulk phases ordered on the nanoscale by wet processes
The rapidity of the solvent evaporation during a spin coating process for the deposition of a bulk thin film phase prevents the occurrence of nucleation and growth processes. Spinning a solution of a single polymer generally produces unstructured thin films, but if a mixture of polymers is used the two polymers will usually phase separate. This phase separation is a complex non-equilibrium process and the resulting film morphologies are very sensitive to a wide range of factors including features of the individual polymers, used solvent and precise spin-coating conditions. Decomposition can also be directed by the surface.66 Developing a complete understanding of the processes occurring during the spin coating of multiphase polymeric materials from a common solvent is crucial for the realization of functional morphologies for polymer-based devices.67
Phase separation can preferentially take place in the direction parallel or perpendicular to the plane of the film, resulting in self-stratified (2D nanostructures) or laterally patterned structures (bulk nanostructures) with characteristic length scales, respectively. As an example, the final morphology of the blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and poly(styrene) (PS) may consist of an ordered bulk heterojunction when spin-coated from chlorobenzene, as reported in Fig. 12. The phase-separated structures arising from the strong demixing of the polymeric components degrade the electrical properties of a film.68 The blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) has been of a broad interest as this is used as an efficient electron donor and acceptor pair in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells, their conversion efficiency (PCE) being typically higher in comparison with other molecular material combinations. However, the main drawback of the related BHJ is the undesirable component distribution in which the P3HT-rich region partitions to the top (air) surface while the PCBM-rich region remains to the bottom (substrate) surface. This drawback limits the power conversion efficiency that in turn requires BHJs with vertical bicontinuous pathways showing a diameter size that should not exceed much the exciton diffusion length.69 The cause of this is related to the surface energy differences of the two components. PCBM, with a higher surface energy than P3HT, is more compatible with the more hydrophilic substrate (typically poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) on ITO). Thus, in terms of system Gibbs energy minimization (equilibrium thermodynamics) the most favourable state results in a PCBM-rich region at the bottom surface and a P3HT-rich region at the top surface, that is a self-stratified planar heterojunction (2D nanostructuring). As a consequence, effort is actually spent on the exploitation of far-from-equilibrium states to freeze thermodynamically unfavourable BHJ structures, and several papers showed the achievement of such structures by changing the dynamic parameters especially by spin-coating procedures.70–72 Accordingly, as a different example, the control of the solvent evaporation rate in the spin coating process of polyfluorene blends (hole acceptor poly-9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-bis-N,N-4-butylphenyl-bis-N,N-phenyl-1,4-phenylenediamine/PFB and the electron acceptor poly-9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole/F8BT) made it possible to obtain final morphologies that were either self-stratified (2D dimensionality; low evaporation rate) or laterally phase separated (bulk nanostructures; high evaporation rate).73
 Fig. 12  Typical atomic force microscope image of the final morphology of a P3HT/PS blend thin film from chlorobenzene (CB). Isolated columnar P3HT domains in the PS matrix of the blend film formed when the film is deposited from pure CB solvent. Such phase-separated structures arise from a strong demixing of the polymeric components (Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH). 
Based on the experimental data, a wide range of models have been proposed to explain the dynamic behaviour of the spin-coating processes and to enable the prediction of the final patterned structures. For example, Walheim et al. suggested that one important mechanism for lateral phase separation was the formation of a transiently layered film by wetting process, followed by the rupture of the layers because of interfacial instabilities.74 Accordingly, it has been inferred that the phase separation of a blend of poly(styrene) and poly(methylmethacrylate) proceeds through a multistage mechanism as summarized in Fig. 13.75 For this system in fact, phase separation initially takes place by the formation of wetting layers at the surface and substrate (i)–(iii). However, when the film thickness decreases to a critical value, the interface becomes unstable due to a solvent-concentration gradient through the film (iv). This is because the solvent at the film surface evaporates faster than the solvent diffuses through the film so that, if the polymer–polymer interface is in the film plane, it is very likely that it will be subjected to a Marangoni-like instability. Since these instabilities grow, a secondary phase segregation may occur, producing lateral domains (v), (vi). The evaporation rate and viscosity of the solution can be used to vary the direction of the phase separation.73,76 For a relatively low evaporation rate, solvent diffusion will be able to maintain a spatially uniform solvent concentration minimizing the interfacial instability.
 Fig. 13  Schematic model describing the film formation during the spin-coating process, and the final film morphology. After the initial spin-off stage where both polymer and solvent are removed (i), (ii), the film separates into two layers (iii) and the film thins owing to solvent evaporation only. The interface between the polymers destabilizes (iv) and the film phase-separates laterally (v), (vi) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2005, Nature Publishing Group). 
Spin-coating speed can be also used to control the characteristic lengths of the phase-separated blend morphologies.77,78Fig. 14 shows the relationship between spin speed and characteristic length of poly(styrene) (PS)/poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) phase separated morphologies. In particular, with the increasing spin speed the characteristic length decreased, an effect that can be reached by reducing the solution concentration, as well. This kinetically driven behavior is because of the evaporation of the mutual solvent is accelerated with increasing spin speed and the time available for the phase separation and domain coarsening is reduced resulting in a reduction of the characteristic length of the PS/PAA blend.77
 Fig. 14  Effect of spin speed on the characteristic lengths of phase-separated morphologies of PS/PAA blends on homogeneous substrates. The inset shows the relative AFM topography images at different spin speed: (a) 1000, (b) 2000, (c) 2500, (d) 3000, (e) 3500, (f) 4000, (g) 5000, (h) 7000, and (i) 9000 rpm. The scan size is 10 μm × 10 μm (Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). 
More recently, Ebbens and co-workers used a narrow-bandwidth illumination stroboscopic microscopy to demonstrate that the phase separation process of a poly(styrene)/poly(isoprene) blend in a final bicontinuous morphology is dominated by spinodal decomposition. These authors stated that phase separation initially occurs at the air–film interface where the solvent concentration is lowest. As the solvent diffuses through the film, and evaporates from the surface, phase separation becomes energetically favourable progressively throughout the film. This effect, first suggested by Buxton et al.,79 has been found to produce an ordering front which propagates in an ordered lateral morphology, with the surface roughening as the film dries (Fig. 15).80
 Fig. 15  Schematic cross section during the phase separation process driven by spinodal decomposition. The progression of the surface roughness at 0.25 s intervals is reported on the right (Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). 
6. Speed dependent far-from-equilibrium pathways for a wet programmable texture on the nanoscale: outlook and conclusions
Above we showed several examples of nanoscale ordered structures by exploiting far-from-equilibrium phenomena. These structures may be conveniently frozen on a surface, their shape and dimension deriving from the dynamic parameters of the process along with the competing forces involved. Thus by changing speed we can develop periodic stripes with a programmable wavelength and direction, we can play with the size and the spacing of nanoscopic dots, we can modulate the shape of supra-aggregates or change the nanoscale morphology of a thin film bulk heterojunction, as well.
Importantly, one can observe that in programming the shape of the nanostructures it has to take into account a compromise between the involved competing forces including those deriving from the physical parameters of the process (physical pressure) and those arising from the chemical nature of the constitutional blocks (chemical pressure). In other words, one has to evaluate how much a system is chemically or physically dependent. By opportunely weighting these two factors it is possible to drive the aggregation mechanism on the nanoscale and thereby it is possible to:
(i) Select similar regular patterns by employing chemically different building blocks that cannot be achieved by employing equilibrium conditions.
(ii) Employ the same building blocks to get very different structures with increasing complexity.
Secondly, all the above reported examples show that the main drivers for a texture on the nanoscale are those including intermolecular and surface interactions along with chemical potentials whose contribution can be modulated by speed parameters. Thus, a metal nanowire can be produced by selecting the right growing speed through the modulation of the chemical potential variation (osmotic pressure) at a liquid/liquid interface, nanoscale stripes/channels can be realized by imposing the right substrate withdrawal speed allowing for a balance between intermolecular and surface forces and the spreading speed of a drop at a solid surface can determine the intermolecular interactions and thus the formation of ordered dots or fractal dendrites, as well. At variance, in macroscopic patterns the scale of ordering exceeds orders of magnitude the range of interaction of the constitutional building blocks, the behaviour of them being widely collective and cooperative because of the strong forces (ex. gravity) involved in the aggregation process.
As a matter of fact, we can say that in spite of almost two decades of work on self-assembly/self-organization at surfaces, the artificial selection of ordered systems with controlled dimensionality is at the beginning and need to be more and more understood.
Here we show several examples where a change in speed is related to dimensionality. In particular, by reporting on zero dimensional nanostructures (Section 2) we showed that these may be preferentially obtained both experimentally and theoretically by a slow diffusion of particles at surface as well as a slow evaporation rate of the solvent, whereas a sparse 2D network is generally observed by a fast particle diffusion. Also, dealing with the selection of nanoscale 1D systems (Section 3) we highlighted that a fast osmotic flux across a membrane can lead to 1D nanowires, whereas a slow flux gives isotropic agglomeration. In the same section, 1D wires by fiber-forming molecules can maintain their nanoscale anisotropic character (eventually changing directionality) or assemble into 0D supra-aggregates or 2D networks as well by respectively decreasing and increasing the transfer process speed. Seemingly, by considering the formation of 2D nanostructures, stripes microns in length, sub-microns in lateral size and only one molecule in height may maintain their dimensionality under a wide range of conditions but develop in direction parallel or perpendicular to the transfer, eventually lead to crossing networks or nearly compact planes at relatively high molecular density and slow transfer speed. Finally, by considering bulk nanostructures, we showed that speed can affect ordering of non-equilibrium columnar bi-continuous phases as well as domain size and roughening of thin films and that we can switch from non-equilibrium laterally bulk separated to near-equilibrium self-stratified (2D) nanostructures by slowing the process speed.
Here, we want to highlight that far from equilibrium is better, in the sense that “there's plenty of room at the bottom”60 by far from equilibrium processes. Indeed, these offer the possibility to realize a wide landscape of systems in terms of structures, patterns and functions and such a versatility cannot be achieved by working with systems at equilibrium. This is the difference between self-assembly which concerns equilibrium systems, that is pathway independent, and dynamic self-assembly which is pathway dependent.
What above shows a dynamic adaptive vision of self-organization that in turn might be an important step toward envisaging the development of an evolutive supramolecular chemistry at surfaces (see also ref. 17 and 81 for related subjects). But, in order to achieve this ambitious goal of supramolecular chemistry and nanotechnology, as make DNA in biological evolution by the natural selection, it has been proposed the need to ensure a transfer information process and mutation between successive generations of structures particularly/also by exploiting different but even successive dynamic adaptation steps.81
By learning from the whole reality, we all know that it is in a continuous evolution and this proceeds by following a common law at all its levels including the physical, biological and social ones. Evolution proceeds from simple to complex by producing phenomena more and more heterogeneous and differentiated, integrated or coordinated between them, coherent and well defined. Thus the evolution of Universe leads to different solar systems articulated in stars, planets and satellites from the first nebula. Biological evolution leads to a variety of living beings starting from few rudimental living systems and these are articulated in species, genders, orders and classes. As all the aggregates in evolution, also the society present a similar character which passes through heterogeneity up to civilized nations including many structural and functional diversities. On this respect, it is important to note that an important factor of an evolutionary process is the time-scale. Indeed, species evolution in biology requires hundreds of thousands of years, cultural evolution in a society may require tens of years, an evolution step of a simple chemical (rupture of a chemical bond) can be provided in picoseconds, whereas molecular or supramolecular development up to the stabilization/adaptation of a complex system at an interface typically may require seconds (see for instance a typical diffusion limited aggregation process34). Thus, as one considers processes characterized by very long periods like those in biology, it can be difficult to understand the whole picture and this is one of the main reasons why some drawbacks are still present in the reconstruction by the Darwinian natural selection (for instance some intermediate species are missing). In the same way, the development of non-equilibrium supramolecular processes may be difficult to fully comprehend since we may miss the right tools allowing playing a continuous film showing the alterations from the picosecond- to the second-scale.
However, in order to get the formation of new generations of systems with desired properties, in the supramolecular aggregation at surfaces the aggregative criterion guides all the process from the beginning and we should be able to properly select it. In other words, since the molecular design, interacting molecules tend to produce more complex forms and this process is directed by the aggregation mechanism that may be changed by chemical and physical stimuli and whose extent may be in turn altered by speed parameters. As to the physical stimuli, recently important papers on dynamic stimuli to supramolecular materials showed the possibility to dynamically control by electromagnetic waves or mechanical solicitation the intermolecular interactions followed by adaptation and mechanization.22,23 In particular, Stoddart et al. showed that by irradiating molecular switches at surfaces it is possible to change their organization and producing macroscopic work as for instance showed by the displacement of a liquid drop.22 Ariga et al. showed the control of molecular structure, molecular orientation, molecular interaction including cleavage and healing, and biological and micron-level phenomena by external mechanical stimuli.23
In this sense the formation process of supra- or super-aggregates is non linear and may be artificially directed by the experimentalist towards one of a number of branched pathways. This is the reason why far from equilibrium processes are characterized by serendipity, i.e. the occurrence and development of events by chance in a happy or beneficial way. It means that by dynamic self-assembly we can be subject to a “happy accident” or a “pleasant surprise” as for instance that to discover ordered nanostructures at interfaces. The external conditions like the here discussed process speeds, but eventually applied physical fields, templates and so on, instruct molecules to change the pathway to adapt and to get survive (Lamarckian factor!!) and, if the instruction is right, ultimately a functional ordered pattern may be frozen for instance by a solid surface.
In the experiments we showed above for speed parameters we intended those like evaporation rate, spinning speed, substrate withdrawal rate, transfer speed, etc. By these examples we can easy learn that speed acts as a threshold factor for bifurcation in the sense that there are peculiar speed ranges where the system follows precise aggregation mechanisms/paths. These paths may lead to ordered or disordered nanostructures. Within a precise aggregation path instabilities may be more or less amplified and we may be able to arbitrarily operate a modulation of the structural dimension as well as of the presence of defects.

Fig. 16 reports on a tree of shapes showing speed both as a threshold factor (branch bifurcations leading to different leaf shapes) along with a size/defects modulator (see the leafs size, distance and defect moving towards the top of the three). For instance in the case of the LB channels/stripes in Section 4 a change in the withdrawal speed from 10 mm min−1 to 60 mm min−1 gives rise to a change of 90° of the direction of the anisotropic features. Together with the wavelength of the structures, the defects density has been observed to drastically change and at intermediate speeds (30 mm min−1) both perpendicular and parallel oscillation lead to a grid structure. Other conditions make oscillations chaotic (non-periodic) and a random picture is observed (see Fig. 10a). Also, in the case of dewetting dots of Section 2 the spreading speed may control their shape, size and order, while the BHJ bicontinuous structures obtained in Section 5 are defined by the spin coating turning speed. In other words, and this is usual in non-equilibrium systems, only a single pattern is stable for a given set of conditions and transitions between different patterns occur as thresholds in control parameters, like some process speeds, are crossed.
 Fig. 16  Stylized tree showing the effect of speed (intended as a speed parameter of the aggregation process) on the dynamic development of the structures. The arrows indicate the speed variation. From left to right speed acts as a threshold factor since the four branches arising at different bifurcation values bring leafs with diverse shapes. Following an individual branch/aggregation-mechanism speed may act as size or defects modulator as the leafs size, distance, defectivity and orientation changes moving towards the top. 
In conclusion, non-equilibrium systems are driven across the threshold of pattern formation and this depends on the aggregation criterion. Speed is a fundamental threshold factor that under a set of conditions selects the peculiar pathway among the different possible bifurcations. Surface and interface wet features are easily controlled by the process speed parameters and this can be exploited to select the criterion and direct the mechanism changing the shapes. Moreover, speed modulates instabilities and/or the competitive forces ratio along the selected path and this may allow tuning also the size of the structures and the amount of defects. What above represents a dynamic adaptation vision of matter along with surface and interface nanoscale features at wet interfaces.
Several implications of the recent developments toward an adaptive non-equilibrium supramolecular chemistry can be emphasised, but of course the possibility to play with the morphology of complex systems is immediately related to the development of emerging nanotechnologies. Applications may be simply predicted in all these fields where the supramolecular shape of structures at interfaces becomes fundamental for their functions like molecular electronics, smart sensors and biosensors, fluidics, photovoltaics etc. but let us to envisage that the understanding of the behaviour of non-equilibrium adaptive structures could probably constitute the base for the realization of future technologies based on non-equilibrium dynamic devices.
Acknowledgements
BP acknowledges Italian MIUR for funding (FIRB-Futuro in Ricerca-RBFR08DUX6, FIRB-MERIT-RBNE08HWLZ_010, PRIN-2008-20088L3BP3_003 and the Public-Private Laboratory PLAST_ICs).
Notes and references
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Science, 2002, 295, 2418–2421 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Whitesides and R. F. Ismagilov, Science, 1999, 284, 89–92 CrossRef CAS .
C. Musumeci, M. H. Rosnes, F. Giannazzo, M. D. Symes, L. Cronin and B. Pignataro, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9992–9999 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fabiano, C. Musumeci, Z. Chen, A. Scandurra, H. Wang, Y.-L. Loo, A. Facchetti and B. Pignataro, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 951 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zang, Y. Che and J. S. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1596–1608 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., –Int. Ed. Engl., 1990, 29, 1304–1319 CrossRef .
J. M. Lehn, Science, 2002, 295, 2400–2403 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Hosseini, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 313–323 CrossRef CAS .

          J. N. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  1995 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Min, M. Akbulut, K. Kristiansen, Y. Golan and J. Israelachvili, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 527–538 CrossRef CAS .
J. Elemans, S. B. Lei and S. De Feyter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7298–7332 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, J. P. Hill, M. V. Lee, A. Vinu, R. Charvet and S. Acharya, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2008, 9, 014109 CrossRef .
M. Yoshizawa, J. K. Klosterman and M. Fujita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3418–3438 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, T. Ye, M. Su, C. Zhang, A. E. Ribbe, W. Jiang and C. Mao, Nature, 2008, 452, 198 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, R. Kou, D. Hu, C. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine, Self-Organization in Nonequilibrium Systems: From Dissipative Structures to Order Through Fluctuations, John Wiley & Sons, New York 1977 Search PubMed .
J. M. Lehn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 151–160 RSC .
M. Grzelczak, J. Vermant, E. M. Furst and L. M. Liz-Marzan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3591–3605 CrossRef CAS .
W. Han and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1534–1546 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Barth, G. Costantini and K. Kern, Nature, 2005, 437, 671–679 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Boyle, R. A. Smaldone, A. C. Whalley, M. W. Ambrogio, Y. Y. Botros and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 204–210 RSC .
K. Ariga, T. Mori and J. P. Hill, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 158–176 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pignataro, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3338–3350 RSC .

          P. Ball, The self-made tapestry: pattern formation in nature, Oxford Press,  1999 Search PubMed .
P. Politi, G. Grenet, A. Marty, A. Ponchet and J. Villain, Phys. Rep. –(Review Section of Physics Letters), 2000, 324, 271–404 CAS .
A. Raudino and B. Pignataro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 9189–9192 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, F. Kim, A. R. Tao, S. Connor and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 896–900 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye and C. V. Thompson, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1567–1571 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Voinescu, M. Kellermeier, B. Bartel, A. M. Carnerup, A. K. Larsson, D. Touraud, W. Kunz, L. Kienle, A. Pfitzner and S. T. Hyde, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1515–1521 CAS .
B. A. Grzybowski, H. A. Stone and G. M. Whitesides, Nature, 2000, 405, 1033–1036 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Lopes and H. M. Jaeger, Nature, 2001, 414, 735–738 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Higgins and R. A. L. Jones, Nature, 2000, 404, 476–478 CrossRef CAS .
V. Fleury, Nature, 1997, 390, 145–148 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Shen, C. M. Ho and T. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 5269–5274 CrossRef CAS .
N. Geblinger, A. Ismach and E. Joselevich, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
J. Boekhoven, A. M. Brizard, K. N. K. Kowlgi, G. J. M. Koper, R. Eelkema and J. H. van Esch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4825–4828 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mann, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 781–792 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rabani, D. R. Reichman, P. L. Geissler and L. E. Brus, Nature, 2003, 426, 271–274 CrossRef CAS .
R. Seemann, S. Herminghaus and K. Jacobs, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 5534–5537 CrossRef CAS .
C. Musumeci, A. Luzio, C. P. Pradeep, H. N. Miras, M. H. Rosnes, Y.-F. Song, D.-L. Long, L. Cronin and B. Pignataro, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4446–4455 CAS .
D. T. Wasan and A. D. Nikolov, Nature, 2003, 423, 156–159 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Martin, M. O. Blunt, E. Pauliac-Vaujour, A. Stannard, P. Moriarty, I. Vancea and U. Thiele, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 116103 CrossRef .
P. Siepmann, C. P. Martin, I. Vancea, P. J. Moriarty and N. Krasnogor, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1985–1990 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pauliac-Vaujour, A. Stannard, C. P. Martin, M. O. Blunt, I. Notingher, P. J. Moriarty, I. Vancea and U. Thiele, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 176102 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Sztrum and E. Rabani, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 565 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kletenik-Edelman, E. Ploshnik, A. Salant, R. Shenhar, U. Banin and E. Rabani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4498–4506 CAS .
J. A. Liddle, Y. Cui and P. Alivisatos, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2004, 22, 3409–3414 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cavallini, F. Biscarini, J. Gomez-Segura, D. Ruiz and J. Veciana, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1527–1530 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cheng, N. Park, M. T. Walter, M. R. Hartman and D. Luo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 682–690 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ritchie, G. J. T. Cooper, Y.-F. Song, C. Streb, H. Yin, A. D. C. Parenty, D. A. MacLaren and L. Cronin, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 47–52 CrossRef CAS .
T. Soejima, M.-a. Morikawa and N. Kimizuka, Small, 2009, 5, 2043–2047 CrossRef CAS .
R. v. Hameren, P. Schön, A. M. v. Buul, J. Hoogboom, S. V. Lazarenko, J. W. Gerritsen, H. Engelkamp, P. C. M. Christianen, H. A. Heus, J. C. Maan, T. Rasing, S. Speller, A. E. Rowan, J. A. A. W. Elemans and R. J. M. Nolte, Science, 2006, 314, 1433–1436 CrossRef .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Nature, 1997, 389, 827–829 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raudino and B. Pignataro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2116–2124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Xie, M. Akada, J. P. Hill, Q. M. Ji, R. Charvet and K. Ariga, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2285–2287 RSC .
B. Pignataro, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3338 RSC .
S. Fabiano and B. Pignataro, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 14848–14860 RSC .
L. Chi, S. Jacobi, B. Anczykowski, M. Overs, H. Schäfer and H. Fuchs, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 25–30 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gleiche, L. F. Chi and H. Fuchs, Nature, 2000, 403, 173–175 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, N. Lu, H. Zhang, M. Hirtz, L. Wu, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8039–8046 CrossRef CAS .
P. Moraille and A. Badia, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 4414–4419 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan and T. M. Fischer, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 3603–3605 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Bigioni, X.-M. Lin, T. T. Nguyen, E. I. Corwin, T. A. Witten and H. M. Jaeger, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Nature, 1997, 389, 827–829 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. L. Jones, L. J. Norton, E. J. Kramer, F. S. Bates and P. Wiltzius, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 1326 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lim, J.-H. Kim, L. Qiu, W. H. Lee, H. S. Lee, D. Kwak and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3292–3297 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Oh, W. S. Jang, T. I. Lee, J.-M. Myoung and H. K. Baik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 023303 CrossRef .
S. Fabiano and B. Pignataro, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 14848–14860 RSC .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arias, N. Corcoran, M. Banach, R. H. Friend, J. D. MacKenzie and W. T. S. Huck, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1695–1697 CrossRef CAS .
S. Walheim, M. Böltau, J. Mlynek, G. Krausch and U. Steiner, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 4995–5003 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Heriot and R. A. L. Jones, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 782–786 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fabiano, Z. Chen, S. Vahedi, A. Facchetti, B. Pignataro and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5891–5896 RSC .
L. Fang, M. Wei, C. Barry and J. Mead, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 9747–9753 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dalnoki Veress, J. A. Forrest, J. R. Stevens and J. R. Dutcher, Physica A, 1997, 239, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Buxton and N. Clarke, EPL, 2007, 78, 56006 CrossRef .
S. Ebbens, R. Hodgkinson, A. J. Parnell, A. Dunbar, S. J. Martin, P. D. Topham, N. Clarke and J. R. Howse, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5124–5131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cronin, Archit. Des., 2011, 34–43 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Simone Fabiano
	Simone Fabiano (1985) received his Master's degree in Chemistry from the University of Catania (2008). Then he joined the group of Prof. Pignataro at the University of Palermo where he earned his PhD in Chemistry in 2012, based on controlling molecular packing for charge transport in organic electronics. From 2010, he also worked as a visiting PhD student in the group of Prof. Loi at the University of Groningen (The Netherlands). He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Organic Electronics group at Linköping University (Sweden). His research interests include supramolecular chemistry for electronic and optoelectronic applications.

Bruno Pignataro
	Bruno Pignataro, born in Bologna in 1972, is a Professor of Physical Chemistry at the University of Palermo. He received a degree in chemistry in 1995 and a PhD in materials science in 2000 at the University of Catania. His research interests focus mainly on engineered molecular and supramolecular materials at solid surfaces including their organization and application in electronics (transistors, photovoltaic cells, biosensors, and screening devices).

 	Fig. 1  A general picture showing different non-equilibrium structures as a function of the length-scale. Shown clockwise from the top are: a simple aggregate of three millimeter-sized, rotating, magnetized disks interacting with one another via vortex–vortex interactions;1 spoke-like radial pattern of dewetted gold nanoparticles on hydrophilic substrate;28 complex pattern produced by templated solid-state dewetting;29 folded CaCO3 coralline-like biomorph produced in alkaline SiO2 sols;30 hierarchical self-assembly of silver nanowires on diblock copolymer scaffolds;32 self-organized carbon nanotubes serpentine generated by competitive dissipative forces of adhesion and aerodynamic inducing oscillations in the nanotubes as they adsorb on the surface.36	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the concentration effect on the drop spreading of POM solution: (a) pure acetonitrile solvent; (b) 0.1 mg ml−1 POM solution in acetonitrile giving dewetted nanodots of 5–15 nm tall and 100–300 nm wide and density of about 4 dots per μm2, as observed by the SFM image exemplarily shown; (c) 1 mg ml−1 POM solution in acetonitrile resulting in large spreading along with POM dependent self-structuring; (d, e) examples of other POM shapes obtained as reported in points 2 (physically driven dendritic structures) and 3 (structure dependent self-organization through hydrogen bonds) above in the text (Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 3  Dynamics of nanoparticle assembly resulting under homogeneous (a–b) and heterogeneous (c–d) evaporation conditions for different nanoparticle diffusion rates (Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 Copyright 2006, Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the confined dewetting. (1) The stamp is placed in contact with a layer of solution spread on the substrate. (2) As the solvent evaporates, the onset of capillary forces pins the solution to the protrusions. Because the evaporation rate is faster in the thinner parts, the receding front between adjacent protrusions leaves dry areas in between. (3) As the critical concentration is reached in the solution confined under the protrusion, molecules precipitate. The material is deposited according to the positive replica of the stamp; as the deposition is followed by dewetting, arrays of droplets with a characteristic size and distance will form. (4) Dilute solutions yield split structures pinned to the edges of the protrusions. (5) Strings of nanodroplets are obtained by dewetting the material deposited upon the regime (4). (b) Aligned nanodots of Mn12 SMM on the Si(100) surface (Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of a confined self-assembly showing centre dewetting (a–b) and edge dewetting (c–d). Under high pressure the contact point between the droplet and stamp edge slips down the side of the stamp (a) and eventually breaks near the stamp edge, creating a droplet on the substrate in the center of the stamp (b). Under low pressure the contact point between the droplet and stamp remains pinned to the side of the stamp (c) and eventually breaks near the stamp middle, creating a droplet on the silicon substrate at the edge of the stamp (d) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–c) Schematic illustration of gold nanowire formation at the water/chloroform interface under far-from-equilibrium conditions. (a) The ion pairs TBA[Au(OH)4] are formed at the water/chloroform interface. (b) The ion pairs continuously diffuse into the aqueous phase as dissipative linear aggregates. The spontaneous formation of linear assemblies at the interface is promoted by vectorial transport of TBA ions across the interface, which is driven by chemical potential (concentration) gradients. (c) Interfacial photoreduction of Au(OH)4− ions preorganized in the linear aggregates gives holey gold nanowires, which grow into the aqueous phase. At high concentration, the fast matter transport across the interface results in elongated gold nanowires, while a lower chemical potential gradient leads to slower flux of matter across the interface and formation of agglomerated nanoparticles. (d) TEM image of holey gold nanowire, indicating the distance between aligned nanocavities. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of the porphyrin trimer and schematic representation of the columnar stack. The proposed formation of periodic patterns on a surface is reported in (b); spinodal dewetting causes an undulating pattern in the solvent, which governs the positioning of the aggregates and thus the spatial distribution of the lines. (c) Topographical SFM image of the porphyrin trimer lines with a cross-section of tens of nanometers. The 1D pattern is aligned parallel to the receding drop direction. Slowing down the solvent evaporation rate by using larger droplets, the lines pattern is perpendicular to the drop edge (d) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2009, AAAS).	 

 	Fig. 8  Fiber forming molecules giving different supra-aggregates by speed-dependent processes: (a) linear aggregates; (b) compact and holed supra-aggregates; (c) cellular networks. The compact and holed aggregates in (a) arise from two different mechanisms (see the schemes marked by the arrows) occurring under the saturation conditions. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society). (d) Nanowires of trigeminal amphiphile porphyrins formed on mica through the diffusive transport of molecules or aggregates of molecules to the suitable recognition sites (e) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 9  AFM images of DPPC patterns on the mica surface that can be formed under various conditions below the main phase transition. Scale bar for these AFM images is 5 μm. The transfer velocity and the transfer surface pressure are (a) 60 mm min−1 and 3 mN m−1, (b) 40 mm min−1 and 3 mN m−1, and (c) 10 mm min−1 and 3 mN m−1. The double arrow in the AFM images shows the axis of film transfer. (d–f) Schematic of the patterns formation during the LB vertical deposition. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Diagram of shapes for LB sub-monolayers transferred at different speeds. (b) Theoretical surfactant–substrate normal pressure (P) versus the distance from the meniscus (x) calculated at (i) low speed (tends to 0; parallel waves) and (ii) high speed (10−3 m s−1; perpendicular waves). Curve (ii) has been enlarged (×3) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (*) Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2000, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the dynamic self-assembly process of gold nanocrystals onto a substrate during the early stages of drying, showing how nanocrystals are captured by a quickly receding liquid–air interface. (b) Micrograph of the gold nanocrystal monolayer produced by drop-casting 10 μl of a solution of dodecanethiol-ligated 6 nm gold nanocrystals onto the silicon nitride substrate. The upper left inset schematically shows the arrangement of two neighbouring nanocrystals in the monolayer. The lower right inset is a fast Fourier transform of the image (Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 12  Typical atomic force microscope image of the final morphology of a P3HT/PS blend thin film from chlorobenzene (CB). Isolated columnar P3HT domains in the PS matrix of the blend film formed when the film is deposited from pure CB solvent. Such phase-separated structures arise from a strong demixing of the polymeric components (Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic model describing the film formation during the spin-coating process, and the final film morphology. After the initial spin-off stage where both polymer and solvent are removed (i), (ii), the film separates into two layers (iii) and the film thins owing to solvent evaporation only. The interface between the polymers destabilizes (iv) and the film phase-separates laterally (v), (vi) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2005, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 14  Effect of spin speed on the characteristic lengths of phase-separated morphologies of PS/PAA blends on homogeneous substrates. The inset shows the relative AFM topography images at different spin speed: (a) 1000, (b) 2000, (c) 2500, (d) 3000, (e) 3500, (f) 4000, (g) 5000, (h) 7000, and (i) 9000 rpm. The scan size is 10 μm × 10 μm (Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic cross section during the phase separation process driven by spinodal decomposition. The progression of the surface roughness at 0.25 s intervals is reported on the right (Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  Stylized tree showing the effect of speed (intended as a speed parameter of the aggregation process) on the dynamic development of the structures. The arrows indicate the speed variation. From left to right speed acts as a threshold factor since the four branches arising at different bifurcation values bring leafs with diverse shapes. Following an individual branch/aggregation-mechanism speed may act as size or defects modulator as the leafs size, distance, defectivity and orientation changes moving towards the top.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
