Perspective on the development of high performance flexible piezoelectric energy harvesters  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC06089A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC06089A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 2905-2924Perspective on the development of high performance flexible piezoelectric energy harvesters

        
          
            Dipak Kumar 
            Khatua
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Sang-Jae 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *ab
aNanomaterials and System Lab, Major of Mechatronics Engineering, Faculty of Applied Energy System, Jeju National University, Jeju 632-43, South Korea. E-mail: kimsangj@jejunu.ac.kr
bResearch Institute of Energy New Industry, Jeju National University, Jeju 632-43, South Korea
Received 
      23rd December 2021
    , Accepted 22nd January 2022First published on 28th January 2022AbstractPiezoelectric energy harvesting is the most effective technique to convert ubiquitous mechanical energy into electricity in comparison to other methods such as triboelectric and electromagnetic based mechanical energy harvesting. This is owing to the high electromechanical coefficient, stability under humidity and environmental changes and suitable range of temperature stability of piezoelectrics. To overcome the limitations of brittleness of piezoceramics and bring the compatibility to the flexible electronics, research on flexible piezoelectric energy harvesters (FPEHs) has become a trend now. Wide varieties of piezoelectric materials are explored in this regard which include conventional ceramic oxides, polymers, biomaterials, etc. Besides, various device designs have enabled performance enhancement and brought compatibility to the different applications. Numerous self-powered sensors based on the FPEHs employed for biomedical sensing, wireless data transmission, environmental remediation, etc. have made this sector of research highly attractive. This review summarizes varieties of piezoelectric materials explored with regard to the FPEHs so far. Then various FPEH device designs are categorically described. Further, possible applications of FPEHs are summarized. Altogether, this review article deals with the summary of materials, device designs and possible applications which gives uniqueness to this article. Performances of different devices are analyzed and discussed. Based on that, future challenges and a roadmap for sustainable FPEH development are outlined.
Dipak Kumar Khatua
Dr Dipak Kumar Khatua is a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Mechatronics Engineering at Jeju National University, Republic of Korea. He received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. He obtained the Master degree in Physics from Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India. His research interests are focused on the structure–property correlations in functional ceramics especially on piezoelectrics and ferroelectrics and energy harvesting and sensor applications.
Sang-Jae Kim
Sang-Jae Kim is a professor in the Department of Mechatronics Engineering and the Department of Advanced Convergence Technology and Science at Jeju National University, Republic of Korea. He received his PhD degree in Electrical Communication Engineering from Tohoku University, Japan. He was a visiting research scholar in the materials science department at the University of Cambridge, UK, and the Georgia Institute of Technology, USA, as well as a senior researcher at the National Institute of Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. His research disciplines are based on nanomaterials and systems for energy and electronics applications, covering Josephson devices, MEMS, and Nano biosensors.
Introduction
The present society is passionate about scavenging electrical energy from various non-conventional, waste energy sources by virtue of energy conversion technology. This surge is prompted by the growing crisis of the conventional fossil fuel-based energy resources. Another driving force to harvest electrical energy from non-conventional sources is to continuously power up in-operando electronic devices at remote locations where wireless transmission is essential and possibly one intends permanent replacement of batteries as power sources. Solar, thermal, and mechanical motions are naturally abundant sources to scavenge electricity by different technical means. Numerous forms of mechanical motions such as water waves, rain falling, wind flow, vehicle motion, human and other animal organ movements, etc. provide potential opportunities to harvest electricity from mechanical movements. Piezoelectric and triboelectric energy harvesting are the dominating mechanisms to convert mechanical motion into electricity.1–3 At present, though the achieved instantaneous power density of triboelectric energy harvesting devices is of two orders of magnitude higher than that of piezoelectric energy harvesters (PEHs), they have certain disadvantages over piezoelectric counterparts. Advantages of PEH over its triboelectric counterpart include device compactness, stability over humidity, air conditions and to the extent with the temperature. The underlying mechanism of PEH devices is known as piezoelectricity, first identified by Jacques and Pierre Curie in 1880. It is a phenomenon in which electric charge (polarization) is generated by the application of mechanical stress. This is also known as the direct piezoelectric effect. On the other hand, when mechanical deformation occurs upon application of electric field, the phenomenon is known as the converse piezoelectric effect.4 In the direct piezoelectric effect, electric displacement D (charge/area) is related to applied stress (T) by the following equation: D = Q/A = d × T (d expressed in Coulomb/Newton)(1)here ‘d’ is the piezoelectric coefficient, a tensor quantity with 18 independent elements originally.5 However, in most of the materials few components of ‘d’ namely, d33, d31, and d15 are large to decide their maximum electromechanical properties and performances of the devices. Based on the above equation 1 as the governing mechanism, numerous sensors are demonstrated which include biomedical sensors, structural health monitoring systems, and other internet of things. Equation 1 also shows charge generation under the application of mechanical pressure which is the basis for the harvested open circuit voltage (VOC) and short circuit current (ISC) of a PEH. Dependency of VOC and ISC on the other parameters can be realized from the equations below.6 (2) (3)where k1 and k2 are constants, d33 is the piezoelectric coefficient, h and A are the device thickness and area respectively, εT33 is the relative permittivity along the applied stress direction, and Δσ and, ΔT are applied stress and impact time respectively.
Wearable/flexible PEH (FPEHs) devices are receiving increasing attention owing to the device compatibility to the applications. Other reasons behind the development of FPEHs are to overcome the brittle nature of piezoceramics (they exhibit high piezoelectric co-efficient) and large stress sustainability. One of the early works on the wearable PEHs was carried out by Paradiso's research group at the MIT media laboratory.7 They incorporated PZT ceramic insole with PVDF inside shoes. Afterward, Rocha et al.8 have also designed a shoe harvester using PVDF in 2010. Since then, numerous device structures were developed focusing on FPEHs. Parallelly, new material development and device applications also progressed manifold. Along with original research articles, several review articles have emerged in the past. Some of the review articles are entirely based on different aspects of flexible piezoelectric energy harvesting.9–34 Several of the articles cover the topic of FPEH along with that of triboelectric energy harvesting partially.35–53 Many review articles even deal with topics on other energy harvesting technologies such as pyroelectric energy harvesting, electromagnetic energy harvesting, photovoltaics, etc. along with the discussions on FPEHs in part.54–70 Essentially, articles covering topics entirely on FPEHs have a larger scope to discuss materials, device designs and/or applications of FPEHs. One of such articles by Sezer et al. deals with piezoelectric energy harvesting from materials and application perspectives.9 The authors have summarized material sections from inorganic, organic, and composite material perspectives. They have articulated the application topic by transportation, and human machine interaction and extensively discussed the biomedical applications of PEHs. Another review article by Safaei et al. deals with different inorganic materials, composite systems and piezoelectrets. The authors have summarized different transducer configurations for PEH. They have also covered the application section in terms of scavenging electricity from different sources using piezoelectric devices.18 An article by Liu et al. describes different inorganic, polymer and bio-piezoelectric materials and related devices. It also covers different device fabrication processes and multi-mode vibrational energy harvesting.23 After going through previous review articles discussing FPEHs, we found that those articles cover materials, device structure and applications partially. However, a systematic summary of basic FPEH device architectures developed until recently is lacking in these literature studies. No single article summarizes possible varieties of applications of FPEHs as well. A single review article containing the summary of possible device architectures and possible varieties of applications is highly contributive to this field of research. In this review we attempt to describe basic device designs for FPEHs categorically followed by brief description of varieties of piezoelectric materials investigated in this regard. Then we summarize different applications of FPEHs. Therefore, this review article provides the opportunity to the readers to look into the material varieties, device architectures and applications of FPEHs in a single article. An overview on the content of this article is schematically shown in Fig. 1. The performance matrix of some of the representative devices is outlined. Through a comparative analysis of different device designs and their performances we point out key parameter(s) responsible for enhancing electrical power density. Systematic tuning of such parameters is expected to enhance device performances, paving the way to further research directions in the area of FPEHs.
 Fig. 1  Overview of field research of flexible piezoelectric energy harvesting. Figures adopted with permission from – (a) ref. 13, (b) ref. 179 Copyright 2016 @ John Wiley & Sons, (c) ref. 180, Copyright 2012 @ American Chemical Society, (d) ref. 140, Copyright 2014 @ John Wiley & Sons, (e) ref. 133, Copyright 2008 @ Royal Society of Chemistry, (f) ref. 1, Copyright 2008 @ Springer Nature, (g) ref. 181, Copyright 2021 @ Elsevier, (h) ref. 163, Copyright 2008 @ Royal Society of Chemistry, and (i) ref. 6 Copyright 2019 @ John Wiley & Sons. 
Materials perspective
Perovskite structure
Most widely studied piezoelectric materials belong to the perovskite oxide family. Among them perovskite oxide piezoceramics with the general formula ABO3 have received most attention with regard to fundamentals and applications due to their high piezoelectric properties. Piezoelectric co-efficient (d33) of such systems has reached a benchmark by this time. ABO3 perovskites can be categorized into three classes: AIBVO3 (example – KNbO3, LiNbO3, (K,Na)NbO3, etc.), AIIBIVO3 (example – BaTiO3, (Na0.5Bi0.5)TiO3, (K0.5Bi0.5)TiO3, etc.), and AIIIBIIIO3 (example – BiFeO3, BiScO3, etc.). Among them Pb based single crystal Sm-doped PbMg2/3Nb1/3O3 – PbTiO3 (PMN-PT) and its polycrystal form showed d33 ∼4000 pC N−1 and ∼1300 pC N−1 respectively.71,72 Very recently, lead free piezoelectric oxide also reached the value of d33 ∼1100 pC N−1via synergistic design.73 Complex interplay of local and global structural features prompted by chemical doping and microstructure leads to the enhanced electromechanical responses of perovskite oxides. Suitable chemical composition leads to the crystallographic phase manipulation. For example, the composition tuned ferroelectric phase mixture leading to the morphotropic phase boundary exhibits anomaly in the piezoelectric co-efficient (d33) and other properties.71–74 In polycrystalline ceramics, grain boundaries act as pinning centers to the domain wall mobility, affecting the overall piezoelectricity. Average polar structural strength of ferroelectrics dictates average piezoelectric properties which in turn is dependent on the grain size. At a submicron to nanometer range of grain size, average polar structure distortion collapses and essentially piezoelectric properties decrease. Piezoelectric properties do not increase monotonously with increasing grain size in the micron range. Rather at an intermediate grain size, properties become maxima, felicitated by the enhanced domain wall mobility75 and/or maximum polar structural heterogeneity survives in the poled state of the ceramics.76,77 Among the perovskite oxides, BaTiO3 is the most widely investigated as a FPEH and related applications with its varying morphology.78,79 Zhang et al. have reported a bioinspired elastic piezoelectric composite based on sol–gel synthesized (Ba,Ca)(Zr,Ti)O3 piezoceramics.80 A self-powered muscle monitoring system was demonstrated based on a composite comprising piezoelectric (Ba,Ca)(Sn,Ti)O3 and non-piezoelectric polymer PDMS.81 Inspired by high piezoelectricity, researchers prepared a nano-material of perovskites and studied the performances of FPEHs. However, we must keep in mind that piezoelectric and ferroelectric property parameters strongly depend on the grain size; with reducing the grain size in all directions, properties deteriorate.75,76
Another subclass of perovskite systems with the general formula ABX3, known as halide perovskites, has received recent attention as FPEHs and related applications. Currently, they are of prime focus for photovoltaic applications. However, with their moderate piezoelectric properties, halide perovskites are used in hybrid energy harvesters. An example includes trimethylchloromethyl ammonium trichloromanganese(II) [Me3NCH2ClMnCl3, (TMCM–MnCl3)] showing d33 ∼ 185 pC N−1, which is comparable to that of BaTiO3 (d33 ∼ 190 pC N−1).82 A comprehensive review of organic–inorganic halide perovskites and related FPEH performance studies can be found in ref. 17.
Wurtzite structure
Another category of piezoelectric materials with relatively simple structural complexity, named after the mineral wurtzite, commonly known as the wurtzite structure has received significant attention as FPEHs and related applications. Materials belong to this category are binary compounds and examples include ZnO, GaN, InN, ZnS, etc. They crystallize with hexagonal symmetry. ZnO with a controlled morphology is the most investigated under this category. Indeed, the first nanogenerator was demonstrated on ZnO nanowires.83 Several research groups have focused on the enhancement of piezoelectric properties of ZnO by chemical doping via shielding of free charge carriers. A list of chemically modified ZnO systems along with heir piezoelectric properties can be found in ref. 16. AlN is another piezoelectric material that has received significant attention as a MEM and biocompatible device due to its good biocompatibility and ease of synthesis as a thin film at lower temperatures.84
Two-dimensional (2D) materials
Emergence of piezoelectricity in 2D layered materials is promising to the future technology. Such materials are important from the fundamental perspective too as this field is emerging. Several materials in this category are under rapid investigations currently. Examples include WS2, MoS2, MoSe2, SnSe, SnS, modified graphene, etc. Lack of inversion symmetry in plane of the materials is the origin of piezoelectricity in such systems. Until now measuring  (strain coefficient or inverse piezoelectric coefficient) by PFM based experiment is one of the most widely followed ways to characterize piezoelectricity in 2D systems. However, implementing as a nanogenerator, d33 is the appropriate parameter and in all the systems they ( and d33) are not in proportional relation. Recently Khan et al. reported a piezoelectric nanogenerator based on the monolayer of SnS.85 Summary of 2D material research and related device structures can be found in the recent review articles.67,86
Polymer materials
Piezoelectric polymers have received significant attention for FPEHs and sensor applications due to their light weight, flexibility, and natural abundance of several of them. Piezoelectricity in polymer PVDF was first discovered by Kawai in 1968.87 Piezoelectricity in PVDF is attributed to the β-phase content of the polymer and its co-efficient (d33) value is around −24 pC/N.61 Co-polymers belonging to the PVDF family are P(VDF-TrFE), PVDF-CTFE, PVDF-HFP, etc. which also exhibit piezoelectricity and are widely used in energy harvesting applications. Polyamides, commercially known as nylons, are receiving increasing attention as piezoelectrics for wearable applications. Among them nylon-11 [C11H21O]n shows the piezoelectric property compared to that of PVDF.88 Cellulose is a naturally available polymer and attractive in FPEH applications due to its large availability and great biocompatibility.89–91 Native cellulose, namely cellulose-I, is crystalline cellulose. Cellulose-II generally requires additional chemical treatment to prepare.
Bio-materials
Apart from cellulose, several other biomaterials like bones, collagen, viruses and a variety of protein-based materials exhibit piezoelectric properties.92–98 FPEHs based on several of such materials are demonstrated in the past. Shin et al. studied PEH based energy harvesting based on vertically aligned nanopillars of phage virus.97 Self-assemblage of diphenylalanine peptide gives enhanced piezoelectric response. A nanogenerator based on this peptide shows an instantaneous power of ∼3.5 nW under a mechanical loading of ∼50 N.98 Lee at al. have fabricated a nanogenerator based on a peptide nanotube array which shows 5 nW peak power and is able to drive an LCD.96 Recently Aloe vera based FPEH and device studies were performed by Alluri et al.94 Persistence of piezoelectric and ferroelectric properties of Aloe vera is established via complementary techniques like ferroelectric hysteresis, and PFM based measurements. An instantaneous power of 0.42 μW was scavenged from the Aloe vera based FPEH device which could power up several low power electronic devices.
Piezoelectrets
Piezoelectric-like materials comprising cellular polymer foams, commonly known as piezoelectrets, have received significant attention in vibration-based energy harvesting.99–101 Piezoelectrets also known as ferroelectrets were first discovered in Finland in the 1980's.102 Ferroelectret foam exhibits piezoelectric-like behavior due to the internal charge voids inside materials. During fabrication, electric field application creates opposite charge layers inside voids, forming macroscopic polarization in the foam. More details about piezoelectret processing, device, and applications can be found in articles ref. 18 and ref. 103 and references therein.
Basic device designs
Single wire/nanowire-based devices
To realize different FPEH device architectures, we start with describing the device structure based on single wire/nanowire (NW). Moorthy et al. demonstrated a single NW FPEH device using hydrothermally grown highly piezoelectric PMN-PT NW.104 Basic steps of the device fabrication are shown in Fig. 2a. Fig. 2b shows the bending and unbending states of the device schematically. Generated voltage and current responses of the device under periodic bending and unbending conditions are shown in Fig. 2c. A single ZnO NW based device under a bending strain of ∼0.1% shows an oscillating output of ∼50 mV and energy conversion efficiency of ∼6.8%.1 Bai et al.105 fabricated a single crystalline PZT nano/micro wire based FPEH device for self-powered UV sensor applications. While single nano/micro wire-based devices can be utilized in nano-scale applications, for macroscopic applications, researchers have developed wire type macroscopic devices which possibly enable nonlinear motion monitoring and wearable applications. Alluri et al. have developed a wire type device based on BaTiO3 (BT) nano materials directly grown on the thin and single Ti-wire.106 Radial growth of BT was preceded from the Ti content of the substrate itself. The authors have demonstrated a self-powered UV light sensor using the device. A triaxial braided yarn type FPEH was fabricated by Mokhtari et al.107Fig. 2(d and e) shows the optical image and cross section of the device. Inner and outer cores are consisting of Ag coated nylon as electrodes and the middle white color yarn is piezo active PVDF. Pressure and load dependent electrical power response of the triaxial device is shown in Fig. 2(f and g).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustrations of fabrication of an overall FPEH device based on PMN-PT single NW. (b and c) Schematic illustration of original and bending state of the PMN-PT NW device and scavenged voltage and current response under periodic bending and unbending states.104 (d and e) Optical photograph of the as-developed triaxial braided piezo generator and its cross-sectional view; (i) silver coated nylon as inner and outer electrodes and (ii) braided PVDF fibers as the intermediate layer. (f and g) The mechanical energy harvesting performance of developed triaxial braided piezoelectric fibers; variation of current and peak power output as a function of applied impact pressure for the developed triaxial piezo energy generator and the peak values of the power and voltage for the fabricated device (obtained at an impact pressure of 0.023 MPa) respectively.107 Copyright 2012 @ Royal Society of Chemistry. 
0–3 Ferroelectric/polymer composites
The most widely investigated FPEH devices and related applications are based on 0–3 type piezoelectric/polymer composites owing to the simple and cost-effective device preparation processes.108–121 Ideally, in a 0–3 type composite, ferroelectric particle to particle interactions in three directions are negligible. On the other hand, the polymer matrix has connectivity and hence interactions in all three directions. A wide variety of ferroelectric particles with varying morphologies are examined for device performance which include oxide ceramics, halide perovskites, 2D nanomaterials, etc. Polymer matrices can be consisting of ferroelectrics (such as PVDF) or non-ferroelectrics (such as PDMS) in nature. To enhance scavenged power density, researchers incorporated conducting fillers such a CNT, Ag, Cu nanowires, etc. into the 0–3 composites while processing. Fig. 3 shows one of such devices and its electrical energy harvesting performance.114 In this case the authors fabricated a BT/PVDF 0–3 composite adding Ag NWs as conducting fillers using a simple casting approach. Fig. 3i shows the working mechanism of the device operation. Scavenged voltage and current under the variation of different parameters are shown in Fig. 3(j–m). Jeong et al.118 fabricated a large area (30 × 30 cm2) FPEH device based on 0.942(K0.480Na0.535)NbO3–0.058LiNbO3 (KNLN) ferroelectric ceramic, Cu nano rods and PDMS polymer matrix. The authors showed an open circuit voltage of ∼120 V and short circuit current of ∼12 μA. In the 0–3 composite scenario, further device engineering has enabled improved device performances. For example, Gao et al. have demonstrated the alignment of (Ba0.85Ca0.15)(Ti0.90Zr0.10)O3 (BCZT) particles aligned in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) matrix piezocomposites by dielectrophoresis (DEP).120 In this process the PDMS/BCZT composite mixture was cured with/without temperature under the AC electric field with varying magnitude, Fig. 4a. Fig. 4(b–g) show the cross-sectional SEM of the composite cured at different time intervals. Ceramic particle alignment in the polymer matrix increases with prolonged curing time which is advantageous for larger piezoelectric figure of merit, Fig. 4h. Fig. 4(i–l) show the electrical output of the DEP composite under different parameters. An ultrahigh piezoelectric voltage coefficient (g33) of 600 × 10−3 Vm N−1 is achieved in this composite. Increased polarization in the matrix led to the better energy harvesting performance.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram (a–c) present the synthesis process of BaTiO3 (BT) micro stone-like (MS) architectures by a solid-state reaction route method and (d–f) present the fabrication process of the FPEH device with a Ag-NWs/BT/PVDF composite film. Photographic images of the flexible (g) Ag-NWs/BT/PVDF composite film and (h) FPEH with an active area of 2 × 2 cm.2 Working mechanism of the BT/PVDF composite film-based FPEH (i). Electrical response (j) VOC and (k) ISC curves of the BT/PVDF composite film-based PEH at various wt% of BT-MSs. Measured (l) VOC and (m) ISC curves of various FPEHs with three different composite films such as pristine PVDF, BT/PVDF, and Ag-NWs/BT/PVDF.114 Copyright 2018 @ Elsevier. 
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagrams of the preparation procedure of the BCZT/PDMS piezocomposites; cross sectional SEM images of the BCZT/PDMS piezocomposites prepared by DEP with an AC electric field of 1 kV mm−1, 50 Hz for different times: (b) 0 h, (c) 6 h, (d) 12 h, (e) 18 h, (f) 24 h, and (g) 30 h; (h) the order parameter of BCZT/PDMS piezocomposites prepared by DEP for different times. (i) VOC of the BCZT/PDMS sensors prepared by different DEP times; (j) VOC and (k) ISC values of the BCZT/PDMS sensor by 24 h DEP under different vertical compression conditions; (l) the dynamic pressure sensitivity of the BCZT/PDMS sensor by 24 h DEP follows a linear law.120 
Further device architecture in the case of a 0–3 composite includes a multi-layer device structure formation based on individual 0–3 composite films as demonstrated in Fig. 5.119 Here, the authors fabricated a multi-layered structure (12 layers) of highly piezoelectric ceramic Sm doped PMN-PT NWs dispersed in the PVDF matrix, Fig. 5(a–e). Much improved current and voltage are obtained (Fig. 5(f and g)) which can compete with some of the TENG based devices (Fig. 5(h and i)) in terms of obtained current density which is the most desired parameter in mechanical energy harvesting in the present scenario.
 Fig. 5  Fabrication and characterization of the multi-layered FPEH – (a) schematic diagram of the fabrication process, (b) optical image of a round Sm-PMN-PT/PVDF composite film with a diameter of 9 cm, (c) cross-section image of the composite film in (b), and (d) optical image of a fabricated FPEH with 7 units. Al electrodes on each side are connected as one electrode, forming a three-dimensional intercalation electrode. (e) The corresponding cross-section image of an FPEH. Al electrodes, composite films and PET are marked by white arrows. Output performance of the device and its position in reported works. (f and g) The rectified current and voltage signals, and (h) the maximum current density of our IENG calculated from rectified current signals in a and some representative PENGs and TENG. (i) Charge density of our IENG calculated from the charging curve in e and selected representative TENGs.119 
1–3 Piezoelectric/polymer composites
Composites with 1–3 type architecture are more efficient than those with a 0–3 architecture. FPEHs based on 1–3 piezoelectric/polymer composites have received much attention for high performance and various applications.122–130 In a 1–3 type architecture, the piezoelectric (ceramic/semiconductor) has connectivity in one direction as schematically shown in Fig. 6a.127 Among them the vertically aligned 1–3 structure is more efficient as piezoelectric nanorod/fibers get direct connectivity to the electrodes in this configuration, Fig. 6b. The one direction piezoelectric can be a single crystalline NW/nano fiber or it can be consisting of micropillars of polycrystalline ceramic/polymer. Jeong et al. fabricated a 1–3 composite based on BaTiO3 NWs embedded in poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF-TrFE)) for a high-performance FPEH.79 The harvested output of the device reaches up to ∼14 V and ∼4 μA, which is higher than the current levels of even previous piezoceramic film-based FPEHs. Fig. 6(c–f) show the fabrication and microstructure of 1–3 composites comprising micropillars of P(VDF-TrFE)/boron nitride nanotube (BNNT) composite.125Fig. 6(g and h) show the voltage and current response of that composite device. Johar et al. have shown a 1–3 nanogenerator based on GaN grown on flexible Cu foil, Fig. 7(a–f).128 Under a bending motion, the corresponding device exhibits high electrical output shown in Fig. 7(g–i). In a 1–3 type nanogenerator, optimization of mechanical strain field, force field sensitivity, electric potential, etc. depends on different factors such a ratio of nanofiber to polymer matrix, length of the fiber, etc.124
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic fabrication procedure of the nanogenerators based on BaTiO3 nanofibers in three kinds of alignment modes namely, 0–3 composite (BTNF-R), 1–3 horizontal composite (BTNF-H), and vertically aligned 1–3 type composite (BTNF-V). (b) Output voltage of three types of BaTiO3/PDMS nanogenerators under a periodic mechanical compression. Inset of (b) is a photograph of a commercial blue LED lit up by the electric energy generated from BTNF-V.127 Copyright 2016 @ American Chemical Society. (c) Experimental processes used for fabrication of a piezoelectric nanogenerator based on the P(VDF-TrFE)/BNNTs nanocomposite micropillar array. (d) SEM image of the nanocomposite micropillar array. (e) SEM image of the micropillar array after coating PDMS. The inset shows the enlarged view of micropillars surrounded by PDMS. (f) SEM image of the top electrode comprising Ag nanowires. The inset shows the magnified view of Ag nanowires. (g and h) Output voltage and current of microstructured nanocomposite micropillar array based PENGs under a continuous compressive load of 40 N.125 Copyright 2019 @ Elsevier. 
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the growth of GaN NWs on graphene-coated Cu foil and the fabrication procedure for the direct integration of a GaN NW-based PENG on metal foil: (a) graphene-coated Cu metal-foil. (b–i) Agglomeration of the Au/In/Ga metal-alloy catalyst and (b-ii) SEM micrograph of catalyst agglomeration. (c-i) Illustration of GaN nanowires grown on graphene-coated Cu foil, (c-ii) low-magnification SEM micrograph of GaN NWs, (c-iii) high-magnification SEM micrograph of GaN NWs. (d) Transfer of GaN NWs grown on graphene-coated Cu foil onto the PDMS-coated PET substrate. (e-i) PDMS deposition to form a GaN NW-PDMS matrix on the substrate, and (e-ii) photograph of the corresponding structure. (f-i) Evaporation of Au onto the PENG, (f-ii) photograph of the corresponding structure of the complete device, and (f-iii) the SEM micrograph of the complete device, with the inset showing the GaN NW/PDMS matrix. (g) Schematic illustration of the NWs undergoing tensile stress applied laterally upon bending of the PENG. (h) Piezoelectric output voltages, and (i) piezoelectric output current upon bending.128 Copyright 2020 @ John Wiley & Sons. 
3–3 Piezoelectric/polymer composites
Unlike a 0–3 configuration, 3D interconnecting polymer/piezoceramic composites are more efficient FPEHs owing to their larger stress transfer ability and grain to grain integration of active components in all three directions.80,131–134 Zhang et al. have prepared a 3–3 composite structure based on Sm doped PMN-PT ceramic and compared the device performance with that of a 0–3 type composite, Fig. 8a–c.131 The 3–3 type deice structure exhibited a maximum instantaneous power 16 times higher than that of 0–3 type nanoparticle-based composites, attributed to the better stress transfer ability in 3D configuration. Shi et al. have prepared a 3–3 composite structure based on cellulose/BaTiO3 aerogel and PDMS composite.89 Zhang et al. have prepared a 3D structure based on sea sponge and wet chemically synthesized BCZT lead free piezoceramics which exhibits enhanced electrical output, Fig. 8(d–f).80 While the authors have used a high temperature approach to prepare a 3D skeleton, other literature studies followed freeze drying ∼−40 to −50 °C first and subsequently high temperature treatments as applicable. Using a porous foam template, a PZT/PDMS 3–3 interconnected structure was prepared by Zhang et al.133 Such a structure is efficient in mechanical load and heat transfer. Essentially mechanical and thermal (pyroelectric) energy harvesting performances of the flexible piezoelectric devices increase through these strategies.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematics of the fabrication for the 3D interconnected porous piezoceramic skeleton based on a cellulose fibril template. (b) Optical picture of a 3D interconnected Sm-PMN-PT skeleton based composite. Inset: As-sintered 3D interconnected porous Sm-PMN-PT skeleton after sintering. (c) Open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current output signals of the 4 wt% cellulose-templated 3D-composite when compressed.131 Copyright 2018 @ Elsevier. (d) Schematic of the fabrication process of the sea sponge inspired 3D piezoelectric composite. Open-circuit voltage and (e) short-circuit current (f) output by compressing and releasing the elastic PCG.80 Copyright 2012 @ Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Thin film-based devices
FPEHs based on the directly grown thin film piezoelectrics on the flexible substrates are highly promising due to the 100% utility of active (piezoelectric) components in the devices, unlike the situation of polymer (non-active) based composites. Thin film PEHs are based on single crystalline or highly oriented piezoceramics,135,136 polycrystalline thin films137,138 or monolayer 2D materials.85,139 Hwang et al. prepared an energy harvesting device based on a (1 − x)Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3–(x)PbTiO3 (PMN-PT) single crystalline thin film (d33 ∼ 2500 pC/N). Such a device exhibits a scavenged voltage and current (peak value) of ∼8 V and 120 μA respectively.136 On the other hand, a large area polycrystalline perovskite piezoceramic was grown on a non-flexible substrate and later transferred to a flexible plastic substrate by the laser lift-off process.140Fig. 9a shows the schematic representation of the laser lift-off process. Cross sectional microstructures of the film and device are shown in Fig. 9(b and c). Fig. 9(d and e) shows the optical picture of the film and the device and electrical output under bending and unbending motion is shown in Fig. 9f. Interestingly, Won et al. grew PZT ceramic on a flexible metallic substrate, Fig. 10(a–f).137 Residual stress effects between the conducting layer and grown thin film arises due to high temperature sintering facilitating increased polarization useful for energy harvesting. Khan et al. have fabricated a liquid metal based SnS film and prepared a nanogenerator based on this atomic layered film.85Fig. 10g shows the schematic representation of the thin film and device fabrication. Fig. 10h shows the TEM image of the prepared film along with the substrate. Fig. 10(i–k) present electrical energy harvesting of the nanogenerator.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process for a highly efficient, flexible, and large-area PZT thin film-based NG using the LLO method. By irradiation of a two-dimensional excimer laser, a 2 μm PZT thin film deposited on a transparent sapphire was successfully transferred onto a flexible PET plastic substrate. Subsequently, the IDEs and protective layer were formed on the PZT thin film to fabricate the NG device. (b and c) The cross-sectional SEM images of PZT thin films on a sapphire (b) and a PET substrate (c). After the LLO process, a PZT thin film on an original substrate was inverted at a flexible substrate. The insets show the top surfaces of the PZT thin film on sapphire and PET substrates. (d) A PZT thin film (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm) on a PET substrate being detached from a sapphire substrate after the LLO process. The inset shows the PZT thin film on a flexible substrate bent by human fingers. (e) The final flexible PZT thin film NG attached to a glass tube and bent by human fingers (the inset). (f) Photographs of the PZT thin film NG captured at bending states and the open-circuit voltage and cross-sectional current density measured from the PZT thin film NG in the forward connection.140 Copyright 2014 @ John Wiley & Sons. 
 Fig. 10  (a) XRD patterns of PZT thin films on the Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si wafer and the flexible LNO/Ni-Cr-based austenitic steel metal foil substrate. (b) Schematic illustration showing the mechanism of c-axis elongation of the PZT film on the flexible LNO/Ni-Cr-based metal foil substrate. (c) SEM image of the PZT thin film on the flexible LNO/metal foil substrate. Inset: SEM image of the PZT thin film on the Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si substrate. (d) Cross-sectional SEM and (e) TEM images of the PZT thin film on the flexible LNO/metal foil. (f) EDS spectrum of the PZT thin film on the flexible LNO/metal foil. Inset: A photograph of the flexible PZT thin film on the LNO/Ni-Cr-steel metal foil substrate bent by fingers.137 Copyright 2019 @ Elsevier. (g) Schematic representation of synthesis and material characterization of the 2D SnS. (h) TEM image of monolayered SnS nanosheets. Scale bar is 500 nm. (i) Response of the output voltage of the two-electrode device. The inset shows an optical image of the device. Scale bar is 50 μm. (j) Response of the output voltage of the multi-electrode device excited at 5 Hz. (k) A graph showing the variation of average output power and voltage at varying tapping frequencies and the inset is the photo of the PDMS-encapsulated mica flexible nanogenerator (multielectrode device).85 
Pure polymer-based devices
Piezoelectric polymer based FPEHs are highly attractive due to their inherent flexibility, light weight and low temperature preparation of the active components.141–148 Though the polymers exhibit relatively low piezoelectric coefficients as compared to that of piezoceramics, a suitable device structure enables high scavenged output in the case of polymer devices. Yuan et al. have fabricated a multi-layered FPEH device structure using the 3D printing process.145 As shown in Fig. 11a, the multi-layered structure consists of alternating layers of P(VDF-TrFE) and Ag was fitted outside of a rugby ball structure. Radial mechanical pressure (Fig. 11b) leads to the scavenged voltage, high current and high instantaneous power, Fig. 11(c–e). Highly aligned PVDF-TrFE nanofibers enabled by stretching-annealing (∼140 °C)-external poling lead to high power generation.146 Godard et al. have reported a cantilever based multi-layered structure polymer device which exhibits mW level power density.142 Interestingly, the multi-layer structured PVDF based device exhibited scavenged power density as high as ∼17 mW cm−2.144 In this case non planer nature of the device utilizes both d33 and d31 mode of the piezoelectrics.
 Fig. 11  A schematic diagram of the PEH – (a) A schematic diagram of the multilayer PVDF-TrFE and internal electrode layer at the molecular level; (b) mechanical structure analysis. (c and d) Voltage and current response of the multi-layered devices. (e) Scavenged power density as a function of external mechanical load for devices with different numbers of polymer layers.145 Copyright 2008 @ Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Piezoelectret based devices
FPEHs based on piezoelectrets are attractive because of their light weight, flexibility, biocompatibility and high performance. Anton et al. have demonstrated the fabrication and vibration energy harvesting of a piezoelectret of the polypropylene (PP) polymer.100 Formation of the piezoelectret involves biaxial stretching of the polymer which led to the formation of lens shaped voids. Afterwards, a charge layer was induced in the wall of voids by corona poling. The foam showed a frequency stable d33 ∼ 175 pC N−1. The device exhibited a maximum instantaneous power of about 0.005 W mm−2 under the frequency of excitation ∼100 Hz. Another approach of piezoelectret foam formation involves altering of nitrogen partial pressure in a short span of time at the temperature of 100 °C based energy harvesting.99Fig. 12 shows the schematic picture of the PP foam-based device, its microstructure, piezoelectric property and energy harvesting performances.99 Interestingly, as evident from the figure, the piezoelectric co-efficient and scavenged power output are comparable to those of some of the highly piezoelectric ceramics when forming a composite with a polymer.80,131
 Fig. 12  Cellular PP-based wearable energy harvester – (a) a schematic diagram of a cellular PP-based energy harvester, (b) a digital photograph showing the device structure and an SEM image of the cellular PP in the inset, (c) longitudinal piezoelectric coefficient (d33) as a function of temperature, (d) variation of d33 with time, (e) instantaneous peak power and current of the device as a function of load resistance, (f) output current–time curves of the device for ∼10500 continuous hitting cycles, (g) peak values of output currents and transferred charges for the device stimulated at different forces and a given frequency of 5 Hz, and (h) the current signal of the device generated by one coughing action and a digital photograph showing the device fastened on the throat.99 Copyright 2015 @ John Wiley & Sons. 
Applications of FPEHs
Many research groups across the globe are investigating the potential applications of piezoelectric energy harvesters. Numerous FPEHs with desired properties such as flexibility, durability, high performance, biocompatibility, biodegradability, etc. are compatible to the specific applications. This section will summarize various applications of FPEHs which include powering the electronic components, mechanical impact sensing, structural health monitoring, biomedical applications, etc. An overview of different applications is shown in Fig. 13. Recent progress in different applications is summarized in the sections below.
 Fig. 13  Overview of different applications of FPEHs investigated so far. Images adopted with permission from – (a) ref. 151, Copyright 2022 @ Elsevier, (b) ref. 150, Copyright 2021 @ Elsevier, (c) ref. 157, Copyright 2015 @ Elsevier, (d) ref. 152, Copyright 1992 @ IOP Publishing, (e) ref. 155, Copyright 2019 @ Elsevier, (f) ref. 160, Copyright 2022 @ Elsevier, (g) ref. 161, Copyright 2021 @ Elsevier, (h and i) ref. 163, Copyright 2008 @ Royal Society of Chemistry, and (j and k) ref. 164 Copyright 2021 @ Elsevier. 
Powering electronic devices
Piezoelectric energy harvesting (PEH) is the most feasible method to harvest numerous mechanical vibrations. However, harvested electric power density in this process to date remains low as compared to the values obtained through other alternative energy harvesting strategies such as solar energy harvesting. With the low power density (typically less than few mW cm−2), while it is impossible to power up the high power consuming electronic devices, powering low power consuming electronic devices using the PEH process is omnipotent. In particular, for powering the electronic devices at remote areas, for wireless power transmission, as a permanent replacement to the conventional batteries, the PEH technique is catching increasing attention. Converting biomechanical movements such as hand tapping, walking, and other mechanical vibrations such as vehicle motion, rain drops, etc., to electric power using FPEH devices, one can glow several LEDs, display devices, and charge dielectric capacitors.149–151 An FPEH device is proposed to supply electric power to pacemakers utilizing heartbeat vibration which may solve the problems of periodic battery replacement of pacemakers.136
Active stress/strain sensors
By virtue of electric pulse (voltage/current) generation under the mechanical stress/strain, FPEHs find numerous applications in impact sensing. In the process, lots of information on environmental changes, structural health of the industrial working devices/bridges, etc., human health conditions, and human machine interactions can be gathered. Maruccio et al. have shown the feasibility of structural health monitoring of a cable-stayed bridge by employing an electrospun PVDF based FPEH to harvest ambient vibration caused by vehicle motion.152 An FPEH based pressure sensor finds potential applications in microfluidics. In this technique, the nature of fluid and some of its characteristics can be evaluated based on droplet flow induced potential generation in nanogenerators. Wang et al. developed a self-powered microfluidic sensor based on a PVDF based nano generator. The device was capable of counting droplets and bubbles by monitoring the output voltage of the nanogenerator.153 An optofluidic logic device was demonstrated by Purusothaman et al. based on the piezophototronic effect in a nanogenerator.154 The authors demonstrated that an optofluidic Y-cannel logic device was capable of performing AND and OR logic operations on fluid flow upon shining UV-light on the device. A gesture sensor based on a PVDF/ZnO nanofiber FPEH was utilized for robotics application, providing an avenue to interactive human machine interfaces (iHMI).155 A cardiac sensor capable of delivering information about the heart condition was developed by Kim et al. using single crystalline PMN-PZT.156 The device was capable of delivering a short-circuit current of 1.74 A and open-circuit voltage of 17.8 V from porcine heartbeats. High blood pressure is dangerous to the human body as it is the major cause of several diseases such as cerebrovascular disease, renal failure, and heart diseases. Monitoring blood pressure using an FPEH by ex vivo or in vivo condition can help for better heath. Zhang et al. have prepared a flexible PVDF based nanogenerator and implemented the device to warp the ascending aorta of a porcine to investigate the output performance of the FPEH device. The implemented device showed a Vmax and Imax of 1.5 V and 300 nA respectively under a heart rate of 120 bpm.157 Mistewicz et al. have demonstrated sonochemical sensor application of a SbSeI based nanogenerator by harvesting acoustic power of an ultrasonic chember.158
Environmental remediation
Wastewater containing multiple pollutants (i.e., inorganic and organic pollutants) produced by rapid industrialization and human behavior have raised ferocious environmental concerns. Such pollutants get mixed up with river/sea water and ground water which hamper human health. Besides photocatalysis, the piezocatalysis process is emerging as an effective way to environmental remediation.159–162 Tian et al. have shown piezocatalytic removal of bisphenol A (BPA) and hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) with a SnS2/CNFs membrane by harvesting vibration energy.161 The authors have shown boosted piezocatalytic removal using ultrasonic vibration as compared to that with just optical illumination.
Deep brain stimulation
Deep brain stimulation – a neurosurgical treatment – is an effective tool which can relieve psychiatric disorders such as depression, essential tremor, epilepsy and other movement disorders. Neurostimulators which utilize a battery as a power source can precisely stimulate the specific part of the brain by a precisely implemented electrode. Piezoelectric energy harvesting has been proposed as an effective tool which can solve the periodic replacement of batteries for such applications. Moreover, FPEH devices can generate electricity by harvesting mechanical motion of human body parts. Hwang et al. developed a FPEH device based on an indium modified single-crystalline Pb(In1/2Nb1/2)O3–Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3–PbTiO3 (PIMNT) thin film on a plastic substrate for deep brain stimulation application.163 With slight mechanical deformation, the device exhibited a maximum output current and voltage of 0.57 mA and 11 V respectively. The scavenged electrical energy directly stimulated a specific target area of the mice's brain to induce forearm movement. The generator successfully stimulated the M1 cortex of a living mouse that efficiently induced forearm movements in mice.
Tissue regeneration
Electricity plays a crucial role in the tissue regeneration in the animal body. It is the inherent electricity of living cells generated by stress-generated effects, and transmembrane potentials which plays a key role in the regeneration process. However, in many cases such as cell damage, wounds, etc., application of external potential can accelerate the tissue repair. Stress induced electric field in piezoelectrics is highly useful for such tissue engineering applications. Wan et al.164 have shown ultrasound mediated built-in potential of a PVDF/BT composite nanogenerator which can enhance the cell adhesion force and protein absorption, giving rise to free standing cell sheets. This process is highly promising for tissue regeneration applications. A systematic review on the wound healing using piezoelectric/triboelectric nanogenerators can be found in the article by Kao et al.165
Discussions and outlook
Performance of a FPEH device depends on the material property, device structure and dimensions, magnitude and frequency of the applied force. Table 1 shows the performance matrix of some of the representative and high performance FPEHs. Materials with moderate piezoelectricity can show better mechanical energy harvesting performance with suitable device designs. For example, PVDF based polymers have a piezoelectric co-efficient (d33) of ∼30 pC N−1 but its multilayered structure delivers scavenged power density as high as 0.2 mW cm−2.147 We also list the value of the external load (impedance) at which the maximum power is delivered by the respective devices in Table 1. From the principle of maximum power transfer theorem, external load signifies the in operando (internal) impedance of the device. It is interesting to note lower internal impedances of the high performing devices from Table 1. Now let's try to discuss the mechanism of resistance lowering and performance enhancement of such devices. As shown in Fig. 14a, in the case of a multi-layered P(VDF-TrFE) structure, maximum power is delivered at 60 kΩ.142 This indicates that internal impedance of the multi-layered device is around 60 kΩ. In the case of a multi-layered structure (Fig. 14b) overall resistance of the device decreases due to parallel connection of respective layers. In another way, due to intercalation of electrodes in such devices, effective charge collection (during force application) increases. This is unlike the case of what is shown in Fig. 15(a and b). In this case, maximum power is generated at ∼300 MΩ.131 This is due to the fact that the device is consisting of a single layered composite (3D connected) which is highly insulating and electrodes are situated on the top and the bottom surfaces of the device. The output performance of the device is only driven by surface charge generated under the mechanical impacts. The scavenged output is due to Maxwell's displacement current (JD) arising due to the time varying polarization (P) change (by applied force). This can be mathematically expressed in eqn (4) below.44 JD = dP/dt = dσ/dt(4)
Table 1 Summary of materials, device structure, field parameters and energy harvesting performance of some of the representative FPEHs




Material
Device structure
Device area (cm2), thickness (μm)

d
33 (pC N−1)
Applied force (N), pressure (MPa), frequency (Hz)
Voltage (V), current (μA), Pmax (μW cm−2)
Impedance @ Pmax (MΩ)
Ref.




P(VDF-TrFE)
Multilayers (10), cantilever
2.4, (10 × 3)
—
—, —, 33
22, 360, 405
0.06

142



PMN-PT
Film (single crystal)
2.9, 8.4
2500
Bending/unbending, -,0.3
3, 60, 62.3
0.02

136



Sm-PMN-PT
3D connected ceramic/PDMS
1, 500
46
35, —, 2
30, 0.4, 11.5
300

131



CsPbBr3/PVDF
0–3 Composite
—,—
62
—, 100, 3
6, 4, 30 μW
3

117



PZT
3–1 Composite
—, —
12
100, —, 10
140, 16, 110
7

130



Porous CNF/PDMS aerogel
3D connected composite
2, 284
19
—, 0.05, 10
50, —, 210
1

134



BT NP/P(VDF-HFP)
Composite with BT cluster
2.2, 40
—
—, 0.23, —
75, 15, 511
—

116



PVDF based
Multi-layer (80)
450, —
—
10^5, —, —
40, 4000, 222
0.008

147



Cu nanorod/KNLN/PDMS
0–3 Composite
900, 380
>300
—, —, —
40, 4, 0.5
40

118



Sm-PMN-PT/PVDF
Multi-layer (12)
—, 30 (×12)
—
—, 0.1, —
4, 320, 2400
—

119



PVDF/PZTNW//PVDF/MWCNT
Thick film (CPC)
4, 400
—
Hand taping, —, 4
61, 8.45, 5.58
40

175



ZnO NW/PMMA
1–3 Composite
1, —
—
—, 1, —
37, 12, —
—

176



SnS monolayer
Thin film
0.1, —
—
0.7%strain, —,—
0.15, —, 2.5
—

85



Aloe vera
Biomaterial film
4, —
—
4, —, 1
0.6, 0.1, 1
10

94



Eggshell membrane
Thick film
3, —
27
24, —, 3
26.4, 1.45, 11.9
2.8

177



Fish gelatin nanofiber
e-skin
—, 110
—
—, 0.02, —
10, 1, 19.2
1

178





 Fig. 14  (a) Instantaneous power and peak-to-peak voltage of the multi-layered polymer device structure as a function of external load resistance. (b) Schematic representation of that multi-layered device and its corresponding SEM micrograph.142 Copyright 2020 @ Elsevier. (c) Instantaneous power of the PMN-PT single crystal based thin film device. The inset shows the schematic representation of the thin film device.136 Copyright 2014 @ John Wiley & Sons. (d) Schematic representation of the intercalated electrode in the single crystal thin film aided by the conducting domain wall which explains lower internal impedance of the device shown in (c). 
 Fig. 15  (a) Instantaneous power, voltage and current of the 3D interconnected polymer/piezoceramic device structure as a function of external load resistance.131 Copyright 2018 @ Elsevier. (b) Schematic representation of the device working mechanism under the application of mechanical force. (c) Scavenged electrical power of the CsPbBr3/PVDF based 0-3 composite as a function of external load resistance.117 Copyright 2020 @ Elsevier. (d) Schematic representation of the intercalated electrode in the composite formed by the well aggregation of the semiconducting (CsPbBr3) particles at some places of the device while being fabricated which explains lower internal impedance of the device shown in (c). 
It is interesting to note much lower internal impedance of a pure thin film based single layered FPEH135–137 at which maximum power is delivered, Fig. 14c. In this case the thin film consisting of PMN-PT single crystal delivers the maximum power at 20 kΩ.136 Lower internal impedance of this single crystal is mostly due to the well patterning of domain walls especially under the mechanical stress. Conducting nature of the ferroelectric domain wall is well established.166–168 With the intercalated conducting domain walls, thin film-based devices probably achieve the configuration of a multilayered structure schematically shown in Fig. 14d. It is interesting to note much lower open circuit voltage ∼8 V of the thin film device in spite of exhibiting much higher d33 ∼ 2500 pC N−1. With higher d33 much higher open circuit voltage is expected. Appearance of lower voltage (but high current) is an indication of the multi-layered configuration of the device prompted by the domain wall engineering. Interestingly, lower internal impedance is also observed for a device consisting of semiconducting ferroelectric particles (such as CsPbBr3) incorporated into the insulating ferroelectric polymer matrices. This is shown in Fig. 15c.117 In this case too, amid random dispersion of semiconducting particles in the ferroelectric polymer, fewer intercalated conducting layers may form due to agglomeration of some of the particles close to the top/bottom electrodes which apparently make the device a multi-layered structure, schematically shown in Fig. 15d. A similar mechanism can be speculated for the relatively lower internal impedance (<50 MΩ) of a conducting filler (such as CNT, RGO, Ag NWs, and Cu nanorods) added polymer/ceramic 0–3 composite.118,169 Essentially, a low impedance device seems to be superior in terms of delivering larger electrical power that too under a lower external loading condition. Another benefit of the lower impedance FPEH device is its ability of first storage of the generated charges in the commercial batteries. Batteries have low internal impedance and from the principle of maximum power transfer theorem, first charging of batteries becomes feasible with such low impedance FPEHs. However, one need to consider the tradeoff between overall piezoelectric strength and impedance of the device for optimum energy generation in this way. Excess conductivity inside the FPEH devices may screen the polarization.
Overall energy harvesting performance of a piezoelectric energy harvester not only depends on the piezoelectric coefficient (dij) but also depends on the transduction coefficient (dij × gij)170–172 where piezoelectric voltage coefficient (gij) can be defined as gij = dij/(ε0εr).(5)
Very recently, Yan et al. have calculated the transduction coefficient for soft and hard piezoceramics based on PZT.173 Interestingly, the authors showed higher transduction co-efficient for soft PZT specimens which also exhibit higher low-field conductivity (characterized by tanδ) and high field conductivity (characterized by high field leakage current). Electromechanical parameters were determined in a 1–3 KNN per epoxy base composite.174 Inspection of the parameters shows that the composite with high transduction coefficient exhibits higher tanδ. Clearly all these indicate that systematic studies are required to evaluate (dij × gij) for different types of low impedance FPEHs which may facilitate superior energy harvesting performances. Thin film-based energy harvesting devices with lower in operando internal impedance have high performance as it utilizes all the active components (piezoceramics) unlike the situation of a (inactive) polymer/ceramic composite. Such quality thin film based FPEHs can be a good choice for industrial production of the high-performance devices. However, fabricating high quality thin film based large area devices in a cost-effective way is difficult as of now. On the other hand, for small scale applications such as in case of MEMS devices one can consider thin film based FPEHs. For larger area device fabrication, a composite consisting of piezoelectric polymers and piezoceramics with multi layered configuration is an effective approach. We need to consider two factors for such devices namely, high (dij × gij) value, and lower in operando internal impedance.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (grant numbers: 2020R1I1A1A01070513, 2021R1A4A2000934).
References
R. Yang, Y. Qin, L. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 34–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-R. Fan, Z.-Q. Tian and Z. Lin Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sahu, S. Hajra, H.-G. Kim, H.-G. Rubahn, Y. Kumar Mishra and H. J. Kim, Nano Energy, 2021, 88, 106255 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Khatua, A. Kalaskar and R. Ranjan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 117601 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Khatua, A. Senyshyn and R. Ranjan, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 134106 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, M. Wu, Q. Zhu, F. Wang, H. Su, H. Li, C. Diao, H. Zheng, Y. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904259 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Shenck and J. A. Paradiso, IEEE Micro, 2001, 21, 30–42 CrossRef .
J. G. Rocha, L. M. Goncalves, P. F. Rocha, M. P. Silva and S. Lanceros-Mendez, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2010, 57, 813–819 Search PubMed .
N. Sezer and M. Koç, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105567 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Jeong, MRC, 2020, 1–14 Search PubMed .
L. Lu, W. Ding, J. Liu and B. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Duan, J. Wu, J. Xia and W. Lei, Sensors, 2020, 20, 2820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Kim, Q. Wang, W. Jo, A. I. Kingon, S.-H. Kim and C. K. Jeong, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 3131–3149 RSC .
X. Yan, G. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yu, K. Wang and Y. Wu, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105180 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Qiu, H. Wu, W. Qin, Y. Liao, Q. Yu and H. Cheng, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 112569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hu, M. Yao, Y. Fan, C. Ma, M. Fan and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 288–304 CrossRef CAS .
V. Jella, S. Ippili, J.-H. Eom, S. V. N. Pammi, J.-S. Jung, V.-D. Tran, V. H. Nguyen, A. Kirakosyan, S. Yun, D. Kim, M. R. Sihn, J. Choi, Y.-J. Kim, H.-J. Kim and S.-G. Yoon, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 74–93 CrossRef CAS .
M. Safaei, H. A. Sodano and S. R. Anton, Smart Mater. Struct., 2019, 28, 113001 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zaarour, L. Zhu, C. Huang, X. Jin, H. Alghafari, J. Fang and T. Lin, J. Ind. Text., 2019, 152808371987019 Search PubMed .
R. A. Surmenev, T. Orlova, R. V. Chernozem, A. A. Ivanova, A. Bartasyte, S. Mathur and M. A. Surmeneva, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 475–506 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ali, W. Raza, X. Li, H. Gul and K.-H. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 879–902 CrossRef CAS .
D. O. Urroz-Montoya, J. R. Alverto-Suazo, J. R. Garcfa-Cabrera and C. H. Ortega-Jimenez, MATEC Web Conf., 2019, 293, 05004 CrossRef .
H. Liu, J. Zhong, C. Lee, S.-W. Lee and L. Lin, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2018, 5, 041306 Search PubMed .
D. Maurya, M. Peddigari, M.-G. Kang, L. D. Geng, N. Sharpes, V. Annapureddy, H. Palneedi, R. Sriramdas, Y. Yan, H.-C. Song, Y. U. Wang, J. Ryu and S. Priya, J. Mater. Res., 2018, 33, 2235–2263 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dagdeviren, P. Joe, O. L. Tuzman, K.-I. Park, K. J. Lee, Y. Shi, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Extreme Mech. Lett., 2016, 9, 269–281 CrossRef .
M.-G. Kang, W.-S. Jung, C.-Y. Kang and S.-J. Yoon, Actuators, 2016, 5, 5 CrossRef .
J. Briscoe and S. Dunn, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 15–29 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kamaruzaman, N. Ahmad, M. A. Rosly and M. H. Mamat, AIP Conf. Proc., 2021, 2332, 120002 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wu, B. Bao and Q. Wang, Eng. Struct., 2021, 235, 112068 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, L. He, X. Gu, S. Yang, S. Wang, P. Wang and G. Cheng, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2021, 92, 041501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, J. Wen and Y. Qin, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106080 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Mahapatra, P. C. Mohapatra, A. I. Aria, G. Christie, Y. K. Mishra, S. Hofmann and V. K. Thakur, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiao, K.-J. I. Egbe, Y. Xie, A. Matin Nazar and A. H. Alavi, Sensors, 2020, 20, 3730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Zhu and C. Du, Micromachines, 2021, 12, 1278 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sun, S. Jiang and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105646 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Z. Yi, B. Yang and C. Lee, Nano Today, 2021, 36, 101016 CrossRef .
S. K. Karan, S. Maiti, J. H. Lee, Y. K. Mishra, B. B. Khatua and J. K. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2004446 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dong, X. Peng and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, Y. Li, M. Bick and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 3668–3720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Stadlober, M. Zirkl and M. Irimia-Vladu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1787–1825 RSC .
S. Lee, B. Yeom, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, A. Yang, C. Zhao, F. Liu and Z. Li, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1336–1347 CrossRef .
S. Maiti, S. K. Karan, J. K. Kim and B. B. Khatua, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803027 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 74–82 CrossRef .
F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4283–4305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grossi, Electronics, 2021, 10, 661 CrossRef .
J. Li and X. Wang, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 739–750 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Gao, Y. Wu, J. Gui, S. Guo, H. Zheng and Z. L. Wang, Exploration, 2021, 1, 90–114 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, L. You, X. Meng, B. Wang and D. Lin, Micromachines, 2021, 12, 1308 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Dai, L. Li, B. Shi and Z. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 194, 113609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Lee, M. K. Gupta and S.-W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 139–160 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2021 DOI:10.1016/j.mattod.2021.10.027 .
X. Zhao, H. Askari and J. Chen, Joule, 2021, 5, 1391–1431 CrossRef .
M. Gholikhani, H. Roshani, S. Dessouky and A. T. Papagiannakis, Appl. Energy, 2020, 261, 114388 CrossRef .
W. Gao, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, G. Yuan and J.-M. Liu, J. Materiomics, 2020, 6, 1–16 CrossRef .
L. Li, J. Zheng, J. Chen, Z. Luo, Y. Su, W. Tang, X. Gao, Y. Li, C. Cao, Q. Liu, X. Kang, L. Wang and H. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 2000743 CrossRef .
P. Wang, M. Hu, H. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Feng, J. Wang, W. Ling and Y. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Maamer, A. Boughamoura, A. M. R. Fath El-Bab, L. A. Francis and F. Tounsi, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 199, 111973 CrossRef .
Y.-W. Chong, W. Ismail, K. Ko and C.-Y. Lee, IEEE Sens. J., 2019, 19, 9047–9062 CAS .
J. Rao, Z. Chen, D. Zhao, Y. Yin, X. Wang and F. Yi, Sensors, 2019, 19, 2763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Costa, J. Nunes-Pereira, N. Pereira, N. Castro, S. Gonçalves and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1800852 CrossRef .
S. Yun, Y. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Liu and Y. Qin, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 600–619 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chandrasekaran, C. Bowen, J. Roscow, Y. Zhang, D. K. Dang, E. J. Kim, R. D. K. Misra, L. Deng, J. S. Chung and S. H. Hur, Phys. Rep., 2019, 792, 1–33 CrossRef CAS .
F. Narita and M. Fox, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2018, 20, 1700743 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, H. Jantunen and J. Juuti, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707271 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Bowen, H. A. Kim, P. M. Weaver and S. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 25–44 RSC .
S. A. Han, J. Lee, W. Seung, J. Lee, S. Kim and J. H. Kim, Small, 2021, 17, 1903519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, C. R. Bowen and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100905 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sivasubramanian, C. Aravind Vaithilingam, S. S. Indira, S. Paiman, N. Misron and S. Abubakar, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 20, 100772 CrossRef .
L. Liu, X. Guo, W. Liu and C. Lee, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, M. J. Cabral, B. Xu, Z. Cheng, E. C. Dickey, J. M. LeBeau, J. Wang, J. Luo, S. Taylor, W. Hackenberger, L. Bellaiche, Z. Xu, L.-Q. Chen, T. R. Shrout and S. Zhang, Science, 2019, 364, 264–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, D. Lin, Z. Chen, Z. Cheng, J. Wang, C. Li, Z. Xu, Q. Huang, X. Liao, L.-Q. Chen, T. R. Shrout and S. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 349–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, Z. Fan, G. Rao, G. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Yuan, T. Ma, D. Li, X. Tan, Z. Lu, A. Feteira, S. Liu, C. Zhou and S. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 104944 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu and X. Ren, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 257602 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ghosh, A. Sakata, J. Carter, P. A. Thomas, H. Han, J. C. Nino and J. L. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 885–896 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Khatua, A. Mishra, N. Kumar, G. D. Adhikary, U. Shankar, B. Majumdar and R. Ranjan, Acta Mater., 2019, 179, 49–60 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, D. K. Khatua, G. D. Adhikary, N. Kumar, U. Shankar and R. Ranjan, J. Adv. Dielectr., 2019, 09, 1950035 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Alluri, A. Chandrasekhar, V. Vivekananthan, Y. Purusothaman, S. Selvarajan, J. H. Jeong and S.-J. Kim, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4730–4738 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Jeong, C. Baek, A. I. Kingon, K.-I. Park and S.-H. Kim, Small, 2018, 14, 1704022 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. K. Jeong, T. Yang, H. Sun, L.-Q. Chen, S. Zhang, W. Chen and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14546–14552 RSC .
N. R. Alluri, V. Vivekananthan, A. Chandrasekhar and S.-J. Kim, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 907–913 RSC .
Y.-M. You, W.-Q. Liao, D. Zhao, H.-Y. Ye, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou, X. Niu, J. Wang, P.-F. Li, D.-W. Fu, Z. Wang, S. Gao, K. Yang, J.-M. Liu, J. Li, Y. Yan and R.-G. Xiong, Science, 2017, 357, 306–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song,, Science, 2006, 312(5771), 242–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Natta, V. M. Mastronardi, F. Guido, L. Algieri, S. Puce, F. Pisano, F. Rizzi, R. Pulli, A. Qualtieri and M. De Vittorio, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 8392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Khan, N. Mahmood, A. Zavabeti, A. Elbourne, Md. A. Rahman, B. Y. Zhang, V. Krishnamurthi, P. Atkin, M. B. Ghasemian, J. Yang, G. Zheng, A. R. Ravindran, S. Walia, L. Wang, S. P. Russo, T. Daeneke, Y. Li and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Ghasemian, T. Daeneke, Z. Shahrbabaki, J. Yang and K. Z. Kalantar, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(5), 2875–2901 RSC .
H. J. Kawai, J. Appl. Phys., 1969, 8, 975–976 CrossRef CAS .
A. Datta, Y. S. Choi, E. Chalmers, C. Ou and S. Kar-Narayan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604262 CrossRef .
K. Shi, X. Huang, B. Sun, Z. Wu, J. He and P. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 450–458 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Alam and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, Q. Liang, Y. Zhao, X. Zheng and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500257 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Halperin, S. Mutchnik, A. Agronin, M. Molotskii, P. Urenski, M. Salai and G. Rosenman, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1253–1256 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, B. Z. Mei, V. Lubkin, J. I. Scheinbeim, B. A. Newman, P. Kramer, G. Bennett and N. Feit, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 1998, 39(3), 453–457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Alluri, N. P. Maria Joseph Raj, G. Khandelwal, V. Vivekananthan and S.-J. Kim, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104767 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Lee, J. Zhang, C. Zueger, W.-J. Chung, S. Y. Yoo, E. Wang, J. Meyer, R. Ramesh and S.-W. Lee, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 351–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Lee, K. Heo, K. Schulz-Schönhagen, J. H. Lee, M. S. Desai, H.-E. Jin and S.-W. Lee, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8138–8144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-M. Shin, H. J. Han, W.-G. Kim, E. Kim, C. Kim, S. W. Hong, H. K. Kim, J.-W. Oh and Y.-H. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3198–3203 RSC .
V. Nguyen, R. Zhu, K. Jenkins and R. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wu, X. Cheng, Q. Zhong, J. Zhong, W. Li, B. Wang, B. Hu and J. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4788–4794 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anton, K. Farinholt and A. Erturk, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2014, 25, 1681–1692 CrossRef .
P. Pondrom, J. Hillenbrand, G. M. Sessler, J. Bös and T. Melz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 172901 CrossRef .
A. Savolainen and K. Kirjavainen, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 1989, 26, 583–591 CrossRef .
X. Mo, H. Zhou, W. Li, Z. Xu, J. Duan, L. Huang, B. Hu and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104033 CrossRef CAS .
B. Moorthy, C. Baek, J. E. Wang, C. K. Jeong, S. Moon, K.-I. Park and D. K. Kim, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 260–265 RSC .
S. Bai, Q. Xu, L. Gu, F. Ma, Y. Qin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 789–795 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Alluri, Y. Purusothaman, A. Chandrasekhar and S.-J. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 1729–1739 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mokhtari, J. Foroughi, T. Zheng, Z. Cheng and G. M. Spinks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(14), 8245–8257 RSC .
V. Vivekananthan, A. Chandrasekhar, N. R. Alluri, Y. Purusothaman, W. Joong Kim, C.-N. Kang and S.-J. Kim, Mater. Lett., 2019, 249, 73–76 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Maria Joseph Raj, G. Khandelwal and S.-J. Kim, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105848 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hanani, I. Izanzar, M. Amjoud, D. Mezzane, M. Lahcini, H. Uršič, U. Prah, I. Saadoune, M. E. Marssi, I. A. Luk’yanchuk, Z. Kutnjak and M. Gouné, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105661 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, X. Du, Z. Zhang, J. Luo, S. Niu, D. Shen, Y. Wang, H. Yang, Q. Zhang and S. Dong, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105709 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Maria Joseph Raj, N. R. Alluri, G. Khandelwal and S.-J. Kim, Composites, Part B, 2019, 161, 608–616 CrossRef .
N. P. Maria Joseph Raj, N. R. Alluri, A. Chandrasekhar, G. Khandelwal and S.-J. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 329–337 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dudem, D. H. Kim, L. K. Bharat and J. S. Yu, Appl. Energy, 2018, 230, 865–874 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shi, B. Sun, X. Huang and P. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Shin, Y.-H. Kim, M. H. Lee, J.-Y. Jung and J. Nah, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2766–2773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mondal, T. Paul, S. Maiti, B. K. Das and K. K. Chattopadhyay, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104870 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Jeong, K.-I. Park, J. Ryu, G.-T. Hwang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2620–2629 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gu, J. Liu, N. Cui, Q. Xu, T. Du, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, C. Long and Y. Qin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, M. Zheng, X. Yan, J. Fu, Y. Hou and M. Zhu,, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(8), 5175–5185 RSC .
Z. Zhou, X. Du, J. Luo, L. Yao, Z. Zhang, H. Yang and Q. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105895 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, Y. Zhang, M. J. Kraśny, C. Bowen, H. Khanbareh and N. Gathercole, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2919–2927 RSC .
X. Chen, H. Tian, X. Li, J. Shao, Y. Ding, N. An and Y. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11536–11544 RSC .
R. Hinchet, S. Lee, G. Ardila, L. Montès, M. Mouis and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 971–977 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, C. Cheng, X. Chen, X. Chen, J. Shao, J. Zhang, H. Hu, H. Tian, X. Li, L. Ma and W. Jia, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 701–714 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Malakooti, Z. Zhou and H. A. Sodano, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 171–182 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan and Y. G. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15700–15709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Johar, A. Waseem, M. A. Hassan, I. V. Bagal, A. Abdullah, J. Ha and S. Ryu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002608 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhai, L. Zhu, A. Berbille and Z. L. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2021, 129, 095501 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Lin, S. Zhang, Y. Huan, S. Huang and X. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(37), 19631–19640 RSC .
Y. Zhang, C. K. Jeong, J. Wang, H. Sun, F. Li, G. Zhang, L.-Q. Chen, S. Zhang, W. Chen and Q. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. Wu, Q. Zhu, F. Wang, H. Su, H. Li, C. Diao, H. Zheng, Y. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904259 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, P. Zhao, X. Zhang, K. Han, T. Zhao, Y. Zhang, C. K. Jeong, S. Jiang, S. Zhang and Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2046–2056 RSC .
Q. Zheng, H. Zhang, H. Mi, Z. Cai, Z. Ma and S. Gong, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 504–512 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yeo, X. Ma, C. Rahn and S. Trolier-McKinstry, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5940–5946 CrossRef CAS .
G.-T. Hwang, H. Park, J.-H. Lee, S. Oh, K.-I. Park, M. Byun, H. Park, G. Ahn, C. K. Jeong, K. No, H. Kwon, S.-G. Lee, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4880–4887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Won, H. Seo, M. Kawahara, S. Glinsek, J. Lee, Y. Kim, C. K. Jeong, A. I. Kingon and S.-H. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 182–192 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zou, S. Liu, C. Zhang, Y. Hong, G. Zhang and Z. Yang, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105984 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li and Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 58132–58139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-I. Park, J. H. Son, G.-T. Hwang, C. K. Jeong, J. Ryu, M. Koo, I. Choi, S. H. Lee, M. Byun, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2514–2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Whiter, C. Boughey, M. Smith and S. Kar-Narayan, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 928–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Godard, L. Allirol, A. Latour, S. Glinsek, M. Gérard, J. Polesel, F. Domingues Dos Santos and E. Defay, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100068 CrossRef .
Y. Dai, J. Chen, W. Tian, L. Xu and S. Gao, IEEE Sens. J., 2020, 20, 7556–7568 CAS .
W.-S. Jung, M. Lee, S.-H. Baek, I. K. Jung, S.-J. Yoon and C.-Y. Kang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 514–523 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, X. Gao, J. Yang, X. Shen, Z. Li, S. You, Z. Wang and S. Dong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 152–161 RSC .
M. Barique, Y. Neo, M. Noyori, L. Aprilia, M. Asai and H. Mimura, Nanotechnology, 2021, 32, 015401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Shin, I. Jung, M.-S. Noh, J. H. Kim, J.-Y. Choi, S. Kim and C.-Y. Kang, Appl. Energy, 2018, 216, 741–750 CrossRef .
D. W. Jin, Y. J. Ko, C. W. Ahn, S. Hur, T. K. Lee, D. G. Jeong, M. Lee, C. Kang and J. H. Jung, Small, 2021, 2007289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Le Scornec, B. Guiffard, R. Seveno, V. Le Cam and S. Ginestar, Renewable Energy, 2022, 184, 551–563 CrossRef .
J. Xing, H. Chen, L. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Tan, Y. Huang, B. Wu, Q. Chen, D. Xiao and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105900 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yoon, S. Ippili, V. Jella, A. M. Thomas, J.-S. Jung, Y. Han, T.-Y. Yang, S.-G. Yoon and G. Yoon, Nano Energy, 2022, 91, 106691 CrossRef CAS .
C. Maruccio, G. Quaranta, L. D. Lorenzis and G. Monti, Smart Mater. Struct., 2016, 25, 085040 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, L. Tan, X. Pan, G. Liu, Y. He, W. Jin, M. Li, Y. Hu and H. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28586–28595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Purusothaman, N. R. Alluri, A. Chandrasekhar, V. Venkateswaran and S.-J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4381 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Deng, T. Yang, L. Jin, C. Yan, H. Huang, X. Chu, Z. Wang, D. Xiong, G. Tian, Y. Gao, H. Zhang and W. Yang, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 516–525 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, H. J. Shin, H. Lee, C. K. Jeong, H. Park, G.-T. Hwang, Ho-Y Lee, D. J. Joe, J. H. Han, S. H. Lee, J. Kim, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700341 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, X.-S. Zhang, X. Cheng, Y. Liu, M. Han, X. Xue, S. Wang, F. Yang, A. S. Smitha, H. Zhang and Z. Xu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 296–304 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mistewicz, M. Jesionek, H. J. Kim, S. Hajra, M. Kozioł, Ł. Chrobok and X. Wang, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2021, 78, 105718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Maria Joseph Raj, N. R. Alluri, G. Khandelwal and S.-J. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 871, 159503 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. Zhang, H. Cao, J. Ma, L. Huang, S. Yu, X. Ma, G. Song, M. Qiu and X. Wang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2022, 331, 130023 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tian, J. Qiu, N. Li, D. Chen, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He and J. Lu, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106036 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, X. Qiu, D. Chen, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He and J. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28671–28677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-T. Hwang, Y. Kim, J.-H. Lee, S. Oh, C. K. Jeong, D. Y. Park, J. Ryu, H. Kwon, S.-G. Lee, B. Joung, D. Kim and K. J. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2677–2684 RSC .
X. Wan, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, Z. Li, Z. L. Wang and L. Li, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 25, 101218 CrossRef .
F.-C. Kao, H.-H. Ho, P.-Y. Chiu, M.-K. Hsieh, J. Liao, P.-L. Lai, Y.-F. Huang, M.-Y. Dong, T.-T. Tsai and Z.-H. Lin, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2022, 23, 1–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Seidel, P. Maksymovych, Y. Batra, A. Katan, S.-Y. Yang, Q. He, A. P. Baddorf, S. V. Kalinin, C.-H. Yang, J.-C. Yang, Y.-H. Chu, E. K. H. Salje, H. Wormeester, M. Salmeron and R. Ramesh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 197603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Vasudevan, W. Wu, J. R. Guest, A. P. Baddorf, A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, N. Balke, V. Nagarajan, P. Maksymovych and S. V. Kalinin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 25 Search PubMed .
P. Schoenherr, K. Shapovalov, J. Schaab, Z. Yan, E. D. Bourret, M. Hentschel, M. Stengel, M. Fiebig, A. Cano and D. Meier, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1659–1664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Song, J. Y. Cho, K.-B. Kim, J. H. Ahn, Y. Song, W. Hwang, S. D. Hong and T. H. Sung, Appl. Energy, 2019, 256, 113916 CrossRef .
C. H. Choi, I. T. Seo, D. Song, M. S. Jang, B. Y. Kim, S. Nahm, T. H. Sung and H. C. Song, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 33(7), 1343–1347 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bijalwan, D. Sobola, V. Prajzler, P. Tofel and K. Maca, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2021, 104(2), 1088–1101 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yuan, Y. Yang, Q. Hu and Y. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 97, 3999–4004 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, M. Zheng, M. Zhu and Y. Hou, Crystals, 2020, 10, 907 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, J. Zhang, D. Liu and Z. Zhang, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47(4), 4643–4647 CrossRef CAS  , 15.
J. Niu, C. Li, Q. Fang, M. Fan, X. Liu and P. Hu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2022, 220, 109266 CrossRef .
G. Zhu, A. C. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3086–3090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Karan, S. Maiti, S. Paria, A. Maitra, S. K. Si, J. K. Kim and B. B. Khatua, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 9, 114–125 CrossRef .
S. K. Ghosh, P. Adhikary, S. Jana, A. Biswas, V. Sencadas, S. D. Gupta, B. Tudu and D. Mandal, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 166–175 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4283–4305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-A. N. Duerloo, M. T. Ong and E. J. Reed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2871–2876 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shi, B. Chai, H. Zou, P. Shen, B. Sun, P. Jiang, Z. Shi and X. Huang, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105515 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Dipak Kumar Khatua
	Dr Dipak Kumar Khatua is a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Mechatronics Engineering at Jeju National University, Republic of Korea. He received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. He obtained the Master degree in Physics from Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India. His research interests are focused on the structure–property correlations in functional ceramics especially on piezoelectrics and ferroelectrics and energy harvesting and sensor applications.

Sang-Jae Kim
	Sang-Jae Kim is a professor in the Department of Mechatronics Engineering and the Department of Advanced Convergence Technology and Science at Jeju National University, Republic of Korea. He received his PhD degree in Electrical Communication Engineering from Tohoku University, Japan. He was a visiting research scholar in the materials science department at the University of Cambridge, UK, and the Georgia Institute of Technology, USA, as well as a senior researcher at the National Institute of Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. His research disciplines are based on nanomaterials and systems for energy and electronics applications, covering Josephson devices, MEMS, and Nano biosensors.
D = Q/A = d × T (d expressed in Coulomb/Newton)	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Overview of field research of flexible piezoelectric energy harvesting. Figures adopted with permission from – (a) ref. 13, (b) ref. 179 Copyright 2016 @ John Wiley & Sons, (c) ref. 180, Copyright 2012 @ American Chemical Society, (d) ref. 140, Copyright 2014 @ John Wiley & Sons, (e) ref. 133, Copyright 2008 @ Royal Society of Chemistry, (f) ref. 1, Copyright 2008 @ Springer Nature, (g) ref. 181, Copyright 2021 @ Elsevier, (h) ref. 163, Copyright 2008 @ Royal Society of Chemistry, and (i) ref. 6 Copyright 2019 @ John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustrations of fabrication of an overall FPEH device based on PMN-PT single NW. (b and c) Schematic illustration of original and bending state of the PMN-PT NW device and scavenged voltage and current response under periodic bending and unbending states.104 (d and e) Optical photograph of the as-developed triaxial braided piezo generator and its cross-sectional view; (i) silver coated nylon as inner and outer electrodes and (ii) braided PVDF fibers as the intermediate layer. (f and g) The mechanical energy harvesting performance of developed triaxial braided piezoelectric fibers; variation of current and peak power output as a function of applied impact pressure for the developed triaxial piezo energy generator and the peak values of the power and voltage for the fabricated device (obtained at an impact pressure of 0.023 MPa) respectively.107 Copyright 2012 @ Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram (a–c) present the synthesis process of BaTiO3 (BT) micro stone-like (MS) architectures by a solid-state reaction route method and (d–f) present the fabrication process of the FPEH device with a Ag-NWs/BT/PVDF composite film. Photographic images of the flexible (g) Ag-NWs/BT/PVDF composite film and (h) FPEH with an active area of 2 × 2 cm.2 Working mechanism of the BT/PVDF composite film-based FPEH (i). Electrical response (j) VOC and (k) ISC curves of the BT/PVDF composite film-based PEH at various wt% of BT-MSs. Measured (l) VOC and (m) ISC curves of various FPEHs with three different composite films such as pristine PVDF, BT/PVDF, and Ag-NWs/BT/PVDF.114 Copyright 2018 @ Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagrams of the preparation procedure of the BCZT/PDMS piezocomposites; cross sectional SEM images of the BCZT/PDMS piezocomposites prepared by DEP with an AC electric field of 1 kV mm−1, 50 Hz for different times: (b) 0 h, (c) 6 h, (d) 12 h, (e) 18 h, (f) 24 h, and (g) 30 h; (h) the order parameter of BCZT/PDMS piezocomposites prepared by DEP for different times. (i) VOC of the BCZT/PDMS sensors prepared by different DEP times; (j) VOC and (k) ISC values of the BCZT/PDMS sensor by 24 h DEP under different vertical compression conditions; (l) the dynamic pressure sensitivity of the BCZT/PDMS sensor by 24 h DEP follows a linear law.120	 

 	Fig. 5  Fabrication and characterization of the multi-layered FPEH – (a) schematic diagram of the fabrication process, (b) optical image of a round Sm-PMN-PT/PVDF composite film with a diameter of 9 cm, (c) cross-section image of the composite film in (b), and (d) optical image of a fabricated FPEH with 7 units. Al electrodes on each side are connected as one electrode, forming a three-dimensional intercalation electrode. (e) The corresponding cross-section image of an FPEH. Al electrodes, composite films and PET are marked by white arrows. Output performance of the device and its position in reported works. (f and g) The rectified current and voltage signals, and (h) the maximum current density of our IENG calculated from rectified current signals in a and some representative PENGs and TENG. (i) Charge density of our IENG calculated from the charging curve in e and selected representative TENGs.119	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic fabrication procedure of the nanogenerators based on BaTiO3 nanofibers in three kinds of alignment modes namely, 0–3 composite (BTNF-R), 1–3 horizontal composite (BTNF-H), and vertically aligned 1–3 type composite (BTNF-V). (b) Output voltage of three types of BaTiO3/PDMS nanogenerators under a periodic mechanical compression. Inset of (b) is a photograph of a commercial blue LED lit up by the electric energy generated from BTNF-V.127 Copyright 2016 @ American Chemical Society. (c) Experimental processes used for fabrication of a piezoelectric nanogenerator based on the P(VDF-TrFE)/BNNTs nanocomposite micropillar array. (d) SEM image of the nanocomposite micropillar array. (e) SEM image of the micropillar array after coating PDMS. The inset shows the enlarged view of micropillars surrounded by PDMS. (f) SEM image of the top electrode comprising Ag nanowires. The inset shows the magnified view of Ag nanowires. (g and h) Output voltage and current of microstructured nanocomposite micropillar array based PENGs under a continuous compressive load of 40 N.125 Copyright 2019 @ Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the growth of GaN NWs on graphene-coated Cu foil and the fabrication procedure for the direct integration of a GaN NW-based PENG on metal foil: (a) graphene-coated Cu metal-foil. (b–i) Agglomeration of the Au/In/Ga metal-alloy catalyst and (b-ii) SEM micrograph of catalyst agglomeration. (c-i) Illustration of GaN nanowires grown on graphene-coated Cu foil, (c-ii) low-magnification SEM micrograph of GaN NWs, (c-iii) high-magnification SEM micrograph of GaN NWs. (d) Transfer of GaN NWs grown on graphene-coated Cu foil onto the PDMS-coated PET substrate. (e-i) PDMS deposition to form a GaN NW-PDMS matrix on the substrate, and (e-ii) photograph of the corresponding structure. (f-i) Evaporation of Au onto the PENG, (f-ii) photograph of the corresponding structure of the complete device, and (f-iii) the SEM micrograph of the complete device, with the inset showing the GaN NW/PDMS matrix. (g) Schematic illustration of the NWs undergoing tensile stress applied laterally upon bending of the PENG. (h) Piezoelectric output voltages, and (i) piezoelectric output current upon bending.128 Copyright 2020 @ John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematics of the fabrication for the 3D interconnected porous piezoceramic skeleton based on a cellulose fibril template. (b) Optical picture of a 3D interconnected Sm-PMN-PT skeleton based composite. Inset: As-sintered 3D interconnected porous Sm-PMN-PT skeleton after sintering. (c) Open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current output signals of the 4 wt% cellulose-templated 3D-composite when compressed.131 Copyright 2018 @ Elsevier. (d) Schematic of the fabrication process of the sea sponge inspired 3D piezoelectric composite. Open-circuit voltage and (e) short-circuit current (f) output by compressing and releasing the elastic PCG.80 Copyright 2012 @ Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process for a highly efficient, flexible, and large-area PZT thin film-based NG using the LLO method. By irradiation of a two-dimensional excimer laser, a 2 μm PZT thin film deposited on a transparent sapphire was successfully transferred onto a flexible PET plastic substrate. Subsequently, the IDEs and protective layer were formed on the PZT thin film to fabricate the NG device. (b and c) The cross-sectional SEM images of PZT thin films on a sapphire (b) and a PET substrate (c). After the LLO process, a PZT thin film on an original substrate was inverted at a flexible substrate. The insets show the top surfaces of the PZT thin film on sapphire and PET substrates. (d) A PZT thin film (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm) on a PET substrate being detached from a sapphire substrate after the LLO process. The inset shows the PZT thin film on a flexible substrate bent by human fingers. (e) The final flexible PZT thin film NG attached to a glass tube and bent by human fingers (the inset). (f) Photographs of the PZT thin film NG captured at bending states and the open-circuit voltage and cross-sectional current density measured from the PZT thin film NG in the forward connection.140 Copyright 2014 @ John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) XRD patterns of PZT thin films on the Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si wafer and the flexible LNO/Ni-Cr-based austenitic steel metal foil substrate. (b) Schematic illustration showing the mechanism of c-axis elongation of the PZT film on the flexible LNO/Ni-Cr-based metal foil substrate. (c) SEM image of the PZT thin film on the flexible LNO/metal foil substrate. Inset: SEM image of the PZT thin film on the Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si substrate. (d) Cross-sectional SEM and (e) TEM images of the PZT thin film on the flexible LNO/metal foil. (f) EDS spectrum of the PZT thin film on the flexible LNO/metal foil. Inset: A photograph of the flexible PZT thin film on the LNO/Ni-Cr-steel metal foil substrate bent by fingers.137 Copyright 2019 @ Elsevier. (g) Schematic representation of synthesis and material characterization of the 2D SnS. (h) TEM image of monolayered SnS nanosheets. Scale bar is 500 nm. (i) Response of the output voltage of the two-electrode device. The inset shows an optical image of the device. Scale bar is 50 μm. (j) Response of the output voltage of the multi-electrode device excited at 5 Hz. (k) A graph showing the variation of average output power and voltage at varying tapping frequencies and the inset is the photo of the PDMS-encapsulated mica flexible nanogenerator (multielectrode device).85	 

 	Fig. 11  A schematic diagram of the PEH – (a) A schematic diagram of the multilayer PVDF-TrFE and internal electrode layer at the molecular level; (b) mechanical structure analysis. (c and d) Voltage and current response of the multi-layered devices. (e) Scavenged power density as a function of external mechanical load for devices with different numbers of polymer layers.145 Copyright 2008 @ Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Cellular PP-based wearable energy harvester – (a) a schematic diagram of a cellular PP-based energy harvester, (b) a digital photograph showing the device structure and an SEM image of the cellular PP in the inset, (c) longitudinal piezoelectric coefficient (d33) as a function of temperature, (d) variation of d33 with time, (e) instantaneous peak power and current of the device as a function of load resistance, (f) output current–time curves of the device for ∼10500 continuous hitting cycles, (g) peak values of output currents and transferred charges for the device stimulated at different forces and a given frequency of 5 Hz, and (h) the current signal of the device generated by one coughing action and a digital photograph showing the device fastened on the throat.99 Copyright 2015 @ John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  Overview of different applications of FPEHs investigated so far. Images adopted with permission from – (a) ref. 151, Copyright 2022 @ Elsevier, (b) ref. 150, Copyright 2021 @ Elsevier, (c) ref. 157, Copyright 2015 @ Elsevier, (d) ref. 152, Copyright 1992 @ IOP Publishing, (e) ref. 155, Copyright 2019 @ Elsevier, (f) ref. 160, Copyright 2022 @ Elsevier, (g) ref. 161, Copyright 2021 @ Elsevier, (h and i) ref. 163, Copyright 2008 @ Royal Society of Chemistry, and (j and k) ref. 164 Copyright 2021 @ Elsevier.	 
JD = dP/dt = dσ/dt	(4)

P(VDF-TrFE)	Multilayers (10), cantilever	2.4, (10 × 3)	—	—, —, 33	22, 360, 405	0.06	
142

PMN-PT	Film (single crystal)	2.9, 8.4	2500	Bending/unbending, -,0.3	3, 60, 62.3	0.02	
136

Sm-PMN-PT	3D connected ceramic/PDMS	1, 500	46	35, —, 2	30, 0.4, 11.5	300	
131

CsPbBr3/PVDF	0–3 Composite	—,—	62	—, 100, 3	6, 4, 30 μW	3	
117

PZT	3–1 Composite	—, —	12	100, —, 10	140, 16, 110	7	
130

Porous CNF/PDMS aerogel	3D connected composite	2, 284	19	—, 0.05, 10	50, —, 210	1	
134

BT NP/P(VDF-HFP)	Composite with BT cluster	2.2, 40	—	—, 0.23, —	75, 15, 511	—	
116

PVDF based	Multi-layer (80)	450, —	—	10^5, —, —	40, 4000, 222	0.008	
147

Cu nanorod/KNLN/PDMS	0–3 Composite	900, 380	>300	—, —, —	40, 4, 0.5	40	
118

Sm-PMN-PT/PVDF	Multi-layer (12)	—, 30 (×12)	—	—, 0.1, —	4, 320, 2400	—	
119

PVDF/PZTNW//PVDF/MWCNT	Thick film (CPC)	4, 400	—	Hand taping, —, 4	61, 8.45, 5.58	40	
175

ZnO NW/PMMA	1–3 Composite	1, —	—	—, 1, —	37, 12, —	—	
176

SnS monolayer	Thin film	0.1, —	—	0.7%strain, —,—	0.15, —, 2.5	—	
85

Aloe vera	Biomaterial film	4, —	—	4, —, 1	0.6, 0.1, 1	10	
94

Eggshell membrane	Thick film	3, —	27	24, —, 3	26.4, 1.45, 11.9	2.8	
177

Fish gelatin nanofiber	e-skin	—, 110	—	—, 0.02, —	10, 1, 19.2	1	
178


 	Fig. 14  (a) Instantaneous power and peak-to-peak voltage of the multi-layered polymer device structure as a function of external load resistance. (b) Schematic representation of that multi-layered device and its corresponding SEM micrograph.142 Copyright 2020 @ Elsevier. (c) Instantaneous power of the PMN-PT single crystal based thin film device. The inset shows the schematic representation of the thin film device.136 Copyright 2014 @ John Wiley & Sons. (d) Schematic representation of the intercalated electrode in the single crystal thin film aided by the conducting domain wall which explains lower internal impedance of the device shown in (c).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Instantaneous power, voltage and current of the 3D interconnected polymer/piezoceramic device structure as a function of external load resistance.131 Copyright 2018 @ Elsevier. (b) Schematic representation of the device working mechanism under the application of mechanical force. (c) Scavenged electrical power of the CsPbBr3/PVDF based 0-3 composite as a function of external load resistance.117 Copyright 2020 @ Elsevier. (d) Schematic representation of the intercalated electrode in the composite formed by the well aggregation of the semiconducting (CsPbBr3) particles at some places of the device while being fabricated which explains lower internal impedance of the device shown in (c).	 
gij = dij/(ε0εr).	(5)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
