PFM (piezoresponse force microscopy)-aided design for molecular ferroelectrics   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00504H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00504H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8248-8278PFM (piezoresponse force microscopy)-aided design for molecular ferroelectrics†

        
          
            Han-Yue 
            Zhang‡
, 
      
        
          
            Xiao-Gang 
            Chen‡
, 
      
        
          
            Yuan-Yuan 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Wei-Qiang 
            Liao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fang-Fang 
            Di
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Mu‡
, 
      
        
          
            Hang 
            Peng
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ren-Gen 
            Xiong
          
          
        
      *
      Ordered Matter Science Research Center, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, P. R. China. E-mail: tangyuanyuan@ncu.edu.cn; xiongrg@seu.edu.cn
Received 
      14th December 2020
    First published on 3rd June 2021AbstractWith prosperity, decay, and another spring, molecular ferroelectrics have passed a hundred years since Valasek first discovered ferroelectricity in the molecular compound Rochelle salt. Recently, the proposal of ferroelectrochemistry has injected new vigor into this century-old research field. It should be highlighted that piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) technique, as a non-destructive imaging and manipulation method for ferroelectric domains at the nanoscale, can significantly speed up the design rate of molecular ferroelectrics as well as enhance the ferroelectric and piezoelectric performances relying on domain engineering. Herein, we provide a brief review of the contribution of the PFM technique toward assisting the design and performance optimization of molecular ferroelectrics. Relying on the relationship between ferroelectric domains and crystallography, together with other physical characteristics such as domain switching and piezoelectricity, we believe that the PFM technique can be effectively applied to assist the design of high-performance molecular ferroelectrics equipped with multifunctionality, and thereby facilitate their practical utilization in optics, electronics, magnetics, thermotics, and mechanics among others.
Han-Yue Zhang
Han-Yue Zhang received her Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Nanjing Normal University in 2018. She is currently a PhD candidate in Materials Physics and Chemistry, Southeast University, under the supervision of Prof. Ren-Gen Xiong. Her research interests include the chemical design of molecular ferroelectrics and their performance optimization under the guidelines of ferroelectrochemistry.
Xiao-Gang Chen
Xiao-Gang Chen received his BS degree (2016) from Southeast University Chengxian College. He is currently a PhD candidate of Material Physics and Chemistry at Southeast University and is supervised by Prof. Ren-Gen Xiong. His current research focuses on the design optimization of molecular-based ferroelectrics, especially in the field of halogen hybrid perovskites.
Yuan-Yuan Tang
Professor Yuan-Yuan Tang received his PhD degree from Southeast University in 2019, and then became a professor at Ordered Matter Science Research Center, Nanchang University. His current research interests focus on the rational design of molecular ferroelectrics with the help of PFM.
Hang Peng
Hang Peng graduated from Nanchang University with a Bachelor's degree in 2019. She is currently a PhD candidate at Nanchang University under the supervision of Prof. Xiong. Her research interests are focused on host–guest inclusion ferroelectrics.
Ren-Gen Xiong
Professor Ren-Gen Xiong is the head of the Ordered Matter Science Research Center at Nanchang University as well as the Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Science and Applications of Molecular Ferroelectrics in the Southeast University. He has more than 200 papers as a corresponding author, including those in Science (4 articles), J. Am. Chem. Soc. (over 40 articles), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. (16 articles), Adv. Mater. (11 articles), and Chem. Soc. Rev. (5 articles). For more than 20 years, he has been conducting research focused on the synthesis and properties of non-centrosymmetric compound, especially in the field of molecular ferroelectrics, establishing ferroelectrochemistry.
1. Introduction
Great advances in various electronic device technologies have opened up several areas in the development of functional materials for applications in high-speed memories, high-efficiency energy conversion, and portable consumer electronics, which have greatly changed people's traditional ways of living, communication, and entertainment.1–4 As one of the manifold areas of functional materials, ferroelectrics have rapidly sprung up and been widely exploited because of their switchable spontaneous polarization and coupling to multi-functions.5–8 Since its birth 100 years ago, ferroelectricity, first found in the molecular compound Rochelle salt by J. Valasek, has become a time-honored study.9 Since then, however, ferroelectrics that have been used in electronic device technologies, ranging from capacitors to non-volatile memory elements, sensors, actuators, and transducers, have been later inorganic ferroelectrics BaTiO3 (BTO) and Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT) due to their exceptional electrical, mechanical, and optical properties.10–12 To address the growing issues in environment, energy, and cost encountered by these inorganic counterparts, the past decade has witnessed the renaissance of molecular ferroelectrics as promising alternatives.13–16 Molecular ferroelectrics, by virtue of their intrinsic advantages of light weight, mechanical flexibility, structural tailoring, low acoustical impedance, the ease of processing, and bearing chiral center and environmental friendliness, have revealed great promise in solving several scientific barriers.17–20 Past decades have witnessed the difficult but significant efforts made to expand the family of molecular ferroelectrics owing to the lack of effective theories to design and optimize ferroelectrics.21–23 This old way seems similar to looking for a needle in a haystack. As depicted in Scheme 1, previously, the determination of ferroelectricity was a complicated and time-consuming process: initially, an unknown compound was synthesized through various methods; then, some basic measurements were required to provide additional analyses of the potential properties of this compound, such as the most basic characteristic of ferroelectrics, i.e., polar structure. Hence, X-ray single-crystal diffraction, dielectric measurement, and second harmonic generation (SHG) measurement as direct methods were used to determine the crystal structure, dielectric anomaly, and symmetry in order to determine the ferroelectricity. However, on account of their occasionally weak SHG signal or accidentally mistaken crystal structure, it is difficult to accurately determine whether the crystal structure is centrosymmetric or non-centrosymmetric by means of these basic techniques, and thus some potential ferroelectrics may be neglected. Besides, the determination of ferroelectricity relies on the measurement of the polarization–electric field (P–E) hysteresis loop, which is a time-consuming and complex task, including the following steps: (1) growing a large crystal, (2) finding the polarization axis, (3) polishing, and eventually (4) carrying out the troublesome measurements of P–E hysteresis loops. Worse, the P–E hysteresis loop can be distorted because of the existence of leakage currents of some measured samples, such as ultra-thin films or defective single crystals.24,25 Besides, this macroscopic technique can sometimes be limited by the size and dimension of samples because the research focus has shifted from bulk crystals and ceramics to thin films, nanostructures, and 2D materials.26 This has made the progress of discovering new molecular ferroelectrics advance slowly and with difficulty in the past. Consequently, an accurate, easily manipulated, and highly effective technique for detecting ferroelectricity is urgently required.
 Scheme 1  The comparison of the discovery process for molecular ferroelectrics in the past and the present. 
Nowadays, piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) has been suggested as an alternative approach for evaluating the piezoelectric and ferroelectric properties at the nanoscale level.27,28 In addition, the time cost of the fabrication process for thin film preparation is undoubtedly reduced in comparison to that for the growth of a large crystal. Ferroelectric domain searching through PFM, as a basic means to determine the ferroelectricity, is much more convenient than the P–E hysteresis loop measurement. Under the dual confirmation of the domain structure and the domain switching process, the measurement of the P–E hysteresis loop pertains to another proof of ferroelectricity instead of an aimless effort. After this pre-screening aided by PFM, the discovery of molecular ferroelectrics have begun a new era of target design at a relatively high speed and high hit rate.29–32 Naturally, the development of molecular ferroelectrics has ushered into the blow-out period on account of the assistance of PFM recently (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Accumulated number of molecular ferroelectrics during the period of 1920–2020 (data from Web of Science). 
It is generally believed that the functionality is determined by the structure;33 similarly, a domain, which is a microscopic reflection of ferroelectricity, is essential for a better understanding of ferroelectricity.34 Polarization switching under an electric field, the most vital characteristic of ferroelectrics, also generally involves the nucleation and growth of new domains and/or the motion of domain walls.35 From a macroscopic point of view, polarization switching can be directly detected through the measurement of the P–E hysteresis loop in the ferroelectric phase. Considering the relationship between macroscopic polarization states and microscopic domain structures, the study on domain structures provides another variable for ferroelectricity.23 Domain structure, as a requisite characteristic of ferroelectricity, can be visualized by several imaging techniques, such as etching method, powder deposition technique, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction microscopy, and scanning probe microscopy (SPM) (Table 1).36–38 The techniques of domain imaging have three stages: firstly, using some etchants and depositional agents can intuitively delineate a static macroscopic domain structure, while the sample surfaces would be etched or contaminated after imaging; secondly, the usage of some electron beam can easily obtain a microscopic domain structure, while the incident electron beam may induce polarization switching and the damage of some sample surfaces; thirdly, with the development of the probe microscope, the domain structure can be visualized in the nanometer scale without any special treatment of the sample surface.37 This evolution boosts the high-resolution and non-destructive visualization and manipulation of the domain structure and thereby aids the confirmation and optimization of ferroelectricity.
Table 1 The comparison of various imaging techniques on the basis of their advantages, disadvantages, mechanism, and spatial resolution




Imaging techniques
Advantages
Disadvantages
Mechanism
Spatial resolution




Etching method
Visualization through optical microscope and even with naked eyes
Surface etching
Etching rates is different between positive and negative domains
Microscale (1 μm or less)


Powder deposition technique
Suitable for the visualization of macroscopic domain structure and samples with cleaved surfaces
Surface contamination
Positively or negatively charged particles are attracted to ferroelectric domains carrying opposite sign of charge
Microscale (about 1 μm)


SEM
Simple in operation
Inducing the polarization reversal
Intensity is the difference of the emitted secondary electron from the positive and negative domains
Nanoscale (greater than 1.8 nm)


X-Ray diffraction microscopy
Available for the visualization of polarization reversal process
Not lucid in the domain boundary
Phase is the difference between the structure factors in the positive and negative domains at each side of the boundary
Nanoscale (about 10 nm)


SPM
High imaging resolution; surface modification; non-destructive characteristic; in situ experiment
Not suitable for the visualization of macroscopic domain structure, buried solid–solid and liquid–liquid interfaces
Phase is the difference in the positive and negative domains
Atomic or subatomic scale




As an offspring of SPM, atomic force microscope (AFM) was invented in 1986, and a dramatic shift in scientific research occurred therewith.39 The highly localized interaction between the probing tip and the sample endows the AFM-based techniques with high spatial resolution.40 It must be mentioned that electromechanical coupling, as one of the mainstream mechanisms underlying the functionality of various materials, has promoted the advent of one of the voltage-modulated AFM measurements.41–43 Especially for ferroelectric materials that possess numerous polarization-dependent properties, the AFM system can qualify because of the sensitive tip-sample electrostatic, mechanical, and electromechanical interactions.44 Guided by this idea, different modes were developed and various attachments were applied to the AFM; consequently, PFM, magnetic force microscopy (MFM), conductive AFM (CAFM), electrostatic force microscopy (EFM), Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM), and so on emerged.45 This makes AFM essential in a broad spectrum of use, e.g., electronic, optical, magnetic, semiconducting, and biotechnological materials.46–48
Besides a basic AFM system, a functional generator, and at least a lock-in amplifier, which generates an oscillating voltage to the conductive PFM tip and figures out the resulting oscillations of the cantilever, respectively, are also basically required for the PFM measurements (Scheme 2).49,50 PFM is based on the detection of local converse piezoelectric effect, which may cause surface vibration of the material under the application of an AC bias with a specific frequency.26,27,49 This technique is believed to endow the advantages of relatively high imaging resolution, non-destructive nature, and simplicity of sample preparation.51 PFM can be applied to ferroelectrics because of their piezoelectric behavior as well as the linear coupling with polarization in the low-field range. In PFM, there are two main approaches for characterizing the ferroelectricity, that is, the imaging and spectroscopy modes.44 PFM imaging mode makes the local domain structure and domain switching much easier to be visualized. Typical PFM imaging modes contain the vertical and lateral ones, as complementary measurements, which measure the out-of-plane (OP, vertical PFM, VPFM) and in-plane (IP, lateral PFM, LPFM) piezoelectric signals, respectively (Fig. 2).52–54 There are two kinds of tip motions: deflection and torsion, which is detected by VPFM and LPFM, respectively.52,53,55,56 Two main parts of the PFM image, namely, amplitude and phase parameters, denote the relative strength of the piezoelectric coefficient and the direction of polarization in each domain, respectively.57 Consequently, this enables a new variable to consider in the quest for piezoelectric and ferroelectric materials, and provides a non-destructive visualization and exquisite modulation for static and dynamic ferroelectric domain structures’ research, respectively.
 Scheme 2  Configurations of a typical PFM system (a) and the PFM setup (b). Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015. 
 Fig. 2  Two possible PFM imaging modes with respect to their corresponding orientations of the cantilever motions and polarization directions: (a) vertical mode; (b) lateral mode. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from American Institute of Physics, Copyright 2010. 
Ferroelectric behavior can be explored through spectroscopic approaches such as PFM hysteresis loop measurements. The PFM hysteresis loop is typically measured at a selected point by applying a voltage waveform consisting of a pulsed triangular DC voltage and a continuous sinusoidal AC voltage, and thereby, both the on-field and off-field loops can be obtained. The off-field and on-field loops record the remnant piezoresponse signal and the mixture of piezoelectricity and the electrostatic effect, respectively. The off-field loop is assumed to merely contain the piezoelectricity-induced electromechanical response, and therefore, the PFM signal is generally obtained in the off-field state to minimize the electrostatic contribution.58 Besides, it has been reported that the electrostatic effect can be minimized by increasing the spring constant of cantilever, conducting measurements at higher AC frequencies, or applying a nullifying voltage.26 This hysteresis loop measurement can be further extended for exploring the spatially varying local switching behaviors based on grid-type measurements, such as switching spectroscopy PFM (SS-PFM) based on the first-order reversal curve waveform.26 While considering the misinterpretation of the PFM signal with the non-piezoelectric contributions, the off-field SS-PFM hysteresis loop is only deemed as an auxiliary support. For a solid evidence of ferroelectricity, we still need to verify the domain switching process and double check the macroscopic P–E hysteresis loop.
It is noteworthy that PFM has already been an essential method to investigate the materials with piezoelectric property, especially the ones with polar structures. Taking the conventional domain imaging method into account, PFM shows its superiority and feasibility in the studies of local non-destructive visualization and exquisite modulation for the statics and dynamics of ferroelectric domain structures.59–61 This undoubtedly attracts a growing interest in the direct measurements of local physical characteristics on the ferroelectric surface, such as piezoelectric coefficients, disorder potential, hysteresis loops, coercive field, and energy dissipation.61 In addition, PFM can also be utilized in in situ imaging and experiments, which supports the visualization of evolution of the ferroelectric domain.62–64 The appearance and disappearance of ferroelectric domains correspond to the breaking and reconstruction of symmetry in the vicinity of Curie temperature (Tc), respectively. The study on ferroelectric domain evolution is conducive for the better understanding of domain dynamics. However, PFM still has some limitations and cautions: (1) the local PFM hysteresis loops can also be the result of other non-piezoelectric contributions;58,65–67 (2) the VPFM exhibits intrinsic limitations for the quantitation of the piezoelectric response;26 (3) the PFM ferroelectric-domain images can be overlapped with topography, and therefore, sometimes it is difficult to distinguish between the domains and topographical cross talk; (4) in some situations, high drive voltage is needed to be applied, while this will result in polarization switching or even damage to the sample. With regard to the inorganic system, PFM is generally used to deeply study the domain structure and the dynamics of known samples.68–72 For molecular materials, along with the rapid development of target design strategies, such as lowering the molecular symmetry, introducing homochirality, applying H/F substitution, and forming intermolecular interactions, a large amount of possible molecular ferroelectrics have sprung up.29,73,74 Accordingly, PFM, as a practical technique to determine ferroelectricity with high efficiency and accuracy, can significantly accelerate the discovery process of molecular ferroelectrics and inject vigor to this century-old study.
Herein, this review summarizes the multitudinous contribution made by PFM toward the aided design of molecular ferroelectrics. Initially, this review discusses the relationship between the crystal symmetry and domain structure, together with the dynamics of ferroelectric domains from the perspective of molecular ferroelectrics. Relying on this, readers can get a better understanding of the statics and dynamics of ferroelectric domains in the molecular system, and this will support the inference and determination of ferroelectricity.75,76 Among them, domain engineering, as an effective methodology to improve the ferroelectric performance through tailored domain patterns, has contributed to the optimization of commercially available ferroelectrics, and this may also promote the commercialization of molecular ferroelectrics.77–79 In addition, since PFM was fully applied to investigate the ferroelectricity, the surge in the discovery of new molecular ferroelectrics has been observed. In order to fast identify each possible molecular ferroelectric and further realize the commercialization of their ferroelectric and piezoelectric performance, PFM not only assists in the discovery of dozens of molecular ferroelectrics but also exploits the research on molecular ferroelectrics with large piezoelectric response. In the continuous pursuit of materials with high performance, molecular ferroelectrics relying on exploring new families to optimize their performance have stepped into a new era of ferroelectrochemistry.29,80 In this context, PFM has been involved and is competent in the aided design of molecular ferroelectrics, and will be an indispensable member in the research area of molecular ferroelectrics.
2. Molecular ferroelectrics designed with the assistance of PFM
For ceaselessly optimizing ferroelectric performance on commercially available inorganic ceramics, PFM has long been used in the in-depth investigation on domain engineering.81–84 Among them, significant progress has been achieved in tunneling electroresistance, multiferroics, topological states, functional domain walls (DWs), flexoelectricity, and photovoltaics, revealing unique electronic, magnetic, and transport properties of inorganic ferroics.61,85–92 This continually refreshes the basic fact that PFM can be dedicated to studying ferroelectric materials from the perspective of ferroelectrophysics, which offers an outlook for future trends and possibility of molecular ferroelectrics.93 However, with respect to the molecular counterparts, their characteristic optimization relies on extending new families, which signifies the broadest boundary underlying ferroelectrochemistry. Under an alliance of ferroelectrophysics and ferroelectrochemistry, the blueprint on ferroelectric research appears with the assistance of PFM (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  The blueprint on ferroelectric researches under the assistance of PFM. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2013. Reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (NAS), Copyright 2019. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2015. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2016. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2019. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2015. 
To convert curiosity-driven discoveries to real-life applications, designing and optimizing molecular ferroelectrics with high performance of ferroelectricity and piezoelectricity are the key factors. How can we resolve this? On the one hand, we can intrinsically enhance the ferroelectric performance. Little is known, however, about the systematic theories to design molecular ferroelectrics as well as optimize the piezoelectric and ferroelectric performance. Nevertheless, after years of being focused on extending their family, we have found some outstanding high-Tc molecular ferroelectrics, such as diisopropylammonium bromide (DIPAB, 1, see ESI† for corresponding compounds, numbers, as well as their abbreviations)94 with a large spontaneous polarization (Ps) up to 23 μC cm−2 and trimethylchloromethyl ammonium trichloromanganese(II) (TMCM-MnCl3, 2)95 with a large piezoelectric coefficient (d33) of 185 pC N−1. On the other hand, we can maximally express the ferroelectricity extrinsically. Inspired by the commercialized inorganic ferroelectrics, such as PZT, multiaxial nature, characterized by more than one polar axis, proclaim their unique superiority for the optimization of ferroelectric and piezoelectric performance in the polycrystalline samples and thin films, as fully discussed in our previous work.29,96 Such characteristics of molecular ferroelectrics not only ameliorate the value of Ps and d33 competitive with their inorganic counterparts but also make the production of emerging thin-film devices possible.97 Under the guidelines of several practical target design strategies on molecular ferroelectrics, a large amount of candidates have emerged over the years. Had we still dwelled on the past time-consuming technique to directly detect ferroelectricity, the progress in expanding new families of molecular ferroelectrics would be stagnant. Besides, the uncertainty of the determination methods for ferroelectricity, such as the inability to determine of the SHG signal, may unwittingly eliminate some candidates for molecular ferroelectrics with weak intensity. Among them, methylamine lead iodide (MAPbI3, 3), a typical three-dimensional (3D) organic–inorganic halide perovskite of great use in solar cells, failed to be detected with a distinct SHG signal because the typical second-harmonic generated at 400 or 532 nm was strongly absorbed by the sample due to its small bandgap.98,99 Non-activity of SHG response signifies a centrosymmetric structure, and this contradicts the statement that the high energy conversion efficiency of MAPbI3 originates from its striking ferroelectric photovoltaic effect. Proving its ferroelectricity through the traditional P–E hysteresis loop measurement is challenging because of the high conductivity and low stability under high applied bias voltage. Therefore, researchers have employed PFM to study the ferroelectric domain structures and the local domain switching behavior of MAPbI3. As shown in Fig. 4, the obvious perpendicular stripe-like alternating polarized domain evidenced the piezoelectric nature, which manifests that the SHG signal detection upon MAPbI3 is inaccurate.100 Thus, tremendous efforts have been made for the detection of SHG signal for MAPbI3. It should be noticed that the SHG signal can be made available for MAPbI3 with a special wavelength of the incident laser (∼1800 nm) due to the absence of any prominent absorbance feature at both 900 nm as well as 1800 nm in MAPbI3.101 Meanwhile, multiple experimental evidences have verified that the tetragonal phase of MAPbI3 is ferroelectric, especially the achievement of domain switching process captured by PFM (Fig. 5).102,103 This provides a conclusive support for the ferroelectricity of MAPbI3. Also, the P–E hysteresis loop measurement can be achieved through the integration of the imaginary part of the permittivity (εim) over the electric field (EDC).103,104 In this case, PFM was presented as a sensitive (a few picometers per volt of excitation) detector for polar materials, and will thus shine more light on the ferroelectricity proof of optoelectronic materials with semiconductor characteristics. PFM can also make a preliminary judgment of the feasibility of the P–E hysteresis loop measurement.
 Fig. 4  (a) PFM image of the MAPbI3 domain pattern. (b) Detailed PFM image of a smaller area of the same sample. Reprinted from ref. 100 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. 
 Fig. 5  For MAPbI3, PFM images (a) before poling, the sample exhibits highly ordered domains with alternating polarization. Most grain boundaries are likely to show the equilibrium shape originating from the tetragonal unit cell, forming an angle of 45° with the domain walls; (b) after DC poling (E = +2 V μm−1) over the channel (2.5 μm, marked in red), some domains widen (position 1), and larger domains of unidirectional polarization occur (position 2). Domain walls that are oriented 45° to the previously parallel domain walls appear (positions 2 and 3); (c) after subsequent DC poling in the opposite direction, the distribution of domains becomes more asymmetric (position 1), and a previously poled domain decreases in size (position 3). The top area of all the three images, which is located atop one of the electrodes, and hence outside of the channel, remains unaffected by the electric poling field. Reprinted from ref. 102 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2020. 
Similarly, (benzylammonium)2PbBr4 ((PMA)2PbBr4, 4) has been regarded as a centrosymmetric compound because it is SHG-inactive.105 Mitzi et al. reported that the space group of (PMA)2PbBr4 should be determined as Cmc21 rather than the previously reported Cmca one.106 The argument revolves around the fact that the (PMA)2PbBr4 crystals do not exhibit optical SHG behavior. It should be noted that the absence of a detectable SHG signal does not certainly indicate the existence of a centrosymmetric space group, which might be caused by an undetectable signal that is too weak. Therefore, the PFM technique, which can respond to the non-centrosymmetric compound, was applied to reconfirm its structure. Notably, as depicted in Fig. 6, the fitted piezoresponse signal varies linearly with the driving voltage, which indicates that obvious piezoelectric response can be found on the thin film of (PMA)2PbBr4. This manifests the crystallization of a non-centrosymmetric space group Cmc21 for (PMA)2PbBr4. Then, we obtained the P–E hysteresis loop of (PMA)2PbBr4, which concludes its ferroelectricity with evidence.107 The PFM technique thus help us to seize another molecular ferroelectric from the abandoned candidates. In fact, in the usual process of exploration, many samples will encounter ambiguous or weak SHG signals. Most of the time, non-centrosymmetric structures are determined by first measuring PFM, and finally the SHG signals are detected by strengthening the laser and other methods. It is the PFM technique with high detecting speed and accuracy that rapidly screens these candidates and eventually promotes the prosperous development of molecular ferroelectrics.108 Since then, a new era toward the targeted design of molecular ferroelectrics has been opened up in the ferroelectric history where PFM plays a versatile role.109,110 Meanwhile, the boom in the discovery of new molecular ferroelectrics also enables intensive study in the field of electroresistance, semiconductors, photovoltaics, polarized optical effect, multiferroics, topological states, and functional DWs.111–114 Herein, the intersection of ferroelectrophysics and ferroelectrochemistry deepens the research on physical properties related to the exploration of the emerging phenomena, and also broadens the candidates in ferroelectric research and provides more possibility for tomorrow.
 Fig. 6  For the film (PMA)2PbBr4, (a) the AFM topographic images of a selected region. (b) Piezoresponse plotted against the driving frequency, fitted using a DSHO function. The AC driving voltage is 3 V. (c) Driving voltage-dependent piezoresponse. Reprinted from ref. 106 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
Modern magnetic memories rely on the reading mechanism of magnetoresistance;115–117 similarly, the difference in electroresistance on molecular ferroelectrics between different orientation states may germinate a new generation of non-volatile resistive memory elements; thus, PFM was used for the aided design of several molecular ferroelectrics equipped with extraordinary electroresistance effect.111,118,119 With respect to the polarization switching-induced resistance of molecular ferroelectrics, the writing voltage (larger than the coercivity) or the reading one (smaller than the coercivity) is applied to polarize the dipoles or to investigate the resistance in a particular dipole orientation, respectively. In the reading process, when the polarization is in the same direction to the reading voltage, the potential barrier of the electrons, as well as the resistance is reduced, which is termed as the ON state; otherwise, the OFF state corresponds to the increased potential barrier where the polarization direction and reading voltage are reversed. Ren et al. confirmed the ferroelectricity of imidazolium perchlorate (Im-ClO4, 5) on its thin film through PFM, where the obvious phase contrast corresponds to the upward and downward polarization domains. Also, CAFM presented a distinct local resistance difference between the ferroelectric domains with different orientations.120 Meanwhile, based on the target design strategy of introducing homochirality, (R)-(−)-3-hydroxyquinuclidinium chloride ((R)-(−)-3-HQ-Cl, 6) was designed as a molecular ferroelectric, where PFM was applied as an assistant. Interestingly, Ren et al. also found pronounced polarization-controlled conductance for (R)-(−)-3-HQ-Cl through the combination of CAFM and PFM.121
Along with the emergence of MAPbI3 based solar cells, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have recently emerged as a class of revolutionary semiconductors for optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices.122,123 Besides some ideal 3D perovskites, two-dimensional (2D) layered ones are still promising candidates due to their peculiar physical properties, resembling the confinement effect as well as their remarkable structural flexibility, tunability, and stability.124–126 As such, under the assistance of PFM, a series of 2D layered hybrid perovskites such as (benzylammonium)2PbCl4 ((PMA)2PbCl4, 7),105 [2-fluorobenzylammonium]2PbCl4 ((2-F-PMA)2PbCl4, 8),125 (4,4-difluoropiperidinium)2PbI4 ((4,4-DFPD)2PbI4, 9),19 (cyclohexylaminium)2PbBr4 ((CHA)2PbBr4, 10),127 (C4H9NH3)2(NH3CH3)2Sn3Br10 ((n-Bu-NH3)2(MA)2Sn3Br10, 11),128 and (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3Br10 ((n-Bu-NH3)2(MA)2Pb3Br10, 12)129 were designed. Specifically, (PMA)2PbCl4 was found as a layered perovskite molecular ferroelectric with semiconducting behavior, where the polarization-switching properties were proved by PFM.105 Guided by the idea of H/F substitution, a target design strategy for molecular ferroelectrics, a series of potential molecular ferroelectric candidates, i.e., (2-F-PMA)2PbCl4, [3-fluorobenzylammonium]2PbCl4 ((3-F-PMA)2PbCl4, 13) and [4-fluorobenzylammonium]2PbCl4 ((4-F-PMA)2PbCl4, 14), emerged.125 PFM, herein, served as a qualified inspector and found that only (2-F-PMA)2PbCl4 possesses the ferroelectricity and semiconductivity. The combination of the ferroelectricity and photoelectric characteristics offers a basis for multi-functional materials in sensors, actuators, solar photovoltaics, and non-volatile memory.130–133 in particular, the ferroelectric photovoltaic (FEPV) effect, indicated by polarization-driven carrier separation as well as above-bandgap photovoltage, is expected to provide a new variable for solar energy conversion.134–136 From the perspective of ideal semiconducting characteristics for photovoltaic applications, narrow bandgaps determined by the energy range of photon absorption are highly desirable, while their inherent in compatibility with ferroelectricity severely hinder the research on this.137,138 Accordingly, bandgap engineering is taking into consideration for the design of molecular ferroelectrics with desirable bandgaps.127 For instance, a molecular ferroelectric hexane-1,6-diammonium pentaiodobismuth(III) (HDA-BiI5, 15) was designed, which features an narrowest bandgap of 1.89 eV that has ever been reported for molecular ferroelectrics.134 PFM study, including the investigation of the domain structure and the well-defined local PFM hysteresis loops, was performed on the thin film of HDA-BiI5 to identify its ferroelectricity.
Magnetoelectric (ME) materials, where the coupling of magnetic and ferroelectric characteristics exists, provide a versatile platform for the development of high-density data storage and spintronic or low-consumption devices.139,140 Long et al. put forward a pair of enantiomorphic molecular ferroelectrics, (μ-(R,R)-2,2′-[(1,2-diphenylethane-1,2-diyl)bis(azanylylidenemethylylidene)]bis(6-methoxyphenolato))-(μ-acetato)-bis(nitrato)-ytterbium(III)-zinc(II) (R,R-[Zn(OAc)(L)Yb(NO3)2], 16) and (μ-(S,S)-2,2′-[(1,2-diphenylethane-1,2-diyl)bis(azanylylidenemethylylidene)]bis(6-methoxyphenolato))-(μ-acetato)-bis(nitrato)-ytterbium(III)-zinc(II) (S,S-[Zn(OAc)(L)Yb(NO3)2], 17), where PFM not only served as the only detecting technique for ferroelectricity but was also applied to investigate their ME coupling.141 Because the Tc is higher than the decomposition temperature, the crystal structure failed to be determined in the paraelectric phase. PFM, thus, precluding the difficulty in determining the crystal structure in the paraelectric phase, directly offered a convincing evidence for their ferroelectricity through the observation of a stripe-like domain structure, SS-PFM hysteresis loops, as well as the polarization switching on the single crystals of R,R-[Zn(OAc)(L)Yb(NO3)2]. Notably, after the proof of magnetostriction of R,R-[Zn(OAc)(L)Yb(NO3)2] at the microscopic and macroscopic scales, ME coupling was engendered as an association of magnetostriction and ferroelectricity. Additional confirmation came from the PFM measurements performed on the single crystal of R,R-[Zn(OAc)(L)Yb(NO3)2] in the presence of a DC magnetic field of ±1 kOe along the (0) plane. The amplitude signal change under magnetic field corresponds to the redistribution of ferroelectric polarization (Fig. 7). This provides evidence of a strong ME coupling in a molecular ferroelectric, and the strong ME effect observed is attributed to the implicated effects in the two functionalities of Yb3+.
 Fig. 7  PFM studies performed on the single crystal of R,R-[Zn(OAc)(L)Yb(NO3)2] under a magnetic field. VPFM and LPFM images at (a) H = 0 Oe and (b) H = 1 kOe. Reprinted from ref. 141 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2020. 
Topological defects have been regarded as unique regions with low dimensionalities, where the order parameters vary discontinuously.142–144 Among them, ferroic domain walls, as the most typical 2D topological defects, have been extensively investigated in nanoelectronics.145 One-dimensional (1D) defects such as vortices and skyrmions have been the hotspot of extensive research studies recently.146–149 This provides numerous possibilities for new nanoscale devices owing to their striking electronic, magnetic, and mechanical performance.150–154 Since the observation of polar skyrmions in the heterostructure of [(PbTiO3)n/(SrTiO3)n]m and the observation of flux-closure domains in PZT, the research on topological defects in inorganic ferroelectrics has advanced rapidly.155 Vortex structure, by virtue of its insensitivity to disturbance, can effectively avert the “cross-talk” within the adjacent data storage area to some degree, which is crucial for data storage in high-density nonvolatile memories.145,156,157 Notably, the vortex–antivortex domain with ferroelectric polarization has also been firstly observed in a two-dimensional lead iodide perovskite ferroelectric, (4,4-DFPD)2PbI4.19 (4,4-DFPD)2PbI4 undergoes a ferroelectric phase transition of 4/mmmFmm2 according to the Aizu rule, which possesses four crystallographically equivalent polarization directions. This is consistent with the PFM domain imaging, where four kinds of polarization directions were discovered in the thin film of (4,4-DFPD)2PbI4. As shown in Fig. 8, the polarizations of the adjacent domains in the same quadrant are opposite, corresponding to the 180° domain walls; however, the two polarization directions in the adjacent quadrants are perpendicular. Thus, the polarization in (4,4-DFPD)2PbI4 displays a +2π rotation (vortex, black arrows) in the clockwise direction as well as a −2π rotation (antivortex, pink arrows) in the anticlockwise direction, which constitute a vortex–antivortex pair. In total, eight domains are present whose domain walls converge into a vortex core. This work not only enlarges the family of molecular ferroelectric domain structures but also throws light on the flexible nanoscale high-storage memory and spintronic devices in medical and biomechanical applications.145,158,159 Meanwhile, the vortex structure can also be observed in a single-component organic ferroelectric, 2-(hydroxymethyl)-2-nitro-1,3-propanediol ((CH2OH)3CNO2, 18).160 With the symmetry breaking from mm to 1, it presents beautiful triangular domains on its thin film after annealing (Fig. 9). The vortex configuration is constituted of six triangular domains, which merge at a 6-fold vertex. This formation mechanism might be attributed to the lowered total free energy where six domain walls intersect at a certain angle and the triangular domains form compact stacks. Peculiar properties can be obtained from the exotic topological structures and consequently, the complexity of the domain structures on molecular ferroelectrics will provide a versatile platform for optimizing the ferroelectric performance. As such, getting deep insights into the relationship between ferroelectric domains and crystallography, and meanwhile understanding the relationship between structure and property, such as the enhanced electric conductivity at the cores of the vortex domain, will enable the identification and targeted design of high-performance molecular ferroelectrics by virtue of PFM and promote their prospective practical applications.153
 Fig. 8  Vortex–antivortex domain in the as-grown (4,4-DFPD)2PbI4 thin film. LPFM (a) amplitude and (b) phase images with sample rotation angles of 0°, 45°, 86°, and 139°, respectively. The orientations of the cantilever and the corresponding scanning directions are illustrated with black insets in amplitude images. Among them, four domains with black arrows form a polar vortex structure and other four domains with pink arrows form a polar antivortex structure, suggesting the in-plane polarization directions for (4,4-DFPD)2PbI4. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. 
 Fig. 9  Domain structures of (CH2OH)3CNO2 in the as-grown state (left) and annealed state (right) of the film surface: (a and d) topographical images, (b and e) vertical PFM amplitude images, and (c and f) vertical PFM phase images of the film surface. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. 
3. The relationship between crystal symmetry and the ferroelectric domain structure
As an essential procedure in the ferroelectricity determination process, domain searching has been long pursued due to its ultra-high efficiency toward the determination of ferroelectricity. In this context, studies on static and dynamic domain structure of ferroelectrics have gained widespread attention.75,161,162 Generally speaking, the ferroelectric domain structure depends strongly on the symmetry of the paraelectric phase and the orientation of spontaneous polarization.163 The symmetry of the single-domain crystal is equal to that of the ferroelectric phase. In their paraelectric phase, there exist several directions corresponding to the direction of spontaneous polarization in the ferroelectric phase, and the probability of spontaneous polarization emerging along these directions is equal.164 This results in the formation of a ferroelectric multi-domain structure on the crystal. The transformation of ferroelectrics from single-domain into multi-domain is triggered by the “twinning effect”, which compensates the absent symmetric elements during the paraelectric-to-ferroelectric phase transitions.165 Within an actual crystal, both 180° and non-180° domains may exists. The formation of 180° and non-180° domains occurs to minimize the depolarizing field and to compensate for the mechanical stress fields on account of the crystal defects, respectively.166 Consequently, ideally, the symmetry of a multi-domain crystal is equal to that of the paraelectric phase. Taking a typical molecular ferroelectric, (R)- and (S)-3-(fluoropyrrolidinium)MnCl3 ((R)- and (S)-3-FP-MnCl3, 19) as an example, the symmetry breaking occurs with an Aizu notation of 222F2, while the macroscopic symmetry elements decrease from four (E, C2 and 2C2′) in the paraelectric point group 222 to two (E and C2) in ferroelectric 2.167 As shown in Scheme 3, according to the symmetry of the ferroelectric phase, the point group of the single-domain crystal is 2. The spontaneous polarization of the single-domain crystal is along the b axis in the ferroelectric phase, while in the paraelectric phase, the two opposite directions along the b-axis are equivalent, which renders the occurrence of the 180° domain. By means of the twinning element, i.e., the lost symmetric element (C2′), (R)- and (S)-3-FP-MnCl3 come into a multi-domain state, whose symmetry group belongs to 222. Not only the domain pattern of the ferroelectrics but also the orientation of the domain wall are determined by the crystal symmetry. Thus, considering the multi-domain crystal whose symmetry group is 222, the domain wall can only exist in the plane of (100) or (001). This is also supported by group theory, where the symmetry group of the ferroelectric domain (D) is the subgroup of the paraelectric symmetry group (G). According to the Curie symmetry principle, the symmetry group of the ferroelectric phase (H) should be a maximal subgroup of G along the direction of polarization, and thereby, set theory describes that the correlation among them should be depicted as follows.168,169D ⊂ H ⊂ G.As for DIPAB, set theory shows that{C2} ⊂ {E, C2} ⊂ {E, C2, C2′, C2′}On the basis of the Lagrange theorem, i.e., the order of a subgroup of a finite group is the denominator of the order of the group, and the general expression can be formulated asK = NG/nHwhere K is the number of the possible orientation states for the ferroelectric domain or the possible equivalent polarization directions; NG and nH are the order of G and H, respectively.170 Herein, K is 2 for (R)- and (S)-3-FP-MnCl3, equipped with a uniaxial characteristic. Generally, to be a uniaxial ferroelectric, K is 2, except for the ones with 2F1, mF1, and mm2Fm; otherwise, it belongs to a multiaxial one. The theoretical analyses are in good agreement with the PFM measurement on the thin film of (R)- and (S)-3-FP-MnCl3, where the 180° antiparallel stripe-like domains and their 180° domain wall were observed (Fig. 10a).167
 Scheme 3  Ferroelectric domain of (R)- and (S)-3-FP-MnCl3: (a) single-domain state whose symmetry group is 2 and (b) multi-domain state whose symmetry group is 222. 
 Fig. 10  Domain structures for some uniaxial molecular ferroelectrics: (a) VPFM phase image for (R)-3-OH-Q. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019; VPFM (b) and LPFM (e) phase images after polarization switching for (R)-3-OH-Q. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (NAS), Copyright 2019; VPFM (c) and LPFM (f) phase images for TMIM-PbI3. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018; (d) VPFM phase images for Im-ClO4. 
Moreover, Im-ClO4 with the mF3m phase transition is also a typical uniaxial ferroelectric (K = 2), which reveals the virgin hexagonal-type domains in both the single crystal and the thin film, similar to those observed in LiNbO3.171 PFM was carried out on the single crystal and the thin film of Im-ClO4 in the (10) plane. With regard to the thin film prepared via the drop-coating or spin-coating method, it seems that the thin film maintains similar properties of the single crystal because the surface effects and dimensional effects are invalid for the prepared thin films whose thickness are above 500 nm. Notably, to compensate for the lost symmetric elements in the paraelectric-to-ferroelectric phase transition, the 180° antiparallel domains appear. A single ferroelectric domain can be regarded as a microcrystal, and the virgin hexagonal domain structure is closely related to the trigonal symmetry of the crystal structure (Fig. 10d). In terms of some multiaxial ferroelectrics whose ferroelectric phase also belongs to the hexagonal/trigonal crystal system, the formation of their domains after annealing (multi-domain state) strongly relies on the “twinning effect”.164 Taking [N-methyl-N′-1,4-diazoniabicyclo[2.2.2]octonium]RbI3 (MDABCO-RbI3, 20) as an example, it undergoes a cubic-to-trigonal phase transition with an Aizu notation of 432F3.30 The symmetry elements decrease from twenty-four (E, 8C3, 3C2, 6C2, and 6C4) in paraelectric point group 432 (O) to three (E and 2C3) in the ferroelectric point group 3 (3), where K is 8, corresponding to a multiaxial characteristic. The breaking of the symmetry elements contributes to the formation of non-180° ferroelectric domains without hexagonal or triangular shapes after annealing (Fig. 11). In addition, interestingly, the emerging domain pattern under an external electric field usually conforms to the symmetry of the ferroelectric phase. Also, for MDABCO-RbI3, the emerging domain shape after the domain switching process is a hexagon instead of the rectangle pattern written, which indicates the growth of domains abiding by the ferroelectric point-group symmetry of the hexagonal phase (Fig. 12a and d).30 Coincidentally, (R)- and (S)-3-quinuclidinol ((R)- and (S)-3-OH-Q, 21), a pair of single-component organic enantiomorphic ferroelectrics with 622F6-type (K = 2) ferroelectric phase transition, also form the 180° antiparallel hexagonal domain after the domain switching process, which is in accordance with the hexagonal ferroelectric phase (Fig. 10b and e).172,173
 Fig. 11  Domain structure of MDABCO-RbI3 (a and d) the VPFM phase and amplitude images in the z direction. The LPFM phase and amplitude images in the x direction (b and e) and y direction (c and f), respectively. The geometry of the cantilever is illustrated schematically. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
 Fig. 12  Domain structures for some multiaxial molecular ferroelectrics: (a) VPFM (a) and LPFM (d) phase images after polarization switching for MDABCO-RbI3. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017; (b, c and e, f) VPFM amplitude (b) and phase (e) images and LPFM amplitude (c) and phase (f) images for MDABCO-NH4I3. Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2018. 
Based on the relationship between crystal symmetry and the ferroelectric domain structure, how can PFM contribute to the research on molecular ferroelectrics? As depicted in Table 2, relying on the relationship between crystal symmetry and the ferroelectric domain structure, i.e., the ferroelectric domain structure is determined by the symmetry of paraelectric phase and the orientation of spontaneous polarization, the unique superiority of PFM to detect ferroelectricity in molecular ferroelectrics appears.170
Table 2 The ferroelectric types and possible domain patterns of some typical ferroelectrics that are aided in design by PFM




Ferroelectrics
Aizu notation
The number of polarization axes (K)
The scheme of equivalent polarization directions
Possible domain pattern




DIPAB,94 Im-IO4,174 TMIM-PbI3175
2/mF2
1 (2)

Scheme 4a

180° antiparallel stripe-like domains


(PMA)2PbCl4,105 HDA-BiI5,134 (4,4-DFPD)2PbI4,176 [DMe-DABCO]CuCl4,177 (TMAEA)Pb2Cl6178

mmmFmm2
1 (2)
180° antiparallel stripe-like or irregular domain


TMCM-CdBr3,179 [(CH3)3NH]3(MnBr3)(MnBr4)180
6/mmmF6mm
1 (2)
180° antiparallel stripe-like or irregular domain


Im-ClO4171
mF3m
1 (2)
180° antiparallel hexagonal domain


[(CH3)2(FCH2CH2)NH]3(CdCl3)(CdCl4)181
6/mF6
1 (2)
180° antiparallel hexagonal domain


(R)- and (S)-3-FP-CdCl3,73 (R)- and (S)-3-FP-MnCl3167
222F2
1 (2)
180° antiparallel stripe-like or irregular domain


(R)- and (S)-3-OH-Q173
622F6
1 (2)
180° antiparallel trigonal domain


HDABCO-ClO4,182 HDABCO-BF4,183 (2-F-PMA)2PbCl4,125 (4,4-DFPD)2PbI419
4/mmmFmm2
2 (4)

Scheme 4b

Stripe-like or vortex–antivortex domain


(R)-(−)-3-HQ-Cl184
432F4
3 (6)

Scheme 4c

Tetragonal domain


HDABCO-ReO4185

mmF4mm
3 (6)
Stripe-like domain


[C(NH2)3]ClO4186

mmF3m
4 (8)

Scheme 4d

Hexagonal domain


MDABCO-RbI3,30 MDABCO-NH4I317
432F3
4 (8)
Stripe-like or hexagonal domain


HQ-ReO4,187 [3-O-Q]ClO4,188 [3.2.1-DABCO]BF457

mmFmm2
6 (12)

Scheme 4e

Stripe-like or irregular domain


TMCM-MnCl3,95 [FMeTP][Ni(NO2)3]189
6/mmmFm
6 (12)

Scheme 4f

Herringbone, stripe-like or irregular domain


(R)- and (S)-1-[(4-CP)EA]2PbI474
422F1
8 (16)
—
Herringbone domain


TM-ClO4,190 [(CH3)3NOH]2[KFe(CN)6],191 (3-AP)RbBr3192

mmFm
12 (24)

Scheme 4g

Stripe-like, tetragonal or irregular domain


(CH2OH)3CNO2

mmF1
24 (48)

Scheme 4h

Triangular domain




 Scheme 4  Possible equivalent polarization directions of (a) uniaxial; (b) 4/mmmFmm2; (c) 432F4 and mmF4mm-type; (d) mmF3m and 432F3-type; (e) mmFmm2-type; (f) 6/mmmFm-type; (g) mmFm-type; (h) mmF1-type ferroelectrics. 
Firstly, the early discovered molecular ferroelectrics are mostly uniaxial, whose ferroelectric space group is a maximal non-isomorphic subgroup of the paraelectric one along the direction of Ps.193–195 This remains a great challenge toward the determination of ferroelectricity through the P–E hysteresis loop measurements, which requires a large devotion of time or effort, let alone the possible crystal defect and relatively high coercive voltage (Vc).196 Fortunately, uniaxial ferroelectrics with typical 180° antiparallel domain and obvious 180° domain wall can be easily determined through PFM. A uniaxial 2/mF2-type molecular ferroelectric (trimethyliodomethylammonium tris(μ2-iodo)-lead (TMIM-PbI3, 22)) was proposed.175 The stripe-like domain structure can be clearly observed for the TMIM-PbI3 thin film (Fig. 10c and f). The 180° phase contrast in both the VPFM and LPFM images signifies that the orientations in the two adjacent domains are antiparallel. Also, the amplitude contrasts for the adjacent domains divided by the domain walls are pretty close, which also support the existence of the 180° domain structure. The existence of the 180° domain as well as the switchable domain provide solid evidence for the ferroelectricity of TMIM-PbI3.
Then, as for the later developed multiaxial molecular ferroelectrics, a conventional method relies on the crystallography and their corresponding ferroelectric properties to distinguish the multiaxial ferroelectrics from others.166 Nevertheless, it has been confronted by the issue that molecular ferroelectrics with multiaxial characteristic may result in cations and anions retaining a highly disordered, isotropic state in the high-temperature phase, thus severely hindering the precise determination of the crystal structure. Neumann's principle described the relationships between macroscopic symmetries and physical properties of the crystals, which asserts that the symmetry of any physical property of a crystal must include all the symmetry elements of the point group of the crystal.197 Consequently, relying on the physical characteristics, such as the domain structure identified by PFM, the uniaxial or multiaxial property of molecular ferroelectrics can be distinguished. In particular, the observation of the non-180° domain can be an effective way to determine their multiaxial characteristic. Much work so far has been focused on multiaxial molecular ferroelectrics due to the superiority of greater ferroelectric performance expression and more easily availability for substrate finding over uniaxial ones.198,199 Among them, (N-methyl-N′-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octonium)-ammonium triiodide (MDABCO-NH4I3, 23) as a typical metal-free three-dimensional perovskite ferroelectric, undergoes a ferroelectric phase transition from trigonal 3 to cubic 432 (K = 8).17 MDABCO-NH4I3 possesses 8 crystallographically equivalent polarization directions, corresponding to 4 ferroelectric polar axes. In general, symmetry breaking is accompanied by the formation of twin domains, and the structure of the twin domains is diversiform. PFM domain imaging shows the stripe-like non-180° domains in the thin film of MDABCO-NH4I3, which is a firm proof of its multiaxial characteristics (Fig. 12b, c and e, f). Generally speaking, 180° and non-180° domains may both exhibit stripe-like textures. Relying on both the VPFM and LPFM images, if both of them show 180°-contrast phase signal and uniform amplitude signal, together with the obvious domain wall, the 180° domains appear; otherwise, the non-180° domains exist.
Furthermore, combining the crystallographic analyses, we can further realize the real space reconstruction of polarization orientation depending on the three components of piezoresponse, namely, VPFM and at least two orthogonal LPFM signals.53,200 This can provide qualitative and semi-quantitative analyses toward the surface reconstruction of polarization orientation. For example, TMCM-MnCl3 was once deemed as a mmmFm-type ferroelectric (K = 4) with 4 crystallographically equivalent polarization directions through single crystal X-ray diffraction analyses.95 In order to visualize the real space reconstruction of polarization orientations, comprehensive PFM studies on the surface of the TMCM-MnCl3 crystal were performed by detecting the PFM phase and the amplitude signal in the x-, y-, and z-directions, respectively, aiming to extract information about the exact orientation of polarization at different domain regions. Initially, a large-area PFM image with irregularly shaped super-domain consisting of herringbone-shaped sub-domains was obtained on the thin film of TMCM-MnCl3 after annealing (Fig. 13). Then, the high-resolution PFM and their polarization analyses were further carried out in two areas with different sub-domain structures in a similar super-domain by recording the in-plane (x- and y-direction) and out-of-plane (z-direction) components of local piezoresponse. As shown in Fig. 14, the static herringbone domain structure can be clearly observed, and four typical regions with different polarization orientations were labelled as I, II, III, and IV. Considering the corresponding relationship between the amplitude/phase signal and the magnitude/direction of polarization, the polarization vector of each domain can be theoretically obtained by adding the vectors detected in each direction together. The phase contrast of each region was indicated by the symbol “±”, which refers to the positive or negative direction of polarization (Fig. 15a), respectively. However, for VPFM and LPFM, which depend on different cantilever distortions and lack an effective correction method to normalize the out-of-plane and in-plane vectors, the absolute amplitude values for the vertical and lateral components are not comparable, and this supports only the in-plane real space reconstruction of the polarization orientations.49,52 It is noteworthy that with regard to the two regions for high-resolution PFM measurements, they possess the same out-of-plane polarization direction (downward), which can simplify the qualitative analyses of polarization directions in the out-of-plane direction. The in-plane polarization directions for different types of domains with distinct polarization directions can be concluded (details can be found in Fig. 15b). Similarly, the polarization analyses were also performed on the other domain area marked with a yellow box. Finally, by combining the results in green and yellow boxed areas in Fig. 14, in total six in-plane polarization directions can be identified. Owing to the 180° reversed super-domains, there are twelve different polarization directions found on the sample surface, as illustrated in Fig. 15b, where solid/dashed arrows indicate upward/downward out-of-plane polarizations, respectively. Thus, twelve polarization directions identified through PFM were contradictory to the initial crystallography analysis, resulting from the uncertainty of single crystal X-ray diffraction analyses. In view of the Neumann's principle, which mentions that crystallography should obey the symmetry of physical characteristic, the crystal analysis of TMCM-MnCl3 was redefined carefully into the renewed one of 6/mmm in the high temperature phase. This suggests the paraelectric-to-ferroelectric phase transition with an Aizu notation of 6/mmmFm, which is highly consistent with the 12 crystallographically equivalent polarization directions from the reconstruction of the polarization orientations through PFM imaging. The real space reconstruction of polarization orientation performed by PFM becomes a useful tool for the visualization of ferroelectric polarization and a solid confirmation toward the crystallographic analyses, especially for multiaxial molecular ferroelectrics.
 Fig. 13  Large-area PFM images obtained on the surface of the crystal TMCM-MnCl3. (a and d) and (b and e) LPFM images constructed by the phase and amplitude of local piezoresponse in the x- and y-directions, respectively. (c and f) VPFM images constructed by the phase and amplitude of local piezoresponse in the z-direction, respectively. The green and yellow dashed boxes indicate areas where high-resolution PFM and polarization analysis were carried out, as shown in Fig. 14. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017. 
 Fig. 14  For TMCM-MnCl3, high-resolution PFM studies on the selected areas indicated by green (a–f) and yellow (g–l) dashed boxes marked in Fig. 13. Sub-images (a–c) and (d–f) are constructed by phase and amplitude signals of the x-, y-, and z-direction components, respectively. (g–l) PFM images obtained in yellow dashed box in Fig. 13 are similar to (a–f). Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017. 
 Fig. 15  (a) For TMCM-MnCl3, the analysis of phase contrast of each region. (b) The sketch map of in-plane real space reconstruction of the polarization orientations. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017. 
Thirdly, different from the inorganic ones, which usually accompany the phase transitions from cubic phase to the tetragonal or trigonal ones, the symmetry breakings on molecular ferroelectrics are of variety due to their structure complexity, which can even realize the cubic-to-triclinic phase transition with the most polarization directions.34 In light of this unique characteristic upon molecular materials, various types of molecular ferroelectrics with different polarization orientations can be designed, and thereby enrich the complexity of the domain structure. Along with the prominent progress in technologies that enables imaging at atomic-scale spatial resolution, the understanding of the domain topology has been transformed. Besides some simple stripe-like or irregularly shaped domains, the observation of intriguing vortex-type topological domain structures has made a significant shift in the focus of domain engineering, as fully discussed above.201,202
4. Dynamics of ferroelectric domains recorded by PFM
The utility of ferroelectric materials, including non-volatile ferroelectric memories used in smart cards and commercial products such as Sony PlayStation, field-effect transistors, and tunnelling devices, stems from the ability of polarization switching, which reveals the switching process among various polar states under sufficiently large electrical load.15,118,203–206 It is important to highlight that with regard to the low-dimensional geometries such as thin films, the deterministic control of the local polarization state at the surface are desirable for their utilizations.207–209 Along with the process of inhomogenous nucleation and anisotropic growth of favorably oriented domains, ferroelectric switching occurs.210 Typically, the polarization switching process between electrodes contains the following steps (Scheme 5): (1) domain nucleation, (2) forward extension, (3) lateral expansion, and (4) domain merging.211 Undoubtedly, the characteristics of polarization switching process are significantly determined by the ferroelectric performance.
 Scheme 5  The containing steps of the domain growth in a general polarization switching process. Reproduced from ref. 222 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2016. 
On the one hand, the requirement for commercially available ferroelectric devices is that the operating voltage should be below 5 V.212 Aiming for this purpose, designing molecular ferroelectrics with ultra-low Vc has aroused wide interests. By averaging the minima of the amplitude hysteresis loops, PFM hysteresis loops can be applied to estimate the local Vc.213 For instance, with regard to the DABCO-system molecular ferroelectrics, the Vc on the thin films of HDABCO-ClO4 (24),182 HDABCO-ReO4 (25),185 and HDABCO-BF4 (26)183 (DABCO = 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane) were studied by the PFM amplitude hysteresis loops, and the estimated values are about 25, 15, and 8.5 V for the corresponding films of about 3, 0.6, and 0.6 μm, respectively (Fig. 16a–c). Furthermore, the research on the relationship between the value of Vc and the thickness of the thin film was carried out on the thin film of HDABCO-BF4.183 As depicted in Fig. 16a and d–f, a similar method by averaging the minima on the amplitude hysteresis loop were performed on the HDABCO-BF4 thin films whose thicknesses vary from 2, 1, 0.6 to 0.15 μm, corresponding to their estimated local Vc values of 20, 15, 10, and 4.2 V, respectively. Evidently, the Vc value relies strongly on the thickness of the thin film, and the dependence of Vc on the film thickness (d) can be depicted by the semiempirical scaling law derived by Kay and Dunn, i.e., Vc = bd1/3.214 Although Vc above 10 V makes utilization in commercial ferroelectric devices difficult, DABCO-system molecular ferroelectrics are usually possess low Vc compared to other molecular ferroelectrics. Notably, two hydrogen-bonded molecular ferroelectric materials, HDABCO-TFSA (27) and its deuterated form DDABCO-TFSA (28) (TFSA = bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)ammonium) were put forward, and the latter one possesses an ultra-low Vc of 1 V.212 Such an ultra-low Vc can be ascribed to the mechanism of polarization switching, namely, the low energy for proton transfer, which will be desirable for FeRAM devices. Moreover, Noda et al. also presented an organic ferroelectric, 2-methylbenzimidazole (MBI, 29), with its relatively low operating voltage of 3–4 V for polarization switching, which is a promising candidate for application in a low-cost printing process.215
 Fig. 16  The SS-PFM measurements of the DABCO-system: (a) HDABCO-BF4. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017; (b) HDABCO-ClO4. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016; and (c) HDABCO-ReO4 on their thin films. (a and d–f) The VPFM phase and amplitude hysteresis loops measured for HDABCO-ReO4 during the switching processes for 0.6 μm (a), 0.15 μm (d), 1 μm (e), and 2 μm (f) thick films. Reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
On the other hand, as a key factor to evaluate the ferroelectrics serving as highly efficient storages, the frequency (speed) of polarization reversal, which is closely related to the ferroelectric domain dynamics during the ferroelectric switching, has provoked intensive research.216,217 Although a detailed investigation is beyond the scope of this work, the rate-limiting step for reversal is the lateral expansion speed of the domain.218 A molecular ferroelectric thin film of HDABCO-ReO4 was presented, which displays the fastest polarization switching of 100 kHz among all reported molecular ferroelectrics at that time.185
The polarization switching process is generally characterized by the P–E hysteresis loops and domain switching.219 However, taking DIPAB as an example, as a uniaxial molecular ferroelectric, the growth of large crystal without defects for the measurement of the P–E hysteresis loop is very time-consuming.94 Several methods have been attempted, while it costs in total more than one year to find a final suitable way. Such a long period of time severely hinders the research progress. With regard to a more easily prepared sample, i.e., the thin film fabricated through drop-coating or spin-coating method, the time spent on the P–E hysteresis loop measurement can be significantly shortened; however, in view of this uniaxial characteristic where the polarization is parallel to the substrate (in-plane polarization), the P–E hysteresis loop can hardly be detected in the out-of-plane direction. Thus, Gruverman et al. have conducted PFM to investigate the statics and dynamics of the ferroelectric domain in the DIPAB microcrystal.162 The observation of the 180° antiparallel stripe-like and head-to-head (H–H) domains is separated by the non-charged and charged domain walls, respectively. The study of domain switching dynamics on DIPAB eventually evidences its ferroelectricity, and also deeply investigates the factors that influence their domain switching behaviors, as fully discussed below.
Moreover, a plastic crystal quinuclidinium perrhenate (HQ-ReO4, 30) with the tunable nature of the crystal orientation as well as mechanical deformability was proclaimed to possess controllable ferroelectricity by Harada et al.220 The ferroelectricity of HQ-ReO4 can only be detected by P–E hysteresis loop measurement at intermediate-temperature phase using the crystal and microcrystalline powder pellet, whose ferroelectric phase transition was denoted with an Aizu notation of mmF3m at 367 K. Although HQ-ReO4 is in possession of a polar crystal structure at room temperature, the P–E hysteresis loop failed to be proved under similar circumstances at the room temperature phase, allowing the reported ferroelectric temperature window of only 22 K (345–367 K). Such a narrow window and the uncertainty of ferroelectricity at room temperature severely hindered their possible utilizations in ferroelectric devices. One year later, the PFM technique was performed on this molecular ferroelectric again to study the static and dynamic behavior on ferroelectric domains.187 Fortunately, with the coexistence of non-180° and 180° domains, local hysteresis loop, and domain switching process observed on the thin film of HQ-ReO4 at room temperature, the ferroelectric behavior on HQ-ReO4 at the room-temperature phase was proved through PFM technique. Then, the rectangular P–E hysteresis loop can be finally obtained on its high-quality thin film at room temperature. The ferroelectric temperature window has been extended to the most important room-temperature phase. This wide working-temperature-range characteristic makes it an ideal candidate for next-generation flexible electronics. Meanwhile, the coexistence of 180° polarization reversal and non-180° polarization rotation has also been verified via PFM in the micrometer scale, which will contribute to the maximal expression of ferroelectricity in the polycrystalline state. PFM provides a comprehensive method where ferroelectricity can be detected without preferred orientation so as to realize the acceleration of the ferroelectric detecting rate, as well as the enhancement of accuracy.
The domain switching process for molecular ferroelectrics has its unique characteristics. During the domain switching process, when a uniform electric field is applied, some domains are easy to diffuse (Fig. 17a and b) owing to the following aspects: (i) the thin film of the sample is usually inhomogeneous so the Vc varies in the different region; (ii) the energy required for domain nucleation is greater than the one for the motion of the domain walls.192 Nevertheless, exceptions also exists, wherein it is preferred to keep nearly the same as the pattern written, such as [(CH3)3NOH]2[KFe(CN)6] (31)191 and guanidinium perchlorate ([C(NH2)3]ClO4, 32)186 (Fig. 17c and d). Illustrating using [C(NH2)3]ClO4 as an example, the visualization of the polarization switching process was conducted on the thin film of [C(NH2)3]ClO4 through the PFM measurement.186 Firstly, a mono-domain area with the identical polarization direction was selected as an initial state. Then, a tip bias of 60 V was applied to the selected area; subsequently, the exactly selected domain area was reversed. Also, the distinct 180° phase contrast suggests a 180° domain switching behavior. Thirdly, after applying a tip bias of −85 V over the central area marked as a yellow box, a region with the phase contrast similar to the initial state emerged. Thus, the box-in-box domain pattern unambiguously establishes the existence of ferroelectricity via the forth-to-back switching of polarization.
 Fig. 17  VPFM phase images after the forth-and-back polarization switching process for (a) (3-ammoniopyrrolidinium)RbBr3 ((3-AP)RbBr3, 33). Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017; (b) HDABCO-BF4. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017; (c) [(CH3)3NOH]2[KFe(CN)6]. Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. (d) [C(NH2)3]ClO4. Reproduced from ref. 186 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2017. 
Notably, the dynamic behavior of the domain switching process may be affected by several factors, such as the pulse amplitude and pulse duration.215,218,221 Under varying pulse amplitude and pulse duration, Gruverman et al. investigated the domain switching process in the DIPAB microcrystals through PFM to study the time-voltage evolution of the domains formed by the local application of the voltage pulses.60,162 Generally, after applying a localized voltage, the single wedge-like domain structure with in-plane polarization (along the b-axis of the crystal is indicated by the blue arrow) was detected in the DIPAB microcrystals. DIPAB exhibits a symmetric in-plane switching process, which depends on the polarity of voltage. A series of LPFM phase images were obtained after the application of positive voltage pulses whose pulse amplitude varies from 25 to 60 V, while the pulse duration is maintained for 10 ms at two fixed points (Fig. 18). When a voltage pulse was applied to the tip-sample contact point, a domain nucleates and begins to unidirectionally extend along the polar axis (forward extension). Subsequently, expansion occurs along the direction that is perpendicular to the polar axis (lateral expansion). In addition, accompanied by the pulse duration in the range from 1 ms to 20 s, the time-dependent domain growth was also investigated with a fixed pulse amplitude of 30 V. As a result, as the pulse amplitude or pulse duration increases, the length and basal width of the wedge domains grow. Furthermore, the evident difference in the growth velocity within the forward extension and lateral expansion process illustrates the anisotropy of the growth velocity on the domain wall, where the lateral expansion rate is smaller than the forward one by about two orders of magnitude. This coincides with the previous study in which the growth in the lateral direction is a rate-limiting step for domain switching. In addition, Yuan et al. also did some similar research toward the ferroelectric domain switching dynamics on the single-crystalline thin film of Im-ClO4, where the domain evolutions under different factors were also discussed.114,222
 Fig. 18  Growth dynamics of the wedge domains for DIPAB vary with (a) pulse amplitude (pulse duration fixed at 10 ms) and (b) pulse duration (pulse amplitude fixed at 30 V). Reprinted from ref. 162 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2015. 
In addition, SS-PFM has been widely used to study the microstructure evolution in ferroelectrics, such as domain wall dynamics and domain nucleation.218,223,224 Although the resultant local PFM hysteresis loops are usually regarded as a typical signature for ferroelectric switching, it has been recently considered that the PFM signal can also originate from some non-piezoelectric contributions, including electrostatic effects, electrochemical strain, electrostriction, Joule heating, and flexoelectricity.26,65,66 One should carefully distinguish the piezoelectric response from the non-piezoelectric response through some phenomenological methods, as summarized by Vasudevan et al.224 Thus, the reliable off-field PFM hysteresis loops can also be present as an auxiliary proof for the ferroelectricity, assuming the influence of the non-piezoelectric signal has been eliminated as far as possible.58 Meanwhile, it is still of great significance for the quantification of some ferroelectric behaviors, including the coercive and nucleation bias, remnant response, and piezoresponse in inhomogeneous or polycrystalline samples, especially for molecular ferroelectric systems.
In addition, the in situ experiment implemented by PFM permits to be a real time monitor on the domain evolution.225,226 Among them, the influences of some environmental factors (such as temperature and moisture) and external stimulus (such as electric field, magnetic field, and UV light) on the ferroelectric domain evolution has drawn great attention. The temperature-dependent evolution of the domain evolution was examined by PFM on DIPAB microcrystals by Gruverman et al. (Fig. 19).162 Initially, a stripe-like domain structure was observed at 25 °C, where the H–H and tail-to-tail (T–T) domain structures separated by CDWs can be discovered after poling. With the temperature increasing from 50 to 75 °C, the domain structure remained stable. Notably, the CDWs initiated the decay by developing spikes, and these spikes gradually turned into a stripe domain as the temperature went up. Till 120 °C, the CDWs were almost disappeared; meanwhile, the stripe domains with non-charged 180° domain walls have not been affected. As the temperature increased above Tc (153 °C), the domain structure on the DIPAB microcrystals vanished (not shown), while after the cooling process, the periodical stripe domains without CDWs could still reemerge on DIPAB at room temperature.
 Fig. 19  PFM image of (a) the as-grown stripe domain structure in a microcrystal of DIPAB. (b) Domain structure after poling. (c–g) Domain evolution in the temperature range from 50 to 120 °C. (h) Domain structure measured at 25 °C after heating the sample to 160 °C and then cooling down. Reprinted from ref. 162 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2015. 
With respect to HQ-ReO4, it undergoes a ferroelectric phase transition at 367 K, and thereby the domain evolution of the HQ-ReO4 film from the ferroelectric to paraelectric phase has also been examined by PFM at a series of temperatures (Fig. 20).187 Originally, a scissor-like domain pattern was exhibited on the thin film at 303 K. On heating, the scissor-like domain structure was displaced by the strip-like one, representing the reorientation of the polarization axis directions in the two ferroelectric phases. Also, the domain pattern rapidly vanished at 393 K, as expected from the ferroelectric phase transition. With a drop in temperature, the domain patterns reemerged, while they are quite different from those obtained during the heating treatment. This is attributed to the regrowth of the ferroelectric domains induced by lowering the temperature.
 Fig. 20  Domain evolution process for HQ-ReO4 during the heating and cooling processes: VPFM amplitude (first), VPFM phase (second), LPFM amplitude (third), and LPFM phase (fourth) images obtained at (a) 303 K, (b) 358 K, heating to 393 K, and cooling back to (c) 363 K and (d) 303 K. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from the American Physical Society, Copyright 2017. 
Furthermore, in order to investigate the influences of multidomain structures toward switchable polarization, the in situ experiment was performed on PFM to visualize the domain switching process on a uniaxial organic ferroelectric of 6,6′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridinium chloranilate ([H-6,6′-dmbp][Hca], 34) by Kagawa et al.172 Then, an area with the coexistence of non-charged and charged domain walls was selected (Fig. 21). After applying an in-plane electric field of 21.9 kV cm−1 for 4 s, a lateral shift of the non-charged domain walls (highlighted by the dotted arrows) and the forward growth of fine domains occurred. As the increased electric field (27 kV cm−1) was sequentially applied for 10 s, the fine domains, which exhibited a forward growth in the first stage, began to undergo lateral shifts on the non-charged domain walls. It is noteworthy that within these domain switching processes, the charged domain walls remained unchanged. In conclusion, the difference in the mobility under an electric field between the charged and non-charged domain walls exists, which can further support the closely-related correlation between switchable polarization and the multidomain topology.
 Fig. 21  For [H-6,6′-dmbp][Hca], the in-plane polarization switching process recorded by the PFM phase images: (a) experimental setup; (b) the as-grown domain structure before the application of an electric field; (c and d) domain structures after the application of an in-plane electric field of 21.9 kV cm−1 for 4 s (c) and 27.0 kV cm−1 for 10 s (d). Reprinted from ref. 172 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. 
5. Piezoelectric response measured via PFM
As for ferroelectrics, besides the intrinsic ferroelectricity, piezoelectricity also steps into the limelight owing to their promising applications.227–229 Piezoelectric devices such as sensors, transducers, actuators, surface acoustic wave devices, frequency control, ultrasound imaging, and energy-harvesting, which respond mechanically to the applied electric field and vice versa, occupy a multibillion-dollar market.230–233 To date, typical commercialized piezoelectric materials have been dominated by two important branches, namely, inorganic ceramics and polymers. Inorganic ceramics have long been put into practice with excellent electromechanical conversion and strong spontaneous polarization, represented by the solid solution PZT (200 to 750 pC N−1) and single component BTO (190 and 105 pC N−1 along [111] and [001] crystal orientations, respectively).13,234–236 With regard to the organic system, PVDF (33 pC N−1) has the virtues of flexibility and biocompatibility, while it is still subjected to the limit of undegradability, low melting temperature, poor crystallinity, and a large coercive field.237–241 Within this context, designing or modulating molecular ferroelectrics with excellent piezoelectric performances is urgently required. Considering the practical use, each utilization generally requires different piezoelectric characteristics. In piezoelectric materials, the strain X is proportional to the electric field E via the linear piezoelectric coefficient d.242 The piezoelectric coefficient d, as a third-rank tensor, which is defined to quantify the ability of transforming the force into electrical charge, can be written asXi = dkiEkwhere Xi, dki, and Ek is the strain, piezoelectric, and electric field tensor matrix, respectively.55,243,244 If a unidirectional electric field is applied along the c-axis, i.e., E3 for example, the resultant possible strain components are d31E3, d32E3, d33E3, d34E3, d35E3, and d36E3 for a triclinic single crystal. If the polarization direction is perpendicular to the ab-plane, the induced strain X3 occurs also along the c-axis, signifying that the piezoelectric coefficient component can only be detected along the c-axis, as denoted by d33.56 It should be noted that d33 can be measured by VPFM.
In order to meet the demand of commercialization of piezoelectric devices, three piezoelectric tensor components, i.e., the longitudinal coefficient d33, the transverse coefficient d31, and the shear coefficient d15, have long been considered to evaluate their performance.55,245,246 Considering the relatively low output power and the non-straightforward fabrication of devices, d33, as the most vital component, is generally used to assess the ability to transform mechanical energy into electricity.244
Generally speaking, piezoelectric coefficients have been detected by several methods, such as the static method (which is based on converse piezoelectric effect), the quasi-static or so-called “Berlincourt” method (which is based on the direct piezoelectric effect), and the dynamic or so-called resonance method (which relies on the frequency resonance effect). These methods take advantage of precise measurement; however, these measurements have set strict limits on the sample preparation, especially for their orientation, shape, size, and electrode configuration, which should conform to their theoretical requirements.244,247–250 Herein, PFM provides a promising supplementary method with great efficiency and easy accessibility to measure the relative piezoelectric coefficients and to further make a comparison of the piezoelectric response among different samples.246,251,252 It is noteworthy that the easy thin-film fabrication as well as the reliable comparison of the piezoresponse make the rapid design of molecular ferroelectrics equipped with a large piezoelectric response possible.
Based on the local converse piezoelectric effect, PFM mainly applies a localized electric field perpendicular to the ab-plane, and thereby, the resultant deflection signal can be detected through VPFM along the out-of-plane direction since it directly couples with the vertical motion of the cantilever.54 This corresponds to the definition of the d33 component. In general, since the original deflection signals on the cantilever are weak, the magnitude order of the PFM signal is similar to the background noise; to end this, firstly, a lock-in amplifier is essential to amplify the PFM signal with a high signal-to-noise ratio. In addition, perhaps the most available option for enhancing the response of the PFM signal is to simply increase the drive amplitude, where the PFM signal is generally proportional to the drive voltage, while the relatively high voltage may render the domain switching unnecessary. Last but not least, the resonance enhancement is used to amplify the small PFM signal, which is vital for samples with a small piezoelectric coefficient to distinguish the measured signal from noise. Subsequently, the quality factor (Q) is introduced to effectively amplify the piezoelectric response, which yields a high factor near the resonance owing to the resonance enhancement.27,49,253 Thus, the amplitude signal is in proportion to the piezoelectric coefficient (such as, d33, the most important component of the piezoelectric tensor on VPFM), and their relationship is shown below.61,254A = d33VtipQ.Accordingly, PFM provides a simple and reliable method to systematically compare the piezoresponse of various samples (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  The comparison of the piezoelectric coefficient among some typical inorganic, molecular, and polymer ferroelectrics. The purple and navy bars signify the molecular ferroelectrics and traditional ones, respectively. 
The quantification methods of the VPFM amplitude have been widely studied, including their advantages, disadvantages, as well as the recent progress, while with regard to the quantification of the LPFM amplitude, it is relatively less explored, as fully discussed by Kim et al.26 Herein, two easy and reliable methods for determining d33 through PFM are put forward. One, by extracting the maximum amplitude of the “butterfly” curve, i.e., the piezoresponse amplitude spectrum as a function of the DC bias voltage after fitting, the local piezoresponse was then obtained by dividing the maximum amplitude by the AC drive voltage.255,256 Taking TMCM-MnCl3 as an example, the maximum amplitude of the calculated “butterfly” curve was 320 pm (350–30 pm) with an AC voltage of 8 V.95 This corresponds to a relative piezoresponse of 40 arbitrary units, while its absolute value can only be obtained after calibration. Furthermore, the local piezoresponses of TMCM-MnCl3 together with its benchmarks, namely, LiNbO3, triglycine sulfate (TGS), and BTO, express a linear relationship with the macroscopic d33 measured through the quasi-static method on the large single crystal (Fig. 23). This supports the reliable detection of the local piezoelectric response through PFM. Thus, TMCM-MnCl3 with a high piezoelectric coefficient d33 of 185 pC N−1, comparable to those of BTO, was proved through PFM.
 Fig. 23  Comparison of the local piezoresponse measured with PFM. The data are plotted against macroscopic d33 so as to demonstrate the linear dependence. (inset) The local piezoresponse of TMCM-MnCl3 as a function of DC bias voltage with an AC voltage of 8 V. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017. 
In the other method, relying on the linear relationship between the responding amplitude signal (A) that is calibrated through Q factor and the drive voltage (Vtip), the local piezoresponse can be derived.257 Among them, by virtue of the construction of morphotropic phase boundaries (MPBs), which is commonly used to optimize the piezoelectric effect in oxides, a ferroelectric solid solution, (trimethylfluoromethyl ammonium)x(trimethylchloromethyl ammonium)1−xCdCl3 ((TMFM)x(TMCM)1−xCdCl3, 35) (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) was reported.254,258,259 To evaluate the piezoelectric performance of the solid solution (TMFM)x(TMCM)1−xCdCl3, the PFM technique, relying on the displacement induced by the drive amplitude on their thin films, was applied to measure the d33 value within various compositions (Fig. 24). Initially, we drove the contact resonance in each sample at different selected points. Then, using the damped harmonic oscillator model to fit the resonance curves, the Q that describes the energy losses in the system was obtained. Finally, by calibrating the resonance amplification with the Q, the relative local piezoresponse can be derived. To ensure that the detected response truly came from piezoelectricity, these measurements were carried out under varying tip biases. An obvious linearity between the intrinsic piezoresponse and the driving voltage on the thin film was observed, precluding the effect of electrostriction. Subsequently, we made a systematic comparison of the maximum local piezoresponse for each composition, and assumed the local piezoresponse of the composition with x = 0 as a benchmark (220 pC N−1). As shown in the inset of Fig. 24, the largest slope is observed for x = 0.26, which was seven times greater than that of the benchmark. In addition, when the compositions are in the vicinity of MPB (0.25 ≤ x ≤ 0.3), a significant enhancement of the piezoelectric behavior can be noticed, where the d33 values range from 1100 to 1540 pC N−1. From the macroscopic perspective, the quasi-static method was applied to verify this huge d33 value on the single crystal of this solid solution near the MPB. An unprecedentedly high piezoelectric coefficient d33 of 1540 pC N−1 in the MPB region is two times larger than that of commercialized PZT. This undoubtedly brings a revolutionary breakthrough in next-generation piezoelectric devices. Besides, this method has also been performed to design a series of molecular ferroelectrics with large longitudinal piezoelectric performance assisted by PFM, such as (TMFM)x(TMCM)1−xCdCl3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1),171 trimethylbromomethylammonium tribromomanganese(II) (TMBM-MnBr3, 36),260 [(CH3)3NCH2X]FeBr4 (TMXM-FeBr4, 37) (X = F, Cl, Br, I),261 and (R-N-methyl-3-hydroxylquinuclidinium)2RbLa(NO3)6 ((R-M3HQ)2RbLa(NO3)6, 38),262 aiming to expedite the discovery of molecular piezoelectric ferroelectrics as well as the optimization of their performance.
 Fig. 24  Comparison of local piezoresponses for (TMFM)x(TMCM)1−xCdCl3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) measured with PFM. The inset shows the piezoresponse amplitude versus driving AC voltage for the selected compositions of x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.25, 0.26, 0.28, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. Norm., normalized to 1 (x = 0). Reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2019. 
In addition, the piezoelectric voltage constant g can be applied to characterize the sensitivity of sensors, which illuminates the correlation between the applied stress and induced voltage.gij = dij/ε,where d is the piezoelectric strain coefficient and ε is the dielectric permittivity.263–265 The value of g directly denotes the figure of merit for piezoelectric sensors, which is critical for their performance.266,267 The relatively low g33 (20 to 40 × 10−3 V m N−1) of PZT ceramics has excited many studies on textured ceramics for the sake of getting high piezoelectric voltage coefficient; however, a satisfactory result has not been reported.268 This is extremely challenging since any increase in d usually results in greatly increased ε. With regard to the molecular materials, despite of its small d33 (33pC N−1), the PVDF polymer has a pretty large g33 (286.7 × 10−3 V m N−1) because of its small dielectric constant (εr).269 Taking the relationship between d and g into consideration, the manufacture of piezoelectric materials with low εr is another key strategy toward the realization of high g33. Thus, molecular ferroelectrics with tunable dielectric constants are suitable candidates for the achievement of large g33. A similar method has also been used to design molecular ferroelectrics with large g33, especially the design of a 2D layered perovskite ferroelectric, (4-aminotetrahydropyran)2PbBr4 ((ATHP)2PbBr4, 39).270 The measured d33 value of (ATHP)2PbBr4 is 76 pC N−1, taking (cyclohexylammonium)2PbBr4 ((CHA)2PbBr4, 40) as the benchmark.127 According to the measured dielectric permittivity (εr = 13), the g33 of (ATHP)2PbBr4 is about 660.3 × 10−3 V m N−1, and this is much higher than that of the PZT-based piezoelectric ceramics and the PVDF polymer.
6. Conclusion and prospects
100 years have passed since the first molecular ferroelectric, Rochelle salt, was discovered. The past century has witnessed the flourishing of inorganic ferroelectrics, together with a renewed surge of molecular ones. Relying on the chemical design, a mass of potential molecular ferroelectrics has sprung up, while the old method cannot catch up with the pace of design due to their interminable and uncertain verification processes for ferroelectricity. To end this, an easy and universal method to identify molecular ferroelectrics has been proposed by PFM, which can greatly reduce the time of the determination process with relatively high accuracy. In this context, the present review has summarized the contribution of PFM toward the aided design of molecular ferroelectrics in the recent years. PFM provides non-destructive visualization and manipulation of the ferroelectric domains at the nanoscale. On the one hand, PFM, as an essential accelerator for detecting ferroelectricity, undoubtedly supports the screening of potential molecular ferroelectric candidates at a high speed and high accuracy, to catch up with the rapid development of ferroelectrochemistry.80 Given the relationship between crystal symmetry and the domain structure, several chemical methods aiming at modifying the crystallography of materials have been linked with the target design of molecular ferroelectrics with specific physical properties. Specifically, the domain structure that is closely related to its physical properties can be effectively identified through the PFM technique. Consequently, a large number of molecular ferroelectrics equipped with extraordinary ferroelectric and piezoelectric behaviors have been designed with the help of PFM. Notably, the research on molecular ferroelectrics possessing large piezoelectric responses provides a new variable for utilization in piezoelectric devices, where a systematic comparison of the piezoresponse among different samples can be easily performed using the PFM technique. On the other hand, along with the growing demand for commercialization, domain engineering and domain wall engineering have been proposed to not only optimize the performance of the ferroelectric itself but also enrich their multi-functionality in electronic, magnetic, and optical fields.271,272 Thus, due to the ability to manipulate the domain switching process, PFM has outperformed in the study of domain dynamics.
This is only a start, although nowadays, the discovering speed of molecular ferroelectrics is unimaginable compared to that in the old days. Looking forward to the future, there is still a great scope to further advance toward the aided design of molecular ferroelectrics through PFM. First of all, PFM will still persist in the aided design of molecular ferroelectrics, and meanwhile enrich the varieties of domain structures that are closely related to data storage. Among them, topology defects, especially polar skyrmions, have garnered enormous interest in condensed-matter physics due to their promising utilization in spintronics or skyrmionic; however, to date, it has not been observed in molecular ferroelectric systems. Thus, much effort in this field is required.
In addition, considering the boundedness of piezoresponse measurement in other components, a combination of experiments and theoretical calculation is needed to explore the undiscovered candidates with desirable performance. For example, Wang et al. performed the first-principles calculation for the in-depth investigation of the piezoelectric properties of MDABCO-NH4X3, a metal-free 3D perovskite ferroelectric discovered.273 The agreement of the calculated d33 component and the measured one proves the precision in this calculation. Meanwhile, they also suggested a large d15 component, comparable to most of the piezoresponse components in inorganic ferroelectrics. Thus, computationally-driven studies provide a wealth of possibilities toward the comprehensive investigation on piezoelectricity.
Last but not least, multifunctionality in molecular ferroelectrics has set off a blooming progress in materials science. In particular, the coexistence of ferroelectricity and ferromagnetism brings forth multiferroicity, demonstrating exceptional performance in next-generation memory devices where the magnetic moments can be controlled through electricity with a low power consumption.85 Fortunately, relying on the combination of PFM and MFM, the advances in molecular multiferroics can be encouraged. Then, inspired by Long's work, PFM is suggested for the aided design of some molecular ferroelectrics that may possess ME coupling.141 A visualized imaging of the ferroelectric domain evolution underlying the applied magnetic field can be easily obtained through the PFM in situ experiment. Notably, owing to the coexistence of multiferroicity and ME coupling at room temperature, BiFeO3 (BFO) holds a great potential in numerous fields of information technology, photocatalysts, magnetic field sensors, micro-electro-mechanical systems, actuators, magnetic memory devices, spintronics devices, etc.274–276 However, the coexistence of multiferroicity and ME coupling in molecular ferroelectrics is rare. Thus, these attractive application prospects inject vigor in this unexploited field, and PFM as an effective tool for detecting ferroelectricity and ME coupling may play a crucial role in the aided design of molecular multiferroic materials with ME coupling. Furthermore, enlightened by the intriguing large open-circuit voltage (Voc) of BFO that is ascribed to its anomalous photovoltaic effect based on ferroelectricity, ferroelectrics have been featured as promising candidates for photovoltaic devices.89 Recently, investigations on organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite-type ferroelectrics toward applications in photoelectric conversion have taken a steep rise, while PFM has seldom be involved. PFM, by virtue of its possibility to study the ferroelectric domain evolution under the condition of light, can be used for the in-depth study of how ferroelectricity contributes to the photovoltaic effect, and can be further applied to the design of molecular ferroelectrics with excellent optoelectronic behavior.
The blueprint of ferroelectrics underlying PFM has been painted from two perspectives, i.e., the old-developed ferroelectrophysics and new-developing ferroelectrochemistry. At present, we have obtained a large number of molecular ferroelectrics with the help of the PFM technique, and we have also done some in-depth physical research on their domain statics and dynamics. In the near future, we not only need to keep the pace for aided design through PFM but also accelerate the speed of the in-depth studies in order to pursue the widely commercialized inorganic ferroelectrics. Then, with the aid of the PFM technique, the surge in molecular ferroelectrics with preeminent ferroelectric and piezoelectric performances as well as multifunctionality will provide more possibilities tomorrow.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21991142 and 21831004).
References
J. F. Scott and C. A. Paz de Araujo, Science, 1989, 246, 1400–1405 Search PubMed .
Q. Wu, L. Yang, X. Wang and Z. Hu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 435–444 Search PubMed .
F. Zhou, H. Huang, C. Xiao, S. Zheng, X. Shi, J. Qin, Q. Fu, X. Bao, X. Feng, K. Müllen and Z.-S. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8198–8205 Search PubMed .
M. Melzer, J. I. Mönch, D. Makarov, Y. Zabila, G. S. Cañón Bermúdez, D. Karnaushenko, S. Baunack, F. Bahr, C. Yan, M. Kaltenbrunner and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1274–1280 Search PubMed .
T. Birol, Nature, 2018, 560, 174–175 Search PubMed .
W. Eerenstein, N. D. Mathur and J. F. Scott, Nature, 2006, 442, 759–765 Search PubMed .
S. Yuvaraja, A. Nawaz, Q. Liu, D. Dubal, S. G. Surya, K. N. Salama and P. Sonar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3423–3460 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Tang, Y. F. Xie, Y. L. Zeng, J. C. Liu, W. H. He, X. Q. Huang and R. G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003530 Search PubMed .
J. Valasek, Phys. Rev., 1921, 17, 475–481 Search PubMed .
I. Bretos, R. Jiménez, A. Wu, A. I. Kingon, P. M. Vilarinho and M. L. Calzada, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1405–1409 Search PubMed .
R. E. Cohen, Nature, 1992, 358, 136–138 Search PubMed .
G. H. Haertling, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1999, 82, 797–818 Search PubMed .
Y. Saito, H. Takao, T. Tani, T. Nonoyama, K. Takatori, T. Homma, T. Nagaya and M. Nakamura, Nature, 2004, 432, 84–87 Search PubMed .
S. Horiuchi and Y. Tokura, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 357–366 Search PubMed .
R. C. G. Naber, K. Asadi, P. W. M. Blom, D. M. de Leeuw and B. de Boer, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 933–945 Search PubMed .
S. Horiuchi, Y. Tokunaga, G. Giovannetti, S. Picozzi, H. Itoh, R. Shimano, R. Kumai and Y. Tokura, Nature, 2010, 463, 789–797 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Ye, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, W.-Q. Liao, J.-X. Gao, X.-N. Hua, H. Cai, P.-P. Shi, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, Science, 2018, 361, 151–155 Search PubMed .
J. X. Gao, W. Y. Zhang, Z. G. Wu, Y. X. Zheng and D. W. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4756–4761 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Zhang, X.-J. Song, X.-G. Chen, Z.-X. Zhang, Y.-M. You, Y.-Y. Tang and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4925–4931 Search PubMed .
J. J. Wang, D. Fortino, B. Wang, X. Zhao and L. Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906224 Search PubMed .
P. P. Shi, Y. Y. Tang, P. F. Li, W. Q. Liao, Z. X. Wang, Q. Ye and R. G. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3811–3827 Search PubMed .
T. Hang, W. Zhang, H. Y. Ye and R. G. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3577–3598 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang and R.-G. Xiong, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1163–1195 Search PubMed .
Y. B. Qin, H. X. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. F. Tian, C. Ma, L. J. Zeng and J. Q. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 072901 Search PubMed .
H. Naganuma, Y. Inoue and S. Okamura, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 061601 Search PubMed .
O. Kwon, D. Seol, H. Qiao and Y. Kim, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1901391 Search PubMed .
S. V. Kalinin and D. A. Bonnell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 125408 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, D. Seol, X. L. Lu, M. Alexe and Y. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41657 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Zhang, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-P. Shi and R.-G. Xiong, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 1928–1938 Search PubMed .
W.-Y. Zhang, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, P.-P. Shi, W.-Q. Liao, D.-W. Fu, H.-Y. Ye, Y. Zhang and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10897–10902 Search PubMed .
Y.-Y. Tang, Y.-H. Liu, H. Peng, B.-B. Deng, T.-T. Cheng and Y.-T. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19698–19704 Search PubMed .
D.-W. Fu, J.-X. Gao, W.-H. He, X.-Q. Huang, Y.-H. Liu and Y. Ai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17477–17481 Search PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 Search PubMed .
P. R. Potnis, N. T. Tsou and J. E. Huber, Materials, 2011, 4, 417–447 Search PubMed .
J. C. Wojdel and J. Iniguez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 247603 Search PubMed .
E. Soergel, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2005, 81, 729–751 Search PubMed .
N. Nakatani, Ferroelectrics, 2011, 413, 238–265 Search PubMed .
I. Peruhov and E. Mihaylova, Ferroelectrics, 2016, 493, 172–182 Search PubMed .
O. D. Payton, L. Picco and T. B. Scott, Int. Mater. Rev., 2016, 61, 473–494 Search PubMed .
B. Kim, S. A. Lee, D. Seol, W. S. Choi and Y. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 1721–1726 Search PubMed .
G. Binnig, C. F. Quate and C. Gerber, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986, 56, 930–933 Search PubMed .
H. J. Butt, B. Cappella and M. Kappl, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2005, 59, 1–152 Search PubMed .
B. D. Gates, Q. B. Xu, M. Stewart, D. Ryan, C. G. Willson and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1171–1196 Search PubMed .
H. Uršič and U. Prah, Proc. R. Soc. A, 2019, 475, 20180782 Search PubMed .
G. Enevoldsen, T. Glatzel, M. Christensen, J. Lauritsen and F. Besenbacher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 236104 Search PubMed .
E. Winfree, F. R. Liu, L. A. Wenzler and N. C. Seeman, Nature, 1998, 394, 539–544 Search PubMed .
W. A. Ducker, T. J. Senden and R. M. Pashley, Nature, 1991, 353, 239–241 Search PubMed .
S. Bertolazzi, J. Brivio and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9703–9709 Search PubMed .
E. Soergel, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 464003 Search PubMed .
J. Li, J.-F. Li, Q. Yu, Q. N. Chen and S. Xie, J. Materiomics, 2015, 1, 3–21 Search PubMed .
D. A. Bonnell, S. V. Kalinin, A. L. Kholkin and A. Gruverman, MRS Bull., 2009, 34, 648–657 Search PubMed .
T. Jungk, Á. Hoffmann and E. Soergel, New J. Phys., 2009, 11, 033029 Search PubMed .
R. Nath, S. Hong, J. A. Klug, A. Imre, M. J. Bedzyk, R. S. Katiyar and O. Auciello, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 163101 Search PubMed .
S. Hong, J. Appl. Phys., 2021, 129, 051101 Search PubMed .
F. Johann, T. Jungk, M. Lilienblum, Á. Hoffmann and E. Soergel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 102902 Search PubMed .
D. O. Alikin, L. V. Gimadeeva, A. V. Ankudinov, Q. Hu, V. Y. Shur and A. L. Kholkin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 543, 148808 Search PubMed .
Z.-H. Wei, Z.-T. Jiang, X.-X. Zhang, M.-L. Li, Y.-Y. Tang, X.-G. Chen, H. Cai and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1995–2000 Search PubMed .
H. Qiao, O. Kwon and Y. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 172901 Search PubMed .
V. Nagarajan, A. Roytburd, A. Stanishevsky, S. Prasertchoung, T. Zhao, L. Chen, J. Melngailis, O. Auciello and R. Ramesh, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 43–47 Search PubMed .
A. Gruverman, B. J. Rodriguez, C. Dehoff, J. D. Waldrep, A. I. Kingon, R. J. Nemanich and J. S. Cross, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 082902 Search PubMed .
A. Gruverman, M. Alexe and D. Meier, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1661 Search PubMed .
A. Alsubaie, P. Sharma, J. H. Lee, J. Y. Kim, C. H. Yang and J. Seidel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11768–11775 Search PubMed .
Y. Kutes, L. H. Ye, Y. Y. Zhou, S. P. Pang, B. D. Huey and N. P. Padture, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3335–3339 Search PubMed .
P. J. Zhao, J. B. Xu, X. Y. Dong, L. Wang, W. Ren, L. Bian and A. M. Chang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2622–2628 Search PubMed .
N. Balke, S. Jesse, Q. Li, P. Maksymovych, M. B. Okatan, E. Strelcov, A. Tselev and S. V. Kalinin, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 072013 Search PubMed .
H. Qiao, D. Seol, C. Sun and Y. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 152901 Search PubMed .
H. Miao, C. Tan, X. Zhou, X. Wei and F. Li, EPL, 2014, 108, 27010 Search PubMed .
A. Chanthbouala, A. Crassous, V. Garcia, K. Bouzehouane, S. Fusil, X. Moya, J. Allibe, B. Dlubak, J. Grollier, S. Xavier, C. Deranlot, A. Moshar, R. Proksch, N. D. Mathur, M. Bibes and A. Barthélémy, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 101–104 Search PubMed .
A. Chanthbouala, V. Garcia, R. O. Cherifi, K. Bouzehouane, S. Fusil, X. Moya, S. Xavier, H. Yamada, C. Deranlot, N. D. Mathur, M. Bibes, A. Barthélémy and J. Grollier, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 860–864 Search PubMed .
D. J. Kim, H. Lu, S. Ryu, C. W. Bark, C. B. Eom, E. Y. Tsymbal and A. Gruverman, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5697–5702 Search PubMed .
T. Jungk, Á. Hoffmann, M. Fiebig and E. Soergel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 012904 Search PubMed .
J. Guyonnet, I. Gaponenko, S. Gariglio and P. Paruch, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5377–5382 Search PubMed .
Y.-Y. Tang, Y. Ai, W.-Q. Liao, P.-F. Li, Z.-X. Wang and R.-G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902163 Search PubMed .
C.-K. Yang, W.-N. Chen, Y.-T. Ding, J. Wang, Y. Rao, W.-Q. Liao, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, Z.-X. Wang and R.-G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808088 Search PubMed .
N. Balke, I. Bdikin, S. V. Kalinin and A. L. Kholkin, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 1629–1647 Search PubMed .
E. A. Little, Phys. Rev., 1955, 98, 978–984 Search PubMed .
V. Y. Shur, A. R. Akhmatkhanov and I. S. Baturin, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2015, 2, 040604 Search PubMed .
V. Y. Shur, Ferroelectrics, 2008, 373, 1–10 Search PubMed .
K. Wang and J. F. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1924–1929 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Liu, H.-Y. Zhang, X.-G. Chen and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15205–15218 Search PubMed .
E. W. Sun and W. W. Cao, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 65, 124–210 Search PubMed .
W. F. Rao and Y. U. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 182906 Search PubMed .
T. Sluka, A. K. Tagantsev, D. Damjanovic, M. Gureev and N. Setter, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 748 Search PubMed .
L. Z. Li, J. Britson, J. R. Jokisaari, Y. Zhang, C. Adamo, A. Melville, D. G. Schlom, L. Q. Chen and X. Q. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6574–6580 Search PubMed .
R. Ramesh and N. A. Spaldin, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 21–29 Search PubMed .
S. W. Cheong and M. Mostovoy, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 13–20 Search PubMed .
J. R. Whyte, R. G. P. McQuaid, P. Sharma, C. Canalias, J. F. Scott, A. Gruverman and J. M. Gregg, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 293–298 Search PubMed .
J. Seidel, P. Maksymovych, Y. Batra, A. Katan, S. Y. Yang, Q. He, A. P. Baddorf, S. V. Kalinin, C. H. Yang, J. C. Yang, Y. H. Chu, E. K. H. Salje, H. Wormeester, M. Salmeron and R. Ramesh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 197603 Search PubMed .
M. Alexe and D. Hesse, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 256 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. D. Lu, X. X. Yong, X. X. Cheng, L. Xie, T. Aoki, L. Z. Li, C. Heikes, S. P. Lau, D. C. Schlom, L. Q. Chen, A. Gruverman and X. Q. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902099 Search PubMed .
G. Catalan, J. Seidel, R. Ramesh and J. F. Scott, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2012, 84, 119–156 Search PubMed .
A. Gruverman and S. V. Kalinin, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41, 107–116 Search PubMed .

          T. Mitsui, I. Tatsuzaki and E. Nakamura, An introduction to the physics of ferroelectrics, Wiley, New York,  1976 Search PubMed .
D.-W. Fu, H.-L. Cai, Y. Liu, Q. Ye, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X.-Y. Chen, G. Giovannetti, M. Capone, J. Li and R.-G. Xiong, Science, 2013, 339, 425–428 Search PubMed .
Y.-M. You, W.-Q. Liao, D. Zhao, H.-Y. Ye, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou, X. Niu, J. Wang, P.-F. Li, D.-W. Fu, Z. Wang, S. Gao, K. Yang, J.-M. Liu, J. Li, Y. Yan and R.-G. Xiong, Science, 2017, 357, 306–309 Search PubMed .
Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, W.-Q. Liao, P.-P. Shi, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8051–8059 Search PubMed .
D. Damjanovic, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1998, 61, 1267–1324 Search PubMed .
S. G. P. Mahale, B. P. Kore, S. Mukherjee, M. S. Pavan, C. De, S. Ghara, A. Sundaresan, A. Pandey, T. N. Guru Row and D. D. Sarma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2412–2419 Search PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Yamada, L. Q. Phuong, N. Maruyama, H. Nishimura, A. Wakamiya, Y. Murata and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10456–10459 Search PubMed .
H. Röhm, T. Leonhard, M. J. Hoffmann and A. Colsmann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 950–955 Search PubMed .
S. Govinda, B. P. Kore, P. Mahale, A. Pandey and D. D. Sarma, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1887–1891 Search PubMed .
H. Röhm, T. Leonhard, M. J. Hoffmann and A. Colsmann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908657 Search PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Xiao, K. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Hu, J. Ouyang, K. P. Ong, K. Zeng and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1155–1161 Search PubMed .
Y. Rakita, O. Bar-Elli, E. Meirzadeh, H. Kaslasi, Y. Peleg, G. Hodes, I. Lubomirsky, D. Oron, D. Ehre and D. Cahen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, E5504–E5512 Search PubMed .
W. Q. Liao, Y. Zhang, C. L. Hu, J. G. Mao, H. Y. Ye, P. F. Li, S. P. D. Huang and R. G. Xiong, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7338 Search PubMed .
K.-z. Du, Q. Tu, X. Zhang, Q. Han, J. Liu, S. Zauscher and D. B. Mitzi, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 9291–9302 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Zhang, Z.-X. Zhang, X.-J. Song, X.-G. Chen and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 20208–20215 Search PubMed .
Y. F. Xie, Y. Ai, Y. L. Zeng, W. H. He, X. Q. Huang, D. W. Fu, J. X. Gao, X. G. Chen and Y. Y. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12486–12492 Search PubMed .
X. G. Chen, X. J. Song, Z. X. Zhang, H. Y. Zhang, Q. Pan, J. Yao, Y. M. You and R. G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 10212–10218 Search PubMed .
L. Z. Chen, W. Q. Liao, Y. Ai, J. Y. Li, S. Y. Deng, Y. L. Hou and Y. Y. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6236–6243 Search PubMed .
S. Gao, X. Yi, J. Shang, G. Liu and R.-W. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1531–1565 Search PubMed .
H. Röhm, T. Leonhard, A. D. Schulz, S. Wagner, M. J. Hoffmann and A. Colsmann, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806661 Search PubMed .
P.-F. Li, Y.-Y. Tang, W.-Q. Liao, H.-Y. Ye, Y. Zhang, D.-W. Fu, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e342 Search PubMed .
W. Gao, L. Chang, H. Ma, L. You, J. Yin, J. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Wang and G. Yuan, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e189 Search PubMed .
S. Yuasa, T. Nagahama, A. Fukushima, Y. Suzuki and K. Ando, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 868–871 Search PubMed .
Y. Moritomo, A. Asamitsu, H. Kuwahara and Y. Tokura, Nature, 1996, 380, 141–144 Search PubMed .
M. N. Ali, J. Xiong, S. Flynn, J. Tao, Q. D. Gibson, L. M. Schoop, T. Liang, N. Haldolaarachchige, M. Hirschberger, N. P. Ong and R. J. Cava, Nature, 2014, 514, 205–208 Search PubMed .
V. Garcia, S. Fusil, K. Bouzehouane, S. Enouz-Vedrenne, N. D. Mathur, A. Barthelemy and M. Bibes, Nature, 2009, 460, 81–84 Search PubMed .
Z. Wen, C. Li, D. Wu, A. D. Li and N. B. Ming, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 617–621 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Zhang, P. F. Li, Y. Y. Tang, A. J. Wilson, K. Willets, M. Wuttig, R. G. Xiong and S. Q. Ren, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701008 Search PubMed .
W. X. Gao, Z. L. Zhang, P. F. Li, Y. Y. Tang, R. G. Xiong, G. L. Yuan and S. Q. Ren, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11739–11745 Search PubMed .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 Search PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau and C. Katan, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 3733–3741 Search PubMed .
P. P. Shi, S. Q. Lu, X. J. Song, X. G. Chen, W. Q. Liao, P. F. Li, Y. Y. Tang and R. G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18334–18340 Search PubMed .
T. Luo, Y. Zhang, Z. Xu, T. Niu, J. Wen, J. Lu, S. Jin, S. Liu and K. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903848 Search PubMed .
H. Y. Ye, W. Q. Liao, C. L. Hu, Y. Zhang, Y. M. You, J. G. Mao, P. F. Li and R. G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2579–2586 Search PubMed .
L. N. Li, X. T. Liu, C. He, S. S. Wang, C. M. Ji, X. Y. Zhang, Z. H. Sun, S. E. Zhao, M. C. Hong and J. H. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1159–1163 Search PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Sun, P. Wang, W. Hu, S. Wang, C. Ji, M. Hong and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12150–12154 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Sun and J. Luo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 517–539 Search PubMed .
C. Ji, S. Wang, L. Li, Z. Sun, M. Hong and J. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805038 Search PubMed .
C. Ji, S. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Chen, L. Li, Z. Sun, Y. Sui, S. Wang and J. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1905529 Search PubMed .
L. Li, X. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Xu, Z. Wu, S. Han, K. Tao, M. Hong, J. Luo and Z. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2623–2629 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Zhang, Z. Wei, P.-F. Li, Y.-Y. Tang, W.-Q. Liao, H.-Y. Ye, H. Cai and R.-G. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 526–530 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, F. Zhang, P. Long, T. Lu, H. Zeng, Y. Liu, R. L. Withers, Y. Li and Z. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801619 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Yang, J. Seidel, S. J. Byrnes, P. Shafer, C. H. Yang, M. D. Rossell, P. Yu, Y. H. Chu, J. F. Scott, J. W. Ager, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 143–147 Search PubMed .
Y. Peng, X. Liu, Z. Sun, C. Ji, L. Li, Z. Wu, S. Wang, Y. Yao, M. Hong and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3933–3937 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, X. Liu, L. Li, C. Ji, Z. Sun, Z. Wu, M. Hong and J. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7693–7697 Search PubMed .
T. Kimura, T. Goto, H. Shintani, K. Ishizaka, T. Arima and Y. Tokura, Nature, 2003, 426, 55–58 Search PubMed .
M. Fiebig, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, R123–R152 Search PubMed .
J. Long, M. S. Ivanov, V. A. Khomchenko, E. Mamontova, J.-M. Thibaud, J. Rouquette, M. Beaudhuin, D. Granier, R. A. S. Ferreira, L. D. Carlos, B. Donnadieu, M. S. C. Henriques, J. A. Paixão, Y. Guari and J. Larionova, Science, 2020, 367, 671–676 Search PubMed .
F.-T. Huang and S.-W. Cheong, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17004 Search PubMed .
S. Prokhorenko, Y. Nahas and L. Bellaiche, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 118, 147601 Search PubMed .
A. Holz and C. Degong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 3751–3754 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Wang, G. Tian, P. Li, L. Zhao, F. Zhang, J. Yao, H. Fan, X. Song, D. Chen, Z. Fan, M. Qin, M. Zeng, Z. Zhang, X. Lu, S. Hu, C. Lei, Q. Zhu, J. Li, X. Gao and J.-M. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700919 Search PubMed .
R. G. P. McQuaid, L. J. McGilly, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. M. Gregg, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 404 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Tang, Y. L. Zhu, X. L. Ma, A. Y. Borisevich, A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, W. Y. Wang, Y. J. Wang, Y. B. Xu, Z. D. Zhang and S. J. Pennycook, Science, 2015, 348, 547–551 Search PubMed .
A. Gruverman, D. Wu, H. J. Fan, I. Vrejoiu, M. Alexe, R. J. Harrison and J. F. Scott, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 342201 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, Q. Feng, Y. Kim, R. Kim, K. H. Lee, S. D. Pollard, Y. J. Shin, H. Zhou, W. Peng, D. Lee, W. Meng, H. Yang, J. H. Han, M. Kim, Q. Lu and T. W. Noh, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1087–1094 Search PubMed .
C.-L. Jia, K. W. Urban, M. Alexe, D. Hesse and I. Vrejoiu, Science, 2011, 331, 1420–1423 Search PubMed .
T. Kurumaji, T. Nakajima, M. Hirschberger, A. Kikkawa, Y. Yamasaki, H. Sagayama, H. Nakao, Y. Taguchi, T.-H. Arima and Y. Tokura, Science, 2019, 365, 914–918 Search PubMed .
A. K. Yadav, C. T. Nelson, S. L. Hsu, Z. Hong, J. D. Clarkson, C. M. Schlepütz, A. R. Damodaran, P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, L. R. Dedon, D. Chen, A. Vishwanath, A. M. Minor, L. Q. Chen, J. F. Scott, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Nature, 2016, 530, 198–201 Search PubMed .
N. Balke, B. Winchester, W. Ren, Y. Chu, A. Morozovska, E. Eliseev, M. Huijben, R. Vasudevan, P. Maksymovych, J. Britson, S. Jesse, I. Kornev, R. Ramesh, L. Bellaiche, L.-Q. Chen and S. Kalinin, Nat. Phys., 2011, 8, 81–88 Search PubMed .
U. K. Rossler, A. N. Bogdanov and C. Pfleiderer, Nature, 2006, 442, 797–801 Search PubMed .
S. Das, Y. L. Tang, Z. Hong, M. A. P. Gonçalves, M. R. McCarter, C. Klewe, K. X. Nguyen, F. Gómez-Ortiz, P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, V. A. Stoica, S. L. Hsu, B. Wang, C. Ophus, J. F. Liu, C. T. Nelson, S. Saremi, B. Prasad, A. B. Mei, D. G. Schlom, J. Íñiguez, P. García-Fernández, D. A. Muller, L. Q. Chen, J. Junquera, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Nature, 2019, 568, 368–372 Search PubMed .

          A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev and S. V. Kalinin, Topological Defects in Ferroic Materials, Springer, Cham,  2016 Search PubMed .
D. P. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. M. Zhang, L. Lin, Z. B. Yan, X. S. Gao and J. M. Liu, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 044103 Search PubMed .
B. J. Rodriguez, X. S. Gao, L. F. Liu, W. Lee, I. I. Naumov, A. M. Bratkovsky, D. Hesse and M. Alexe, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1127–1131 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng and W. J. Chen, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2017, 80, 086501 Search PubMed .
Y. Ai, Y.-L. Zeng, W.-H. He, X.-Q. Huang and Y.-Y. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 13989–13995 Search PubMed .
H. Haefke, R. Luthi, K. P. Meyer and H. J. Guntherodt, Ferroelectrics, 1994, 151, 143–149 Search PubMed .
H. D. Lu, T. Li, S. Poddar, O. Goit, A. Lipatov, A. Sinitskii, S. Ducharme and A. Gruverman, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7832–7838 Search PubMed .
R. R. Choudhury and R. Chitra, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2006, 41, 1045–1048 Search PubMed .

          I. S. Zheludev, Solid State Physics, Academic Press, New York,  1971 Search PubMed .
Z. Zikmund, Czech J. Phys., 1984, 34, 932–949 Search PubMed .
E. G. Fesenko, V. G. Gavrilyatchenko and A. F. Semenchev, Ferroelectrics, 1989, 100, 195–207 Search PubMed .
Y. Ai, X.-G. Chen, P.-P. Shi, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, W.-Q. Liao and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4474–4479 Search PubMed .
P. Zielinski, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1990, 11, 179–223 Search PubMed .

          R. C. Powell, Symmetry, Group Theory, and the Physical Properties of Crystals, Springer, New York,  2010 Search PubMed .

          I. S. Zheludev, in Solid State Physics, ed. H. Ehrenreich, F. Seitz and D. Turnbull, Elsevier, Vienna,  1971, vol. 26, pp. 429–464 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, H.-Y. Ye, D.-W. Fu, W. Gao, H. Ma, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Zhang, J. Li, G.-L. Yuan and R.-G. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5064–5068 Search PubMed .
F. Kagawa, S. Horiuchi, N. Minami, S. Ishibashi, K. Kobayashi, R. Kumai, Y. Murakami and Y. Tokura, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 239–243 Search PubMed .
P. F. Li, W. Q. Liao, Y. Y. Tang, W. C. Qiao, D. W. Zhao, Y. Ai, Y. F. Yao and R. G. Xiong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 5878–5885 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H.-Y. Ye, H.-L. Cai, D.-W. Fu, Q. Ye, W. Zhang, Q. Zhou, J. Wang, G.-L. Yuan and R.-G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4515–4520 Search PubMed .
X.-N. Hua, W.-Q. Liao, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, P.-P. Shi, D. Zhao and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12296–12302 Search PubMed .
T.-T. Sha, Y.-A. Xiong, Q. Pan, X.-G. Chen, X.-J. Song, J. Yao, S.-R. Miao, Z.-Y. Jing, Z.-J. Feng, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901843 Search PubMed .
J.-C. Liu, W.-Q. Liao, P.-F. Li, Y.-Y. Tang, X.-G. Chen, X.-J. Song, H.-Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3495–3499 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Zhang, X.-J. Song, H. Cheng, Y.-L. Zeng, Y. Zhang, P.-F. Li, W.-Q. Liao and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4604–4608 Search PubMed .
W.-Q. Liao, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3975–3980 Search PubMed .
Z. H. Wei, W. Q. Liao, Y. Y. Tang, P. F. Li, P. P. Li, H. Cai and R. G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8110–8113 Search PubMed .
Z.-X. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4372–4378 Search PubMed .
Y.-Y. Tang, W.-Y. Zhang, P.-F. Li, H.-Y. Ye, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15784–15789 Search PubMed .
P.-P. Shi, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, H.-Y. Ye and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1319–1324 Search PubMed .
P.-F. Li, Y.-Y. Tang, Z.-X. Wang, H.-Y. Ye, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13635 Search PubMed .
Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, W.-Y. Zhang, H.-Y. Ye, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13903–13908 Search PubMed .
Q. Pan, Z.-B. Liu, H.-Y. Zhang, W.-Y. Zhang, Y.-Y. Tang, Y.-M. You, P.-F. Li, W.-Q. Liao, P.-P. Shi, R.-W. Ma, R.-Y. Wei and R.-G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700831 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Tang, P. F. Li, P. P. Shi, W. Y. Zhang, Z. X. Wang, Y. M. You, H. Y. Ye, T. Nakamura and R. G. Xiong, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 207602 Search PubMed .
C.-K. Yang, W.-N. Chen, Y.-T. Ding, J. Wang, Y. Rao, W.-Q. Liao, Y. Xie, W. Zou and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1781–1787 Search PubMed .
Y.-A. Xiong, T.-T. Sha, Q. Pan, X.-J. Song, S.-R. Miao, Z.-Y. Jing, Z.-J. Feng, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 8857–8861 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Ye, J.-Z. Ge, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, Y. Zhang, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13175–13178 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Xu, P.-F. Li, Y.-Y. Tang, W.-X. Zhang, R.-G. Xiong and X.-M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6369–6375 Search PubMed .
Q. Pan, Z.-B. Liu, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, R.-W. Ma, R.-Y. Wei, Y. Zhang, Y.-M. You, H.-Y. Ye and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3954–3957 Search PubMed .
D.-W. Fu, W. Zhang, H.-L. Cai, J.-Z. Ge, Y. Zhang and R.-G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5658–5662 Search PubMed .
H.-L. Cai, W. Zhang, J.-Z. Ge, Y. Zhang, K. Awaga, T. Nakamura and R.-G. Xiong, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 147601 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W.-Q. Liao, D.-W. Fu, H.-Y. Ye, C.-M. Liu, Z.-N. Chen and R.-G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3942–3946 Search PubMed .
S. Ducharme, V. M. Fridkin, A. V. Bune, S. P. Palto, L. M. Blinov, N. N. Petukhova and S. G. Yudin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 175–178 Search PubMed .

          J. F. Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals: Their Representation by Tensors and Matrices, Oxford
University Press, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .
Y. M. You, Y. Y. Tang, P. F. Li, H. Y. Zhang, W. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Y. Ye, T. Nakamura and R. G. Xiong, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14934 Search PubMed .
K. S. Hwang, T. Manabe, T. Nagahama, I. Yamaguchi, T. Kumagai and S. Mizuta, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 347, 106–111 Search PubMed .
L. M. Eng, H. J. Guntherodt, G. A. Schneider, U. Kopke and J. M. Saldana, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 233–235 Search PubMed .
H. Pan, F. Li, Y. Liu, Q. H. Zhang, M. Wang, S. Lan, Y. P. Zheng, J. Ma, L. Gu, Y. Shen, P. Yu, S. J. Zhang, L. Q. Chen, Y. H. Lin and C. W. Nan, Science, 2019, 365, 578–582 Search PubMed .
J. Seidel, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 188–190 Search PubMed .
B. H. Park, B. S. Kang, S. D. Bu, T. W. Noh, J. Lee and W. Jo, Nature, 1999, 401, 682–684 Search PubMed .
Z. J. Hu, M. W. Tian, B. Nysten and A. M. Jonas, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 62–67 Search PubMed .
A. Gruverman, D. Wu, H. Lu, Y. Wang, H. W. Jang, C. M. Folkman, M. Y. Zhuravlev, D. Felker, M. Rzchowski, C. B. Eom and E. Y. Tsymbal, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3539–3543 Search PubMed .
S. L. Miller and P. J. McWhorter, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 5999–6010 Search PubMed .
R. Ramesh, S. Aggarwal and O. Auciello, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2001, 32, 191–236 Search PubMed .
D. J. Taylor, R. E. Jones, P. Zurcher, P. Chu, Y. T. Lii, B. Jiang and S. J. Gillespie, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 2300–2302 Search PubMed .
K. J. Choi, M. Biegalski, Y. L. Li, A. Sharan, J. Schubert, R. Uecker, P. Reiche, Y. B. Chen, X. Q. Pan, V. Gopalan, L. Q. Chen, D. G. Schlom and C. B. Eom, Science, 2004, 306, 1005–1009 Search PubMed .
W. J. Merz, Phys. Rev., 1954, 95, 690–698 Search PubMed .
A. Agronin, M. Molotskii, Y. Rosenwaks, G. Rosenman, B. J. Rodriguez, A. I. Kingon and A. Gruverman, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 104102 Search PubMed .
X.-J. Song, Z.-X. Zhang, X.-G. Chen, H.-Y. Zhang, Q. Pan, J. Yao, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 9000–9006 Search PubMed .
E. Strelcov, Y. Kim, J. C. Yang, Y. H. Chu, P. Yu, X. Lu, S. Jesse and S. V. Kalinin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 192902 Search PubMed .
J. J. Steffes, R. A. Ristau, R. Ramesh and B. D. Huey, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 2413–2418 Search PubMed .
Y. Noda, T. Yamada, K. Kobayashi, R. Kumai, S. Horiuchi, F. Kagawa and T. Hasegawa, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6475–6481 Search PubMed .
R. Mankowsky, A. von Hoegen, M. Forst and A. Cavalleri, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 118, 197601 Search PubMed .

          J. F. Scott, Ferroelectric Memories, Springer, Berlin,  2000 Search PubMed .

          A. L. Kholkin, S. V. Kalinin, A. Roelofs and A. Gruverman, Review of Ferroelectric Domain Imaging by Piezoresponse Force Microscopy, Springer, New York,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Li, R. C. Rogan, E. Ustundag and K. Bhattacharya, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 776–781 Search PubMed .
J. Harada, T. Shimojo, H. Oyamaguchi, H. Hasegawa, Y. Takahashi, K. Satomi, Y. Suzuki, J. Kawamata and T. Inabe, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 946–952 Search PubMed .
C. T. Nelson, P. Gao, J. R. Jokisaari, C. Heikes, C. Adamo, A. Melville, S. H. Baek, C. M. Folkman, B. Winchester, Y. J. Gu, Y. M. Liu, K. Zhang, E. G. Wang, J. Y. Li, L. Q. Chen, C. B. Eom, D. G. Schlom and X. Q. Pan, Science, 2011, 334, 968–971 Search PubMed .
H. Ma, W. X. Gao, J. L. Wang, T. Wu, G. L. Yuan, J. M. Liu and Z. G. Liu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600038 Search PubMed .
S. Jesse, A. P. Baddorf and S. V. Kalinin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 062908 Search PubMed .
R. K. Vasudevan, N. Balke, P. Maksymovych, S. Jesse and S. V. Kalinin, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 021302 Search PubMed .
B. J. Rodriguez, R. J. Nemanich, A. Kingon, A. Gruverman, S. V. Kalinin, K. Terabe, X. Y. Liu and K. Kitamura, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 012906 Search PubMed .
K. Y. Fang, W. Q. Jing and F. Fang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2019, 102, 7710–7719 Search PubMed .
C. R. Qiu, B. Wang, N. Zhang, S. J. Zhang, J. F. Liu, D. Walker, Y. Wang, H. Tian, T. R. Shrout, Z. Xu, L. Q. Chen and F. Li, Nature, 2020, 577, 350–354 Search PubMed .
J. Koruza, Nature, 2020, 577, 325–326 Search PubMed .
P. K. Panda and B. Sahoo, Ferroelectrics, 2015, 474, 128–143 Search PubMed .
Y. Qi, N. T. Jafferis, K. Lyons, C. M. Lee, H. Ahmad and M. C. McAlpine, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 524–528 Search PubMed .
B. Y. Lee, J. X. Zhang, C. Zueger, W. J. Chung, S. Y. Yoo, E. Wang, J. Meyer, R. Ramesh and S. W. Lee, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 351–356 Search PubMed .
L. E. Cross, Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull., 1984, 63, 586–590 Search PubMed .
D. Damjanovic, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 2663–2676 Search PubMed .
W. F. Liu and X. B. Ren, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 257602 Search PubMed .
S. Wada, K. Yako, H. Kakemoto, T. Tsurumi and T. Kiguchi, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 014109 Search PubMed .
Z. Kutnjak, J. Petzelt and R. Blinc, Nature, 2006, 441, 956–959 Search PubMed .
B. Stadlober, M. Zirkl and M. Irimia-Vladu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1787–1825 Search PubMed .
P. Martins, A. C. Lopes and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 683–706 Search PubMed .
C. E. Chang, V. H. Tran, J. B. Wang, Y. K. Fuh and L. W. Lin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 726–731 Search PubMed .
F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4283–4305 Search PubMed .
C. S. Lynch, Ferroelectrics, 1993, 150, 331–342 Search PubMed .
F. Li, D. B. Lin, Z. B. Chen, Z. X. Cheng, J. L. Wang, C. C. Li, Z. Xu, Q. W. Huang, X. Z. Liao, L. Q. Chen, T. R. Shrout and S. J. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 349–354 Search PubMed .
R. A. Anderson and R. G. Kepler, Ferroelectrics, 1981, 32, 13–15 Search PubMed .
K. M. Ok, E. O. Chi and P. S. Halasyamani, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 710–717 Search PubMed .
R. Zeng, K. W. Kwok, H. L. W. Chan and C. L. Choy, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 2674–2679 Search PubMed .
M. H. Malakooti and H. A. Sodano, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 061901 Search PubMed .
G. T. Park, J. J. Choi, J. Ryu, H. Q. Fan and H. E. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 4606–4608 Search PubMed .
W. P. Mason and H. Jaffe, Proc. IRE, 1954, 42, 921–930 Search PubMed .
J. M. Liu, B. Pan, H. L. W. Chan, S. N. Zhu, Y. Y. Zhu and Z. G. Liu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2002, 75, 12–18 Search PubMed .
K. Lefki and G. J. M. Dormans, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 76, 1764–1767 Search PubMed .
M. H. Zhao, Z. L. Wang and S. X. Mao, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 587–590 Search PubMed .
D. A. Bonnell, D. N. Basov, M. Bode, U. Diebold, S. V. Kalinin, V. Madhavan, L. Novotny, M. Salmeron, U. D. Schwarz and P. S. Weiss, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2012, 84, 1343–1381 Search PubMed .
S. H. Xie, A. Gannepalli, Q. N. Chen, Y. M. Liu, Y. C. Zhou, R. Proksch and J. Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 408–413 Search PubMed .
W. Q. Liao, D. W. Zhao, Y. Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, P. F. Li, P. P. Shi, X. G. Chen, Y. M. You and R. G. Xiong, Science, 2019, 363, 1206–1210 Search PubMed .
M. E. Caspari and W. J. Merz, Phys. Rev., 1950, 80, 1082–1089 Search PubMed .

          S. V. Kalinin and A. Gruverman, Scanning Probe Microscopy: Electrical and Electromechanical Phenomena at the Nanoscale, Springer, New York,  2007 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. H. Lam, K. K. Shung, J. Li and Q. Zhou, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 187205 Search PubMed .
R. Guo, L. E. Cross, S. E. Park, B. Noheda, D. E. Cox and G. Shirane, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 5423–5426 Search PubMed .
M. Ahart, M. Somayazulu, R. E. Cohen, P. Ganesh, P. Dera, H. K. Mao, R. J. Hemley, Y. Ren, P. Liermann and Z. G. Wu, Nature, 2008, 451, 545–548 Search PubMed .
W.-Q. Liao, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18071–18077 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X.-J. Song, Z.-X. Zhang, D.-W. Fu and R.-G. Xiong, Matter, 2020, 2, 697–710 Search PubMed .
C. Shi, J.-J. Ma, J.-Y. Jiang, M.-M. Hua, Q. Xu, H. Yu, Y. Zhang and H.-Y. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 9634–9641 Search PubMed .
J. F. Tressler, S. Alkoy and R. E. Newnham, J. Electroceram., 1998, 2, 257–272 Search PubMed .
X. Gao, J. Wu, Y. Yu, Z. Chu, H. Shi and S. Dong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706895 Search PubMed .
S.-E. Park and T. R. Shrout, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 82, 1804–1811 Search PubMed .
D. B. Deutz, J. A. Pascoe, B. Schelen, S. van der Zwaag, D. M. de Leeuw and P. Groen, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 444–453 Search PubMed .
R. E. Newnham, A. Safari, J. Giniewicz and B. H. Fox, Ferroelectrics, 1984, 60, 15–21 Search PubMed .
Y. Yan, K.-H. Cho, D. Maurya, A. Kumar, S. Kalinin, A. Khachaturyan and S. Priya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 042903 Search PubMed .
R. E. Newnham, L. J. Bowen, K. A. Klicker and L. E. Cross, Mater. Des., 1980, 2, 93–106 Search PubMed .
X. G. Chen, X. J. Song, Z. X. Zhang, P. F. Li, J. Z. Ge, Y. Y. Tang, J. X. Gao, W. Y. Zhang, D. W. Fu, Y. M. You and R. G. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1077–1082 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, F. Zheng, N. Z. Koocher, H. Takenaka, F. G. Wang and A. M. Rappe, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 693–699 Search PubMed .
P. Sharma, Q. Zhang, D. Sando, C. H. Lei, Y. Y. Liu, J. Y. Li, V. Nagarajan and J. Seidel, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700512 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Liu, Z. Zhang, Z. Liu, Z. Lv, T. Li, W. Ju, H. Li, X. Cai and H. Han, npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 5, 17 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, J. B. Neaton, H. Zheng, V. Nagarajan, S. B. Ogale, B. Liu, D. Viehland, V. Vaithyanathan, D. G. Schlom, U. V. Waghmare, N. A. Spaldin, K. M. Rabe, M. Wuttig and R. Ramesh, Science, 2003, 299, 1719–1722 Search PubMed .
D. Lebeugle, D. Colson, A. Forget, M. Viret, P. Bonville, J. F. Marucco and S. Fusil, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 024116 Search PubMed .
J. Song, T. L. Kim, J. Lee, S. Y. Cho, J. Cha, S. Y. Jeong, H. An, W. S. Kim, Y.-S. Jung, J. Park, G. Y. Jung, D.-Y. Kim, J. Y. Jo, S. D. Bu, H. W. Jang and S. Lee, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 642–655 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00504h‡ Present address: Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Science and Applications of Molecular Ferroelectrics, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, P. R. China.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Han-Yue Zhang
	Han-Yue Zhang received her Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Nanjing Normal University in 2018. She is currently a PhD candidate in Materials Physics and Chemistry, Southeast University, under the supervision of Prof. Ren-Gen Xiong. Her research interests include the chemical design of molecular ferroelectrics and their performance optimization under the guidelines of ferroelectrochemistry.

Xiao-Gang Chen
	Xiao-Gang Chen received his BS degree (2016) from Southeast University Chengxian College. He is currently a PhD candidate of Material Physics and Chemistry at Southeast University and is supervised by Prof. Ren-Gen Xiong. His current research focuses on the design optimization of molecular-based ferroelectrics, especially in the field of halogen hybrid perovskites.

Yuan-Yuan Tang
	Professor Yuan-Yuan Tang received his PhD degree from Southeast University in 2019, and then became a professor at Ordered Matter Science Research Center, Nanchang University. His current research interests focus on the rational design of molecular ferroelectrics with the help of PFM.

Hang Peng
	Hang Peng graduated from Nanchang University with a Bachelor's degree in 2019. She is currently a PhD candidate at Nanchang University under the supervision of Prof. Xiong. Her research interests are focused on host–guest inclusion ferroelectrics.

Ren-Gen Xiong
	Professor Ren-Gen Xiong is the head of the Ordered Matter Science Research Center at Nanchang University as well as the Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Science and Applications of Molecular Ferroelectrics in the Southeast University. He has more than 200 papers as a corresponding author, including those in Science (4 articles), J. Am. Chem. Soc. (over 40 articles), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. (16 articles), Adv. Mater. (11 articles), and Chem. Soc. Rev. (5 articles). For more than 20 years, he has been conducting research focused on the synthesis and properties of non-centrosymmetric compound, especially in the field of molecular ferroelectrics, establishing ferroelectrochemistry.

 	Scheme 1  The comparison of the discovery process for molecular ferroelectrics in the past and the present.	 

 	Fig. 1  Accumulated number of molecular ferroelectrics during the period of 1920–2020 (data from Web of Science).	 

Etching method	Visualization through optical microscope and even with naked eyes	Surface etching	Etching rates is different between positive and negative domains	Microscale (1 μm or less)
Powder deposition technique	Suitable for the visualization of macroscopic domain structure and samples with cleaved surfaces	Surface contamination	Positively or negatively charged particles are attracted to ferroelectric domains carrying opposite sign of charge	Microscale (about 1 μm)
SEM	Simple in operation	Inducing the polarization reversal	Intensity is the difference of the emitted secondary electron from the positive and negative domains	Nanoscale (greater than 1.8 nm)
X-Ray diffraction microscopy	Available for the visualization of polarization reversal process	Not lucid in the domain boundary	Phase is the difference between the structure factors in the positive and negative domains at each side of the boundary	Nanoscale (about 10 nm)
SPM	High imaging resolution; surface modification; non-destructive characteristic; in situ experiment	Not suitable for the visualization of macroscopic domain structure, buried solid–solid and liquid–liquid interfaces	Phase is the difference in the positive and negative domains	Atomic or subatomic scale

 	Scheme 2  Configurations of a typical PFM system (a) and the PFM setup (b). Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 2  Two possible PFM imaging modes with respect to their corresponding orientations of the cantilever motions and polarization directions: (a) vertical mode; (b) lateral mode. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from American Institute of Physics, Copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 3  The blueprint on ferroelectric researches under the assistance of PFM. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2013. Reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (NAS), Copyright 2019. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2015. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2016. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2019. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) PFM image of the MAPbI3 domain pattern. (b) Detailed PFM image of a smaller area of the same sample. Reprinted from ref. 100 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 5  For MAPbI3, PFM images (a) before poling, the sample exhibits highly ordered domains with alternating polarization. Most grain boundaries are likely to show the equilibrium shape originating from the tetragonal unit cell, forming an angle of 45° with the domain walls; (b) after DC poling (E = +2 V μm−1) over the channel (2.5 μm, marked in red), some domains widen (position 1), and larger domains of unidirectional polarization occur (position 2). Domain walls that are oriented 45° to the previously parallel domain walls appear (positions 2 and 3); (c) after subsequent DC poling in the opposite direction, the distribution of domains becomes more asymmetric (position 1), and a previously poled domain decreases in size (position 3). The top area of all the three images, which is located atop one of the electrodes, and hence outside of the channel, remains unaffected by the electric poling field. Reprinted from ref. 102 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 6  For the film (PMA)2PbBr4, (a) the AFM topographic images of a selected region. (b) Piezoresponse plotted against the driving frequency, fitted using a DSHO function. The AC driving voltage is 3 V. (c) Driving voltage-dependent piezoresponse. Reprinted from ref. 106 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 7  PFM studies performed on the single crystal of R,R-[Zn(OAc)(L)Yb(NO3)2] under a magnetic field. VPFM and LPFM images at (a) H = 0 Oe and (b) H = 1 kOe. Reprinted from ref. 141 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 8  Vortex–antivortex domain in the as-grown (4,4-DFPD)2PbI4 thin film. LPFM (a) amplitude and (b) phase images with sample rotation angles of 0°, 45°, 86°, and 139°, respectively. The orientations of the cantilever and the corresponding scanning directions are illustrated with black insets in amplitude images. Among them, four domains with black arrows form a polar vortex structure and other four domains with pink arrows form a polar antivortex structure, suggesting the in-plane polarization directions for (4,4-DFPD)2PbI4. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 9  Domain structures of (CH2OH)3CNO2 in the as-grown state (left) and annealed state (right) of the film surface: (a and d) topographical images, (b and e) vertical PFM amplitude images, and (c and f) vertical PFM phase images of the film surface. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.	 
D ⊂ H ⊂ G.
{C2} ⊂ {E, C2} ⊂ {E, C2, C2′, C2′}
K = NG/nH

 	Scheme 3  Ferroelectric domain of (R)- and (S)-3-FP-MnCl3: (a) single-domain state whose symmetry group is 2 and (b) multi-domain state whose symmetry group is 222.	 

 	Fig. 10  Domain structures for some uniaxial molecular ferroelectrics: (a) VPFM phase image for (R)-3-OH-Q. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019; VPFM (b) and LPFM (e) phase images after polarization switching for (R)-3-OH-Q. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (NAS), Copyright 2019; VPFM (c) and LPFM (f) phase images for TMIM-PbI3. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018; (d) VPFM phase images for Im-ClO4.	 

 	Fig. 11  Domain structure of MDABCO-RbI3 (a and d) the VPFM phase and amplitude images in the z direction. The LPFM phase and amplitude images in the x direction (b and e) and y direction (c and f), respectively. The geometry of the cantilever is illustrated schematically. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 12  Domain structures for some multiaxial molecular ferroelectrics: (a) VPFM (a) and LPFM (d) phase images after polarization switching for MDABCO-RbI3. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017; (b, c and e, f) VPFM amplitude (b) and phase (e) images and LPFM amplitude (c) and phase (f) images for MDABCO-NH4I3. Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2018.	 

DIPAB,94 Im-IO4,174 TMIM-PbI3175	2/mF2	1 (2)	
Scheme 4a
	180° antiparallel stripe-like domains
(PMA)2PbCl4,105 HDA-BiI5,134 (4,4-DFPD)2PbI4,176 [DMe-DABCO]CuCl4,177 (TMAEA)Pb2Cl6178	
mmmFmm2	1 (2)	180° antiparallel stripe-like or irregular domain
TMCM-CdBr3,179 [(CH3)3NH]3(MnBr3)(MnBr4)180	6/mmmF6mm	1 (2)	180° antiparallel stripe-like or irregular domain
Im-ClO4171	mF3m	1 (2)	180° antiparallel hexagonal domain
[(CH3)2(FCH2CH2)NH]3(CdCl3)(CdCl4)181	6/mF6	1 (2)	180° antiparallel hexagonal domain
(R)- and (S)-3-FP-CdCl3,73 (R)- and (S)-3-FP-MnCl3167	222F2	1 (2)	180° antiparallel stripe-like or irregular domain
(R)- and (S)-3-OH-Q173	622F6	1 (2)	180° antiparallel trigonal domain
HDABCO-ClO4,182 HDABCO-BF4,183 (2-F-PMA)2PbCl4,125 (4,4-DFPD)2PbI419	4/mmmFmm2	2 (4)	
Scheme 4b
	Stripe-like or vortex–antivortex domain
(R)-(−)-3-HQ-Cl184	432F4	3 (6)	
Scheme 4c
	Tetragonal domain
HDABCO-ReO4185	
mmF4mm	3 (6)	Stripe-like domain
[C(NH2)3]ClO4186	
mmF3m	4 (8)	
Scheme 4d
	Hexagonal domain
MDABCO-RbI3,30 MDABCO-NH4I317	432F3	4 (8)	Stripe-like or hexagonal domain
HQ-ReO4,187 [3-O-Q]ClO4,188 [3.2.1-DABCO]BF457	
mmFmm2	6 (12)	
Scheme 4e
	Stripe-like or irregular domain
TMCM-MnCl3,95 [FMeTP][Ni(NO2)3]189	6/mmmFm	6 (12)	
Scheme 4f
	Herringbone, stripe-like or irregular domain
(R)- and (S)-1-[(4-CP)EA]2PbI474	422F1	8 (16)	—	Herringbone domain
TM-ClO4,190 [(CH3)3NOH]2[KFe(CN)6],191 (3-AP)RbBr3192	
mmFm	12 (24)	
Scheme 4g
	Stripe-like, tetragonal or irregular domain
(CH2OH)3CNO2	
mmF1	24 (48)	
Scheme 4h
	Triangular domain

 	Scheme 4  Possible equivalent polarization directions of (a) uniaxial; (b) 4/mmmFmm2; (c) 432F4 and mmF4mm-type; (d) mmF3m and 432F3-type; (e) mmFmm2-type; (f) 6/mmmFm-type; (g) mmFm-type; (h) mmF1-type ferroelectrics.	 

 	Fig. 13  Large-area PFM images obtained on the surface of the crystal TMCM-MnCl3. (a and d) and (b and e) LPFM images constructed by the phase and amplitude of local piezoresponse in the x- and y-directions, respectively. (c and f) VPFM images constructed by the phase and amplitude of local piezoresponse in the z-direction, respectively. The green and yellow dashed boxes indicate areas where high-resolution PFM and polarization analysis were carried out, as shown in Fig. 14. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 14  For TMCM-MnCl3, high-resolution PFM studies on the selected areas indicated by green (a–f) and yellow (g–l) dashed boxes marked in Fig. 13. Sub-images (a–c) and (d–f) are constructed by phase and amplitude signals of the x-, y-, and z-direction components, respectively. (g–l) PFM images obtained in yellow dashed box in Fig. 13 are similar to (a–f). Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) For TMCM-MnCl3, the analysis of phase contrast of each region. (b) The sketch map of in-plane real space reconstruction of the polarization orientations. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Scheme 5  The containing steps of the domain growth in a general polarization switching process. Reproduced from ref. 222 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 16  The SS-PFM measurements of the DABCO-system: (a) HDABCO-BF4. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017; (b) HDABCO-ClO4. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016; and (c) HDABCO-ReO4 on their thin films. (a and d–f) The VPFM phase and amplitude hysteresis loops measured for HDABCO-ReO4 during the switching processes for 0.6 μm (a), 0.15 μm (d), 1 μm (e), and 2 μm (f) thick films. Reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 17  VPFM phase images after the forth-and-back polarization switching process for (a) (3-ammoniopyrrolidinium)RbBr3 ((3-AP)RbBr3, 33). Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017; (b) HDABCO-BF4. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017; (c) [(CH3)3NOH]2[KFe(CN)6]. Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. (d) [C(NH2)3]ClO4. Reproduced from ref. 186 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 18  Growth dynamics of the wedge domains for DIPAB vary with (a) pulse amplitude (pulse duration fixed at 10 ms) and (b) pulse duration (pulse amplitude fixed at 30 V). Reprinted from ref. 162 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 19  PFM image of (a) the as-grown stripe domain structure in a microcrystal of DIPAB. (b) Domain structure after poling. (c–g) Domain evolution in the temperature range from 50 to 120 °C. (h) Domain structure measured at 25 °C after heating the sample to 160 °C and then cooling down. Reprinted from ref. 162 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 20  Domain evolution process for HQ-ReO4 during the heating and cooling processes: VPFM amplitude (first), VPFM phase (second), LPFM amplitude (third), and LPFM phase (fourth) images obtained at (a) 303 K, (b) 358 K, heating to 393 K, and cooling back to (c) 363 K and (d) 303 K. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from the American Physical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 21  For [H-6,6′-dmbp][Hca], the in-plane polarization switching process recorded by the PFM phase images: (a) experimental setup; (b) the as-grown domain structure before the application of an electric field; (c and d) domain structures after the application of an in-plane electric field of 21.9 kV cm−1 for 4 s (c) and 27.0 kV cm−1 for 10 s (d). Reprinted from ref. 172 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014.	 
Xi = dkiEk
A = d33VtipQ.

 	Fig. 22  The comparison of the piezoelectric coefficient among some typical inorganic, molecular, and polymer ferroelectrics. The purple and navy bars signify the molecular ferroelectrics and traditional ones, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 23  Comparison of the local piezoresponse measured with PFM. The data are plotted against macroscopic d33 so as to demonstrate the linear dependence. (inset) The local piezoresponse of TMCM-MnCl3 as a function of DC bias voltage with an AC voltage of 8 V. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 24  Comparison of local piezoresponses for (TMFM)x(TMCM)1−xCdCl3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) measured with PFM. The inset shows the piezoresponse amplitude versus driving AC voltage for the selected compositions of x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.25, 0.26, 0.28, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. Norm., normalized to 1 (x = 0). Reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2019.	 
gij = dij/ε,
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00504h
‡ Present address: Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Science and Applications of Molecular Ferroelectrics, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, P. R. China.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
