Assembly of one dimensional inorganic nanostructures into functional 2D and 3D architectures. Synthesis, arrangement and functionality   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35089K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35089K
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5285-5312Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAssembly of one dimensional inorganic nanostructures into functional 2D and 3D architectures. Synthesis, arrangement and functionality†

        
          
            Ravi K. 
            Joshi
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jörg J. 
            Schneider
          
          
        
      *
      Technische Universität Darmstadt, Fachbereich Chemie, Eduard-Zintl-Institut für Anorganische und Physikalische Chemie, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany. E-mail: joerg.schneider@ac.chemie.tu-darmstadt.de;  Fax: +49-6151-16-3470;   Tel: +49-6151-16-3225
Received 
      22nd March 2012
    First published on 21st June 2012AbstractThis review will focus on the synthesis, arrangement, structural assembly, for current and future applications, of 1D nanomaterials (tubes, wires, rods) in 2D and 3D ordered arrangements. The ability to synthesize and arrange one dimensional nanomaterials into ordered 2D or 3D micro or macro sized structures is of utmost importance in developing new devices and applications of these materials. Micro and macro sized architectures based on such 1D nanomaterials (e.g. tubes, wires, rods) provide a platform to integrate nanostructures at a larger and thus manageable scale into high performance electronic devices like field effect transistors, as chemo- and biosensors, catalysts, or in energy material applications. Carbon based, metal oxide and metal based 1D arranged materials as well as hybrid or composite 1D materials of the latter provide a broad materials platform, offering a perspective for new entries into fascinating structures and future applications of such assembled architectures. These architectures allow bridging the gap between 1D nanostructures and the micro and macro world and are the basis for an assembly of 1D materials into higher hierarchy domains. This critical review is intended to provide an interesting starting point to view the current state of the art and show perspectives for future developments in this field. The emphasis is on selected nanomaterials and the possibilities for building three dimensional arrays starting from one dimensional building blocks. Carbon nanotubes, metal oxide nanotubes and nanowires (e.g. ZnO, TiO2, V2O5, Cu2O, NiO, Fe2O3), silicon and germanium nanowires, and group III–V or II–VI based 1D semiconductor nanostructures like GaS and GaN, pure metals as well as 1D hybrid materials and their higher organized architectures (foremost in 3D) will be focussed. These materials have been the most intensively studied within the last 5–10 years with respect to nano–micro integration aspects and their functional and application oriented properties. The critical review should be interesting for a broader scientific community (chemists, physicists, material scientists) interested in synthetic and functional material aspects of 1D materials as well as their integration into next higher organized architectures.
Ravi K. Joshi
Ravi Joshi obtained his Bachelor's degree in Mechanical Engineering from Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India. Thereafter he worked towards his Master's degree in Materials science at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras, Chennai, India. From 2006 he worked towards his PhD degree which he received from Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany, in 2010, working in the group of Prof. J. J. Schneider on carbon nanotubes and their hybrid materials. He examined the growth mechanism of ultra-long carbon nanotubes, their composites and hybrid materials and their exploration as functional materials for sensoric and electronic applications. In 2011, he accepted an offer for a post doc position in the group of Prof. G. Duesberg at CRANN Center of Trinity College Dublin, Ireland, working on suspended graphene transistor devices. Currently he is a researcher with the Infinion company, Villach, Austria.
Jörg J. Schneider
Jörg J. Schneider studied chemistry at the Philipps Universität Marburg, Germany and obtained a Dr rer nat. in 1986 working in the field of organometallic chemistry. From 1987 until 1988 he was a post doc at Kansas State University, KS, Manhattan, USA and from 1989–1994 a post-doc at the Max-Planck-Institut für Kohlenforschung, Mülheim a.d. Ruhr, Germany. From 1994 until 1999 he was a Heisenberg Fellow of the DFG at the University of Essen and from 2000–2003 a full professor for Inorganic Chemistry at the Karls-Franzens-Universität, Austria. Since 2003 he has been a professor for inorganic chemistry at the Technische Universität Darmstadt. His current research interests are in the area of materials and organometallic chemistry: functional properties of carbon nanotubes, graphene, metal oxides for electronics, catalytic and sensoric properties of these materials and their hybrids as well as organometallic chemistry of polycondensed aromatics.
1. Introduction
One dimensional (1D) nanostructured inorganic materials (nanowires, nanorods or nanotubes) are fascinating from various aspects. Besides their physical properties, they can be grown in a vertical fashion forming geometrically confined structures. They have been identified as next generation building blocks for sensors, electronics, photonics and bioelectronics applications. The fascinating properties, which these 1D inorganic nanostructures exhibit, are based on their atomic scale structures and their 1D morphology e.g. their length and their diameter dimensions at the nanoscale. Based on these parameters a variety of physical properties like electrical and electronic, piezoelectric and magnetic, catalytic, sensoric as well as actoric properties can be tailored. This potential relies on the subtle control of their physical properties such as their density of states and the transport of electrons and photons. These can be varied over a wide range of material compositions which make these 1D morphologies so outstanding and intensively researched. 1D nanomaterials which have been mainly in the research focus of the community over the last 5–10 years in these respects are carbon nanotubes (CNTs), metal oxide nanotubes and nanowires (e.g. ZnO, TiO2, V2O5, Cu2O, NiO, Fe2O3), silicon, germanium nanowires, and III–V or II–VI based hetero-nanostructures, metallic nanowires and also hybrid or structures of different composition. This critical review will have its focus on these 1D materials and it will lay a special emphasis on research aimed towards integration of these materials into two and three dimensional architectures (2D and 3D) and connected with this their interesting functional properties and device applications (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  From one dimensional nanostructures to integrated function and applications (taken with gratitude from M. Rauber, Dissertation, TU Darmstadt, 2011). 
From a synthetic point of view, numerous different techniques available for the growth of 1D nanostructures have been devised over the years. Besides physical or chemical vapour deposition (PVD, CVD), which most often rely on the vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) technique, template assisted growth, electrochemical etching, electrochemical deposition techniques, or laser ablation techniques have been applied successfully. The most efficient and successful way to grow ordered arrays of 1D nanostructures certainly relies on the prominent VLS technique. With this technique it is possible to grow perfectly aligned nanowires or nanotubes, steer the diameter and length viz. the aspect ratio of these 1D nanostructures, to control their growth process and to tune the formation of monolithic, ordered micro or even macrostructures of 1D nanoobjects. The application and development of the VLS method has enhanced the integration of 1D nanomaterial into device architectures significantly over the last decade. An important step towards the integration of 1D nanostructures into higher organized 2D and 3D structures is the ability to grow or arrange these nanostructures in a defined manner. The growth and alignment into 3D arrays which are composed of 1D nanostructures has allowed bridging the gap from the nano into the micro and macro world and is essential for a variety of engineering applications. Compared to nanoparticles, 1D nanostructures show effects due to their nanosize in two dimensions while the third is typically micro or even macrosized. Therefore they offer possibilities for manoeuvring such 1D structures more easily than it is done for quasi 0D particles. Moreover the latter loose their size characteristic properties when enlarging their isotropic size parameters1 (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Schematic overview depicting possible surface effects connected with a 1D nanowire morphology and the physical properties which are addressable with a 1D morphology together with characteristic measuring parameters to detect such properties (adopted from Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 151). 
Being successful in manoeuvring 1D nanomaterials over larger areas and most precisely, the resulting 2D or 3D arrays could minimize fabrication or alignment errors, reduce or even eliminate device malfunction due to mechanical strain and can form flexible or bendable device arrays when the substrates are soft. Apart from this organization issue, pristine 1D nanostructures can even be functionalized in the gas phase or in solution and the high surface area of the slender nanotubes or nanowires helps in their selective functionalization to achieve an ordered alignment by self-organisation or by techniques like printing or stamping. Among the larger family of nanomaterials, 1D nanotubes and nanowires are thus considered to be at the materials forefront, the complexity associated with their anisotropic nature calls for devising new approaches to integrate them into larger micro and macro scale device architectures.
In this review report, we have taken efforts to address issues of synthesis, organization and device integration from the perspective of selected 1D materials. The report is targeted on those 1D nanostructures which can be grown into micro or macro structured architectures following aligned bottom-up growth concepts and their subsequent integration into higher order architectures displaying various electrical, optical, optoelectronic, sensory or energy applications. At first, a brief synopsis over various methods and techniques which are available and have been most often successfully used for growth and post-growth alignment of 1D nanostructures will be given. Thereafter, inorganic 1D materials which are central to this review (see above) are discussed from the perspective of their selected physical properties and their usage for a variety of functional material applications or device structures. For a basic but broad coverage in the field of 1D nanostructures, the excellent current monograph on 1D inorganic nanowires by Meyyappan and Sunkara is highly recommended.2
2. Synthesis of 2D and 3D architectures composed of 1D nanostructures by the vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) growth method
The vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) growth method is the most widely used technique for the growth of inorganic 1D nanomaterials. The footprints of this method are followed way back to the year 1964, when Wagner and co-workers from Bell Labs have grown micrometre thick whiskers of silicon.3 During the growth process, gaseous precursors undergo thermal decomposition forming vapours of highly reacting species (vapour) which then dissolve into the liquidized catalyst particle (liquid) to form nanowires or nanotubes in solid form (the growth process) (Fig. 3). A similar process to the VLS process is the solution–liquid–solid (SLS) growth process, where the growth species are present in solution and the growth proceeds on a suspended metal catalyst particle (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 3  (A) Pictorial representation of the Vapour–Liquid–Solid (VLS) mechanism demonstrating the growth of 1D nanoobjects: (a) formation of reactive species in the vapour phase upon decomposition of the precursor, (b) metal catalyst species upon formation of a liquid–solid junction, (c) growth of nanowire in solid form. (B) High resolution transmission electron micrograph (HRTEM) image of the catalyst alloy–nanowire interface of a SiNW with a [111] growth axis. (C) Vertical stacks of SiNWs grown in a stepwise manner. (D) Side view of the horizontal growth as of (C) ((B) reproduced with permission from Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 433. (C) and (D) with permission from Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1100). 
 Fig. 4  Schematics exemplifying the Solution–Liquid–Solid (SLS) growth for the generation of nanowires in solution. 
For the growth of 1D nanomaterials, various kinds of substrates have been utilized (silicon, sapphire wafers, metal foils, quartz or glass substrates). The crystal structure and the orientation of the substrates often play a vital role in the growth process. It allows controlling the direction of nanowire growth which allows growth of arrays of 1D nanostructures perpendicular or inclined at a certain angle to the substrate surface. The location of the nanowire growth can easily be manoeuvred by controlling the preferred deposition of the catalyst on the surface. The size of the catalyst nanoparticle influences the 1D nano-object growth. The catalyst nanoparticles formed during the growth process can be deposited either prior to or simultaneously during the growth process. The deposition of the catalyst at a desired location can be achieved either by external masks or by position precise deposition as with e-beam lithography.4,5 The melting point of the catalyst particle is crucial for the overall nanowire deposition. Gold is the most frequently used catalyst for VLS growth. It has a high melting point, is chemically inert even under higher temperatures and allows dissolving a variety of precursor species used for the growth process. Low melting point catalysts are e.g. Ga, Bi, Sn and Te. These are typically not able to dissolve growth precursors. Nevertheless, in both growth processes either with high melting (Fig. 3) or low melting catalyst particles6 (Fig. 5 and 6) the rate determining step for nanowire growth occurs at the catalyst–substrate interface.
 Fig. 5  Schematics illustrating the VLS growth mechanism with a low-melting metal mediated growth (adopted after ref. 2). 
 Fig. 6  Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a dense tentacle growth of Bi nanowires schematically shown in Fig. 5. The wires have been growing out of a liquid gallium droplet by a low melting mediated VLS method (reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16219). 
Independent of the precursor, gold has been used as an active catalyst for the growth of silicon or germanium nanowires,7 metal oxide (ZnO, SnO2, In2O3etc.) nanowires,8–10 III–V semiconductor (GaN, GaAs, InP etc.) nanowires.11,12 With the CVD technique the growth of branched nanowires,13 core–shell or heterostructures14 of different chemical composition has also been realized. The possibility of synthesizing mixed compositions allows growth of p–n junctions with the VLS technique in just a single CVD run.15 A proper control over the growth process of the nanowires is possible by tuning the growth rate and dopant concentration. In contrast to the VLS method, the thermal vapour transport method works without a growth catalyst. The precursor is used in its solid state, and evaporates under vacuum which allows transport of the vapours to the substrate leading to a growth of 1D nanoobjects. This method has been quite often used for the growth of different morphologies of ZnO while the usage of this method for the growth of other nanostructures of different oxides such as Ga2O3 SnO216 or growth of silicon nanowires17,18 is more rare. For the growth of metal oxides, controlled supply of oxygen is crucial, since it reacts with the precursor vapours in the gas phase, leading to further nucleation of reactive species. Unique structures such as tripods or flower like structures have been reported with this technique. Nevertheless, compared to the VLS process a control over the growth and alignment of 1D nanostructures is hard to achieve with this technique.
3. Selected solution based growth methods for 1D nanomaterials
In solution based chemistry the synthesis of 1D nanostructure arrays is carried out in a solution medium either by a solution growth or by etching of a substrate. In a standard procedure, like the hydro- or solvothermal method, a solution containing metal ions and an oxidizing agent is heated with or without pressure to a desired high temperature. By depositing catalyst or seeding particles, nanostructures can thus be deposited. An oriented growth can be achieved by patterning the catalyst or adding a seeding agent on the substrate surface. With this strategy, arrays of ZnO, α-Fe2O3, SnO2, Mn3O4, VO2 have been formed on various different substrates.19–22 Band gap engineering of such oxides by adding a doping agent during the growth has been achieved and widely employed as a modification procedure. Often, nanostructures which have been deposited by this technique are semi-crystalline in nature, usually post-treatment processes are necessary to convert them into the final crystalline nanomaterials. The etching method has solely been employed for the formation of arrays of 1D silicon nanowires covered herein.21 Catalyst nanoparticles (Ag, Au, or Pt) have been deposited on crystalline silicon wafers and etched in hydrofluoric acid to form silicon nanowires (SiNWs).23,24 The catalyst particles hinder the etching of the substrate beneath them and thus SiNWs form when the peripheral part of the wafer is consumed. The length, size and the direction of the growth of an array can be designed using this technique. Electrochemistry provides yet another quite often used access for the growth of 1D nanostructures. This method can be performed as electrochemical oxidation or as direct electrochemical deposition technique. The electrochemical oxidation method is associated with the oxidation of metal foils or thin metal films into 1D self-ordered arrays of metal oxide nanostructures. The metal substrate is oxidized in an acidic medium under the influence of an electrical potential in a controlled manner. An intriguing example of this method is growth of titania nanotubes.25,26 The control over the electrochemical potential applied and the pH of the acidic medium offers control over diameter as well as length of the titania nanotubes. Similarly, 1D ZnO nanorod arrays have been deposited on gold foil by means of depositing Zn2+ ions in an electrochemical technique from a ZnCl2 solution.27 A valuable extension of the method can be obtained when deposition and growth is performed within a compartmented template structure. Template assisted techniques are discussed in the following chapter.
4. Template assisted growth of 1D nanostructures
In template assisted methods, most often porous aluminium oxide (PAOX) templates, polycarbonate (PC) and polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) based templates have been widely used for the growth of 1D nanostructures and the techniques described are state of the art in synthesizing 1D inorganic materials.28 In these templates the pores are either aligned (PAOX)28 (Fig. 7) or stochastically arranged (with PC or PMMA templates, Fig. 8), leading to a more or less ordered growth of 1D nanostructures depending on the pore arrangement of the template.
 Fig. 7  Cross-sectional view of a 3D channel array of a porous alumina template which can be used for arranging 1D nanomaterials into 3D ordered structures. (reproduced with permission from ref. 28). 
 Fig. 8  Scheme for an ion track etching process to yield a polymer template (e.g. PC or PMMA based). Heavy ions hit the PC foil and generate spurs which can be etched to form randomly oriented pores (a and b); 1D nanostructures can be synthesized in the etched tracks, e.g. by electrochemical deposition; template freed rods after complete polymer template dissolution (d). If the polymer template is not completely dissolved but leaving a polymer residue at the bottom (not shown), straight and vertically aligned 1D nanowire assemblies can be obtained. 
After the growth, one can easily dissolve the template either by an organic solvent (if the template is polymer based) or in acidic or basic medium (e.g. for PAOX) to obtain free standing arrays of nanowires or nanotubes. Both types of templates have been successfully used for the growth of arrays of carbon nanotubes,29 titania nanotubes,30 zinc oxide,31 In2O3 and Ga2O3 nanotubes,32 silicon nanowires32 and various kinds of metallic nanowires34,35 (Fig. 9). These materials will be dealt with in the upcoming paragraphs.
 Fig. 9  (A) Scheme representing the process of template assisted growth of 1D nanostructures using either PAOX, or PC as templates; (b) e.g. scanning electron micrographs showing the deposition of TiO2 inside a PAOX template top (B1) and cross-sectional view (B2). (c) 3D arranged nanoarray of TiO2 nanotubes after complete removal of the PAOX template, (c1) top view, (c2) side view. ((B and C) reproduced with permission from Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 601). 
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) or chemical vapour deposition (CVD) methods have been employed for the growth of 1D nanostructures, however chemical or electrochemical deposition techniques are also very common. In the case of PAOX the final 1D nanowire array structure must be stable either towards acid or base to dissolve the template selectively. The lateral dimension of the PAOX template nanostructure can be tailored between 20 and 200 nm. For the polymer templates a pore size tuning is more complicated because the pores are obtained by ion track etching followed by a chemical pore widening process. The pore diameter depends on the heavy ions used for the track etch process as well as the individual etching conditions. However, both template types have advantages and drawbacks. Polymer templates can be dissolved under smooth conditions in organic solvents, whereas PAOX templates are stable to more than 1000 °C and thus are widely employed in the synthesis of 1D ceramic nanostructures or carbon nanotubes. Polymer templates have been widely used for inorganic 1D structures in combination with solution processing routes.36–40 By employing electrochemical deposition techniques, core–shell nanotubes and other heterostructures have been grown inside such pores.37,41 This has been achieved by consecutive runs of individual material depositions. It has been reported that an ordered array of 1D nanowires can itself act as a template for the growth of 1D nanostructures. This has nicely been demonstrated by using an array of ZnO nanowires as a template for the growth of GaN nanotubes.42 After the growth of GaN on the surface of a ZnO array, the ZnO array was etched away to obtain standing nanotubes of GaN. Similarly, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been employed for the growth of various kinds of metal oxide nanotube structures as for CuO, Al2O3, SiO2 or V2O5 oxides.43 A complete review of synthetic techniques for the growth of 1D nanostructures is certainly beyond the scope of this review. Fig. 10 gives a compact overview of so far established methods. Again the reader is referred to the book of Meyyappan and Sunkara for further reading.1
 Fig. 10  Overview of various growth techniques for 1D nanomaterials (tubes, wires, rods) from the gas phase and solution (scheme adopted from ref. 2). 
5. Two dimensionally (2D) and three dimensionally (3D) arranged carbon nanotube architectures
With respect to an arrangement of the carbon allotropes, graphite, graphene and their spherical structures, the bucky balls, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been certainly established to show currently the highest potential for an organisation into 3D morphological carbon based entities. This can be attributed to their intrinsic well known mechanical strength as well as the synthetic pathways and a still growing knowledge leading to a better understanding of their growth characteristics which has been developed in depth over the last 10 years. These studies have allowed growth of CNTs in really anisotropic ultralong morphologies of several mm lengths. Besides that fact, CNTs are meanwhile accessible in large quantities by various synthetic techniques.44–46 Some of these methods are template assisted, some of them are catalyst driven, while others are substrate and catalyst driven.26,42 By controlling the growth process with respect to a long catalyst life e.g. by adding controlled amounts of oxygen containing molecules like water, ethers, ketones, aldehydes or alcohols the growth of macroscopic, ultralong CNTs has been realized in 2004 for the first time and immediately has boosted new application avenues of such high aspect ratio CNT structures.5,47,48 These 3D CNT structures typically display 10–15 nm inter tube spacings which are due to van der Waals interactions and inter-tube nano-capillary forces.49–51 These intertube binding effects can be deliberately used to form various geometric architectures by reversible shrinkage or entanglements of CNTs and even thicker yarn like structures of mm long CNTs. Other complex 3D architectures such as arrays of micro-flowers, cactus or volcanic cones have been achieved using porous silicon as a substrate for the growth of CNTs (Fig. 11).52
 Fig. 11  (A and B) SEM micrographs showing various morphologies of vertically aligned CNTs obtained by a structured CNT growth. (C) Schematic explaining the collapse of the structure upon wetting and drying of the CNT structures. (D–F) show different CNT structures before and after the collapse of the structure ((A and B) reproduced with permission from J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1717, (C–E) reproduced with permission from Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987 and (F) from J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5967). 
van der Waals forces between individual CNTs are the basis for using arrays of 3D oriented CNTs as artificial structures e.g. mimicking the natural gecko feet effect (Fig. 12 and 13). Successful tests have shown that for 1 mm2 of CNT surface area, such well aligned 3D CNT films support shear stresses of about 4 times that of the natural gecko feet.53
 Fig. 12  3D CNT array (tilt 70°). CNT top layer provides contact for adhesion, see Fig. 13. 
 Fig. 13  Right: a large spanner suspended from a one cm2 3D CNT sample, left: CNT sample supporting the weight of a typical textbook of ca. 1000 g (gratitude to Dr G. Keeley for photographs). 
Dense 3D arrangements of CNTs display enormous high surface areas inside and outside the tubes making them ideal candidates for catalyst supports and exploiting new avenues into nano–micro sized monolithic chemical reactors.54 Typical surface to volume ratios exceed those of microreactors by several orders of magnitude and allow attachment of catalyst particles on the individual CNT outer walls within the 3D CNT array making catalyst driven hydrogenation and C–C coupling reactions in unique flow through reactor systems with minimal footprint size possible (Fig. 14).54
 Fig. 14  (a) Nanostructured microsized 3D CNT array with dimensions matching a macroscopic handable size; (b) flexible nature of the all carbon 3D CNT; (c) microscopic (SEM) view of the 3D CNT array, height about 40 μm. The tubes are embedded between a top and bottom graphitic layer interconnecting individual nanotubes; (d) close up side view of the 3D CNT structure displaying the straight and parallel CNT arrangement (reproduced with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8958). 
When packaged in a suitable housing, the 3D CNT structure is applicable as a nanostructured reactor with a surface-to-volume-ratio two orders of magnitude higher compared to current state of the art micro reactors. This represents a significant step further towards miniaturization and integration of nanostructures into micro–macro device architectures. The high surface area and good electrical conductivity of 3D CNT structures make them an ideal candidate for lithium ion batteries,55 super capacitors49 or filters.56 3D CNT structures play a key role in miniaturization of Li-ion batteries. Such structures have served as low footprint electrode materials for highly integrated cathodes.57–59 Much in the same way as shown in Fig. 15 with a carbon micro bead electrode, bare 3D CNT arrays could be used as active electrode supports (anode side) or with an electroactive layer as a cathode side in low footprint microbattery architectures. Li-ions could be directly incorporated between individual layers of multiwall CNTs (intra tube intercalation) or deposited between isolated tubes in the voids of dense CNT arrays (inter-tube intercalation).
 Fig. 15  Schematic comparison of (a) a 2D parallel plate and (b) a concentric tube 3D battery with low areal footprint containing a 1 D anode composed of carbon microbeads (reproduced with permission from MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 523). 
The cathode side could be a 3D CNT/inorganic oxide. The challenge in this field is to include both electrodes within a narrow battery assembly. Certainly the search for small footprint architectures will continue in the future because 3D configurations offer high energy and power densities compared to lower dimensional structures. Other three dimensional designs for batteries are possible (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Three dimensional designs for prospective 3D batteries; (a) array of interdigitated cylindrical cathodes and anodes; (b) interdigitated plate array of cathodes and anodes; (c) rod array of cylindrical anodes coated with a thin layer of ion-conducting dielectric (electrolyte) with the remaining free volume filled with the cathode material; (d) a periodic “sponge” architecture in which the solid network of the sponge serves as the charge insertion cathode, which is coated with an ultrathin layer of ion-conducting dielectric (electrolyte), and the remaining free volume is filled with an interpenetrating, continuous anode (reproduced with permission from Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 226). 
Various types of filters, pressure or electro-osmotic filters can be envisaged to be made out of aligned CNT films.60 Ordered 3D CNT block structures show excellent field emission characteristics. Depending on the 3D CNT block size and the intermediate distance between individual blocks, current emissions in the order of a few tens up to hundreds of microamperes have been recorded.61,62 A very recently reported approach uses a carbon cloth as a substrate on which ZnO wires were grown and subsequently arrays of CNTs were arranged. Such a hybrid structure decreases the screening effect and achieves a large emission current density which enhances the field emission performance. The overall 3D device remains flexible due to the carbon cloth substrate on which the ZnO and CNT material are deposited.63 Aligned CNT structures possess good electrical conductivity62 in the longitudinal as well as in the lateral direction, making them potential candidates for electrical interconnects. Their thermal conductivity exceeds copper by a factor of 15 which is certainly superior for the dissipation of heat from devices compared to copper. In addition a perfect metallic like CNT material is an ideal normal electron conductor thus making them most promising in wiring applications for chip applications.
The longitudinal conductivity of CNTs is based on the electrical transport along the tubes long axes, whereas their lateral conductivity is due to sidewall interactions between two neighbouring and touching CNTs within 3D forests (Fig. 17). A synthetic hurdle for further application of 3D CNT arrays grown by thermal CVD, especially on more temperature sensitive substrates, is the ability to grow them at lower temperature, 350 °C being currently the lower limit realized.64,65 An alternative approach to the thermal CVD growth process is to grow CNTs using plasma enhanced CVD under ambient conditions. This method allows growth of CNTs inside the grooves and holes of temperature sensitive substrates or cover them with non-conductive oxide layers for application in micro-electronic interconnects.66,67 3D arrays of CNT blocks have been employed to transfer heat to thermally cool, small integrated chips68 or for an efficient cooling of light emitting diodes to increase their lifetime.69 Laser etched CNT heat transfer fins have been found to exhibit a thermal cooling effect as good as copper.68 The CNTs used for this purpose consist of 10 to 90 nm diameter CNTs. The cooling effect or the thermal conductivity of the CNT film can be increased by narrowing down this diameter distribution as it is known that the thermal conductivity is strongly dependent on the diameter of the carbon nanotubes.70 In order to make use of the excellent thermal conductivity of carbon nanotubes, two CNT films, one made up of aligned and one of entangled carbon nanotubes, have been incorporated for a thermal energy harvesting cell. The test cell delivers a Carnot cycle efficiency of 1.5% over days of operation and is three times higher that of the standard thermal cells.71 As grown single walled carbon nanotube films have been compiled with gold electrodes to form Au–CNT thermocouples which are used in MEMs device structures72 and have achieved Seebeck coefficients up to 18–20 μV C−1. CNTs, due to their fast electron transfer rate and electro catalytic effects, are known to be ideal candidates for various sensing modules. 3D CNT block structures have been investigated for various gas- or bio-sensor applications. 3D CNT forests have been studied for gas sensing applications via a gas ionization detection. With aligned CNT films as an anode and a metal plate as a counter cathode electrode, various gases have been detected by measuring their ionization potential at certain gas pressures.73–75 3D CNT films which are coated with different polymers show good sensitivity against NH3 and NO2.76 Although high gas sensing sensitivities are known for CNT-field effect transistor (FET) devices,77,78 CNT sensor devices using an ionization detection mechanism are able to detect non-polar gases such as He or Ar along with polar gases such as NH3 or NOx.74 Carbon nanotube block arrays embedded in epoxy are composite materials which act as electrochemical sensors.79–81 Using cyclic voltammetry, micron sized blocks of 3D aligned CNTs are able to detect single chemical species, depicting again their high sensitivity for chemical and biological sensing. Lin et al. have demonstrated the usage of such structures for glucose sensing.82 In terms of bio-sensing, CNT arrays can be functionalized by nucleic acids to detect biomolecules83as well as sensors for DNA detection.84,85 In terms of optical properties, CNT arrays have been coupled with other n-type material to function as IR-radiation detectors86 or such oriented CNT films behave as perfect black body absorbers.87,88 Alike sensors, oriented CNT array structures have been successfully engineered into various types of actuators. A straightforward electrochemical actuator has been studied by using a 4 mm long CNT block against the Ag/AgCl electrode. It actuates up to 10 Hz with 0.15% strain for an applied voltage as small as two volts.89 Grown in proper arrangements, such aligned CNT arrays can form arrays of actuators.90 MEMS cantilevers based solely on such 3D CNT arrays as small as 100 to 200 nm in width have been made. As grown CNT films can be stretched to form thin transparent films of horizontally aligned carbon nanotubes.91–93 Such sheets are mainly formed by drawing entangled CNTs from their arranged films. These sheets have a few microns of cross-sectional thickness compared to their macro longitudinal dimensions and were capable of supporting masses about 50000 times higher than that of their own.93 Such sheets or yarns have been illuminated to generate illuminated polarized, incandescent light or can be used for microwave enhanced plastic welding.91,94 Other device options which have been realized are thin film loudspeaker devices which operate in air95 or even under the water.96 In both cases, the effect is derived by a thermo-acoustic phenomenon. Under water the effect is further enhanced by the hydrophobic nature of CNTs which let a thin layer of air envelope boosting the efficiency of the device.96 Stretched CNT sheets drawn from aligned CNTs can be turned and twisted to form a yarn or a fibre to be used as a mechano-electrical force sensor.97 Thin CNT films stretched in a proper way on a polymer film work as strain sensors to record human activities such as jumping, bending or squatting.98 Blocks of entangled CNTs have been grown several millimetres long and were tested for their visco-elastic properties in the temperature range from −196 to 1000 °C.99 Viscoelastic properties were present over a wide temperature range from −150 to 600 °C which is due to a continuous zipping and unzipping behaviour of neighbouring CNTs in the individual blocks. Related to this, experimental micro-compression tests on 50 mm vertically grown CNT arrays as well as theoretical calculations on uniaxial compression on such structures have been performed. As a result of both, a sequential periodic buckling has been observed when such a uniaxial compression is applied100 (Fig. 18). Vertical compression ability of 3D aligned CNT arrays has been used to drive a tactile sensor device which uses mechanical deformations in which the CNT–metal contact resistance (a) and the electronic band structure (b) of the 3D CNT array are important101 (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 17  Left side: schematic view of a 3D aligned CNT interconnect. Right side: scanning electron micrograph of a 3D CNT wire array obtained via a CVD technique (reproduced with permission from Microelectron. Eng., 2002, 64, 399). 
 Fig. 18  An array of compressed and uncompressed 50 μm high pillars of 3D vertically aligned CNT arrays with inset showing a magnified image of an as grown pillar; (b) typical stress strain curve for uniaxial compression of a single bundle of CNTs; (c) buckled morphology present in a 3D CNT pillar after compression and recovery; (d) a stress strain plot taken at four different strain rates. (For more information see Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2338, all figures reproduced with permission therefrom.) 
 Fig. 19  Mechanical deformations in 3D CNT tactile sensor element might result in a change of the electronic band structure and/or a CNT–metal contact resistance. Left side: contact of CNTs with the neighboring CNTs might occur. Right side: bending of individual CNTs inside a 3D CNT block, schematically shown. This affects the electronic band structure of the CNTs in the block structure. 
Electrical contacting of the CNT array was achieved by a series of micro contact processing steps. The pressure sensitivity was measured with a Frey-hair filament which defines artificial hairy structures used to measure pressure points on the human skin and allow detection of their stimulus threshold.102 The local and spatial sensitivities of the 3D CNT array were measured close to the sensitive area of the nano-pressure sensor array. The used Frey-filament buckled at a defined force of 32 mN and this force was applied to the nano-pressure sensor multiple times to ensure reproducibility (Fig. 20). The defined force of 32 mN leads to a resistance decrease of about 0.7 kΩ at an initial resistance of 12.7 kΩ corresponding to a relative change of 6%.101
 Fig. 20  Left side: frey-hair impingement on the surface of a single 3D CNT nano-pressure sensor. The entire demonstrator has a size of about 2.5 mm2 (5 mm × 5 mm) and comprises twelve units of 4 × 4 individually contacted sensor elements. Right side: optimized wiring of the CNT pressure sensor elements: (a) CNT contacts; (b) vertical aligned CNTs; (c) top wiring; (d) bottom wiring (perpendicular to top wiring) (reproduced with permission from Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 085501). 
Additional inspiring actuation and sensing properties based on arranged CNTs architectures are given in Fig. 21. A more general view into tactile sensing with organized nanostructures can be found in a review by Maheswari and Saraf.102
 Fig. 21  (A) Electron micrograph showing a CNT film supported on Si pillars. The Si morphology can act as a base structure to form micro-electro mechanical systems. To the left: top image shows a source–drain–gate combination of a CNT based actuator, bottom image shows a cantilever position in ON and OFF states. (B) Arrays of such actuators. (C) 2D CNT films stretched between two copper electrodes to form a device (D) and their application to generate sound under water. (E) Horizontally grown CNTs forming a 2D aligned CNT film. Below it schematic showing a device configuration and SEM image of the same device and (F) optical images of a SWNT device formed on a transparent flexible PET substrate. ((A and B) reproduced with permission from Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 298, (C and D) from Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2374, (E and F) from Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 230). 
Two dimensional horizontally aligned thin films of CNT have been integrated into flexible electrical circuits delivering a high performance output.103–106 The most effective method to grow 2D CNTs thin films for such an application is either the thermal CVD technique using methane as a precursor molecule103 or plasma assisted CVD66,107 under ambient conditions using a sub-nanometre thin layer of iron metal as a catalyst103or while on the other hand CNTs can be arranged on a substrate by π–π stacking104 forming 2D networks. TFT devices based on such structures show performance with an on/off ratio as high as 900000,104 switching speeds in a kilohertz range,104 good mechanical stability and operative voltage in the range of 5 to 10 V. These devices based on 2D thin films of CNT can be miniaturized on silicon substrates as well as flexible transparent polymer sheets. For further reading into this topic the interested reader is referred to the review article by Hu et al.108
6. Two dimensional (2D) and three dimensional (3D) silicon nanowire architectures
During the last decade, silicon nanowires (SiNWs) have gained extensive attention. The growth processes along with an introduction on widely used catalysts and precursors for the synthesis of SiNWs arrays will be discussed first, before giving a detailed insight into recent developments exemplifying integrating SiNW arrays into various energy, electronics and sensing oriented nanowire architectures.
Like CNTs, SiNWs can be synthesized with different diameter, and length and arranged on a variety of substrates. For the synthesis of SiNWs, epitaxial chemical vapour deposition (CVD) and the VLS technique have been employed most widely.13,109,110 In the latter method, growth of SiNWs can be catalysed using numerous different metal catalysts like Cu,7,111 Al,112,113 Ni,114,115 Fe,115,116 Ti,117 Sn118 and Au which is the most frequently employed.7,13,109 Various low melting metal catalysts with good solubility for Si catalyse SiNW growth at a temperature as low as 500 °C.119 When employing thermal CVD, SiH4 or SiCl4, the latter in combination with hydrogen gas are the most commonly used precursors. As dopants, boron, aluminium or phosphorous containing compounds have been employed. Other methods used for the growth of SiNWs are laser ablation,17,115 alumina template assisted growth33,120 and chemical etching of Si-substrates (Fig. 22).23,121,122
 Fig. 22  Scanning electron micrographs of SiNWs grown using (A) the VLS method using Al as catalyst, (B) by the CVD method, (C) by chemical etching, (D) branched SiNW structure grown in a two step growth process, (E) SiNWs patterned on the Si substrate using the Langmuir–Blodgett method, (F) TFTs based on an aligned SiNW thin film, (G) SiNWs deposited between source and drain ((A) reproduced with permission from Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 186; (B) from Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93 1568–1571; (C) from ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3222; (D) from J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5376; (E) from Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1255; (F and G) from Nature, 2003, 425, 274). 
In the synthesis process of laser ablation or in the thermal transport method, a mixture of Si powder and a suitable metal catalyst are typical starting materials. The chemical etching technique uses metal catalyst particles of Au, Cu, Ag or Pt.122 With this technique, SiNW arrays can be grown. The individual wires are either vertically aligned or inclined at a certain angle to the substrate even up to wafer size which has been shown to be attractive for sensing applications.123
Silicon nanowires are extensively employed in various electronic, sensing and energy applications. As grown semiconducting SiNWs can be deposited at predefined locations in the vertical as well as in the horizontal direction.124–126 Vertically grown SiNWs have been selectively functionalized and transferred to other substrates to form 2D thin films of ordered SiNWs. Therefore SiNWs can be transferred mechanically directly to the substrate from the original growth substrate by a dry transfer process.127 Another technique uses a contact printing process,128 in which transfer of SiNWs nanowires has been achieved on a chemically modified substrate surface to ease the transfer of the nanowires. Such a chemical functionalization of SiNWs has been reported with amine groups and allows a dispersion of SiNWs in aqueous media. SiNWs have been transferred onto a silicon substrate or on gold electrodes as negatively charged self-assembled monolayers.129 Large area 2D thin films of horizontally aligned SiNWs have been obtained by a surfactant assisted route in which SiNWs suspended in non-polar solvents containing surface active molecules can be transferred by the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique.130 Such a transfer however in the dry state and from one substrate to another has also been achieved by embedding SiNWs in a polymethylmethacrylate (PDMS) polymer film.110 As the peeled off polymer–SiNW composite film is flexible in nature, a transfer onto a flexible substrate surface seems possible.
SiNWs arrays have been extensively used for developing Si based FET electronic and photonic properties into new avenues. Thin films made up of horizontally aligned single crystalline SiNWs have served as light weight and flexible, high speed electrical circuits.131–133 Macro-electronic devices based on thin films of 2D ordered SiNWs show exceptionally high charge carrier mobilities (119 cm2 V−1 s−1) and high on/off ratio (in the order of 108) which are close to the values obtained from poly-silicon FETs.133
In dense and aligned arrays of SiNWs, single nanowires have been electrically addressed using a demultiplexing technique.134 This technique could be advantageous to demonstrate high density integrated logic or memory circuits. On SiNWs arrays CdS or GaN nanowires have been deposited to generate p–n junctions which show electroluminescence.132 As grown vertically aligned SiNWs have been directly employed to develop vertically aligned and integrated nanowire FET devices135 (Fig. 23). An amorphous SiO2 layer was deposited on vertically grown SiNWs which serve as a gate, while the base substrate and top contact acting as source and drain electrodes. Such devices based on aligned arrays of SiNWs have proven to be competitive with other solid state devices in the sub 10 nm regime. Arrays of SiNWs transistors have been extensively used for bio-sensing applications. Arrays of FETs based on thin films of 2D ordered SiNWs have been introduced for extracting electrical signals from various biological entities viz. heart cells,136,137 neuronal cells138 or thin brain slices,139 cancer markers140 or shown to be able to detect single viruses.141 An axon on a neuronal cell which is grown on a parallel array of SiNW-FETs helps to understand the fate of propagation of electrical signals through the axon itself (Fig. 24) and offers new possibilities for neuronal prosthetics.142
 Fig. 23  Schematics showing the set-up of a tactile sensor design using Si nanowires. (B) Optical image of the same. (C) Schematics explaining the vertical FET using Si-nanowires and (D) electron micrographs of vertical FET made up of Si-nanowire itself ((A and B) reproduced with permission from Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 821; (C) and (D) from Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 973). 
 Fig. 24  (a) Vertical silicon nanowire electrode arrays (VNEAs) for interrogating neuronal networks. Dimensions of the nanowire electrodes were designed to facilitate single cell intracellular electrical coupling. (d) shows a cortical rat cell (false yellow colored) on top of a VNEA pad. (b, c, e, f) show recording pads for parallel multi site interrogation and neuronal rat cells cultured on a VNEA device (see Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 180, figures reproduced with permission therefrom). 
The signal propagation delay across the axon length as well as speed of propagation was studied. Vertically arranged Si nanowire electrode arrays have been shown to act as a scalable platform for intracellular interfacing to neuronal circuits. Such platforms allow growth of cells and offer multiple stimulation/recording sites for neuronal activities. Due to their planar structures such micro sized structures might be incorporable into implantable electrodes and offer new possibilities for neuronal prosthetics.142
Arrays of SiNWs have been used to detect protein cancer markers. Interestingly, negatively charged proteins lead to a change in electrical conductance in both n and p-type FET devices either by accumulation or by depletion of charge carriers in such a device. The device works accurately for as low as femto-molar concentrations thus allowing highly sensitive detection of prostate specific antigen.140 Similar arrays of SiNW-FETs have been used for the measurement of cardio-electricity.136,137 The recorded peak signal is composed of two peaks and further experiments reveal that the first peak recorded is a transient ion-channel peak. All the signals recorded have excellent signal to noise ratios, making this method optimal for future experiments on heart cell related studies including drug testing and discovery. SiNWs active semiconductor materials in FET arrays have been modified using antibodies demonstrating the capability of single virus detection. The detection is caused by the field effect and by modifying SiNWs in different FETs with different antibodies, it was shown that such a device is able to detect different ranges of viruses at the same time.141 In addition to biosensing, arrays of transistors developed from horizontally aligned SiNWs have been envisaged for futuristic chemical,143,144 tactile145 or image sensors.146,147 Arrays of aligned SiNWs transferred onto flexible substrates do show good chemical sensitivity and their sensitivity was further fine tuned using various functional groups. Detection of acetone, hexane or NO2144 has been performed. Aligned 2D networks of SiNW-FET structures have also been explored. They serve as fascinating artificial skin to mimic tactile sensing (e-skin). In this approach SiNWs were transferred onto polyimide and were cross contacted by various aligned source-drain electrodes forming numerous well aligned SiNW-FET devices. The conductance of these FETs tends to alter upon the application of mechanical pressure as the conductance of pressure sensitive rubber changes leading to a change in the source current. The device showed a nominal change in functional characteristics even after 2000 operation cycles. Optical as well as image sensing device configurations have been constructed with a combination of arrays of SiNWs with other nanomaterials. CdSe nanowires have been introduced into hybrid circuitries of Ge/Si NW-FET arrays and by doing so the photocurrent generated by CdSe nanowires could be multiplied by at least five fold, achieving a sensitive response.146 Instead of such CdSe nanowires, Wong et al. miniaturized an image sensor by using aligned SiNW-FET arrays in connection with an amorphous silicon p–n junction photodiode.147 Such kind of devices unleash the real potential of 2D aligned nanowire networks as well as their potential application in various future technological fields.
Prospects for future utilization of 1D SiNW arrays for generating photoelectricity in photovoltaics are certainly high. The p–n junction necessary for the formation of solar cells has been realized employing different techniques. In most cases, p–n junctions have been developed by in situ growth of SiNWs,148–150 by growth of p-type SiNWs on n-type substrates or vice versa,151–154 by depositing polycrystalline or amorphous silicon layer on SiNWs,155,156 by heterojunction formation157–160 or by photo-electrochemical routes.161 Again the VLS method has allowed growth of SiNWs with proper element doping (P or B) on silicon substrates to form p–n junctions.149 In p-type Si wafers, SiNWs have been synthesized by chemical etching techniques followed by excessive doping with n-type dopants to generate p–n junctions.150,162 In addition to this, the substrate on which SiNWs have been etched has also been doped with Al or B to further reduce the resistance of such a device. Such p–n junctions formed in monocrystalline wafers deliver power conversion efficiencies as high as 9.31%. The output efficiency tends to increase by about 20% provided that SiNW arrays are grown in the slant direction rather than perpendicular to the substrate.154 The improvement in the overall device performance is also attributed to the anti-reflection property of the SiNW arrays as well as their better electrical contact in the cell geometry. A combination of micro and tapered SiNWs has been used to further reduce the reflectance of a solar cell based on these 1D nanomaterials.163 The efficiency can be further boosted by reducing the internal contact resistance by forming N+ doped regions at the tips of SiNWs and by depositing SiNx thin layers.164 Another technique to accomplish p–n junctions with SiNW arrays is to deposit a thin layer of polycrystalline156 or amorphous155 silicon on such arrays. If the SiNW arrays are p-type, the silicon thin layer can be enriched using an n-type dopant or vice versa. By this technique, and by employing an amorphous thin layer of p doped Si (40 nm in thickness) it delivers an output efficiency of 12% at 690 nm.155 Due to the thin layer of amorphous silicon, the optical reflectance of the solar cell drops by two orders of magnitude. N-doped SiNWs have been deposited together with p-type poly-3,4-ethylenedioxy-thiophene (PEDOT) polymers. The hybrid heterojunction shows a maximum efficiency of 32% at 700 nm wavelength. Similarly, CNTs in mesh form have been deposited on a SiNW array to build up a solar cell,160 coupling of SiNWs with a platinum counter electrode in a photo-electrochemical solar cell has also been achieved.161 Apart from this, SiNWs have been directly combined with platinum nanoparticles159 or TiO2 nanoparticles158 to boost the output efficiency of the solar cell. However in neither case, much improvement over the standard cells was achieved thus output efficiency and p–n junctions based on silicon structures still remain the favourite choice so far. SiNWs have also been considered for thermoelectric applications.165–168 In SiNWs the mean free path of electrons as charge carriers is much smaller than that of phonons at room temperature165 making SiNWs a good candidate to achieve high figures of merit (ZT). SiNWs have also been investigated as anode electrode materials for Li-ion batteries,169,170 as field emitter cathodes in cold cathode field emission171 or to enhance the heat transfer.172 At first sight silicon seems to be no ideal material for Li-ion batteries since it undergoes up to 400% of volume expansion upon lithiation.173 However, due to their small diameter, their large aspect ratio and their high conductivity when appropriately doped, Li nanowire arrays show much better performance as battery anode material than bulk Si. In addition it can withstand stresses due to volume variations occurring from Li cycling.173 This behaviour is superior for Si nanowire arrays compared to films or particles of Si, the latter tend to deteriorate severely after battery cycling (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  Schematic drawing showing the influence of silicon morphology on the morphological integrity of a Si electrode. The volume expansion leading to severe anode structure deformation for the different Si morphologies: Si film vs. particles vs. 3D nanowire array is shown (reproduced with permission from Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31). 
Due to a possible doping of SiNWs to control their conductivity, regular arrays of dense SiNWs will certainly have a future impact on these and other applications like e.g. optoelectronics where doping has an impact on performance.174
SiNW arrays of different diameter have been coupled to realize data saving applications or as colour filters for different image sensors.
Summarizing, SiNWs, with their broad synthesis spectrum by employing various growth techniques, their ease of doping, inherent semiconducting properties as high mobility, will remain a multifaceted material for unique applications in the future.
7. Integration of 1D metal oxide nanostructures
Materials of modern day microelectronics are interesting to sustain high power densities, they can exhibit superconductivity, colossal magneto resistance or ferromagnetism as well as piezoelectricity to name just a few important ones.175,176 In the field of semiconducting nanomaterials inorganic 1D structures offer the possibility to combine interesting material composition with the possibilities to structure these materials anisotropically. Currently there is an intense search for new semiconducting materials for FET applications as well as gate dielectric materials. Various inorganic nanomaterials of oxides have thus been synthesized and these will be pioneering materials for complementary metal oxide semiconductor and CMOS technologies.177 With the use of various growth techniques (see Fig. 10), these materials can be deposited in high purity at a nanometre scale.176 In this part of the review paper, semiconductor oxide nanomaterials will be scrutinized from the perspective of their electronic and sensing applications. Along with ZnO and TiO2, being probably the two most broadly studied metal oxides, other popular oxides like V2O5, Cu2O, NiO, Fe2O3 and WO3 will be reviewed with respect to their 1D structures and integration of these into higher organized 3D architectures.
7.1 Integration of 1D zinc oxide nanostructures
Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a binary (II–VI) compound which has been studied intensively as emerging material for optoelectronic applications, blue (UV) light emission as well as for transparent and printable electronics, piezoelectric or sensor applications. ZnO with wurtzite crystal structure has substantial covalent bonding character.178 Most of its applications depend on its electronic wide band gap of 3.37 eV179 making it transparent in the visible region of light. Its piezoelectric nature has been the base for various transducer functions. Zinc oxide can be grown employing various techniques resulting in a variety of different morphologies. ZnO nanowires are accessible using physical (magnetron sputtering, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE),180 PLD181) and chemical (metal–organic (MO)-CVD,182 catalysed epitaxial growth183,184) deposition techniques as well as by solution techniques18,185,186 (Fig. 26). The solution route has been widely employed for the growth of 1D ZnO nanorods. During vapour phase growth, a thin layer of gold from which the gold particles form upon heating is used to catalyse the growth of ZnO nanorods,183,185 however other metal particles have also been used.184 In-depth information on the background of these growth processes has been reported.184,187–189 3D aligned arrays of ZnO nanorods have been grown on metallic zinc foil,184 glass substrates186as well as on Si or sapphire substrates.183
 Fig. 26  Electron micrographs showing various growth morphologies of organized ZnO nanostructures on different substrates. (A and B) ZnO nanowires on Kevlar fibers, (C) on a pre-etched Si substrate, (D) on GaN micro pyramids, (E) on a GaN substrate, (F) on quartz glass; and (G and H) on different crystal planes of ZnO itself. ((A and B) reproduced with permission from Nature, 451, 809; (C, E, G, H) from Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 33, (D) from J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 941 and (F) from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2378). 
Interestingly, different facial crystal planes of GaN have also been used for hetero-epitaxial growth of arranged ZnO forests with various architectures.190,191 The piezoelectric effect of 1D ZnO arrays has been used to deduce various nanoscale devices for power scavenging or transducer applications. Recently, a composite fabric having bristles of 1D ZnO nanowire arrays and a core of Kevlar fibre has been studied for energy scavenging through light body movements.192 Using the hydrothermal approach, ZnO nanowires were grown on the Kevlar fibre. Upon a slight movement, as an outcome of their piezoelectric effect, these nanowires due to stretching and brushing convert the movement into electrical energy. The output power for such a fabric is expected to be 6 to 14 mW m−2 which is considered to be enough to drive a small device such as an MP3 player.193 Other reports on 1D ZnO structures report on the conversion of mechanical vibrations into electricity by a piezoelectric effect.194–196 A fully flexible and transparent nanogenerator has been obtained by growing ZnO nanowires on a graphene film.197 1D ZnO arrays which were grown by a PAOX template assisted method198 and 1D ZnO deposited on CNT arrays depict a similar piezoelectric effect.199
One dimensional nanostructures of ZnO have been employed for optical and electroluminescence applications due to their high excitation binding energy of 60 meV.200 An optically pumped laser, based on ZnO nanowires, has been already demonstrated.31,183,201 On the other hand, heterostructures of ZnO nanowires grown on different kinds of substrates have been tested for light emission properties.27,202,203 ZnO nanowires grown on gold foil and PEDOT:PSS polymer film show emission covering the broad spectral range of 500–1100 nm.27 The same heterostructure built on n-type gallium nitride film has been studied and claimed to show light emission starting from UV edge till 748 nm.203 Similarly ZnO nanowires synthesized on ITO substrates were coupled with NPB polymers and this composite emits in the UV region.202 This approach can be a solution for two problems; need of n-type semiconductors for organic LEDs and a current lack of reproducible p-type ZnO which remains still a technological challenge.204 An array of n-type ZnO nanowires grown on p-type GaN shows good electroluminescence even at a reverse bias of 3 V.205 Apart from this, arrays of ZnO nanowires were modified using methyl viologen to develop a fast switching electrochromic display.206 The display show a memory effect that lasts for 1 h or it can be switched rapidly between coloured and bleached state by applying a 2 V square wave. Arrays of ZnO nanowires have been reported to be a substitute for TiO2 nanotubes in dye sensitized solar cells.207–210 In comparison to the output efficiency of TiO2 nanowires as photoactive material, the present overall efficiency for ZnO is only about 1.5%. The primary limiting factor for such a low efficiency is claimed to be the low surface area of the TiO2 nanowires.209,210 With a proper match of photosensitive dye one can increase the photon conversion efficiency of about 5.3% which is however still much less than that of DSSC based 1D TiO2 nanostructures. However development of high performance TiO2 morphologies for photoconversion applications has taken several decades to achieve the current champion efficiencies of 10%. Similar as for TiO2 nanotubes, the output efficiency for 1D ZnO materials in solar cells is also strongly dependent on the length of the nanowires.208,209,211 In order to increase the efficiency, intense efforts to dope ZnO nanowires by various group III metals such as indium,212 gallium213 or tin213have been undertaken. p-type ZnO wires have been realized using N2O214 or Zn3P2215 as a doping agent. Zinc atoms have been substituted by magnesium atoms forming composite MgxZn1−xO nanowires.216,217 As grown ZnO nanowires have been decorated with other inorganic nano-materials to improve their photocatalytic efficiency. Hexagonal ZnO nanowires have been grown on thin films of TiO2 (P 25 Degussa) nanoparticles, leading to a photo-conversion efficiency of 2.15%.218 Another approach to increase the photoconversion efficiency is to build ZnO–TiO2 (core–shell) structures. An optimized thickness of the shell pushes the conversion efficiency to 2.25%.219 Instead of a TiO2 shell, a ZnS shell leads to a slightly higher efficiency.220 The increase in the performance is supported by the fact that the shell layer reduces the extent of surface defects and thereby reducing the recombination effects of the electron–hole charge carriers. Other studies report on aligned ZnO nanowires decorated with CdSe quantum dots.221 In spite of this there was not much improvement in the conversion efficiency observed. An alternative approach combines n-type ZnO nanowires with various p-type materials to form the heterojunction for efficient trapping of solar light. The p-type semiconductors can be either an inorganic material such as Cu2O, CuSCN, or an organic material such as polythiophene.222–225 However, the conversion efficiency for these kinds of solar cells is comparable to that of DSSC solar cells and lies in the range of 2% to 2.3%.223 The on-going search for finding properly matching p-type inorganic materials and the still on-going search for stable p-type ZnO nanostructures is thus understandable.
ZnO has a high electron mobility making it an ideal candidate for thin film transistor (TFT) devices. ZnO nanowires are intrinsically n-type semiconductors and one can generate thin films of aligned 1D ZnO nanowires. Synthetic methods can be classified into two main classes; the first one is the transfer process and the second one is the horizontal growth process. In the first process, 1D nanowires were grown on a substrate or in solution and are transferred on a new substrate with the help of roll transfer,226,227 stamping,228 spin coating229 or drop casting.230,231 In the roll transfer method ZnO nanowires were lifted off from the growth substrates with a PDMS pad and transferred to a desired substrate. Alternatively ZnO nanorods were either synthesized in solution or transferred into the solution after growth on a substrate. They were then drop casted on a FET substrate. Alternatively, ZnO nanowires were directly grown on contact electrodes using solution processing or thermal deposition techniques.8,232–235 FETs developed in that way using aligned ZnO structures are photosensitive in nature,232,236 depict a high electron mobility and an enhanced on/off ratio in the order 104 to 105 depending on the channel length and nanowire density in the channel.228,230 With both methods, transfer and in situ growth; arrays of ZnO-FETs can be fabricated, which might be an ideal way for inexpensive large area electronic applications.228,230,233 Arrays of 1D ZnO nanowires have been employed for various kinds of sensing applications. ZnO is biocompatible and thus is a good candidate for bio-sensors. Recently, various forms of nanostructured ZnO were used as a DNA sensor to differentiate genetic variants of Bacillus bacteria.237,238 The detection was based on the fluorescence detection capability of ZnO and was able to detect concentrations at the lower femtomolar level without any chemical or biological amplification.237,238 The same technique allows detection of cancer cells in serum by arrays of ZnO nanowires on glass substrates.239 ZnO nanowire based electrochemical sensors have been utilized to detect the glucose level in human as well as in frog cells.240 An array of single crystal ZnO nanorods which were grown on silver coated borosilicate glass performs as an electrode. The same electrode also performs as a pH measurement device in human fat cells.241 Enzyme coated ZnO nanorods are able to exhibit potential differences in the glucose level.240,242 Their detection limit can be boosted by using ZnO nanorod arrays grown on the gate region of an AlGaN/GaN high electron mobility structure.243 For further information of ZnO based electrochemical sensors the reader is referred to a recent review article.204 ZnO arrays have been intensively studied for gas sensing applications. The aligned ZnO arrays grown on different substrates were contacted by using metal contact pads, forming either Schottky244 or Ohmic contacts, and were subjected to various gas environments. ZnO nanowire arrays show good sensitivity against few or few hundreds of ppm of hydrogen (H2),185,245 ammonia (NH3),185,246 carbon monoxide (CO)185 or ethanol (C2H5OH).244,247 In most of the cases, the measurement is carried out at higher temperature (250 to 300 °C) and regeneration time was in the range of a couple of minutes.185,246 The regeneration time can be further reduced under an air or oxygen atmosphere following the analyte gas.245 In a recent review work on functionalized ZnO, GaN, and InN nanowires as hydrogen gas and biological sensors, the use of ZnO nanowire arrays with polymers in inorganic–organic hybrid LEDs has been reported (for ZnO nanowires see Fig. 24). For biological sensing, examples of the detection of lactic acid and glucose by ZnO nanowires were also described (Fig. 27).
 Fig. 27  Schematic cross-sectional view of the glucose sensor device based on ZnO nanorod gated high electron mobility transistor structure (top); and drain current change for different concentrations of glucose dissolved in the PBS buffer solution (bottom) (adopted and redrawn from IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2011, 17, 1092). 
Arrays of 1D ZnO nanowires exhibit excellent cold cathode field emission behaviour.248–250 An emission of 1 mA cm−2 can be reached for ZnO nanowires grown on carbon cloth with electric onset fields as low as 0.7 V μm−1.249 However, reports suggest that doping increases the conductivity of ZnO nanowires reducing the turn on fields required for the field emission.250 Recent studies implicate that 1D ZnO nanowire arrays increase the mass sensitivity of microbalance crystals,251 help to identify varying pH values and are furthermore expected to be a promising material for next generation photonic devices.252
7.2 Spatially oriented titanium dioxide nanostructures
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is probably one of the most researched oxide materials due to its outstanding properties in photocatalysis and as photoactive nanomaterial in dye sensitized solar cells. The photoactivity of titania is strongly phase dependent and the two major phases studied are the anatase and rutile polymorphs. The anatase polymorph has a slightly higher band gap and shows a higher photoactivity than rutile. In the context of this review, arrays of titania nanotubes and nanowires are discussed. Titanium dioxide nanotubes have been synthesized using electrochemical oxidation25,253,254 (Fig. 26) or hydrothermal method.255–257 However, the latter method offers unordered nanotubes with relatively low aspect ratio255 and with length extending to a maximum of 1 μm.257 On the other hand, TiO2 nanotubes with relatively high aspect ratio (>50) and high spatial order were first synthesized using the electrochemical oxidation method, discussed earlier. Their length can be easily tuned from a few microns up to hundreds of microns by varying the oxidation time.26,258 The same technique can be further modified to grow TiO2 nanotube arrays by oxidizing titanium metal films deposited on several other substrates viz. Si-wafer,259 borosilicate glass,260,261 or on indium tin oxide (ITO) films.254 Recently other studies have demonstrated the formation of TiO2 nanotubes inside the pores of PAOX templates.30,262,263 In terms of length and diameter of TiO2 nanotubes, 1000 μm264,265 and 350 nm266are the largest recorded values, respectively. Vertically aligned arrays of TiO2 nanotubes were meticulously investigated in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC),267,268 for water splitting269–271and for heterojunction solar cells.272,273 In order to build up a solar cell, TiO2 nanotube arrays were directly grown on transparent conducting electrodes or transferred onto it by selectively detaching the TiO2 wires from the Ti foil.274 The primary studies deduce the photo-conversion efficiency in a range of 2% to 3% and it took another decade of intense research to double such values.260,267,268 Numerous efforts have been put forth to tune the band gap of TiO2 nanotubes into the visible range. The red shift was achieved by doping the as synthesized TiO2 nanotubes using doping agents such as carbon,275 nitrogen,276 chromium277etc., by intercalation of small atoms such as hydrogen or lithium278,279 as well as by forming nanotubes of binary metal alloys of titanium and copper,269 iron280 and niobium.281 Cu–Ti–O nanotubes have been shown to depict p-type characteristic behaviour. Such kind of nanotubes upon coupling with normal n-type TiO2 nanotubes form a heterojunction to effectively harvest solar energy or generate hydrogen by a water splitting reaction269 (Fig. 28). The highest photo-conversion efficiency for the photo-cleavage of water with TiO2 nanotubes is currently 6.8%.271 Under solar light, TiO2 nanotube arrays decorated with Cu or Pt nanoparticles successfully convert CO2 and water into methane gas with a conversion rate at least 20 times higher than that of previous reports.282 TiO2 nanotubes and poly(3-hexylthiophen-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) polymer form a heterojunction solar cell which converts photon energies from the visible and the infrared region into electricity.272,273 The total output efficiency in this case was 3.8%; comparable to that of DSSCs.273
 Fig. 28  (A and B) Scanning electron micrographs of titania nanotubes synthesized using anodic oxidation of Ti foil. (C) Schematic drawing of a p–n junction composed of Cu doped titania nanotubes and bare titania nanotubes forming a semiconductor device for hydrogen generation. (D) Schematics explaining the hydrocarbon (methane) production using titania nanotubes. (E) Plot showing hydrocarbon generation using Pt and Cu loaded titania nanotubes ((A) reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1113, (B) from Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12445, (C) from Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1906 and (D and E) from Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 731). 
Similar to TiO2 nanotubes, TiO2 nanowires have been synthesized using various growth techniques. TiO2 nanowires can be single or polycrystalline in nature. TiO2 nanowires have been grown in using PAOX templates283,284 or on different kinds of substrates using the VLS technique,285,286 hydrothermal processing287,288 physical vapour deposition process289 or the thermal evaporation method.290,291 The as grown nanowires are 20 to 100 nm in diameter and grow to a length of 5 to 10 μm. TiO2 nanowires show often oxygen vacancies on the surface leading to a yellow photo luminescence (PL).285,290,291 TiO2 nanowires can be grown on metal foil or on the ITO glass to directly incorporate them in dye synthesized solar cells (DSSC).287,288 Most often the titania anatase phase was studied for DSSC applications, however TiO2 nanowires with rutile phase do also give commendable energy conversion efficiencies.292 In either case, the photo-conversion efficiency of compact TiO2 nanowires is not much different than that of TiO2 nanotubes.288,292 More complex morphologies such as TiO2–SiO2 core–shell structures or TiO2–CdSe heterojunctions have been formed during the initial growth or by post-growth processing.286,289 Ordered 1D TiO2 nanostructures are used in energy harvesting applications and various kinds of sensing, catalytic as well as for biological applications.293–295 Alike various metal ion decorated TiO2 thin films, TiO2 nanotube arrays depict excellent hydrogen gas sensing when contacted with platinum electrodes.296 Studies reveal a linear increase in the sensitivity against hundreds of ppm of hydrogen gas and the sensitivity was found to be temperature dependent. Under cathodic polarization TiO2 nanoarrays change their colour from colourless or slightly yellow to dark blue. This effect has been used to form high contrast electrochromic devices using ordered TiO2 nanotubes.297 Upon applying an electric field, intercalation of H+ ions leads to a reduction of Ti4+ ions to Ti3+ initiating the colour change. The geometry of the ordered TiO2 nanotube array helps to reduce hydrogen evolution at the contact electrodes, thereby enhancing the stability of the device. Instead of H+ ions, lithium ion intercalation also leads to an electrochromic effect.279 TiO2–MoO3 nanotube composite arrays have also shown to enhance the electrochromic effect.298 TiO2 nanotubes have been used for the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants or gases.299–304 Under UV illumination, TiO2 nanotubes decorated with Fe3O4 nanoparticles perform site selective degradation of pollutants. Due to the magnetic nature of the attached nanoparticles the TiO2–Fe2O3 nanowire composite can be separated from the reaction solution by magnetic separation.299 For the photocatalytic degradation efficiency, structured arrays of TiO2 nanotubes are more efficient than TiO2 (Degussa P25) nanoparticles.300,304 This is due to the 1D geometry of the TiO2 structures which offer shorter carrier diffusion pathways and a lower number of recombination events for the generated electron–hole pairs.305 Alternatively ordered TiO2 nanotubes can be decorated by cuprous oxide Cu2O, to enhance the photo-electro-catalytic effect of a TiO2 nanowire/composite array.302,303,306 A net conversion efficiency as high as 12.3% was obtained.304 An ordered array of TiO2 nanotubes has been utilized as micro reactors and with this the decomposition of the methylene blue has been achieved. Its decomposition follows approximately first order kinetics.291Titania is well known for its biocompatibility and thus a number of studies have demonstrated the use of TiO2 nanotube arrays for biological applications.299,307–309 TiO2 nanotubes have been utilized for site selective drug delivery.309 The drug can be released by scission of the linker molecule which is attached to the titania nanotubes by UV irradiation. The UV release of the drug (via termination of the linker) is fast enough to hinder the possible decay of the drug itself which might occur under UV illumination. It has also been observed that TiO2 nanotubes enhance cell motility as well as decrease the vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation.307–309 Another advantage of TiO2 nanotubes is that they can be grown up to mm length and on a variety of surfaces such as implants by the electrochemical oxidation process.264 Thus, this technique allows implementation of such structures directly for in vivo applications.
7.3 Spatially organized 1D indium oxide architectures
Indium oxide (In2O3), with body centred cubic bixbyite structure, is considered to be an important thin film material for transparent electrodes in photovoltaic cells, liquid crystal displays, or light emitting diodes.310,311 It has a wide band gap of 3.75 eV and thus thin films composed of this material are optically transparent. Alike ZnO, indium oxide nanowires can be grown on various substrates using modern deposition techniques to form large area arrays of In2O3 wires. In general, In2O3 nanostructures can have numerous morphologies ranging from nano-crystals to nanowires and nanobelts depending on the growth process.312–314 From a growth perspective, VLS and CVD techniques are the most favoured methods for the growth of organized In2O3 nanowire arrays313,315,316 while methods such as carbo-thermal or vapour–solid growth and laser ablation method are also quiet frequently used for the synthesis of indium oxide wires and ordered In2O3 wire arrays.317–320 Rare reports comment on the growth of In2O3 nanotubes with the help of the template assisted method.32,321
The blue-green PL spectrum of ordered In2O3 nanotubes depicts oxygen related defects in nanowires319 which makes it a promising material for gas sensing. 2D thin film arrays of horizontally aligned In2O3 nanowires based FETs have been tested for NOx sensing. The resulting device performs in the range from 5 to 200 ppb with a short reaction time of 200 seconds and a good selectivity even in the presence of other polar gases such as NH3 or CO.322 Depending on the size and length of the In2O3 morphology, the sensitivity towards NO2 gas varies. For an ordered array of nanowires with a higher aspect ratio than nanorods, the gas sensitivity is better.323 In2O3 nanowires have also been used for detecting chemical vapours of liquids such as acetonitrile on the ppm scale.324 Similar 2D thin film arrays of In2O3 have been used to immobilize DNA strands. The surface of these nanowires was electrochemically activated which helps to bind single strands of thiol-terminated DNA.325 In spite of these efforts to find new device options for In2O3; the most developed application of In2O3 remains that of a transparent conductor. Those applications are not considered herein, as for those applications, thin films are used instead of arrays of nanostructures.
7.4 Ordered 1D tin oxide nanostructures
Tin oxide is another large band gap oxide possessing potential usage and applications in many electronic and sensing applications. It has a band gap of 3.6 eV which is comparable to that of ZnO or TiO2, however with an additional feature of an electron high mobility in the range of 125 cm2 V−1 s−1 for nanostructures. This is due to oxygen vacancies and tin interstitials which have a low formation energy. Various devices based on 1D SnO2 nanowires have already been configured. SnO2 in its nano form can be grown in various morphologies18,147,326 using regular growth techniques such as VLS or CVD, solution processing, laser ablation, or the vapour transport method.9,18,19,327,328 The growth can be catalysed by using gold nanoparticles or it can be self-catalysed. Using Au as a catalyst, quasi aligned SnO2 nanowires having three fold symmetry are accessible.9,16 They grow at an inclination angle of ∼45°, suggesting growth in a preferred direction which minimizes epitaxial lattice mismatch with the underlying substrate structure.16 For In2O3, tin has been used as a dopant, for SnO2, indium has been employed in much the same way.16 Other elements such as Sb, Ta, and F have also been used as dopants for SnO2 nanowires.329,330 SnO2 nanowire arrays could be a suitable candidate for low cost, flexible (bendable) and optical transparent high performance electronic devices331 (Fig. 29). SnO2 nanowire arrays have been transferred onto another substrate to form 2D thin film transistors with mobilities of 7.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an on/off ratio of order 106 to 108.
 Fig. 29  As synthesized, unorganized SnO2 nanowires (a), XRD of the same, together with standard (b), room temperature photoluminescence spectrum (c), (d) and (e) show schematic processes for nanowire SnO2-FET formation (d) and SEM of aligned nanowire arrangement (e) (all reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1331). 
Due to the high electrical conductivity of SnO2 nanorods, they have been employed as electrodes for Li-ion batteries. For this purpose one can use SnO2 nanorods332 or SnO2 nanotubes, the latter have been fabricated using ZnO nanorods as a template.333 A high reversible capacity of 580 mA h g−1 even after 100 cycles of operation at a constant current output has been obtained. In addition to that, aligned SnO2 nanowire arrays, due to their good electrical conductivity, have been considered for field emission applications. Entangled In2O3 nanowires,334 cone shaped nanorods335 or even nanobelt structures336 were also used for this purpose. Turn on fields in cold cathode field emission for In2O3 nanowires were 2 to 3 V μm−1 with a couple of hours stable emission currents with minimal fluctuations. This behaviour is well comparable to values reported for aligned CNT arrays.335,336
The occurrence of oxygen deficient sites makes In2O3 nanowires an important gas sensing oxide known. Alike In2O3, SnO2 displays a good sensitivity against NOx, CO, H2, or H2S gases as well as vapours of alcohols.337–340
SnO2 nanowires obtained by plasma treatment of thin films deliver good sensitivity in the ppm range against NO2 gas. 2D thin films of SnO2 nanowires contacted with platinum electrodes deliver excellent CO gas sensitivity in the ppb range. For CO as well as for ethanol or 2-propranol, the same structure is sensitive in the sub ppm range.337 A comparative study of a randomly oriented nanowire mesh and a thin film of nanoparticles demonstrates the long term stability of oriented nanowires towards gas exposure.337 This difference in sensitivity is due to an aggregation of the nanoparticles after gas exposure which reduces the active surface and thus the sensitivity by reducing the potential barrier at the contact points. Palladium decorated SnO2 nanowires have been studied in hydrogen detection.338,341 The deposition of Pd nanoparticles on the SnO2 nanowire mesh enhances its sensitivity for hydrogen detection by a six fold amount and that for ethanol by a 2.5 fold amount.339 The detection was reversible and can be performed at a temperature as low as 100 °C for 2% of Pt loaded SnO2 nanowires.341 Similar to Pd, CuO nanoparticles deposited onto a SnO2 nanowire mesh are able to detect H2S gas in the ppm range with a minimal cross gas response to NO2, ethanol or CO, the response time was 1–2 seconds at 300 °C.340
7.5 Other 1D metal oxide nanoarchitectures
Apart from the so far discussed metal oxide nanoarrays a fair number of other metal oxides with 1D nano sized morphologies have also been investigated. Iron oxide (Fe2O3, Fe3O4), tungsten oxide (WO3), vanadium oxide (VO2, V2O5), copper oxide (CuO), nickel oxide (NiO) have been synthesized in various intriguing nano-morphologies.34,342–346 Most of these exhibit band gaps in the range of 2 to 4 eV and possess properties which are interesting in fields such as energy harvesting or conversion, sensing, catalysis, optical, electrical, optoelectronics or magnetic applications.339–342 Iron oxide hematite (Fe2O3), with a band gap of 2.2 eV would be the ideal material for solar energy harvesting.347 However the lack of proper synthesis or post-synthesis (processing) techniques to improve its activity makes its application still a challenge. Nickel oxide is one of the few p-type oxide semiconductor materials among the many known n-type oxide semiconductors. Nanoparticles of NiO have already been used for the build up of tandem DSSC solar cells with TiO2 nanoparticles and a hole injecting dye.339 However, the research on NiO as a potential material for solar cell applications is still scarce. NiO can also be a potential material for resistive memory switching applications. Vertically grown, aligned heterostructure nanowires of NiO depict strong resistive memory switching.345 Tungsten and vanadium oxides (WO3 and VO2 respectively) can be potential electrochromic materials. Both oxides can be grown in the form of nanowires or nanorods.342,343 They have also been utilized for solar energy based hydrogen generation.348–350 In spite of the availability of straightforward recipes for their growth using established growth techniques; these materials have lacked further in depth attention. CuO is also a p-type oxide and arrays of this oxide have been prepared by a direct metal foil oxidation method (Fig. 30). The obtained wire arrays are highly crystalline and have been utilized for H2S sensing.351
 Fig. 30  Formation of CuO nanowires by oxidation of Cu foil. (b) Cross-section view of the CuO nanowire array, showing the length of the nanowires in the range of 4–8 μm and the thickness of the supporting foil to be about 3 μm; (c) TEM image of a single CuO nanowire, the diameter of which is about 150 nm; (d) high-resolution TEM image of the boxed area in part (c) shows that the nanowires are single crystalline and no second phase is identified (reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16017). 
They show a detection limit for H2S of 500 ppb. The sensing mechanism is not clear cut and the array reacts to form CuS when the H2S concentration exceeds 5 ppm. Copper oxide, Cu2O, can also be grown in the form of nanowires,345 nanotubes, nanobelts.346 It is a potential material for the sensing of toxic gases such as H2S or it can be used in Li-ion batteries or as a sensing element.345,352,353 There is certainly a need to look beyond the conventional metal oxides which have already been discussed herein and to do so systematic studies are needed to make full usage of the properties of such oxides which have received inadequate attention with respect to their future potential in nano-micro integration so far. A theoretical or computational route might be a good approach for this purpose. Looking beyond the binary metal oxides, ternary or quaternary metal oxides are also needed to be scrutinized.176 Nanowire networks of non-stoichiometric WO3−x networks have been reported. These networks are composed of nanowires with width from ten nanometres up to the micrometre regime and show gas sensing behaviour down to 50 ppb for NO2 which highlights the suitability of such nanowire based sensors for practical applications.354
8. Organized III–V 1D semiconductor nanostructures
These semiconductor materials are formed from two or more elements from III (13) and V (15) columns of the periodic table. They are often direct band gap semiconductors which can be fine-tuned by doping. They possess a high electron mobility making them promising candidates for optoelectronic applications. Among numerous binary or ternary combinations known, we focus on organized structures of GaN and GaAs and their doped versions. These two semiconductor materials are grown in different morphologies which have been mainly studied for their optoelectronic applications.
8.1 1D gallium arsenide based hierarchical structures
Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) is a direct band gap semiconductor material with a band gap of 1.43 eV. It has a stronger light emission capability than silicon and is thus extensively used for optoelectronic applications. GaAs offers a higher electron mobility, allowing transistors to be built on this material to work at GHz frequencies. However the limiting factor is the mismatch in the lattice constant to the used Si substrate.11,355,356 The solution for this problem could be growing 1D nanowires or nanotubes of GaAs. This has been accomplished by various methods resulting in the formation of ordered structures of nanowires or nanotubes of GaAs. Such arrays of nanowires can be grown employing a classical VLS mechanism up to a length of few microns or even exceptional lengths of about 40 μm.355,357 The photo-physical properties are however affected when the catalyst from the VLS growth is still present in such GaAs wire arrays (Fig. 31).
 Fig. 31  Scanning electron micrographs of (a) Au-assisted and (b) self-assisted GaAs–(Al,Ga)As core–shell nanowires on Si(111), insets show magnifications of the wires in the top and foot region. (C) μ-PL spectra of the Au-assisted and the self-assisted nanowires at room temperature. The integrated intensity for the self-assisted nanowires is larger than that for the Au-assisted ones by more than 2 orders of magnitude. (D) μ-PL transients for the Au-assisted and the self-assisted nanowires at room temperature. The inset shows a magnification of the Au-assisted nanowire transient. Solid lines represent fits to the data. The obtained minority carrier lifetimes differ by more than 2 orders of magnitude (reproduced with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1276). 
The internal quantum efficiency is lower for nanowires grown in a Au assisted route than for a Au-free route.358 This might be due to an inter-diffusion of the Au catalyst into the grown semiconductor wire. GaAs nanotubes have also been grown using a template assisted method.11,12,356 Similarly, GaAs nanowires can be selectively etched from core–shell morphology of binary GaAs and ternary AlGaAs structures to obtain AlGaAs nanowires.358
Even though the contact point between the substrate and nanowire is too small to impart its influence on the properties of the nanowire, the orientation of the substrate can lead to a change in the direction of the growth of the nanowire. This is because GaAs is a polar material while the substrate Si is not. Although most of the GaAs nanowires preferentially grow along the 〈111〉 direction, a growth along other directions has also been observed in the same sample.11,359 GaAs nanowires can be grown either vertically or horizontally on the substrate.360 In the case of self-assisted growth, the growth is guided by a gallium droplet under a precisely controlled arsenic pressure.355,361–364 GaAs nanowires have been doped with elements such as Be whereas inclusion of a third atom type can also lead to band gap tuning. Apart from this, metals such as Mn tend to occupy Ga lattice sites, making GaMnAs one of the most studied diluted ferromagnetic semiconductor materials.365
The most favoured application for GaAs nanowires is in nanoscale light emitting devices. For this purpose, core–shell or core–multishell nanowires have been fabricated. The as grown GaAs nanowire forms a core for this structure and InGaP (40 nm thick) radially covers this core forming a final core–shell morphology.15,358 If different subsequent layers of p-GaAs, p- and n-AlGaAs were deposited and form a p–n junction in a vertical direction along the axial length of the GaAs nanowire; the resulting morphology is denoted as core multishell structure.366 Instead of the nanorod morphology it has also shown that nano-needle367 or nanotube358 morphologies can be grown. Those tend to enhance the light emission characteristics. These structures astonishingly do not exhibit twinning defects which are typically seen in GaAs nanowires.367 In spite of increasing efforts to incorporate 1D nanostructures of GaAs in optoelectronic applications, most of the commercial LEDs are still made out of thin films of GaAs up to now.
An almost perfect position and orientation controlled growth of InAs, GaAs and InGaAs nanowire arrays on Si by a selective area growth has been developed recently.358 Vertical surrounding gate field-effect transistors and light emitting diode arrays on Si have been devised from these 3D aligned semiconductor structures. The excellent properties for tuning the band gap of III–V semiconductor materials make them feasible for solar energy harvesting applications. By tuning the band gap, one can optimize the GaAs band gap in the optical region to enhance their solar cell efficiency. Typically core–shell structures or tandem solar cells manufactured by double or multi-junctions are more recent and effective examples in the energy sector. Currently most of such devices however use thin films.368 Nevertheless, along with typical dopants for p and n type materials, more exotic dopants such as tellurium have also been used.368 Despite intensive studies towards doping of 1D III–IV nanostructures, their total conversion efficiencies are still too low compared to that of current thin film solar cells.357 For 1D nanowire structures they are in the range between 0.83% and 2.54% photon conversion efficiency.369,370 The major reasons for the lower efficiency compared to that of thin films are the usage of gold as catalyst during nanowire growth and the poor interface between the transparent conducting electrodes used.370 Self-aligned planar arranged 〈110〉 GaAs nanowires have been grown by atmospheric pressure MOCVD on GaAs 〈100〉 substrates (Fig. 32).
 Fig. 32  Planar 〈110〉 GaAs nanowires grown on a GaAs 〈100〉 substrate. (A) Low, (b) medium, and (c) high magnification SEM images of well-aligned 〈110〉 oriented planar nanowires. Nanowires were grown at 460 °C in (a and b) and at 475 °C in (c) (reprinted with permission of Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4421). 
The temperature window for the GaAs nanowire formation is very narrow. The possibility of transferring self-aligned planar nanowires to other substrates while maintaining both the position and alignment has been demonstrated and could enable flexible electronics and photonics at a true nanometre scale.371
8.2 1D gallium nitride structures
Gallium nitride (GaN) is the most intriguing material of all known III–V semiconductors due to its high carrier mobility, direct band gap, and the ease of forming a p or n-type channel material upon doping. Where the need of highly crystalline material with less defect density poses a problem for thin films of GaN, 1D GaN nanostructures have already paved the way towards formation of new optoelectronic devices. Single GaN wire based multicoloured LEDs have been demonstrated.372,373 Efforts are ongoing to assemble aligned nanowire arrays into light emitting devices. GaN nanowires can be grown using various techniques on different substrates.374–378 Methods such as VLS growth, CVD, molecular beam epitaxy, or vapour phase epitaxy are all commonly used with or without employing catalyst particles during nanowire growth. In catalyst assisted methods, transition metals, such as Fe, Ni, along with Pt, Pd or Au nanoparticles have played an important role as catalyst.12 In addition, catalyst free growth of GaN nanowires on various different substrates have been devised.374–376 Depending on the growth process, GaN nanowires display round, hexagonal or even triangular cross-sectional morphologies.375,376,379 In addition to this technique, template assisted synthesis of GaN nanowires, or GaN nanotubes has been demonstrated.42,380–382 For this purpose, a PAOX template or aligned ZnO nanowire arrays have been employed. After the growth of GaN nanowires, the template material was selectively etched to gain access to the aligned GaN nanowire arrays. A scalable process for the growth of high-quality GaN nanowires and uniform nanowire arrays in which the position and diameter of each nanowire are precisely controlled has been reported. Using a mask technique, location, orientation, and diameter of the GaN nanowires can be controlled. Vertical GaN nanowire growth rates in excess of 2 μm h−1 were measured and the diameter of the nanowires remains constant over the length of the nanowires (Fig. 33).
 Fig. 33  (A) Scanning electron micrograph of a GaN nanowire array consisting of 1 μm GaN nanowires (inset shows plan view and reveals the hexagonal symmetry of the nanowires); (b) lower magnification SEM image reveals the long-range order of the GaN nanowire arrays (reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1808). 
An array of gallium nitride nanorods combined with an InGaN/GaN multi-quantum well (MQW) has been used for electroluminescence applications.383 Multilayered p and n type GaN and MQWs were grown one over the other layer using standard growth techniques like e.g. CVD. After proper contacting, light emission was more than 4 times intense than broad area thin GaN films at a current input of 20 mA. If the precursor flow was directed at a certain angle towards the substrate during nanowire growth, nanowires can be grown selectively on nanorods which have been formed by dry etching of the n-type GaN substrate.384 With proper thickness of the multi-quantum well (MQW) formed in such InGaN/GaN layers, p and n type GaN nanorods exhibit high light output power densities of 3700 mW cm−2 for a current consumption of 20 mA. To achieve such a high output density, a transparent conductor made up of slanted ITO was grown. It confirms a sticky and non-leaky contact with the GaN nanorods. In another approach, p and n type GaN along with a MQW layer structure were deposited on the substrate and thereafter, using ion coupled plasma dry etching, equidistant and spatial nanorods are formed on the substrate.385–387 The observed electroluminescence wavelength depends on the length of the nanorods.387 In a different approach, ZnO nanowires have been used as building blocks for GaN based LEDs. It has been known that GaN as well as ZnO can grow on individual crystal planes of each other.42,190 p and n-type GaN along with layers of MQW were grown on the side walls of ZnO nanowires.388 At a current input of 100 mA light emission can be observed under typical room illumination conditions. The dominant emission was obtained at 2.45 eV. The complete composite morphology can be transferred onto a flexible conductor surface such as a graphene film.389 From such an assembly, light can be emitted with a current input as less as 10 mA. Thus it could facilitate the visualization of flexible and low power consumption displays.
GaN nanorods have also been studied for photovoltaic applications.390–392 Vertically aligned, Mg doped GaN nanowires were grown on n-type silicon wafers using CVD methods. Such a device delivered a short circuit current of 7.6 V cm−2 and an open circuit voltage of 0.96 V cm−2. Mg doping lowers the series resistance of GaN nanorods while increasing their transport efficiency.393 The net efficiency under solar illumination was 2.37%390 and only 1% under UV illumination.391 Entangled GaN nanowires have been employed as photoactive material in DSSCs.392 However, their efficiency was only 0.44%, well below the reported values for DSSCs using metal oxide based photoactive materials. Current studies have exemplified that nanoenergy generation based on piezoelectric effects as has been found for ZnO nanowires is possible with GaN nanowires, too. In contact AFM mode, an array of triangular shaped GaN nanowires generate a negative voltage of 20 mV.392
8.3 Miscellaneous 1D compound semiconductor nanostructures
Less abundant reports are on the synthesis and application of group II–VI, IV–VI and V–V semiconductor nanowire arrays. Template assisted synthesis, either in soft (PMMA or PC) or hard templates (PAOX), has led to the synthesis of II–VI (CdS, CdTe)394 and group IV/VI (PbSe) nanowire arrays. Embedding three dimensional CdS nanowire arrays into nanostructured CdTe has led to the creation of rigid and flexible solar modules with enhanced carrier collection efficiency due to the 3D nanowire architecture.395 Three dimensional assembly of CdSe nanowires is possible by thermal assembly and rapid deposition of hexagonally arranged vertically aligned nanowires of this semiconductor combination. This technique may have a broader impact as a simple and straightforward self-organization technique to arrange 1D semiconductors from solution396 (Fig. 34).
 Fig. 34  Thermal assembly and rapid deposition of vertically aligned CdSe nanorods (reprinted with permission from Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1016). 
3D Bi/Sb nanowire arrays have been reported using the PAOX template based technique. This material as well as its 3D morphology has potential as a low footprint thermoelectric material.397
9. Nanowire arrays of metals
In contrast to three-dimensional semiconductor nanowire arrays, the growth of 3D metallic nanostructure arrays has relied strongly on template techniques so far. The growth of metal nanowire arrays using hard templates as structure directing objects has been reviewed.398 Besides, soft templates like PC and PMMA polymeric membranes have also been widely employed for obtaining structured arrays of metallic nanowires. Two dimensional metal arrays have been obtained by techniques relying on principles of weak interactions or external fields. These are Langmuir–Blodgett,399 magnetic field alignment400 or electric field assisted techniques.401 These techniques were employed after the nanowire synthesis has been performed in the appropriately chosen template. An area of intense interest has been found in studying the magnetic properties of metal arrays composed of a single component metal as well as layered compositions of different metals, so called bar-code nanowires (e.g. Co–Cu, Fe–Au, Co–Pt, Ag–Co, Pt–Pd, Ni–Cu). In an extension to that intensively studied field, even multisegmented, multi-barcode metal nanowires have also been reported. In contrast to just displaying information on items on which such barcodes are tagged (as it is used in supermarket codes), their nanostructure would not allow making a direct readout possible. Therefore this miniaturization might be interesting for encoding information which should not be accessible at first sight. Other implications e.g. in bioanalytical tagging are obvious too. The relevant metallic materials as well as functionality aspects of this technique have been highlighted.402 Employing a template free electrodeposition method, metallic cobalt nanowires displaying a corrugated morphology have been obtained (Fig. 35). The nanowire organisation process of the corrugated structures can be tuned by applying different electric currents during the growth.403
 Fig. 35  Scanning electron micrograph of a cobalt filament array. The white circles mark the branching regions of the filaments, where the correlation of the corrugations on adjacent filaments can be easily identified (reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1694). 
The nanorods have been assembled, again template free, into 2D aligned structures with the use of magnetic particles. Nanoparticles itself can direct the orientation of Te nanorods into an aligned structure. Fe3O4 magnetite nanoparticles have been tethered to the surface of individual Te nanorods and thus the Te nanowires can be easily aligned by an external field afterwards. After alignment, the magnetite nanoparticles have been irreversibly removed by an acid etch404 (Fig. 36).
 Fig. 36  Scheme showing an alignment of Te nanorods by a magnetization–alignment–demagnetization process which is assisted by an external magnetic field and mediated by superparamagnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles. The acid etch in the last step removes the magnetic particles (reprinted with permission from ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1441). 
A solution based self-organization using Gemini-surfactants which contain two hydrophobic tails and two hydrophilic headgroups has been reported as an successful approach to self-assemble gold nanorods into free standing superlattices which form colloidal nanocrystals.405 Hard templating using PAOX has been employed to control synthesis and organization of giant, three dimensional hybrid nanowire assemblies of Au and CNTs.406These hybrids are sensitive to magnetic fields as well as to optical stimuli. Three dimensional networks of metals which consist of an interpenetrating network of Pt nanowires are accessible by using a porous soft template like PMMA or PC which contains an interconnected network of pores. This is obtained by ion track etching of the polymer template at different inclination angles of the ion beam, followed by etching of the pores, and electrodeposition of Pt-metal. The process results in a freestanding 3D nanowire network (Fig. 37).
 Fig. 37  Scheme showing template fabrication and formation of a 3D nanowire network (reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2304). 
After electrodeposition of suitable metals or semiconductors into the template structure followed by template etching, freestanding 3D nanowire networks of Pt, Au, CdSe have been obtained (Fig. 38).
 Fig. 38  Field emission scanning electron micrograph of a 3D Pt nanowire network, inset shows the nanowire network with higher magnification. Similar structures are possible for other metals or semiconductors by adaption of the same process (reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2304). 
This technique is effective for obtaining macroscopically stable nanowire networks (2D and 3D) for which size, shape, composition and orientation of the nanowires as well as their integration level and thus the dimensional complexity of the network can be controlled over a wider range.407
10. Recent developments in 3D integrated architectures based on 1D inorganic hybrid and composite nanomaterials
Besides the individual classes of 1D nanomaterials which have been discussed in the afore-mentioned chapters, the family of 1D hybrid materials, which combine different material classes, has been especially in the focus while promising a high potential for nano–micro integration into device structures. The research field of energy harvesting and storage with such 1D hybrid materials stands out within the last two to three years. Examples on 1D hybrid nanomaterials are flexible Cu2O@CNT-hybrid electrodes for Li ion battery applications. These are accessible by a combination of CVD and electrodeposition techniques.408 In that realm it was shown that not only the 3D electrode configuration with maximized areal energy density is important for superior performance but also the efficient construction of an insulating while being still Li ion conducting electrolyte is a crucial necessity to obtain a working micro battery ensemble.409 Foam like large area CNT–inorganic hybrids manufactured by a two-step process have been devised by a ferrocene catalysed CVD process for CNT formation. It has proven to give access to 3D carpets of TiO2@CNTs as well as fibers of those. Again photocatalysis as well as sensors are the goals.410 An alternative to carbon for its usage in supercapacitor electrodes are aluminium nanowire arrays coated with vanadium oxide. They exhibit a volumetric capacitance in excess of 1400 F cm−3 exceeding traditional carbon based ones by an order of magnitude (Fig. 39).411
 Fig. 39  Forest of Al nanowires onto which vanadium oxide can be deposited by atomic layer deposition (reprinted with permission from ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 118). 
Core–shell nanowire arrays consisting of a metallic tin core surrounded by a CNT shell are promising electrodes for high performance proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Besides their enhanced stability they show significantly higher oxygen reaction performance and a better CO tolerance than established materials.412 3D arrays of core–shell hybrid nanowires ITO@TiO2 were directly grown on metallic current collectors and have served as self-supported electrodes in Li-ion batteries.413 They displayed a superior rate capability and long term cycle lifetime (Fig. 40).
 Fig. 40  Schematic representation of a 3D ITO nanowire array and a 3D ITO@TiO2 core–shell nanowire composite electrode (reprinted with permission from Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1796). 
Free standing all carbon supercapacitor composite electrodes with a macroscopic 3D structure were composed of a polyaniline (PANI) coating on CNT–nickel fiber hybrids. They show energy density rates of around 22 Wh kg−1 which is 2000 W kg−1 based on total electrode mass together with a good cyclability of the device.414 The usage of a variety of 1D materials (inorganic and organic as well as a combination of these) with hybrid morphology in research on energy harvesting technologies and their prospects in solar cell research using has been reviewed very recently.415
11. Resume and outlook
In this critical review we have given an overview of the latest directions of organizing one dimensional nanomaterials into higher organized architectures. We have tried to focus the attention on the organization of different types of nanomaterial compositions which we have identified as the most intensively researched during the last 5–10 years in this regard. Here the choice might be somewhat deliberately chosen with respect to a full comprehensive coverage of the literature. Nevertheless, we have tried to focus on the most prominent and intriguing examples in the area of three dimensional architectures created from one dimensional nanostructured building blocks. Due to their unique structure, the broad range of chemical compositions possible with one dimensional materials and the variety of experimental approaches for their synthesis, these nanomaterial compositions with their different morphologies such as wires, rods and tubes occupy a distinct place right in the heart of nanoscience and nanotechnology. Compared to nanoparticles they have the tremendous advantage that most often their length dimension is highly variable and can be controlled by experimental approaches. This fact has been recognized by the research community working with these structures, and it will certainly be of paramount importance in the future when researchers are striving to develop new technological breakthroughs with these materials in the area of chemical and mechanical sensors, in the field of actors or as high surface area and low footprint supports for catalysts or device structures like batteries or capacitors. A recent review highlights the manufacturing of 1D inorganic nanomaterials from a conceptual as well as perspective viewpoint.416 Besides single phase material, composed of only one material, hybrid and composite 1D, 2D and 3D structures and morphologies comprising multiple materials, either as a purely inorganic or as a composite between inorganic and organic, will greatly enhance the scope of functionality further, and beyond that of what has been currently realized. Bridging the gap between understanding fundamental science of 1D structures and the exploitation of the possibilities to integrate them into higher hierarchical architectures in 2D and in 3D has nevertheless already made enormous progress over the last 5–10 years. Nonetheless, the integration issue of 1D nanostructures will certainly be an important and constant driver in the science and technology of such dimensional nanomaterials for the future. E.g. smart solutions have to be created which are CMOS compatible and allow the integration of 1D inorganic structures e.g. directly on a chip device without the need of a follow up transfer step of the as grown material onto the chip. This might then overcome current limitations associated with the typically used high temperature growth temperatures for their formation and to form well performing semiconductor devices. Besides a number of examples given in different chapters of this review another intriguing example for such an in situ integration has been reported very recently for germanium and tin oxide nanowires.417 The nano to micro to macro integration issue of one dimensional materials will be a major challenge in nanomaterials research and calls for an on-going implantation of new material combinations and technological approaches. It will be one of the central key issues for developing nanoscience further towards nanotechnology with specific applications using 1D nanostructures. Functional device architectures with higher and more complicated organized nanostructures will be the goal, and nanowires, nanorods and nanotubes are the nanostructured materials to achieve that.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge past and current support of their studies on three dimensional nanoarchitectures through the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in various funding programs, as well as the Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung, BMBF, through its Micro-Nano initiative (MNI) over the last few years.
Notes and references
A. Kolmakov and M. Moskovits, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 151–180 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Meyyappan and M. Sunkara, Inorganic Nanowires, Applications, Properties and Characterization, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Raton, London, New York,  2010 Search PubMed .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4, 89–90 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Cheung, R. J. Nikolic, C. E. Reinhardt and T. F. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, X. D. Wang and C. J. Summers, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 423–426 CrossRef .
G. Bhimsresetti and M. K. Sunkara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16219 CrossRef .
B. M. Kayes, M. A. Filler, M. C. Putnam, M. D. Kelzenberg, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 103110 CrossRef .
L. J. Chen, J. H. He, J. H. Hsu, C. W. Wang, H. N. Lin and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 50–53 CrossRef .
S. Mathur and S. Barth, Small, 2007, 3, 2070–2075 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, Q. Wan, E. N. Dattoli, W. Y. Fung, W. Guo, Y. B. Chen and X. Q. Pan, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2909–2915 CrossRef .
J. I. Song, S. G. Ihn, T. W. Kim, D. S. Leem, T. Lee, S. G. Lee, E. K. Koh and K. Song, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 39–44 CrossRef .
W. Seifert, M. Borgstrom, K. Deppert, K. A. Dick, J. Johansson, M. W. Larsson, T. Martensson, N. Skold, C. P. T. Svensson, B. A. Wacaser, L. R. Wallenberg and L. Samuelson, J. Cryst. Growth, 2004, 272, 211–220 CrossRef CAS .
R. Maboudian, G. S. Doerk, N. Ferralis and C. Carraro, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5376–5381 RSC .
K. Tomioka, Y. Kobayashi, J. Motohisa, S. Hara and T. Fukui, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 145302 CrossRef .
C. P. T. Svensson, T. Martensson, J. Tragardh, C. Larsson, M. Rask, D. Hessman, L. Samuelson and J. Ohlsson, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 305201 CrossRef .
H. T. Ng, P. Nguyen, J. Kong, A. M. Cassell, R. Quinn, J. Li, J. Han, M. McNeil and M. Meyyappan, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 925–928 CrossRef .
C. M. Lieber and A. M. Morales, Science, 1998, 279, 208–211 CrossRef .
Z. R. Dai, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 9–24 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres and M. Graetzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3666–3670 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2007, 89, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
L. Krusin-Elbaum, D. M. Newns, H. Zeng, V. Derycke, J. Z. Sun and R. Sandstrom, Nature, 2004, 431, 672–676 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Han, H. D. Yu, Z. P. Zhang, X. T. Hao and F. R. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2378–2379 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, M. G. Zhu, X. J. Chen, Z. L. Wang, Y. Chen, D. F. Ma and H. Peng, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 511, 106–109 CrossRef .
S.-w. Chang, V. P. Chuang, S. T. Boles and C. V. Thompson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4364–4370 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghicov, H. Tsuchiya, J. M. Macak and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 505–509 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schmuki, J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, L. Taveira and S. Aldabergerova, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7463–7465 CrossRef .
A. Nadarajah, R. C. Word, J. Meiss and R. Konenkamp, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 534–537 CrossRef CAS .

          J. J. Schneider, A. Popp and J. Engstler, Fundamentals and Functionality, in Inorganic Wires, Rods and Tubes, in Nanotechnology, Principles and Fundamentals, ed. G. Schmid, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH&Co KGaA, Weinheim,  2008, vol. 1 Search PubMed .
G. Che, B. B. Lakshmi, C. R. Martin, E. R. Fisher and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 260–267 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imai, Y. Takei, K. Shimizu, M. Matsuda and H. Hirashima, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2971–2972 RSC .
S. T. Lee, C. H. Liu, J. A. Zapien, Y. Yao, X. M. Meng, C. S. Lee, S. S. Fan and Y. Lifshitz, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 838–841 CrossRef .
B. Cheng and E. T. Samulski, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2901–2902 RSC .
T. Shimizu, T. Xie, J. Nishikawa, S. Shingubara, S. Senz and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 917–920 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Lee, S. J. Son, X. Bai, A. Nan and H. Ghandehari, J. Controlled Release, 2006, 114, 143–152 CrossRef .
F. Cheng, Z. Tao, J. Liang and J. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 667–681 CrossRef CAS .
T.-S. Kang, A. P. Smith, B. E. Taylor and M. F. Durstock, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 601–606 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cao, K. Takahashi, Y. Wang and K. Lee, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 82, 27–31 CrossRef .
M. Sima, I. Enculescu, M. Sima and E. Vasile, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., 2007, 9, 1551–1554 CAS .
C. Schonenberger, B. M. I. vander Zande, L. G. J. Fokkink, M. Henny, C. Schmid, M. Kruger, A. Bachtold, R. Huber, H. Birk and U. Staufer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5497–5505 CrossRef .
M. L. Tian, J. U. Wang, J. Kurtz, T. E. Mallouk and M. H. W. Chan, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 919–923 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Meng, F. M. Han, X. L. Zhao, B. S. Chen, D. C. Yang, J. X. Liu, Q. L. Xu, M. G. Kong, X. G. Zhu, Y. J. Jung, Y. J. Yang, Z. Q. Chu, M. Ye, S. Kar, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7166–7170 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Yang, J. Goldberger, R. R. He, Y. F. Zhang, S. W. Lee, H. Q. Yan and H. J. Choi, Nature, 2003, 422, 599–602 CrossRef .
B. C. Satishkumar, A. Govindaraj, E. M. Vogl, L. Basumallick and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Res., 1997, 12, 604–606 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thess, R. Lee, P. Nikolaev, H. Dai, P. Petit, J. Robert, C. Xu, Y. H. Lee, S. G. Kim, A. G. Rinzler, D. T. Colbert, G. E. Scuseria, D. Tomanek, J. E. Fischer and R. E. Smalley, Science, 1996, 273, 483–487 CAS .
K. Hata, D. N. Futaba, K. Mizuno, T. Namai, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Science, 2004, 306, 1362–1364 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhong, S. Hofmann, F. Yan, H. Telg, J. H. Warner, D. Eder, C. Thomsen, W. I. Milne and J. Robertson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17321–17325 CAS .
A. J. Hart and A. H. Slocum, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8250–8257 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987–994 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, Z. Zhao, X. Wang and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5967–5971 RSC .
D. N. Futaba, K. Miyake, K. Murata, Y. Hayamizu, T. Yamada, S. Sasaki, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3302–3307 CrossRef CAS .
M. Terrones, E. Munoz-Sandoval, V. Agarwal, J. Escorcia-Garcia, D. Ramirez-Gonzalez, M. M. Martinez-Mondragon, E. Cruz-Silva, D. Meneses-Rodriguez, J. A. Rodriguez-Manzo and H. Terrones, Small, 2007, 3, 1157–1163 CrossRef .
L. Ge, S. Sethi, L. Ci, P. M. Ajayan and A. Dhinojwala, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 10792–10795 CrossRef CAS .
A. Popp and J. J. Schneider, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8958–8960 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Pushparaj, M. M. Shaijumon, A. Kumar, S. Murugesan, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, R. J. Linhardt, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 13574–13577 CrossRef CAS .
A. Srivastava, O. N. Srivastava, S. Talapatra, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 610–614 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Schneider, J. Khanderi, A. Popp, J. Engstler, A. Sarapulova, N. N. Bramnik, D. Mikhailova, L. A. Schmitt, H. Ehrenberg, L. Dimesso, C. Förster and W. Jaegermann, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 4297–4302 Search PubMed .
T. S. Arthur, D. J. Bates, N. Cirigliano, D. C. Johnson, P. Malati, J. M. Mosby, E. Perre, M. T. Rawls, A. L. Prieto and B. Dunn, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 523–531 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Miller, V. Y. Young and C. R. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12335–12342 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Pushparaj, L. Ci, S. Sreekala, A. Kumar, S. Kesapragada, D. Gall, O. Nalamasu, A. M. Pulickel and J. Suhr, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 153116 CrossRef .
R. K. Joshi, J. Engstler, A. Navitski, V. Sakharuk, G. Müller and J. J. Schneider, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3258–3264 RSC .
J.-M. Bonard, M. Croci, C. Klinke, R. Kurt, O. Noury and N. Weiss, Carbon, 2002, 40, 1715–1728 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, G. Fang, W. Zeng, H. Zhou, H. Long, H. Long and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3478–3484 RSC .
M. J. Bronikowski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17705–17712 CAS .
M. Cantoro, S. Hofmann, S. Pisana, V. Scardaci, A. Parvez, C. Ducati, A. C. Ferrari, A. M. Blackburn, K.-Y. Wang and J. Robertson, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1107–1112 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kreupl, A. P. Graham, G. S. Duesberg, W. Steinhogl, M. Liebau, E. Unger and W. Honlein, Microelectron. Eng., 2002, 64, 399–408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Q. Ye, A. Cassell, H. T. Ng, R. Stevens, J. Han and M. Meyyappan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2491–2493 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kordas, G. Toth, P. Moilanen, M. Kumpumaki, J. Vahakangas, A. Uusimaki, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 123105 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, Y. Chai, M. M. F. Yuen, D. G. W. Xiao and P. C. H. Chan, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 215706 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Pettes and L. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3918–3925 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hu, B. A. Cola, N. Haram, J. N. Barisci, S. Lee, S. Stoughton, G. Wallace, C. Too, M. Thomas, A. Gestos, M. E. d. Cruz, J. P. Ferraris, A. A. Zakhidov and R. H. Baughman, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 838–846 CrossRef CAS .
V. T. Dau, D. V. Dao, T. Yamada, B. T. Tung, K. Hata and S. Sugiyama, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 075003 CrossRef .
S. Kim, S. Pal, P. M. Ajayan, T. Borca-Tasciuc and N. Koratkar, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 416–419 CrossRef CAS .
N. Koratkar, A. Modi, E. Lass, B. Q. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nature, 2003, 424, 171–174 CrossRef .
S. Chopra, A. Pham, J. Gaillard, A. Parker and A. M. Rao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 4632–4634 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Singh, R. Mangu and S. Rajaputra, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 215502 CrossRef .
J. Kong, N. R. Franklin, C. Zhou, M. G. Chapline, S. Peng, K. Cho and H. Dai, Science, 2000, 287, 622–625 CrossRef CAS .
A. Star and D. R. Kauffman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6550–6570 CrossRef .
N. Punbusayakul, L. J. Ci, S. Talapatra, W. Surareungchai and P. M. Ajayan, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 2085–2090 CrossRef CAS .
N. Punbusayakul, S. Talapatra, L. Ci, W. Surareungchai and P. M. Ajayan, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, F13–F17 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Schulz, Y. H. Yun, V. Shanov, Z. Y. Dong, A. Jazieh, W. R. Heineman, H. B. Halsall, D. K. Y. Wong, A. Bange, Y. Tu and S. Subramaniam, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 120, 298–304 CrossRef .
Y. H. Lin, F. Lu, Y. Tu and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 191–195 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Nguyen, L. Delzeit, A. M. Cassell, J. Li, J. Han and M. Meyyappan, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1079–1081 CrossRef CAS .
J. Koehne, J. Li, H. Chen, A. Cassell, H. T. Ng, W. Fan, Q. Li, J. Han and M. Mayyappan, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 226, U119–U120 Search PubMed .
J. Li, H. T. Ng, A. Cassell, W. Fan, H. Chen, Q. Ye, J. Koehne, J. Han and M. Meyyappan, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 597–602 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Xu, Infrared Phys. Technol., 2001, 42, 485–491 CAS .
S. Y. Lin, Z. P. Yang, M. L. Hsieh, J. A. Bur, L. Ci, L. M. Hanssen, B. Wilthan and P. M. Ajayan, Appl. Opt., 2011, 50, 1850–1855 CrossRef .
K. Hata, K. Mizuno, J. Ishii, H. Kishida, Y. Hayamizu, S. Yasuda, D. N. Futaba and M. Yumura, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 6044–6047 CrossRef .
Y. Yun, V. Shanov, Y. Tu, M. J. Schulz, S. Yarmolenko, S. Neralla, J. Sankar and S. Subramaniam, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hayamizu, T. Yamada, K. Mizuno, R. C. Davis, D. N. Futaba, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 289–294 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Jiang, Q. Q. Li and S. S. Fan, Nature, 2002, 419, 801 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Zhang, K. L. Jiang, C. Teng, P. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Kong, T. H. Zhang, Q. Q. Li and S. S. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1505–1510 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. L. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215–1219 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Li, K. L. Wang, J. Q. Wei, B. Q. Wei, H. W. Zhu, Z. C. Wang, J. B. Luo, W. J. Liu, M. X. Zheng and D. H. Wu, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2007, 52, 113–117 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Jiang, L. Xiao, Z. Chen, C. Feng, L. Liu, Z. Q. Bai, Y. Wang, L. Qian, Y. Y. Zhang, Q. Q. Li and S. S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4539–4545 CrossRef .
A. E. Aliev, M. D. Lima, S. L. Fang and R. H. Baughman, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2374–2380 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mirfakhrai, J. Oh, M. E. Kozlov, S. L. Fang, M. Zhang, R. H. Baughman and J. D. W. Madden, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, 2011, 16, 90–97 CrossRef .
T. Yamada, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Yamamoto, Y. Yomogida, A. Izadi-Najafabadi, D. N. Futaba and K. Hata, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, D. N. Futaba, T. Yamada, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Science, 2010, 330, 1364–1368 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Hutches, L. J. Hall and J. R. Greer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2338–2346 CrossRef .
O. Yilmazoglu, A. Popp, D. Pavlidis, J. J. Schneider, D. Garth, F. Schüttler and G. Battenberg, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 085501 CrossRef CAS .
V. Maheswari and R. Saraf, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7808–7826 CrossRef .
S. J. Kang, C. Kocabas, T. Ozel, M. Shim, N. Pimparkar, M. A. Alam, S. V. Rotkin and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 230–236 CrossRef CAS .
Z. N. Bao, M. C. LeMieux, M. Roberts, S. Barman, Y. W. Jin and J. M. Kim, Science, 2008, 321, 101–104 CrossRef .
D. M. Sun, M. Y. Timmermans, Y. Tian, A. G. Nasibulin, E. I. Kauppinen, S. Kishimoto, T. Mizutani and Y. Ohno, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 156–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rogers, Q. Cao, H. S. Kim, N. Pimparkar, J. P. Kulkarni, C. J. Wang, M. Shim, K. Roy and M. A. Alam, Nature, 2008, 454, 495 CrossRef .
W. J. Park, E. J. Bae, Y. S. Min and U. J. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 495203 CrossRef .
L. B. Hu, D. S. Hecht and G. Gruner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5790–5844 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schmid, M. T. Bjork, J. Knoch, H. Riel, W. Riess, P. Rice and T. Topuria, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 024304 CrossRef .
H. A. Atwater, K. E. Plass, M. A. Filler, J. M. Spurgeon, B. M. Kayes, S. Maldonado, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 325–328 CrossRef .
Y. Yao and S. Fan, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 177–181 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Redwing, Y. Ke, X. J. Weng, C. M. Eichfeld, T. R. Swisher, S. E. Mohney and Y. M. Habib, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4494–4499 CrossRef .
Y. W. Wang, V. Schmidt, S. Senz and U. Gösele, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 186–189 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Korgel, H. Y. Tuan and D. C. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5184–5187 CrossRef .
N. Wang, Y. H. Tang, Y. F. Zhang, D. P. Yu, C. S. Lee, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 283, 368–372 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Fan, Q. Gu, H. Y. Dang, J. Cao and J. H. Zhao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 3020–3021 CrossRef .
T. I. Kamins, R. S. Williams, D. P. Basile, T. Hesjedal and J. S. Harris, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 1008–1016 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Collins, S. J. Rathi, B. N. Jariwala, J. D. Beach, P. Stradins, P. C. Taylor, X. J. Weng, Y. Ke, J. M. Redwing and S. Agarwal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3833–3839 Search PubMed .
V. Schmidt, J. V. Wittemann and U. Gösele, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 361–388 CrossRef CAS .
O. Rabin, P. R. Herz, Y. M. Lin, A. I. Akinwande, S. B. Cronin and M. S. Dresselhaus, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 631–638 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. Wong, M. L. Zhang, K. Q. Peng, X. Fan, J. S. Jie, R. Q. Zhang and S. T. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4444–4450 Search PubMed .
W. Lee, J. Kim, H. Han, Y. H. Kim, S. H. Choi and J. C. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3222–3229 CrossRef .
S. Ingebrandt, X. T. Vu, R. GhoshMoulick, J. F. Eschermann, R. Stockmann and A. Offenhausser, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 144, 354–360 CrossRef .
P. D. Yang, R. R. He, D. Gao, R. Fan, A. I. Hochbaum, C. Carraro and R. Maboudian, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2098–2102 CrossRef .
P. D. Yang, A. I. Hochbaum, R. Fan and R. R. He, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 457–460 CrossRef .
A. San Paulo, N. Arellano, J. A. Plaza, R. R. He, C. Carraro, R. Maboudian, R. T. Howe, J. Bokor and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1100–1104 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Lieber, A. Javey, S. Nam, R. S. Friedman and H. Yan, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 773–777 CrossRef .
A. Javey, Z. Y. Fan, J. C. Ho, Z. A. Jacobson, R. Yerushalmi, R. L. Alley and H. Razavi, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 20–25 CrossRef .
S. Hong, K. Heo, E. Cho, J. E. Yang, M. H. Kim, M. Lee, B. Y. Lee, S. G. Kwon, M. S. Lee, M. H. Jo, H. J. Choi and T. Hyeon, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4523–4527 CrossRef .
C. M. Lieber, D. Whang, S. Jin and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1255–1259 CrossRef .
R. S. Friedman, M. C. McAlpine, D. S. Ricketts, D. Ham and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2005, 434, 1085 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Lieber, M. C. McAlpine, R. S. Friedman, S. Jin, K. H. Lin and W. U. Wang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1531–1535 CrossRef .
X. F. Duan, C. M. Niu, V. Sahi, J. Chen, J. W. Parce, S. Empedocles and J. L. Goldman, Nature, 2003, 425, 274–278 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Heath, R. Beckman, E. Johnston-Halperin, Y. Luo and J. E. Green, Science, 2005, 310, 465–468 CrossRef .
P. D. Yang, J. Goldberger, A. I. Hochbaum and R. Fan, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 973–977 CrossRef .
C. M. Lieber, B. P. Timko, T. Cohen-Karni, G. H. Yu, Q. Qing and B. Z. Tian, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 914–918 CrossRef .
P. Chen, T. S. Pui, A. Agarwal, F. Ye and N. Balasubramanian, Small, 2009, 5, 208–212 Search PubMed .
C. M. Lieber, F. Patolsky, B. P. Timko, G. H. Yu, Y. Fang, A. B. Greytak and G. F. Zheng, Science, 2006, 313, 1100–1104 CrossRef .
V. N. Murthy, Q. Qing, S. K. Pal, B. Z. Tian, X. J. Duan, B. P. Timko, T. Cohen-Karni and C. M. Lieber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 1882–1887 CrossRef .
C. M. Lieber, G. F. Zheng, F. Patolsky, Y. Cui and W. U. Wang, Nat. Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 1294–1301 CrossRef .
C. M. Lieber, F. Patolsky, G. F. Zheng, O. Hayden, M. Lakadamyali and X. W. Zhuang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 14017–14022 CrossRef .
J. T. Robinson, M. Jorgolli, A. K. Shalek, M.-H. Yoon, R. S. Gertner and H. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 180–184 CrossRef CAS .
I. Park, Z. Y. Li, A. P. Pisano and R. S. Williams, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 015501 CrossRef .
M. C. McAlpine, H. Ahmad, D. W. Wang and J. R. Heath, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
A. Javey, K. Takei, T. Takahashi, J. C. Ho, H. Ko, A. G. Gillies, P. W. Leu and R. S. Fearing, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 821–826 CrossRef .
A. Javey, Z. Y. Fan, J. C. Ho, Z. A. Jacobson and H. Razavi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 11066–11070 CrossRef .
W. S. Wong, S. Raychaudhuri, R. Lujan, S. Sambandan and R. A. Street, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2214–2218 CrossRef CAS .
O. Gunawan and S. Guha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1388–1393 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stelzner, M. Pietsch, G. Andra, F. Falk, E. Ose and S. Christiansen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 295203 CrossRef .
K. Q. Peng, Y. Xu, Y. Wu, Y. J. Yan, S. T. Lee and J. Zhu, Small, 2005, 1, 1062–1067 CrossRef CAS .
S. Perraud, S. Poncet, S. Noel, M. Levis, P. Faucherand, E. Rouviere, P. Thony, C. Jaussaud and R. Delsol, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1568–1571 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, K. Q. Peng and Z. P. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 73–96 CrossRef .
V. Sivakov, G. Andra, A. Gawlik, A. Berger, J. Plentz, F. Falk and S. H. Christiansen, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1549–1554 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, H. Fang, X. D. Li, S. Song and Y. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 56 Search PubMed .
L. Tsakalakos, J. Balch, J. Fronheiser, B. A. Korevaar, O. Sulima and J. Rand, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 233117 CrossRef .
P. D. Yang and E. C. Garnett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9224–9225 CrossRef .
C. F. Lin, S. C. Shiu, J. J. Chao, S. C. Hung and C. L. Yeh, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3108–3113 CrossRef .
P. D. Yang, Y. J. Hwang and A. Boukai, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 410–415 CrossRef .
K. Q. Peng, X. Wang, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3704–3709 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Wang, Q. K. Shu, J. Q. Wei, H. W. Zhu, Z. Li, Y. Jia, X. C. Gui, N. Guo, X. M. Li, C. R. Ma and D. H. Wu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4338–4342 CrossRef .
S. T. Lee, K. Q. Peng and X. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92 Search PubMed .
S. K. Srivastava, D. Kumar, P. K. Singh, M. Husain and V. Kumar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 215–218 CrossRef .
J. Y. Jung, Z. Guo, S. W. Jee, H. D. Um, K. T. Park, M. S. Hyun, J. M. Yang and J. H. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 445303 CrossRef .
R. Jia, C. Chen, H. F. Li, Y. L. Meng, X. Y. Liu, T. C. Ye, S. Kasai, H. Tamotsu, N. J. Wu, S. L. Wang and J. H. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 143108 CrossRef .
M. W. Shao, D. D. D. Ma and S. T. Lee, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 4264–4278 CrossRef CAS .
A. Majumdar, A. I. Hochbaum, R. K. Chen, R. D. Delgado, W. J. Liang, E. C. Garnett, M. Najarian and P. D. Yang, Nature, 2008, 451, 163–165 CrossRef .
M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen, M. Y. Tang, R. G. Yang, H. Lee, D. Z. Wang, Z. F. Ren, J. P. Fleurial and P. Gogna, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1043–1053 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Buddharaju, N. Singh, G. Q. Lo and S. J. Lee, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 32, 674–676 CrossRef CAS .
H. Foll, E. Ossei-Wusu, A. Cojocaru, H. Hartz and J. Carstensen, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 1417–1421 CrossRef .
S. T. Lee, K. Q. Peng, J. S. Jie and W. J. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 033105 CrossRef .
J. C. She, S. Z. Deng, N. S. Xu, R. H. Yao and J. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 013112 CrossRef .
A. Majumdar, R. Chen, M. C. Lu, V. Srinivasan, Z. Wang and H. H. Cho, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 548–553 CrossRef .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwarth, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Crozier, K. S. Seo, K. M. Wober, P. Steinvurzel, E. Schonbrun, Y. P. Dan and T. Ellenbogen, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1851–1856 CrossRef .
A. P. Ramirez, Science, 2007, 315, 1377–1378 CrossRef .
D. H. A. Blank and G. Rijnders, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 279–280 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, F. L. Deepak, G. Gundiah and A. Govindaraj, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2003, 31, 5–147 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Jagadish and S. Pearton, Zinc Oxide Bulk, Thin films and Nanostructures, Elsevier,  2006 Search PubMed .
T. Makino, K. Tamura, C. H. Chia, Y. Segawa, M. Kawasaki, A. Ohtomo and H. Koinuma, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2002, 229, 853–857 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Chen, D. M. Bagnall, H. J. Koh, K. T. Park, K. Hiraga, Z. Q. Zhu and T. Yao, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 3912–3918 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Vispute, V. Talyansky, S. Choopun, R. P. Sharma, T. Venkatesan, M. He, X. Tang, J. B. Halpern, M. G. Spencer, Y. X. Li, L. G. Salamanca-Riba, A. A. Iliadis and K. A. Jones, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 348–350 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. R. Gorla, S. Liang, N. Emanetoglu, Y. Lu, H. Shen and M. Wraback, J. Electron. Mater., 2000, 29, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897–1899 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gu, M. P. Paranthaman, J. Xu and Z. W. Pan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 273–278 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Sun, J. X. Wang, Y. Yang, H. Huang, Y. C. Lee, O. K. Tan and L. Vayssieres, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4995–4998 CrossRef .
H. Yu, Z. Zhang, M. Han, X. Hao and F. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2378–2379 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Sun, J. Zhang, J. L. Yin, H. L. Su, C. S. Liao and C. H. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4172–4177 CrossRef .
J. G. Wen, J. Y. Lao, D. Z. Wang, T. M. Kyaw, Y. L. Foo and Z. F. Ren, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 372, 717–722 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Kong and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1625–1631 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hong, H. S. Jung, J. Yoo, Y. J. Kim, C. H. Lee, M. Kim and G. C. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 222–226 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hong, J. Yoo, Y. J. Doh, S. H. Kang, K. J. Kong, M. Kim, D. R. Lee, K. H. Oh and G. C. Yi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 941–947 RSC .
Z. L. Wang, Y. Qin and X. D. Wang, Nature, 2008, 451, 809 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3553–3567 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and J. H. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, X. D. Wang, J. H. Song and J. Liu, Science, 2007, 316, 102–105 CrossRef .
S. Xu, Y. Qin, C. Xu, Y. G. Wei, R. S. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Kim, D. Choi, M. Y. Choi, W. M. Choi, H. J. Shin, H. K. Park, J. S. Seo, J. Park, S. M. Yoon, S. J. Chae, Y. H. Lee, J. Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee and J. M. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2187–2192 CrossRef .
H. J. Fan, W. Lee, R. Hauschild, M. Alexe, G. Le Rhun, R. Scholz, A. Dadgar, K. Nielsch, H. Kalt, A. Krost, M. Zacharias and U. Gösele, Small, 2006, 2, 561–568 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hu, Y. H. Lin, C. W. Tang, M. Y. Tsai, W. K. Hsu and H. F. Kuo, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2941–2945 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Steiner, Semiconductor Nanostructures for Optoelectronic Applications, Artech House, Inc, Boston, USA,  2004 Search PubMed .
H. Q. Yan, R. R. He, J. Johnson, M. Law, R. J. Saykally and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4728–4729 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Sun, J. Z. Huang, J. X. Wang and Z. Xu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1219–1223 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Chang, F. C. Tsao, C. J. Pan, G. C. Chi, H. T. Wang, J. J. Chen, F. Ren, D. P. Norton, S. J. Pearton, K. H. Chen and L. C. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 173503 CrossRef .
M. Willander, L. L. Yang, A. Wadeasa, S. U. Ali, M. H. Asif, Q. X. Zhao and O. Nur, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1006–1018 RSC .
W. I. Park and G. C. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Sun and J. X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1884–1889 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Zhou and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087–4108 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Baxter, A. M. Walker, K. van Ommering and E. S. Aydil, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, S304–S312 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Aydil and J. B. Baxter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 053114 CrossRef .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, C. K. Xu, P. Shin and L. L. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 125–129 Search PubMed .
J. Zhu, M. Ahmad, J. Zhao, J. Iqbal, W. Miao, L. Xie and R. Mo, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 165406 CrossRef .
S. Y. Bae, C. W. Na, J. H. Kang and J. Park, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2526–2531 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zhang, G. D. Yuan, J. S. Jie, X. Fan, J. A. Zapien, Y. H. Leung, L. B. Luo, P. F. Wang, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2591–2597 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, M. P. Lu, J. Song, M. Y. Lu, M. T. Chen, Y. Gao and L. J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1223–1227 CrossRef .
L. C. Ying, T. Y. Tseng, S. Y. Li and P. Lin, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1105–1111 CrossRef .
H. Tang, B. J. Kwon and J.-Y. Park, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2010, 207, 2478–2482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Sun and K. Li, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 1102–1104 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Yang, M. Law, L. E. Greene, A. Radenovic, T. Kuykendall and J. Liphardt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22652–22663 CrossRef .
S. Lim, J. Chung, J. Myoung and J. Oh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21360–21365 Search PubMed .
D. J. Norris, K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793–1798 CrossRef .
I. C. Chen, T. J. Hsueh, C. L. Hsu, S. J. Changa, P. W. Guo and J. H. Hsieh, Scr. Mater., 2007, 57, 53–56 CrossRef .
C. Levy-Clement, R. Tena-Zaera, M. A. Ryan, A. Katty and G. Hodes, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1512–1515 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Frechet, A. L. Briseno, T. W. Holcombe, A. I. Boukai, E. C. Garnett, S. W. Shelton and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 334–340 CrossRef .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18451–18456 CAS .
Y. K. Chang and F. C. N. Hong, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 195302 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. Yang, M. S. Lee and H. J. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 253106 CrossRef .
H. E. Unalan, Y. Zhang, P. Hiralal, S. Dalal, D. P. Chu, G. Eda, K. B. K. Teo, M. Chhowalla, W. I. Milne and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 163501 CrossRef .
B. Sun and H. Sirringhaus, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2408–2413 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Myoung, J. H. Choi, S. W. Lee, J. P. Kar, S. N. Das, J. Jeon, K. J. Moon, T. Il Lee and U. Jeong, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7393–7397 RSC .
S. Bubel, D. Nikolova, N. Mechau and H. Hahn, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 064514 CrossRef .
S. Kim, J. S. Lee and M. S. Islam, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1487–1490 CrossRef .
S. H. Ko, I. Park, H. Pan, N. Misra, M. S. Rogers, C. P. Grigoropoulos and A. P. Pisano, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 154102 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, Y. Qin and R. S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18734–18736 Search PubMed .
N. Wang, C. Cheng, M. Lei, L. Feng, T. L. Wong, K. M. Ho, K. K. Fung, M. M. T. Loy and D. P. Yu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 53–58 CrossRef .
S. M. Peng, Y. K. Su, L. W. Ji, S. J. Young, C. Z. Wu, W. B. Cheng, W. C. Chao and C. N. Tsai, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 32, 339–341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hahm, N. Kumar and A. Dorfman, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2875–2881 CrossRef .
A. Dorfman, N. Kumar and J. I. Hahm, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 4890–4895 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Li, W. H. Hu, Y. S. Liu, H. B. Yang and X. Q. Zhou, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3683–3687 CrossRef .
M. H. Asif, S. M. U. Ali, O. Nur, M. Willander, C. Brannmark, P. Stralfors, U. H. Englund, F. Elinder and B. Danielsson, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 2205–2211 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Al-Hilli, M. Willander, A. Ost and P. Stralfors, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 084304 CrossRef .
X. W. Sun, A. Wei, J. X. Wang, Y. Lei, X. P. Cai, C. M. Li, Z. L. Dong and W. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 123902 CrossRef .
B. S. Kang, H. T. Wang, F. Ren, S. J. Pearton, T. E. Morey, D. M. Dennis, J. W. Johnson, P. Rajagopal, J. C. Roberts, E. L. Piner and K. J. Linthicum, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 042114 CrossRef .
Y. R. Lin, T. J. Hsueh, S. J. Chang, C. L. Hsu and I. C. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 053111 CrossRef .
H. T. Wang, B. S. Kang, F. Ren, L. C. Tien, P. W. Sadik, D. P. Norton, S. J. Pearton and J. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 243503 CrossRef .
X. G. Wen, Y. P. Fang, Q. Pang, C. L. Yang, J. N. Wang, W. K. Ge, K. S. Wong and S. H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15303–15308 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Chen, T. J. Hsueh, C. L. Hsu and S. J. Chang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 126, 473–477 CrossRef .
X. Fang, Y. Bando, U. K. Gautam, C. Ye and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 509–522 RSC .
Z. F. Ren, D. Banerjee and S. H. Jo, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2028–2032 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, M. Ahmad and H. Y. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1299–1305 Search PubMed .
S. Jeon, D. Lee, M. Yoo, H. Seo, Y. Tak, W. G. Kim, K. Yong and S. W. Rhee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 135, 444–448 CrossRef .
M. Willander, O. Nur, Q. X. Zhao, L. L. Yang, M. Lorenz, B. Q. Cao, J. Z. Perez, C. Czekalla, G. Zimmermann, M. Grundmann, A. Bakin, A. Behrends, M. Al-Suleiman, A. El-Shaer, A. C. Mofor, B. Postels, A. Waag, N. Boukos, A. Travlos, H. S. Kwack, J. Guinard and D. L. Dang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 332001 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2100–2102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and Z. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4026–4030 CAS .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3160–3163 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, G. Mogilevsky, Q. Chen and A. Kleinhammes, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 460, 517–520 CrossRef .
P. G. Bruce, G. Armstrong, A. R. Armstrong and J. Canales, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2454–2456 Search PubMed .
P. Schmuki, J. M. Macak, S. Aldabergerova and A. Ghicov, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2006, 203, R67–R69 CrossRef .
P. Schmuki, J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, S. Berger, S. Bauer and S. Fujimoto, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 428, 421–425 CrossRef .
C. A. Grimes, G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose and O. K. Varghese, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 215–218 CrossRef .
C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1451–1457 RSC .
M. S. Sander, M. J. Cote, W. Gu, B. M. Kile and C. P. Tripp, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2052–2057 CrossRef CAS .
T.-S. Kang, A. P. Smith, B. E. Taylor and M. F. Durstock, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 601–606 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Grimes, M. Paulose, K. Shankar, S. Yoriya, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. A. Latempa and A. Fitzgerald, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16179–16184 CrossRef .
C. A. Grimes, M. Paulose, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, L. Peng, K. C. Popat, G. K. Mor and T. A. Desai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14992–14997 Search PubMed .
S. Yoriya and C. A. Grimes, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 417–420 CrossRef .
M. Paulose, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, 2498–2503 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Kuang, J. Brillet, P. Chen, M. Takata, S. Uchida, H. Miura, K. Sumioka and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1113–1116 CrossRef .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, R. H. T. Wilke, S. Sharma, K. Shankar, T. J. Latempa, K.-S. Choi and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1906–1911 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Grimes, G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose and O. K. Varghese, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 191–195 CrossRef .
C. A. Grimes, K. Shankar, G. K. Mor, H. E. Prakasam and O. K. Varghese, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12445–12449 CrossRef .
G. K. Mor, S. Kim, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, K. Shankar, J. Basham and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4250–4257 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, T. W. Lee and M. G. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2867–2869 RSC .
P. Schmuki, R. Hahn, A. Ghicov, J. Salonen and V. P. Lehto, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 105604 CrossRef .
P. Schmuki, A. Ghicov, J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, J. Kunze, V. Haeublein and S. Kleber, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 419, 426–429 CrossRef .
P. Schmuki, A. Ghicov, B. Schmidt and J. Kunze, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 433, 323–326 CrossRef .
B. H. Meekins and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3437–3446 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schmuki, R. Hahn, A. Ghicov, H. Tsuchiya, J. M. Macak and A. G. Munoz, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2007, 204, 1281–1285 CrossRef .
C. A. Grimes, G. K. Mor, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese and K. Shankar, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2356–2364 CrossRef .
P. Schmuki, A. Ghicov, S. Aldabergenova and H. Tsuchyia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6993–6996 CrossRef .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 731–737 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Xu, Z. Miao, J. H. Ouyang, G. L. Guo, X. S. Zhao and Y. Q. Tang, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 717–720 CrossRef .
B. B. Lakshmi, C. J. Patrissi and C. R. Martin, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2544–2550 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Sung, J. C. Lee, K. S. Park, T. G. Kim and H. J. Choi, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4317–4321 CrossRef .
Y. M. Sung, J. C. Lee, T. G. Kim and H. J. Choi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2588–2593 Search PubMed .
B. Liu, J. E. Boercker and E. S. Aydil, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 56 Search PubMed .
C. A. Grimes, X. J. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and T. J. Latempa, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781–3786 CrossRef .
H. Z. Zhang, X. H. Luo, J. Xu, B. Xiang and D. P. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 14866–14869 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Chen, J. M. Wu, H. C. Shih, W. T. Wu and Y. K. Tseng, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 281, 384–390 CrossRef .
H. C. Shih, J. M. Wu and W. T. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 105–109 CrossRef .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thelakkat, K. Willinger, K. Fischer and R. Kisselev, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5364–5376 RSC .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphrybaker, E. Muller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382–6390 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thelakkat, K. Shankar, J. Bandara, M. Paulose, H. Wietasch, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1654–1659 CrossRef .
C. A. Grimes, O. K. Varghese, D. W. Gong, M. Paulose and K. G. Ong, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 93, 338–344 CrossRef .
P. Schmuki, A. Ghicov, S. P. Alba and J. M. Macak, Small, 2008, 4, 1063–1066 CrossRef .
P. Schmuki, N. K. Shrestha, Y. C. Nah and H. Tsuchiya, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2008–2010 Search PubMed .
P. Schmuki, N. K. Shrestha, J. M. Macak, F. Schmidt-Stein, R. Hahn, C. T. Mierke and B. Fabry, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 969–972 CrossRef .
A. G. Kontos, A. Katsanaki, T. Maggos, V. Likodimos, A. Ghicov, D. Kim, J. Kunze, C. Vasilakos, P. Schmuki and P. Falaras, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 490, 58–62 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schmuki, S. P. Albu, A. Ghicov, J. M. Macak and R. Hahn, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1286–1289 CrossRef .
X. Y. Li, Y. Hou, X. J. Zou, X. Quan and G. C. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 858–863 CrossRef .
X. Quan, H. M. Zhang, S. Chen and H. M. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 6104–6109 CrossRef .
X. Quan, S. G. Yang, X. L. Ruan and H. M. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 3770–3775 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schmuki, J. M. Macak, M. Zlamal and J. Krysa, Small, 2007, 3, 300–304 CrossRef .
X. Y. Li, Y. Hou, Q. D. Zhao, X. Quan and G. H. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 5098–5103 CrossRef .
T. A. Desai, L. Peng, A. J. Barczak, R. A. Barbeau, Y. Y. Xiao, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 143–148 CrossRef .
L. Peng, A. D. Mendelsohn, T. J. LaTempa, S. Yoriya, C. A. Grimes and T. A. Desai, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1932–1936 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Jin, K. S. Brammer, S. H. Oh and J. O. Gallagher, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 786–793 CrossRef .
C. G. Granqvist and A. Hultaker, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 411, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Gordon, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 52–57 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Chun, Y. S. Choi, S. Y. Bae and J. Park, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 81, 539–542 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cheng, E. Stern, S. Guthrie, M. A. Reed, R. Klie, Y. F. Hao, G. Meng and L. Zhang, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 85, 233–240 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bianchi, E. Comini, M. Ferroni, G. Faglia, A. Vomiero and G. Sberveglieri, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 118, 204–207 CrossRef .
P. Nguyen, H. T. Ng, T. Yamada, M. K. Smith, J. Li, J. Han and M. Meyyappan, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 651–657 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kim, N. H. Kim and C. Lee, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 81, 1135–1138 CrossRef CAS .
R. Savu and E. Joanni, Scr. Mater., 2006, 55, 979–981 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Magdas, A. Cremades and J. Piqueras, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 094320 CrossRef .
M. J. Zheng, L. D. Zhang, G. H. Li, X. Y. Zhang and X. F. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 839–841 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jang, D. H. Kim, H. R. Lee and S. Y. Lee, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 1526–1529 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pashchanka, R. C. Hoffmann, A. Gurlo and J. J. Schneider, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8311–8319 RSC .
D. H. Zhang, Z. Q. Liu, C. Li, T. Tang, X. L. Liu, S. Han, B. Lei and C. W. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1919–1924 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Xu, Z. X. Cheng, Q. Y. Pan, J. Q. Xu, Q. Xiang, W. J. Yu and Y. L. Chu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 130, 802–808 CrossRef .
E. Comini, G. Faglia, M. Ferroni, A. Ponzoni, A. Vomiero and G. Sberveglieri, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 305, 170–177 CrossRef CAS .
M. Curreli, C. Li, Y. H. Sun, B. Lei, M. A. Gundersen, M. E. Thompson and C. W. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6922–6923 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 57–62 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Chen, X. F. Cui, K. Zhang, D. Y. Pan, S. Y. Zhang, B. Wang and J. G. Hou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 369, 16–20 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Liu, D. H. Zhang, S. Han, C. Li, T. Tang, W. Jin, X. L. Liu, B. Lei and C. W. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1754–1757 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wan, E. Dattoli and W. Lu, Small, 2008, 4, 451–454 CrossRef CAS .
E. N. Dattoli, Q. Wan, W. Guo, Y. Chen, X. Pan and W. Lu, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2463–2469 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, N. Mathews, M. R. Zheng, C. H. Sow, L. H. Wong and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1331–1336 CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Li, X. Huang, R. Ding, Y. Hu, J. Jiang and L. Liao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1859–1864 RSC .
J. Z. Wang, N. Du, H. Zhang, J. X. Yu and D. R. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11302–11305 CAS .
A. B. Bhise, D. J. Late, B. Sathe, M. A. More, I. S. Mulla, V. K. Pillai and D. S. Joag, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2010, 5, 527–535 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Ma and T. L. Guo, Physica B (Amsterdam), 2008, 403, 3410–3413 CAS .
Y. J. Chen, Q. H. Li, Y. X. Liang, T. H. Wang, Q. Zhao and D. P. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5682–5684 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Sysoev, J. Goschnick, T. Schneider, E. Strelcov and A. Kolmakov, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3182–3188 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, O. K. Tan, Y. C. Lee, T. D. Tran, M. S. Tse and X. Yao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 093507 CrossRef   (3 pages).
Y. C. Lee, H. Huang, O. K. Tan and M. S. Tse, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 132, 239–242 CrossRef .
I.-S. Hwang, J.-K. Choi, S.-J. Kim, K.-Y. Dong, J.-H. Kwon, B.-K. Ju and J.-H. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 142, 105–110 CrossRef .
Y. Shen, T. Yamazaki, Z. Liu, D. Meng, T. Kikuta, N. Nakatani, M. Saito and M. Mori, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 135, 524–529 CrossRef .
Y. B. Li, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and K. Kurashima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 367, 214–218 CrossRef CAS .
F. Krumeich, H. J. Muhr, M. Niederberger, F. Bieri, B. Schnyder and R. Nesper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 8324–8331 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oka, T. Yanagida, K. Nagashima, H. Tanaka and T. Kawai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3434–3435 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Li, J. Hu, R. Q. Wu and J. G. Lu, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 485502 CrossRef .
X. Y. Song, H. Y. Yu and S. X. Sun, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 289, 588–591 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gilbert, C. Frandsen, E. R. Maxey and D. M. Sherman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 03518 CrossRef .
A. Nattestad, A. J. Mozer, M. K. R. Fischer, Y. B. Cheng, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle and U. Bach, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Z. Li, R. Vajtai, L. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1492–1496 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, X. Feng, J. D. Sloppy, L. Guo and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2010, 11, 203–208 CrossRef .
J. Chen, U. Wang, L. Hartman and W. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16017–16021 CAS .
J. C. Park, J. Kim, H. Kwon and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 803–807 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Kim, I. S. Hwang, S. J. Kim, C. Y. Lee and J. H. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 135, 298–303 CrossRef .
A. Ponzoni, E. Comini, G. Sberveglieri, J. Zhou, S. Z. Deng, N. S. Xu, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 203101 CrossRef .
S. Plissard, K. A. Dick, G. Larrieu, S. Godey, A. Addad, X. Wallart and P. Caroff, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 385602 CrossRef .
K. Tomioka, T. Tanaka, S. Hara, K. Hiruma and T. Fukui, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2011, 17, 1112–1129 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Ramdani, E. Gil, C. Leroux, Y. Andre, A. Trassoudaine, D. Castelluci, L. Bideux, G. Monier, C. Robert-Goumet and R. Kupka, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1836–1841 CrossRef CAS .
J. Noborisaka, J. Motohisa, S. Hara and T. Fukui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 093109 CrossRef .
P. Krogstrup, R. Popovitz-Biro, E. Johnson, M. H. Madsen, J. Nygard and H. Shtrikman, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4475–4482 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, S. A. Fortuna, J. G. Wen and I. S. Chun, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4421–4427 CrossRef .
S. Breuer, C. Pfuller, T. Flissikowski, O. Brandt, H. T. Grahn, L. Geelhaar and H. Riechert, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1276–1279 CrossRef CAS .
C. Colombo, D. Spirkoska, M. Frimmer, G. Abstreiter and A. F. I. Morral, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 155326 CrossRef .
F. Jabeen, V. Grillo, S. Rubini and F. Martelli, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 275711 CrossRef .
K. Sladek, V. Klinger, J. Wensorra, M. Akabori, H. Hardtdegen and D. Grutzmacher, J. Cryst. Growth, 2010, 312, 635–640 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rudolph, M. Soda, M. Kiessling, T. Wojtowicz, D. Schuh, W. Wegscheider, J. Zweck, C. Back and E. Reiger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3860–3866 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tomioka, J. Motohisa, S. Hara, K. Hiruma and T. Fukui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1639–1644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moewe, L. C. Chuang, S. Crankshaw, C. Chase and C. Chang-Hasnain, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 023116 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 346–352 Search PubMed .
J. A. Czaban, D. A. Thompson and R. R. LaPierre, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 148–154 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mariani, P. S. Wong, A. M. Katzenmeyer, F. Leonard, J. Shapiro and D. L. Huffaker, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2490–2494 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Fortuna, J. Wen, I. Su Chun and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4421–4427 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, H. J. Choi, K. P. Knutsen, R. D. Schaller, P. D. Yang and R. J. Saykally, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 106–110 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qian, S. Gradecak, Y. Li, C. Y. Wen and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2287–2291 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Kim, D. S. Kim, Y. S. Park, D. Y. Kim, T. W. Kang and K. S. Chung, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 991–993 CAS .
Y. S. Park, C. M. Park, D. J. Fu, T. W. Kang and J. E. Oh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5718–5720 CrossRef CAS .
R. Calarco, R. J. Meijers, R. K. Debnath, T. Stoica, E. Sutter and H. Luth, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2248–2251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, W. Jin, T. Tang, C. Li, D. H. Zhang, X. L. Liu, J. Han and C. W. Zhou, J. Mater. Res., 2003, 18, 245–249 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuykendall, P. J. Pauzauskie, Y. F. Zhang, J. Goldberger, D. Sirbuly, J. Denlinger and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 524–528 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuykendall, P. Pauzauskie, S. K. Lee, Y. F. Zhang, J. Goldberger and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1063–1066 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. D. Zhang, X. F. Wang, C. H. Liang, X. S. Peng and Y. W. Wang, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 5714–5717 CrossRef CAS .
P. Deb, H. Kim, V. Rawat, M. Oliver, S. Kim, M. Marshall, E. Stach and T. Sands, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1847–1851 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Hersee, X. Sun and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1808–1811 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Kim, Y. H. Cho, H. Lee, S. I. Kim, S. R. Ryu, D. Y. Kim, T. W. Kang and K. S. Chung, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1059–1062 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lee, S. Y. Lin, C. H. Chiu, T. C. Lu, H. C. Kuo, S. C. Wang, S. Chhajed, J. K. Kim and E. F. Schubert, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 141111 CrossRef .
C. H. Chiu, T. C. Lu, H. W. Huang, C. F. Lai, C. C. Kao, J. T. Chu, C. C. Yu, H. C. Kuo, S. C. Wang, C. F. Lin and T. H. Hsueh, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 445201 CrossRef .
L. Y. Chen, Y. Y. Huang, C. H. Chang, Y. H. Sun, Y. W. Cheng, M. Y. Ke, C. P. Chen and J. J. Huang, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 7664–7669 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Wang, L. Y. Chen, C. P. Chen, Y. W. Cheng, M. Y. Ke, M. Y. Hsieh, H. M. Wu, L. H. Peng and J. Huang, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 10549–10556 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lee, J. Yoo, Y. J. Hong, J. Cho, Y.-J. Kim, S.-R. Jeon, J. H. Baek and G.-C. Yi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 213101–213103 CrossRef .
C. H. Lee, Y. J. Kim, Y. J. Hong, S. R. Jeon, S. Bae, B. H. Hong and G. C. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4614–4619 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Tang, Z. H. Chen, H. S. Song, C. S. Lee, H. T. Cong, H. M. Cheng, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4191–4195 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, S. H. Lee, J. H. You, T. W. Kim, K. H. Lee, J. Y. Lee, Y. H. Kwon and T. W. Kang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2010, 312, 2320–2323 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Chen, C. T. Yip, M. K. Fung, A. B. Djurisic and W. K. Chan, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2010, 100, 15–19 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Huang, J. H. Song, W. F. Lee, Y. Ding, Z. Y. Gao, Y. Hao, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4766–4771 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohgai, L. Gravier, X. Hoffer and J.-P. Ansemet, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2005, 35, 479–485 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, H. Razavi, J. W. Do, A. Moriwaki, O. Ergen, Y.-L. Chueh, P. W. Leu, J. C. Ho, T. Takahashi, L. A. Reichertz, S. Neale, K. Yu, M. Wu, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 648–653 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Hung, T. Oh and J. N. Cha, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1016–1020 RSC .
F. H. Xue, G. T. Fei, B. Wu, P. Cui and L. D. Whang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15348–15349 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Kline, M. Tiang, J. Wang, A. Sen, M. W. H. Chan and T. E. Mallouk, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7555–7565 CrossRef CAS .
D. Whang, S. Jin, Y. Wu and Y. C. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2003, 1255–1259 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bentley, J. Trethewey, A. Ellis and W. Crone, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 487–490 CrossRef CAS .
P. Smith, C. Nordquist, T. Jackson, T. Mayer, B. Martin, J. Mbindyo and T. Mallouk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 1399–1401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4017–4020 RSC .
X. P. Huang, W. Han, Z. L. Shi, D. Wu, M. Wang, R.-W. Peng and N.-B. Min, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1694–1697 CAS .
J. Yuan, H. Gao, F. Schacher, Y. Xu, R. Richter, W. Tremel and A. H. E. Müller, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1441–1450 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guerero-Martinez, J. Perez-Juste, E. Carbo-Argibay, G. Tardajos and L. M. Liz Marzan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9484–9488 CrossRef .
F. S. Ou, M. M. Shaijumon and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1853–1857 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rauber, I. Alber, S. Müller, R. Neumann, O. Picht, C. Roth, A. Schökel, M. E. Toimil-Molares and W. Ensinger, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2304–2310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goyal, A. L. M. Reddy and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2011, 7, 1709–1713 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ruzmetov, V. P. Oleshko, P. M. Haney, H. J. Lezec, K. Karki, K. H. Baloch, A. K. Agrawal, A. V. Davydov, S. Krylyuk, Y. Liu, J. Y. Huang, M. Tanase, J. Cumings and A. A. Talin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 505–511 CrossRef CAS .
S. Neocleus, S. W. Pattinson, A. M. Moisala Motta, A. H. Windle and D. Eder, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2011, 4, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. Benson, S. Boukhalfa, A. Magasinski, A. Kvit and G. Yushin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sudan Saha, R. Li, M. Cai and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 1079–1085 CrossRef .
K.-S. Park, J.-G. Kang, Y.-J. Choi, S. Lee, D.-W. Kim and J.-G. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1796–1801 CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Fang, H. Liu, X. Wu and Y. Lu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2867–2869 RSC .
M. Yu, Y.-Z. Long, B. Sun and Z. Fan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2783–2796 RSC .
A. Gasparotto, D. Barreca, Ch. Maccato and E. Tondello, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2813–2825 RSC .
S. Barth, R. Jimenez-Diaz, J. Sama, J. D. Prades, I. Gracia, J. Santander, C. Cane and A. Romano-Rodriguez, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4734–4736 RSC .

Footnote† Part of a web theme on the topic of nanomaterials (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft SPP1181/Nanomaterials program).This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Ravi K. Joshi
	Ravi Joshi obtained his Bachelor's degree in Mechanical Engineering from Shivaji University, Kolhapur, India. Thereafter he worked towards his Master's degree in Materials science at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras, Chennai, India. From 2006 he worked towards his PhD degree which he received from Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany, in 2010, working in the group of Prof. J. J. Schneider on carbon nanotubes and their hybrid materials. He examined the growth mechanism of ultra-long carbon nanotubes, their composites and hybrid materials and their exploration as functional materials for sensoric and electronic applications. In 2011, he accepted an offer for a post doc position in the group of Prof. G. Duesberg at CRANN Center of Trinity College Dublin, Ireland, working on suspended graphene transistor devices. Currently he is a researcher with the Infinion company, Villach, Austria.

Jörg J. Schneider
	Jörg J. Schneider studied chemistry at the Philipps Universität Marburg, Germany and obtained a Dr rer nat. in 1986 working in the field of organometallic chemistry. From 1987 until 1988 he was a post doc at Kansas State University, KS, Manhattan, USA and from 1989–1994 a post-doc at the Max-Planck-Institut für Kohlenforschung, Mülheim a.d. Ruhr, Germany. From 1994 until 1999 he was a Heisenberg Fellow of the DFG at the University of Essen and from 2000–2003 a full professor for Inorganic Chemistry at the Karls-Franzens-Universität, Austria. Since 2003 he has been a professor for inorganic chemistry at the Technische Universität Darmstadt. His current research interests are in the area of materials and organometallic chemistry: functional properties of carbon nanotubes, graphene, metal oxides for electronics, catalytic and sensoric properties of these materials and their hybrids as well as organometallic chemistry of polycondensed aromatics.

 	Fig. 1  From one dimensional nanostructures to integrated function and applications (taken with gratitude from M. Rauber, Dissertation, TU Darmstadt, 2011).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic overview depicting possible surface effects connected with a 1D nanowire morphology and the physical properties which are addressable with a 1D morphology together with characteristic measuring parameters to detect such properties (adopted from Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 151).	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Pictorial representation of the Vapour–Liquid–Solid (VLS) mechanism demonstrating the growth of 1D nanoobjects: (a) formation of reactive species in the vapour phase upon decomposition of the precursor, (b) metal catalyst species upon formation of a liquid–solid junction, (c) growth of nanowire in solid form. (B) High resolution transmission electron micrograph (HRTEM) image of the catalyst alloy–nanowire interface of a SiNW with a [111] growth axis. (C) Vertical stacks of SiNWs grown in a stepwise manner. (D) Side view of the horizontal growth as of (C) ((B) reproduced with permission from Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 433. (C) and (D) with permission from Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1100).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematics exemplifying the Solution–Liquid–Solid (SLS) growth for the generation of nanowires in solution.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematics illustrating the VLS growth mechanism with a low-melting metal mediated growth (adopted after ref. 2).	 

 	Fig. 6  Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a dense tentacle growth of Bi nanowires schematically shown in Fig. 5. The wires have been growing out of a liquid gallium droplet by a low melting mediated VLS method (reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16219).	 

 	Fig. 7  Cross-sectional view of a 3D channel array of a porous alumina template which can be used for arranging 1D nanomaterials into 3D ordered structures. (reproduced with permission from ref. 28).	 

 	Fig. 8  Scheme for an ion track etching process to yield a polymer template (e.g. PC or PMMA based). Heavy ions hit the PC foil and generate spurs which can be etched to form randomly oriented pores (a and b); 1D nanostructures can be synthesized in the etched tracks, e.g. by electrochemical deposition; template freed rods after complete polymer template dissolution (d). If the polymer template is not completely dissolved but leaving a polymer residue at the bottom (not shown), straight and vertically aligned 1D nanowire assemblies can be obtained.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Scheme representing the process of template assisted growth of 1D nanostructures using either PAOX, or PC as templates; (b) e.g. scanning electron micrographs showing the deposition of TiO2 inside a PAOX template top (B1) and cross-sectional view (B2). (c) 3D arranged nanoarray of TiO2 nanotubes after complete removal of the PAOX template, (c1) top view, (c2) side view. ((B and C) reproduced with permission from Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 601).	 

 	Fig. 10  Overview of various growth techniques for 1D nanomaterials (tubes, wires, rods) from the gas phase and solution (scheme adopted from ref. 2).	 

 	Fig. 11  (A and B) SEM micrographs showing various morphologies of vertically aligned CNTs obtained by a structured CNT growth. (C) Schematic explaining the collapse of the structure upon wetting and drying of the CNT structures. (D–F) show different CNT structures before and after the collapse of the structure ((A and B) reproduced with permission from J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1717, (C–E) reproduced with permission from Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987 and (F) from J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5967).	 

 	Fig. 12  3D CNT array (tilt 70°). CNT top layer provides contact for adhesion, see Fig. 13.	 

 	Fig. 13  Right: a large spanner suspended from a one cm2 3D CNT sample, left: CNT sample supporting the weight of a typical textbook of ca. 1000 g (gratitude to Dr G. Keeley for photographs).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Nanostructured microsized 3D CNT array with dimensions matching a macroscopic handable size; (b) flexible nature of the all carbon 3D CNT; (c) microscopic (SEM) view of the 3D CNT array, height about 40 μm. The tubes are embedded between a top and bottom graphitic layer interconnecting individual nanotubes; (d) close up side view of the 3D CNT structure displaying the straight and parallel CNT arrangement (reproduced with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8958).	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic comparison of (a) a 2D parallel plate and (b) a concentric tube 3D battery with low areal footprint containing a 1 D anode composed of carbon microbeads (reproduced with permission from MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 523).	 

 	Fig. 16  Three dimensional designs for prospective 3D batteries; (a) array of interdigitated cylindrical cathodes and anodes; (b) interdigitated plate array of cathodes and anodes; (c) rod array of cylindrical anodes coated with a thin layer of ion-conducting dielectric (electrolyte) with the remaining free volume filled with the cathode material; (d) a periodic “sponge” architecture in which the solid network of the sponge serves as the charge insertion cathode, which is coated with an ultrathin layer of ion-conducting dielectric (electrolyte), and the remaining free volume is filled with an interpenetrating, continuous anode (reproduced with permission from Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 226).	 

 	Fig. 17  Left side: schematic view of a 3D aligned CNT interconnect. Right side: scanning electron micrograph of a 3D CNT wire array obtained via a CVD technique (reproduced with permission from Microelectron. Eng., 2002, 64, 399).	 

 	Fig. 18  An array of compressed and uncompressed 50 μm high pillars of 3D vertically aligned CNT arrays with inset showing a magnified image of an as grown pillar; (b) typical stress strain curve for uniaxial compression of a single bundle of CNTs; (c) buckled morphology present in a 3D CNT pillar after compression and recovery; (d) a stress strain plot taken at four different strain rates. (For more information see Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2338, all figures reproduced with permission therefrom.)	 

 	Fig. 19  Mechanical deformations in 3D CNT tactile sensor element might result in a change of the electronic band structure and/or a CNT–metal contact resistance. Left side: contact of CNTs with the neighboring CNTs might occur. Right side: bending of individual CNTs inside a 3D CNT block, schematically shown. This affects the electronic band structure of the CNTs in the block structure.	 

 	Fig. 20  Left side: frey-hair impingement on the surface of a single 3D CNT nano-pressure sensor. The entire demonstrator has a size of about 2.5 mm2 (5 mm × 5 mm) and comprises twelve units of 4 × 4 individually contacted sensor elements. Right side: optimized wiring of the CNT pressure sensor elements: (a) CNT contacts; (b) vertical aligned CNTs; (c) top wiring; (d) bottom wiring (perpendicular to top wiring) (reproduced with permission from Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 085501).	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Electron micrograph showing a CNT film supported on Si pillars. The Si morphology can act as a base structure to form micro-electro mechanical systems. To the left: top image shows a source–drain–gate combination of a CNT based actuator, bottom image shows a cantilever position in ON and OFF states. (B) Arrays of such actuators. (C) 2D CNT films stretched between two copper electrodes to form a device (D) and their application to generate sound under water. (E) Horizontally grown CNTs forming a 2D aligned CNT film. Below it schematic showing a device configuration and SEM image of the same device and (F) optical images of a SWNT device formed on a transparent flexible PET substrate. ((A and B) reproduced with permission from Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 298, (C and D) from Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2374, (E and F) from Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 230).	 

 	Fig. 22  Scanning electron micrographs of SiNWs grown using (A) the VLS method using Al as catalyst, (B) by the CVD method, (C) by chemical etching, (D) branched SiNW structure grown in a two step growth process, (E) SiNWs patterned on the Si substrate using the Langmuir–Blodgett method, (F) TFTs based on an aligned SiNW thin film, (G) SiNWs deposited between source and drain ((A) reproduced with permission from Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 186; (B) from Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93 1568–1571; (C) from ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3222; (D) from J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5376; (E) from Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1255; (F and G) from Nature, 2003, 425, 274).	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematics showing the set-up of a tactile sensor design using Si nanowires. (B) Optical image of the same. (C) Schematics explaining the vertical FET using Si-nanowires and (D) electron micrographs of vertical FET made up of Si-nanowire itself ((A and B) reproduced with permission from Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 821; (C) and (D) from Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 973).	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Vertical silicon nanowire electrode arrays (VNEAs) for interrogating neuronal networks. Dimensions of the nanowire electrodes were designed to facilitate single cell intracellular electrical coupling. (d) shows a cortical rat cell (false yellow colored) on top of a VNEA pad. (b, c, e, f) show recording pads for parallel multi site interrogation and neuronal rat cells cultured on a VNEA device (see Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 180, figures reproduced with permission therefrom).	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic drawing showing the influence of silicon morphology on the morphological integrity of a Si electrode. The volume expansion leading to severe anode structure deformation for the different Si morphologies: Si film vs. particles vs. 3D nanowire array is shown (reproduced with permission from Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31).	 

 	Fig. 26  Electron micrographs showing various growth morphologies of organized ZnO nanostructures on different substrates. (A and B) ZnO nanowires on Kevlar fibers, (C) on a pre-etched Si substrate, (D) on GaN micro pyramids, (E) on a GaN substrate, (F) on quartz glass; and (G and H) on different crystal planes of ZnO itself. ((A and B) reproduced with permission from Nature, 451, 809; (C, E, G, H) from Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 33, (D) from J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 941 and (F) from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2378).	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic cross-sectional view of the glucose sensor device based on ZnO nanorod gated high electron mobility transistor structure (top); and drain current change for different concentrations of glucose dissolved in the PBS buffer solution (bottom) (adopted and redrawn from IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2011, 17, 1092).	 

 	Fig. 28  (A and B) Scanning electron micrographs of titania nanotubes synthesized using anodic oxidation of Ti foil. (C) Schematic drawing of a p–n junction composed of Cu doped titania nanotubes and bare titania nanotubes forming a semiconductor device for hydrogen generation. (D) Schematics explaining the hydrocarbon (methane) production using titania nanotubes. (E) Plot showing hydrocarbon generation using Pt and Cu loaded titania nanotubes ((A) reproduced with permission from ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1113, (B) from Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12445, (C) from Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1906 and (D and E) from Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 731).	 

 	Fig. 29  As synthesized, unorganized SnO2 nanowires (a), XRD of the same, together with standard (b), room temperature photoluminescence spectrum (c), (d) and (e) show schematic processes for nanowire SnO2-FET formation (d) and SEM of aligned nanowire arrangement (e) (all reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1331).	 

 	Fig. 30  Formation of CuO nanowires by oxidation of Cu foil. (b) Cross-section view of the CuO nanowire array, showing the length of the nanowires in the range of 4–8 μm and the thickness of the supporting foil to be about 3 μm; (c) TEM image of a single CuO nanowire, the diameter of which is about 150 nm; (d) high-resolution TEM image of the boxed area in part (c) shows that the nanowires are single crystalline and no second phase is identified (reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16017).	 

 	Fig. 31  Scanning electron micrographs of (a) Au-assisted and (b) self-assisted GaAs–(Al,Ga)As core–shell nanowires on Si(111), insets show magnifications of the wires in the top and foot region. (C) μ-PL spectra of the Au-assisted and the self-assisted nanowires at room temperature. The integrated intensity for the self-assisted nanowires is larger than that for the Au-assisted ones by more than 2 orders of magnitude. (D) μ-PL transients for the Au-assisted and the self-assisted nanowires at room temperature. The inset shows a magnification of the Au-assisted nanowire transient. Solid lines represent fits to the data. The obtained minority carrier lifetimes differ by more than 2 orders of magnitude (reproduced with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1276).	 

 	Fig. 32  Planar 〈110〉 GaAs nanowires grown on a GaAs 〈100〉 substrate. (A) Low, (b) medium, and (c) high magnification SEM images of well-aligned 〈110〉 oriented planar nanowires. Nanowires were grown at 460 °C in (a and b) and at 475 °C in (c) (reprinted with permission of Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4421).	 

 	Fig. 33  (A) Scanning electron micrograph of a GaN nanowire array consisting of 1 μm GaN nanowires (inset shows plan view and reveals the hexagonal symmetry of the nanowires); (b) lower magnification SEM image reveals the long-range order of the GaN nanowire arrays (reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1808).	 

 	Fig. 34  Thermal assembly and rapid deposition of vertically aligned CdSe nanorods (reprinted with permission from Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1016).	 

 	Fig. 35  Scanning electron micrograph of a cobalt filament array. The white circles mark the branching regions of the filaments, where the correlation of the corrugations on adjacent filaments can be easily identified (reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1694).	 

 	Fig. 36  Scheme showing an alignment of Te nanorods by a magnetization–alignment–demagnetization process which is assisted by an external magnetic field and mediated by superparamagnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles. The acid etch in the last step removes the magnetic particles (reprinted with permission from ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1441).	 

 	Fig. 37  Scheme showing template fabrication and formation of a 3D nanowire network (reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2304).	 

 	Fig. 38  Field emission scanning electron micrograph of a 3D Pt nanowire network, inset shows the nanowire network with higher magnification. Similar structures are possible for other metals or semiconductors by adaption of the same process (reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2304).	 

 	Fig. 39  Forest of Al nanowires onto which vanadium oxide can be deposited by atomic layer deposition (reprinted with permission from ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 118).	 

 	Fig. 40  Schematic representation of a 3D ITO nanowire array and a 3D ITO@TiO2 core–shell nanowire composite electrode (reprinted with permission from Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1796).	 
Footnote
† Part of a web theme on the topic of nanomaterials (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft SPP1181/Nanomaterials program).

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
