Ammonium sulfate treatment at the TiO 2 /perovskite interface boosts operational stability of perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC02657G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02657G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 14334-14341Ammonium sulfate treatment at the TiO2/perovskite interface boosts operational stability of perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Bening Tirta 
            Muhammad
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Teddy 
            Salim
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Annalisa 
            Bruno
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Andrew C. 
            Grimsdale
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Wei Lin 
            Leong
          
        
      *ac
aEnergy Research Institute@NTU (ERI@N), Research Techno Plaza, X-Frontier Block, Level 5, 50 Nanyang Drive, 637553, Singapore. E-mail: wlleong@ntu.edu.sg
bInterdisciplinary Graduate Programme, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore
cSchool of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore
Received 
      9th June 2021
    , Accepted 13th September 2021First published on 15th September 2021AbstractTitanium dioxide (TiO2) electron transport layers (ETLs) are still widely used in perovskite solar cells (PSCs) due to their compatibility with existing printing technologies and favorable energy level alignment for efficient electron extraction. However, TiO2 ETLs suffer from surface defects, e.g. oxygen vacancies, that are detrimental to the perovskite/ETL interface stability, especially under operational conditions. Furthermore, hydroxyl groups present on the TiO2 surface also contribute to deprotonation of acidic organic cations in PSCs. We thus hypothesize that the metal oxide surface turns chemically reactive under 1-sun illumination whereby devices are highly populated with charge carriers and experience elevated temperatures (ca. 60 °C). Here, we introduced facile incorporation of sulfate species on the metal oxide surface to minimize chemical degradation at the perovskite/ETL interface. The sulfate treatment was found to minimally influence the perovskite film morphology grown on top of the ETLs, so ruling out morphological effects and allowing us to study the perovskite/ETL interface stability. We found that the sulfate treated devices exhibited enhanced operational stability under the initial maximum power point voltage (VMPP) over 1800 s of measurement. The sulfate treated devices retained 95% of their initial efficiency while the pristine devices already lost more than 40% of their initial efficiency. We also thermally aged encapsulated perovskite films coated on top of pristine and treated ETLs. We found that the thermally aged perovskite films coated on the pristine ETL contained perovskite hydrate species while the treated samples did not. We thus postulate that the water molecules contributing to hydrate formation were generated solely from the ETL/perovskite interface. Lastly, better energy alignment was also found between the perovskite and sulfate-treated ETL, which also contributes to the improved operational and thermal stability.
Introduction
Since their emergence as promising photovoltaic materials in 2009,1 organic–inorganic halide perovskites have attracted a great deal of attention owing to their high carrier mobility,2 long-lived photoinduced charge carriers,3 large absorption coefficient,4 and tunable bandgaps.5,6 Recently, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have surpassed the 25% power conversion efficiency (PCE) benchmark for a single-junction configuration. However, the commercialization of PSCs is still hampered by their instability in moist ambient air,7–10 and elevated temperatures (∼60 °C) under 1 sun operational conditions.11–13 Generally, a PSC device is comprised of a perovskite photo-absorber layer sandwiched between electron and hole transport layers. The poor interfacial contact quality between the perovskite layer and charge transport layer is thought to be one of the determining factors in limiting the device efficiency as well as stability.14 For instance, poor charge-carrier extraction from the perovskite layer to the electron transport layer would cause a local excess of charge-carriers that destabilizes the perovskite layer.15
Titanium dioxide or TiO2 is one of the most widely used electron transport layers (ETLs), due to its suitable conduction band alignment relative to that of the perovskite,16 which allows the efficient extraction of photo-induced electrons. Although requiring high-temperature annealing, TiO2 in its mesoporous form is processable by established printing technologies, such as ink-jet printing, screen-printing, and spray-coating, allowing fast large-area fabrication of PSCs.17–19 Furthermore, mesoporous TiO2 (mTiO2) is commonly harnessed as the scaffold for high-efficiency carbon-based perovskite solar modules (70 cm2).20,21 With an optimized thickness, the mTiO2 layer could also offer better ambient device stability than its planar counterpart.22 However, there are a few drawbacks that impede the realization of robust TiO2-based perovskite solar cells in term of operational stability. The surface hydroxyl groups present on the TiO2 surface could induce chemical degradation at the perovskite/TiO2 interface.23 Meanwhile, in the presence of oxygen and ultraviolet (UV) light, oxygen vacancies could become deep trap states in TiO2.24 Surface modifications are therefore utilized to mitigate these drawbacks. For instance, fullerene derivatives have been used as interfacial layers between the perovskite and TiO2 to passivate surface defects.25–27 Bifunctional self-assembled monolayers with carboxylic acid,28 phosphonic acid,29 or silane30,31 anchoring groups at one end and either hydrophobic or hydrophilic and positively charged functional groups at the other were reported to passivate surface defects and tune the work function of TiO2, resulting in better performance as well as stability in ambient air. Besides the mentioned organic solution-based treatments, inorganic interlayers such as Nb2O5,32 atomic layer deposited TiN,33 and MXene and metallic dopants34,35 were also utilized to improve the electrical properties of TiO2-based ETLs. However, most surface modification strategies typically also changed the surface energy of the modified ETL, thus changing the morphology of perovskites grown or coated on top. It is thus challenging to decouple the morphological change effect from the interfacial strengthening that the surface modification strategy has contributed to the perovskite/ETL interface stability.
Here, we report that the use of ammonium sulfate surface treatment on a TiO2 ETL can boost the perovskite solar cell operational stability. Interestingly, this surface treatment minimally disrupts the perovskite crystallization dynamics and therefore allows us to study the perovskite/ETL interface stability. We hypothesized that under 1-sun light illumination and in the operational temperature range of solar cells (circa 60 °C), the metal oxide/perovskite turns chemically reactive, leading to perovskite layer degradation starting from the interface and via a perovskite hydrate intermediate. Thus, the use of ammonium sulfate surface treatment on the TiO2 ETL can serve to eliminate the latter degradation pathway. The presence of the hydrate intermediate in the thermally aged pristine sample was detected by X-ray diffraction measurements while not in the sulfate-treated sample. We further performed photophysical characterizations to correlate the improved operational and thermal stability to improved charge transport properties. A better energy alignment was also found between the perovskite and sulfate-treated ETL. Finally, we found that sulfate treatment could also extend the thermal stability by at least fivefold, where T80 (the time required to drop to 80% of the initial efficiency) of the solar cell devices increased from 80 hours (pristine) to 440 hours (sulfated) at a temperature mimicking the operational conditions, i.e. 60 °C.
Results and discussion
Perovskite solar cell (PSC) devices with a configuration of FTO/compact TiO2/mTiO2 (with and without ammonium sulfate modification)/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au in a normal mesoscopic architecture as shown in Fig. 1a have been fabricated for studying the device performances. The perovskite used in this study was a Cs-doped mixed halide perovskite (commonly known as a triple-cation perovskite recipe36 with a chlorobenzene solvent washing technique). The perovskite solar cell was completed by depositing a lithium-doped spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer (HTL) and thermally evaporated gold (Au) contact.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the device structure used in this study. (b and c) O 1s core orbital XPS spectra of pristine and ammonium sulfate-treated mesoporous TiO2. Statistical distribution of the photovoltaic parameters of the pristine and sulfated ETL-based solar cell devices: (d) open-circuit voltage (VOC), (e) short-circuit current density (JSC), and (f) fill factor (FF). (g) J–V scans both in reverse (VOC to JSC) and forward (JSC to VOC) directions of the pristine and treated champion devices. The inset table is of the average photovoltaic parameter values in both scan directions. (h) Operational stability tracking as presented by fixed bias measurements at the initial maximum power point voltage (VMPP) for 1800 seconds. 
Sulfate species were applied on the mTiO2 layer by spin-coating an aqueous solution of ammonium sulfate, (NH4)2SO4, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 15 minutes. The annealing process at 150 °C was required to eliminate solvent and ammonia species from the surface treatment, thus leaving only the oxyanion species.37 To confirm the successful chemical modification on the mTiO2 surface, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was utilized to elucidate the surface composition of the fabricated films. The presence of sulfate species was confirmed by the evolution of the S 2p orbital peak after surface treatment as shown in the full XPS spectra of pristine and sulfated mTiO2 (see Fig. S1, ESI†). Fig. 1b and c highlight the composition analysis based on surface oxide speciation for the pristine and treated samples. Based on O 1s orbital peak fitting, we found that 6.1 atomic percentage (% at.) of sulfate was successfully incorporated on the mTiO2 surface upon the treatment. We also found that the amount of metal hydroxide (M-OH) species was lowered after the treatment from a 5.7% to a 2.8% atomic ratio (see Table S1, ESI†). The XPS data suggest that the sulfate treatment could also lower the amount of hydroxide/hydroxyl dangling bonds present on the metal oxide surface.

Fig. 1d–f and Fig. S2 (ESI†) present the photovoltaic parameters of the pristine and sulfated devices, namely the open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current (JSC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE). The average values of VOC of the pristine and sulfated devices are similar, i.e. 1073 mV and 1076 mV, respectively. The mean Jsc values are also very close between the pristine and sulfated samples, 21.50 and 21.44 mA cm−2, respectively. Though a slight decrease in the average fill factor between the pristine and sulfated devices (75.3% versus 73.4%) was observed, the overall performance was very similar with average device efficiencies of 17.4% and 17.2% for the pristine and treated samples. Table S2 (ESI†) also presents a summary of the solar cell performance parameters with varying concentration of ammonium sulfate (5 mM, 10 mM, and 20 mM). 5 mM was found to be the optimized condition. It is important to note that, although the sulfated devices have a very similar PCE to that of the pristine ones, the hysteresis between the reverse and forward scan directions was less significant. Fig. 1g shows the J–V plots during forward and reverse measurements of perovskite solar cell devices with an active area of 0.090 cm2 dictated by the photomask used. Following the equation of hysteresis effect index (HEI) = (JRS(0.8 VOC) − JFS(0.8 VOC))/[(JRS(0.8 VOC) + JFS(0.8 VOC))/2], JRS(0.8 VOC) and JFS(0.8 VOC) refer to the current density at 80% of the open-circuit voltage (VOC),38 we could calculate HEI values of 0.15 and 0.10 for the pristine and sulfate treated devices, respectively. We postulate that the lower hysteresis effect index in the sulfate treated devices can be attributed to less surface defect-assisted charge carrier trapping and thus less charge accumulation at the perovskite/sulfated ETL interface.39–41 Strikingly, enhanced operational stability was observed from power output tracking at the initial maximum power point voltage (VMPP) as shown in Fig. 1h. With 1800 s exposure under one-sun illumination and a fixed applied bias (0.81 V), 95% of the initial power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the treated device was retained while the pristine one had lost more than 40% of its initial PCE. Note that the J–V scan measurement and operational stability tracking are conducted in ambient air with unencapsulated devices. The relative humidity (RH) in our lab in Singapore is also high, in the range of 55% to 70%. In addition, the temperature of the solar cell devices during the stability tracking measurements was found to reach between 55 and 60 °C as measured by a non-contact infrared (IR) thermometer, similar to a previous report.11 The effect of thermal stress on the devices will be delved into further in subsequent sections.
As mentioned earlier, the surface treatment of the ETL with functionalized organic and inorganic modifiers usually would also alter the perovskite morphologies. Thus, the effect of the surface treatment on the perovskite film morphology was then characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and UV-visible absorbance spectroscopy. Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images show the morphology of the resulting perovskite films coated on pristine and sulfated mTiO2 films (Fig. 2a–d). The perovskite morphology was found to not distinctly change upon surface treatment. The quantification of the perovskite grain size distribution (Fig. S3, ESI†) presents average grain sizes of 346 ± 102 nm and 353 ± 123 nm for the pristine and treated samples, respectively. This is also in line with the water droplet contact angle measurements, which showed that the surface wetting of the metal oxide surfaces with and without the sulfate treatment remained about the same (Fig. S4, ESI†). The cross-sectional SEM images also showed comparable thickness of the perovskite layers, i.e. about 500 nm. Moreover, the absorbance profiles of the pristine and treated perovskite films overlap well (Fig. S5, ESI†), which correspond to the similar thickness and an unaffected perovskite bandgap energy (Eg). Furthermore, the similar crystallinity of the resulting perovskite films both coated on top of pristine and sulfated mTiO2 was further confirmed by the XRD patterns. Fig. 2e and f show complete XRD spectra of the perovskite films and a full width at half maximum (FWHM) comparison of the pristine and treated samples. Both data suggest that the treatment did not affect the crystallinity of the resulting perovskite films.
 Fig. 2  (a–d) Top-view and cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the perovskite film grown on pristine and sulfated mTiO2 with a scale bar of 500 nm. (e) X-ray diffraction spectra of perovskite films coated on top of pristine and sulfated mTiO2. (f) Full width at half maximum (FWHM) plotting of the perovskite film identity peak at 2θ = 14.1°. 
Since there should be no significant influence on device performance by the negligible change in morphology and crystallinity induced by the sulfate modifications, we further employed steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements to obtain insights into the improvement in the operational stability of the sulfated ETL-based device. The steady-state PL profile (Fig. 3a) shows that the PL intensity of the perovskite layer coated on top of the sulfated ETL was quenched more than double compared to that of the pristine ETL. The time-resolved PL measurements showed a much faster decay of the PL intensities for both the films of the perovskite on the sulfated ETL and the pristine ETL as compared to the pure perovskite films (Fig. 3b), confirming that efficient quenching is taking place. All the decays were fitted with a bi-exponential decay function and the two characteristic decay time constants, τ1 and τ2, which correspond to non-radiative and radiative recombinations of excited charge carriers, were extracted accordingly. The PL lifetime (τave) was assessed from the amplitude-weighted average of the two characteristic time constants. The sulfate treatment significantly accelerates the PL decay of the perovskite film coated on top of the sulfated ETL with a τave of 3.0 ns as compared to 8.3 ns for the pristine ETL (see Table S3, ESI,† for a time constant summary), and thereby enhances the carrier extraction process. The improved charge transport property is most likely to contribute to the enhanced operational stability since unextracted electrons would otherwise form reactive superoxide species and destabilize the perovskite layer.7,8,42
 Fig. 3  (a and b) Steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) profiles of perovskite films coated on pristine and sulfated ETLs. (c) UPS spectra of the pristine and sulfated mTiO2. The valence band maximum energy levels (EVBM) of the pristine ETL and sulfated one are –7.42 eV and –7.32 eV, respectively, calculated from the equation EVBM = − [21.22 eV − (Ecutoff − Eonset)], where Ecutoff is the cut-off of higher binding energy and Eonset is the onset energy of the valence band region. (d) A plot of (αhν)2versus hν to deduce the bandgap of the respective ETLs. (e) Constructed bandgap diagram of the full solar cell device stack. 
Next, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and UV-visible absorbance measurements were utilized to examine the energy level alignment between the pristine and sulfated ETLs and perovskite absorber layer. The valence band maximum (EVBM) was estimated from valence band spectra in UPS measurements (Fig. 3c), whereas the conduction bands (ECBM) can be determined by subtracting the optical bandgap (Egap) from EVBM. The optical bandgap was obtained from the Tauc plot of perovskite absorption edges (Fig. 3d). To infer the band gap energy (Egap) values of the ETL films, the Tauc plot equation was employed: αhν = A(hν − Egap)0.5, with α, h, A and ν being the absorption coefficient, Planck's constant, a constant, and the frequency of electromagnetic radiation, respectively. Using the aforementioned formula, Egap of the pristine and sulfated ETLs was estimated by the extrapolation of a linear fit over the energy (hν) axis. Thus, we found that there was no significant change in the optical bandgap of the ETL films with and without the sulfate treatment. Fig. 3e summarises the energy band levels of the solar cell component materials. Importantly, the deeper ECBM level of the sulfated ETL relative to ECBM of the perovskite absorber layer would provide a larger driving force for electron extraction and thus could minimize the interfacial charge carrier accumulation at the ETL/perovskite interface.
Besides the operational stability, we also performed UV illumination and thermal aging tests on unencapsulated devices. Fig. S6 (ESI†) shows that the sulfate treatment could improve the UV stability of the resulting devices. Meanwhile, a thermal aging test was conducted by heating the unencapsulated devices at 60 °C over the course of 500 hours. Fig. 4a–d present the photovoltaic parameter tracking over 500 hour thermal aging. The open-circuit voltage (VOC) was found to remain very close to the initial point for both the pristine and treated devices. After the 500 hour thermal aging process, the short-circuit current density (Jsc) decreased to 84% and 89% from the initial values for the pristine and treated devices, respectively. Similarly, the average fill factor (FF) reduced to 78% and 86% relative to the FF values at t = 0 for the pristine and treated devices, respectively. The decrease in Jsc could be attributed to perovskite absorber layer degradation where volatile organic cation components in the hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite layer were expected to escape the devices as the devices were aged without encapsulation. Meanwhile, the decrease of the fill factor could be correlated to deteriorated interfaces between the perovskite and transport layers. The deteriorated interface was evidenced by cross-sectional SEM images presented in Fig. S7 (ESI†) which show the presence of voids at the mTiO2/perovskite interface of thermally aged pristine devices. Meanwhile, the thermally aged sulfated samples remained intact given the same thermal aging conditions. Therefore, the surface treatment was found to slow down the degradation of Jsc and FF, and enhance the thermal stability of the perovskite layer as well as the interface. A similar thermal aging test was also carried out at a higher temperature of 85 °C (unencapsulated devices; Fig. S8, ESI†). A more rapid decrease of Jsc, FF and VOC was observed at higher thermal stress of 85 °C, which could be correlated to the perovskite layer degradation and low glass transition temperature of the doped spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer (HTL), in which the 85 °C-aged HTL film was found to crystallize and led to poorer interfaces/contact.43 Nevertheless, at both 60 °C and 85 °C, improved thermal stability was observed in the sulfate treated PSC.
 Fig. 4  Stability tracking of photovoltaic parameters, i.e. open-circuit voltage (a), fill factor (b), short-circuit current density (c), and solar cell efficiency (d) for pristine and sulfated devices over 500 hours of thermal stress at 60 °C. Averages of four devices are shown with respective standard deviations. T80 of the sulfated devices was more than five times longer than that of the pristine ones, i.e. 80 and 440 hours. 
To further understand the role of sulfate treatment on the ETL/perovskite interface in enhancing the thermal stability, the degradation of perovskite films at the ETL/perovskite interface under thermal stress of 85 °C was probed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements for encapsulated samples. Perovskite layers were coated on pristine and ammonium sulfate-treated ETLs and subsequently encapsulated with an about 50 nm thick hydrophobic poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) film. The encapsulation was necessary and reported to be able to slow down the degradation process of the bulk perovskite films itself and eliminate external factors such as ambient oxygen and humidity in a perovskite solar cell interfacial stability study.44 The encapsulated samples were thermally aged inside an oven with a set temperature of 85 °C. After one month, we characterized the perovskite film samples using XRD measurements with the hypothesis that the interfacial instability factor would be rather significant as we had suppressed the bulk perovskite degradation by the hydrophobic encapsulation. Fig. 5a and b show the XRD patterns of fresh and thermally aged perovskite films coated on top of pristine and sulfated mTiO2 films. Note that the fresh perovskite films for both the pristine and treated samples already contained excess lead iodide (PbI2) shown by the peaks at 2θ = 12.7°, as expected from our PbI2-excess perovskite precursor recipe. As for the aged samples, the perovskite peak intensity at 2θ = 14.1° was observed to be lower for the pristine sample as compared to that of the sulfated one. This corresponds to a higher degree of perovskite degradation occurring in the pristine sample. More importantly, another XRD peak at 2θ = 11.3° commonly attributed to hydrated perovskite components was observed. The hydrate component was previously reported to be one of the degradation pathways of the perovskite to its initial precursor compounds, i.e. PbI2, organic halide salts, and volatile amines.45 The appearance of the perovskite hydrate peak was in agreement with our initial hypothesis that under operating conditions the metal oxide turns chemically reactive with the perovskite layer and thus could cause deprotonation of organic cation species, such as methylammonium (CH3NH3+), and generate water molecules at the interface. The generated water molecules were purported to initiate the perovskite degradation by formation of hydrated perovskite species. Note that through the use of PMMA encapsulants, we eliminated the external ambient factor and attributed the water molecule formation solely to the interfacial reaction. Moreover, the XPS data (see Fig. 1b and c and Table S1, ESI†) also suggest that hydroxide species are relatively more prominent in the untreated ETL. We argue that hydroxide (−OH) bonds on pristine TiO2 will undergo protonation from organic cation species under operational conditions (high population of charge carriers and elevated temperature). This is in agreement with the study by Zhang et al. which infers that the hydrogen transfer from CH3NH3+ to −OH species is favourable based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations combined with the ab initio molecular dynamics technique.46 Additionally, a semi-quantitative analysis of the degraded perovskite in the pristine and treated films based on the area under the curve for the perovskite, PbI2, and hydrated perovskite XRD peaks is presented in Table S4 (ESI†). We found that there was only 24% perovskite content remaining in the pristine sample and the hydrate species content was estimated to be about 12.5%. Meanwhile, the sample coated on the sulfated ETL film retained 37% of its perovskite component after the thermal aging. Overall, this finding helps to explain the enhanced thermal stability given the role of sulfate treatment.
 Fig. 5  (a) Full XRD spectra of as prepared and thermally aged perovskite films coated on top of pristine and sulfated ETLs. (b) XRD 2θ region of interest of the perovskite (14.1°), PbI2 precursor (12.7°), and perovskite hydrate species (11.3°). The presence of the perovskite hydrate species was evidenced by the evolution of the peak at 11.3° of the aged perovskite film coated on the pristine ETL (dotted grey line), which corresponds to the intermediate of the perovskite degradation pathway. 
Conclusions
We have demonstrated the role of ammonium sulfate treatment in metal oxide/perovskite interface stability improvement. The treated metal oxide ETL-based devices show excellent improvement in the operational stability when the solar cell was run at the initial maximum power point voltage (VMPP). The improved operational stability was attributed to the larger driving force to extract photo-excited electrons due to the lower conduction band minimum energy level (ECBM) for the sulfate treated ETL. The improved charge extraction was also reflected by PL decay measurements. Improved thermal stability at 60 °C and 85 °C was also demonstrated in the sulfate treated device. The thermal stability enhancement was attributed to the elimination of the perovskite degradation pathway through perovskite hydrate formation. This study provides a facile surface treatment method to improve the metal oxide/perovskite interfacial stability. Unlike other ETL surface treatment studies, the present work decouples the effect of surface treatment into interfacial stability from perovskite quality improvement. Overall, the findings hint that the metal oxide/perovskite interface is not that benign under operational conditions and sulfate-functionalization might also be extended to other metal oxide-based transport layers, such as tin and nickel oxides.
Author contributions
BTM conceived the idea and performed all device fabrication and most of the measurements. TS carried out the XPS measurements and provided the analysis. AB performed the TRPL measurement. BTM wrote the manuscript. WLL directed the project and critically reviewed the manuscript. WLL and ACG supervised the project. All authors revised and approved the final version.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Ministry of Education (MOE) under AcRF Tier 2 grant (2019-T2-2-106) and National Robotics Programme (W1925d0106). The authors would like to thank Prof. Subodh Mhaisalkar, Prof. Nripan Mathews, Prof. Joel W. Ager, Prof. Wladek Walukiewicz, Dr Koh Teck Ming and Dr Natalia Yantara for insightful discussions. The authors also acknowledge the Facility for Analysis, Characterization, Testing and Simulation (FACTS) lab, Nanyang Technological University's central shared facilities, for the use of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) equipment.
Notes and references
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kulkarni, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, N. Mathews and S. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9221–9225 RSC .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. Saiful Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8208–8212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25469–25475 RSC .
M. Salado, L. Contreras-Bernal, L. Caliò, A. Todinova, C. López-Santos, S. Ahmad, A. Borras, J. Idígoras and J. A. Anta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10917–10927 RSC .
W. Tress, K. Domanski, B. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, E. A. Alharbi, M. Graetzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 568–574 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, X. Niu, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8235–8286 RSC .
B. Chen, J. Song, X. Dai, Y. Liu, P. N. Rudd, X. Hong and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902413 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen and N.-G. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2742–2786 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, B. Chen, Y. Fang, J. Zhao, C. Bao, Z. Yu, Y. Deng, P. N. Rudd, Y. Yan, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4981 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
A. J. Huckaba, Y. Lee, R. Xia, S. Paek, V. C. Bassetto, E. Oveisi, A. Lesch, S. Kinge, P. J. Dyson, H. Girault and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 317–324 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Rossi, J. A. Baker, D. Beynon, K. E. A. Hooper, S. M. P. Meroni, D. Williams, Z. Wei, A. Yasin, C. Charbonneau, E. H. Jewell and T. M. Watson, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800156 CrossRef .
A. G. Tomulescu, V. Stancu, C. Beşleagă, M. Enculescu, G. A. Nemneş, M. Florea, V. Dumitru, L. Pintilie, I. Pintilie and L. Leonat, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1900922 CrossRef CAS .
A. Priyadarshi, L. J. Haur, P. Murray, D. Fu, S. Kulkarni, G. Xing, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3687–3692 RSC .
K. S. Keremane, S. Prathapani, L. J. Haur, A. Bruno, A. Priyadarshi, A. V. Adhikari and S. G. Mhaisalkar, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 249–258 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, J. Cao, X. He, S. Yuan, S. Sun, J. Li, N. Zheng and L. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16860–16866 RSC .
S. Olthof and K. Meerholz, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 40267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, S. Pathak, M. M. Lee, T. Leijtens, A. Abate and G. E. Eperon, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Xue, B. Zheng, J. Tian, H. Wang, C. Gao and X. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 30422–30427 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, Q. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Hong, Z. Liu, Y. T. Hsieh, L. Meng, Y. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15540–15547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, J. Zhen, Q. Liu, Z. Fang, D. Li, P. Zhou, T. Chen and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1724–1733 RSC .
B. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Liang, D. Gao and W. Huang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 94290–94295 RSC .
S. Y. Abate, D.-C. Huang and Y.-T. Tao, Org. Electron., 2020, 78, 105583 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Q. Wang, S.-B. Xu, J.-G. Deng and L.-Z. Gao, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2017, 4, 170980 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-C. Zhang, S. Yuan, Y.-H. Lou, Q.-W. Liu, M. Li, H. Okada and Z.-K. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Chavan, N. Parikh, M. M. Tavakoli, D. Prochowicz, A. Kalam, P. Yadav, P. H. Bhoite and C. K. Hong, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2100177 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Chavan, M. M. Tavakoli, D. Prochowicz, P. Yadav, S. S. Lote, S. P. Bhoite, A. Nimbalkar and C. K. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8098–8106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, P. Wang, C. Ma, F. Igbari, Y. Kang, K.-L. Wang, W. Song, C. Dong, Y. Li, J. Yao, D. Meng, Z.-K. Wang and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2593–2600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Jiang, Z.-K. Wang, M. Li, C.-H. Li, P.-F. Fang and L.-S. Liao, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800149 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
E. H. Jung, B. Chen, K. Bertens, M. Vafaie, S. Teale, A. Proppe, Y. Hou, T. Zhu, C. Zheng and E. H. Sargent, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2796–2801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, S. Ravishankar, H. Liu, X. Hou, Y. Sheng, A. Mei, Q. Wang, D. Li, M. Xu, J. Bisquert and H. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2383–2391 RSC .
T. Chen, Z. Sun, M. Liang and S. Xue, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 245–251 RSC .
S. F. Shaikh, H.-C. Kwon, W. Yang, H. Hwang, H. Lee, E. Lee, S. Ma and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15478–15485 RSC .
K. K. Wong, A. Fakharuddin, P. Ehrenreich, T. Deckert, M. Abdi-Jalebi, R. H. Friend and L. Schmidt-Mende, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 10691–10698 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. Wheeler, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1655–1660 RSC .
X. Zhao, H. S. Kim, J. Y. Seo and N. G. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7148–7153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pérez-del-Rey, C. Dreessen, A. M. Igual-Muñoz, L. van den Hengel, M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, T. J. Savenije, F. C. Grozema, C. Zimmermann and H. J. Bolink, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000447 CrossRef .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. Van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and P. H.-L. Sit, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 76938–76947 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Figures S1–S8 and Tables S1–S4. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc02657gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the device structure used in this study. (b and c) O 1s core orbital XPS spectra of pristine and ammonium sulfate-treated mesoporous TiO2. Statistical distribution of the photovoltaic parameters of the pristine and sulfated ETL-based solar cell devices: (d) open-circuit voltage (VOC), (e) short-circuit current density (JSC), and (f) fill factor (FF). (g) J–V scans both in reverse (VOC to JSC) and forward (JSC to VOC) directions of the pristine and treated champion devices. The inset table is of the average photovoltaic parameter values in both scan directions. (h) Operational stability tracking as presented by fixed bias measurements at the initial maximum power point voltage (VMPP) for 1800 seconds.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–d) Top-view and cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the perovskite film grown on pristine and sulfated mTiO2 with a scale bar of 500 nm. (e) X-ray diffraction spectra of perovskite films coated on top of pristine and sulfated mTiO2. (f) Full width at half maximum (FWHM) plotting of the perovskite film identity peak at 2θ = 14.1°.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) Steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) profiles of perovskite films coated on pristine and sulfated ETLs. (c) UPS spectra of the pristine and sulfated mTiO2. The valence band maximum energy levels (EVBM) of the pristine ETL and sulfated one are –7.42 eV and –7.32 eV, respectively, calculated from the equation EVBM = − [21.22 eV − (Ecutoff − Eonset)], where Ecutoff is the cut-off of higher binding energy and Eonset is the onset energy of the valence band region. (d) A plot of (αhν)2versus hν to deduce the bandgap of the respective ETLs. (e) Constructed bandgap diagram of the full solar cell device stack.	 

 	Fig. 4  Stability tracking of photovoltaic parameters, i.e. open-circuit voltage (a), fill factor (b), short-circuit current density (c), and solar cell efficiency (d) for pristine and sulfated devices over 500 hours of thermal stress at 60 °C. Averages of four devices are shown with respective standard deviations. T80 of the sulfated devices was more than five times longer than that of the pristine ones, i.e. 80 and 440 hours.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Full XRD spectra of as prepared and thermally aged perovskite films coated on top of pristine and sulfated ETLs. (b) XRD 2θ region of interest of the perovskite (14.1°), PbI2 precursor (12.7°), and perovskite hydrate species (11.3°). The presence of the perovskite hydrate species was evidenced by the evolution of the peak at 11.3° of the aged perovskite film coated on the pristine ETL (dotted grey line), which corresponds to the intermediate of the perovskite degradation pathway.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Figures S1–S8 and Tables S1–S4. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc02657g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
